Supervising Section Editor: Sean Henderson, MD Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem A
28-year-old female was transferred to the emergency department from her physician’s office for further evaluation of tachycardia. She was
being seen for a recent illness which included nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and fevers. The patient endorsed fatigue, dyspnea on exertion, and
extremity edema. She had no chest pain or cough. Exam revealed a pale, fatigued, mildly ill-appearing female with bilateral lower extremity
edema and diminished breath sounds on the right. Chest radiograph revealed a large right pleural effusion (Figure 1). Computed tomographic
angiography of the chest was performed (Figure 2). This is a rare form of primary invasive malignant tumor of the heart. Most cardiac tumors
are secondary.1 Of primary tumors, benign myxomas are the most common.2 About 25% of primary cardiac tumors are malignant with 95% of those
being sarcomas.3 Sarcomas often invade into adjacent structures including the myocardium, valves, vena cava and pericardium.3 The
differential diagnosis for intracardiac contrast-filling defects includes thrombus, tumor and vegetations from endocarditis.4
Echocardiography, angiocardiography and magnetic resonance imaging may also be helpful in establishing a diagnosis.1,3 Large intracardiac
tumors frequently result in inflow/outflow obstruction which can precipitate heart failure.2 Treatment of this condition is primarily
operative.5 Heart transplantation (including autotransplantation) may even be necessary.5 Cardiac sarcomas often recur after resection.
Post-surgical chemotherapy and radiation are of limited benefit.6 Our patient underwent surgical resection of the tumor, replacement of the
tricuspid valve and reconstruction of the vena cava. She survived for several weeks after surgery but eventually succumbed to her illness.
Conflicts of Interest : By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources
and financial or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Portable semi-
upright chest radiograph showing large right pleural effusion. Axial computed tomography angiogram of the chest showing intracardiac
contrast-filling defect with an associated right-sided pleural effusion.
