A 28-year-old woman with severe mitral stenosis underwent percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty at 26 weeks’ gestation. Balloon dilation using a
double 18-18 mm balloon resulted in improvement in mean mitral pressure gradient (32 to 8 mmHg) and in calculated mitral valve area (0.9 to
2.4 cm2) without complications and any evidence of fetal distress during procedures with an estimated radiation exposure to the fetus of
0.13 rem. This procedure resulted in the disappearance of symptoms of congestive heart failure and allowed for normal full term spontaneous
delivery of a 3.51 kg boy without any complication. Although rheumatic heart disease is increasingly rare in developed countries, it remains
the most common cardiac disorder in much of the world1). Surgery is an effective treatment for mitral valve stenosis. Percutaneous mitral
valvuloplasty has been shown to be a new therapy for patients with mitral stenosis2–4) and has achieved excellent results in the majority of
patients with severe mitral stenosis. This report describes our first clinical application with this procedure in a pregnant woman with
severe rheumatic mitral stenosis. A 27 year old pregnant woman was admitted to the hospital with severe dyspnea. She had been free of
cardiac symptoms until one month prior to admission (25 weeks gestation). She began to be treated with digoxin and diuretic therapy. On two
days before admission, she suffered from severe dyspnea and orthopnea. Physical examination showed an acutely distressed woman in moderate
respiratory distress. The blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg and the pulse rate was 120/min; respirations were 28/min. The jugular venous
pressure was increased to 12 cm above the sternal angle. Cardiac examination revealed a prominent right ventricular heaving. The first heart
sound was increased and the second sound was narrowly split with an accentuated pulmonic component. There was a grade 4/6 diastolic rumble
with presystolic accentuation at the apex. Abdomen was protruded due to enlarged uterus. Height of uterine fundus was up to the umbilicus.
There were no abnormal findings on gynecological examination except enlarged uterus due to 26 weeks gestation. The obstetrical
ultrasonographic examination revealed no abnormal findings on the fetus. There was no peripheral edema. The electrocardiogram showed the
findings of left atrial enlargement. Two dimensional and Doppler echocardiographic findings were consistent with severe mitral stenosis.
There was evidence of left atrial enlargement, normal left ventricular dimension and function. There was no evidence of mitral regurgitation
and echogenic mass in left atrium. After intensive treatment with diuretics she could remain in the supine position. To protect the fetus
from radiation, she was wrapped in a lead shield from the diaphragm to the symphysis pubis. Fetal monitoring, including fetal heart rate,
was done during the procedure. Using the percutaneous femoral approach, a 7 Fr. Swan-Ganz catheter was placed in the pulmonary artery and an
8 Fr. pigtail catheter was placed in the left ventricle. The pressures, thermodilutional cardiac output and oximetry were recorded. After
prevalvuloplasty measurements (Table 1), transseptal catheterization was accomplished from the right femoral vein using a modified
Brockenbrough needle and an 8 Fr. Mullins transseptal sheath (USCI). Systemic anticoagulation was achieved with 5000 units of heparin given
after successful transseptal catheterization. Left heart pressures and transvalvular gradients were then measured directly to corroborate
the previously obtained wedge pressure measurement. The 7 Fr. wedge ballon catheter was advanced through the mitral and aortic valves to the
descending aorta, followed by insertion of a 0.035 inch, 260 cm long Teflon-coated exchange guide wire through the flow directed catheter.
The sheath and balloon catheter were then removed, leaving only the guide wire in place. After dilating the septal puncture site with 8 mm
balloon (Meditech Inc.), a second guide wire was introduced to the descending aorta through the double lumen catheter which was inserted
through the first guide wire. After removal of this catheter, two 18 mm balloon catheters (9Fr.) were advanced across the septum through the
left atrium and positioned across the mitral annulus. Two balloon inflations with a mixture of saline solution and iodinated contrast medium
were then performed until the indentation in the balloon due to the mitral stenosis disappeared. Immediately after catheter valvotomy, all
hemodynamic measurements, including determinations of transvalvular gradient and cardiac output, were repeated (Table 1). Figure 1 shows the
simultaneous left atrial and left ventricular pressure before and after balloon dilatation. there was a decrease in mean diastolic gradient
across the mitral valve to 8 mmHg and an increase in cardiac output to 6.6 liters/min. The mitral valve area was increased to 2.4 cm2.
Pulmonary arterial systolic pressure decreased to 46 mmHg. Right heart oximetry demonstrated no evidence of a left to right shunt across the
atrial septum. To minimize radiation exposure to the fetus, left ventricular cineangiogram was not performed. However, definite evidence of
mitral regurgitation was not detected by physical examination and by Doppler examination of the mitral valve. The procedure was completed in
2 hours (fluoroscope time; 35 min.) and the patient tolerated it well with minimal discomfort. There was no evidence of fetal distress and
the amount of radiation was 0.13 rem during the procedure. She delivered a 3.51 kg, healthy, full-term boy without any evidence of fetal
abnormalities. Follow-up examination of this boy for 17 months has shown normal growth and development. Our findings demonstrate that
percutaneous mitral valvuloplasty is an effective and safe procedure for treating pregnant patients with mitral stenosis. The patient had
immediate symptomatic relief and the hemodynamic data showed significant relief of pulmonary hypertension and a significant increase in
mitral valve area. Palacious5), Safian6), Mangione7) and their co-workers also reported successful outcome. These favorable results suggest
that prercutaneous mitral valvuloplasty could be the treatment of choice for selected pregnant patients with mitral stenosis refractory to
medical treatment. Simultaneous left ventricular (LV) and left atrial (LA) pressure tracing before (Pre-PMV) and after (Post-PMV)
valvuloplasty. Hemodynamic Results before and after Mitral Valvuloplasty a(v): atrial a and v wave pressure; D: diastolic: S: systolic
