Rupture of the heart as a complication of myocardial infarction is one of the most common causes of in-hospital mortality. Rupture of the
free wall of the ventricle or interventricular septum has a poor prognosis when treated conservatively. So, rupture of the heart after
infarction requires prompt diagnosis and early surgical repair despite the high overall incidence of early operative mortality before
hemodynamic deterioration and multiorgan failures develop. Rupture of the left ventricle results in pseudoaneurysm if the overlying
pericardium adhers to the surface of the heart. Pseudoaneurysms which rarely develop after infarction, tend to rupture. Their presence alone
is an indicator for operation because of the very poor prognosis following rupture. We experienced successful management of 2 rare
complications after acute myocardial infarction: ventricular septal defect and pseudoaneurysm. The first patient was a 49-year-old man who
had an apical septal defect. His electrocardiogram showed Q wave in leads V2–V6, II, III, and aVF but a coronary angiogram showed normal
findings. He was successfully treated by patch closure of the septal defect. The second patient was a 65-year-old female who had false
aneurysm of the left ventricle. She had neither chest pain nor abnormality on the electrocardiogram. A coronary angiogram showed complete
occlusion of the distal circumflex artery. Under cardiopulmonary bypass, the neck of the aneurysmal sac was successfully closed with a
prolene suture. Rupture of the myocardium after acute myocardial infarction may involve the free wall of the ventricle, interventricular
septum, or the papillary muscles. Rupture of the free wall usually results in either acute hemopericardium with apparent cardiac arrest or,
rarely, when pericardial adhesions are present, in bleeding that is confined to a limited space, which gradually expands as the blood flows
through a small communicating orifice under high pressure, forming a false aneurysm1). Besides the above types of ventricular rupture,
“subacute” rupture may result in a syndrome resembling cardiogenic shock2). Septal rupture results in the creation of a left to right shunt.
As a result of the improved treatment of ventricular arrhythmia during the early phase of acute infarction, myocardial rupture has become,
after myocardial power failure, one of the most common causes of in-hospital mortality3,4). Rupture of the heart as a complication of acute
myocardial infarction is responsible for 5% to 13% of deaths after infarction5). Postinfarction septal rupture has a poor prognosis when
treated conservatively. Septal rupture after infarction should be considered for surgical repair unless a compelling reason exists to
suggest otherwise6–8). Pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle in even asymptomatic patients or small-sized aneurysms, tend to rupture9). Their
presence alone is an indicator for operation because of the very poor prognosis following rupture10). This report describes the clinical
features, diagnostic evaluation, operative management and pathologic findings of 2 patients with mechanical complications after myocardial
infarction. One case is a patient with septal rupture after infarction. The other is a patient with pseudoaneurysm after infarction which
followed pericarditis. A 49-year-old man with a 3-year history of exertional chest pain was hospitalized due to acute myocardial infarction
in June 1990. After an uneventful discharge, he still had exertional chest pain. In October 1990, he was admitted to another hospital due to
progressive chest pain. Septal defect was found on echocardiography, but no specific management for septal rupture was done. After
discharge, he had chest pain which was relieved by isonid spray. He was readmitted due to chest pain in December 1990 and referred to our
hospital for definitive management of septal defect and postinfarction angina. On physical examination, he was in relatively good condition
and not dyspneic. Vital singns were blood pressure 100/70 mmHg, pulse rate 70 times per minute, and body temperature 36.2°C. The conjunctiva
was not anemic. On chest auscultation, a pansystolic murmur was heard along the left sternal border, and the point of maximal intensity was
Erb’s area. On abdominal examination, the liver was palpated by 5 cm below the right costal margin. At admission, a hemogram revealed
hemoglobin 13.1 g/dl, WBC 5400/mm3, and platelet 142 k/mm3. Lipid profiles were cholesterol 149 mg/dl, triglyceride 114 mg/dl, and HDL 24
mg/dl. CK and LDH were within normal range. A chest roentgenogram showed cardioimegaly and bilateral pleural effusions (Fig. 1). An
electrocardiogram showed a Q wave in leads V3–V6, II, III, and aVF, along with ST segment elevation in V3–V5 (Fig. 2). On echocardiogram,
apical dilatation and apical septal defect through which a jet flow traversed were noticed (Fig. 3). Wall motions in the basal septum and
left ventricular posterior wall were relatively well preserved and the ejection fraction was 80%. Cardiac catheterization revealed increased
main pulmonary arterial, right ventricular and right atrial pressures (MPA 64/18/32 mmHg, RV 60/2/18 mmHg, RA 18/18/14 mmHg). A left
ventriculogram showed an apical aneurysm with apical and anterolateral wall hypokinesia and contrast filling to the right ventricle and
pulmonary artery through interventricular septal defect. A coronary angiogram showed no definite abnormality. The pulmonary-systemic flow
ratio was 3.76. On the 9th hospital day, an operation was done. The patient was found to have pericardial effusion and septal defect which
measured 1×3 cm and were located in the apex. Fibrosis around the septal defect was noticed The septal defect was closed with a Dacron
patch. The left ventriculotomy was closed with 2 Gore-Tex strips and buttressed by prolene horizontal matress suture. Finally, a Gore-Tex
patch was attached to the LV wall. His postoperative recovery was uneventful, and echocardiography before his dicharge showed akinetic
apical wall without septal defect. On the 34th hospital day, he was discharged witout any complication and treated with digoxin, diltiazem,
and isosorbide dinitrate at OPD. On August 18 1990, a 65-year-old female was admitted to Seoul National University Hospital because of
dyspnea, which devoloped 1 week before admission. She had been managed for diabetes mellitus for 20 years. On April 1990, she had been
admitted because of pleuritic chest pain in her left anterior chest. At admission, pericardial friction rub was noticed on chest
auscultation, and the electrocardiogram showed ST segment elevation in leads V1–6, aVL, aVF, and II (Fig. 4). Her cardiac enzymes were
within normal range. An echocardiogram showed concentric LVH with pericardial effusion. She was treated with antiinflammatory agents under
the impression of uremic pericarditis and made a good recovery. After discharge, her dyspnea progressed and pericardial effusion increased
on echocardiogram which was done in OPD. So, she was readmitted due to progressive dyspnea and general weakness. On physical examination,
she was dyspneic, but showed an intact orientation and a clear consciousness, Vital signs were as follows: blood pressure 120/80 mmHg, pulse
rate 72/min, respiration rate 26/min, and body temperature 36.3°C. The conjunctiva was pale and the jugular vein was markedly engorged. On
palpation, the apical impulse was felt on the fifth intercostal space of the left anterior axillary line. On chest auscultation, the heart
beats were regular without additional heart sound nor murmur. Inspiratory basal crackles were heard in her left lower lung field, especially
on her posterior chest. Mild pitting edema in both extremites was noticed. On admission a hemogram revealed hemoglobin 8.8 g/dl, WBC
10300/mm3, and platelet 212 k/mm3. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 41 mm per hour. Serum electrolytes were 128 mEq/l for sodium, 4.4
mEq/l for potassium, and 103 mEq/l for chloride. Arterial blood gas analysis revealed metabolic acidosis with compensatory respiratory
alkalosis. Fasting blood glucose was 402 mg/dl. CK and LDH were within normal range. Blood urea nitrogen and cratinine were 35 mg/dl and 4.2
mg/dl, respectively. A chest roentgenogram showed increased cardiomegaly and pleural effusion since the last study (Fig. 5). An
electrocardiogram showed no remarkable findings except nonspecific ST-T wave change (Fig. 6). A 2-dimentional echocardiogram suggested a
defect in the left ventrcular wall with a surrounding aneurysmal sac which contained a suspicious echogenic mass (Fig. 7). Lateral wall
motion was decreased. The left ventricular dimensions were 55 mm in systole and 70 mm in diastole, and the ejection fraction was 51%.
Cardiac catherization showed elevated left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and pulmonary arterial pressure (LVEDP 30 mmHg, PAP; systole
60 mmHg, diastole 30 mmHg). A coronary angiogram showed complete occlusion of the distal circumflex artery, 30% stenotic lesion of mid-LAD,
and 95% stenotic lesion of the posterior descending artery(Fig. 8). The patient was transferred to the Intensive Care Unit after detection
of pseudoaneurysm. On the 3rd hospital day, the initial pulmonary capillary wedge pressure was around 50/25 mmHg. Intravenous nitroglycerin
and aminophylline along with furosemide were administered for control of congestive heart failure. Her blood pressure was maintained above
130/70 mmHg, but dyspnea continued with slight improvement. On the 7th hospital day, an operation was done. The pericardial cavity contained
effusion and loose adhesions. Severe fibrotic changes were found especially in the diaphragmatic surface which might suggest sequealae of
tuberculous pericarditis. An aneurysmal sac the size of an adult fist was located in the posterolateral wall of the left ventricle. The neck
of the aneurysmal sac measured 2.0×1.5 cm, which was closed with prolene suture and reinforced by bovin pericardium. The aneurysmal specimen
was found to be chronic nonspecific inflammation (fig. 9). The pleural specimen was found to be chornic nonspecific inflammation with mild
fibrosis. On the 30th hospital day, she was discharged without postoperative problems. After discharge, she was managed through OPD for
hypertension and mitral insufficiency which developed after the operation. Ventricular septal rupture complicates 1% to 3% of all
infarctions and reportedly accounts for 5% of all periinfarction deaths11). It occurs most frequently during the first week after myocardial
infarction, the infartion often having been the patient’s first attack12,13). Before operative repair was introduced by Cooley in 195614),
septal rupture was almost always fatal. When medical therapy alone was used, 25% died from cardiogenic shock within 24 hrs and 80% died
within 2 months12,13). The onset of a new systolic murmur after myocardial infarction is the clinical sign that caused clinicians to suspect
ventricular septal ruptue. In rare instances, a systolic murmur is absent or overlooked15). The diagnosis of ventricular septal rupture by
means of bedside right-heart catheterization and sequential oximetry was described in 197216). This technique differentiated the septal
rupture from infarction-induced acute mitral regurgitation, because septal rupture usually produces a pulmonary-to-systemic flow ratio of
more than 2:117). If right-heart catheterization cannot be performed easily, septal defect sometimes can be visualized by 2-dimensional
echocardiography with color flow image18). Left-to-right shunt also may be detected by radionuclide techniques19). The approach to the
management of patients with ventricular septal rupture has varied over the years. Until the late 1970s, most cardiologists and
cardiovascular surgeons recommended waiting at least 3 to 6 weeks before attempting surgical repair of the septal rupture17). This was done
primarily to allow myocardial healing and fibrosis to occur in the hope that this would facilitate repair. The overall incidence of early
operative mortality is high20). A delay in repair for 6 to 8 weeks results in an improved early mortality, but the cost is the death of a
number of patients who might otherwise be salvaged by early operation. The current approach in most units, therefore, is to consider
ventricular septal rupture as a surgical emergency6–8). Most studies postulated that perioperative survival is mainly determined by
preoperative cardiogenic shock or right ventricular dysfunction21,22). Unlike most complications of myocardial infarction, the clinical
outcome does not appear to depend on the left ventricular function, shunt size, infarct size or extent of the coronary disease21,22).
Several technical advances in the operation for ventricular septal rupture have been made in recent years. An anterior defect can usually be
closed primarily with felt-buttressed sutures. Amputation of the apex and infarctectomy is often used if the defect is in the apical septum.
Posterior septal defect usually requires prosthetic replacement of part of the posterior wall to prevent reopening of the defect or
dehiscence of the ventriculotomy23–25). In our first case, a chest roentgenogram showed cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusion. An
electrocardiogram showed a Q wave in the precordial leads and inferior limb leads, along with persistent ST-segment elevation in the
precordial leads. We confirmed the presence of an apical septal rupture and apical aneurysm by echocardiogram and cardiac catheterization.
The septal defect was closed with a Dacron patch, successfully. The incidence of true aneurysm of the heart following myocardial infarction
is approximately 10%26). The incidence of false aneurysm is not known but appears to be quite rare. A true aneurysm develops by a gradual
bulge of the involved portion of the wall. The process results from a removal of the infarcted tissue and concomitant molding of the bulge.
The final result is an aneurysm with a wide mouth. The aneurysmal wall is comprised primarily of fibrous tissue among which elements of the
original wall may be identified. Classically, the true aneurysm is relatively large, frequently 6 to 7 centimeters in diameter9). A false or
pseudoaneurysm is a consequence of the rupture of the ventricular wall but with containment of the resulting hematoma. With time, the
periphery of the hematoma becomes organized into fibrous tissue among which no element of the cardiac wall is present. Characteristically,
the mouth of a false aneurysm is narrow compared with the width of the fundus. In a false aneurysm, an important difference compared with a
true aneurysm is in regard to the rupture of aneurysm27,28). The clinical presentation of a patient with pseudoaneurysm may be pericarditis,
cardiac failure or supraventricular tachyarrhythmia. The chest radiogram may show cardiomegaly with abnormal bulges from the ventricular
wall. Echocardiography is of diagnostic value29). Angiography will determine whether an aneurysm is true or false and, in addition, show if
there is appreciable coronary artery disease30). The surgical management of false aneurysms is simpler than that of true aneurysms, as the
excision of the left ventricular wall is not required because the aneurysm does not constitute a part of the functional left ventricular
wall. In our second case, Pericarditis occurred before myocardial infarction developed. So, when left ventricular rupture after myocardial
infarction developed, the left ventricular rupture did not make cardiac temponade and resulted in pseudoaneurysm. Chest roentgenogram showed
cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusions. Electrocardiogram and cardiac enzymes did not show typical findings for myocardial infarction.
We confirmed a defect in the left ventricle wall with surrounding aneurysmal sac by echocardiogram. Before the operation, angiography was
done for detection of appreciable mitral regurgitation that might require additional surgical treatment. The neck of aneurysmal sac was
closed with prolene suture which was reinforced by bovine pericardium successfully. Chest roentgenogram shows cardiomegaly and bilateral
pleural effusions. Electrocardiogram shows Q wave in leads V3–6 and II, III, aVF, and ST segment elevation in V3–5. Echocardiogram shows
apical dilatation and apical septal defect through which a jet flow tranverses. Electrocardiogram shows ST segment elevation in leads V1-6,
aVL, aVF, and II. Chest roentgenogram shows cardiomegaly and bilateral pleural effusions. Electrocardiogram shows no remarkable findings
except nonspecific ST-T wave change. Echocardiogram shows A) a rupture into the pseudoaneurysmal sac from the lateral wall of the left
ventricle on apical 4-chamber view, and B) turbulent flow through the rupture site on apical 4-chamber view. A) Left coronary angiogram
shows a complete occlusion of distal circumflex artery and 30% stenotic lesion of mid-LAD (RAO 30°). B) Right coronary angiogram shows 95%
stenotic lesion of the posterior descending artery (LAO 60°). A) Lower power microscopic view of the wall of the false aneurysm It is
composed of an outer layer of fibrinoid necrosis and an inner layer of severe fibrosis. There is no element of myocardial muscle. B) High
power view, dense collagenous tissue and mononuclear cell infiltration.
