We report a case of methimazole-induced acute hepatic failure, which occurred 17 weeks after initiation of the drug in a 43-year-old man
with hyperthyroidism and hepatitis B surface antigenemia. Postmortem needle autopsy of the liver revealed an established micronodular
cirrhosis secondary to hepatitis B with moderate septal/portal inflammation, marked cholestasis and scattered acidophilic bodies. The serum
hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) was positive, but reactivation of hepatitis B was unlikely in view of the absence of a serum hepatitis B
e antigen (HBeAg) and hepatitis B virus deoxyribonucleic acid (HBV-DNA) and negative stain for HBsAg and hepatitis B core antigen (HBcAg) in
the liver tissue. After the introduction of methimazole by Stanley and Astwood in 19491), this chemical has been a widely-used, safe and
highly-effective drug for patients with hyperthyroidism. However, in 5–7% of the patients side effects occur2), including fever, skin
rashes, gastrointestinal symptoms, loss of taste, neuropahty and often fatal agranulocytosis. Drug-induced hepatitis seems to be a very rare
toxic reaction by this drug. Only 15 documented cases have been reported3–17). None of these reports mentioned acute hepatic failure induced
by methimazole. A 43-year-old man was admitted to the Endocinology Section of this hospital because of palpitations, weight loss of two
years’ duration and recent onset of exertional dyspnea. The physical examination, laboratory and histological findings, including serum
thyroxine, TSH level and needle biopsy of the thyroid, were compatible with hyperthyroidism and congestive heart failure. He was initially
treated with propylthiouracil (300 mg daily), and the heart failure symptoms improved with appropriate care. On admission, serum HBsAg was
tested as a part of routine clinical tests and was found to be positive. The patient denied any history of hepatitis exposure or any family
history of hepatitis B or exposure to blood products. Serum aminotransferase activities were within normal limits. HBeAg and HBV–DNA were
not detected in the serum. The patient was discharged on the 21st hospital day with markedly improved general condition. Two months later,
propylthiouracil was substituted with methimazole (30 mg daily) for better compliance. Seven months later, the patient was readmitted to the
hospital because of nausea, general malaise and jaundice of two weeks’ duration and transferred to the Hepatology Section. He denied any use
of illicit drugs, herb medication or alcohol during the period. On examination the patient appeared acutely ill and icteric, although he was
clinically euthyroid. No Spider angiomata, skin rash or palmar erythema was noted. The pulse was irregular with a rate of about 80 due to
atrial fibrillation. The edge of the liver was palpable 5 cm below the right costal margin with a vertical span of 13 cm. The liver was
diffusely tender. No evidence of ascites was found. The hematocrit was 42 percent; the white cell count was 6400; with a normal differential
count, the platelet count was 81,900/mm3. Agranulocytosis or eosinophilia had not developed during the illness. The serum protein was 7.1
g/dl (albumin 4.6 g and the globulin 2.5 g) and the bilirubin was 5.0 mg/dl (direct 3.5 mg and indirect 1.5 mg). The serum alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) was 180 U/L (normal <40), the serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), 848 U/L (normal <40), and the alkaline
phosphatase, 848 IU/L (normal: 64–238). The prothrombin time was 13.7 seconds with a control 11.3 seconds. The T3 RIA was 109.85 ng per 100
ml (normal: 90–210), the thyroxine 3.01 ug per 100 ml (normal: 5–13) and the TSH 19.85 uU per ml (normal: 0.3–5). Serum HBsAg and antibody
to hepatitis B core antigen (anti-HBc) were positive, but HBeAg, IgM anti-HBc, and HBV-DNA by dot and slot blot hybridization were negative.
Antibody to hepatitis C virus (Anti-HCV) by Elisa method was negative. An ultrasonographic examination of the abdomen revealed a diffusely
enlarged liver, although the spleen was not enlarged. The methimazole was discontinued and symptomatic care was given. During the next four
weeks the patient’s condition deteriorated rapidly (Fig. 1). From the 21st hospital day, dexamethasone was administered at a dose of 10 mg
daily. On the 27th hospital day, hepatic encephalopathy developed and the patient died four days later. A postmortem needle autopsy of the
liver was performed (Fig. 2, 3). The histologic findings revealed a micronodular cirrhosis secondary to a hepatitis B virus infection with
moderate septal/portal inflammation, marked cholestasis and scattered acidophilic bodies. No HBsAg or HBcAg was detected in the liver by
peroxidase-antiperoxidase method. In contrast to propylthiouracil-induced hepatotoxicity in which cytotoxic injury is the predominant
lesion, methimazole-associated hepatic injury is mainly cholestatic10). It is probably due to an idiosyncratic (hypersensitive) reaction,
which is usually infrequent and unpredictable. This type of response is not does-dependent and may occur at any time during or shortly after
exposure to the drug18). The mechanisms underlying these hypersensitivity reactions are not known. But autoimmune mechanisms10) and the
immunosurppressive effect of the antithyroid drugs19) have been described. Previously reported patients with methimazole-induced
hepatotoxicity were predominantly female and usually over 40 years old (Table 1). There have been two fatal cases reported. Both were
related to pneumonia with or without agranulocytosis3,8). In the remaining cases, the clinical symptoms and laboratory abnormalities became
normal when methimazole was discontinued, or with the use of corticosteroids8). But in one patient with malignant exophthalmos8),
methimazole-induced hepatic injury actually developed during high dose glucocorticoid therapy6). The development of hepatic injury long
after propylthiouracil was discontinued indicates that the injury was not due to propylthiouracil in this case. While the prominent
cholestasis was consistent with other reported cases of methimazole-induced hepatic injury, this case was different in the prominence of the
parenchymal injury and liver failure. Other possible mechanisms for hepatic injury in this case include the superinfection of a hepatitis C
virus and the spontaneous reactivation of chronic hepatitis B20). After the discovery of the causative agent and the development of the
detection method of type C virus infection, it becomes possible to make a serological diagnosis21,22) but anti HCV test in serum was
negative in this patient. Lastly, it is well -known that reactivation of hepatitis B is one of the most important and frequent predisposing
causes in aggravating chronic hepatitis B. However, the absence of HBeAg, IgM anti-HBc, or HBV-DNA in serum and negative stain for HBsAg and
HBcAg in the liver may exclude this possibility of reactivation with some certainty. It is unclear what role the hepatitis B virus infection
itself plays in the development of acute hepatic failure in case all the viral replication markers do not express. It is possible that the
presence of a micronodular cirrhosis secondary to the hepatitis B virus infection may have predisposed the patient to the development of
acute hepatic failure with the administration of methimazole. It should be kept in mind, therefore, that in patients with underlying chronic
liver disease, particularly cirrhosis, active or inactive, any hepatotoxic agent should be used with caution. We wish to thank Dr. K.G.
Ishak and Dr. H. J. Zimmerman for their kind and excellent interpretation of the histology of this case and for their comments. Schematic
diagram of clinical and biochemical changes in the patient. Micronodular cirrhosis with inflammatory cell infiltration and fibrosis of the
portal tracts and septa. Hematoxylin and eosin ×40. Portal inflammatory cell infiltration and bile plugs (thick arrows) in bile ducts and
acidophilic body (thin arrow). Hematoxylin and eosin ×200 Hepatic Injury from Methimazole
