Diffuse alveolar septal involvement is a rare form of pulmonary amyloidosis. Ante-mortem diagnosis is unusual, and most of the reported
cases were diagnosed at autopsy. It has recently been reported that transbronchial lung biopsy via a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope was a
relatively safe method to confirm diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis. We report a case of pulmonary diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis
confirmed by transbronchial lung biopsy. The patient’s chief complaints were dyspnea on exertion and epigastric pain aggravated over a one-
year period, while a chest roentgenogram showed bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltration. This case also showed nephrotic syndrome,
cardiac arrhythmia, congestive heart failure, a tingling sensation in both hands and multiple nodules in the gastrointestinal tracts,
suggesting involvement of the kidney, heart, peripheral nerves and gastrointestinal tracts. We propose that when diffuse interstitial lung
disease is present with systemic signs such as nephrotic syndrome or cardiac arrhythmia, amyloidosis should be considered as a possible
diagnosis. Also, transbronchial lung biopsy may be a useful confirmative diagnostic tool. Amyloidosis is a multisystem disease of diverse
causes characterized by the presence of extracellular deposits of an insoluble fibrillar protein, amyloid1,2). Amyloid deposits are commonly
found in the kidneys, nerves, vessels, liver, spleen, gastrointestinal tracts, heart and respiratory tracts3). The pulmonary involvement of
amyloidosis is usually classified as being tracheobronchial, parenchymal nodular and diffuse alveolar septal types4). Among these, the
diffuse alveolar septal type is by far the rarest, and ante-mortem diagnosis is very unusual5). The diagnosis of diffuse alveolar septal
amyloidosis is usually by post-mortem examination or open lung biopsy. Only a small number of cases have been confirmed by transbronchial
lung biopsy using a flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope. In Korean literature, there have been many reports of primary amyloidosis but no
documented case of pulmonary amyloidosis. We describe a case of pulmonary diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis confirmed by transbronchial
lung biopsy, which also involved the kidneys, heart, nerves and gastrointestinal tracts, manifested by diffuse infiltration of the lung,
nephrotic syndrome, cardiac arrhythmia and multiple nodules in the gastrointestinal tracts. A 60-year-old woman presented with complaints of
progressive dyspnea on exertion, epigastric pain and low anterior chest pain. She was well until one year ago, when epigastric pain
developed. At that time, an abnormality in urinalysis was detected at a local clinic. One month later she underwent an appendectomy with an
impression of acute appendicitis. At that time, a chest roentgenogram showed increased interstitial markings in both lower lung fields.
Eight months ago, dyspnea on exertion and intermittent edema on her face and dorsum of the hands developed and progressed. For the last
three months she was almost in a bed-ridden state due to dyspnea on exertion and weakness. She also felt postural dizziness and a tingling
sensation in both hands. So, she was admitted to this hospital. On physical examination, the blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg, the heart rate
60 beats/minute and respiration rate 24/min. Jugular venous engorgement was noted, and bilateral basal crackles were heard on the chest. The
heartbeat was irregular, but a murmur was not heard. Abdominal examination revealed no organomegaly, but epigastric tenderness was noted.
Pitting edema was present on both dorsum of the feet, presacral and pretibial areas. A chest roentgenogram revealed a bilateral diffuse
ground-glass density, especially in the lower lung fields, with pleural effusion (Fig. 1). Blood gas analysis showed pH 7.44, PaCO2 33 mmHg,
PaO2 67 mmHg, HCO3− 22 mEq/L. The hemoglobin concentration was 11.8 g/dl, leukocyte count 6,300/mm3, platelet count 410,000/mm3 and
erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 32 mm/hr. The coagulation profile was normal. The serum calcium level was 7.9 mg/dl, phosphorus 4.5
mg/dl, blood urea nitrogen 19 mg/dl and serum creatinine level 0.9 mg/dl. The serum total protein concentration was 5.0 g/dl, albumin 2.6
g/dl and cholesterol level 388 mg/dl. Urinalysis showed specific gravity 1.025, pH 6.0, albumin 4+, RBC 2–3/high power field (HPF), WBC
7–10/HPF, and 24-hour urine protein was 5,240 mg. Creatinine clearance was 66 ml/minute and the selectivity index of proteinuria was 0.12.
In serum protein electrophoresis, albumin was 49.3%, alpha-1 globulin 4.0%, alpha-2 globulin 18.1%, beta globulin 17.5% and gamma globulin
11.3%. Urine protein electrophoresis showed albumin 66.2%, alpha-1 globulin 4.5%, alpha-2 globulin 5.7%, beta globulin 20.6% and gamma
globulin 3.0%. In both electrophoresis, there was no M-peak, and urine Bence-Jones protein was negative. The ECG finding was sinus
bradyarrhythmia with sinus pause, junctional escape beats and low voltage QRS complex in the limb leads. A Holter ECG recording showed
frequent sinus bradyarrhythmia with junctional escape rhythm, a few episodes of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (sick sinus
syndrome) and multiform ventricular premature beats (VPBs) (Fig. 2). In the echocardiogram, the left ventricular posterior wall,
interventricular and interatrial septum were thickened, and the myocardium showed a hyperrefractile “granular sparkling” appearance (Fig.
3). A 99m Tc-pyrophosphate myocardial scan revealed no hot uptake. In an upper gastrointestinal series and colon study, multiple polypoid
lesions were suspected in the stomach, ascending colon, splenic flexure of the transverse colon and sigmoid colon. In a pulmonary function
test, the forced vital capacity was 1.54L (68.1% of predicted value), and the forced expiratory volume in one second was 1. 48 L/sec (85.5%
of predicted value), showing mainly a restrictive pattern. The carbon monoxide diffusing capacity corrected by alveolar volume (DLCO/VA) was
72.1% of the predicted value. High resolution computed tomography (HRCT) of the lung showed a diffuse thickening of the interlobular septal
lines and prominence of bronchovascular core structure, suggesting a diffuse interstitial infiltrative process. Bilateral pleural effusion
with mild pleural thickening was observed (Fig. 4). Because lymphangitic metastasis was suggested on chest CT and gastrointestinal tumor was
also suspected, bronchoscopy with transbronchial lung biopsy was done. There was no endobronchial lesion. After the procedure, the patient
complained of dyspnea, and inspiratory crackle was heard on the entire lung field. A chest radiograph revealed pulmonary edema and increased
pleural effusion. The dyspnea and pulmonary edema was improved by aminophylline and diuretics. Three days later, the patient suddenly
experienced dizziness after standing up and loss of consciousness, and cardiac standstill developed. Despite cardiopulmonary resuscitation,
the patient expired on the 22nd hospital day. A transbronchial lung biopsy specimen revealed diffuse hyaline thickening of the alveolar
septa and blood vessel walls. Polarizing microscopy following Congo-red stain revealed apple-green birefringence at the vascular walls and
along the alveolar septa (Fig. 5). Electron microscopic observation revealed a massive deposit of fibrillar material in the alveolar septum
(Fig. 6). Pulmonary deposition of amyloid was first described by Virchow in 1857. Thereafter three major types of pulmonary amyloidosis have
been described: the tracheobronchial, parenchymal nodular and diffuse alveolar septal types4). Minimal or moderate focal involvement of the
lung by amyloid deposits have been reported in up to 88% of the patients with primary systemic amyloidosis6). However, diffuse alveolar
septal amyloidosis is extremely rare5,7). In our case, a chest radiograph revealed bilateral diffuse interstitial infiltration which was
aggravated during a period of one year, and high resolution CT of the lung showed diffuse thickening of the septal lines, prominence of
bronchovascular core structure and bilateral pleural thickening with pleural effusion. A pulmonary function test showed mainly a restrictive
pattern and a mildly decreased diffusing capacity. Biopsy revealed diffuse hyaline thickening of the alveolar septum and blood vessel wall
on light microscope, along with apple-green birefringence on polarizing microscope following Congo-red staining. Considering the clinical
course and laboratory findings, it is certain that this case belongs to the category of diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis. The prognosis
for diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis is reported to be grave. The diagnosis of most patients is discovered at autopsy, and even if found
while the patients is alive, most show an inexorable progression to respiratory failure within two years8). The cause of death in pulmonary
amyloidosis is also related to cardiac involvement9,10) and there have been reports that cardiac involvement tends to parallel pulmonary
involvement6). Our case showed congestive heart failure, cardiac arrhythmia and a granular sparkling appearance of the myocardium on
echocardiography. Although there was no pathologic confirmation, it is evident that this case involved the heart, and sudden death was
related to cardiac amyloidosis, especially with conduction system involvement that was evident by ECG and Holter monitoring. Diagnosis of
systemic amyloidosis could be done by simple and safe methods, such as rectal biopsy or subcutaneous fat aspiration, if the clinician
suspects that entity of disease11). But pulmonary amyloidosis, especially the diffuse alveolar septal type, is extremely rare and very
difficult to confirm in living patients12). In English literature there are six cases reported of diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis for
which ante-mortem diagnosis was made by transbronchial lung biopsy up until 198712–15). In our case, a roentgenogram of the gastrointestinal
tracts showed multiple nodules, and a high resolution CT of the lung suggested the possibility of lymphangitic metastasis. In cases of
amyloidosis, transbronchial lung biopsies pose the risk of massive bleeding. But since we couldn’t completely exclude the possibility of
malignancy with systemic manifestations, we decided to perform fiberoptic bronchoscopy and transbronchial lung biopsy. Fortunately, we could
confirm the diagnosis of diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis without serious complication. The dyspnea aggravated after bronchoscopy was
probably due to congestive heart failure and soon improved. Kline et al. described three cases of pulmonary parenchymal amyloidosis
diagnosed by transbronchial lung biopsy via the flexible fiberoptic bronchoscope12). Although there was a report that serious complications
appeared during bronchoscopy and transbronchial lung biopsy in one patient with amyloidosis15), on the whole, bronchoscopy and
transbronchial lung biopsy are considered relatively safe methods if carried out with caution16). We recommend that bronchoscopy be carried
out under the monitoring of ECG and oxygen saturation and that an emergency operation team for open thoracotomy stand by during the
procedure to control any massive bleeding. Amyloid infiltrates in the gastrointestinal tracts have been reported frequently. Some patients
have masses that are interpreted roentgenographically as carcinoma or multiple polyps17,18). In our case, a multiple polypoid lesion shown
on a gastrointestinal roentgenogram was possibly due to amyloid deposits even though pathologically not proved. Our case also showed
nephrotic syndrome, a tingling sensation in both hands, gastrointestinal disturbance and orthostatic hypotension suggesting involvement of
the kidneys and peripheral nerves. In conclusion, this patient had pulmonary diffuse alveolar septal amyloidosis confirmed by transbronchial
lung biopsy, which also involved the heart, kidneys, gastrointestinal tracts and peripheral nerves. We suggest that when diffuse
interstitial lung disease is present with systemic signs, such as nephrotic syndrome or cardiac arrhythmia, amyloidosis should be considered
as a possible diagnosis and transbronchial lung biopsy be implemented as a useful confirmative diagnostic tool. Serial chest radiographs of
60-year-old female patient. A. The Initial radiograph shows bilateral diffuse ground glass appearing density, especially in the lower lung
fields. B. Radiograph obtained one year later A shows both aggravated lower lung field lesions. Note bilateral pleural effusion and
increased heart size as compared with radiograph A. A Holter ECG recording shows sinus bradyarrhythmia with junctional escape rhythm,
episode of paroxysmal supraventricular tachycardia (PSVT) and multiform ventricular premature beats (VPBs). A two-dimensional echocardiogram
shows a thickened left ventricular posterior wall, interatrial and interventricular septum. The myocardium shows an increased refractile
pattern, a so-called “granular sparkling” appearance. A high resolution CT obtained at right lower lung field (retrospective retargeting,
FOV 20 cm, 140KVP, 510 mAs, 512×512 matrix, bone algorithm) shows prominent interlobular septa (white arrowhead) and a central core
structure (thin arrow), as well as a diffuse, ill-defined, increased hazy density. Increased density between the rib and the lung (thick
black arrows) is due to pleural effusion. Polarizing microscopy following Congo-red stain reveals apple-green birefringence at the vascular
walls and along the alveolar septa (×400). Electron microscopic observation of the lung reveals massive deposition of fibrillar material in
the alveolar septum. The alveolar basement membrane (long arrows) is incorporated into the amyloid substance. Retractile white spots and
fibers (tiny arrowheads) in the amyloid pool are preexisting collagen fibers. Free space (stars) in the interstitium is due to interstitial
edema. Alveolar epithelial cells (P) are artifactually deformed. (E: endothelial cells; smaller arrows: capillary basement membrane). (Bar
represents 1 um, ×14,000) (Inset) Magnification of the amyloid substance reveals nonbranching fibrills of approximately 100 nm in length and
10 nm in diameter. Granular deposits, less than 10 nm in diameter, are scattered also. (Bar represents 0.1 um, ×56,000).
