In this case, a 51-year old local man presented to the emergency department (ED) with acute onset of central chest pain. The worst intensity was experienced four hours before arrival and was self-graded as 6/10. There was associated profuse sweating. His only cardiovascular disease risk factor was 40-pack/year history of smoking. On examination, he was afebrile and his blood pressure and pulse rate were 94/53 mmHg and 125/min, respectively. He was conscious and alert, had mild pallor, icterus, tea-coloured urine and hepatomegaly of three fingerbreadths under right hypocondrium with dull Traube's space. There were no remarkable findings on respiratory and cardiovascular examination. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed greater than 2 mm ST segment elevation in leads V1 to V3 suggestive of acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction (AMI) . Cardiac biomarkers inclusive of troponin I, creatinine kinase and creatinine kinase MB were normal (CK, 105 U/L; CKMB was less than 1 ng/mL; trop I was less than 0.01 ng/ml). Potassium was at 3.3 mmol/L (normal value, 3.5-5.5 mmol/L) with serum calcium of 1.94 mmol/L (normal value, 2.1-2.5 mmol/L) at presentation. Other investigation at baseline revealed high serum lactate (6.6 mmol/L), deranged renal function (urea, 32.8 mmol/L; serum creatinine, 216 umol/L), elevated bilirubin (78 micromol/L), and mildly elevated liver enzymes (ALT, 67; AST, 154). He was also anaemic with leukocytosis and thrombocytopaenic at presentation (Hb, 10.7 g/dl; total white cells, 11.4 × 10 9 /mm 3 and platelet 20 × 10 9 /mm 3, respectively). Of note, a blood film was sent for malaria parasite detection from the ED as the travel history might have prompted this, as this is not routinely carried out in all the febrile cases presenting to our ED unit. A clinical diagnosis of AMI was made in the ED and the patient was promptly referred to a cardiologist. Bedside echocardiogram performed and showed hyperdynamic contractility with preserved LV systolic function. Inotrope and oral statin were commenced and urgent coronaryangiography was performed, as thrombolysis was contraindicated due to his marked thrombocytopaenia. Angiography revealed normal coronary arteries and left ventriculogram. The diagnosis of AMI was revised, as the repeated cardiac enzymes at least six hour apart were also negative. Later, on further questioning, he revealed that he had been working in Gabon for six weeks, returning three weeks prior to his presentation. He had received yellow fever immunization but had not been advised to take any antimalarial chemoprophylaxis prior to travelling. A week after his return to Malaysia, he developed fever with myalgia but no chills or rigors. As the symptoms were not severe, he then flew to Hat Yai, Thailand for a vacation. He stayed there for four days before returning to Malaysia. With this history revealed, his blood film for malaria parasite was traced and found to be positive 24 hours later. On day 2 of admission, he was found to be tachypnoeic, hypotensive, pale, and jaundiced. He remained afebrile and examination of the other systems remained the same. Identification of the malaria parasite was done using Binaxnow® Malaria (Binax, Inc, Portland, ME, USA) rapid diagnostic test and confirmed to be Plasmodium falciparum via a real time PCR-based test . The parasite burden was 6%. The diagnosis was revised to severe malaria and intravenous artesunate and oral doxycycline were promptly initiated. He was promptly transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU). Unfortunately, a few hours after ICU admission he developed progressive hypoxemia due to acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) which necessitated invasive ventilation. He underwent continuous veno-venous haemodialysis (CVVHD) due to oliguric acute kidney injury with a peak urea of 14.3 mmol/L and creatinine of 450 micromol/L with noradrenaline support. Intravenous ceftriaxone was added to cover for possible super-added bacterial infection. Normoglycaemia was maintained throughout his stay in ICU with intravenous 5% dextrose solution. After six hours of commencement of the first dose of IV artesunate, the parasite count rapidly declined to 0.07%. Following anti-malarial therapy, the inotrope requirement was gradually reduced. The parasite count was undetectable after 48 hours of IV artesunate.
ECGs and the angiogram studies. A shows the ECG that was done at presentation, which showed ST elevations on the V1 to V3 leads suggestive of acute anteroseptal myocardial infarction. B shows the ECG done 5 days after the first ECG, which showed resolution of ST segment elevations without Q waves development. C, D and E show normal coronary arteries of right coronary artery, left anterior descending artery, left main stem artery and left circumflex artery respectively.
