A 50-year-old nonsmoker with paroxysmal atrial fibrillation was referred to our hospital for pulmonary vein isolation (PVI). He had a known 1-vessel coronary artery disease. Because of stable angina, a drug-eluting stent had been implanted into the midportion of the left anterior descending artery in 2010. Otherwise he was healthy. His medical treatment included warfarin, sotalol, an angiotensin-converting enzyme-inhibitor and a statin. Cryoballoon-PVI (Arctic Front Advance 28 mm; Medtronic) was scheduled under general anesthesia (international normalized ratio, 2–9; minimal activated clotting time, 300 s). After transseptal access, the left PV were targeted first, followed by the right inferior PV and right superior PV, respectively. PVI of all PVs could be visualized in real-time and gained within 40 s. Two freeze– thaw cycles were used for each PV, except for the left superior PV, which had to be treated 3×, because of an initially ineffective freeze ( in the Data Supplement ). The procedure had been uneventful, until a sudden blood pressure drop occurred (70/40 mm Hg), immediately after the second right superior PV-freeze. Cardiac tamponade was excluded. Twelve-lead ECG revealed global ST-depression and progressive ST-elevation in aVR, consistent with coronary main stem occlusion . Pulseless electric activity developed rapidly, necessitating cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Coronary angiography showed a severe spasm of the left coronary main stem, without evidence for air-or thromboembolism , which could be completely reverted by balloon dilatation and intracoronary nitroglycerine administration . The right coronary artery showed a less severe spasm, which was treated by nitroglycerine alone ( and 3B). Immediately after coronary reperfusion, ventricular fibrillation occurred, affording several direct current shocks. Because of severe global myocardial stunning, without effective myocardial contractions, an extracorporeal cardiac life support system (veno-arterial extracorporeal cardiac life support system) had to be implanted. Myocardial stunning reverted completely during the following 5 days, and the patient could be weaned from the extracorporeal cardiac life support system. He survived without any major focal neurologic deficit, but impairment of short-term memory was apparent during follow-up. Predischarge echocardiography showed normal biventricular function without wall motion abnormalities. About the used cryoballoon device, the manufacturer excluded a technical malfunction.
