Case 1 A 4-month-old girl was transferred to our center because of cardiogenic shock with unknown origin. Emergent echocardiography exhibited a dilated left ventricle with an ejection fraction of 10 %. Soon after admission, she developed ventricular tachycardia and circulatory collapse. We applied extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) with arterial perfusion through an ascending aortic cannula and venous inflow through a right atrial single cannula via a midline sternotomy. Epicardial echocardiography displayed the turbulent flow on the left main coronary artery. Direct aortography revealed 99 % stenosis of the ostium of the left main coronary artery and the right coronary artery connected to the left coronary arteries with small collateral arteries . On ECMO, the ascending aorta was clamped and cardiac arrest was induced with a cold crystalloid cardioplegic solution delivered antegradely. The infant underwentcoronary osteoplasty with an azygos vein patch, which was harvested and used as a patch to augment the stenotic ostium of the left main coronary trunk (LMT). The main pulmonary artery was encircled with a tape and retracted laterally to expose the left main coronary artery. The anterior oblique aortic incision was made and extended distally to the LMT up to 7 mm through the stenotic ostium . A fresh azygos vein patch was sutured to the LMT using a continuous 8–0 monofilament suture. The heart had been resuscitated on ECMO support for 4 days, and the patient was successfully weaned from ECMO. At discharge, echocardiography displayed a wide-open LMT with a physiologic laminar flow pattern and normal left ventricular systolic function with an ejection fraction of 65 %. Coronary angiography was performed 6 months after surgery and demonstrated a patent and smooth internal surface of LMT without aneurysmal dilatation and calcification . The collateral coronary arteries disappeared. She has been doing well for 3 years after surgery with a normal echocardiographic study and cardiothoracic ratio of 45 % on chest X-ray.
Case 2 A 10-month-old girl was referred to our center because of mitral regurgitation. Echocardiography showed no blood flow to the LMT and increased echogenicity of the papillary muscles leading to severe mitral valve regurgitation. Coronary angiography revealed 90 % stenosis of the LMT. She underwent the angioplasty of the LMT using an autologous azygos vein patch with the same technique as Case 1. In addition, artificial chordae were implanted to the anterior mitral leaflet and the anterior commissure was subsequently plicated. Her postoperative course was uneventful. Postoperative cardiac catheterization demonstrated the LMT patent, while mild-to-moderate mitral regurgitation was noted.
A 2-year-old girl was referred to our center for surgical treatment of an LMT obstruction and severe mitral regurgitation. Although the diagnosis was made at the age of 5 months in a former hospital, surgical intervention was Preoperative and postoperative coronary angiography. a Contrast medium was injected into the ascending aorta in an infant on ECMO during short-time clamping of the aorta. Severe stenosis of the left main coronary artery was identified (see arrow). b Postoperative coronary angiography, which was performed 6 months after surgery, showed a smooth shape of the proximal part of the LMT, which was augmented with an azygos vein patchabandoned because of difficulty in surgery. A coronary angiogram demonstrated complete obstruction of the LMT . There was a 6-mm distance between the ascending aortic lumen and the proximal blind end of the LMT which measured 1.2 mm in diameter. She underwent coronary revascularization using an azygos vein interposed between the ascending aorta and the distal LMT . Concomitantly, the elongated mitral chordae were shortened and the anterior mitral commissure was plicated. Postoperative cardiac catheterization, performed 17 months after surgery, indicated that the bypass graft was patent and the graft flow was smooth . The LV end-diastolic volume was decreased from 405 to 200 % of the normal volume. Two years after surgery, cardiac catheterization was repeated because of significant residual mitral regurgitation. Because organic changes of the mitral apparatus with calcification were noted, the mitral valve was replaced with a mechanical valve, sparing a posterior mitral apparatus. She has been doing well after the mitral valve replacement.
