A 75-year-old Chinese man who had been experiencing chest pain for 10 years presented at our institution. He was moderately active, doing odd jobs around the house, and accelerating angina over the past 2 years. The patient had been taking aspirin, nifedipine for high blood pressure and metformin for diabetes mellitus type 2 for almost 10 years. He smoked one pack of cigarettes per day for about 40 years before quitting the previous year. His past history was remarkable for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. At the time of admission, the physical examination showed heart rate (HR), 67 beats/min (bpm); blood pressure (BP), 156/89 mmHg; and blood glucose, 6.85 mmol/L. An electrocardiogram (ECG) showed a sinus rhythm with ST depression and T-wave inversion when chest pain occurred. A complete blood count and a basal metabolic profile were examined; the evaluation of kidney function, blood acid, base balance, and blood sugar levels showed that there were all within a normal range. The treadmill exercise test was positive, and showed ST depression on the ECG when chest pain or shortness of breath occurred. The patient's response to clopidogrel therapy was determined by * Correspondence: winterlee@hotmail.com † Equal contributors Department of Cardiology, Yuhuangding Hospital, Qingdao Medical College, Qingdao University, Yantai, Shandong Province, China testing for CYP450 genetic polymorphism, which showed non-resistance to such therapy. Testing for CYP450 genetic polymorphism was to predict response to clopidogrel . The patient was prepared for coronary angiography (and stent placement if necessary). Before the procedure, the patient's spontaneous baroreflex sensitivity (BRS), heart rate variability (HRV), and blood pressure variability (BPV) were measured . Six hours before the patient underwent coronary angiography, he was given 300 mg aspirin and 300 mg clopidogrel. An initial dose of heparin (100U/kg) was intravenously given before the procedure; an additional dose of heparin at 500U would be given if the procedure lasted 1 hour. The activated clotting time was maintained at 325 s. The coronary angiogram was done through the radial approach. The angiogramrevealed a proximal 90% diffuse stenosis with calcification in the middle segment of the left anterior descending artery , and 95% stenosis with calcification in the left circumflex artery . The right coronary artery was observed to have >80% diffuse stenosis with heavy calcification and occlusion in the middle segment . Two overlapping sirolimus-eluting stents (Cypher; Cordis, Miami, USA.), mounted on a balloon catheter, were inserted without a gap into the left anterior descending artery (stents were 36 mm in length and 3 mm in diameter) and the left circumflex artery (stents 14 mm in length and 3 mm in diameter), respectively . The stents were advanced into the narrowed section of the arteries. When the stents were positioned, the balloon was inflated. To ensure full expansion of the stents, the stent balloon was gradually inflated to 14 atm in 10 to 40 seconds. Because of chronic total occlusion in the right coronary artery, we attempted to pass a wire through the lesion but failed. Considering that collateral circulation was already present, we abandoned the stent placement into the right coronary artery. After the stenting procedure, the thrombolysis in myocardial infarction (TIMI) grade was 3, and no cineangiographic characteristics of thrombus were present. The procedure was uneventful without a special condition for the patient. Approximately 20 minutes after the procedure (18:40), the patient developed nausea, vomiting, sweating and slow breathing associated with diaphoresis and pale complexion. His blood pressure was 87/52 mmHg and heart rate was 39 bpm. At that time, the patient was conscious and had no chest pain. No evidence of bleeding or hematoma was found. The ECG monitor showed no change in ST/T waves. The HRV and BRS were, however, found to be greatly elevated  compared with the levels measured before stenting, suggesting VBA. After administration of 1.5 L intravenous saline with dopamine and atropine, the BP and HR slightly improved. However, at 22:50, the patient complained of precordial chest pain and diaphoresis, and presented drowsy, cold and clammy extremities. His peripheral pulses were not palpable, and blood pressure was not recordable. The ECG monitors showed ST elevation in leads V1, V2, V3 and V4; reciprocal ST depression in leads I, aVL and aVF; and sinus bradycardia with first-degree heart block. The cardiac troponin I (cTnI) testing value was 0.06 ng/ mL (normal value 0.04 ng/mL). A diagnosis of myocardial infarction associated with first-degree heart block and cardiogenic shock was made. Immediately a repeat coronary angiogram was done through the femoral approach, and the left anterior descending and circumflex arteries, into which the stents had been placed, were reexamined. The angiogram revealed thrombotic occlusion of the planted stents  in both the left anterior descending and circumflex arteries, with TIMI flow grades of 1 and 0, respectively. The thrombus burden was graded as G3 in the circumflex artery and as G4 in the left anterior descending artery. No evidence of artery dissection was found. An intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) was immediately inserted. The TIMI flow grade showed no improvement after runs of aspiration in the two arteries; at that time the patient was still in cardiogenic shock. An intracoronary balloon was placed at the location where the thrombi adhered in the left anterior descending and circumflex arteries. While continuing counterpulsation of the IABP, the thrombi in the stents disappeared shortly afterward . The patient was given tirofiban, aspirin, clopidogrel and heparin; the balloon counterpulsation was maintained until the patient's heart rate normalized and blood pressure stabilized. The patient was discharged with a normal echocardiographic evaluation, and was asymptomatic at follow-up.
