A 3-month-old boy presented to an outside hospital with a 3-day history of fever, truncal rash, red hands and feet, dry lips, and conjunctivitis. He was hospitalized for 4 days for a septic workup, and he received antibiotics prior to being discharged home. He returned to the emergency department 2 weeks later after an out-of-hospital cardiac arrest, for which he received bystander cardiopulmonary resuscitation. A transthoracic echocardiogram revealed poor biventricular function with multiple CAA. With these findings, a diagnosis of KD was made and he was transferred to our facility for potential extracorporeal membrane oxygenation support or transplant. The patient received IVIG and aspirin en route to our institution. On arrival, he was treated with infliximab (a chimeric monoclonal antibody against tumor necrosis factor alpha) and heparinized.A dopamine infusion was started to support myocardial function. Troponin levels were elevated at 14 ng/mL (normal <0.1 ng/mL). An electrocardiogram showed normal sinus rhythm with nonspecific repolarization abnormalities. Our echocardiogram revealed multiple CAA in the left anterior descending artery (LAD), in the right coronary artery (RCA) with small thrombus, and dilated circumflex artery . There was decreased anterior and septal wall motion of the left ventricle with decreased ejection fraction (EF) of 41% and decreased strain . A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) coronary angiography was performed using retrospective ECG gating. The left main coronary artery (LMCA) and proximal circumflex were diffusely ectatic, but the LAD remained unopacified suggesting complete occlusion at its origin . There was a giant 7.2-mm aneurysm in the proximal RCA containing thrombus, which occupied approximately 50% of the lumen . Additional CT coronary angiogram findings included multiple smaller aneurysms in the mid and distal portions of the RCA, occlusion of the circumflex artery, decreased anteroseptal systolic wall motion and an estimated left ventricular EF of 46%. The patient was taken to the cardiac catheterization laboratory for intracoronary thrombolysis  with careful selection of anesthetic agents in a patient with depressed myocardial function. Alteplase (0.2 mg) was administered 3 times directly into the LMCA but no improvement was noted in the obstruction. The patient returned to the intensive care unit with a systemic tPA infusion for 6 hours and was heparinized. An echocardiogram demonstrated small amount of flow in the LAD; however, the following day, an echocardiogram demonstrated no flow by color Doppler and moderately decreased systolic EF of 36%. The troponin started to rise again and the patient was restarted on tPA for 24 hours. Arepeat echocardiogram the following day demonstrated no flow in the LAD. Because of persistent elevation in troponin levels, abciximab 0.25 mg/kg intravenous bolus, followed by 0.125 µg/kg/h intravenous drip was administered for 12 hours to decrease the amount of thrombus burden in the coronaries. Forty-eight hours after the abciximab infusion, the echocardiogram revealed antegrade diastolic flow in the LAD . There were no bleeding complications from this medication. The patient was discharged home with enalapril, aspirin, clopidogrel, and enoxaparin. Two weeks later at follow-up, the patient had normal cardiac function with an EF of 63% and continued flow in the RCA, LAD, and circumflex arteries .
