A 51-year-old Japanese woman (body mass index = 21.0) with no medical history consulted the emergency room complaining of the sudden onset of anterior chest pain while shopping. She had no coronary risk factors. Her blood pressure was 192/100mmHg, and pulse was 64/ minute and regular. A 12-lead electrocardiogram demonstrated an increased ST-segment in V2 to V5 anterior chest leads , and echocardiography showed A 12-lead electrocardiogram in the emergency room demonstrated an increased ST-segment in V2 to V5 anterior chest leads.akinesis localized in her left ventricular apex. A laboratory study showed an increased level of white blood cells (10,480/μL) and a positive troponin T. Although there was no apparent triggering of the episode such as emotional or physical stress, we suspected LVBS based on the findings of persistent anterior chest pain in a postmenopausal woman with no coronary risk factors and left ventricular wall motion asynergy localized in the apex. Therefore, we performed emergency cardiac catheterization. Left ventriculography demonstrated akinesis in the apex and hyperkinesis in the basal area of her left ventricle, which closely resembled the typical findings of LVBS . Next, we performed CAG. Her right coronary artery and left circumflex artery showed no abnormal findings . However, the distal portion of her LAD artery looked like a withered branch (arrows in ). Because we considered the condition to have been induced by coronary vasospasm, we injected a total of 3mg of isosorbide dinitrate (ISDN) directly into her left coronary artery, but no change in her LAD artery appearance was observed. We did not try to perform any other imaging modalities, such as an intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) or an optical coherence tomography (OCT) for fear that those devices might be invasive to coronary lesions. At that time, because her chest symptom had mostly resolved and her vital signs had stabilized, we completed cardiac catheterization. We started continuous intravenous infusion of nicorandil at a rate of 2mg/hour and oral administration of aspirin and calcium blockers. Creatine phosphokinase was maximal at 1073mg/dL the next day. A Tc-pyrophosphate cardiac scintigram revealed an increased uptake of the radioisotope localized at the left ventricular apex. Based on her clinical course, she was diagnosed with apical myocardial infarction and discharged on day 8 of hospitalization after finishing cardiac rehabilitation.up echocardiography was undertaken twice per month post-discharge; her left ventricular apex remained hypokinetic throughout. This finding is discrepant with LVBS whereby the wall motion defect is reversible. After 5 months from the acute phase, she received follow-up CAG ( ,C). It was found that her LAD coronary artery had extended around the apex , and blood flow in the distal portion of her LAD artery had normalized compared with that in the acute phase . We suggest that improvement of her LAD artery appearance might be derived from remission of the coronary vasospasm or the natural healing of spontaneous coronary artery dissection (SCAD), and the prolonged reduced blood flow in the LAD artery in this case resulted in apical myocardial infarction mimicking LVBS.
