Mucocele of the appendix is a nonspecific term that is used to describe an appendix abnormally distended with mucus. This may be the result
of either neoplastic or non-neopleastic causes and may present like most appendiceal pathology with either mild abdominal pain or life-
threatening peritonitis. Urologie manifestations of mucocele of the appendix have rarely been reported. Laparoscopy can be used as a
diagnostic tool in equivocal cases. Conversion to laparotomy may be indicated if there is a special concern for the ability to remove the
appendix intact or if more extensive resection is warranted, as in malignancy. We here report our experience with a woman presenting with
hematuria whose ultimate diagnosis was mucocele of the appendix, and we review the appropriate literature. This case highlights the mucocele
as a consideration in the differential diagnosis of appendiceal pathology and serves to remind the surgeon of the importance for careful
intact removal of the diseased appendix. Mucocele of the appendix is a nonspecific term that is used to describe an appendix abnormally
distended with mucus. This may be the result of either neoplastic or non-neoplastic causes and may present like most appendiceal pathology
with either mild abdominal pain or life-threatening peritonitis. Urologie manifestations of mucocele of the appendix have rarely been
reported. We report our experience with a woman with mucocele of the appendix and review the relevant literature. A 34-year-old female
presented to our service with the complaint of lower abdominal and back pain increasing in severity over the last month. She stated she
experienced a single episode of gross hematuria one month ago and that although she had not noted other occur-rences of hematuria, the
abdominal pain consistently was worse with urination. The patient described the pain as sharp and constant. She denied nausea, vomiting or a
change in bowel habits, but had been having occasional fever. She was seen twice in the Emergency department without diagnosis or
resolution. The patient's past medical history included a tubal ligation, a cholecystectomy, and a pituitary adenoma diagnosed but not
treated. She denied any history of kidney stones. The patient is married with two children, smokes one-half pack per day and drinks alcohol
occasionally. Her family history is remarkable only for thyroid disease. Physical exam was significant only for a diffusely tender abdomen
upon palpation without peritoneal signs. The pain was more pronounced on the right anterior abdomen and right flank. The remainder of the
physical exam was unremarkable. Labs were noncontributory other than a white blood cell (WBC) count of 12,000/ml. Cystoscopy, upper GI
endoscopy and colonoscopy were negative. KUB (kidney, ureter, bladder) plain film was significant for a pea-sized opacity seemingly outside
the right lower border of the right kidney. Intravenous pyelography revealed a duplex ureter on the right and no filling defects in the
urinary system and confirmed an opacity apparently outside the free edge of the right kidney (Figure 1). Intravenous pyelogram showing
duplex ureter and multiple opacities outside the free edge of the right kidney. Computed tomography of the abdomen revealed a 7 cm × 1.5 cm
tube-like structure extending from the cecum to the liver and was otherwise within normal limits (Figure 2, 3). CT of abdomen showing soft
tissue density in the area of the cecum with associated calcification. CT of abdomen at the level of the lower liver showing upper extent of
cecal-based mass with calcification. At laparoscopy, the patient was found to have a grossly dilated appendix that extended from the
retroperitoneal cecum to the liver posteriorly. It was detached from the liver and successfully removed intact laparoscopically (Figure 4).
The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. Pathologic examination revealed a benign mucinous cystadenoma with mucocele formation
(Figure 5). Laparoscopic view of grossly dilated appendix being dissected off the cecum; the distal portion was first detached from the
liver. Microscopic appearance characteristic of mucinous cystadenoma; there is no evidence of deep tissue invasion. Mucocele of the appendix
has been described to occur more often in females and at an average age over 50.l It was originally characterized in 1973 with the term
retention cyst to describe a sterile outflow obstruction in the appendix that was dilated and swollen with glairy mucus. The term mucocele
has more recently been substituted. Patients almost always present with symptoms that are characteristic of any number of abdominal or
pelvic conditions. The porcelain appendix and the so-called volcano sign are two nonspecific diagnostic clues, but CT remains the most
suggestive tool. Mucoceles are occasionally diagnosed incidentally in the course of other surgery. On ultrasound, they have been known to
mimic ovarian cyst torsion. Mucoceles can be classified histologically into three types: Mucinous neoplasms of the appendix may be benign,
taking the form of hyperplasia or cystadenoma, or may more rarely occur as cystadenocarcinoma, which is malignant. Both benign and malignant
mucoceles may spontaneously rupture, secondary presumably to hypersecretion of mucus. These patients may present with a peritoneal cavity
filled with mucus, informally described as “jelly belly.” Mucocele characterized only by mucosal hyperplasia is an entity that
macroscopically resembles a hyperplastic colorectal polyp. Cystadenomas are also benign and may be treated similarly. Simple appendectomy
with free margins is curative for these nonmalignant mucoceles as long as they have not ruptured. Treatment for malignant mucoceles is
distinct in that the histologie diagnosis following appendectomy warrants a return to the operating room for a right hemicolectomy. Because
the neoplastic diagnosis is only determined by pathology, removal of the appendix requires caution as inadvertent rupture may lead to
seeding of the malignancy causing pseudomyxoma peritonei. Although rupture of a mucinous cystadenocarcinoma does not result in systemic
metastasis, excessive mucin in the peritoneum and pseudomyxoma peritonei may cause death due to infection or intestinal obstruction.
Laparoscopy can be used as a diagnostic tool in those cases which are equivocal. Conversion to laparotomy may be indicated if there is
special concern for the ability to remove the appendix intact or if more extensive resection is warranted, as in malignancy. Various
etiologies have been reported. Mucoceles secondary to obstruction have been reported to occur in endometriosis, cystic fibrosis, and in
cases of carcinoid. Additionally, mucocele has occasionally been reported to cause small bowel obstruction secondary to volvulus and to
intussusception. There has been one report of a mucocele secondary to diverticulitis.2 Mucocele of the appendix rarely presents with
urologie manifestations. Local or mass effects of mucoceles have been reported to cause hydronephrosis, and classic symptoms of urinary
tract infection (UTI), but have very seldom been reported to cause hematuria alone.3,4 In one case report, mucocele was responsible for
infertility, which resolved upon surgical removal of the diseased appendix. A variety of abnormalities of the appendix underscores the need
for routine pathologic examination of the appendix. Histopathology often changes both the diagnosis and the treatment, as in occult
parasitic infestation and malignancies. Although uncommonly reported in the literature, urologie symptoms may be a manifestation of
appendiceal pathology. In this case, back pain with hematuria was the primary presentation of a benign cystadenomatous mucocele of the
appendix. Laparoscopy allowed for definitive diagnosis and therapy. We recommend laparoscopy as the initial intervention and emphasize the
need for the careful intact removal of a suspected mucocele of the appendix.
