Gallbladder duplication is an unusual congenital biliary anomaly, and its laparoscopic management has rarely been described. This is a
report of a gallbladder duplication successfully treated with laparoscopic cholecystectomies. Previous cases are summarized, and
recommendations for optimal laparoscopic management are presented. Congenital duplication of the gallbladder is rare. Since the presence of
a double gallbladder was first reported in 31 BC by Pliny, 213 cases of true duplication of the gallbladder have been described.1 Boyden, in
1926, estimated the incidence of gallbladder duplication to be approximately 1 in 3000 to 4000, in a review from 10 institutions and
approximately 19000 cadavers and patients. In his review, only five cases of gallbladder duplication were observed. Two previous articles
have addressed the efficacy of laparoscopic cholecystectomy in the presence of gallbladder duplication.2,3 We present the second case of
unsuspected accessory duplication of the gallbladder successfully treated by laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A 52-year-old woman was seen
after several attacks of epigastric and right upper quadrant abdominal pain with radiation to the right upper back. The patient had a long-
standing history of cholelithiasis documented by sonography. A recent scintiscan had revealed normal visualization of the liver,
gallbladder, bile duct and duodenum. Her past medical history was notable for right breast cancer and subsequent TRAM flap reconstruction,
appendectomy and hysterectomy. Physical examination revealed surgical changes with no scierai icterus, organomegaly or Murphy's sign.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy for chronic cholecystitis was planned. Laparoscopy was performed using an open technique and placement of a
Hasson introducer at the umbilical site. After pneumoperitoneum was established, three additional ports were inserted, one in the left
epigastrium and two in the right upper quadrant. Pericholecystic adhesions of the omentum were identified. The gall-bladder fundus was
retracted in a cephalad manner and the infundibulum in a lateral direction, exposing the triangle of Calot. Adhesions were lysed with gentle
traction. The peritoneum of the infundibulum was swept medially, revealing the cystic duct-infundibulum junction to view. When a
satisfactory length of the cystic duct had been cleared, it was clipped and transected. The cystic artery was identified in its normal
location, and behind it a saccular structure was seen. The artery was gradually dissected free, clipped and transected. The saccular
structure was adherent to the hepatic bed and the hepatic aspect of the gallbladder. Using scissor dissection, the plane between the two
structures was developed. A small entry was created into the saccular structure with the release of a small amount of thick, whitish fluid.
No bile was seen. The gallbladder was excised using cautery in the standard manner. As the dissection proceeded, the teardrop shape of the
organ suggested gallbladder duplication rather than a choledochal cyst or bile duct diverticulum. A narrow cystic duct was identified,
clipped and transected. No associated artery was seen. The remainder of the operation was routine. The patient was discharged as an
outpatient, and her recovery was uneventful. Gross specimen is shown in Figure 1. Pathology demonstrated chronic cholecystitis with
cholelithiasis in the primary gallbladder and showed no histological abnormality in the accessory gallbladder. Gallbladder duplication can
be distinguished histologically from a choledocal cyst by the presence of a muscular wall with epithelial lining. Gross specimen with
accessory gallbladder in foreground. True duplication of the gallbladder results from the division of a single gallbladder primordium during
the fifth or sixth week of embryonic development. Two subtypes are recognized as true gallbladder duplications. The gall-bladders may share
a common cystic duct, the “Y type,” or may be divided by an internal or external septum, the “V type.”1,3–6 Accessory duplication of the
gallbladder arises from two distinct gallbladder primordia. This results in three sub-types. The first is the “H-shaped” or ductular type,
also the most common, in which two separate gallbladders and two separate cystic ducts join the common bile duct. The second is the duodenal
type in which the two cystic ducts enter the duodenum directly. The last is the trabecular type in which the accessory cystic duct enters
the right intrahepatic system (Figure 2). The position of the duplicate gallbladder may be subhepatic, intrahepatic, within the
gastrohepatic ligament or within the gallbladder fossa.3,7 True and accessory gallbladder duplication occur in approximately equal numbers
and with an even male to female ratio.1 Given the higher frequency of symptomatic cholelithiasis in women, duplication is seen more often
clinically in women. The classification of gallbladder duplication: A) Y shaped, B) V shapped (external), C) V snapped (internal), D) H
type, E) duodenal type, F) trabecular. No specific symptoms can alert the clinician to the presence of gallbladder duplication.1,6 Disease
may be present in one or both gallbladders. Previous cases have shown variations in disease between the separate gall-bladders. In one case
of triple duplication by Roeder et al, each organ contained a different histopathological pattern. One gallbladder contained cholelithiasis
and cholecystitis, the second gallbladder contained a papillary adenocarcinoma, and the third intrahepatic gallbladder was presumed to
contain no disease. Although gallbladder duplication may be documented by ultrasonography, other conditions such as a folder gall-bladder,
Phyrigian cap, gallbladder diverticulum or vascular band, choledochal cyst, and focal adenomyomatosis may mimic gallbladder duplication.8
Goiney et al suggested a more sensitive ultrasonographic sign of gall-bladder duplication. This sign consisted of isolated contraction of
the nondiseased gallbladder with absent contraction of the diseased gallbladder. Scintigraphy may also be falsely negative in cystic duct
obstruction of an accessory or double gallbladder.9 Endoscopie retrograde cholangiography (ERCP) is the most accurate test in displaying the
biliary tract anatomy of gallbladder duplication.3,9,10 if duplication is suspected, ERCP has been recommended to define the biliary tract
anatomy clearly before surgical intervention.3,7 The presence of multiple gallbladders may be easily missed at operation.1,6 Therefore, the
physician should consider the possibility of gallbladder duplication in a patient with persistent symptomatic cholelithiasis or the presence
of a subhepatic fluid collection following cholecystectomy.6 The failure to recognize the presence of a double gallbladder at the initial
operation can require reoperation.1 Few reports have addressed the successful excision of gallbladder duplication laparoscopically. It was
previously recommended that in suspected duplication, open cholecystectomy should be performed to expose the biliary anatomy accurately.6
However, it is our opinion that duplicated gallbladders can be safely removed laparoscopically if the gallbladder infundibulum-cystic duct
junctions are clearly identified. Two previous case reports describe successful laparoscopic excision in the presence of gallbladder
duplication. Miyajima et al presented a case where the presence of duplication was demonstrated by ERCP to be a “V shaped” type with an
internal septum prior to surgical intervention. At surgery, the gallbladder was removed intact without difficulty. Garcia et al described a
case of unsuspected gallbladder duplication, which was diagnosed at the time of laparoscopy. The initial gallbladder was taken down in a
standard fashion, exposing the presence of an accessory gallbladder. The biliary anatomy was defined with direct puncture of the accessory
gallbladder and transcystic cholangiogram of the primary gallbladder. A partial cholecystectomy was performed in the accessory gallbladder,
and a routine cholecystectomy was performed in the primary gallbladder. In our case, the infundibulum-cystic duct junctions were identified
on both the accessory gallbladder and the primary gallbladder on laparoscopic examination, and radiographie demonstration of the biliary
anatomy was not required for safe dissection. In this case, the diagnosis of duplicated gallbladder had not been made preoperatively despite
the fact that both ultrasonography and scintiscans had been performed. With no preoperative assessment of the bile duct anatomy by ERCP, and
with the diagnosis of gallbladder duplication made intraoperatively, when is it safe to proceed with laparoscopic cholecystectomy? That was
done in this case with the first, and largest, gallbladder, making its resection nearly routine. The second gallbladder was adherent to both
the liver and first gallbladder, but, with gentle exposure, the planes of dissection were readily apparent. Entry into the thin-walled
gallbladder suggested that any connection to the bile ducts would be minimal, as no bile was evident. As dissection developed the junction
between the infundibulum and cystic duct of the second gallbladder, it revealed the cystic duct to be diminutive. Cystic duct transection
was safe following identification of the junction, regardless of the proximal anatomy of the cystic ducts and common bile duct(s). The
diagnosis of gallbladder duplication is often made intraoperatively, and safe, definitive surgical management can be performed
laparoscopically without intra-operative cholangiography when the junction of the cystic ducts to the gallbladders can be identified and
dissected prior to clipping and transection. Otherwise, intraoperative cholangiography must be performed with consideration of open
cholecystectomy. There are few reported cases of laparoscopic cholecystectomy with gallbladder duplication. In the presence of gallbladder
duplication, both organs should be removed. This can safely be accomplished laparoscopically without cholangiogram if the infundibulum-
cystic duct junction can be clearly identified in both gallbladders. It is not necessary to radiographically demonstrate the anatomy of the
cystic duct-common bile duct junction to remove either organ. The surgeon should be aware of this entity in the symptomatic “post
cholecystectomy” patient.11
