We report a case of insufficiency fracture of the sternum in a 70-year-old female patient with a review of the literature. She complained of
sudden onset chest pain and aggravating dyspnea. She has been managed with corticosteroid due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease for
15 years. Diagnosis of sternal insufficiency fracture presented with thoracic kyphosis was made on the basis of absence of trauma history,
radiologic findings of lateral chest radiograph, bone scintigraphy and chest computed tomography. Thoracic kyphosis and osteoporosis
secondary to menopause, corticosteroid therapy and limited mobility due to chronic obstructive pulmonary disease were considered as
predisposing factors of the sternal insufficiency fracture in this patient. Insufficiency fractures occur in weakened bones unable to
withstand even the stresses of normal daily activities. Spine, pelvis and long bones of lower extremities are common sites of insufficiency
fracture1). Cases of sternal insufficiency fracture have been rarely reported in an elderly patient with osteoporosis or chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease (COPD) taking corticosteroid2) Osteoporosis often leads to thoracic kyphosis secondary to thoracic compression fracture.
Thoracic kyphosis may cause a bending stress on the sternum, which may result in sternal insufficiency fracture3). To make the diagnosis of
sternal insufficiency fracture, spontaneous fracture of sternum secondary to secondary neoplasm, lymphomatous infiltration and myelomatosis
must be excluded4–6). It has been emphasized that sternal insufficiency fracture should be considered in the differential diagnosis of acute
chest pain in the elderly7–8). Bone scintigraph contributes to the early diagnosis and chest computed tomography can confirm the diagnosis
and rule out the possibilities of metastatic spread9). Therapy for underlying causes, as well as pain control, must be included for the
treatment of sternal insufficiency fracture. We describe here a case of sternal insufficiency fracture in a patient with long-standing COPD
who had osteoporosis and thoracic kyphosis. A 72-year-old woman, a smoker with a 15 years history of COPD, was admitted to our hospital
because of anterior chest pain for 20 days. She denied any trauma history. She has been managed with corticosteroids after she was diagnosed
as having COPD. Recently, her dyspnea was aggravated with the onset of acute chest pain. On examination, she appeared acutely ill. Body
temperature was 37°C, respiration rate 30/min and blood pressure 120/70 mmHg. Auscultation of the chest showed coarse breathing sound
without rale and heart sound was normal. There was a tenderness on the sternum. Her initial laboratory findings were as follows: hematocrit
42.1%, leukocyte count 11,600 × 109/mm3 (neutrophil 71.8%, lymphocyte 20%, monocyte 7.4%, eosinophil 0.3%), platelet count 235,000 ×
109/mm3. The values for glucose, liver function, renal function, muscle enzyme and electrolytes were normal. Urinalysis was normal. Arterial
blood gas on room air revealed pH 7.443, PO2 of 64.7 mmHg, PCO2 of 38.9 mmHg, bicarbonate 26 mmol/L and O2 saturation of 93.7%. The
alveolar-arterial oxygen difference was 29.2 mmHg. Electrocardiogram revealed no definite abnormality. Lateral radiograph of the sternum
showed buckling fracture of the upper body of the sternum (Fig. 1), but her previous lateral radiograph of the sternum obtained 3 months ago
revealed normal appearance. Lateral chest radiograph demonstrated compression fracture of the 5th and 8th thoracic spine and osteoporosis
through the spine (Fig. 2). Bone scintigraph showed increased uptake at the upper body of the sternum, costovertebral junction of both 2nd
and 4th ribs, and compression fracture with hot uptake at 2nd, 3rd lumbar vertebrae (Fig. 3). Chest CT revealed cortical breakage at the
posterior aspect of the sternum with soft tissue swelling (Fig. 4). Lumbar spine bone density measured by dual energy x-ray absorptiometry
was reduced to 0.735 g/cm2 (T score;−3.21) at the level of L2. Her chest pain and dyspnea were declined by the administration of calcitonin
and analgesics. Stress fractures are classified as fatigue and insufficiency fracture depending on the amount of stress applied to bone and
on the elastic properties of the bone. Insufficiency fracture occurs when the elastic resistance of bone is inadequate to withstand the
stresses of normal activity. The spine, pelvis and lower extremities are commonly affected by these fractures1). Spontaneous sternal
insufficiency fractures have been rarely reported in elderly patients2,3,7–10). The sternum is an integral part of the thoracic cage, and
slight movement at the manubirosternal joints aids expansion of the chest during inspiration. The stresses of sudden forward angulation of
the thoracic spine in violent flexion are transmitted to the sternum by the ribs and clavicles. Bone loss with age and loss of elasticity
associated with ossification of the costal cartilage are major predisposing factors for sternal insufficiency fracture. Bones weakened by
osteopenia have insufficient elastic resistance to withstand even the minimal stress of normal daily activity. Sternal insufficiency
fracture, which has been attributed to chronically applied flexion compression stress to the sternum caused by accentuated thoracic
kyphosis, results from acute flexion-compression stress applied to the weakened sternum, particularly during forward bending9). The degree
of sternal displacement may vary with the extent of the kyphosis. But Chen et al. reported that sternal insufficiency fracture may occur
with or without thoracic kyphosis10). They classified sternal insufficiency fracture into two types- nonbuckling or buckling- and reported
that all buckling fractures were associated with thoracic kyphosis, whereas nonbuckling fracture may be presented with or without thoracic
kyphosis. Our patient had buckling type fractures with thoracic kyphosis. Hameed et al. reported spontaneous sternal fractures in four
patients with chronic obstructive pulmonary disease taking corticosteroid and suggested that corticosteroids treatment and limited mobility
secondary to their lung disease caused accelerated trabecular bone loss, which, in turn, lead to progressive thoracic kyphosis and deforming
stress to the sternum2). They also suggested that coughing may also cause sternal fracture. Our patient has suffered from COPD and has been
taking corticosteroid for 15 years. In most cases, sternal insufficiency fractures occur at the junction between the superior third and the
two inferior thirds of the sternal body7). If sternal fractures were accompanied by osteolysis and adjacent soft-tissue swelling, pathologic
fracture must be considered4). Spontaneous sternal fractures have been also reported in patients with myeloma, metastatic cancer,
lymphomatous infiltration, during labour or athletic activities. In our patient, pathologic fractures could be excluded on the basis of
clinical findings and absence of osteolysis. Patients with sternal insufficiency fracture usually have symptoms of chest pain4,6,11,12).
However, patients with buckling sternal insufficiency fracture may be asymptomatic. The chest pain may be similar to that of myocardial
infarction, acute pericarditis, pulmonary embolism and reflux esophagitis. Cardiopulmonary disorders as underlying causes of chest pain
could be ruled out by the electrocardiograph, laboratory findings and clinical course in our patient. Dyspnea in COPD patients with sternal
insufficiency fracture can be aggravated by paradoxical movement of the upper fractured fragment. If sternal insufficiency fracture is
clinically unsuspected, radiological investigation and accurate diagnosis might be delayed2). Sternal insufficiency fracture can be
confirmed by lateral chest radiographs which provide information about the location of the fracture, the stage in the process of callus
formation, additional thoracic vertebral fractures and thoracic kyphosis10). Bone scintigraphy is a very useful diagnostic tool in the
diagnosis of insufficiency fracture in various sites, such as the sternum13). Bone scintigraphy, which shows an intense horizontal or
oblique uptake, contributes to an early diagnosis. In most cases, increased uptake on bone scan is observed within 72 hours at the fracture
sites, but the bone scan may detect insufficiency fracture as early as 1 day after occurrence. It is also useful in monitoring the healing
process through gradual decrease in uptake intensity. The minimum time for return to normal is 5 months and, in 90% of patients, the
abnormal uptake disappears within 2 years14). Computed tomography provides information on the location, extent and stage of repair and helps
exclude the possibility of infection and malignancy15). Bone biopsy must be considered only in cases which are suspicious of malignancy and
infection. Abundant granulation tissue with reactive bone and hyaline cartilage are the main histological features in bone biopsy specimens
from the insufficiency fracture14). Analgesics or NSAID treatment can relieve the pain. Calcitonin therapy seems to be effective through
both its analgesic and anti-osteoclastic effects16). In addition, the underlying causes for osteoporosis should be recognized and
specifically treated. In summary, sternal insufficiency fracture should be included in the differential diagnosis of acute chest pain or
aggravating dyspnea in COPD patients, and radiologic studies, such as lateral chest radiography, bone scintigraph or CT, must be considered.
Lateral view of sternum reveals buckling fracture. The upper portion of sternal body was located posterior to the lower portion (arrow).
Lateral chest radiograph shows compression fractures of T5 and T8. Note osteoporosis and kyphosis throughout the thoracic spine. Bone
scintigraph reveals increased radioisotope uptake at body of sternum around 3rd costosternal area. Upper (2nd) and lower (4th) costochondral
junction of both ribs show increased uptakes. Chest CT with bone setting image reveals cortical disruption (arrow) and adjacent soft tissue
swelling at the posterior aspect of the sternum.
