Baker’s cysts are rare cause of peripheral nerve entrapment and only a few cases of tibial nerve entrapment resulting from the popliteal
cyst in the calf muscle have been reported in the literature. We present a case of rheumatoid arthritis complicated by a Baker’s cyst with a
tibial nerve entrapment. It is important to diagnose a Baker’s cyst early and to differentiate it from thrombophlebitis, a popliteal
aneurysm, tumor or muscle tear to effect optimal therapy and to obviate a potential neuropathy. Prompt recognition of these cases may save
the patients unnecessary procedures and delay in treatment. Baker’s cysts are found in severe polyarthritis and formed by the escape of
synovial effusion from the knee joint into one of the popliteal bursae, herniation of the posterior joint capsule or herniation of the
posterior knee synovium1) cysts are commonly. Although most Baker’s identified as an asymptomatic mass occurring just below the popliteal
fossa, the fluid may further extravasate into a deep compartment or cause nerve compression with symptoms of local pain and tenderness2)
Recently, we experienced a case of posterior tibial neuropathy caused by a Baker’s cyst in a 64-year-old woman who suffered from rheumatoid
arthritis. She had manifestations of posterior tibial neuropathy, including pain and numbness of the sole, weak flexion of the big toe and
decreased right ankle jerk. The diagnosis of entrapment neuropathy was entertained preoperatively by electromyography and nerve conduction
study. Her pain resolved following surgical removal of Baker’s cyst. We present this case with a review of the literature. A 64-year-old
woman was presented to us with a two-year history of poly arthritis, most marked in the knees and both hand proximal interphalangial joints
(PIP) and associated with left ankle pain, in October 1998. Past medical history revealed a history of hypertension and intracerebral
hemorrhage. Rheumatoid arthritis was diagnosed according to 1987 ACR revised criteria, based on a symmetric polyarthritis involving the PIP,
shoulders, left ankle and knees, morning stiffness and the presence of rheumatoid factor. She was treated with hydroxychloroquine and
methotrexate, but an exacerbation occurred involving the right knee in January 1999. Also, she had numbness of the right sole. At radiologic
evaluation of the knees, narrowing of the medial joint space and joint effusion were noted, but no erosion was seen. Treatment with local
steroid injection was resumed with increments of methotrexate doses. Within a few weeks of local steroid injection in the knee joint,
however, right knee pain worsened and numbness of the sole continued. She gave no history of prior injury or other paraesthesia. On physical
examination, she revealed pain and increased sensation along the plantar aspect of the right foot and the mass was palpable on the posterior
aspect of the right knee. Also, she showed weak flexion of the big toe and decreased right ankle jerk. A lobulated 4×4×3 cm3 cystic lesion
with inhomogeneous signal intensity was seen on ultrasound. The needle aspiration of the right knee joint was unproductive, and magnetic
resonance imaging of the right knee and popliteal fossa was obtained and revealed a Baker’s cyst(Figure 1). The cyst extended towards the
popliteal tendon and lateral collateral ligament and there was no evidence of deep vein thrombosis. On electromyography, 3+ and
2+fibrillation and positive sharp waves potentials were observed in the abductor hallucis and tibialis posterior showing abnormal
spontaneous response. During contraction, polyphasic motor unit was observed in the abductor hallucis and tibialis posterior. On nerve
conduction studies, proximal latency and amplitude in the right tibial nerve was 15.4ms and 0.1mV, showing low amplitude and delayed
proximal latency of right tibial compound muscle action potential. Repeated needle aspiration was unproductive, and open surgical procedure
was performed. At operation, a lobulated cystic lesion displacing neurovascular structures was released, but neurovascular invasion by a
cyst was not found(Figure 2). The cavity contained many folds and measured 4×4×3 cm3, and extended anteriorly toward the posterior cortex of
the tibia. The communication between the synovial compartment and the cavity was present near the popliteal hiatus. The biopsy finding was
compatible with Baker’s cyst due to rheumatoid arthritis(Figure 3). Her pain resolved following surgical removal of Baker’s cyst, but mild
degree of numbness remained. Baker’s cyst represents a distended gastrocnemio-semimembranosus bursae. The cyst has a synovial lining similar
to joint synovium and communicates with the knee joint by a long thin stalk. The cysts are formed by the escape of synovial effusion from
the knee joint into one of the popliteal bursae, herniation of the posterior joint capsule or herniation of the posterior knee synovium1.
Any intra-articular process associated with effusion may lead to distension of this bursa through a one-way valve mechanism. Although most
Baker’s cysts remain asymptomatic or are associated with only mild localized symptoms, a variety of complications have been
reported2–7,10,11). It may cause mild discomfort or pain and tenderness at the posterior aspect of the knee. Baker’s cysts can produce
neuropathy by direct pressure on the nerve, either gradually or suddenly. The most dramatic complication is acute rupture with the clinical
presentation often called the pseudothrombophlebitis syndrome10). Herein, we report the case of a patient with a Baker’s cyst complicated by
a posterior tibial neuropathy. It seems that although the cyst was unruptured, there were patient positions that could cause the expansion
of the Baker’s cyst, producing compression of the posterior tibial nerve. The diagnosis of entrapment neuropathy was entertained
preoperatively by electromyography and nerve conduction study. This case is interesting because tibial nerve neuropathy is rare in Baker’s
cyst. Previous reports in the literature on tibial nerve neuropathy from Baker’s cyst are summarized in Table 1. Nakano8 presented the first
clinical cases of 5 patients with entrapment neuropathy from Baker’s cyst. Four patients had classical rheumatoid arthritis, while foot-drop
developed in one man after trauma to the knee. In four patients, intra-articular steroid injections relieved the symptoms of pain, with
gradual return of motor and sensory function of the lower limb, while one patient required synovectomy. In 1985, Kashani et al.9) described
a case of degenerative joint disease of both knees, complicated by a Baker’s cyst. He responded well to knee joint aspiration and intra-
articular prednisone injection. Recently, Dash et al.3) reported a case with psoriatic arthritis, ruptured Baker’s cyst and entrapment
neuropathy. He was treated with intra-articular corticosteroid injections with improvement. It is important to diagnose a Baker’s cyst early
and to differentiate it from thrombophlebitis, a popliteal aneurysm, tumor or muscle tear, to effect optimal therapy and to obviate a
potential neuropathy. Intra-articular steroid injections often benefit the patient immediately, while refractory and recurrent cases may
require synovectomy11). T2 weighted magnetic resonance image of the left knee and popliteal fossa. The hyperintense lesion represents the
Baker’s cyst. Surgical specimen of Baker’s cyst showing lobulated cystic lesion. Biopsy specimen revealing a cyst with synovial lining which
is compatible with Baker’s cyst. Entrapment neuropathy from a Baker’s cyst. Review of the literature. RA - rheumatoid arthritis DJD -
degenerative joint disease PsA - psoriatic arthritis IAI - intra-articular injection
