The videolaparoscopic repair of a diaphragmatic hernia of Morgagni by external knot tying technique is described. A 69-year-old woman with
subocclusive symptoms by intrathoracic migration of abdominal viscera had an immediate and complete postoperative recovery. The hernial sac
was not excised. A four-year follow-up shows no hernia recurrence. This case indicated that the laparoscopic approach can be considered a
suitable and safe procedure for treatment of Morgagni's hernia. Morgagni foramen is a para-retrosternal defect resulting from an incomplete
fusion of the septum transversum and sternum with the anterior ribs. Hernias of this foramen are rare.1,2 Surgical treatment consists of
direct closure of the diaphragmatic defect, suturing by transabdominal or transthoracic access. We report a patient with hernia of Morgagni
who underwent a laparoscopic reduction and diaphragmatic defect closure. A formerly healthy, 69-year-old woman was seen at our department in
February 1995 because of epigastric pain and subocclusive symptoms for nine months. Barium enema showed a diaphragmatic herniation. A chest
x-ray displayed a shadow in the lower anterior mediastinum. A computed tomography showed a gross diaphragmatic anterior hernia with partial
right and transverse colon migration (Figure 1). The diagnosis of hernia of Morgagni was made, and the patient was considered for repair of
the diaphragmatic defect by the laparoscopic approach. CT scan reveals the bowel herniated in the lower right anterior mediastinum. The
patient was placed in a supine position and at 45° anti-Trendelenburg. Close CO2 pneumoperitoneum (12 mm Hg) was performed with a Veress
needle. A 10-mm trocar was inserted through the umbilicus for the video-laparoscope. The diagnosis of hernia of Morgagni was easily
performed. Two additional 10-mm trocars were placed in the left and right flanks. The herniated bowel was gently pulled down with grasping
forceps and placed entirely into the abdominal cavity (Figures 2, 3 and 4). The defect was ovoid and was closed with interrupted polyester
stitches (Ethibond-Ethicon) using the external knot-tying technique. An aspirate drainage was left in the diaphragmatic defect (Figure 5).
Another drainage was left in the abdominal cavity. Trocars were retrieved under direct endoscopic vision, and the fascial incision was
closed with glycolic acid (Vicryl-Ethicon). A chest xray showed the successful laparoscopic closure of the diaphragmatic defect (Figure 6).
Recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged four days after surgery. Laparoscopic view of hernia of the foramen of Morgagni
containing colon and omentum. Colon and omentum were gently pulled out from hernial defect. Videolaparoscopic view of hernial defect after
reduction of its content. Only falciform ligament is in. An aspirate drainage was left in the sac before closing last stitches. Chest x-ray
done after operation, showing no evidence of Morgagni's hernia. After 12, 24, 36 and 48 months follow-up, the patient was symptom-free,
without recurrence of her Morgagni's hernia (Figure 7). Chest x-ray done four years after the laparoscopic repair, showing no evidence of
hernial recurrence. Giovanni-Battista Morgagni first described this type of hernia in 1761.2 The origin of the retroxyphoid diaphragmatic
defect is mainly congenital, rarely traumatic.3,4 Being overweight and having scoliosis are often associated with this type of hernia.5
Morgagni's hernia represents approximately 1-3% of surgically treated diaphragmatic hernias.1,5 The defect is usually small and contains a
sac with herniated omentum, transverse colon and, more rarely, liver, small bowel and stomach.6–8 Many hernias are frequently found in
adults. They are often asymptomatic and diagnosed incidentally by a chest X-ray.6,7,9 They may also produce epigastric and/or retrosternal
discomfort or bloating. Acute symptoms are rare and are almost always due to large bowel obstruction.8 In infants, respiratory distress and
cyanosis are more frequent symptoms.10 Plain roentgenograms usually differentiate the hernia of foramen of Morgagni from other masses (lung
or mediastinal tumors, pericardial fat pad, pleural, pericardial, mediastinal or diaphragmatic cyst) or pathologies (atelectasis,
pneumonia). Barium enema, computed tomography and magnetic resonance may be required to confirm the diagnosis.6,8,11,12 Although
complications are rare, because of potential strangulation, hernia of Morgagni foramen should be repaired. The standard surgical procedure
requires laparotomy or a thoracotomy. After viscera reduction into the abdominal cavity, the sac can or cannot be excised. The defect is
closed with nonabsorbable suture.6 Both the laparotomic and thoracotomic approach require a long postoperative recovery period, with
significant mortality and a prolonged rehabilitation period. Conversely, the laparoscopic approach for treatment of Morgagni hernia results
in an immediate return to normal diet and activities. Literature review of laparoscopically treated Morgagni's hernia is reported in Table
1. Regarding the technique of defect closure, in a previous report Kuster has underlined that the hernial sac does not needed to be
removed.6 This removal, in fact, may result in massive pneumomediastinum with potential respiratory and circulatory complications. In
Kuster's technique, the diaphragmatic defect was closed by a nonabsorbable monofilament with continuous suture joining the subcostal and
retrosternal peritoneum to the full thickness of the diaphragmatic edge. Then the suture was percutaneously brought back anteriorly to the
abdomen. A 2-cm skin incision was made, through which the two ends of the suture were tied in subcutaneous tissue.6 More recently,
Fernandez-Cebrian has described a patient in whom the hernial sac was removed without complications.13 Also, in this case, the defect was
repaired with a continuous suture, but with intra-abdominal knotting. In our own experience, the sac was not removed to avoid the
unacceptable risk of damage to the pericardium and/or the mediastinic or diaphragmatic pleura. Cases of fatal pneumopericardium have been
reported after dissection of the peritoneal sac in children.14 We preferred to close the defect with interrupted nonabsorbable suture using
an extra-abdominal knot-tying technique. In fact, in our own experience and in the literature, it has been noted that separate stitches are
preferable to avoid tissue tearing. Moreover, extracorporeal knotting has been shown to be easier to perform and is less time consuming than
intracorporeal techniques.15 The drainage is generally left in place of an empty cavity, according to traditional principles of general
surgery. Probably, it is not useful, but, since we did not have any previous experience with this kind of operation, a prudential approach
was preferred. Rau in 1994,11 Huntington in 1996,16 Orita17 in 1997, and Del Castillo18 in 1998 reported a successfully repaired
laparoscopic Morgagni hernia by stapling a mesh prosthesis. Rau did resect a peritoneal sac, and the prosthesis was covered with a flap of
falciform ligament and with ligament teres.11 Huntington did not resect the sac, and the prosthesis was covered by a peritoneal reflection
obtained by a peripherical incision for several centimeters around the defect.16 In the Orita experience also, the sac was not removed, and
the operation was conducted by a gas-less approach to facilitate the suturing technique.17 Vinard, in 1997, presented a case that allowed
satisfactory surgical repair by simple closure of the hernial orifice with a running suture.8 Because of the lack of experience reported in
the literature, it is not possible to define whether or not mesh placement is better than a suture for closing the Morgagni's hernia. It is,
however, noteworthy that the classic repair by the laparotomic approach is the direct suture of the linear hernial orifice.19 A large cavity
is observed only with pneumoperitoneum. Moreover, laparoscopic repair can be successfully associated with other procedures, such as
cholecystectomy.7,9,13 Follow-up of operated patients was reported only by some authors and only in one case for 24 months. It is not known
whether or not patients were recurrence free after longer follow-up. In the patient herein reported, follow-up was done for more than four
years and showed the absence of symptoms or recurrence. Laparoscopic Repair in Cases of Morgagni Hernias: Literature Review. In =
incidental; preop = preoperative; NR = not reported; Y = yes; N = non; RS = running suture; SS = separate stitches; A = stapled agraphes; D
= drainage. Independently from the laparoscopic surgical technique used, literature data and our own experience indicate that the
therapeutic and rehabilitative advantages that are well proved for cholecystectomy and other videolaparoscopic procedures with respect to a
laparotomic approach can be extended to patients with hernia of foramen of Morgagni as well.
