Idiopathic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis, in adults, is a rare disease. Partial gastrectomy, gastroenterostomy, pyloromyotomy, pyloroplasty
and endoscopic dilatation have all been recommended with variable results. A 54-year-old white female is presented with the onset of
symptoms of idiopathic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis one year prior to operation. Two endoscopic pyloric sphincter balloon dilatations
provided only temporary relief. A laparoscopic pyloroplasty was performed. The patient tolerated a solid diet on postoperative day three.
The patient was symptom-free at a 13 month follow-up. Idiopathic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis in adults can be treated with laparoscopic
pyloroplasty, offering a minimally invasive alternative to open repair. Adult idiopathic hypertrophic pyloric stenosis (AIHPS) was first
described by Jean Cruveilhier in 1835.1 It is a rare disease and presents in adult life as pyloric obstruction, without a history of
vomiting in infancy or other gastrointestinal symptoms. Abdominal distention relieved by vomiting is usually the only physical sign. All
patients experience weight loss.2 Diagnosis is made with barium contrast upper GI series and upper endoscopy.3,4 Malignancy has to be ruled
out. Optimal treatment should provide relief of obstruction, low recurrence and low operative morbidity, since AIHPS is a benign disease.
Pyloromyotomy, pyloroplasty, gastrojejunostomy, endoscopic dilatation and gastrectomy have all been recommended for AIHPS.5 We diagnosed
AIHPS in a patient who presented with postprandial vomiting and weight loss. Laparoscopic pyloroplasty was performed after two failed
attempts of pyloric sphincter balloon dilatation. The patient is a 54-year-old white female with a history of postprandial pain and vomiting
for one year. Upper endoscopy revealed a stenotic pyloric channel. Endoscopic pyloric sphincter dilatation was performed using a 45 French
balloon. Her symptoms returned one month later. Computerized tomography was negative for masses or adenopathy. A second endoscopy revealed
recurrent pyloric stenosis. Biopsies were negative for malignancy, and balloon dilatation was repeated. Symptoms of fullness and meal
intolerance returned after two months. Laparoscopic pyloroplasty was then performed for symptom relief. The patient was placed in a modified
lithotomy position with the surgeon at the foot of the operating table and an assistant at each side. A Veress needle was inserted, and the
abdomen was insufflated with CO2 gas up to a pressure of 14 cm H2O. Laparoscopic pyloroplasty requires five ports arranged similar to that
used in Nissen fundoplication: one 12-mm port for the laparoscope, three 5-mm working ports, and one additional working port for retraction
of the liver and falciform ligament. The 12-mm port was placed in the midline, 4 cm above the umbilicus. Two 5-mm ports were placed in the
right upper and left upper quadrant at the anterior axillary line. The two remaining 5-mm ports were placed at the left and right
midclavicular line, both at the level of the umbilicus. Alternatively, the ports may be placed lower in the abdomen, or a sixth port may be
used. The duodenum was mobilized with a modified Kocher maneuver to avoid tension on the anastomotic line. This mobilization was achieved
using two atraumatic babcock clamps and the harmonic scalpel. The harmonic scalpel was also used to perform a longitudinal pyloromyotomy. A
nasogastric tube was required for decompression of the stomach, and suction was available to avoid spillage of duodenal contents. The
pyloric opening was then approximated in a transverse fashion with one layer of full thickness, 2-0 Ethibond interrupted sutures (Weinberg
pyloroplasty). The first approximating sutures were tied extra-corporeally to relieve tension, and the remaining were tied intracorporeally.
The operative time was two hours, and there were no intraoperative complications. Radiographic study with gastrografin on the first
postoperative day showed no leak of contrast and no evidence of obstruction. The nasogastric tube was removed, and the patient was placed on
a clear liquid diet. The diet was advanced to full liquids on the following day. On postoperative day three, a soft diet was introduced, and
the patient was discharged home. Thirteen months after surgery, the patient is tolerating a regular diet and is completely symptom free.
Adult hypertrophic pyloric stenosis is classified into three types.2,3 The first type is the late stage of infantile hypertrophic pyloric
stenosis, which is easily diagnosed from the history of symptoms during infancy. The second type is hypertrophic pyloric stenosis commencing
in adult life but secondary to other disease in the upper gastrointestinal tract. This can be a hiatal hernia, duodenal ulcer, gastric
ulcer, tumors or inflammatory diseases. This type is the most common and is recognized by a long-standing history of gastrointestinal
complaints recently complicated by obstructive symptoms. Primary “idiopathic” hypertrophic pyloric stenosis presenting in adult life without
any apparent cause is the third type. In this entity, there is no history of vomiting during infancy or other gastrointestinal symptoms.
AIHPS is further divided into two groups. In one group, there are no complications from the stenosis. In the complicated variety, there is
gastritis or peptic ulcer. The sequence of events can differentiate this type from the secondary type of hypertrophic pyloric stenosis.2
Diagnosis is based upon history, clinical and radiological findings and endoscopic appearance. The main symptom in every patient is
postprandial upper abdominal distension. The discomfort is relieved by vomiting. Nausea and pain are minimal during vomiting. Anorexia and
early satiety can be present. All patients experience weight loss. The absence of pain at the onset of symptoms is a significant diagnostic
point. The duration of symptoms can range from 5 weeks to 16 years.2 Several radiological signs have been described related to AIHPS. The
length of a normal pyloric canal is no more than 1 cm. In AIHPS, the length may extend up to 4 cm. A convex indentation at the base of the
duodenal bulb, known as Kirklin's sign, is another indication of AIHPS. An eccentric or concentric narrowing of the pyloric region is the
“string sign.” The “Twining's” sign is a barium filling defect, which can project to either or both sides of the pylorus. It is located 4 to
6 cm proximal to the base of the duodenal bulb.2,3,6 Some or all these findings can distinguish AIHPS from other diseases. In contrast,
there are reports that “typical” cases are rare, and the radiological picture is highly variable. Some patients with AIHPS have repeatedly
normal radiographs. In addition, patients with pyloric carcinoma have had x-rays similar to those seen in AIHPS.7 Endoscopically, the
pylorus is fixed, markedly narrow and has a smooth border. Its appearance has been described as the “cervix sign,” or even as a “donut.” The
pylorus fails to close completely even though the peristaltic waves appear to culminate in some degree of contraction in the pyloric area.
The main advantage of endoscopy is that it can easily differentiate AIHPS from other diseases that cause gastric outlet obstruction.3,6
Biopsy should always be taken to exclude malignancy.4,5 Surgical exploration has been advised to establish diagnosis and provide treatment.
Gastrectomy, gastrojejunostomy, pyloromyotomy and pyloroplasty have been recommended for AIHPS. Full-thickness biopsy is proposed for the
exclusion of malignancy.2,5 Most reports in the literature have advocated subtotal distal gastric resection. Pyloromyotomy is undesirable
because of possible mucosal laceration and late diverticula. Pyloroplasty is considered technically difficult if the pylorus is grossly
thickened and is reserved for the debilitated patient.8 Brahos and Meck have performed a double pyloroplasty in one patient. The closure was
completed without tension, and a wide pyloric channel was produced.9 The benign nature of the disease prompted Levine et al to suggest non-
operative diagnosis and treatment. The authors have concluded that laparotomy is not required for the diagnosis and that gastroscopic
findings are more important than radiographic findings.4 Dye et al treated a poor operative candidate with endoscopic dilatation.
Examination with barium on the following day showed only a slightly wider pyloric channel. The patient subsequently was placed on a solid
diet but had occasional vomiting.3 Endoscopic balloon dilatation performed for benign pyloric stenosis from other causes resulted in a high
recurrent obstruction rate. In two separate studies, the authors suggested that endoscopic dilatation may palliate symptoms but should be
reserved only for patients with high operative risk.10,11 The patient we are presenting had only temporary relief after two balloon
dilatations. The first laparoscopic pyloromyotomy for infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis was performed in 1990.12 Since then, many
series have shown that the laparoscopic approach is safe, efficient, offers improved cosmesis, earlier postoperative recovery and shorter
hospitalization.13 The benign nature of the disease in adults mandates a surgical treatment that can be performed safely and effectively
with low morbidity and mortality rate. It is reasonable to relieve the pyloric obstruction as directly and atraumatically as possible. A
major operation like gastric resection seems unnecessary for a benign process. The diagnosis can be performed more safely with endoscopy,
and pyloroplasty has less morbidity than gastrectomy. Laparoscopic pyloroplasty is a technically feasible operation requiring laparoscopic
suturing skills. It can be safely performed in AIHPS. It provides treatment while preserving the benefits of a minimally invasive surgical
technique in the debilitated patient. Laparoscopic pyloroplasty is safe, effective and offers decreased pain, hospital stay and
postoperative disability. Larger studies and longer follow-up are required for its establishment as the treatment of choice. The authors
acknowledge the support of the library technician Abbie Sheloush.
