Gastric volvulus can be a medical emergency with life-threatening complications. Early surgical intervention is important to avoid potential
ischemic complication that may lead to infarction of the stomach. The condition has been reported in children and in the elderly, but the
majority of cases are reported in the fifth decade of life. We present a case of a complication arising from corrective laparoscopic surgery
for gastric volvulus, whereby most of the small bowel herniated around the anterior laparoscopically performed gastropexy. The herniation
was reduced during a laparotomy, and the space through which the herniation occurred was closed. A 79-year-old male presented to the North
Shore University Hospital Emergency Department with a three-day history of anorexia, nausea and coffee ground emesis. The symptoms began
three days earlier when he awakened at night nauseated and achieved only mild relief by vomiting. In the days leading up to admission, the
patient continued vomiting dark, grainy coffee ground emesis at least five times per day with concurrent loss of appetite. His last bowel
movement was one day prior to the onset of symptoms, and his overall condition worsened with time. The patient stated that he had increased
his intake of NSAID for about one week prior to the initial symptoms due to progressing osteoarthritic pain. Further, he admitted to an
increase in consumption of alcohol. On examination, the patient was alert, oriented and in moderate distress. He was afebrile with a pulse
of 127 bpm, blood pressure of 82/33 torr, and a respiratory rate of 19 breaths per minute. He appeared thin, weak, with poor skin turgor and
dry oral mucosa. The lung exam revealed poor distant breath sounds at the area of the left lower lobe. The abdomen was mildly distended, but
soft, non-tender, without guarding or palpable masses. Bowel sounds were distant. Stool was guaiac positive. The remainder of the exam was
unremarkable. Relevant laboratory results were as follows: hematocrit 39.5%, sodium 136, bicarbonate 30, and BUN/creatinine were 77/2.2. The
anion gap was 8. The remainder of the electrolytes, liver function tests, and the urinalysis were within normal limits. The chest x-ray
showed left basal, possibly lingular atelectasis, while the abdominal x-ray revealed a nonspecific bowel gas pattern with stool in the
colon. The past medical history of the patient was significant for osteoarthritis, hypertension and one transient ischemic attack. Twenty
months prior to the present illness, the patient presented to the emergency room with similar symptoms with mild hematemesis. Extensive
work-up revealed a paraesophageal hernia and a gastric volvulus along with erosive esophagitis. The patient underwent laparoscopic repair of
the crus of the diaphragm and an anterior gastropexy to prevent recurrence of volvulus. Based on the history and clinical picture, the
initial working diagnosis was that of gastritis secondary to the NSAIDs and the increased alcohol intake. He was vigorously rehydrated. An
upper endoscopic evaluation revealed severe erosive gastritis with a gaping lower esophageal sphincter permitting reflux and causing distal
esophagitis. The patient, however, did not improve after several days of medical therapy with propulcid, erythromycin and prilosec, so an
upper GI series with small bowel follow-through was performed (Figure 1). It revealed that most of the small bowel was displaced to the left
upper quadrant with one loop of distal ileum coursing to the right lower quadrant to join a medially displaced cecum. These findings were
consistent with an internal hernia around the site of the anterior gastropexy. The patient was taken to the operating room. A laparoscopic
exploration was done that confirmed the diagnosis. The small bowel had herniated to the left upper quadrant through the space created
between the anterior gastropexy and the falciform ligament. An upper GI with small bowel follow through showing the small intestine in the
left upper quadrant and the terminal ileum in the mid abdomen. Attempts at laparoscopic reduction of the small bowel (SB) were not
successful, so a laparotomy was performed. The SB was reduced without any difficulty. It was viable with no evidence of ischemia. The defect
through which the herniation occurred was closed by suturing the greater curvature of the stomach distal to the gastropexy to the anterior
abdominal wall and medially to the falciform. Postoperatively, the patient recovered without complications and was discharged home a few
days later. The patient was doing well on follow-up a month later. Gastric volvulus is an uncommon but potentially life-threatening problem.
In its acute and complete form, the presentation is characteristic. Patients present with unproductive retching, abdominal distention and
inability to pass a nasogastric tube (Borchardt's Triad). The rotation can be organoaxial (more common) or mesenteroaxial. The
pathophysiology is laxity in the ligamentous attachments of the stomach (gastrophrenic, gastrohepatic, gastrosplenic and gastrocolic). This
can be seen with age or secondary to gastric distention caused by disorders such as pyloric hypertrophy or stenosis.1 The management
consists of immediate reduction of the volvulus. This may be achieved endoscopically, laparoscopically or by an open surgical procedure. If
the stomach is viable, an anterior gastropexy can be performed with any of the mentioned approaches. However, if there is evidence of
gastric necrosis then an emergent gastrectomy is indicated. Several authors have reported laparoscopic anterior gastropexy for gastric
volvulus. The techniques differ, however. Some suture the fundus to the diaphragm and the greater curvature with one anchoring stitch to the
anterior abdominal wall,2 others have more than one anchoring point to the anterior abdominal wall.3 A combined laparoscopic and endoscopic
approach has been used by Newman et al4 and Koger et al,5 whereby one or more endoscopic gastrostomies were part of the anterior gastropexy.
Laparoscopic-assisted gastropexy using T-fasteners for anchoring the stomach to the anterior abdominal wall has also been described.6 The
usual reported complication of anterior gastropexy is recurrence of the volvulus.7 This case is an unusual complication of laparoscopic
anterior gastropexy for gastric volvulus. The adhesions formed in an open procedure will probably prevent any such herniation from
happening. With laparoscopic surgery, adhesions are minimal; thus, the potential for herniation is there. Our patient seems to have had
gastritis precipitated by the NSAIDs and the increased alcohol intake. The doubling over and increased intra-abdominal pressure associated
with the vomiting that pursued may have led to the rostral displacement of the small bowel with herniation into the left upper quadrant
around the attachment of the stomach to the anterior abdominal wall. Review of the laparoscopic literature did not reveal a similar
complication. To avoid similar complications, anchoring the stomach along the greater curvature at several sites, or performing a concurrent
gastrostomy will help obliterate open spaces and the herniation that may ensue.
