Current strategies for the immunotherapy of melanoma include augmentation of the immune response to tumor antigens represented by
melanosomal proteins such as tyrosinase, gp100, and MART-1. The possibility that intentional targeting of tumor antigens representing normal
proteins can result in autoimmune toxicity has been postulated but never demonstrated previously in humans. In this study, we describe a
patient with metastatic melanoma who developed inflammatory lesions circumscribing pigmented areas of skin after an infusion of
MART-1–specific CD8+ T cell clones. Analysis of the infiltrating lymphocytes in skin and tumor biopsies using T cell–specific peptide–major
histocompatibility complex tetramers demonstrated a localized predominance of MART-1–specific CD8+ T cells (>28% of all CD8 T cells) that
was identical to the infused clones (as confirmed by sequencing of the complementarity-determining region 3). In contrast to skin biopsies
obtained from the patient before T cell infusion, postinfusion biopsies demonstrated loss of MART-1 expression, evidence of melanocyte
damage, and the complete absence of melanocytes in affected regions of the skin. This study provides, for the first time, direct evidence in
humans that antigen-specific immunotherapy can target not only antigen-positive tumor cells in vivo but also normal tissues expressing the
shared tumor antigen. The appearance of vitiligo in melanoma patients is thought to be the result of immune-mediated destruction of
melanocytes through recognition of shared target antigens and has been associated with clinical response 12. However, there has been no
direct evidence that either a cell-mediated or humoral event is responsible for melanocyte destruction, and no demonstration that targeting
a specific antigen in melanoma patients results in vitiligo. Current trials of immunotherapy in melanoma have been directed at melanocytic
differentiation antigens such as MART-1/MelanA, gp100, and tyrosinase 3456. To evaluate the efficacy and potential toxicity of targeting the
MART-1 antigen 7, a clinical trial using adoptively transferred CD8+ CTL clones was initiated. In this report, we describe a patient who
developed unusual inflammatory skin lesions after an infusion of MART-1–specific CTLs and provide direct evidence in humans that antigen-
specific immunotherapy can target not only antigen-positive tumor cells in vivo but also normal melanocytes expressing a tumor-associated
self-protein. Studies using human subjects received prior approval by the Institutional Review Board at the Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research
Center and the University of Washington. PBMCs were obtained from donors by leukapheresis. MART-1–specific CTL clones were generated as
described previously 89. In brief, autologous PBMCs were stimulated using antigen-presenting cells pulsed with the A2-restricted peptide
epitope of MART-1 (M27:AAGIGILTV 10). After three cycles of stimulation, T cells were cloned by limiting dilution and expanded for in vitro
testing. CTL clones demonstrating specific lysis of M27 peptide–pulsed and MART-1–positive tumor targets in a chromium release assay were
selected for infusion. Clones used for infusions 1 and 2 were transduced with the inducible suicide gene, hygromycin-thymidine kinase (HyTK;
a gift of Targeted Genetics Corporation, Seattle, WA, and the National Gene Vector Lab, Indianapolis, IN; reference 11). CTLs transduced
with HyTK express the resistance marker, hygromycin phosphotransferase, to permit in vitro selection, and the HSV thymidine kinase gene to
permit in vivo ablation with low dose ganciclovir should toxicity due to the infused T cells occur. The transduction protocol for CD8+ CTL
clones and characterization of HyTK-transduced T cells have been described previously 12. Tetramers were made according to the protocol of
Altman et al. 13. In brief, human β2-microglobulin and the soluble domain of the HLA-A2 heavy chain (residues 1–276) linked at its COOH
terminus to a BirA substrate peptide (BSP) were expressed in Escherichia coli and isolated as an insoluble aggregate. The expressed
HLA-A2–BSP and β2-microglobulin subunits were solubilized and refolded together in vitro in the presence of peptide. Folded material was
biotinylated by BirA enzyme. HLA-A2–peptide complexes were purified on gel filtration and ion exchange columns. Tetrameric complexes of
biotinylated HLA-A2–peptide were produced by mixing purified, biotinylated heterodimer with NeutrAvidin–PE (Molecular Probes) at a molar
ratio of 4:1. Tetramers presenting immunogenic epitopes of MART-1 (M27:AAGIGILTV), tyrosinase (T368:YMDGTMSQV), and gp100 (G154:KTWGQYWQV)
were constructed. To evaluate in vivo persistence of T cells in the peripheral blood, PBMCs were prepared from samples drawn on day 0
(preinfusion), 1, 7, and 14 after each infusion and cryopreserved so all samples could be analyzed simultaneously. At the completion of the
study, these samples were thawed, stained with PE-conjugated M27 peptide–MHC tetramer (M27-tetramer PE; 50 μg/ml), anti-CD8–FITC (1:60), and
a cocktail of Cy5-PE–conjugated antibodies (anti-CD4, -CD16, and -CD19) for 40 min at 22°C. Analysis was carried out on the CD8+
Cy5-PE–conjugated lymphocyte subset to eliminate nonspecific tetramer staining. The frequency of MART-1–specific CTLs is presented as a
fraction of tetramer-positive, CD8+ lymphocytes over the total number of CD8+ cells. This method detects with high specificity a frequency
of antigen-specific T cells population as low as 1/10,000 CD8+ cells or 1/100,000 PBMCs 141516. Analysis of T cell infiltrates from tissue
samples (skin and tumor) using peptide–MHC tetramers was performed as described above except that single cell suspensions were prepared from
fresh biopsy samples by mechanical disruption followed by Ficoll gradient separation before staining. Staining for gp100 (1:100; Dako),
MART-1 (1:5; Novocastra Laboratories, Ltd.), and tyrosinase (1:30; Novocastra Laboratories, Ltd.) was performed by a peroxidase-labeled
streptavidin–biotin method on an automated stainer (Ventana Medical Systems). Paraffin tissue sections were mounted on aminoalkylsilane-
treated glass slides and heat treated to optimize antigen retrieval. Endogenous peroxidase activity was blocked by incubation in hydrogen
peroxide/methanol. Immunohistochemical staining involved the sequential application of diluted primary antibody, biotinylated goat secondary
antibodies, and then peroxidase-labeled streptavidin. The antigens were visualized by incubation with aminoethylcarbazole substrate in the
presence of hydrogen peroxide. Nonimmune mouse IgG in place of specific antibody was used for negative control sections. The patient
described in this study was a 46-yr-old woman diagnosed with metastatic melanoma of unknown primary who presented with supraclavicular and
axillary lymphadenopathy. There was no prior history of vitiligo or ocular symptoms. She was initially treated with a chemoimmunotherapy
regimen of carmustine (BCNU), dacarbazine (DTIC), cisplatin, IFN-α, and high dose IL-2 17. She received four cycles of chemoimmunotherapy
with a partial response but, 3 mo after her last cycle, developed progressive chest wall and nodal disease. Treatment with adoptively
transferred MART-1–specific CTL clones was initiated at that time. A total of five T cell infusions consisting of autologous MART-1–specific
CD8+ CTL clones were administered over a 4-mo period. The initial two infusions were carried out using HyTK-transduced CTL clones at cell
doses of 1.0 and 3.3 × 109 cells/m2 1 wk apart, followed by a 3-wk period of observation for toxicity. No toxicity was observed and the
patient received infusions 3, 4, and 5 consisting of unmodified CTL clones at cell doses of 3.3 × 109 cells/m2 3 wk apart, each accompanied
by a 14-d course of subcutaneous IL-2 (500,000, 1,000,000, and 2,000,000 U/m2 daily, respectively). 5 d after infusion 3, given with low
dose subcutaneous IL-2 (500,000 U/m2), well-demarcated erythematous papules appeared around pigmented areas of skin in a targetoid pattern
(Fig. 1). Some lesions developed into bullae and underwent a vitiliginous change, whereas others began to spread and coalesce over the next
3 d to cover most of her back and upper arms (Fig. 2). These lesions were associated with pruritis and a low-grade fever (37.8°C). Because
of concern that choroidal melanocytes might be involved, the patient underwent a complete ophthalmologic evaluation. Visual acuity and field
of vision were normal. Fundoscopic examination revealed a mild anterior uveitis but no evidence of choroiditis or retinitis. 10 d after the
infusion, the infiltrates resolved without intervention. Except for a few depigmented bullae, the patient retained most of her skin
pigmentation even in areas of previous inflammation. The IL-2 injections continued to day 14. The patient subsequently received infusions 4
and 5 of MART-1–specific T cells and IL-2 without incident. During the 4-mo period of T cell infusions, clinical and radiographic
examination demonstrated stabilization of the tumor masses. 3 mo after the last T cell infusion, the patient developed central nervous
system metastases and a rapidly enlarging chest wall mass; she received palliative radiotherapy but expired 6 wk later. On day 6 after
infusion 3, a skin biopsy was obtained over an inflamed site. Histologically, the skin displayed an intense inflammatory infiltrate composed
of lymphocytes centered around the dermal–epidermal junction (Fig. 3). Few definite nevus cells could be identified within the degenerating
keratinocytes and the changes were consistent with a regressing melanocytic nevus replaced by an intense lymphocytic infiltrate. Further
analysis of the lymphocytic infiltrate using horseradish peroxidase–conjugated anti-CD3, -CD4, and -CD8 antibodies demonstrated a
predominance of CD3+CD4−CD8+ lymphocytes. To further characterize the CD8+ infiltrate seen in the skin biopsy at day 6 after infusion 3, a
portion of the biopsy specimen was processed into a single cell suspension. Staining of these cells using peptide–MHC tetramers revealed a
substantial proportion (28.2%) of CD8+ T cells binding specifically to the M27 peptide–MHC tetramer (Fig. 4). Staining of CD8+ T cells with
control tetramers (the tyrosinase T368 and gp100 G154 peptide tetramers) was negative. Simultaneous analysis of the peripheral blood (see
below) yielded a frequency of MART-1–specific CTLs (1.2% of all CD8+ cells) that was higher than a preinfusion sample (<0.01%) but
significantly lower than that of the skin biopsy sample (28.2%), demonstrating in vivo persistence of infused MART-1–specific CTLs in the
peripheral blood and preferential localization to areas of inflammation. The patient presented with a supraclavicular mass extending to her
right axilla and breast measuring 12 × 17 cm. For a period of 24–48 h after each T cell infusion, the patient noted tenderness and erythema
localized to the chest wall tumor. To evaluate if transferred T cells infiltrated the tumor site, core biopsies of the tumor mass were
obtained and divided for histologic analysis and for processing into a single cell suspension. Histologically, lymphocytic infiltration of
the tumor mass was present with evidence of extensive necrosis. Approximately 38% of CD8+ lymphocytes from this specimen stained with the
MART-1 (M27) peptide–MHC tetramer but not with control tetramers (tyrosinase and gp100), demonstrating that infused MART-1–specific T cells
localized not only to normal melanocytes in the skin but also to tumor sites (Fig. 4). The preinfusion (day 0) frequency of MART-1–specific
T cells in the peripheral blood of patient 1017-3 was <1/10,000. After infusion 1, MART-1–specific T cells appeared in the peripheral blood
at a frequency of 1/99 (1.0%) of CD8+ T cells on day 1, but declined rapidly, dropping by day 14 to a frequency one log lower (1/1,232).
After T cell infusion 3 and IL-2 (500,000 U/m2/d for 14 d), MART-1–specific T cells maintained a high frequency in vivo (day 1, 1/125; day
7, 1/84; day 14, 1/118) which included the period when the inflammatory skin reaction was observed (days 6–10). To determine if T cell
localization to tumor sites and skin was associated with expression of MART-1, immunohistochemistry was performed on tumor and skin samples.
Analysis of a core biopsy of the chest wall tumor obtained preinfusion demonstrated abundant expression of MART-1 by >70% of melanoma cells
(data not shown). Analysis of a preinfusion skin biopsy demonstrated a layer of melanized keratinocytes underlying pigmented skin and
abundant MART-1 expression among melanocytes lining the dermal–epidermal junction (Fig. 5; preinfusion). Examination of a skin biopsy
obtained from a previously inflamed and pigmented site obtained 3 wk after infusion 3 demonstrated no T cell infiltrate and histologic
changes consistent with a regressed nevus: presence of melanophages, residual melanin, dermal fibrosis, a lentiginous pattern of
keratinocytes, and no melanocytes confirmed by the complete absence of MART-1 staining (Fig. 5; postinfusion). This finding was confirmed in
multiple skin biopsies. In this study, we describe a patient who developed unique inflammatory lesions circumscribing pigmented areas of
skin after an infusion of MART-1–specific CD8+ T cell clones. These lesions resulted in loss of cutaneous melanocytes in involved regions
and provide direct evidence that vitiligo after immunotherapy of melanoma can be attributed to melanocyte-specific CD8+ CTLs. CTL-mediated
destruction of melanocytic nevi as a precedent to the development of vitiligo is consistent with animal models in which depigmentation
occurs after immunization to murine homologues of human melanoma antigens, tyrosinase-related protein (TRP)-1 and gp100 1819. However, the
mechanism of vitiligo in humans after immunotherapy has never been clearly defined. Although antibody- or T cell–mediated events have been
postulated in patients who develop nonmelanoma-associated vitiligo 2021, neither T cells nor antibodies have been identified or recovered
from the site of lesions. This study suggests that one mechanism by which patients receiving immunotherapy may develop vitiligo is the
induction of CTLs reactive to melanocytic differentiation antigens such as MART-1. After cognate antigen recognition, such CTLs may mediate
melanocyte destruction by direct cytotoxicity or initiation of a localized inflammatory response. Direct analysis of the T cell population
present in inflammatory skin lesions and tumor nodule biopsies was performed using peptide–MHC tetramers 22. The inflammatory lesions
appeared after T cell infusion 3 at a time when the precursor frequency of MART-1–specific CTLs in the peripheral blood was ∼1% of all CD8+
cells. However, the infiltrating MART-1–specific T cell population in the inflamed skin biopsy specimen and a tumor nodule harvested at this
time represented >28% of CD8+ T cells in the specimen, demonstrating that transferred CTLs preferentially migrated and localized to antigen-
positive tissue. Histologically, melanocytes in the inflamed tissue were replaced by a T cell infiltrate. Lesions of high antigen density,
e.g., a raised, pigmented mole (Fig. 3), rapidly blistered and developed vitiligo. However, other involved areas did not undergo
depigmentation and subsequent infusions of an equivalent cell dose of MART-1–specific CTLs with IL-2 (infusions 4 and 5) failed to elicit an
inflammatory response, even in areas of pigmentation. To explain this discordance, postinfusion skin biopsies of previously inflamed sites
were taken and analyzed for the presence of melanocytes and MART-1 expression. Histology revealed no residual melanocytes, but pigmented
keratinocytes and melanophages were seen. Residual melanin can often appear in these latter cell types after melanocytic destruction and
account for the observed pigmentation. Immunohistochemical staining for melanosomal proteins (MART-1, gp100, and tyrosinase) was negative,
in contrast to normal skin where localized staining is observed within melanocytes. Thus, one explanation is that, during the initial
inflammatory process (after infusion 3), MART-1–specific CTLs eradicated skin melanocytes but pigmentation persisted due to residual melanin
in keratinocytes and melanophages. In the absence of melanocytes and the MART-1 antigen, no skin toxicity occurred with subsequent infusions
of MART-1–specific CTLs and IL-2. IL-2 therapy alone (without T cells) had been administered previously to the patient and was insufficient
to induce an autoimmune reaction, suggesting that the coadministration of antigen-specific T cells was essential to the observed response.
The absence of observable toxicity after infusions of MART-1–specific T cells alone (infusions 1 and 2) suggests that coadministered IL-2
(first given with infusion 3) may be equally important to the observed T cell–mediated toxicity. IL-2 may facilitate a breach in tolerance
by maintaining or expanding the population of infused MART-1–specific T cells. Analysis of T cell persistence demonstrated sustained levels
of transferred MART-1–specific CTLs during IL-2 administration of >1/100, significantly higher than that observed after T cell transfer in
the absence of IL-2. Another effect of the administered IL-2 may be increased vascular permeability 23. Although the dose of IL-2 was only
500,000 U/m2, or at least 20 times lower than doses typically associated with clinical signs of vascular leakage, it is possible that even
at this low dose, a subclinical effect on vascular permeability was sufficient to permit transmigration of circulating MART-1–specific T
cells to the dermal junction where sampling of antigen-positive melanocytes could occur. Of note, in our patient and in other patients
described previously as developing vitiligo after melanoma therapy, the skin toxicity was self-limited and without chronic sequelae. Our
patient experienced a mild anterior uveitis but this resolved uneventfully without specific therapy and there was no evidence of posterior
uveitis involving choroidal melanocytes or the pigmented retina. This discordance in toxicity may be due to the locally immunosuppressive
intraocular microenvironment 24. Toxicity in this patient was self-limited and restricted to cutaneous melanocytes. Should this prove to be
the only significant adverse effect in subsequent trials, further studies using larger T cell doses and increased numbers of infusions in
patients with lower tumor burden are warranted. We wish to acknowledge the clinical assistance of Dr. Daniel Markowitz. This work was
supported by National Institutes of Health grant R01 CA71849, a Burroughs Wellcome Fund Career Award, and the Cancer Research Institute (C.
Yee). Clinical appearance of inflammatory skin lesions after infusion of autologous MART-1–specific CD8+ CTL clones and 500,000 U/m2/d of
IL-2. (A) Close-up of well-circumscribed erythematous papules surrounding pigmented lentiges and nevi on right anterior shoulder. (B) Close-
up of vitiliginous bullae appearing in the previous site of raised pigmented nevus on the back. Progression of inflammatory lesions
appearing around pigmented areas of skin from days 5–7 after T cell infusion 3. Immunohistochemical staining of inflammatory lesion from
skin biopsy obtained on day 6. Hematoxylin and eosin stain demonstrates intense lymphocytic infiltrate in the dermal–epidermal junction in
the area of melanocytic nevus. Immunohistochemical staining of the same section demonstrates a predominant population of CD4−CD8+
lymphocytes in infiltrate. Characterization of lymphocytes harvested from skin biopsy obtained day 6 after CTL infusion 3 (left) and from
tumor biopsy (right). Same skin sample as in Fig. 3. Flow cytometry analysis (left) using PE-conjugated M27 tetramer or an irrelevant (T369)
tetramer and anti-CD8–FITC antibody demonstrates a population of MART-1–specific CTL clones representing >28% of the CD8+ lymphocyte
population recovered from the skin biopsy. Flow cytometry analysis (right) of tumor biopsy demonstrates MART-1–specific CTL staining
comprising >37% of CD8+ lymphocytes in tumor sample. Preinfusion and postinfusion skin biopsies stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)
(top) or anti–MART-1 horseradish peroxidase antibody (bottom). In the preinfusion sample, melanized keratinocytes and melanocytes are
present in the dermal–epidermal layer. Abundant expression of MART-1 antigen is seen in basal melanocytes. In the postinfusion sample,
melanocytes are absent, but residual melanin is observed coating melanophages (black arrowheads) and within melanophages (white arrowheads).
No MART-1 staining is seen.
