The use of endoscopic surgical procedures has rapidly spread to abdominal and thoracic surgeries and subsequently to surgeries of the neck
region. Several surgeons initiated endoscopic parathyroidectomy using CO2 insufflation to create the working space; however, they reported
various complications. We describe here a skin-lifting method that may have few complications. A 65-year-old man was diagnosed with primary
hyperparathyroidism due to a solitary adenoma of the left inferior parathyroid gland. A 3-cm oblique incision was made below the left
clavicle, and a 5-mm incision was made on the lateral neck. After the skin was lifted up, we performed video-assisted parathyroidectomy.
Parathyroid extirpation took 2 hours and blood loss was minimal. The patient had minimal pain and no complications postoperatively. Serum
concentrations of calcium and intact parathyroid hormone were normalized on the next day. Using the skin-lifting method, we obtained a
sufficient operative view and encountered no complications. This procedure is cosmetically desirable, and we consider it a feasible
alternative for the treatment of parathyroid adenoma. Since Mandl reported the first parathyroidectomy in 1925, surgical treatment for
primary hyperparathyroidsm has been considered the gold standard. In a long-term observational study it has proven to be curative in 95% of
patients.1 However, conventional procedures left wide transverse operative scars in the anterior neck. With the expanded use of video-
assisted surgical procedures, several surgeons used endoscopic parathyroidectomy with CO2 insufflation to achieve less invasiveness and
better cosmetic results.2–10 Recently Shimizu et al 11,12 reported endoscopic thyroidectomy with an anterior neck-lift method, causing a
very minimal neck wound. We introduce here the same approach to endoscopic parathyroidectomy and discuss its feasibility and technical
issues. A 65-year-old man was admitted for investigation of hypercalcemia. An elevation of serum calcium had been observed for nine years,
but it had not been pursued because no other remarkable signs or symptoms had occurred. He had a 10-year history of urinary tract stones.
Laboratory data showed that serum concentrations of calcium and intact parathyroid hormone (PTH) were markedly elevated. Calcium was 3.20
mmol/L (normal range; 2.15 - 2.60 mmol/L), and PTH was 280 pg/mL (10 - 65 pg/mL). An ultrasonographic examination revealed a hypoechoic mass
measuring 23x15x11 mm adjacent to the left lower pole of the thyroid gland (Figure 1). 201Tl - 99mTc subtraction scintigraphy indicated a
single uptake at the same location (Figure 2). Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also showed a solitary nodule
at the same site. Endocrinological examinations and other imaging studies denied multiple endocrine neoplasm and coexisting nodular goiter.
The patient was diagnosed with primary hyperparathyroidism due to a single parathyroid adenoma. After we obtained informed consent from the
patient, he underwent video-assisted parathyroidectomy. Ultrasonographic examination showed a hypoechoic mass adjacent to the left lower
pole of the thyroid gland in the size of 23x15x11 mm. 201Tl - 99mTc subtraction scintigraphy showed a single uptake near the left lower pole
of the thyroid gland. The operative procedure was similar to Shimizu et al. 11,12 The patient received general anesthesia while in the
supine position with slight extension of the neck. A 3-cm oblique incision was made below the left clavicle. Subcutaneous fat tissue was
dissected behind the platysma by means of electrocautery or ultrasonic coagulating shears (Harmonic scalpel, Johnson & Johnson, Cincinnati,
OH) until the left sternocleidomastoid muscle and strap muscles were exposed. Blunt finger dissection was useful, but care had to be taken
not to injure the anterior jugular veins. After two sets of Kirschner wires were inserted transversely in the subcutaneous tissue of the
anterior neck, the wires were lifted up and fixed to an L-shaped prop (Mizuho, Tokyo, Japan) to yield a working space (Figure 3). Another
laterally sited 5-mm incision was made on the same side of the neck for the 5-mm endoscope. A lateral approach to the parathyroid was
performed. The left sternocleidomastoid muscle and strap muscles were separated, and the strap muscles were divided transversely with the
harmonic scalpel. We used both conventional and laparoscopic surgical instruments for dissection but did not use clips for hemostasis. After
exposing the left lower pole of the thyroid gland, the parathyroid tumor was identified and extirpated without explorations of the laryngeal
recurrent nerve or the second parathyroid (Figure 4). The specimen was immediately prepared for frozen section examination, which revealed
parathyroid tissue and no malignancy. The resected specimen was a soft solid mass completely encapsulated measuring 18 x 14 x 9 mm in size
and 1.25 g in weight. The divided muscles were susequently sutured, followed by insertion of a closed suction drain in the resected area.
The platysma and skin were closed with absorbable sutures. External view of the skin-lifting method. Two sets of Kirschner wires were pushed
through the subcutaneous layer. They were lifted up and fixed to the prop to create working space to operate. Operative view. Parathyroid
adenoma appeared adjacent to the left lower pole of the thyroid gland (arrow). The procedure required 2 hours for extirpation of the
specimen and 3 hours and 30 minutes for the complete procedure. Blood loss was minimal. The patient had minimal pain and no postoperative
complications. Intact PTH decreased to < 2.0 pg/mL the next day and normalized a week after the operation. The final pathological diagnosis
was an adenoma of the parathyroid gland. Since laparoscopic cholecystectomy was first reported in 1987, endoscopic surgery has been widely
accepted with improving instruments and surgical techniques. This minimally invasive procedure was rapidly adopted for use in various
abdominal and thoracic surgeries, and subsequently to closed spaces, such as extraperitoneal or neck regions. Since 1996, several authors
have described the advantages of endoscopic parathyroidectomies.2–10 Miccoli et al 8 recently reported in their prospective randomized study
that postoperative pain was significantly less, and the postoperative inactivity was significantly shorter in video-assisted
parathyroidectomy than in conventional surgery. Additionally, patient satisfaction as regards cosmetic results was significantly better in
the former procedure. Finally, Naitoh et al 9 and Yeung et al 10 have noted the advantage of a magnified field of view, which has helped
clarify anatomic detail and discriminate important nerves and vessels. Most previous reports of endoscopic surgery described CO2
insufflation to create a working space in the anterior neck. However, excessive CO2 absorption could induce an elevation of end-tidal CO2
with insufflation pressure above 12 mm Hg.10 Brunt et al 13 showed that CO2 insufflation of the neck could result in pneumomediastinum,
pneumothorax, diminution in the pulse, and extensive subcutaneous emphysema in dogs and cadavers. They discontinued establishing a working
space with CO2 and began to use an external lifting device. Naitoh et al 9 also reported CO2 related complications, such as subcutaneous
emphysema, hypercarbia, and respiratory acidosis. Similar complications were also reported in retroperitoneal surgeries.14 To overcome these
CO2 related problems, several authors used low-pressure CO2 insufflation 6, 10or short CO2 insufflation with external retractors.7
Mechanical elevation has previously been reported to provide a feasible alternative to pneumoperitoneum.15 In this report, we have discussed
a video-assisted parathyroidectomy with the skin-lifting method, which was initiated by Shimizu et al in the endoscopic resection of thyroid
tumors.11,12 Using this method, we overcame all CO2 related issues and developed a sufficient operative view. An additional advantage was
improved cosmesis. The incisions were made below the clavicle and were completely hidden even with open necked shirts (Figure 5A and 5B).
Operative scars on the seventh day after operation: A 3-cm oblique incision was seen under the clavicle. A 5-mm incision on the lateral neck
is barely visible. An oblique incision was completely covered by open-necked shirts. No scars appeared in the exposed anterior neck. CT and
MRI, which are not always necessary for the preoperative evaluation, were added to help localize the adenoma. In addition, we believe that
the long operative time will improve with experience. This report demonstrates the feasibility of endoscopic parathyroidectomy using a skin-
lifting method. There were no CO2 related problems and we secured an adequate operative view. This procedure yielded an excellent cosmetic
result and is an excellent option for the treatment of parathyroid adenoma when preoperative imaging modalities demonstrate accurate
localization.
