Bladder injury is a complication of laparoscopic surgery with a reported incidence in the general surgery literature of 0.5% and in the
gynecology literature of 2%. We describe how to recognize and treat the injury and how to avoid the problem. We report two cases of bladder
injury repaired with a General Surgical Interventions (GSI) trocar and a balloon device used for laparoscopic extraperitoneal inguinal
hernia repair. One patient had a prior appendectomy; the other had a prior midline incision from a suprapubic prostatectomy. We repaired the
bladder injury, and the patients made a good recovery. When using the obturator and balloon device, it is important to stay anterior to the
preperitoneal space and bladder. Prior lower abdominal surgery can be considered a relative contraindication to extraperitoneal laparoscopic
hernia repair. Signs of gas in the Foley bag or hematuria should alert the surgeon to a bladder injury. A one- or two-layer repair of the
bladder injury can be performed either laparoscopically or openly and is recommended for a visible injury. Mesh repair of the hernia can be
completed provided no evidence exists of urinary tract infection. A Foley catheter is placed until healing occurs. Current indications for
laparoscopic hernia repairs are bilateral or recurrent hernias in patients who have a good cardiovascular risk status. Bladder injury
secondary to needle, trocar, or balloon dissector insertion is a potential complication in laparoscopic surgery. We describe two cases of
laparoscopic bladder injury in extraperitoneal hernia repairs and address ways to recognize the injury and how best to treat and avoid the
problem. A 49-year-old patient with a history of heavy lifting and a several-month history of symptomatic bilateral inguinal hernias elected
to have bilateral laparoscopic extraperitoneal hernia repairs. He had a history of a prior appendectomy and was otherwise healthy. The
patient received general endotracheal anesthesia, nasogastric (NG) tube insertion, and Foley catheter insertion. The General Surgical
Interventions (GSI) trocar and balloon device were used and appeared to insert easily without resistance. On removal of the balloon and
insertion of the laparoscope, a tear in the anterior dome of the bladder was noted as well as a large amount of gas in the Foley bag. Based
on a urology consult, a transverse suprapubic incision was made to enter the peritoneal cavity. A two-layer bladder repair was performed.
The hernias were repaired by suturing the transversus abdominus arch to Cooper's ligament. The Foley catheter was left in place for two
weeks, and a cystogram was performed at the end of two weeks. No leakage was revealed. The patient recovered and was doing well at the last
follow-up one year after his repairs. An elderly patient with a history of three prior right inguinal hernia repairs and a prior open
prostate resection via a midline incision elected to have an extraperitoneal laparoscopic right inguinal hernia repair. The patient received
general endotracheal anesthesia, and a Foley catheter was placed. The GSI trocar and balloon device were used, and insertion of the device
appeared to go easily without resistance. On removal of the balloon and insertion of the laparoscope, the operating room nurse noted a large
amount of air in the Foley bag. The bladder injury was not immediately apparent, but after careful inspection with the laparoscope, a small
tear measuring approximately one cm was noted in the anterior bladder wall. Laparoscopic two-layer repair of the bladder injury was
performed, and the hernia was repaired laparoscopically with mesh. The Foley catheter was left in place for two weeks, and a voiding
cystogram showed no leak. The Foley catheter was removed, and the patient recovered without further problems. In a review of the urology,
gynecology, and general surgery literature, we found that bladder injury with laparoscopic surgery is reported in the general surgery
literature to be 0.5% and in the gynecology literature to be 2%.1–6 Typical laparoscopic surgeries discussed in the literature reviewed were
bladder neck suspensions, pelvic lymphadenectomy, nephrectomies, laparoscopically assisted vaginal hysterectomies, and transabdominal
preperitoneal and total extraperitoneal laparoscopic herniorrhaphies, which is a recognized complication in laparoscopic hernia repair that
may be underreported. To help avoid bladder injury, a Foley catheter is placed prior to a laparoscopic procedure or the patient is asked to
void immediately prior to a short laparoscopic procedure. Therefore, the likelihood of encountering an enlarged bladder is reduced. Despite
this precaution, injuries to the bladder still occur. This can result from the Veress needle insertion, trocar insertion, balloon dissector
insertion, or simply during the laparoscopic procedure itself. In patients with prior lower abdominal procedures, especially in the midline,
one must proceed with more caution. In the review by Ramshaw et al1 comparing the transabdominal preperitoneal (TAPP) hernia repair to the
total extraperitoneal (TEP) repair, the incidence of bladder injury was the same, although the overall incidence of complications was higher
with the TAPP repair (10.7%) versus the TEP repair (3.7%). Ramshaw et al noted that the bladder injury in the TEP group was in a patient
that had a prior lower abdominal operation. This is considered to be a relative contraindication to the laparoscopic approach due to
potential dense adhesions to the bladder and a greater likelihood of bladder injury.1 If a bladder injury occurs, it may be immediately
visualized. At this time, repair of the bladder injury is indicated. However, a bladder injury may not be immediately apparent. Hematuria
must raise the suspicion of bladder injury, and if an injury is not clearly seen laparoscopically, cystoscopy is recommended. An injury in
the space of Retzius is less apparent than in the bladder dome. Gaseous distension of the Foley bag during laparoscopy also should alert the
surgeon to a bladder injury.7,8 Next, consideration must be given to the type of bladder repair. An open two-layer repair is one way to
repair the bladder. However, laparoscopic repair of the bladder injury is entirely possible with a one- or two-layer closure of 3-0 or 4-0
chromic suture or polydioxone with either the running or interrupted technique.7–13 Bladder injury in total extraperitoneal repair of
hernias deserves special discussion. In some educational videotapes, it is recommended that the balloon dissector with obturator in place be
moved down to the pubic tubercle and then actually be placed below the pubic tubercle. In our experience, this increases the risk of bladder
injury from the obturator. By staying anterior to the preperitoneal space and away from the bladder, and letting the balloon do the
dissection, rather than the obturator, it is less likely that bladder injury will occur. It is also possible to create the preperitoneal
space using blunt dissection with the laparoscope only, which has the theoretical advantage of not having to insert an obturator blindly
into the preperitoneal space. In addition, balloon rupture can occur with loose fragments entering the peritoneal cavity or underlying
viscus. Inflation volumes should not be exceeded, and slow insufflation pressures are safer than high insufflation pressures. With some
commercially available balloons, one can actually see the cavity as it is being dilated, and some recommend the use of such a device
although it may be more expensive. A debate also exists as to whether the type of medium used to distend the balloon should be air or water.
Water is heavier and may cause peritoneal or viscus disruption. However, if the balloon ruptures, compressed air is said to have a more
energetic force and potential for injury.14 Once the bladder injury is repaired, one can complete the laparoscopic hernia repair with mesh
provided one does not suspect a urinary tract infection. A Foley catheter is left in place for approximately 10 days to two weeks, and a
voiding cystogram is performed to confirm that no leakage of urine is occurring. The Foley catheter is then removed. As more laparoscopic
procedures are performed, complications like bladder injury are being reported. One must be able to recognize and treat these injuries
laparoscopically if possible and complete the procedure. By adhering to the technical strategies detailed here, the incidence of bladder
injury may be reduced. As more experience is gained, the incidence of significant complications after laparoscopic hernioplasty can be
substantially reduced according to Felix et al,15 who reported that overall complications in the first 3 years were 5.6% compared with 0.5%
in the last three years, and 90% of the complications developed in the first 50% of a total of 1,087 patients. The bladder injuries reported
here occurred early in the learning curve, during the first 100 repairs. Also, as more experience with laparoscopic extraperitoneal
herniorrhaphy is gained, the need for balloon dissectors and Foley catheters is reduced.16 Disclosure: The authors have no financial
interest in any commercial device, equipment, instrument, or drug that is a subject of this article
