Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is a diagnostic procedure with several known risks. We present two rarely reported
complications of ERCP and sphincterotomy: transverse mesocolon disruption with ischemic colitis and splenic rupture. The first patient, a
54-year-old female, presented one day following ERCP and stent revision for pancreas divisum. She presented with hypotension and abdominal
distention. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed a ruptured spleen, which was confirmed on laparotomy. She had a complicated
postoperative course and died of multiple organ failure. The second patient is a 56-year-old female who presented five days after ERCP and
sphincterotomy with abdominal pain, abdominal wall ecchymosis, and decreasing hematocrit. Her evaluation included hospital admission and
abdominal CT scan, which showed free fluid and a large hematoma in the transverse mesocolon. These findings were confirmed on laparotomy and
a devascularized segment of bowel was resected. Only 6 cases of ERCP-related splenic injury have been reported in the literature. One
additional report is available of a fatal splenic artery injury. No previous reports exist of a mesenteric hematoma resulting in bowel
devascularization. Prompt evaluation and awareness of potential complications should help capture potentially life-threatening sequelae of
ERCP. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) is a diagnostic procedure with several known risks. Procedure-specific risks
include esophageal perforation (0.05% to 0.1%), pancreatitis (2% to 15%, clinically significant in 1% to 5% of patients), and the potential
for cholangitis.1,2 The addition of endoscopic sphincterotomy has been shown to increase morbidity and mortality and to pose unique risks,
such as bleeding and duodenal or ductal perforation. We present two cases of rarely reported ERCP complications: splenic rupture and
mesenteric hematoma leading to ischemic colitis. The first patient was a 54-year-old female who underwent ERCP with stent revision for
pancreas divisum. Her past medical history was significant for hepatitis C, cirrhosis, and chronic pancreatitis. She presented one day
following the procedure with hypotension with marked abdominal distension. After the patient responded to resuscitation, a CT scan of her
abdomen was performed. The CT demonstrated a ruptured spleen (Figure 1). The patient decompensated and was taken for laparotomy. Laparotomy
confirmed splenic rupture associated with massive hemoperitoneum and cirrhosis. A splenectomy was performed. Postoperatively, the patient
remained ventilator-dependent and required treatment for Pseudomonas pneumonia. She also required intermittent vasopressors and
hemodialysis. She died on postoperative day 40 of multiple organ failure. Abdominal CT, axial view, showing hemoperitoneum and splenic
rupture The second patient is a 56-year-old female who underwent ERCP and sphincterotomy for sphincter of Oddi dysfunction. She presented
five days after the ERCP with intermittent abdominal pain, anorexia, nausea, emesis, and hematochezia that had lasted for 3 to 4 days. Her
past surgical history was significant for three prior abdominal operations, total abdominal hysterectomy, appendectomy, and exploratory
laparotomy with ileal resection. Her past medical history was significant for chronic abdominal pain with opiate dependence, malabsorption
treated with enzyme replacement, hypertension, and osteoporosis. The initial examination showed a pale but hemodynamically stable patient.
Her cardiopulmonary examination was normal. Her abdomen was soft with diffuse tenderness, voluntary guarding, and distention. She was noted
to have ecchymosis along her previous abdominal incisions. Stool guaiac was negative. Initial laboratory findings were significant for a
hematocrit of 26% (decreased from 36%), platelets 181,000/mm3, blood urea nitrogen 38 mg/dL, creatinine 1.7 mg/dL, and amylase 209 U/L.
Resuscitation was initiated, including a transfusion of two units of blood once her hematocrit reached a nadir of 22%. Her abdominal pain
continued, despite resolution of her nausea and anorexia, prompting a CT scan of the abdomen on her second hospital day, and a surgical
consultation on hospital day three. The CT demonstrated free fluid within the abdomen and a large hematoma in the transverse mesocolon
(Figure 2). Laparotomy confirmed a large hematoma within the transverse mesocolon due to disruption of the middle colic vessels. The
transverse colon distal to the hematoma was devascularized. Blood was also noted to have dissected along associated abdominal wall adhesions
and previous incisions accounting for the ecchymotic scars noted on the initial physical examination. Bowel resection and primary
anastomosis were performed. Further investigation, including careful inspection of the duodenum and splenic vessels, revealed no other
abnormalities. Her hospitalization was complicated by respiratory compromise requiring intubation on the first postoperative day. She had
hemodynamic decompensation thereafter, requiring pharmacological support, and crystalloid resuscitation. She developed Pseudomonas pneumonia
in her 12-day ventilator course. She was eventually discharged home on postoperative day 20 without further sequelae. Abdominal CT, axial
view, showing a mesenteric hematoma in the transverse mesocolon and compromised bowel. Factors affecting morbidity and mortality during ERCP
include operator experience and patient comorbidity. Risk of bleeding following ERCP is increased in patients with coagulopathy and with the
use of therapeutic sphincterotomy. Duodenal hematomas have been reported, as well as rupture of a gastroduodenal pseudoaneurysm following
ERCP. Several case reports of splenic injury, including splenic rupture have been reported in the literature. The first report of splenic
injury following ERCP is by Trondsen et al.3 They reported a woman who underwent ERCP and sphincterotomy for acute gallstone pancreatitis.
Five hours after the procedure she presented with hemoperitoneum due to a “decapsulated” spleen requiring splenectomy. Ong et al4 later
reported one case of splenic injury after ERCP. Their patient had an elective laparotomy two days following ERCP where a splenic laceration
necessitating splenectomy was noted. They attributed endoscopic-related splenic injuries to traction on adhesions and looping of the
endoscope. Lewis et al5 described two cases of splenic injury following ERCP. In one patient, a hypotensive episode nine hours postprocedure
led to laparotomy and splenectomy for avulsed short gastric vessels. The other patient required laparotomy for a bleeding duodenal ulcer.
Hemoperitoneum was discovered from a concurrent splenic capsule avulsion so the spleen was removed. These authors likewise felt the injury
was secondary to traction, despite both endoscopic procedures being described as uneventful. Wu and Katon6 described a woman undergoing ERCP
who became hypotensive with peritoneal signs three days after her procedure. Laparotomy revealed splenic capsule avulsion requiring
splenectomy along with a hepatic laceration requiring repair. The authors noted intraabdominal adhesions on exploration, including adherence
of the splenic capsule to the anterior abdominal wall. Furman and Morgenstern7 also reported a subcapsular splenic hematoma reported
following ERCP and papillotomy. Reiertsen et al8 reported a splenic artery injury during esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and biopsy
resulting in a fatal hemorrhage. We have not found other reports of ERCP resulting in a mesenteric hematoma with associated bowel ischemia
as seen in our second patient. The majority of authors attribute splenic injury during endoscopy to looping of the endoscope and traction on
the greater curvature of the stomach, short gastric vessels, and splenic capsule. Some theorize that the insufflation alone poses a risk. We
also believe intraabdominal adhesions pose an increased risk for traction-related injuries. Our first case adds to the reports of splenic
injury following endoscopy. Our second case appears to be the first recorded with an endoscopic mesenteric injury resulting in bowel
ischemia. The incidence of adverse outcomes should decrease as we increase our awareness of potential complications. Close clinical
monitoring and prompt evaluation for postprocedure complaints should capture potentially life-threatening complications. Disclosure: The
authors have no financial or proprietary interest in the subject matter and materials discussed in this article.
