Approximately 50 % of patients with scleritis are known to be associated with systemic connective tissue diseases or vasculitic diseases
such as rheumatoid arthritis (RA), Wegener’s granulomatosis, relapsing polychondritis, and systemic lupus erythematosus. The patients with
scleritis in association with Behcet’s disease (BD) have been rarely described in the literature. We report a 46-year-old female patient
with BD who developed the nodular scleritis. Scleritis or episcleritis may be a harbinger of systemic diseases. While episcleritis is
relatively benign, the least severe form of disease, necrotizing scleritis is the most severe disease that can rapidly blind the
patient1,2). Although episcleritis may be seen in patients with rheumatic disease, most patients with episcleritis have no underlying
connective tissue disease. However, approximately half of patients with scleritis have systemic connective tissue diseases or vasculitic
diseases1,3). RA is the most common rheumatic disease associated with scleritis, followed by Wegener’s granulomatosis and relapsing
polychondritis. Other less frequently associated diseases include systemic lupus erythematosus, polyarteritis nodosa, Reiter’s syndrome,
psoriatic arthritis, giant cell arteritis and Cogan syndrome1,4–7). The scleritis occurred in patients with BD has been rarely reported in
the literature1,8). We describe a female patient who developed the scleritis in the course of BD. In December 1999, 46-year-old woman
presented with bilateral red eye and boring ocular pain with radiation to the temple developed 2 weeks ago. She had been diagnosed as
Behcet’s disease in March 1997 by recurrent orogenital ulcerations, pustular skin eruption, erythema nodosum-like lesions and positive
pathergy test. She had been admitted in April 1998 to Asan-Kangnung Hospital with bloody diarrhea due to multiple ulcerations of terminal
ileum, cecum and ascending colon. At that time, the diagnosis of intestinal BD was established, and prednisolone, colchicine and
sulfasalazine were prescribed. Even though taking medications of low dose prednisolone, sulfasalazine, nabumetone and colchicine, she had
been suffering from refractory oligoarticular arthritis since July 1999. Her arthritis had been improved with the addition of weekly
methotrexate. Recently, she withheld the medications for 6 weeks by herself. Physical examination revealed multiple aphthous ulcers on the
buccal mucosa, several pustular eruptions on the cheek, and multiple erythema nodosum-like lesions on the legs. There were tenderness,
swelling and warmth on the right wrist and right knee. On eye examination by an ophthalmologist, there were episcleral nodules with marked
dilatation of the scleral vessels and episcleral vessels in both eyes (Figure 1). The vision of both eyes was 20/20. The adjacent cornea and
anterior chamber were normal. The focal tenderness with digital compression on both eyes was remarkable. Hematological and biochemical tests
were as follows: WBC 14,300/mm3, hematocrit 25.8 %, platelet 59,8000/mm3, total protein 8.6 g/dL, albumin 3.5 g/dL, AST/ALT 11/6 IU/L.
Erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 104 mm/hr and C-reactive protein was 5.51 mg/dL. Antinuclear antibody and rheumatoid factor were
negative. Antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) with p-type was positive (titer, 1:160). HBs antigen and HCV antibody were negative.
HLA-B51 antigen was positive. There were no bony abnormalities on plain radiographs of both wrists and both knees. She was diagnosed to have
BD with nodular scleritis. Initially, sulindac 400 mg/day, sulfasalazine 2 g/day, methotrexate 17.5 mg/week and prednisolone 30 mg/day were
prescribed. Although her eye disease and arthritis were improved within several days, she experienced two more recurrent events of scleritis
when prednisolone was trying to be reduced. After cyclophosphamide was given instead of methotrexate, the scleritis was controlled without
ocular complications. Scleritis is a severe, destructive disease that may cause decrease in vision by leading to one or more ocular
complications such as anterior uveitis, keratitis, glaucoma, secondary cataract or ocular change1). It is classified clinically as either
anterior or posterior scleritis. Anterior scleritis is further classified as either diffuse, nodular or necrotizing scleritis9). Diffuse
scleritis is the most common form of scleritis with or without RA. Nodular scleritis is characterized by firm foci of inflammation, which
are very tender. Of these three forms of anterior scleritis, necrotizing scleritis is the most destructive form. Episcleritis is a benign
disease that rarely causes decrease in vision. Patients with episcleritis usually describe discomfort rather than pain. The main feature
differentiating episcleritis from scleritis is pain, which in the latter is usually severe and deep-seated. Pain is frequently radiated to
the temple, brow, sinuses or jaw. Scleritis tends to have recurrences, which can be minimized if the initial attack is adequately treated5).
Our patient satisfied the diagnostic criteria by International Study Group for Behcet’s Disease10), and she had nodular scleritis with
severe boring pain and ocular tenderness. Although she had severe arthritis, the diagnosis of RA could not be established because of
asymmetric oligoarthritis, negative rheumatoid factor, no radiographic findings consistent with RA, and her typical symptoms and signs were
compatible to BD. The detection of systemic vasculitic diseases in patients with scleritis can be a sign of poor prognosis. Sainz de la Maza
et al11) found that ocular prognosis of scleritis with systemic vasculitic diseases varied depending on the specific systemic vasculitic
diseases. Scleritis in spondyloarthropathies or in systemic lupus erythematosus was usually a benign and self-limiting condition, whereas
scleritis in Wegener’s granulomatosis was a severe disease that could lead to permanent blindness, and that in RA or relapsing
polychondritis was a disease of intermediate severity. The treatment of scleritis requires attention to relief of pain and to halting the
progression of the disease. In patients with diffuse and nodular scleritis, NSAIDs should be the initial choice and, in case of therapeutic
failure, corticosteroids should be added or substituted as second-line therapy. In patients with necrotizing scleritis, or with diffuse or
nodular scleritis which donot respond to NSAIDs and corticosteroids, immunosuppressive agents should be added12). Cyclophosphamide is
particularly indicated in ANCA-positive vasculitis-associated scleritis5). Low-dose cyclosporin A has been advised in young patients for
whom cyclophosphamide is not recommended because of the risk of sterility13). In our patient with ANCA-positive scleritis, medications of
prednisolone, NSAID and low-dose methotrexate were initially given for scleritis and severe arthritis. However, cyclophosphamide was
eventually required to control the scleritis. RA is the most common systemic disease associated with scleritis. The incidence of scleritis
in patients with RA is reported in the range of 0.67 to 6.3 percent, although as many as 33 % of all patients presenting to an
ophthalmologist with scleritis may have associated RA. The patients with scleritis associated with RA usually have a higher proportion of
longstanding and severe erosive joint disease, generalized vasculitis and mortality than those with RA without scleritis14). Scleritis is a
manifestation of vasculitis. The scleritis could be the first manifestation of a systemic connective tissue disease or vasculitic disease in
considerable patients with scleritis1). As we know, the underlying pathology of BD is vasculitis. Our patient had relatively severe BD with
gastrointestinal hemorrhage due to multiple intestinal ulcerations and severe arthritis. It may be speculated that the scleritis might be
complicated in severe BD like scleritis in patients with RA. More studies and experiences will be needed. Closer photograph of the both eyes
shows episcleral nodules with marked dilatation of the scleral vessels and episcleral vessels consistent with nodular scleritis.
