To report an unusual case of herpetic bullous keratitis misdiagnosed as a case of pseudophakic bullous keratopathy with secondary glaucoma.
A retrospective analysis of the case record of a 60-year-old man who had earlier undergone bilateral cataract surgery, was done. He
presented with a complaint of decrease in vision in the right eye of 20 days duration. On examination, cornea showed epithelial bullae all
over the surface with stromal and epithelial edema. Intraocular pressure was 30 mm of Hg in RE. He was treated with anti-glaucoma
medications. Two dendritic lesions were seen in the cornea during a subsequent visit four days later. Virological investigations confirmed a
diagnosis of Herpes simplex keratitis. He was treated with topical acyclovir. This case highlights the fact that herpes simplex keratitis
can present initially as a more diffuse corneal stromal and epithelial edema with epithelial bullae mimicking bullous keratopathy. Herpetic
bullous keratitis, although unusual, should be considered in the differential diagnosis under such circumstances. Herpes simplex keratitis
(HSK) is a sight threatening ocular infection and is a leading cause of corneal blindness . Clinical presentation of HSK is often protean.
While a typical and common presentation of HSK is usually a dendritic or geographic ulcer, atypical presentations are not uncommon . We
report here an unusual presentation of HSK. The patient presented to us with bullous keratitis, which was misdiagnosed as a case of
pseudophakic bullous keratopathy (PBK) with secondary glaucoma. A sixty-year-old male presented to our cornea services with a complaint of
progressive diminution of vision, in the right eye, of 20 days duration. There were no other ocular or systemic complaints. He gave a
history of having undergone extracapsular cataract extraction with posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation 4.5 years earlier in the
RE and phacoemulsification with posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation 2 years earlier in the LE. Surgery and postoperative period
were uneventful on both occasions with a final visual acuity of 6/6 in both eyes. On examination, visual acuity in RE was restricted to
perception of light with accurate projection of light in all the four quadrants. Conjunctiva was congested and cornea showed epithelial
bullae all over the surface with mild to moderate epithelial and stromal edema. Anterior chamber was deep and quiet. Intraocular lens was in
place and fundus details were within normal limits. Intraocular pressure in the RE was 30 mm of Hg and LE was 14 mm Hg. A diagnosis of PBK
with secondary glaucoma, was made. Patient was immediately treated with intravenous mannitol (350 cc) and a single oral dose of 250 mg
acetazolamide, followed by 250 mg three times daily and 0.5% timolol eye drops twice daily for the right eye. Intraocular pressure was 16 mm
of Hg following mannitol administration and he was discharged. Patient presented to us four days later. Visual acuity in the RE had improved
to counting fingers at 1 m and 6/6 in LE. On examination, cornea showed few epithelial bullae with mild to moderate epithelial and stromal
edema. The intraocular pressure in the right eye was 16 mm Hg. Two dendritic lesions were seen (Figure 1) in the cornea. A clinical
diagnosis of PBK with HSK was made. Corneal scrapings were collected for virological investigations. The patient was treated with 3%
acyclovir eye ointment five times daily and cyclopentolate eye drops twice daily for the RE. The patient was lost to follow up. Diffuse
illumination of the RE: Diffuse illumination of the right eye showing two dendritic lesions stained by fluorescein, multiple bullae (arrows)
and a diffuse corneal edema. Papanicolaou stained smear of the corneal scraping showed multinucleated giant cells and intranuclear
eosinophilic inclusion (Figure 2). HSV-1 antigen was detected in the epithelial cells of the corneal scraping and the smear revealed
multinucleated giant cells (Figure 3). HSV-1 was isolated in culture and PCR was positive for HSV DNA using primers, which amplified a 179
bp region of the DNA polymerase gene of HSV 1/2. Papanicolaou stain of the corneal scraping: Corneal scraping showing intranuclear
eosinophilic inclusion (arrow) in an epithelial cell (× 500). Immunoperoxidase assay of the corneal scraping: Corneal scraping showing
multinucleated giant cells and the presence of HSV-1 antigen (Seen as brown precipitate) (× 500). This case was initially diagnosed as PBK
with secondary glaucoma based on a history of cataract surgery, presence of diffuse corneal stromal and epithelial edema, epithelial bullae
and a raised intraocular pressure in the affected eye. The subsequent appearance of typical dendritic lesions and virological investigations
confirmed a diagnosis of herpetic bullous keratitis. Further, the present event occurred after 4 years after the cataract surgery. Since
corneal latency of HSV has been described , it is perfectly reasonable to assume that herpes rather than the previous endothelial damage
caused the whole syndrome. The presence of glaucoma possibly suggests HSV trabeculitis in the affected eye. It is difficult to ascertain
this finding since we did not perform any investigation. A PCR assay for the detection of HSV DNA using aqueous humor would have provided
supporting evidence. This event was possibly a syndrome of HSV stromal and epithelial keratitis with trabeculitis, which explains the signs
of a diffuse corneal stromal and epithelial edema and an acute rise in the intraocular pressure in the affected eye. The formation of
epithelial bullae due to corneal edema could have predisposed the cornea for the development of dendritic ulcers. It has earlier been shown
that the presence of corneal epithelial bullae has a statistically significant effect on the rate of ulcer development . This case
highlights the fact that HSK can present initially as a more diffuse corneal stromal and epithelial edema with epithelial bullae mimicking
bullous keratopathy. To the best of our knowledge and based on a MEDLINE search, such a presentation of HSK has not been documented.
Herpetic bullous keratitis, although unusual, should be considered in the differential diagnosis under such circumstances to prevent further
complications and for the prompt institution of specific antiviral therapy. None declared The pre-publication history for this paper can be
accessed here: We thank the patient for giving us informed consent to publish the details of the case.
