The use of laparoscopy in urology is increasing. Tumor of the kidney or adrenal gland and, in some cases, metastatic disease can involve the
diaphragm. We describe the application of laparoscopic suturing techniques in the case of diaphragmatic involvement with a renal tumor.
After resection of the tumor and a small area of the diaphragm, a chest tube was placed under laparoscopic guidance. The tube was kept
clamped until the end of the procedure. Decreasing intraabdominal pneumoperitoneum pressure made suturing easier with less tension on the
edges of the diaphragmatic incision. Nonabsorbable interrupted horizontal mattress sutures were placed to close the diaphragmatic defect.
The repair was uneventful; no intraoperative complications occurred. Extubation was done at the end of the procedure in the operating room.
The chest tube was removed on postoperative day 2, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. Laparoscopic repair of the
diaphragm should be commensurate with traditional open surgical principles. In this regard, it is essential that surgeons interested in
performing “advanced” laparoscopic onco-logic surgery become facile in laparoscopic suturing. Tumors of the kidney and adrenal gland rarely
involve the diaphragm; however, when this does occur, en bloc resection including partial excision of the diaphragm is needed. In the
current environment, laparoscopic surgery has come to play a larger role in the removal of renal and adrenal tumors. To date, only 1
urological case has involved repair of a laparoscopic diaphragmatic injury (Kavoussi LR, personal communication), and no reports exist of
intended resection of part of the diaphragm using laparoscopic techniques. The initial investigation evaluating the role of minimally
invasive surgery via thoracoscopy in the management of diaphragm injuries has been reported by Jackson and Ferreira.1 Adamthwaite2,3 was the
first to recommend laparoscopy for dealing with traumatic injuries of the diaphragm. Since then, several authors have advocated the use of
laparoscopy4–13 or thoracoscopy14–18 for the diagnosis and repair of diaphragmatic defects or injuries. With broadening and honing of
laparoscopic skills, acute incarcerated diaphragmatic hernias have now also been repaired19 laparoscopically. According to the pediatric
surgical literature,20 laparoscopic diaphragmatic plication is now accepted treatment for congenital diaphragmatic eventration. A 57-year-
old woman was seen because of painless hematuria. A CT scan showed a 3.9 x 3-cm mass involving the upper and midportion of the right kidney
and extending medially to the area of the main renal vein (Figure 1). The right kidney (8 cm) was markedly smaller than the left (11.6 cm),
and a renal scan showed only 34% function coming from the right side. Significant in her past medical history was total abdominal
hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by chemotherapy for ovarian cancer in 1991 (Stage 2 C). In 1992, she had a second
look procedure followed by intraperitoneal P-32 (prophylactic). In 1993, she had a recurrence in Morison's pouch, which was treated with
chemotherapy. She had another recurrence in Morison's pouch in 1994, which was treated with high-dose chemotherapy followed by bone marrow
stem cell transplantation. She also received 3-D radiotherapy (5940 cGy over 6 weeks) to Morison's pouch. In 1999, the patient was evaluated
for hematuria, and a right renal mass was discovered consistent with a renal cell carcinoma. Metastatic evaluation at this time was
negative. Her serum creatinine ranged from 1.3-1.5 mg/dL. Her only other health problem was a history of asthma. CT scan showing the tumor
involving the diaphragm. After general endotracheal anesthesia, a nasogastric tube and Foley catheter were placed. A Veress needle
pneumoperitoneum was achieved via a 12-mm incision off of the iliac crest. With the patient in a lateral decubitus position, 3 ports were
placed: a 12-mm port off the iliac crest in the midclavicular line, a 12-mm port approximately 4 cm above the umbilicus in the pararectus
line, and a 12-mm port subcostal in the midclavicular line. Dense adhesions were encountered; an extensive adhesiolysis was performed. In
particular, the liver edge was adherent to Gerota's fascia, likely a result of the patient's prior radiation therapy. The line of Toldt was
incised, as was the hepatic triangular ligament. The colon was mobilized medially, and a Kocher maneuver was done on the duodenum. The renal
hilum was dissected; the artery was secured with 5 clips, and cut. The renal vein was then carefully dissected and secured with the Endo-GIA
stapler. The specimen appeared to be adherent to the diaphragm, and no clear plane of dissection existed. As such, the involved portion of
the posterior diaphragm was resected along with the tumor. A chest tube (20 F) was placed at what appeared to be the 6th intercostal space,
under laparoscopic guidance; this was affixed to the skin and kept clamped until the end of the procedure. The diaphragm was repaired with
interrupted 0 silk sutures: 2 simple and 3 horizontal mattress sutures; the sutures were tied intracorporeally with the knots on the
abdominal side of the diaphragm (Figure 2). During this portion of the procedure, the pneumoperitoneum was reduced to 10 mm Hg to facilitate
reapproximation of the edges of the diaphragm. The tail of the previously placed suture was used as a handle to aid accurate placement of
the next suture. After complete mobilization of the specimen, the ureter was taken between pairs of clips and was then placed in an Endo-
Catch (United States Surgical, Corp., Norwalk, CT). The lowermost incision was extended to approximately 7 cm, and the specimen was removed
intact. The intraabdominal pressure was reduced to 5 mm Hg, and hemostasis was obtained. The 12-mm port sites were closed with the aid of
the Carter-Thomson device (Inlet Medical, Inc., Prairie Eden, MN) under laparoscopic visualization. No intraoperative complications
occurred. The patient was extubated in the operating room. Surgical technique of laparoscopic closure of diaphragm. The chest tube was
removed on postoperative day 2. A regular diet was instituted on postoperative day 2. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. The
pathology showed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma with sheets of necrosis. The tumor involved the renal cortex and renal medulla and
distorted the renal pelvis, but no perirenal fat was involved. All resection margins were clear. The tumor was felt to represent metastatic
ovarian cancer. Laparoscopic surgery offers the advantages of minimally invasive access for treating a wide range of renal diseases. As
laparoscopic skills and experience increase, more difficult and larger renal tumors are being approached. For the upper pole complex renal
mass, the laparoscopic approach offers several obvious benefits over a standard thoraco-abdominal incision.21,22 However, for these tumors,
the surgeon needs to be able to effectively reconstruct the diaphragm. Once the diaphragm has been opened, rhythmic contractions of the
diaphragm may cause further diastasis; in addition, once an opening in the diaphragm occurs, a natural tendency exists for the
intraabdominal contents to migrate through the opening. Also, the pressure of the pneumoperitoneum can result in a tension pneumothorax,
making ventilation of the patient more difficult. Lastly, upon closure of the diaphragm, as much as a 100 cm H2O pleuroperitoneal pressure
gradient (during deep inspiration) may occur, which may pull apart a diaphragmatic repair and thereby force intraabdominal contents into the
chest.23 Accordingly, during laparoscopic repair of a diaphragmatic injury, it is helpful to keep the pneumoperitoneum pressure at 10 mm Hg.
This facilitates ventilation of the patient and the creation of a tension-free closure. Immediately prior to the repair, the surgeon needs
to decide whether to place a chest tube. If the opening in the diaphragm is small, the surgeon may elect to not place a chest tube. In this
circumstance, a 24 F red rubber catheter can be placed through 1 of the ports and passed across the final diaphragmatic mattress suture into
the chest. Air and fluid are then withdrawn under suction. With the lungs held in full inspiration, the catheter is extracted while the
final mattress suture is tied. In this case, a postoperative chest radiograph is obtained; tube thoracostomy may be necessary if a > 20%
residual pneumothorax exists. On the other hand, if a chest tube is to be placed, then the 30-degree laparoscopic lens is helpful, because
it can be passed through the opening in the diaphragm and the chest tube can be placed under endoscopic guidance, properly positioned,
secured to the skin, and clamped. The diaphragmatic defect is usually closed using interrupted figure-of-eight or horizontal mattress
sutures of 2-0 nonabsorbable suture material (eg, polypropylene or silk).24–27 Teflon pledgets are occasionally used when the diaphragm is
attenuated or if the closure is tenuous. Other techniques include placing 2 rows of nonabsorbable sutures28 or using absorbable materials
placed in an interrupted or continuous technique.29 Some authors recommend a 2-layer closure for defects greater than 2 cm. The inner layer
is composed of an interlocking horizontal mattress (nonabsorbable) that everts the edges. This is then reinforced with a running 3-0
polypropylene or similar type of nonabsorbable suture. Endoscopic approximation of the diaphragmatic defect edges has also been performed
using a hernia stapler.16,30 The purpose is to attain a firm closure while being careful not to injure the phrenic nerve (Table 1).29
Principles/Techniques Recommended. Intracorporeal suturing is cumbersome and by far the rate-limiting factor in reconstructive laparoscopic
surgery.31–33 A profound interest has developed, therefore, in the improvement of instrumentation to facilitate laparoscopic suturing and
tissue apposition. Several new instruments have been designed for laparoscopic reconstructive surgery. The Endo Stitch semiautomated
suturing device (United States Surgical Corp., Norwalk, CT) and the suture-assist device (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) have been
developed to address these issues.32 Ethicon has introduced another device called suture-assist, which also makes intracorporeal suturing
easier. However, both of these aids involve straight rather than curved needles, which may limit their application. Another aid, the
absorbable Lapra-Ty clip (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) allows fixation of a suture without requiring a knot to be tied, thus
speeding laparoscopic suturing; however, this clip is approved only for use on absorbable suture material. Because of these limitations and
due to the high cost of these disposable products, laparoscopic surgeons interested in expanding into other more difficult procedures need
to be skilled in intracorporeal free-hand laparoscopic suturing and knot tying. When the defect is too large to reapproximate primarily,
then it can be closed by placement of allogenic material (eg, polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE), fluorinated polyester (FP), and a Gore-Tex
graft or polypropylene mesh). PTFE is the most commonly used material in pediatric and adult surgery due to concern over the possible
erosion of any mesh material into adjacent structures, such as the esophagus.11
