Intestinal tuberculosis is a rare disease in western countries, affecting mainly immigrants and immunocompromised patients. Intestinal
tuberculosis is a diagnostic challenge, especially when active pulmonary infection is absent. It may mimic many other abdominal diseases.
Here, we report a case of isolated colonic tuberculosis where the initial diagnostic workup was suggestive of Crohn's disease. Computed
tomography findings however, raised the possibility of colonic tuberculosis and the detection of acid-fast bacilli in biopsy specimens
confirmed the diagnosis. In conclusion, this case highlights the need for awareness of intestinal tuberculosis in the differential diagnosis
of chronic intestinal disease Intestinal tuberculosis (TB) is rarely seen in western countries, affecting mainly immigrants and
immunocompromised patients . However, the incidence of abdominal TB has been steadily increasing for the past 20 years and a reported 2–3%
of patients with abdominal TB have isolated colonic involvement . Intestinal TB is usually a diagnostic challenge, particularly in the
absence of active pulmonary infection. It may mimic many other abdominal diseases, such as other infectious processes, tumors,
periappendiceal abscess, and Crohn's disease (CD) . Several cases of intestinal TB have so far been described including a few reports of
intestinal TB mimicking CD . The differential diagnosis between TB and CD is important because if TB is suspected, empiric treatment with
antituberculous drugs should be considered, especially if an immunosuppresive treatment for CD is to be initiated. In this report we present
a case of isolated colonic TB in which the initial diagnostic workup suggested CD. It highlights the need for awareness of intestinal TB in
the differential diagnosis of chronic intestinal disease. A 61-yr-old man, born and raised in Crete, was admitted to our hospital with a
6-month history of diarrhea, weight loss of 7 kg, weakness, anorexia, low grade fever, and episodes of pain in the right lower abdominal
quadrant. He did not reported arthralgias, rash, cough, or the presence of blood in his stools. There was no family history of inflammatory
bowel disease or colon cancer. His past medical history included a diagnosis of hypothyoidism under treatment with thyroxine 100 mcg/d, and
an episode of haemoptysis five years ago attributed to bronchiectasis. The patient had no past history of TB and was not aware of any TB
exposure. He had been drinking alcohol (50–60 g/d) for 25 years, but stopped drinking five years ago. He did not smoke and worked as
auxiliary staff in a community mental clinic. Physical examination revealed mild abdominal tenderness, mostly confined to the right lower
quadrant. The remainder of the examination was unremarkable. The laboratory workup showed a mild anaemia (Hb 11.5 g/dl, Hct 35.8%, MCV 68.1
fl), a serum ferritin of 7.71 (normal, 12–237 ng/ml) and a serum folate of 4.2 ng/ml (normal, 5.3–14.4 ng/ml). Liver biochemistries, total
cholesterol, serum proteins, prothrombin time and thyroid hormones were within normal range. Serologic testing for HIV, Yersinia and E.
histolytica were negative. Stool samples were negative for infectious organisms. A chest x-ray examination presented no significant
findings. Colonoscopy revealed a tumorous lesion in the ascending colon near the caecum. The colonoscope could not be introduced beyond the
lesion. Initial endoscopic diagnosis was that of a malignant lesion, and multiple biopsies were obtained. Histology showed chronic
inflammatory changes and noncaseating epithelioid granulomas, a pattern consistent with Crohn's disease. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy showed
an axial hiatal hernia and a diffusely erythematous gastric mucosa. A small bowel series was normal. A tentative diagnosis of Crohn's
disease was made and a treatment with Budesonide 9 mg/d and Mesalamine 3 g/d was initiated. However, no improvement was noticed and the
diarrhea and fever rather deteriorated in the next days. A CT-scan examination was performed to rule out an abdominal or pelvic abscess. The
CT scan revealed a concentric wall thickening confined to the caecal-ascending colon border, luminal stenosis, extensive thickening of the
mesenteric folds, the peritoneum and great omentum, small mesenteric lymph nodes, and a small amount of high density peritoneal fluid
(Figures 1 and 2). CT findings were not consistent with Crohn's disease and raised the possibility of TB involvement. Tuberculin test was
negative. A thoracic CT revealed nodular and fibrotic changes in the apical segments of the upper lobes, a pattern consistent with past TB
exposure. Bronchoscopy was normal and acid-fast bacilli were not detected in the sputum, bronchoalveolar lavage or gastric aspirate. In view
of our failure to confirm the diagnosis of colonic TB, a second colonoscopy was planned to obtain new biopsy specimens for culture and PCR
analysis. When however the biopsies from the tumorous lesion were reevaluated and appropriately stained to look for acid-fast rods, several
tubercle bacilli were identified upon Zielh-Neelsen staining. The patient was treated with Rifampicin (10 mg/kg/d), Isoniazid (5 mg/kg/d),
Pyrazinamide (30 mg/kg/d) and Ethambutol (15 mg/kg/d). Over the next 10 days, the patient became afebrile, the stools were formed, at a
frequency of 2–3 times per day, and he was subsequently discharged from the hospital in good condition. The patient was seen 2 months after
discharge at which time he had gained weight and he was asymptomatic. Colonoscopy revealed a normal appearing caecal mucosa. Currently, six
months after diagnosis, the patient is free of symptoms and is continuing the anti-tuberculous treatment. Colonic wall thickening with
irregular outer margins. Note the thickening of the mesenteric folds. High density peritoneal fluid, peritoneal thickening and extensive
mesenteric infiltration in the pelvis. The ileo-caecal area is reported to be the area most commonly involved in colonic tuberculosis . The
apparent affinity of the tubercle bacillus for lymphoid tissue and areas of physiologic stasis facilitating prolonged contact between the
bacilli and the mucosa may be the reasons for the ileum and cecum being the most common sites of disease. Other areas of the colon besides
the ileocaecal area represent the next more common site of tuberculous involvement of the GI tract, usually manifested as segmental colitis
involving the ascending and transverse colon . Colonic TB may present as an inflammatory stricture, hypertrophic lesions resembling polyps
or tumors, segmental ulcers and colitis or rarely, diffuse tuberculous colitis . The diagnosis can be quite difficult since there are no
specific clinical symptoms of large bowel TB and only a quarter of patients have chest radiographs showing evidence of active or healed
pulmonary infection . The clinical, radiological and endoscopic picture is most likely to be confused with neoplasms or Crohn's disease, and
infrequently with other considerations including amoeboma, Yersinia infection, GI histoplasmosis, and periappendiceal abscess . The
diagnostic procedure of choice is colonoscopy and biopsy . Apart from routine histology looking for caseating granulomas, appropriately
stained slides should be prepared to look for acid-fast rods and biopsies should also be sent for culture . Biopsies should be taken
preferably from the margins of ulcerations because granulomas are often submucosal . However, granulomas with or without caseation are
usually seen in less than 50% of patients , while clusters of epithelioid cells without well formed granulomas have been reported to occur
in 20–30% of the biopsies obtained . Similarly, in a considerable number of cases the biopsies have features of chronic inflammation but no
granulomas, caseation or clusters of epithelioid cells . Only 35–60% of cases can be rapidly diagnosed by the finding of acid-fast rods ,
however there are reports indicating no detection of tubercle bacilli in the biopsies . Culture of the biopsy material may increase the
diagnostic yield , however disappointing results with 0% detection of acid-fast bacilli have also been reported . Polymerase chain reaction
analysis of biopsy specimens obtained endoscopically has been shown to be more sensitive than culture and acid-fast stains in diagnosing
intestinal TB . Other studies have suggested that an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay using mycobacterial saline-extracted antigen may
increase the yield of correct diagnosis of colonic TB . Extensive infiltration of the peritoneum, omentum and mesentery – in the form of
peritoneal folds thickening – and the coexistence of high density peritoneal fluid are CT findings favoring the diagnosis of TB involvement
. Small bowel series and barium enema most often reveal a high-riding cecum with or without a string-like lesion of the terminal ileum . The
preferred treatment of GI TB is with antituberculous drugs, with surgery reserved primarily for complications . Our case illustrates not
only a typical manifestation of isolated colonicTB, but also a case mimicking CD. Colonoscopic differentiation between TB and Crohn's
colitis can be difficult taking into account that both entities may present themselves with mucosal ulcerations and nodularity, apthous
ulcers, oedematous mucosal folds, strictures and pseudopolyps and luminal narrowing . Although in our case endoscopic appearance was
suggestive of a neoplasm, histology showed chronic inflammatory changes and noncaseating epithelioid granulomas, a pattern consistent with
CD. CT scan was helpful revealing an infiltrative pattern suggesting TB. This is in accordance with other reports where it was found that CT
scan was useful for the diagnosis avoiding unnecessary exploratory laparotomy . Finally with the detection of acid-fast bacilli in our
biopsy specimens we were able to set the correct diagnosis. It then became obvious that despite normal appearing chest x-ray the previously
mentioned episode of haemoptysis was probably due to active pulmonary TB. Correct diagnosis in such patients is extremely important taking
into account that steroid treatment may have potentially disastrous effects. In conclusion colonic TB should be considered as a differential
diagnosis in patients suspected of having a tumourous lesion on colonoscopy and in patients suspected of having Crohn's disease. CD, Crohn's
disease; CT, computer tomography; GI, gastrointestinal; TB, tuberculosis None declared The pre-publication history for this paper can be
accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of the patient's details
