To the Editor: Hantaviruses are enveloped RNA viruses belonging to the family Bunyaviridae (1,2), for which a number of species have been
identified, including the Hantaan, Seoul, Puumala, Dobrava-Belgrade, and Sin Nombre viruses (1,2). Each hantavirus is associated with a
specific rodent reservoir (1,2). Hantaan virus, found throughout northeastern Asia, causes a life-threatening illness known as hemorrhagic
fever with renal syndrome (HFRS). Main symptoms and signs of HFRS are fever, myalgia, severe vascular leakage with ascites and
retroperitoneal edema and pain (abdominal, loin, or headache), shock, acute renal failure, proteinuria and hematuria, thrombocytopenia, and
bleeding complications (3). Seoul virus, found worldwide, and Puumala virus, found in Scandinavia and Eastern Europe, cause mild forms of
HFRS. Sin Nombre virus, found in the United States, causes hantavirus pulmonary syndrome, which is characterized by increased pulmonary
capillary permeability and pulmonary edema and can progress to severe respiratory distress syndrome and shock as a result of low cardiac
output (4,5). Despite the fact that HFRS is frequently reported in People’s Republic of China, no indigenous cases of HFRS have been
reported in Taiwan. Previous serologic studies found that the Seoul strain is endemic in the areas of Taiwan and two isolated islands
nearby, Kinmen and Matzu; in contrast, in the People’s Republic of China, the Hantaan and Seoul strains concurrently predominate (6,7). Our
patient, a 38-year-old man, had onset of sore throat, headache, cough, myalgia, and intermittent fever (up to 38.3°C) on February 2, 2001. A
resident of Matzu for more than 30 years, he had traveled to the People’s Republic of China 3 months before the symptoms began. Laboratory
tests at a local hospital showed thrombocytopenia (58,000/mL) and leukopenia (3,800/mL). Because his symptoms persisted, he was transferred
to the National Taiwan University Hospital on February 7, 2001. Initial tests there showed a temperature of 36.4°C, heart rate 74 beats/min,
and respiratory rate 18/min; there was no skin rash. The rest of the physical examination was normal. He had a platelet count 73,000/µL;
leukocytes 5,670/µL with 59.1% segments, 19.8% lymphocytes, and 18.2% monocytes; urea nitrogen 7.4 mg/dL; and creatinine 0.94 mg/dL.
Urinalysis showed proteinuria (300 mg/dL). His chest radiography was normal. Abdominal ultrasound showed a fatty liver. After admission, the
patient’s laboratory values gradually improved and his proteinuria subsided. He had no fever. On February 10, 2001, he had marked sinus
bradycardia (as low as 33 beats/min) and became fatigued. His blood pressure was 120–130/70–80 mmHg. No abnormal serum electrolytes, urea
nitrogen, creatinine, creatine kinase, and troponin-I were noted. Echocardiogram showed normal atrium and ventricle size, good left
ventricle contractility, and small amount of pericardial effusion. His heart rate gradually increased. He was discharged on February 15,
2001, without event. A substantial increase of serum immunofluorescent immunoglobulin (Ig) G titers (1:640 on February 6; 1:5120 on February
19, 2001) and positive IgM titers of 1:80 against hantavirus antigen (Seoul type) confirmed that this virus was responsible for the illness.
A few reports of hantavirus infection with cardiac involvement have been published. A case report by Chun and Godfrey showed right atrium
dilation with diffuse atrial hemorrhage, interstitial edema, and vascular congestion without surrounding myocardial fibers and conduction
system involvement in a 19-year-old soldier who died from epidemic (Korean) hemorrhagic fever, sinus tachycardia, paroxysmal
supraventricular tachycardia, and congestive heart failure (8). Marked sinus bradycardia (as low as 34 beats/min) in a patient with a severe
form of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome (acute renal failure) has been reported (9). However, this finding was not observed in
patients with mild cases of the disease. The possibility that our patient acquired the infection during his travel to the People’s Republic
of China 3 months earlier is extremely low because of the length of the incubation period (typical incubation period 4–28 days) (10) and the
different hantavirus strains prevalent in the People’s Republic of China (6). Although viral genetic sequence data from the patient and
rodents in Matzu were not available in this study, our patient was infected with the Seoul strain, which is highly seroprevalent in rodents
in Matzu (6,7). In summary, this case was probably the first indigenous case of hantavirus infection in Taiwan. Its characteristics suggest
that marked sinus bradycardia should be included as a protean manifestation of hantavirus. Suggested citation: Liu Y-H, Huang J-H, Hsueh
P-R, and Luh K-T. Hantavirus Infection with Marked Sinus Bradycardia, Taiwan. Emerg Infect Dis. [serial on the Internet]. 2002 Jun [date
cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol8no6/01-0340.htm
