We report a very rare case of ovarian torsion following controlled ovarian stimulation for in vitro fertilization in which no oocytes were
obtained at the time of ovum retrieval from the left torsed ovary. The patient was a 33-year-old nulligravida female undergoing controlled
ovarian stimulation. On day 14, the patient complained of lower left abdominal pain with nausea. Transvaginal oocyte retrieval from the
right ovary was performed. The patient subsequently underwent laparoscopy 6 hours following oocyte retrieval. A portion of the left ovary
was observed. The ovary was detorsed at the time of laparoscopy followed by peritoneal lavage. Empty follicle syndrome (EFS) is
characterized by failure to obtain oocytes from mature follicles after ovulation induction for assisted reproduction treatment. It has a
reported incidence of 0.6% to 7%.1 The etiology of EFS is a subject of controversy. Tsuiki et al2 suggested that it might be a manifestation
of intrinsic ovarian dysfunction. Ndukwe et al3 concluded that EFS is a drug-related phenomenon caused by very low serum hCG levels. Adnexal
torsion is the fifth most common gynecologic surgical emergency with a prevalence of 2.7%.4 Ovarian induction is believed to be a
predisposing factor for adnexal torsion. Pena et al5 demonstrated in a recent study that ovulation induction was associated with ovarian
torsion in 19% of patients.5 The purpose of this report is to describe a case of empty follicle syndrome associated with ovarian torsion.
This appears to be the first published report. The patient was a 33-year-old nulligravida female whose husband had asthenoteratospermia.
Tubal patency had been demonstrated with hysterosalpingography. The day 3 FSH level was 2.6 IU/mL, and LH level was 2.1 IU/mL. The long
protocol of pituitary desensitization was commenced and maintained with daily injection of 0.1 mg of triptorelin (Arvekap, Ipsen)
administered on day 21 of the preceding menstrual cycle, for 2 weeks. Ovulation induction was achieved with daily subcutaneous injections of
300 IU of recombinant human FSH (Gonal F, Serono). On day 13 of stimulation, sonography of the left ovary showed 10 follicles of 19 mm in
mean diameter and 5 smaller follicles (16 mm in mean diameter); the right ovary had 12 follicles of 19 mm in mean diameter and 6 smaller
follicles. Estradiol level was 1741 pg/mL. A dose of 5,000 IU of hCG was administered intramuscularly on day 13, and oocyte retrieval was
scheduled at 36 hours later on day 15. Late in the afternoon on day 14, the patient had a sudden onset of lower left abdominal pain with
nausea. A physical examination revealed lower abdominal tenderness especially on the left side and signs of peritonitis on day 15.
Transvaginal oocyte retrieval was undertaken. No oocytes were retrieved from the left ovary; 18 oocytes were obtained from the right ovary.
After the procedure was completed, the patient's symptoms worsened. Laparoscopy was performed 6 hours later and revealed torsion of the left
ovary. The ovary was detorsed under laparoscopic control and peritoneal lavage was performed. Antibiotics were given for 10 days. The
patient's clinical symptoms resolved 2 days later, and transcervical transfer of 4 embryos, created from retrieved oocytes of the right
ovary, was performed on day 18. Unfortunately, pregnancy did not ensue. Acute adnexal torsion is an uncommon but serious complication of
controlled superovulation in assisted reproduction programs. The enlarged stimulated ovaries may explain this association. Adnexal torsion
may involve twisting of the ovary, fallopian tube, or both. If complete ovarian torsion remains undiagnosed and untreated, it can lead to
necrosis with peritonitis, loss of the ovary, infertility, and even death. Early diagnosis and immediate surgical intervention are,
therefore, essential if adnexal organs and function are to be preserved. Abnormal flow detected by Doppler sonography is highly predictive
of adnexal torsion and, therefore, useful in the diagnosis of ovarian torsion. However, when normal flow is detected by Doppler sonography,
it does not necessarily exclude ovarian torsion; in fact, torsion is missed in 60% of cases, and diagnosis in these cases is delayed.5 In
our case, we did not perform a Doppler study. Since successful conservative management of adnexal torsion by laparoscopy was described by
Mage et al,6 this technique has been extensively used even when diagnosis is delayed and the adnexa appear ischemic and hemorrhagic with
subsequent good functional results. In a recent study, Robson and Kerin7 described a case of acute adnexal torsion before oocyte retrieval
in an in vitro fertilization cycle. They had aspirated 8 follicles and obtained 7 oocytes from the torsed ovary. They noticed a great
difference in the characteristics of the follicular fluid obtained from the 2 ovaries; in all the follicles from the affected ovary, fluid
was heavily bloodstained, and in all the follicles from the contralateral ovary, it was clear. In our study we aspirated 12 follicles, and
no oocytes were obtained from the affected left ovary. We also noticed that the follicular fluid from the left affected ovary was dark and
bloodstained as compared with the clear-colored follicular fluid from the right ovary. EFS is defined as the failure to retrieve oocytes
from mature follicles following ovulation induction for assisted reproductive treatments. Its patho-physiology is unclear. Evidence has been
provided8 to suggest that EFS is more likely to represent a defect in the in vivo bioactivity of hCG rather than being an intrinsic patient
problem,2 although Awonuga1 has demonstrated its occurrence in the presence of normal hCG concentrations. In our opinion, evidence suggests
that EFS may be a multifactorial problem with common manifestations and the lack of oocyte retrieval during the operation.2 It is known from
pathological findings that venous and lymphatic stasis occur early in torsion and arterial flow is decreased at this stage. It seems that
our case was one of ovarian torsion that resulted in decreased blood flow to the affected ovary, which in turn might have resulted in
reduced concentration of hCG to that ovary inducing dys-functional folliculogenesis. Venous and lymphatic stasis in torsion may also have
contributed to intrinsic ovarian dys-function and dysfunctional folliculogenesis. In conclusion, to the best of our knowledge this is the
first published report of empty follicular syndrome from a torsed ovary. Conservative management with detorsion under laparoscopic control
represents the best option for treatment.
