We report a case of pathologically proven simultaneous duodenal and colonic metastases about four years after nephrectomy for mixed clear
and granular cell type renal cell carcinoma (RCC). A 76-year-old female patient who had undergone a left radical nephrectomy 4 years
previously for RCC presented with a 1-month history of dyspepsia and pain in the right upper abdomen. An abdominopelvic CT scan showed
circumferential wall thickening with high enhancement at the second portion of the duodenum and additional enhancement of an irregular
protruding mass into the lumen of the ascending colon. A gastroscopy showed a large and ulcerative protruding mass nearly obstructing the
second portion of the duodenum. A colonoscopy revealed a polypoid, nodular and purplish mass in the ascending colon. Microscopy of the
biopsy specimen showed the features identical to those of the RCC which was resected 4 years earlier in this patient. We believe this to be
the first case illustrating a metastatic renal cell carcinoma as simultaneous duodenal and colon masses. Renal cell carcinoma (RCC) may
metastasize to any site of the body, but clinically evident metastatic intestinal involvement by RCC is extremely rare1–7). To our
knowledge, simultaneous duodenal and colonic metastases have not been reported in the English literature. We report a case of pathologically
proven simultaneous duodenal and ascending colonic metastases about four years after a left nephrectomy for RCC. A 76-year-old female
patient who had undergone a left radical nephrectomy 4 years previously for RCC (mixed clear and granular cell type, TNM stage III)
presented with a 1-month history of dyspepsia, lethargy and pain in the right upper abdomen. Her blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate
80/min, respiration rate 22/min and body temperature 36.8°C. Her conjunctiva were slightly pale and chest was normal to auscultation.
Abdominal examination revealed slight tenderness but normal peristalsis; however, a movable mass was palpated in the right upper abdomen.
The hematocrit was 28.1% and the white cell count was 9700/mm3 with 77% polymorphonuclear cells and 14% lymphocytes. Serum sodium was 134
mEq/L, potassium 3.5 mEq/L, chloride 101 mEq/L and calcium 9.5 mg/L. The result of liver function tests were as follows: total protein 6.5
g/dL, albumin 3.5 g/dL, cholesterol 165 mg/L, bilirubin 0.6 mg/dL, alkaline phosphatase 105 IU/L, AST 28 IU/L and ALT 21 IU/L. The result of
a stool examination revealed positive occult blood. A chest X-ray showed no evidence of lymphadenopathy. Tumor marker levels, such as
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), carbohydrate antigen 19-9 (CA19-9) and α-fetoprotein (AFP), were within normal limits. An abdominopelvic CT
scan showed circumferential wall thickening with high enhancement at the second portion of the duodenum and additional enhancement of an
irregular protruding mass into the lumen of the ascending colon with multiple lymphadenopathy in the aortocaval area (Figure 1). A
gastroscopy showed a large, irregular multi-lobed, partially necrotic and ulcerative protruding mass nearly obstructing the second portion
of the duodenum. A colonoscopy revealed a polypoid, nodular mass in the ascending colon, which was purplish in color, had sharp margins and
was pliable (Figure 2). Microscopic findings of biopsy specimens showed features identical to those of the renal cell carcinoma which was
resected 4 years earlier in this patient and immunohistochemical stainings for vimentin was positive (Figure 3). Interferon was given at a
dose of 2 million IU per square meter three times a week. However, interferon therapy was discontinued after three months due to anemia,
anorexia and general weakness. She is still alive 1 year later. The biological behavior of RCC is characteristically variable and the
prognosis is unpredictable8). The clinical course of the disease ranges from months to several decades and even spontaneous regression has
been documented9). Renal cell carcinoma can disseminate locally by contiguity and metastatize to distant sites. Approximately 25% of
patients with RCC have metastatic disease at the time of diagnosis2). The delayed occurrence (as late as 31 years after a nephrectomy) of
metastatic RCC is well known3). Solitary metachronous metastases from RCC are rare; however, they can occur very late in the course of the
disease1). Renal cell carcinoma may metastasize to almost every organ of the body, but 95% of the metastatic lesions involve the lung, lymph
nodes, liver, bone, adrenal glands and the opposite kidney3). However, there are scattered reports in the literature of clinically evident
intestinal metastasis from RCC1–7). To the best of our knowledge, simultaneous duodenal and colonic metastases have not been reported in the
English literatures. A secondary tumor involving the intestinal tract may be caused by direct extension, lymphatic spread, peritoneal or
hematogenous dissemination4). In the present case, duodenal and colonic metastases are not generalized carcinomatosis because any other
metastasis is not occurred in common metastatic sites and duodenal and ascending colonic involvement are remote from a primary cancer of the
left kidney. Metastatic RCC, like the primary tumor, is frequently hypervascular1, 5). Hypervascularity of the present tumor, as suggested
by a CT scan, gastroscopy and colonoscopy, was compatible with the characteristics of metastatic renal cell carcinoma. Also, positive
immuno-histochemical stain for vimentin elucidated that the duodenal and colonic masses are compatible with carcinoma rather than
adenocarcinoma. Surgical excision of the local recurrence is the best procedure for therapy, but this can be radical only when the
recurrence can be completely excised3). Chemotherapies, including hormonal and interferon therapies, are effective in some patients with
metastatic renal cell carcinoma8). In our case, only interferon treatment was done without surgical excision. Although Interferon treatment
was used to treat metastatic RCC, it is not easy to evaluate Its effectiveness because of premature discontinuance of the treatment. In our
opinion, endoscopists should consider the possibility of intestinal metastasis of RCC when endoscopic and CT studies show a hypervascular
mass in a patient with a previous history of RCC. Abdominopelvic CT scan. (A) Circumferential wall thickening with high enhancement in the
second portion of the duodenum. (B) Enhancement of an irregular protruding mass into the lumen of the ascending colon. Endoscopy. (A) A
gastroscopic view shows an irregular multi-lobed, partially ulcerative and protruding mass nearly obstructing the second portion of the
duodenum. (B) A colonoscopic view shows a purplish-colored, sharp-margined and nodular mass on the ascending colon. Pathology. (A) Mixed
clear and granular cell type renal cell carcinoma in the nephrectomy specimen 4 years ago (H&E X200). (B) Renal cell carcinoma in duodenal
tumor (H&E X200). (C) Positive immunohistochemical stain for vimentin in duodenal tumor X200).
