Trichinellosis is a widespread parasitic disease caused by different genotypes of Trichinella. It is common in animals and can spread from
its reservoir in wild animals to synanthropic animals, domestic animals and people. Different transmission patterns have been documented .
They range from those in which humans do not play any role to those in which improper human behaviour is the only cause of transmission .
The infection pressure of the parasite biomass present in sylvatic animals and human malpractice in animal husbandry together can easily
favour the transmission of Trichinella from the wild to the domestic habitat . The growing importance of sylvatic species in the persistence
and re-emergence of trichinellosis in many regions was emphasized at the 10th International Conference on Trichinellosis . Few cases of
finding of Trichinella britovi in domestic pigs are known . This study deals with a case of pig trichinellosis in Estonia due to Trichinella
britovi and makes an attempt to elucidate the transmission patterns in the actual case. At the end of 1994 routine meat inspection diagnosed
trichinellosis in 3 hogs of 8–15 months of age from the Lõpe co-operative on the island of Hiiumaa. At the beginning of 1995 trichinellosis
was diagnosed in one sow of the age of one year and 8 months on the same farm. Muscle samples from 2 of these 4 pigs (pig 1–9-month-old sow
and pig 2–20-month-old sow) were submitted for thorough investigation at the department of parasitology of the Estonian Agricultural
University. The other 2 positive pigs had been burned already. Samples (á 10 grams, except for 5 grams from tip of the tongue) were taken
from 11 different muscles (see Table 1) and first investigated by the compressor method. Larvae were collected and counted after artificial
digestion of muscle samples . Muscle samples (diaphragm, masseter muscle, temporal muscle and eye muscles) of a cat from the same farm were
taken and investigated as well. Trichinella in different muscles of a 9-month-old (pig 1) and 20-month-old (pig 2) sows, found by artificial
digestion method. ReNa fur-animal farm is situated only about one kilometre from the Lõpe co-operative. 20 blue foxes (Alopex lagopus) aged
1–4 years and one mink (Mustela lutreola) were investigated with regard to Trichinella. Additionally 18 brown rats (Rattus norvegicus)
caught in the feed preparation unit and adjacent rooms of the same farm were investigated for Trichinella. Samples (á 5 grams) were taken
from diaphragm, thigh muscles, masseter muscle and temporal muscle. The above-mentioned artificial digestion method was used in case of all
investigations. Because Trichinella infection of some farm fur-animals was demonstrated, an investigation of feed-briquettes was carried out
to possibly identify the source of infection. The uncertified briquettes (1,5 × 1,0 m), imported from Sweden consisted of raw pork leavings
(trotters, ears, tongue and cuttings of tissues of little value) and were used as feed for fur-animals. Samples were taken from 190
different places of the 15 briquettes. Muscle samples from some of the Trichinella positive animals: the 9-month-old sow, cat, blue foxes
and rats were sent to the Trichinella Reference Centre (TRC, in Rome) by air. The vacuum-packed samples were covered with streptocide and
fungicide, but not refrigerated. For identification of Trichinella genotypes the random amplified polymorphic DNA analysis (RAPD) was used
following the protocol proposed by . The intensity of Trichinella larvae in 11 different muscle groups of each of the 2 pigs is presented in
Table 1. Trichinella larvae in the muscles of pig 1 were encapsulated, and a capsule in the semimembranosus muscle was observed to be in the
early stage of calcification. In muscles of pig 2 all capsules were calcified. In comparison with pigs, cat muscles were heavily infected
with Trichinella larvae. There were 95 larvae per gram (LPG) in eye muscles, 90 LPG in masseter muscle, 85 LPG in temporal muscle and 80 LPG
in diaphragm. The prevalence of Trichinella infection in blue foxes was 55% (11 of the 20 foxes were infected). From 2 to 19 Trichinella LPG
were found. The average number of LPG in thigh muscles was 8.3, in masseter muscle 6.0, in temporal muscle 4.0 and in diaphragm 3.6. The
mink was not infected. Two brown rats out of 18 were infected with Trichinella, with an average intensity of 50.0 LPG in one and 90.0 LPG in
the other rat. Both infected rats were old. Larvae were not found from the muscles of 11 young rats and 5 adults. No Trichinella larvae were
found in the pork leavings briquettes. Larvae (12 LPG) from pig 1 were identified as T. britovi (TRC code ISS 333), whereas those from the
blue foxes and the rats were found to be T. spiralis (TRC codes ISS 356-ISS 358 and ISS 359 respectively). Unfortunately muscle samples from
the domestic cat were in a poor condition upon arrival at the Trichinella Reference Centre and no electrophoretically reproducible pattern
was observed after RAPD amplification of DNA from the larvae. No data are available on Trichinella species previously found in cats. The
results of the present study indicate that in domestic pigs the muscles most heavily infected with Trichinella larvae were the tongue
muscle, especially the body of tongue, masseter muscle and diaphragm. Parasite distribution within a host appears to be independent of the
genotype of Trichinella and predilection sites are primarily determined by host species and secondarily by the age and level of infection .
Thus, in about half of the medium to light infections (0.005–59 LPG) the root of the tongue showed higher larval densities than the crus
muscle of the diaphragm . The calcification of all Trichinella capsules in pig 2 indicates that the infection was acquired long before
slaughter. In Estonia, this was the first case of finding T. britovi in domestic pig and the second case of trichinellosis in domestic pig.
The first case of trichinellosis was diagnosed in one hog from Haldreka co-operative, about 30 km from the Lõpe co-operative in Hiiumaa in
1994, but the species of Trichinella was not determined. The third case occurred in 1999, when a domestic pig from a private farm on the
mainland (Järvamaa County) was infected with T. spiralis. ReNa fur-animal farm is situated only about one kilometre from the Lõpe co-
operative. The prevalence of Trichinella infection found in blue foxes was high, but the intensity of infection was low. Only 11% of rats
were infected, but they had a relatively high infection rate (up to 90 LPG). The infection agent both in blue foxes and rats was identified
as T. spiralis. During the flaying period at the ReNa farm, pigs in the Lõpe co-operative were fed with boiled fox carcasses. Because T.
spiralis was registered in blue foxes and rats on Hiiumaa and T. britovi was surprisingly found in domestic pig, it seems that in this case
the skinned carcasses of blue foxes from the nearby farm were not likely the source of infection for pigs. We have found T. britovi in 2
raccoon dogs (Nyctereutes procyonoides) and one red fox (Vulpes vulpes) on the island of Hiiumaa . This sylvatic species of Trichinella is
considered poorly infective for swine . Hunters frequently offer carcasses of red foxes and other game animals for pig feed but such feed is
usually cooked. However, unboiled (undercooked) carcasses used as pig feed might have caused the T. britovi infection of swine in Lõpe co-
operative. So far we have identified T. spiralis and T. britovi on the island of Hiiumaa. The distance between this island and the mainland
is about 20 kilometres. Nonetheless, during wintertime the sea between the mainland and the island is frozen and does not represent a
barrier for terrestrial mammals. Furthermore, it is easy for carnivorous and omnivorous hosts to "visit" Hiiumaa from the island of
Saaremaa, as the shortest distance between the islands is only 6 kilometres. High infection prevalence of Trichinella is registered in
wolves, lynxes, raccoon dogs and red foxes in Estonia . In big slaughterhouses all pigs are investigated for Trichinella using artificial
digestion method. In 2000 all 193462 pigs slaughtered were Trichinella negative. At the same time in small abattoirs the less sensitive
compressor method is still allowed. Thus it is possible that light infection is not noticed and Trichinella may spread. Since all genotypes
of Trichinella pose a threat to human beings, every case of trichinellosis in pigs should be thoroughly investigated. Nevertheless, to the
best of our knowledge the main source of Trichinella infection for humans in Estonia is game meat, which has not been controlled for
Trichinella. In the present case the source of pig infection with T. britovi was not identified, despite the investigation of some of the
possible routes of transmission via rats and fur-animals from a nearby farm. These were found to carry only T. spiralis infection. We
acknowledge the support of our research activities by the Estonian Science Foundation (grant No 4119).
