It has not been clearly demonstrated whether HIV vaccination can complicate routine HIV testing. In this report, we describe the laboratory
data of two prisoners who received rgp120 vaccine in a phase III trial underway in Thailand. These data indicate that previous vaccination
may complicate the interpretation of screening HIV diagnostic tests. The participants were identified from a cohort study on "Health factors
related to HIV-1 and other viral infections among incarcerated people" that was approved by The Ethical Committee for Research in Human
Subjects, Ministry of Public Health, Thailand. HIV diagnosis was definitively established with serial specimens using multi-screening tests,
Western blot and diagnostic PCR. Anti-HIV screening tests consistently exhibited either weakly reactive or inconclusive results. The band
patterns of the Western blot analysis corresponded to those found in individuals who received the rgp120 vaccination. Definite results were
established using diagnostic PCR, which exhibited consistently negative results with follow-up specimens. Such problems in HIV testing are
not easily resolved in the routine clinical setting in Thailand. These data demonstrate that HIV-1 vaccination interferes with routine
diagnostic tests. Similar cases will not be uncommon in Thailand, where 2,545 people have already participated in a phase III trial. At
present, there is only one protective human immunodeficiency virus type 1 (HIV-1) vaccine undergoing phase III trials. In 1998, the phase
I/II trial was conducted among 33 injecting drug users in Bangkok, Thailand, using rgp 120 derived from HIV 1 subtype B (MN). The
preliminary data of the phase I/II trials demonstrated acceptable safety and immunogenicity, with some breakthrough infections. Then, a
randomized (ratio1: 1), double-blind, placebo-controlled phase III trial, using a bivalent rgp 120 vaccine derived from subtype B (MN) and
subtype E (244), was initiated in March 1999, in Bangkok, Thailand, with 2,545 injecting drug users. The final result on the efficacy of
this vaccine may be expected in late 2003. Indeed, almost 100% of vaccinated individual seroconverted following immunization and developed a
high antibody titer. The development of antibody following vaccination would be predicted to interfere with anti-HIV screening tests but
there are few reports describing such complications. In the trials, vaccinated individuals are distinguished from HIV infected cases by
nucleic acid tests such as PCR. However, it is questionable whether or not the technique of PCR can be routinely implemented in the trial
sites. In this report, we present data derived from two vaccinated individuals whose vaccination history was not known before inconclusive
anti-HIV test results were observed. The confounding effects of vaccination upon subsequent HIV testing are discussed and recommendations
suggested. The two cases reported were male prisoners selected from among 689 participants in a study on health factors related to HIV-1 and
other viral infections among incarcerated people. The study was reviewed and approved in 2001 by The Ethical Review Committee for Research
in Human Subjects, Ministry of Public Health, Thailand. Participants received a thorough explanation of the study, including the risks and
benefits, and gave signed informed consent prior to entry into the study. Patients were visited monthly during the 6-month period of follow-
up. At each visit, the participants were interviewed regarding their risk behaviors, received pre-test or post-test counseling and gave
samples for laboratory tests. HIV diagnosis was established by a combination of screening tests as recommended by the WHO and Ministry of
Public Health, Thailand. HIV-1 antibody testing was performed with a two enzyme immunoassay (EIA) using Uni-Form II Ag/Ab (Organon Technika)
and HIV1/2 gr. O EIA (Abbott laboratories) together with a gel particle agglutination test (GPA, Fugirebio Inc.). Positive anti-HIV results
were reported after concordant reactive results were observed. In the case of discordant results from these screening tests, the specimens
underwent Western blot analysis (HIV blot 2.2, Genelabs diagnostic) and HIV-1 RNA and DNA were detected by in-house PCR as described in a
previous report. KP 548 and KP 667 were heroin users (by injection) since 1991 (KP 548) and 1994 (KP 667). They had shared needles before
and during incarceration. In addition, KP 667 shared needles with two HIV-infected prisoners. However, both KP 548 and KP 667 were anti-HIV
negative in the latest tests undertaken in 2001. The results of screening tests on KP 548 and KP 667 were consistently discordant at the
first visit and 2, 8 and 14 weeks later. All specimens were analyzed by Western blot that demonstrated unique high intensities of gp120 but
minor or undetectable gp160. Such Western blot banding patterns were not found in any HIV-1 infected cases. After analysis of the serial
specimens, the serological test results remained inconclusive and indeterminate Both RT-PCR and DNA PCR for HIV-1 were consistently negative
in all the samples. The history of vaccination was elicited at the fourth visit after a 2-month period of follow-up. Detailed laboratory
data is illustrated in Table 1. Laboratory data of KP 548 and KP 667 day after first visit; ** EIA1, Vironostika, Uni-Form II Ag/Ab ; ***
EIA2, Abbott HIV1/2 gr O EIA; GPA, Gel particle agglutination; WB, Western blot; Pos, Positive result; Neg, Negative result; NR, non-
reactive; index, OD/Cutoff value; ID, Indeterminate result; 1+ to 4+, relative intensities of bands in WB as compared to those of weakly
reactive control; Interpretation criteria for positive WB was the presence of 2 envelopes +/- gag +/- pol, as recommended by the
manufacturer. KP548 and KP667 were two out of 2,545 individuals involved in a phase III trial in Thailand. Their clinical specimens were
tested for HIV-1 infection using the same test algorithm used for routine individual diagnostic specimen testing. Their vaccination history
was not known since such data was not included in both the questionnaire and the pre-test counseling but was discovered by the laboratory
test results and was confirmed by retrospective interviewing of the cases. Thus, a vaccination history should be included in the standard
pre-test counseling both for diagnosis and blood safety. Secondly, the vaccine induced antibody response can complicate anti-HIV-1 screening
tests. Similar complications were observed among vaccinees in the phase I/II trial. The vaccine had induced antibody that was detectable by
EIAs and Western blot. The extent of reactivity of the tests was depended on antigenic determinants of the tests and the vaccines. The
weakly reactive EIA and discordant screening test results were similar to those of early seroconverters. However, the follow-up testing
exhibited stable signals in the EIA and Western blot, while those of early seroconverters should be increasing. Thirdly, the Western blot
results were incorrectly reported as anti-HIV positive if the band intensities were not scored. As demonstrated in Figure 1, the intensities
of gp120 were significantly higher than the intensities of gp160. Such relative intensities were not observed in any HIV-1 infected cases.
Finally, the definite diagnosis was obtained after PCR testing of serial specimens. However, PCR testing is not available or affordable for
all laboratories in Thailand, except in the case of a few research settings. Furthermore, such viral genome detection test is prone to
contamination as demonstrated in a vaccinee who got repeatedly false positive HIV RT-PCR. These two cases demonstrate the potential impact
of HIV vaccination on the laboratory diagnosis of HIV in all places where people have access to HIV vaccines. Another complication of HIV
vaccine trial is trial-related discrimination that occurred at 5% of the volunteers. Among these events, 10% was reported to be linked with
HIV testing. The design of efficacy trial of new HIV vaccines should be in parallel with development of novel diagnostic tests that are
capable of differentiating between immunization and true HIV infection. Western Blot results of KP 548 and KP667 *Day after first visit.
WPC: weak positive control None declared. All authors read and approved the final manuscript and contributed equally to the manuscript. The
pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: The authors would like to thank all of the staff of the Department of
Corrections, Ministry of Interior, Thailand, for their excellent cooperation. The study was supported by the Annual Budget, Thai government.
The patients gave their informed consent for the publication of their data as indicated in the ethical approved protocol.
