Shwachman-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is a rare genetic disorder of unknown pathogenesis involving exocrine pancreatic insufficiency and
hematological and skeletal abnormalities. About 25% of patients develop hematopoietic malignancies. We report on a case of acute myeloid
leukemia (M2) in a 21-year-old woman affected by SDS. She was treated with conventional chemotherapy (idarubicin plus cytarabine) and
reached complete remission of leukemia. After induction chemotherapy, she underwent allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT). The BMT
preparative regimen consisted of total body irradiation (TBI) followed by cyclophosphamide. Cyclosporin A and short term methotrexate were
used for graft-versus-host disease prophylaxis. After a follow-up of 12 months, she is alive leukemia free off any immunosuppressive agent.
Although experience in this field is scarce, we speculate that bone marrow failure in SDS is an indication for BMT which is the only
curative treatment option. Shwachmann-Diamond syndrome (SDS) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by exocrine pancreatic
insufficiency, somatic abnormalities (particularly metaphyseal dystosis) and bone marrow dysfunction1,2). It was first described in 1964 by
Shwachman et al. and is now recognized as the second most frequent cause of pancreatic insufficiency in children1). In addition,
myelodysplastic syndrome and acute myeloid leukemia (AML) have been recognized as major complications in this disease and occur in up to one
third of patients3). When leukemia develops, due to the preceding bone marrow failure, serious complications may be induced by chemotherapy
and underlying organ dysfunctions. At present, the only curative treatment option for bone marrow dysfunction and leukemia in SDS is
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT)4,5). These patients should be managed with extreme caution when treated with allogeneic BMT. We
report the first case in Korea of a patient with SDS to undergo related BMT following transformation to AML. A 21-year-old woman was
admitted to the hospital because of indigestion and poor oral intake. Her most prominent clinical features were short stature, diarrhea and
hematologic abnormality. She was pancytopenic (Hb 9.7 g/dL white cell count of 4,200/μL [neutrophils 800/μL] and platelets 220,000/μL).
Marrow aspirate showed high cellularity with massive infiltration by blast cells which were positive for Sudan black and myeloperoxidase
(Figure 1). She was diagnosed as AML, M2 according to the FAB classification. The blast population displayed the following immunophenotype:
CD13 48%, CD33 59%, CD34 61%, HLA-DR 59% and CD20 negative. A bone marrow sample was processed for cytogenetic analysis. A complex karyotype
was found in 20 out of 20 metaphases: 47XX, del (20)(q11.2), tas (21;22) (q22;q13), +22 (Figure 2). A skeletal survey showed an mild
metaphyseal dystosis. The abdominal MRI showed an enlarged pancreas, a hyperintense signal on T1-and T2-weighted image and low signal on
fat-suppressed image (Figure 3A, B). She was treated with conventional chemotherapy (idarubicin plus cytarabine). The period of aplasia was
characterized by numerous complications, including persistent fever despite empiric antibacterial and antifungal therapy and hematemesis.
Marrow recovery was slow. The patient achieved remission 41 days after the beginning of chemotherapy. Conventional cytogenetics at that time
showed a normal karyotype. She received BMT from her sister who was HLA identical. Unmanipulated donor marrow was given following
conditioning with cyclophosphamide (60 mg/kg×2) and total body irradiation (TBI) (1200 cGy in 6 fractions) using a combination of
cyclosporin A and methotrexate as graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. The post-transplant period was complicated by staphylococcal
septicemia and acute GvHD in grade II. But she has been alive disease free and off any immunosuppressives, for a follow-up of 13 months
after BMT. SDS is an inherited constitutional bone marrow failure syndrome and has a marked propensity of developing leukemia5). In a recent
study, the overall risk of malignant transformation was found to be 24%, while leukemia was observed in 70% of a subgroup of patients with
pre-existing pancytopenia, myelodysplastic features and clonal cytogenetic abnormalities2,6). Previous to this report, BMT has been
documented in some patients with SDS7). One patient died from congestive heart failure attributed to cyclophosphamide toxicity as part of
the conditioning regimen8). Although a similar cyclophosphamide dose was used in the patient reported here, no cardiac dysfunction was
observed in the pre- and post-BMT period. Our observations indicate that a cyclosphosphamide/TBI conditioning regimen might be taken into
consideration in patients with SDS. The aetiopathogenesis of SDS is still enigmatic. The unspecific cytogenetic abnormalities are a common
finding in SDS and were detected in about 40% of patients in an earlier study2). This led to the hypothesis that SDS might also be a
chromosomal breakage syndrome caused by a DNA repair defect9). And also, constitutional karyotype of our patient was abnormal: 47XX, del
(20) (q11.2), tas (21;22) (q22;q13), +22. As the same with other cases of acute leukemia in patients with SDS, the clinical course of the
disease in our patient was characterized by multiple complications after chemotherapy, and by a delayed hematologic reconstitution2,10).
Experiences with allogeneic BMT are extremely limited. Although the correct clinical approach for leukemic SDS patients is still to be
determined, our case shows that a stable remission may be obtained by allogeneic BMT, even in the presence of an adverse complex bone marrow
karyotype. Bone marrow biopsy shows myeloblasts. They are large irregular shaped cells with granular cytoplasm, a nucleus having coarsely
clumped chromatin, and nucleoli (H&E stain, ×200). G-band bone marrow karyotype on diagnosis of acute myeloid leukemia. The MRI shows an
enlarged pancreas, a hyperintense signal in T1-and T2-weighted image (A), suppressed image in fat-suppressed image (B).
