Ruptured renal neoplasms can be a catastrophic clinical presentation. Angiomyolipoma is the commonest renal tumor which presents in this
fashion. Renal sarcomas are rare renal neoplasms. Renal leiomyosarcomas are the most common histological subtype of renal sarcomas,
accounting for approximately 50–60% of the reported cases. These tumors are usually peripherally located and appear to arise from either the
renal capsule or smooth muscle tissue in the renal pelvic wall. A 70 years old male, with hypertension and ischemic disease, developed acute
left flank pain. The general physician evaluated this using ultrasound, which showed a solid left renal mass. Two weeks later, he presented
in the emergency room in a state of shock with a palpable flank mass. CT scan of the abdomen showed a large heterogeneous mass lesion in the
left perinephric space with minimal post contrast enhancement. Per-operatively, large retroperitoneal hematoma was found within Gerota's
fascia along with spleen plastered to the upper limit of hematoma. Nephrectomy and splenectomy were performed. Postoperative course was
uneventful and patient was discharged on the 10th post-operative day. Histopathological evaluation of the specimen showed high-grade
leiomyosarcoma Spontaneous rupture of renal neoplasm is a rare clinical presentation. Angiomyolipoma is the commonest cause of spontaneous
rupture of the kidney. Presentation of a leimyosarcoma as a ruptured renal neoplasm has not been previously reported in the English
literature. Leiomyosarcomas of the kidney make up to 0.5–1.5% of malignant renal tumors in adults . There is no difference in the gender
distribution with a mean age at diagnosis in the sixth decade. They typically presents with the classical triad of symptoms i.e. flank pain,
hematuria, and abdominal mass mimicking renal cell carcinoma. Radiological findings are nonspecific and diagnosis is usually made
postoperatively. Spontaneous rupture of renal neoplasm is commonly seen for large angiomyolipoma, occasional case report also describes
cases of renal cell cancers and Wilm's tumor. Ruptured renal leiomyosarcoma is not previously reported in English literature. In non-English
literature, there are two cases . Yoshikawa et al reported a case of a spontaneously ruptured renal leiomyosarcoma, treated by nephrectomy
followed by immuno-chemotherapy and radiotherapy . At 18 months, follow up of patient was free of local recurrence and distant metastasis.
Kyuno et al reported a case of spontaneous rupture of leiomyosarcoma, who died 2 months after nephrectomy of intestinal perforation. A 70
years old male, known case of hypertension and ischemic disease, developed acute left flank pain, the general physician evaluated this by an
ultrasound that showed a solid left renal mass. He was referred to this hospital for further evaluation, however, he presented in the
emergency room with sudden onset of severe central abdominal pain, radiating to left flank increasing with movement and associated with two
episodes of non-bilious vomiting. On clinical examination patient was haemodynamically stable, pale looking, with a bi-manually palpable
left flank mass, extending to right hypochondrium. Initial laboratory work up showed a low Hemoglobin 6.1 g/dl (13.7–16.3), urinalysis
showed microscopic haematuria, and serum creatinine 1.8 mg/dl. CT scan of abdomen (Figure 1) showed a large heterogeneous mass lesion in the
left perinephric space with minimal post contrast enhancement. After adequate resuscitation, nephrectomy was performed. Per-operatively,
large retroperitoneal hematoma was found within Gerota's fascia along with spleen plastered to the upper limit of hematoma. Nephrectomy and
splenectomy were performed. Postoperative course was uneventful and patient was discharged on 10th post-operative day. Histopathological
evaluation of the specimen showed high-grade leiomyosarcoma (figure 2). Sections were stained for a broad panel of immunohistochemical
markers using monoclonal antibodies, which was positive for vimentin and α-smooth muscle actin (ASMA) and negative for desmin, S-100 and
CD34. Patient refused radiotherapy and died 4 months after surgery. Post contrast spiral CT showing large retroperitoneal hematoma with
minimal contrast uptake by the renal tissue confined to the upper pole of the left kidney. High power photomicrograph of Leiomyosarcoma
exhibiting irregular bundles of spindle and polyhydral cells having pleomorphic vesicular nuclei. An abnormal mitotic figure is present in
the center of the picture (H & E × 200). Spontaneous rupture of renal neoplasm is a rare clinical presentation. Angiomyolipoma are the
commonest cause of spontaneous rupture of kidney. Presentation of a leimyosarcoma as a ruptured renal neoplasm has not been previously
reported in English literature. Leiomyosarcomas even when confined to the kidney have a poor prognosis. Radical surgery offers the best
chance of cure; role of adjuvant chemo-immunotherapy and/or radiotherapy remains debatable, due to paucity of data on the treatment of this
rare renal neoplasm and divergent results from limited experience in literature. None declared. MM carried out the literature search and
drafted the manuscript. MHA proposed that the manuscript be drafted, literature search and drafted the manuscripts. ASH conceived of the
study, and participated in drafting the pathology aspect of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the patient's relative for publication of the
patient's details.
