Drug samples commonly are provided by physicians to patients in the outpatient setting. The use of drug samples, however, has come under
scrutiny as critics argue that the practice is a marketing tool for the pharmaceutical industry.1–5 An additional problem facing the medical
community is the growing rate of medication errors. Recently, there has been a national call for new methods of identifying and avoiding
these frequently disabling events.6 We describe a case in which a medication error was averted through the use of drug samples. A 63-year-
old woman came to her primary care physician with a 2-day history of a swollen right knee. She denied fever, chills, severe pain in her
knee, and recent trauma. Medical history was remarkable for degenerative joint disease and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation, for which she
took warfarin 7.5 mg/day. Physical examination was remarkable for a cool, nontender, and non-erythematous right knee with a moderate
effusion. Arthrocentesis yielded 20–25 ml of straw-colored fluid. Analysis of the joint fluid revealed a white blood cell count of 7.23 ×
103/mm3 and an erythrocyte count of 320/mm3. No crystals were seen by birefringent microscopy, and no organisms were seen with Gram's stain.
The patient was given several sample tablets of rofecoxib 25 mg (Vioxx; Merck & Co., Whitehouse Station, NJ) and was instructed to take one
tablet/day for acute exacerbation of degenerative joint disease. She also was given a prescription for Vioxx so that she could continue
taking the drug when the samples were consumed. Her symptoms improved with the use of the samples. Three days later she had her prescription
for Vioxx filled at her local pharmacy. Although the pill bottle was labeled as rofecoxib, she noticed that the newly prescribed tablets
looked significantly different from the Vioxx samples she had been given. Although the samples were small white pills, the contents of the
new prescription were blue diamond-shaped tablets with “VGR 25” inscribed on each side. Concerned because of the difference in appearance
between the drug samples and the new tablets, the patient returned the new tablets to the pharmacy, where they were found to be sildenafil
citrate 25-mg tablets (Viagra; Pfizer Inc., New York, NY). The drug dispensing error was corrected, and the patient's prescription was
replaced. Medication errors cause as many as 40,000 deaths7 and cost nearly 80 billion dollars annually in the United States.8 Because of
this enormous impact, a recent Institute of Medicine report called for novel ways to reduce rates of medication errors.6 This patient's
experience resulted in a situation in which a medication error was detected and avoided by the use of drug samples provided by her primary
care physician. The debate over the ethical use of drug samples is likely to continue. Although there is evidence that pharmaceutical
companies provide these free drugs in an attempt to influence prescribing patterns of practitioners, often they are used to help treat
patients who would not otherwise be able to obtain their drugs. This case report highlights an additional, positive use of drug samples that
could help patients visually verify that they receive the intended drug from the pharmacy.
