Henoch-Schönlein purpura is an acute, self-limited vasculitis syndrome which shows characteristic skin, joint, renal and gastrointestinal
manifestations. It is common in childhood and may also occur in adults with fatal complications such as nephritis and gastrointestinal
bleeding. We experienced a case of a 20-year-old woman who presented with palpable purpura and severe arthritis. The histopathologic
examination of the skin revealed leukocytoclastic vasculitis with perivascular deposition of IgA and she was diagnosed with Henoch-Schönlein
purpura. Despite treatment with prednisolone for one month, she had more aggravated purpura and fatal gastrointestinal bleeding. The
symptoms were improved shortly by cyclophosphamide pulse therapy with plasmapheresis but symptoms were aggravated and symmetric
mononeuropathy of the ulnar nerve developed. She was treated with 400 mg/day of thalidomide and symptoms were improved. We herein report a
case of Henoch-Schönlein purpura successfully treated with thalidomide which was refractory to prednisolone, immunosuppressive drugs and
plasmapheresis. Henoch-Schönlein purpura is characterized by palpable purpura, arthritis, nephritis and gastrointestinal involvement. This
disease is common in children and runs as a benign, self-limited illness. Adults have more fatal complications, poor prognosis and require
more aggressive treatment1). Corticosteroids are used in patients with recurrent skin lesions, abdominal pain with gastrointestinal bleeding
or nephropathy, and cytotoxic agents are used as corticosteroid-sparing agents. Some cases reported a successful resolution of symptoms
refractory to corticosteroid and immunosuppressive drugs using plasmapheresis, immunoglobulin or dapsone. Thalidomide is a promising drug
for severe, unusual, dermatologic diseases2). Thalidomide has immune modulating effects to reduce cytokine synthesis and to inhibit tumor
necrosis factor-alpha synthesis3). In this report, we describe an adult patient who had refractory Henoch-Schönlein purpura with severe
gastrointestinal bleeding, arthritis and peripheral mononeuropathy. The symptoms were refractory to prednisolone, immunosuppressive drugs
and plasmapheresis. We applied thalidomide and symptoms were improved. A 20-year-old woman was admitted to hospital because of arthralgia on
both ankles and palpable purpura on both legs for 5 days. Physical examination showed multiple purpura on legs and buttock and swelling and
tenderness on both elbows and ankles (Figure 1). Laboratory data showed normal blood counts, blood chemistry and urine analysis. C-reactive
protein was 3.7 mg/dL and ESR was 21 mm/hr. Tests for antinuclear antibody, rheumatoid factor and antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA)
were negative. Serum concentrations of immunoglobulin (Ig)G, IgA, IgM, C3 and C4 were normal. A biopsy specimen of skin lesions showed
leukocytoclastic vasculitis and immunofluorescent study revealed IgA depositions on vessels (Figure 2). She was treated with prednisolone 50
mg/day (1 mg/kg/day) for control of arthralgia which caused the limited motion of both knee joints. Arthralgia was improved immediately but
purpura spread to the upper trunk and face and improved slowly one month later. After six weeks, prednisolone was tapered to 20 mg/day. On
the seventh week of hospitalization, she experienced abdominal pain and hematochezia and the hemoglobin was decreased to 7.0 g/dL.
Gastrofibroscopic examination revealed hemorrhagic gastritis and colonoscopy revealed multiple ulcerations (Figure 3). Biopsy specimens from
the colon showed ulcerations with neutrophils infiltration and fibrin thrombi formation in vessels (Figure 4). Intravenous methyl-
prednisolone pulse therapy was not effective for abdominal pain and hematochezia. She was treated with plasmapheresis for 3 days and
cyclophosphamide 750 mg (500 mg/m2), followed by prednisolone 30 mg/day. Purpura, arthralgia and hematochezia were much improved and then
prednisolone was tapered to 15 mg/day. On the 67th day of hospitalization, she complained of weakness and numbness of both fourth and fifth
fingers, followed by a wrist drop. The study of nerve conduction velocity showed both ulnar nerve mononeuropathy. She was treated with
prednisolone 30 mg/day and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg/day and then the ulnar nerve mononeuropathy, arthralgia and gastrointestinal bleeding
resolved but purpura was aggravated. We added 200 mg/day of azathioprine to the patient but it was not effective. Finally, we used 400
mg/day of thalidomide and purpura was improved (Figure 5). After two months of treatment with thalidomide, purpura disappeared and then we
tapered thalidomide and stopped. Henoch-Schönlein purpura is a systemic vasculitis syndrome that affects small vessels (arterioles and
venules) and can present a variety of clinical manifestations. The etiology of Henoch-Schönlein purpura remains unknown, but it is clear
that IgA, especially aberrant glycosylated IgA1, plays a pivotal role in the immunopathogenesis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura4). The diagnosis
of Henoch-Schönlein purpura is confirmed by histologic examination of skin biopsy, demonstrating a leukocytoclastic vasculitis with
neutrophil infiltration. Immunofluorescent studies reveal granular deposits of IgA and lesser quantities of C3 and fibrin. This disease is
common in children with male dominace (1.5:1). It runs as an acute, benign and self-limited illness that generally lasts about 4 weeks and
recurs in 33% of patients with a mean span time of 2.5±3.1 months after initial resolution of symptoms1, 5). Nevertheless, Henoch-Schönlein
purpura in an adult has more fatal complications and poor prognosis. Adults have more frequent symptoms of joint and renal involvement5).
Gastrointestinal hemorrhage does not respond to conservative treatment and transfusions and required surgical management6, 7). Nephritis is
one of the manifestations of Henoch-Schönlein purpura that may be chronic and severe. Cardiac and pulmonary complications have been reported
and were associated with a poor prognosis8). Neurologic complication occurs in 1–8% of patients and includes seizure, confusion, stroke and
peripheral mononeuropathy1, 9, 10). Abundant clinical experience indicates that corticosteroids are not effective on rash and prevention of
recurrences but can control the arthritis and abdominal pain11). Other studies have reported the benefit of pulse methyl-prednisolone and
cytotoxic agents for nephritis12, 13). Cases have been reported with successful resolution of symptoms using plasmapheresis14),
immunoglobulins15) and dapsone16). To date, thalidomide has been used for various severe, unusual, dermatologic disorders2). The revival of
thalidomide began shortly after the drug was withdrawn from the market because of its teratogenic properties. After the therapeutic effects
of this were found accidentally in leprosy patients with erythema nodosum leprosum17), thalidomide shows significant clinical impact in
several diseases, such as chronic graft-versus-host disease18), systemic lupus erythematosus19) and Behcet’s syndrome20). The effects of
thalidomide are thought to be based on its ability to alter the phenotype of circulating immunological cells, reduce cytokine synthesis and
inhibit tumor necrosis factor-alpha synthesis by macrophages. Alteration at the level of cytokine synthesis and release, as well as
lymphokine synthesis, changes lymphocyte trafficking and neutrophil migration. Thalidomide alters TNF-α-induced expression of adhesion
molecules on endothelial cells and reduces leukocyte extravasation and modulates the response of inflammation3). In general, Henoch-
Schönlein purpura is an acute, self-limited vasculitis, but refractoriness as well as fatal complications are not resolved with conservative
treatment. In this case, we tried all therapeutic modalities such as corticosteroids, immunosuppressive agents, hydroxy-chloroquine and
plasmapheresis, but the response duration was very short and symptoms aggravated again. We finally tried thalidomide and the symptoms
disappeared completely after 2 months. The mechanism of thalidomide to control the symptoms of Henoch-Schönlein purpura is unknown. We
suggest that thalidomide modulates immune response and reduces leukocyte extravasation and inflammation by alteration of TNF-α-induced
expression of adhesion molecules on endothelial cells and control of the vasculitis of Henoch-Schönlein purpura. Palpable purpura on the
foot. (A) Skin biopsy shows necrotizing leukocytoclastic vasculitis (H&E, ×200). (B) Immunofluorescent examination shows IgA deposition on
the wall of vessel. Colonoscopic findings show multiple ulcers with hemorrhage. Colon biopsy shows neutrophils and nuclear debris
infiltration on the wall of vessels (H&E, ×400). Improved purpura with pigmentation.
