Transesophageal echocardiography was performed to evaluate the exact cause of severe mitral regurgitation in a 64-year-old man presented
with hypotension and dyspnea after acute inferior wall myocardial infarction. In mid-esophageal two-and four-chamber view, the ruptured
stump of papillary muscle could not be visualized. However, in transgastric two-chamber view, we could clearly visualize the ruptured head
of the posteromedial papillary muscle as a separated mass attached by chorda tendinae, as well as the freely mobile stump of the ruptured
papillary muscle within the left ventricle. So, the comprehensive transesophageal echocardiography, including transgastric imaging, is
always indicated in patients with severe mitral regurgitation after acute myocardial infarction. Mitral regurgitation (MR) after myocardial
infarction is a relatively common complication and its incidence is about 50%. One cause of MR after myocardial infarction is papillary
muscle rupture, and this situation usually requires urgent surgical treatment. Since prognosis is favorable with early surgical
intervention, early diagnosis of the underlying cause of mitral regurgitation is very important. Transthoracic echocardiography is an
excellent tool for detection and estimation of the severity of mitral regurgitation in patients with myocardial infarction, especially those
who have a systolic murmur. But transthoracic echocardiography may have limitations for detailed exploration of the subvalvular apparatus of
the mitral valve. Multiplane transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) has been used for accurate evaluation of the mechanism of mitral
regurgitation in patients with acute myocardial infarction. We experienced a case of severe mitral regurgitation due to papillary muscle
rupture that was confirmed only by transgastric view of TEE. A 64-year-old man with recent inferior wall myocardial infarction was
transferred to the emergency department. He had chest pain for 3 days about two weeks previously and underwent coronary angiography at
another hospital. The coronary angiography showed total occlusion of mid-RCA and 70% long segment stenosis at mid LAD. PTCA was tried to
open RCA but failed. On admission to our hospital, he was hemodynamically unstable with severe pulmonary congestion, respiratory distress
and hypotension requiring vasopressor support. His blood pressure was 90/60 mmHg with infusion of Dobutamine 10 μg/Kg/min, pulse rate was
100/min and respiration rate was 25/min. On physical examination, systolic murmur was audible at the cardiac apex and coarse breath sounds
were audible, with rales and wheezing over both lower lung fields. The electrocardiogram showed sinus tachycardia with the rate of 113/min
and Q wave in II, III, aVF that was compatible with old inferior wall myocardial infarction. The chest X-ray showed cardiomegaly with
pulmonary congestion. The transthoracic echocardiogram showed akinesis of inferior wall with moderately reduced left ventricular systolic
function with estimated ejection fraction of 40% and moderate to severe mitral regurgitation with anterior mitral leaflet prolapse. The
eccentric mitral regurgitant jet was directed to the posterolateral side of the left atrial chamber in color flow mapping, and pulsed
Doppler interrogation of the right upper pulmonary vein demonstrated holosystolic flow reversal suggesting severe mitral regurgitation. The
transthoracic echocardiogram could not detect papillary muscle rupture. Initially, he was treated medically with intravenous dobutamine,
digitalis, ACE inhibitor and diuretics for 3 days, but the cardiogenic shock and pulmonary edema state continued without improvement. So, he
underwent transesophageal echocardiography for further evaluation of mitral regurgitation. In mid-esophageal two-chamber view, grade III/IV
mitral regurgitation with anterior mitral leaflet prolapse was identified (Figure 1A). In mid-esophageal four-chamber view, flail motion of
anterior mitral valve leaflet was visualized which was highly suspicious of the ruptured chordae tendinae (Figure 1B). In transgastric two-
chamber view, we could identify the ruptured head of papillary muscle as a separated mobile mass attached to chordae tendinae of anterior
mitral valve leaflet and the stump of the ruptured posteromedial papillary muscle (Figure 2A, 2B). During diastole, the two ruptured parts
moved freely within the left ventricular cavity but, during systole, each ruptured end of the papillary muscle parts approaced each other
and we could clearly visualize the stump of the ruptured posteromedial papillary muscle within the left ventricle (Figure 2A, 2B). With
these findings, he was transferred to cardiac surgery. At the operation field, the ruptured parts of the posteromedial papillary muscle were
identified but repair looked impossible, so the valve was removed and mitral valve replacement, as well as LIMA to LAD bypass surgery, was
successfully performed. The post-operative course was uneventful and the patient survived. Mitral regurgitation (MR) after myocardial
infarction (MI) is a common complication. In the TIMI-II trial, MR was present in 13% and the incidence of MR may be as high as 50% if
transient MR is included1). It is important to recognize the exact cause of acute MR because papillary muscle rupture needs urgent surgical
intervention, while the MR of other causes may improve with medical treatment after thrombolysis or percutaneous coronary intervention.
Papillary muscle rupture has been reported in about 1% of patients following acute myocardial infarction, and is most common in the setting
of inferior wall infarct due to the occlusion of either RCA or left circumflex artery2). The posteromedial papillary muscle is twelve times
more likely to rupture than the anterolateral papillary muscle because the blood supply of the two papillary muscles are different. The
clinical manifestation of papillary muscle rupture usually includes the development of new systolic murmur and cardiogenic shock 3–7 days
after acute myocardial infarction but, in patients with complete papillary muscle rupture or severe left ventricular dysfunction, the murmur
may not be audible. In contrast, partial papillary muscle rupture often does not result in severe MR or cardiogenic shock. At right heart
catheterization, large v-wave can be recorded in the pulmonary wedge pressure curve in 60% of patients with papillary muscle rupture, but a
large v-wave alone is non-diagnostic since it can also be observed in ventricular septal rupture or severe left ventricular dysfunction3).
So, the echocardiogram has been regarded as a gold standard for the diagnosis of papillary muscle rupture. Transthoracic echocardiogram is
useful in the demonstration of severe MR and, if the image is ideal, the diagnosis of papillary muscle rupture is possible4). But in some
cases, the transthoracic echocardiogram has limitations for detailed exploration of the mitral subvalvular apparatus. And, in critically ill
patients, it has other limitations, such as restriction in optimal positioning and limited echocardiographic window, due to mechanical
ventilation. Several reports have described the usefulness of transesophageal echocardiography in the diagnosis of papillary muscle rupture.
In these cases, the papillary muscle rupture was confirmed only by the use of transesophageal echocardiography5–7). Single plane TEE may
allow only incomplete evaluation of the subvalvular apparatus and easily miss papillary muscle rupture, so multiplane TEE is more useful8).
In the current case, despite careful examination, we could not confirm papillary muscle rupture from the mid-esophageal window, although
severe MR and a flail anterior mitral valve leaflet did suggest the possibility of chordal rupture, indirectly. But in the transgastric
view, the freely mobile ruptured head of the papillary muscle was clearly visualized within the left ventricle, with systolic prolapse into
the left atrial cavity. The stump of the ruptured papillary muscle was also visible in this view. Therefore, we suggest that the
transgastric window of TEE, especially the two-chamber view with careful clockwise or counter-clockwise rotation, is important for the
diagnosis of papillary muscle rupture. The bang-down mid-esophageal long-axis view (A) and four-chamber view (B) shows anterior mitral valve
prolapse (arrow) into the left atrium during systole. (ANT, anterior wall; LV, left ventricle; LA, left atrium; RV, right ventricle) The
bang-down transgastric long-axis view clearly shows flail motion of the ruptured stump (double arrows) and the head (arrow) of the
posteromedial papillary muscle during diastole (A). During systole, the two ruptured parts approach each other (B). (ANT, anterior wall; LV,
left ventricle; LA, left atrium)
