Laparoscopic procedures continue to gain popularity over traditional open operations for a variety of abdominal and retroperitoneal surgical
procedures. With regard to urological surgery, the first laparoscopic nephrectomy was performed in an adult in 1991. In the following years,
the feasibility of laparoscopic management of pediatric urological disorders was described, and in 1992 the first laparoscopic nephrectomy
in an 8-month-old infant with a multicystic dysplastic kidney was reported. We report the feasibility of laparoscopic nephrectomy for the
management of renovascular hypertension in a 6-month-old infant with a dysplastic left kidney. The first successful minimally invasive
surgical nephrectomy was reported in an adult patient by Clayman et al.1 Since that report, the feasibility of laparoscopic management of
urological diseases has been described in children including laparoscopic nephrectomy. In 1992, Koyle et al2 reported an 8-month-old infant
with a large multicystic dysplastic kidney treated by laparoscopic nephrectomy. To our knowledge, the case report here is the first report
of a laparoscopic nephrectomy in the management of an infant with renovascular hypertension secondary to a small dysplastic left kidney.
This case supports the use of laparoscopic nephrectomy as an effective and safe treatment modality in pediatric surgery. The patient was a
6-month-old male referred to our institution for assessment of severe renovascular hypertension secondary to a hypoplastic/dysplastic left
kidney. The patient was born prematurely at 32 weeks and required captopril 1 mL 3 times a day to manage his hypertension since birth. His
workup included a renal perfusion scan and aortogram that confirmed the presence of a left hypoplastic left kidney with minimal function and
2 small hypoplastic renal arteries. The right kidney was normal. Ultrasound examinations at 1 and 3 months of age revealed a progressive
decrease in size of the left dysplastic kidney with decreased blood flow. The ultrasound examination of the right kidney and serum creatine
were normal. Because of the infants worsening renovascular hypertension despite drug therapy, left nephrectomy was recommended. The patient,
while under general anesthesia, was placed in a partial right lateral decubitus position. A small umbilical incision was made through which
a 5-mm Step trocar (Innerdyne, Salt Lake City, Utah) was placed and pneumoperitoneum was established with carbon dioxide. The pressure limit
was set at 6 mm Hg. A 30-degree angled laparoscope was introduced, and visualization of the peritoneal cavity did not reveal any visceral
abnormalities. Two additional 5-mm trocars were placed, one in the epigastric region and one in the left lower quadrant. The left colon was
mobilized medially and Gerota's fascia was opened exposing a small dysplastic kidney. The kidney was dissected free from the retroperitoneal
space with a lateral to medial approach. The proximal left ureter was clearly identified and isolated. The superior and inferior pole
arteries and a large renal vein were identified. By using 5-mm clips, the vessels were clamped with 2 clips on the proximal side. The ureter
was ligated proximal to the bladder with 2 Endoclips (Allport, Ethicon EndoSurgery, Cincinnati, OH). The vessels and ureter were then
divided with endoscissors. The kidney was placed in an Endobag. The 5-mm umbilical port was dilated to a 10-mm port, and the small
dysplastic kidney was extracted. A 3 × 2 × 1-cm dysplastic kidney was confirmed by pathology. Reinspection of the abdomen revealed no bowel
injury and excellent homeostasis. The trocars were removed and closure of the muscle fascia at each trocar site was accomplished with 2-0
Vicryl sutures (Ethicon, Johnson and Johnson, Somerville, NJ). The total operating time was 80 minutes and estimated blood loss was less
than 5 mL. The patient had an uneventful recovery and resumed formula feeds on the first postoperative day. The patient was discharged home
within 24 hours postoperatively and was normotensive. Pain medication administered was minimal. On his postoperative visit 10 days later,
the patient's surgical scars were well healed. At the 1-year follow-up visit, the patient did not require antihypertensive medications.
Laparoscopy continues to gain widespread applicability in managing common abdominal and pelvic surgical disorders. Laparoscopic surgery in
children has proved beneficial in comparison with the traditional open operations evident by reduced hospitalization, decreased time to full
recovery, and better cosmetic results.3 In 1991, Clayman performed the first successful laparoscopic nephrectomy in an adult.1 The following
year, Koyle et al2 performed a laparoscopic nephrectomy on an 8-month-old boy for an asymptomatic multicystic dysplastic right kidney. The
first published report of laparoscopic nephrectomy by Ehrlich in 1992 further demonstrated the technical feasibility of laparoscopy in renal
surgery in a child.4 In 1994, Ehrlich et al5 reported an initial case series of 17 children aged 4 months to 11 years who underwent
transperitoneal laparoscopic renal surgeries including giant renal cyst excision, as well as partial and complete nephrectomy. In 6 cases, a
laparoscopic nephrectomy was performed for large symptomatic multicystic kidneys (average age 7 months) in addition to an 11-month-old child
with poorly controlled diastolic hypertension from a dysplastic kidney.5 As the popularity of laparoscopic renal surgery expands, the
surgical approaches to laparoscopic nephrectomy have included the utilization of retroperitoneoscopic techniques. In a review by Valla et
al6, laparoscopic renal surgery was reported to have been performed in 18 children (3 months to 14 years) by using a retroperitoneal
approach for multicystic dysplastic kidneys and obstructive uropathy. The technique of retroperitoneal laparoscopic nephrectomy involved
placing the patient in a lateral kidney position, a 1.5-cm incision at the lower border of the 12th rib in the midaxillary line, blunt
dissection of musculature and placement of the first trocar (10, 8, or 5 mm). Insufflation and dissection between the renal capsule and
perinephric fat progressed until the poles and posterior surface of the kidney were freed. Additional ports (10, 5, or 3 mm) were placed and
the nephrectomy was performed. Only 1 case was converted to an open procedure due to a missed upper pole vessel and subsequent repair of a
small duodenal perforation. In 1999, Borer et al7 published a report describing successful modifications of retroperitoneal laparoscopic
renal surgery in 14 children. Modifications included the prone patient position; the number, site, and technique of trocar placement; an
inflatable dissecting device; and use of 2-mm instrumentation. No major complications occurred. These studies demonstrate ongoing efforts by
surgeons to optimize retroperitoneal laparoscopic renal surgery in the pediatric population.6–8 Laparoscopic nephrectomy is emerging as an
alternative to the open surgical proceedure.9,10 In the current report, a 6-month-old infant underwent laparoscopic nephrectomy with a
transperitoneal approach for the management of severe renovascular hypertension. Postoperative pain was minimal and the patient was
discharged within 24 hours. Reports such as this one demonstrate that laparoscopic nephrectomy in children is technically feasible, safe,
allows for reduced hospital stay and time to recovery, and has excellent cosmetic results. Reported complications of laparoscopic
nephrectomy in children include retroperitoneal hematoma, duodenal perforation, colonic serosa tears, and incisional hernia.6,9,10 Potential
complications include vascular/visceral injury, intestinal adhesions, and omental evisceration.6 While the popularity of laparoscopic
nephrectomy increases, the indications for surgery as well as the standardization of the surgical technique warrant scrutiny. Large
comparative studies are not yet available due to the limited number of cases. As illustrated by this case, laparoscopic nephrectomy can be
safely performed in young infants with excellent results.
