We describe a patient presenting with lead shot in his appendix. A plain radiograph of his lumbar spine was performed for back pain, and an
incidental finding of lead shot retained within the appendix was seen. Lead shot in the appendix is associated with appendicitis, and 2
cases have been reported of lead intoxication. We suggest that an elective laparoscopic appendectomy should be offered to patients as a
possible management option. Reports of foreign bodies found in the appendix are rare. Most cases were reported around the turn of the
century.1 A literature review conducted in 1998 noted 256 reported cases of ingested foreign bodies within the appendix occurring over the
last 100 years.2 Since that review, only 2 cases have been reported. Lead shot or pellets retained in the appendix after ingestion account
for approximately a third of all reported cases. These cases include 2 reports of lead intoxication3,4 and numerous reports of appendicitis.
A 45-year-old male general medical practitioner presented to a rheumatologist with a few months' history of back pain and paresthesia
affecting both hands. As part of his investigations, radiographs were taken of his spine including his pelvis. The films confirmed a
diagnosis of cervical nerve root irritation due to cervical spondylosis. However, as an incidental finding, opacities were seen above the
right sacro-iliac joint (Figure 1). He was referred for a surgical opinion because the appearance suggested the opacities might be lead shot
in the appendix. A further history from the patient revealed that he had eaten pigeon as a child on numerous occasions. The patient was
eager to have his appendix removed laparoscopically despite normal blood lead levels. He underwent a laparoscopic appendectomy as a day
case. Macroscopic appearance of the open appendix is shown in Figure 2. Histology showed reactive lymphoid hyperplasia with no evidence of
acute inflammation or serosal reaction. There were in total 27 pieces of lead shot found in the appendix. Plain abdominal radiograph showing
opacities in the appendix. Pathological specimen of the opened appendix following laparoscopic removal, demonstrating multiple lead shot.
Lead shot in the appendix is a rare phenomenon. A potential risk exists of lead intoxication and acute appendicitis developing. Laparoscopic
appendectomy has been shown to be a reliable and safe method.5 It is therefore suggested that patients who present with lead shot in their
appendix should be given the option of an elective appendectomy.
