The benefits of ultrasound-guided hysteroscopic metroplasty have been well described in the management of the partial septate uterus. The
use of ultrasonography at the time of hysteroscopy provides visualization of the intrauterine instruments within the uterine cavity. This
report describes a case where ultrasound-guidance was used to enter a noncommunicating uterine cavity hysteroscopically. A 22-year-old
female after her third miscarriage experienced worsening dysmenorrhea. The patient underwent a laparoscopy and hysteroscopy to further
evaluate the cause of pelvic pain and to treat the Müllerian anomaly. Under ultrasound-guidance, the 2 uterine cavities were unified by
hysteroscopic metroplasty. Postoperative sonohysterography demonstrated unification of the 2 cavities. This unique application of
ultrasound-guidance in hysteroscopic surgery may aid the surgeon in entering a noncommunicating uterine cavity. Müllerian anomalies occur in
approximately 1 in 400 women1 and have been associated with reproductive failure and pelvic pain from endometriosis and hematometra.
Noncommunicating uterine cavities pose a challenge to the surgeon performing a hysteroscopic metroplasty because the position of the
hysteroscope in relation to the cervix and ipsilateral uterine cavity is not known. Ultrasound-guidance may aid the surgeon in the treatment
of this specific type of anomaly. This report was completed after approval by the institutional review board. A 22-year-old G3 P0030 female
with a history of 3 consecutive pregnancy losses presented with secondary dysmenorrhea. The past surgical history was significant for a
laparoscopy performed by the patient's local physician after a Müllerian anomaly was suspected at the time of a miscarriage. The laparoscopy
revealed a heart-shaped outer appearance of the uterus. Hysteroscopy performed at the same surgery revealed 2 uterine cavities with 2 tubal
ostia separated by a septum. A pelvic examination showed 2 cervical ostia. An MRI revealed complete duplication of the endometrial canal
with normal kidneys and bladder. Sonohysterography cannulating both cervical ostia documented noncommunicating right and left uterine
cavities. The septal thickness varied from 5.8 mm near the internal cervical os to 8.6 mm at the fundus (Figure 1). The uterine cavities
deviated laterally at the fundus with a normal myometrial thickness. Preoperative sonohysterographic image of the 2 uterine cavities.
Laparoscopy and hysteroscopy were performed with the patient under general anesthesia. The urinary bladder was distended with a triple lumen
catheter. A speculum was placed in the vagina, and the 2 cervical ostia were visualized. The right cervix was grasped with a single tooth
tenaculum. A uterine manipulator (Kronner Medical Manufacturing, Cooper Surgical, Shelton, CT) was placed in the left uterine canal and
indigo carmine was instilled. The right cervix was dilated to admit a 22 F operative hysteroscope (Karl Storz, Endoscopy America Inc, Culver
City, CA) through which the right uterine cavity was visualized and the right tubal ostia identified. Under transabdominal ultrasound-
guidance (ATL HDI 5000 Ultrasound System, Bothell, WA), the wall between the 2 uterine cavities was incised at its narrowest point above the
internal cervical os with a resectoscope until indigo carmine overflowed into the right-sided cavity (Figure 2). The incision was extended
to the fundus and the internal os. A concomitant laparoscopy revealed a heart-shaped uterus, normal tubes, and ovaries. Minimal
endometriosis was identified on the right uterosacral ligament and left ovary, which was treated with a laser. Chromopertubation revealed
bilateral patency of the fallopian tubes. A balloon uterine stent (Cook OB/GYN, Spencer, IN) was placed inside the uterus, instilled with
2.5 cc of saline, and left in place for 1 week. Postoperative sonohysterography performed a few months after the surgery revealed an arcuate
uterine cavity. Hysteroscopic view at resection of the uterine septum. The image was taken immediately after the ipsilateral uterine cavity
was entered in the lower uterine segment. The septum is identified in the midline. The uterus and cervix are derived embryologically from
paired Müllerian ducts that fuse medially to form the uterine isthmus and cervix. The fundal portion of the uterus is created by rapid
proliferation of cells from the medial walls of the ducts into a septum followed by resorption. Anomalies of the uterus result from abnormal
fusion of the Müllerian ducts or from failure of absorption of the septum. This patient's anomaly consisted of an externally divided fundus,
a well-formed septum, and cervical duplication. Thompson et al2 noted at the time of surgery that in 5 out of 12 cases of double uteri, the
uteri divided externally with a well-formed septum internally. Thompson et al2 did not report the incidence of cervical duplication in this
series; however, several case reports have described cervical duplication with or without a uterine or vaginal septum.3–6 Although patients
with double uteri may have normal reproductive outcomes, studies have demonstrated improved outcomes after correction when a history of
pregnancy complications exists.7–10 Since Ruge11 reported a successful pregnancy after removal of a septum in 1884, many procedures have
been described for the treatment of Müllerian anomalies. Alternative methods to resect the septum have been described by Strassmann,12
Tompkins,13 and Jones8 with numerous modifications.14 The surgical management of M00FC;llerian anomalies has evolved since the first
descriptions, being modified due to evolving techniques. The choice of technique is influenced by vascularity of the incision, trauma to
remaining myometrium, and soundness of the uterine scar.7,14 Theoretically, a minimal amount of myometrial tissue should be removed with the
repair. Hysteroscopic metroplasty has the benefits of minimal myometrial tissue disruption and outpatient care. The benefits of ultrasound-
guided hysteroscopic metroplasty have been well described for a partially sep-tate uterus.15 The use of ultrasonography at the time of
intrauterine surgery provides visualization of the intrauterine instruments as well as the myometrium and septum. In this case, ultrasound
identified the area of the septum to incise hysteroscopically. The area initially incised was the narrowest width above the internal os of
the cervix. The internal cervical os was identified sonographically at the angle of the cervix with the uterine body. Although a small
series did not find a high risk of cervical incompetence with resection of the cervical septum,16 the theoretical risk of cervical
incompetence remains.17 In addition, in this patient, unification of the cervices would have been technically difficult due to the wide
separation of the ostia. Alternatively, this procedure could be performed blindly with the guidance of a uterine sound or cervical dilator;
however, the direction of the resection and relationship to the cervix is less obvious than with ultrasound. In summary, the use of ultra-
sound may aid the surgeon in entering a noncommunicating uterine horn during a hysteroscopic metroplasty. Disclosure: No relevant financial
support or conflict of interest by any author or reviewer exists.
