Behcet's disease (BD) is a chronic relapsing multisystem inflammatory disorder with mucocutaneous, ocular, articular, vascular,
gastrointestinal and central nervous system manifestations. Tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha is believed to play a pivotal role in BD.
Therapeutic blockade of the activity of TNF has been successfully given in a short course of therapy with favorable effects in patients with
BD refractory to conventional immunosuppressive drugs. We aimed to find out whether a 12-month treatment with infliximab, a chimeric
monoclonal antibody to TNF-alpha, had any beneficial effect in reducing relapses of a patient with long-standing BD refractory to
conventional immunosuppressive drugs. A 54 year-old-woman with a 35-year history of BD with orogenital ulcerations, arthritis in the right
knee and retinal lesions compatible with vasculitis received infliximab, 5 mg/kg by a two-hour intravenous infusion. Symptoms improved
within 24 hours and eight days later the genital and oral ulcers healed as well as the arthritis in the right knee subsided. The retinal
infiltrates completely resolved within 10 days. The infusions were repeated at weeks 2, 6, 14, 22 and then every 8 weeks. The patient was
able to return to her domestic daily life. No exacerbation of the mucocutaneous ocular or arthritic symptoms occurred during the treatment
period. Previous studies have suggested that infliximab given in a short course of treatment is effective in inducing remission of severe
mucocutaneous, gastrointestinal and ocular manifestations of BD. Our patient received a 12-month infliximab treatment showing a favorable
effect on remission of BD manifestations. The long-term infliximab treatment appears as a new therapeutic option for patients with active BD
who failed to respond to conventional immunosuppressive agents. Behcet's disease (BD) is a chronic relapsing multisystem inflammatory
disorder that causes orogenital ulcerations, skin lesions, intraocular inflammation (uveitis and retinal vasculitis) and less commonly
arthritic, vascular, gastrointestinal and neurologic manifestations . The enhanced inflammatory reaction in BD appears to be mediated by
cytokines derived from T helper type I lymphocytes, including tumor necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha . TNF-alpha is produced by monocytes as part
of the inflammatory cascade in BD and concentrations of TNF and soluble TNF receptors are increased in the serum of patients with the active
disease . It has been demonstrated that the T lymphocytes expressing the gammadelta receptor in BD are activated in vivo and produce
increased amounts of TNF-alpha and interferon-gamma compared with healthy controls . TNF-alpha and interleukin-8 might increase the
expression of the CD11b-CD18 constitutively present on the polymorphonuclear neutrophils membrane and facilitate their rolling and
diapedesis through the vascular endothelial wall . Therapeutic blockade of the activity of TNF has been successfully employed to treat
Crohn's disease and rheumatoid arthritis, two other Th-1 mediated disorders . Recently a short-term anti-TNF treatment was given with
favorable effects in patients with BD refractory to conventional immunosuppressive drugs . We aimed to find out whether a 12-month treatment
with infliximab, a chimeric monoclonal antibody to TNF-alpha, had any beneficial effect in reducing relapses of a patient with long-standing
BD. A 54-year-old woman with a 35-year history of BD was admitted to our Unit. The patient fulfilled the International Study Group criteria
for diagnosis of BD . She had a history of recurrent genital and oral aphthous ulcers. Thirty years ago she was diagnosed retinal lesions
compatible with vasculitis which lead a few years later to a decrease in visual acuity and blindness in the right eye. On admission she had
orogenital ulcerations, and arthritis in the right knee. The ulcers on the buccal mucosa and tongue were painful with a diameter ranging
from 2 to 6 mm. The right knee was swollen with severe functional limitation. She had retinal infiltrates in the left eye. Previous
treatment with prednisolone, colchicine, azathioprine and cyclosporin was ineffective and the symptoms recurred periodically. Erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) was 18.5 mm/h and C-reactive protein (CRP) was markedly elevated (+++). CRP levels were measured semiquantitatively
and graded negative (-), detectable (+), elevated (++), and markedly elevated (+++). PPD Mantoux test was negative. Infliximab (Remicade,
Centocor Inc, Malvern, PA, Schering Plough SpA, Italy), 5 mg/kg, was administered by a two-hour intravenous infusion. The patient was
observed for 1 hour after stopping infusion and no adverse effects occurred. An improvement in symptoms was reported within 24 hours after
the first infusion. Eight days later the ulcers healed and the arthritis subsided as well. The retinal infiltrates completely resolved
within 10 days. A detailed ophthalmological examination was done before and 1, 2, 4,7, 10, 14, 21, 28 days after the beginning of the
treatment; then every 14 days for three months and every 28 days for other eight months. The infusions were repeated at weeks 2, 6, 14, 22
and then every 8 weeks for 12 months. No other immunosuppressive agent was administered together with infliximab infusions. After 4 weeks
ESR was 15.5 mm/h and CRP elevated (++). The patient was able to return to her domestic daily life. No exacerbation of the mucocutaneous
ocular or arthritic symptoms occurred during the treatment period. After 12 months ESR was 7.5 mm/h and CRP detectable (+). Neither serious
infections nor development of autoantibodies against double-stranded DNA were observed. Previous studies have suggested that BD can be
treated effectively with TNF blocking therapy. Infliximab given in a short course of treatment has been reported to be effective in inducing
and maintaining remission of BD. Infliximab was successfully administered for treating severe mucocutaneous , gastrointestinal and ocular
manifestations of BD, with a prompt improvement of long-lasting symptoms which disappeared within a few weeks. The efficacy of infliximab
after the failure of etanercept was also reported . Infliximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody directed against TNF-alpha. The antibody
binding to soluble TNF-alpha is responsible of the initial dramatic improvement in symptoms after infliximab infusions. The longer-lasting
effects are related to infliximab binding to transmembrane TNF-alpha expressed on the surface of activated T cells and macrophages,
resulting in lysis of these cells via complement fixation or antibody-dependent cellular toxicity . It is well known that conventional
therapy for BD relies on available anti-inflammatory and immunomodulatory agents, and in view of the scarcity of controlled clinical trials,
it is to a large extent empirical . Several case series and single reports have suggested that infliximab given in a short course of
treatment is effective in inducing remission of the various manifestations of BD . Our patient received a 12-month treatment with a good
therapeutic response. When given in a long-term use infliximab seems to be a useful therapeutic approach for preventing relapses in patients
with this disease. In particular the long-term infliximab treatment appears a promising new option for patients with active BD who failed to
respond to conventional immunosuppressive agents. BD, Behcet's disease; TNF, tumor necrosis factor; ESR, erythrocyte sedimentation rate;
CRP, C-reactive protein. None declared. SG partecipated in the design of the study and drafted the manuscript. CA partecipated in the
systemic examination and collecting data. LB partecipated in the systemic examination and collecting data. LM partecipated in the systemic
examination and performed laboratory findings. DS partecipated in the systemic examination and follow-up visits. IC carried out the detailed
ophthalmological assessment. GFB conceived of the study, and partecipated in its design and coordination. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of study.
