In Europe, most reported human cases of babesiosis have been attributed, without strong molecular evidence, to infection with the bovine
parasite Babesia divergens. We investigated the first known human cases of babesiosis in Italy and Austria, which occurred in two asplenic
men. The complete 18S ribosomal RNA (18S rRNA) gene was amplified from specimens of their whole blood by polymerase chain reaction (PCR).
With phylogenetic analysis, we compared the DNA sequences of the PCR products with those for other Babesia spp. The DNA sequences were
identical for the organism from the two patients. In phylogenetic analysis, the organism clusters with B. odocoilei, a parasite of white-
tailed deer; these two organisms form a sister group with B. divergens. This evidence indicates the patients were not infected with B.
divergens but with an organism with previously unreported molecular characteristics for the 18S rRNA gene. Babesiosis is a tick-borne
zoonosis caused by intraerythrocytic protozoa of the genus Babesia (1,2). The world’s first well-documented human case of babesiosis was a
fatal case in 1956 in an asplenic man in the former Yugoslavia (3). Since then, hundreds of human cases of babesiosis have been reported in
the United States, approximately 30 cases have been reported in Europe (4–7), and a few cases have been reported elsewhere. Most of the
reported U.S. cases have been caused by infection with Babesia microti, a parasite of small mammals transmitted by Ixodes scapularis ticks.
Most European cases have been attributed to B. divergens, a parasite of cattle transmitted by I. ricinus. However, from 1991 through 2000,
additional zoonotic Babesia and Babesia-like pathogens have been identified and characterized with molecular techniques. These pathogens
include, in the United States, the WA1- (for “Washington 1”) and CA1- (for “California 1”) type parasites and the MO1 (for “Missouri 1”)
parasite (8–10) and, in Europe, the organism we describe here. We report what to our knowledge are the first described human cases of
babesiosis in Italy and Austria and provide evidence that the etiologic agent of the two cases, which is related to but clearly not B.
divergens, has molecular characteristics that have not previously been reported. Following the precedent we previously established for
reports of newly characterized organisms in the United States, we refer here to this organism from Europe as EU1 (for “European Union 1”).
Serum specimens from the patients were tested at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) in serial fourfold dilutions by
indirect fluorescent antibody (IFA) testing for reactivity to B. microti (11), WA1 (8), and B. divergens antigens. The antigen sources were
human isolates of B. microti and WA1 and a bovine isolate of B. divergens (the Purnell strain from the Republic of Ireland ) that had been
passaged in gerbils (Mongolian jirds; Meriones unguiculatus) and adapted to culture in bovine erythrocytes. The serum specimens were also
tested at the Clinical Institute of Hygiene of the University of Vienna by IFA for reactivity to B. divergens antigens (from a bovine
isolate from Hanover, Germany, that had been passaged in jirds); the dilutions of serum that were tested were 1:16, 1:64, 1:256, 1:1,000,
and 1:4,000. Five jirds, which are competent hosts for B. divergens (13), were injected intraperitoneally with 0.5 mL of 1-day old,
refrigerated, pretreatment blood from the Austrian patient. Animal experimentation guidelines were followed. The jirds were monitored
periodically (at least weekly; 26 times in 17.5 weeks) for parasitemia by examination of Diff Quik-stained (DADE AG, Düdingen, Switzerland)
smears of blood obtained either by tail snip or, at the end of the monitoring period, by cardiac puncture after anesthesia with ketamine.
The blood obtained by cardiac puncture was also examined by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) (see below). DNA was extracted from EDTA-
stabilized whole blood from the two patients by using the QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (QIAGEN Inc., Valencia, CA); the DNA was stored at 4°C.
The complete 18S ribosomal RNA (18S rRNA) gene was amplified by PCR, with a pair of generic apicomplexan 18S rRNA-specific primers: CRYPTOF,
the forward primer (5′-AACCTGGTTGATCCTGCCAGT-3′), and CRYPTOR, the reverse primer (5′-GCTTGATCCTTCTGCAGGTTCACCTAC-3′). PCR was conducted
with the AmpliTaq Gold DNA Polymerase (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The conditions for PCR included 95°C for 15 min, followed by 45
cycles of denaturation at 94°C for 30 s, annealing at 65°C for 30 s, and extension at 72°C for 1.5 min. Final extension was done at 72°C for
9 min, followed by a hold step at 4°C. Amplification products were purified by using the StrataPrep DNA Purification Kit (Stratagene, La
Jolla, CA). In addition, DNA provided us that had been extracted from two isolates of B. odocoilei (i.e., the Brushy Creek and Engeling
isolates ), a parasite of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) (15,16), and from B. divergens [Purnell strain] ) was analyzed. Both
strands of the PCR products were sequenced by using a set of internal primers. Sequencing reactions were conducted with the ABI PRISM BigDye
Terminator Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems), and reactions were analyzed on the ABI 377 or ABI 3100 automatic DNA sequencer
(Applied Biosystems). The resulting sequences were assembled by using the program SeqMan II (DNASTAR, Inc., Madison, WI). The GenBank
accession numbers for the complete sequences we generated of the 18S rRNA gene for the various organisms are as follows: B. odocoilei,
AY046577; B. divergens, AY046576; and EU1, AY046575. The complete sequences of the 18S rRNA genes for B. bigemina, B. bovis, B. caballi, B.
divergens, B. gibsoni, B. odocoilei, and Babesia sp. (isolated from Bos taurus) were retrieved from the GenBank database (see Figure 1
legend for GenBank accession numbers) and aligned with the sequence for EU1 by using the program CLUSTAL W version 1.83 (17). The 18S rRNA
sequence for Theileria annulata was included as the outgroup for the phylogenetic analysis. This analysis was performed with the following
programs: the PHYLIP package, which includes versions 3.5 of CONSENSE, DNADIST, DNAML, NEIGHBOR, and SEQBOOT (18); and version 5.73c of
TREE-PUZZLE (19). The phylogenetic trees inferred by these programs were drawn by using the program TreeView, version 1.6.6 (20). The trees
were statistically evaluated by using bootstrap (18) and quartet puzzling methods (19). Phylogenetic tree for the complete 18S rRNA gene
from selected Babesia spp. The tree was computed by using the quarter puzzling maximum likelihood method of the TREE-PUZZLE program and was
oriented by using Theileria annulata as the outgroup. Numbers at the nodes indicate the quartet puzzling support for each internal branch.
Scale bar indicates an evolutionary distance of 0.01 nucleotides per position in the sequence. Vertical distances are for clarity only. The
GenBank accession numbers for the sequences used in the analysis are as follows: Babesia bigemina A, X59604; B. bovis, L19077; B. caballi,
Z15104; B. divergens (Purnell isolate ), AY046576; B. gibsoni (genotype Asia 1), AF175300; B. odocoilei (Brushy Creek and Engeling isolates
), AY046577; Babesia sp. (isolated from Bos taurus), U09834; EU1 (the etiologic agent of infection in the two cases described here),
AY046575; and Theileria annulata, M64243. The Italian and Austrian patients were 55- and 56-year-old men, respectively, who had undergone
splenectomy in the 1980s because of stage IA Hodgkin’s disease. The Italian patient had recently begun chemotherapy (Table footnote) for
stage IIIA diffuse large B-cell lymphoma, which had been diagnosed in June 1998. Both men lived in small towns and hunted avocationally
(Table); neither had pets. Only the Austrian patient recalled tick exposure—a tick bite while hunting about 2 weeks before he noticed his
urine was dark. Neither patient had traveled extensively: the Italian patient had never left Italy, and the Austrian patient had been in
Barbados (1998) and Turkey (1999). aIFA, indirect fluorescent antibody; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; CDC, Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention. bNon-Hodgkin’s lymphoma developed in the Italian patient (diagnosis: June 1998). Chemotherapy, begun on September 23, 1998, was
stopped prematurely on October 14, after he became febrile. His chemotherapeutic regimen included daily prednisone (75 mg) and weekly
administration of various drugs in rotation. He received 4 of the intended 12 weeks of therapy, which included doxorubicin and
cyclophosphamide during odd-numbered weeks (weeks 1 and 3) and vincristine and either methotrexate (week 2) or bleomycin (week 4) during
even-numbered weeks. cAlthough the possibility that he became infected by blood transfusion could not be excluded because he had been
transfused before blood smears were examined, his febrile illness and hemolytic anemia preceded the transfusions. dLaboratory values were
from hospital admission (October 18, 1998, for the Italian patient, and July 25, 2000, for the Austrian patient), unless otherwise
specified. Values for the Austrian patient are from testing performed at the hospital to which he was transferred after a brief (<24-hour)
stay at a local hospital. eEarlier on July 25, at a local hospital, his hemoglobin value was 16.2 g/dL, which had been his approximate
baseline value during the previous 10 months. fIFA testing of serum specimens from both patients was negative for antibodies to B. microti.
A specimen from the Italian patient (February 15, 1999) was negative for antibodies to WA1. gPlasma exchange was performed on October 23,
when he mistakenly was thought to have thrombotic th The two cases ranged in severity from quite mild (Austrian case) to moderately severe
(Italian case). The salient clinical details of their cases and the relevant laboratory values are provided in the Table. Fever occurred
only in the Italian patient (maximum of 39°C), which initially was considered a reaction to one of his chemotherapeutic agents (i.e.,
bleomycin). He also had marked anemia, for which he received blood transfusions (Table). Both patients had thrombocytopenia, elevated serum
lactate dehydrogenase and bilirubin values, and dark urine from hemoglobinuria. The Italian patient’s creatinine value also was elevated. In
both cases, babesiosis was diagnosed by noting parasitic inclusions in erythrocytes on peripheral blood smears (Table; Figure 2). The
intervals between onset of the symptoms that ultimately were attributed to babesiosis and confirmation of the diagnosis ranged from 2 days
(Austrian case) to 10 days (Italian case). Subsequent testing of serum specimens from both patients showed IFA reactivity to B. divergens
but not to B. microti antigens; serum from the Italian patient was also tested for reactivity to WA1 antigens and was negative. Attempts to
obtain an isolate of the parasite that infected the Austrian patient, by injecting specimens of his blood into jirds, were unsuccessful; the
smears of blood from periodic tail snips and PCR analysis of blood obtained by cardiac puncture of the jirds were negative. Both patients
responded to antimicrobial therapy for babesiosis: the Austrian patient was treated with clindamycin, and the Italian patient was treated
with both clindamycin and quinine (Table). Panel of computer-generated electronic images of photomicrographs of Babesia-infected
erythrocytes on a Giemsa-stained smear of peripheral blood from the patient who became infected in Austria. The electronic images were
edited for uniformity of color, without changing the form or size of the organisms. The image on the far right shows a tetrad (Maltese-cross
form). Three glass slides of the actual blood films have been deposited in the Oberösterreichisches Landesmuseum, Biologiezentrum, Linz
(i.e., Biology Center of the Upper Austrian Museum, Linz), with the accession number 2002/9. The slides are labeled “Babesia sp. (EU1),
patient 001, Austria, Krems Land, July 25, 2000.” Amplification of the complete 18S rRNA gene, by using generic protozoan primers and the
Babesia DNA extracted from the patients as the templates, yielded a specific product of approximately 1,700 base pairs for each patient.
Sequence analysis showed that the 18S rRNA gene was 1,727 bases long and that the PCR products from the two patients had identical
sequences. BLAST (available from: URL: http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/) search showed that the sequence, although clearly from a Babesia
sp., was not identical to any complete 18S rRNA sequences in the GenBank database. In phylogenetic analysis, EU1 clusters together with B.
odocoilei, and these two organisms form a sister group with B. divergens (Figure 1). The clustering of these organisms was identical,
regardless of which phylogenetic method was used. The associations were strongly supported statistically. Support for the internal branch
leading to the B. divergens, B. odocoilei, and EU1 group was 100% with both quartet puzzling and bootstrap distance analysis; for the
internal branch separating B. divergens from B. odocoilei and EU1, the support was 100% for quartet puzzling and 88% for bootstrapped
distance analysis. The alignment of the sequences used to construct the phylogenetic tree (Figure 1) is available from the authors upon
request. Because the complete 18S rRNA sequences in GenBank that were previously determined for various bovine isolates of B. divergens were
not identical, we reanalyzed the complete 18S rRNA gene from isolates (cultures or DNA) from Ireland (Purnell ; GenBank accession no.
U16370), Germany (U07885 ), and Northern Ireland (Z48751) that were provided to us. The sequences of the 18S rRNA gene we obtained for these
isolates were identical, which suggests that no variability is present in this gene among geographically distinct bovine isolates of B.
divergens (Slemenda et al., unpub. data). In contrast, the EU1 and B. divergens 18S rRNA sequences differed by 31 bases. Similarly, our
sequences of the 18S rRNA gene for both isolates of B. odocoilei (i.e., Brushy Creek and Engeling isolates) were identical to each other
(GenBank accession no. AY046577) and to the B. odocoilei sequence with the GenBank accession no. U16369 (14). The EU1 and B. odocoilei 18S
rRNA sequences differed by 29 bases. We investigated the first reported human cases of babesiosis in Italy and Austria and have provided
molecular evidence that the etiologic agent was a previously uncharacterized Babesia organism, which we refer to here as EU1. The organism
was found in countries in Europe not previously known to have zoonotic babesiosis and had novel molecular characteristics for the genetic
marker we analyzed, the complete 18S rRNA gene. Sequence analysis of this gene provides an objective and precise means of species
identification and phylogenetic classification. The DNA sequences of the 18S rRNA gene were identical for the Babesia organisms from the two
patients, which indicates that they were infected with the same organism. Each of the organisms was sequenced in a different country, which
indicates that the findings were not artifactual. The phylogenetic analysis (Figure 1) indicates that EU1 is most closely related to but
distinct from B. odocoilei, which infects white-tailed deer (15,16) and is not known to infect humans. EU1 and B. odocoilei form a sister
group to B. divergens, a bovine parasite that has been considered the main Babesia pathogen of humans in Europe. We have demonstrated that
no variability exists in the 18S rRNA sequences among several geographically distinct bovine isolates of B. divergens (Slemenda et al.,
unpub. data), which is the organism to which the name B. divergens legitimately applies, and showed that EU1 clearly is not B. divergens.
EU1 is also distinct from the MO1 parasite, which caused a fatal human case of babesiosis in Missouri in 1992 and was thought then by the
investigators to be B. divergens–like but distinct from it (10). The sequence provided in the publication about MO1 (10) was for only a
128–base pair fragment; in that region, the EU1 and MO1 sequences differ by four bases, and three positions in the MO1 sequence were
unresolved. The DNA sequences available in GenBank for B. divergens in Europe are from cattle not humans. To our knowledge, molecular data
have been reported for only one of the purported human cases of B. divergens infection in Europe, a case on the Canary Islands (22,23).
However, the data were for an incomplete 18S rRNA sequence (GenBank accession no. AF435415), and therefore were not suitable for the
phylogenetic analysis we performed of complete 18S rRNA sequences. Nevertheless, the sequence for the case on the Canary Islands differs by
18 bases with the sequence for EU1 and by 1 base with the B. divergens sequence from cattle (AY046576) in the 369-base-long region of the
gene that could be compared. In the absence of molecular data, we are not certain which organisms have caused the human cases of babesiosis
in Europe that have been attributed to B. divergens. The evidence that particular human cases were caused by B. divergens has varied in
quantity, quality, and type. The evidence typically has included various combinations of morphologic data, from examination of blood smears;
serologic data (usually, but not always, from IFA testing); and data concerning whether jirds or cattle injected with the patient’s blood
become parasitemic. Although these techniques are useful for detecting Babesia infection, they do not necessarily provide reliable species
identification (e.g., because of serologic cross-reactivity between EU1 and B. divergens in IFA testing ). Although some of the human cases
attributed to B. divergens may truly have been caused by the bovine B. divergens, others might have been caused by EU1. The cases of EU1
infection we reported likely would have been attributed to B. divergens had only the traditional methods of characterization, without
molecular analysis, been used. Our molecular characterization also showed that EU1 is not closely related to the other Babesia (or Babesia-
like) agents known to have infected humans (most notably, B. microti and the WA1- and CA1-type parasites). B. microti, together with B.
rodhaini, Cytauxzoon felis, and B. equi, is ancestral to the Theileria spp. and perhaps also to the Babesia sensu stricto group (depending
on which tree topology is used) (24). Reclassification of the B. microti group to a new family has been proposed (24). The WA1- and CA1-type
parasites, which have caused human cases of babesiosis in the western United States (8,9), also form a well-defined group, whose position in
the phylogeny of the piroplasms is uncertain (25). Although EU1 represents a zoonotic pathogen with previously unreported molecular
characteristics, whether it represents a new species per se awaits further evidence.1 EU1 might constitute a new species in the sense that
it was never previously recognized or characterized in any way or one that was characterized but not with molecular data (e.g., was misnamed
B. divergens or some other Babesia sp.). Because DNA sequence data are not available for most of the Babesia spp. found over the past
century in nonhuman animals and because data about the morphologic features and host specificity of a parasite are inadequate for definitive
species identification, we cannot exclude the possibility that EU1 is one of the many previously described Babesia spp. of nonhuman animals,
some named and some not, that were not known to be zoonotic. Although the serologic cross-reactivity between EU1 and B. divergens could have
resulted in diagnostic confusion in the past, cross-reactivity between these two organisms also could be advantageous. The B. divergens IFA
could be a useful tool for testing serum from persons who might be infected with EU1 or who participate in serosurveys to determine the
prevalence and geographic distribution of EU1 infection. Unfortunately, our attempts to obtain an isolate of EU1 by inoculation of jirds
were unsuccessful. One consequence is that we did not generate the homologous antigen needed for development of an IFA assay for EU1.
Therefore, we could not contrast the degree of reactivity of our patients’ serum specimens with antigens from EU1 and B. divergens. The
importance of determining whether the etiologic agent of a particular case of babesiosis is EU1 rather than B. divergens or some other
Babesia sp. depends in part on whether the clinical manifestations of infection and the response to antimicrobial therapy differ. We cannot
generalize about such issues from two cases of infection with EU1. However, the range in severity of the two cases, from quite mild
(Austrian case) to moderately severe (Italian case), is of interest, particularly because the two patients were similar in some respects
(i.e., both were asplenic men in their mid-fifties). Factors that likely placed the Italian patient at increased risk for a more severe case
included immunosuppressive chemotherapy for lymphoma and the 10-day interval between the onset of fever and the diagnosis of babesiosis
(Table). Largely from data for B. microti infection in the United States, combination therapy with either clindamycin and quinine or
atovaquone and azithromycin is recommended for treatment of babesiosis (28), with the addition of exchange transfusion in some situations in
severely ill patients. The Austrian patient, whose case was mild, was treated with clindamycin only. Some in vitro data and anecdotal
clinical data for purported zoonotic cases of B. divergens infection suggest that therapy with clindamycin alone, in combination with
exchange transfusion, when indicated, might be effective for treating B. divergens infection (4,29,30). However, no clinical trials in
humans have evaluated the effectiveness of any antimicrobial regimens for treatment of Babesia infection not caused by B. microti. The
public health importance of infection with EU1, including such factors as its biology, geographic distribution, ecology, prevalence, risk
factors for infection and disease, clinical manifestations, tick vector, and animal reservoir host(s), is not yet known and may take years
to determine. The Italian patient likely became infected in a garden habitat and the Austrian patient in a garden or forest habitat. Of
interest, an incomplete 18S rRNA sequence (GenBank accession no. AF373333) for a Babesia sp. found in I. ricinus ticks was recently reported
by investigators in Slovenia (31), which borders Italy and Austria. The sequence was reported for only 364 bases and corresponds to
positions 433–796 of the complete 18S rRNA sequence for EU1. In this part of the gene, the sequences for the organisms from the Slovenian
ticks and EU1 are identical. However, the relatedness of the two organisms cannot be determined without the complete 18S rRNA sequence for
the organism from the ticks. The occurrence of two identified cases of EU1 infection in humans in different countries (i.e., Italy and
Austria) and years (i.e., 1998 and 2000) indicates that EU1 is not restricted to one geographic area or time. Increased vigilance for
zoonotic infection with novel vector-borne pathogens is needed. Suggested citation for this article: Herwaldt BL, Cacciò S, Gherlinzoni F,
Aspöck H, Slemenda SB, Piccaluga P, et al. Molecular characterization of a non–Babesia divergens organism causing zoonotic babesiosis in
Europe. Emerg Infect Dis [serial online] 2003 Aug [date cited]. Available from: URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol9no8/02-0748.htm We
thank Henry S. Bishop, Doris A. Ware, Patricia B. Wilkins, and Marianna Wilson for laboratory support; Mark L. Eberhard and James Maguire
for helpful advice; Otto Picher, Sue Dillard, and Dennis D. Juranek for help with Figure 2; Patricia Holman for providing DNA extracted from
two isolates of Babesia odocoilei and one isolate of B. divergens; and Jeremy Gray, Ute Mackenstedt, John Kenny, and Gale Wagner for
providing bovine isolates (cultures or DNA) of B. divergens. This work was supported in part by the Italian Association of Cancer Research
(G.M.), Associazione Italiana contro le Leucemie-Linformi and ATENEO 60% target projects grants (P.P.), and the Murst 40% (Cofin 2002 –
Michele Baccarani) project (F.G.). The issue of what constitutes a new or newly described species requires periodic reevaluation as the
techniques for characterizing microbes improve. Although the advent of molecular biology/phylogeny has made it possible to characterize
organisms more precisely, the issue of how large a genetic difference in a particular gene(s) constitutes a new or different species is
controversial. Bacterial taxonomy is a much more active and advanced field (26,27) than that for characterizing protozoa, in part because of
the increasingly large numbers of bacteria being proposed as new species and the challenges posed by such possibilities as genetic
rearrangements. In the recommendations published in 2002 by an ad hoc committee that reevaluated the species definition for bacteria (26),
scientists were encouraged to use the “Candidatus” concept (i.e., to propose candidates for newly described bacterial species) for organisms
that had been well-characterized, including the sequencing of the small subunit RNA gene, but had not yet been cultured. As noted above, we
have referred to the protozoan we characterized as EU1. We have not claimed it as a newly identified species, despite having complete,
identical, and novel 18S rRNA sequences for the organism from two patients, who were separated in time and space, and having done the
sequence analysis for the two cases in different countries. However, although the Candidatus concept per se does not formally exist now for
protozoa, on the basis of the precedent from the field of bacterial taxonomy, we propose that EU1 be considered a candidate species. If
additional evidence supports the conclusion that the organism indeed constitutes a newly described species of the Babesia genus, we would
favor the name Babesia venatorum, which now does not constitute an official name. We chose this name because the patients whose cases we
reported were avocational hunters; “venator” is the Latin word for “hunter” (“venatorum,” the plural genitive case, means “of the hunters”).
Dr. Herwaldt is a medical epidemiologist in the Parasitic Diseases Epidemiology Branch, Division of Parasitic Diseases, Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention. Her research interests include the epidemiology of various protozoan parasites, such as Babesia, Leishmania,
Trypanosoma, and Cyclospora spp.
