We describe a case of systemic inflammatory response syndrome associated with air embolism following the removal of a central line catheter,
coupled with a deep inspiratory maneuver. The presence of a patent foramen ovale allowed the passage of a clinically significant amount of
air from the venous circulation to the systemic circulation. The interaction of air with the systemic arterial endothelium may have
triggered the release of endothelium-derived cytokines, resulting in the physiologic response of systemic inflammatory response syndrome.
Tachycardia, tachypnea, fever or hypothermia and leukocytosis or leukopenia are the hallmarks of systemic inflammatory response syndrome
(SIRS) . Although SIRS is commonly associated with infectious etiologies, it also occurs in patients with noninfectious conditions,
including trauma, burns, pancreatitis, anaphylaxis, adrenal insufficiency, pulmonary embolism, myocardial infarction, massive hemorrhage,
and following cardiopulmonary bypass . We describe a case of SIRS associated with air embolism following the removal of a central line
catheter. A 65-year-old male with adult immune deficiency syndrome (CD4+ cell count, 90), chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and
hepatitis-related cirrhosis was admitted for a transjugular intrahepatic porto-systemic shunt procedure for recurrent bleeding from
esophageal varices. The procedure was performed without complications. The following afternoon, an internal jugular sheath used to gain
access to the vena cava during the procedure was pulled in anticipation of discharge. Approximately 20 min later, and against medical
advice, the patient went to the bathroom, where he collapsed while attempting to defecate. He was found on the floor, incoherent and not
moving his extremities. Vital signs showed tachycardia (heart rate, 96 beats/min), tachypnea (28 breaths/min) and arterial blood pressure of
170/100 mmHg. A physical examination revealed an unconscious man with a weak gag reflex, with sluggishly reactive, 3 mm pupils and who was
able to withdraw to pain. Chest auscultation revealed diffuse wheezes and crackles over both lung fields. The cardiac rhythm was regular and
no murmurs were heard. The patient was orally intubated and placed on mechanical ventilation. A diagnosis of venous air embolism was made
and the patient was taken to a hyperbaric chamber for treatment with 100% oxygen at 2.5 atm for 90 min . Upon removal from the hyperbaric
chamber, the patient's blood pressure was 58/40 mmHg with a heart rate of 105 beats/min, and aggressive volume and vasopressor
(norepinephrine) resuscitation was initiated. A pulmonary artery was inserted approximately 20 hours after the air embolism episode. As
shown in Fig. 1, initial hemodynamic measurements showed an elevated cardiac output at 8.2 l/min and a low systemic peripheral resistance of
460 dynes/s/cm5. At that time the patient developed hematemesis and profuse bleeding both from a tongue laceration and from the internal
jugular puncture site. Laboratory results confirmed a clinical diagnosis of diffuse intravascular coagulation. The patient was transfused
several units of packed red blood cells, fresh frozen plasma, platelets and cryoprecipitate. Intravenous antibiotic therapy with vancomycin
and imipenem was initiated for suspected sepsis. An interval physical examination revealed a right-sided hemiplegia. A patent foramen ovale
(PFO) was noted by transthoracic echocardiogram. Bleeding had stopped and volitional movement had returned to all extremities by the next
morning. Over the next 24 hours, the patient's hemodynamic parameters normalized and vasopressor support was discontinued. Forty-eight hours
later the patient was weaned off the ventilator without difficulty and the antibiotics were discontinued. Several days later, he was
discharged from the hospital with no neurological sequelae. Blood, urine and sputum cultures taken during hospitalization failed to grow
pathogenic organisms. Air embolism is defined as the entry of air into the vasculature, and it can occur during the insertion or removal of
central venous catheters . For air to enter the venous circulation, there must be both a direct communication between the atmosphere and a
noncollapsed vein and a pressure gradient favoring the passage of air into the circulation . The patient described in the present report met
these criteria by having a patent lumen from skin to the central vein formed by the internal jugular sheath and by developing a pressure
gradient while taking a deep inspiration immediately before or after a Valsalva maneuver. Moreover, this patient exhibited symptoms
compatible with arterial air embolism, implying that a large portion of air sucked into the central veins found its way into the left
ventricle and the systemic circulation. The PFO provided the mechanism by which venous air passed into the systemic circulation, a condition
defined as 'paradoxical' air embolism . A noteworthy aspect of this case was the patient's physiological response to the acute embolic
event. Embolization of large quantities of air into the right ventricle usually results in pulmonary hypertension, a phenomenon that appears
to be related to the release of endothelin-1 from the pulmonary vascular endothelium . The rapid increase in pulmonary artery pressure leads
to right ventricular decompensation, to decreased left ventricular preload, and to a rapid decline in cardiac output with profound
hypotension. These mechanisms may have been present immediately after the entry of air into the patient's circulation, but a few hours after
the episode of air embolism the patient's hemodynamic and clinical condition (elevated cardiac output, decreased systemic vascular
resistance, tachypnea, fever and diffuse intravascular coagulation) was compatible with the diagnosis of SIRS. The rapidity of the patient's
recovery, as well as the lack of positive cultures, suggest that sepsis was not the cause of his hemodynamic decompensation, although this
possibility cannot be totally ruled out. Instead, we hypothesize that entry of air into the systemic circulation through the PFO, a
condition present in approximately 30% of the population , must have triggered the release of inflammatory mediators that resulted in SIRS.
Perhaps owing to the episode of air embolism being a single, self-limited event, the systemic response in this patient was relatively short
lived and resulted in no permanent organ dysfunction. Inflammatory states associated with systemic air embolism have been described in
animal models . Air can form microscopic bubbles that disrupt microvascular flow, resulting in platelet aggregation and the release of
plasminogen-activator inhibitor . This mechanism has been implicated as a trigger to the cascade of cytokines thought to be causative agents
of SIRS, among them interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor . The host response to these cytokines may include diffuse endovascular injury,
microvascular thrombosis, organ ischemia, multiorgan dysfunction, and death. Animal studies suggest that agents such as heparin and
lidocaine attenuate the thrombo-inflammatory response of the endothelium to luminal air. In conclusion, the removal of an internal jugular
vein sheath introducer in this patient, coupled with a deep inspiratory maneuver, allowed the passage of a clinically significant amount of
air from the venous circulation to the systemic circulation through a PFO. The interaction of air with systemic arterial endothelium may
have triggered the release of endothelium-derived cytokines, resulting in the physiologic response of SIRS. This complication of air
embolism has not been previously documented in the clinical literature. • Air embolization can occur following the removal of a central
venous catheter • A patent foramen ovale (PFO) allows air to pass from the venous to the arterial circulation (paradoxical air embolism) •
Air may trigger the release of cytokines by the arterial endothelium resulting in the development of the systemic inflammatory response
syndrome (SIRS) None declared. PFO = patent foramen ovale; SIRS = systemic inflammatory response syndrome. Changes in hemodynamic parameters
following the removal of the right internal jugular vein introducer (time = 0). There was an initial rise in blood pressure and in heart
rate at the time of air entry into the circulation. This was followed by severe hypotension, which was treated with intravenous (i.v.)
norepinephrine. At the time of insertion of a pulmonary artery catheter, approximately 20 hours after the removal of the introducer, the
patient's cardiac index was elevated and the systemic vascular resistance was low. These parameters normalized during the next 2 days. MAP,
mean arterial pressure.
