A Meckel's diverticulum is one cause of small bowel obstruction in the virgin abdomen. A 17-year-old female presented with a 24-hour history
of lower abdominal pain and emesis. Radiological imaging studies revealed a high-grade partial small bowel obstruction. A diagnostic
laparoscopy was performed revealing a bowel obstruction secondary to a Meckel's diverticulum. The diverticulum was resected using an
endovascular GIA stapler. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 3, tolerating a regular diet. Laparoscopy is a useful diagnostic
and therapeutic tool for a patient with a small bowel obstruction with an unclear etiology. Beyond the newborn period, hernias,
intussusception, congenital bands, appendicitis, and a Meckel's diverticulum are potential causes of a small bowel obstruction in the virgin
abdomen. Meckel's diverticulum is the most frequent congenital anomaly of the gastrointestinal tract with an incidence of 2% in the general
population.1 Meckel's diverticulum can present as abdominal pain with an unclear cause, hematochezia, inflammation with or without
perforation, intussusception, and a small bowel obstruction.2,3 In children with a small bowel obstruction, laparoscopy can be used for both
diagnostic and therapeutic purposes. We present a case of a small bowel obstruction secondary to a Meckel's diverticulum, diagnosed and
treated laparoscopically. A 17-year-old female, with a reported history of irritable bowel syndrome and questionable Crohn's disease,
presented with a 24-hour history of lower abdominal pain and emesis without flatus. Initial abdominal films revealed multiple air fluid
levels (Figure 1). An upper gastrointestinal series was performed because of the question of Crohn's disease. It revealed poor filling of
the terminal ileum consistent with a high-grade partial small bowel obstruction (Figure 2). Plain abdominal film revealing multiple air
fluid levels. Upper gastrointestinal series with high-grade distal ileal obstruction. A diagnostic laparoscopy was performed. A 12-mm Hassan
trocar was placed at the umbilicus via an open technique. Two additional 5-mm ports were placed, one in the right upper quadrant anterior
axillary line, and one in the left lower quadrant anterior axillary line. A Meckel's diverticulum with a thick band from the tip of the
diverticulum to the small bowel mesentery creating the obstruction was discovered. An obvious transition zone in the distal ileum existed at
this point of internal small bowel herniation. The diverticulum was resected using an endovascular GIA stapler. The patient was discharged
home on postoperative day 3, tolerating a regular diet. The goals when managing a small bowel obstruction are to identify the cause, relieve
the obstruction, and ensure bowel viability.4 Often, a definitive preoperative cause cannot be determined. In patients whose obstruction is
not relieved with nonoperative management, surgery is required to prevent bowel compromise. Laparoscopy provides a tool to diagnose the
cause of the obstruction and often to relieve the obstruction without laparotomy.3,5 Small bowel obstruction secondary to a Meckel's
diverticulum most often results from intussusception or from herniation of bowel around a diverticular band.2 Historically, laparotomy has
been required to diagnose and treat these conditions. Attwood et al6 initially described resection of a Meckel's diverticulum using
laparoscopy. Subsequently, the use of laparoscopy has been reported in the pediatric population for resection of Meckel's diverticulum in
cases of both bleeding and obstruction.2,3,7,8 In two of the cases,2,3 a diagnostic laparoscopy was performed to determine the cause of a
bowel obstruction. A subsequent diverticulectomy was performed. Laparoscopy was used for diagnostic and therapeutic purposes in the
presented case. Laparoscopic access via an open technique helps minimize the risk of bowel perforation associated with a Veress technique.
Laparoscopy also permits inspection of the remainder of the abdomen with reduced postoperative pain and potentially a decreased length of
hospital stay. In cases of small bowel obstruction with an unclear cause, laparoscopy offers an excellent diagnostic modality. When a
Meckel's diverticulum is found as the cause of obstruction, laparoscopy also provides a therapeutic modality, obviating the need for
laparotomy. Presented as a poster at the IPEG Meeting, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, March 28-30, 2000.
