Quinupristin/Dalfopristin is a new combination of streptogramin antibiotics designed specifically to treat clinically significant infections
due to Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus Faecium. Sweet’s syndrome is characterized by painful skin plaques, which is associated with dermal
neutrophilic infiltration, fever and peripheral blood leukocytosis. Drug-induced Sweet’s syndrome has a temporal relationship between drug
ingestion, clinical presentation and the temporally-related resolution of lesions following drug withdrawal or on treatment with systemic
corticosteroids. A 63-year-old woman received Quinupristin/Dalfopristin for acute pyelonephritis developed fever, arthralgia, vomiting, and
painful erythematous skin plaques. A skin biopsy showed neutrophilic dermatosis, and there was rapid resolution of the symptoms and
cutaneous lesions after discontinuation of Quinupristin/Dalfopristin, consistent with drug-induced Sweet’s syndrome. To date, there has been
no reported case of Sweet’s syndrome associated with the use of Quinupristin/Dalfopristin. Quinupristin/Dalfopristin (Synercid®), a
combination of two different streptogramins antibiotics, has a bactericidal effect by inhibiting the bacterial protein synthesis of
ribosome1–4). It is currently used in infections caused by Vancomycin-resistant Enterococcus faecium (VREF), when no other active
antibacterial agent is available1). The known adverse effects of Quinupristin/Dalfopristin are peripheral vasculitis, arthralgia, myalgia,
nausea, diarrhea, vomiting and skin papules2, 3, 5). Sweet’s syndrome, or acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis, is characterized by painful
skin papules, and plaques, fever and peripheral blood leukocytosis, with dermal neutrophilic infiltration on a skin biopsy6, 7). Drug-
induced Sweet’s syndrome has a temporal relationship between the drug ingestion and clinical presentation, or a temporally-related
recurrence after oral rechallenge, with temporally-related resolution of the lesions following drug withdrawal or on treatment with systemic
corticosteroids8–13). The authors, having encountered a patient, who was the first to our knowledge, developed Sweet’s syndrome after
administration of Quinupristin/Dalfopristin, herein report on the case with a review of the English literature relating to the other adverse
effects of the drug and the clinical features of the syndrome. A 63-year-old woman, with end stage renal disease, receiving hemodialysis
three times a week, was hospitalized for acute subdural hemorrhage. On the 30th day following her admission, she had a high fever of 39°C
and complained of costovertebral angle (CVA) tenderness on physical examination. Chest radiographs showed no abnormalities. VREF was
isolated in a urine culture, but with blood cultures yielding no growth of microorganism. Acute pyelonephritis, due to VREF, was diagnosed.
The patient was treated with Quinupristin/Dalfopristin (Synercid®, 7.5 mg/kg, intravenously, through a central venous catheter, every 8
hours). On the 1st day of the Quinupristin/Dalfopristin treatment, her body temperature was normalized and the CVA tenderness subsided, but
she complained of nausea, vomiting, and myalgia. On the 2nd day of treatment with the drug, she complained of severe myalgia, arthralgia and
general weakness, and presented tender erythematous 2 cm-sized papules on the palms of her hands (Figure 1A). On the 3rd day of treatment
the skin papules, which started on the palm, spread to the face, chest and neck, and progressed to maculopapular plaques or pustules (Figure
1B). Her body temperature again rose to 38.7°C. The white blood cell count was 20,600 cells/mm3 (neutrophils, 84%), the hemoglobin was 7.0
g/dL, the platelet count was 209,000 cells/mm3, but her liver enzymes were within normal limits. There was no evidence of infections on
physical examinations. Blood and urine cultures revealed no growth of microorganisms. A punch biopsy of a skin lesion on her palm was
performed, which showed intra- and sub-corneal pustular formation, with epidermal leukocytosis (Figure 2). There was no evidence of
vasculitis, necrosis or infections caused by bacteria, fungus or mycobacteria, in the biopsy specimen. These findings were compatible with
Sweet’s syndrome. She had received no other drugs that could have caused the drug-induced Sweet’s syndrome. The Quinupristin/Dalfopristin
treatment was stopped, after which, the severity of these side effects were rapidly relieved, and the pain from the skin lesions subsided
without analgesics. The maculopapular plaques and pustules, also, spontaneously disappeared. The 3-month follow-up revealed no recurrence of
the disease. In 1964, Sweet described a new disease, in eight female patients, which was characterized by the acute onset of fever,
leukocytosis, and tender skin plaques infiltrated by neutrophils: he named the disorder acute febrile neutrophilic dermatosis6). In as many
as 50 percent of patients, Sweet’s syndrome is associated with a variety of underlying diseases:7, 14, 15) malignancy, bacterial and viral
infections, drugs (furosemide8), hydralazine9), oral contraceptives10), minocycline11), nitrofurantoin12), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole13)
and Granulocyte-stimulating factor16), autoimmune and collagen vascular diseases (rheumatoid arthritis, systemic lupus erythematosus, mixed
connective tissue disease, Hashimoto thyroiditis, Sjogren’s syndrome), inflammatory bowel disease (Chron’s disease, ulcerative colitis) and
pregnancy. The pathogenesis of Sweet’s syndrome is still unknown, but it is currently thought that cytokine dysregulation, a type
3-hypersensitivity reaction or a T cell-dependent cellular immune reaction is involved8–13, 15). Diagnostic criteria have been proposed for
Sweet’s syndrome7), with a patient having to meet two major and two minor criteria for the diagnosis to be confirmed. One major criterion is
the abrupt onset of typical cutaneous lesions, with the other being a histopathology compatible with Sweet’s syndrome. There are four minor
criteria antecedent fever or infection; accompanying fever, arthralgia, conjunctivitis, or underlying malignancy; leukocytosis and good
response to systemic corticosteriods, but no response to antibiotics15). The cutaneous lesions are characterized by tender or painful
erythematous or violaceous plaques or nodules. They are most often found on the face, neck and upper extremities, especially on the dorsum
of the hands, but they can occur anywhere7, 13, 15). The diagnostic histopathologic feature of Sweet’s syndrome is nodular and dense
perivascular neutrophilic infiltration, with no evidence of vasculitis. The neutrophils can transepidermally migrate, creating subcorneal
pustules6, 7, 14, 15). Drug-induced Sweet’s syndrome is found to be resolved promptly, without recurrences, on discontinuation of
medication, or with systemic steroid therapy8–13). In patients with drug-induced Sweet’s syndrome, neutrophilia is often absent13). It is
difficult to definitively determine whether the cause of the dermatosis is drug-induced, or related to an underlying condition13). Two
useful criteria for establishing a diagnosis of drug-induced Sweet’s syndrome are a temporal relationship between the drug administration
and the clinical presentation, and between drug withdrawal and resolution of the disease. VREF infections have recently become a particular
public health concern. These organisms were first described, in Europe, in the mid-1980s1). Quinupristin/Dalfopristin is a novel parenteral
antimicrobial agent, consisting of two different semisynthetic, water-soluble, streptogramins antibiotics, Quinupristin (30%) and
Dalfopristin (70%). They are synergistic, and usually bactericidal against Gram-positive, selected Gram-negative and some anaerobic
organisms, and is an effective therapy for serious infections due to VREF2). It has a unique mechanism of action that involves bacterial
cell entry, by diffusion of the drug to the bacterial ribosome, followed by the formation of stable Dalfopristin-ribosome-Quinupristin
complexes. This results in the irreversible inhibition of bacterial protein synthesis and bacterial cell death. Consequently, this
combination of the two components may prevent the appearance of strains resistant to either of the components3, 4). However, parenteral
administration of Quinupristin/Dalfopristin can cause systemic adverse effects. Arthralgia, without objective signs of articulopathy, and
myalgia are the most commonly reported adverse events, and the leading causes of treatment discontinuation. Gastrointestinal adverse events
(nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea) and skin rash have also been documented2, 3, 5). All theses side-effects are reversible on discontinuing
the drug, and its overall tolerability is good2, 5). Patients receiving at least one intravenous infusion of quinupristin/dalfopristin have
been known to experience local venous intolerability (pain, burning, inflammation, and thrombophlebitis)2). Laboratory findings of the
adverse events are the increases in alkaline phosphatase, aminotransferases and γ-glutamine transferase, as well as decreases in sodium,
hemoglobin, haematocrit, platelet count and red blood cell count2, 3, 5) The drug is primarily excreted by the liver (75%), with a small
portion of the unchanged (15–19%) form eliminated by the kidneys3, 17). A recent study indicates that no formal dosage reduction would
appear necessary in patients with severe chronic renal impairment or hepatic dysfunction, although there is a tendency for slower clearance
of unchanged dalfopristin and active quinupristin derivatives3, 17). However, the effect of a dose reduction or an increase in the dosing
interval, on the pharmacokinetics of Quinupristin/ Dalfopristin in these patients requires further study, so no recommendations can be made
at this time3). Our patient, who received Quinupristin/Dalfopristin treatment, initially presented with arthralgia, myalgia, nausea,
vomiting and fever, with maculopapular plaques that progressed to pustules. There was no evidence of infections or vasculitis. A skin biopsy
revealed diffuse infiltration of neutrophils into the epidermis. After discontinuation of the drug, the systemic adverse events were quickly
resolved, and the cutaneous lesions cleared within 7 days. The patient receive no systemic corticosteroids. Although unproved, it is not
inconceivable that in this patient the Quinupristin/Dalfopristin was involved in the clinical and histological reactions. All theses
findings were suggestive of Quinupristin/Dalfopristin-induced Sweet’s syndrome. The drug has never been implicated in the literature as a
causative agent of Sweet’s syndrome before. Additional studies are warranted to determine the mechanism of Sweet’s syndrome associated with
the drug. Erythematous papules (A) and pustule (B) on the palm aspect of the hand. Microscopic findings: The skin biopsy showing dermal
edema and intra- and sub-corneal pustular formation with diffuse epidermal infiltration of neutrophils, but no evidence of vasculitis. (A:
H&E; ×40), (B: H&E; ×200).
