Severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) in childhood is associated with a high mortality and morbidity. Decompressive craniectomy has regained
therapeutic interest during past years; however, treatment guidelines consider it a last resort treatment strategy for use only after
failure of conservative therapy. We report on the clinical course of six children treated with decompressive craniectomy after TBI at a
pediatric intensive care unit. The standard protocol of intensive care treatment included continuous intracranial pressure (ICP) monitoring,
sedation and muscle relaxation, normothermia, mild hyperventilation and catecholamines to maintain an adequate cerebral perfusion pressure.
Decompressive craniectomy including dura opening was initiated in cases of a sustained increase in ICP > 20 mmHg for > 30 min despite
maximally intensified conservative therapy (optimized sedation and ventilation, barbiturates or mannitol). In all cases, the ICP normalized
immediately after craniectomy. At discharge, three children were without disability, two children had a mild arm-focused hemiparesis (one
with a verbal impairment), and one child had a spastic hemiparesis and verbal impairment. This spastic hemiparesis improved within 6 months
follow-up (no motor deficit, increased muscle tone), and all others remained unchanged. These observational pilot data indicate feasibility
and efficacy of decompressive craniectomy in malignant ICP rise secondary to TBI. Further controlled trials are necessary to evaluate the
indication and standardization of early decompressive craniectomy as a 'second tier' standard therapy in pediatric severe head injury. See
related Commentary: Severe traumatic brain injury (TBI) (Glasgow Coma Scale < 8) occurs in 60% of polytraumatized children after car
accidents or child abuse, and it is associated with a high mortality and morbidity . The primary therapeutic aim is to maintain an adequate
cerebral blood flow (estimated from cerebral perfusion pressure) and brain oxygenation. Intensive care management of severe head injury in
cases of refractory intracranial pressure (ICP) is not based on controlled, randomized studies. Studies in adults report more side effects
than positive benefits . Decompressive craniectomy has regained some therapeutic interest during the past decade. However, treatment
guidelines for traumatic brain injury from German, European (European Brain Injury Consortium ) North-American (Brain Trauma Foundation )
and international (pediatric neurosurgery) medical societies consider decompressive craniectomy only as last resort treatment strategy after
failure of conservative therapy. In the pediatric population, a mere handful of case reports, cohort studies and pilot studies discuss the
indication for decompressive craniectomy . We report on the clinical course of six pediatric patients enrolled in a pilot study secondary to
decompressive craniectomy after TBI. All patients were immediately treated by the medical emergency team at the accident site and
transferred to the Pediatric Intensive Care Unit (see Table 1 for details on diagnosis, treatment and follow-up). Early parameters of
treatment at admission were transcutaneous oxygen saturation > 92% and an estimated cerebral perfusion pressure of at least 50 mmHg. After
emergent clinical evaluation with stabilization of ventilation and hemodynamics, a computed tomography (CT) scan was initiated. Significant
traumatic masses were treated surgically on an emergency basis. In all other cases, an external ventriculostomy was performed and/or an ICP
monitor was inserted. Insertion of an external ventriculostomy was performed in cases with accessible ventricles on admission for
cerebrospinal fluid drainage as required by ICP monitoring. The ICP was monitored continuously by an intraparenchymal probe (MicroSensor;
Codman, Johnson & Johnson, Raynham, MA, USA) in all cases. The treatment protocol generally applied was sedation and continuous muscle
relaxation, 15–30° elevation of the upper part of the body, normothermia (36–37°C), and mild hyperventilation (pCO2 = 30–35 mmHg). To
maintain a sufficient cerebral perfusion pressure (50–60 mmHg; see ), all patients received catecholamines (epinephrine and norepinephrine)
as needed. Standard therapy was intensified in cases of an ICP increase > 20 mmHg for at least 30 min. Body position, body temperature,
blood pressure, fluid management and ventilation as well as analgosedation were evaluated and optimized in order to lower the ICP. In each
case of an unexpected and sustained elevation of ICP, a current CT scan was evaluated to rule out new space occupying intracranial lesions .
Continuing and sustained deviation of the ICP > 20 mmHg for longer than 30 min was treated by single doses of barbiturate (2–5 mg/kg) and by
infusion of mannitol (0.5 g/kg in 15 min). No treatment response within 30 min or even a further increase of ICP lead to immediate surgical
treatment (decompressive craniectomy). A unilateral or bilateral fronto-temporo-parietal craniectomy was performed depending on the extent
and location of the brain swelling. The removed bone flap was stored by kryopreservation until secondary cranioplasty. The dura was opened
and enlarged by an autologous galeal flap or by a Goretex patch. In patient 1, dura enlargement was restricted to one side despite bilateral
decompression. In patient 6 (cerebellar contusion), a suboccipital craniectomy and duraplasty was performed because of a cerebellar swelling
and altered somatosensory evoked potentials (SEP), in addition to a severe head trauma after blunt injury to the craniocervical junction. In
five out of six patients, the ICP normalized (< 12 mmHg) immediately after craniectomy and no secondary elevation in ICP was noticed. The
continuous sedation and muscle relaxation could be tapered and stopped on day 5 or day 6 after surgical decompression. Patient 2 showed a
secondary brain swelling with an increase of ICP level intractable to intensified medical treatment on day 4 after unilateral decompression.
A craniectomy of the contralateral side was therefore performed, with subsequent normalization of the ICP. Figure 1 presents the CT scan
before and Figure 2 after bilateral craniectomy of patient 2. There was neither infection nor disturbance of wound healing, nor mortality.
One patient (patient 3) developed a late aseptic necrosis of the replaced bone flap. In this case, a post-traumatic hydrocephalus led to
subgaleal cerebrospinal fluid collection with surgical revision and transient insertion of a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt. This might have
caused insufficient fixation of the bone flap and a lack of revascularization with subsequent partial necrosis. The shunt was removed 3
months after trauma and the bony defect was covered by an autologous calvarial split graft. The neurological outcomes at discharge and at 6
months follow-up are presented in Table 2. Furthermore, SEP of the median nerve before and after decompressive craniectomy are described in
Table 2. Patient 1 suffered from a severe transitional syndrome after discontinuation of sedation. The neurological status was normal after
recovery, in spite of pathological SEP of the median nerve. At discharge from the intensive care unit, patient 2 showed a hemiparesis,
predominantly of the left arm, which resolved to normal strength in the following weeks. None of the patients with severe head injury
suffered from post-traumatic seizures or received anticonvulsive medication. Based on findings for SEP of the median nerve, a favorable and
stable long-term outcome could be predicted for all of our patients suffering from TBI, confirming previously published data . The SEP 1
week after trauma correlated with the neurological outcome 6 months after trauma, except for patient 1. Mild disturbances of SEP were seen
in patient 1, but revealed no deterioration during follow-up. After exclusion or surgical removal of traumatic hematomas and other space
occupying lesions, prevention of secondary brain injury is the mainstay of intensive care treatment in pediatric severe head injury. Diffuse
brain swelling and multiple cerebral contusions are the most common cause of morbidity and death after severe head injury in pediatric
patients . Standardized treatment protocols have been suggested for the management of severe head injury in children , including drainage of
cerebrospinal fluid, mild hyperventilation (pCO2 lower threshold of 30 mmHg) and mannitol bolus (unless serum osmolality exceeds 320
mosmol/l) as generally accepted baseline therapies for the pediatric population . In cases of sustained elevated ICP (> 20 mmHg) and reduced
critically cerebral perfusion pressure (< 50 mmHg), despite optimal medical therapy including controlled hyperventilation, further
management using 'second tier' therapy is a matter of controversy and has to follow the different stages of postinjury cerebral insults.
Brain swelling and intracranial hypertension in the early post-traumatic period has been proposed to induced by cerebral hyperemia (i.e.
increased cerebral blood flow ), especially in children . However, the impact of hyperemia on outcome has been rated controversially.
Beneficial as well as detrimental effects have been discussed . 'Second tier' intensified conservative treatment will have to rely on
specific prognostic monitoring parameters. Therefore, CBF-dependent therapy has been studied . But, as cerebral blood flow is age dependent
in the unaffected child (normal range from 40 to > 100 ml/100 g/min , absolute cerebral hyperemia may only be defined within narrow age
ranges . CBF thresholds cannot be taken from adult studies for the initiation of therapeutic interventions in the pediatric population.
Monitoring of cerebral metabolic parameters has been reported for treatment in adult patients. In children, an early decrease in the
cerebral metabolic rate of oxygen and the arterio-venous difference for oxygen has been reported to occur 1–3 days after trauma . Recently,
Cruz and colleagues predicted clinical outcome based on monitoring of the ICP and the cerebral extraction rate for oxygen (CEO2) in
children. In their observational study of 45 children, an increased ICP and a decreased CEO2 indicated cerebral hyperemia during the first 5
days after head injury. An unfavorable outcome occurred in children with higher ICP and lower CEO2 (< 17%). Monitoring of the CEO2 (or
oxygen saturation at the jugular vein bulb for hemoglobin > 12 g/l) might therefore be used to direct ventilation and medical therapy in
children in the future. However, two out of 45 patients died prior to intended decompressive surgery while being monitored for CEO2, which
points towards the need for shortened monitoring intervals and early surgical decompression. Prolonged barbiturate therapy inherits a high
risk of unwanted therapeutic effects, and revealed small benefits in the outcome in children . In a proven state of refractory absolute
hyperemia, selective reduction of the CBF by cerebral vasomodulation (dihydroergotamine, metoprolol and clonidin , or a monotherapy
dihydroergotamine respectively ) might be considered, but these treatment options are still not for routine application and require very
intensive multimodal monitoring. Brain edema associated with cerebral ischemia requires optimized cerebral perfusion and fluid management.
Experimental medical treatment is proposed to lower the ICP and to reestablish sufficient CBF after failure of mannitol and vasopressors to
support sufficient CBF. Hypertonic saline (7.2%) as a bolus or an infusion decreased the ICP in adults and children, and may therefore be
indicated preferably in hypovolemia . As a surgical 'second tier' option, controlled lumbar drainage of cerebrospinal fluid has been
proposed. This regimen necessitates an external ventriculostomy and discernible basal cisterns on CT with careful control of both external
drainage systems. In a study cohort of 16 pediatric head injury patients, Levy and colleagues reported good control of refractory
intracranial hypertension without drainage-related mortality. Surgical decompression using craniectomy is largely seen as a last resort
therapeutic option. This may be due to disappointment from previous anecdotic results based on late intervention. Encouraging results have
been reported from studies in adolescent and adult patients indicating an early time point of decompression as extremely important to
achieve a favorable outcome . In addition to the 'optimal' time point for decompression, the extent of brain decompression seems to be
important . Restoration of cerebral perfusion by surgical enlargement of the intracranial space is the primary goal of decompression . This
may necessitate a large craniotomy with duraplasty. Prospective controlled, randomized studies on the effect of surgical decompression in
TBI in childhood are missing. A pilot study by Taylor and colleagues demonstrated an improved neurological outcome of patients who were
treated with an early decompressive craniectomy in a cohort of 27 children compared with historical controls. In contrast to our patients,
only a small temporal craniectomy without opening the dura was performed. The risk of transtentorial herniation can be lowered in this way,
but restoration of the cerebral perfusion can hardly be achieved. However, a benefit from temporal craniectomy without duraplasty has been
shown by Taylor and colleagues, which underlines the potential of a larger decompression. Studies in adults demonstrated a greater decrease
of the ICP after duraplasty than in cases with craniectomy only . Neither in these studies nor in our cohort was a higher rate of
complications such as infections or hygroma noted due to duraplasty. Immediate normalization of the ICP after supratentorial surgical
decompression was achieved in all patients from our study cohort. A good neurological outcome was achieved in all our patients suffering
from TBI treated with decompressive craniectomy and duraplasty. Due to the early timepoint of decompression after failure of first-line
treatment options, unwanted effects of prolonged medical therapy (e.g. barbiturate coma) or brain herniation with secondary brain stem
compromise could be prevented, and all children survived. There currently seems to be no specific treatment regimen in children compared
with adults in severe head injury , and there is no preference for a special 'second tier' treatment strategy in pediatric head injury . The
presented pilot trial adds an additional argument for surgical decompression at an early stage in case of treatment-refractory intracranial
hypertension, and calls for a controlled trial that includes this treatment option in pediatric severe head injury patients. • In case of
sustained increase in ICP (>20 mmHg) under intensified conservative therapy conditions and early decompressive craniectomy including
duraplasty has to be considered This pilot trial and the favorable results from the study by Taylor and colleagues demonstrate the necessity
of a multicenter, controlled, randomized study to evaluate the indication and standardization of early decompressive craniectomy as a
'second tier' standard therapy in children with severe head injury. None declared. CBF = cerebral blood flow; CEO2 = cerebral extraction
rate for oxygen; CT = computed tomography; ICP = intracranial pressure; SEP = somatosensory evoked potentials; TBI = traumatic brain injury.
CT scan of patient 2 before craniectomy. CT scan of patient 2 after bilateral craniectomy. Basic clinical data and course in study infants
CT, computed tomography; DAI, diffuse axonal injury; DBS, diffuse brain swelling; ICP, intracranial pressure; tSAH, traumatic subarachnoid
hemorrhage. Neurological outcome of patients with decompressive craniectomy at discharge and after 6 months compared with somatosensory
evoked potentials of the median nerve (M-SEP) before and after craniectomy PTH, post-traumatic hydrocephalus; VP shunt,
ventriculo–peritoneal shunt.
