We describe 2 newborn infants with persistent pericardial effusion treated with thoracoscopic pericardial window and thoracic duct ligation.
Patient 1 was a premature female newborn who presented with severe cardiac anomalies, including dextrocardia. She was treated with pulmonary
artery banding and pacemaker placement for complete cardiac block. Postoperatively, she developed pericarditis with persistent symptomatic
pericardial effusion. She did not improve despite pericardial drain placement. She was treated with a thoracoscopic pericardial window.
Patient 2 was a newborn male who presented with cardiac tamponade secondary to congenital chylopericardium. He did not respond to
pericardial drain placement or medical management with fasting, total parenteral nutrition, and octreotide. He was treated with
thoracoscopic pericardial window and thoracic duct ligation. Patient 1 improved rapidly. The pericardial effusion disappeared. The chest
tube was removed 5 days following surgery. She died 6 weeks later of a cardiac arrhythmia secondary to pacemaker failure. The pericardial
effusion had resolved. Patient 2 responded to the pericardial window and thoracic duct ligation. He was discharged 10 days following the
procedure. Thoracoscopy provides an excellent approach to the pericardium. Pericardial windows and biopsy can be safely performed with this
approach. The thoracic duct can be easily identified and ligated even in small babies. Recovery can be fast with minimal postoperative
discomfort. Cosmetic results are excellent and length of hospitalization is minimized. Pericardial effusions are a rare neonatal condition.
They have been associated with operative trauma, lymphangiectasis, irradiation, caval obstruction, and primary and metastatic mediastinal
tumors (Table 1).1–4 Occasionally, the exact cause remains unknown. Regardless of the cause, approximately 45% to 55% of pericardial
effusions require surgical intervention when medical management fails.5,6 Although the indications for surgery are often obvious, as in
cardiac tamponade, choosing the best route for drainage is often a complex decision. This is especially true in neonates in whom the
thoracoscopic approach is often limited because of the patient's size. Causes of Pericardial Effusion1–5 In the present report, we describe
2 cases of pericardial effusion in neonates. One patient had a pericardial effusion after cardiac surgery, and the other had a
chylopericardium secondary to congenital lymphangiectasis. Both patients underwent thoracoscopic surgery as successful definitive therapy.
The surgical management of these pediatric patients illustrates the safety and effectiveness of thoracoscopic pericardial window creation
with or without concomitant thoracic duct ligation as a surgical option for pericardial effusion, even in neonates weighing as little as 3.3
kg. A 3-month-old Hispanic female with a history of dextrocardia, multiple ventricular septal defects, atria septal defect, sinus node
dysfunction, and pulmonary venous anomalies presented to our pediatric intensive care unit in respiratory distress requiring mechanical
ventilation. An admission chest radiograph demonstrated dextrocardia and cardiomegaly. An initial echocardiogram found good ventricular
function and no evidence of pericardial effusion. She was taken to the operating room and had pulmonary artery banding and insertion of a
pacing system. Following surgery, she developed a large pericardial effusion, which was detected on an echocardiogram. A pericardial
catheter was placed and drained about 40 cc to 80 cc of serous fluid daily despite medical management. Consequently, she was taken to the
operating room for creation of a thoracoscopic pericardial window. Despite her preoperative weight of only 3.3 kg, the patient recovered
well after surgery. Follow-up echocardiograms showed no residual effusion. Her chest tube was removed on the fifth postoperative day;
however, she died 6 weeks later of a cardiac arrhythmia secondary to pacemaker failure. A newborn male infant was transferred to our
neonatal intensive care unit for a pericardial effusion that was diagnosed prenatally via ultrasound. Upon birth, the patient was found to
have congenital anomalies including macroglossia, skin folds, and overriding suture plates. The patient underwent a pericardiocentesis on
the first day of life, and fluid analysis demonstrated a chylopericardium (Table 2). Repeated pericardiocentesis and follow-up
echocardiograms revealed a persistent, large pericardial effusion. As a result, a pericardial catheter was inserted, and an average of about
50 cc of chyle drained from it daily despite medical management. The patient was taken to the operating room on his 27th day of life
(weight, 3.9 kg), and a thoracoscopic thoracic duct ligation was performed followed by thoracoscopic creation of a pericardial window. The
chest tube was removed on the 5th postoperative day. A repeat echocardiogram postoperatively demonstrated minimal residual pericardial
effusion. The patient was subsequently discharged on the 10th postoperative day, and is currently doing well. Pericardial Fluid Analysis WBC
= white blood cells. RBC = red blood cells. PMN = Polymorphonuclear leukocytes. In both cases, the neonate was given general anesthesia with
a single lumen endotracheal tube, and placed in the left lateral decubitus position with the right chest up. After preparing the chest, a
5-mm thoracoscopic trocar was introduced into the thoracic cavity in the mid axillary line, fifth intercostal space. The chest was then
insufflated with carbon dioxide to a pressure of 6 to 8 mm Hg to collapse the right lung parenchyma. Then, under direct vision, a second
trocar was placed in the anterior axillary line, seventh intercostal space. Finally, to complete the triangulation of the ports, a third
trocar was inserted in the posterior axillary line, seventh intercostal space. The phrenic and vagus nerves were identified and preserved.
The Harmonic scalpel was then used to open the pericardium. An appropriately large pericardial window was created with a combination of the
Harmonic scalpel and endoscopic scissors. The fluid drained from the pericardium was suctioned from the chest as well as the opened
pericardial sac. Pericardioscopy was then performed, and the adhesions encountered were divided using the Harmonic scalpel. The procedure
was finished with the placement of a chest tube. The ports were removed and closed in the usual fashion. In the second case, the patient had
a chylopericardium; therefore, a thoracoscopic thoracic duct ligation was carried out prior to the creation of the pericardial window
(Figures 1 and 2). In this patient, a 12F nasogastric tube was placed to make the esophagus easier to recognize during dissection. In
addition, 10 mL of intralipid via nasogastric tube was administered about 1 hour prior to surgery to facilitate identification of the
thoracic duct. The ports were placed as described above. Then the esophagus, aorta, and azygos vein were identified. Dissection occurred low
in the chest on the thoracic vertebral bodies. The pleura were opened over the spine, and the thoracic duct was identified and clipped en
bloc with 5-mm Endo Clips. Care was taken not to disrupt the continuity of the duct and its tributaries.6 The thoracoscopic pericardial
window was then created as described above. Creation of pericardial window and performance of biopsy. After creation of pericardial window,
pericardioscopy was performed. The percutaneously placed catheter for drainage of pericardial tamponade is seen inside the pericardium.
Death from cardiac compression by a pericardial effusion was first documented in the 17th century.2 The catastrophic complication of cardiac
tamponade and death makes the detection and treatment of large pericardial effusions imperative, especially in neonates who naturally have a
limited physiological reserve. However, to be clinically significant, a pericardial effusion need not cause cardiac tamponade. Complications
including electrolyte, fluid, and acid-base imbalances often develop in children with chronic effusions. Other morbidities include protein
wasting, as well as loss of triglycerides, fat-soluble vitamins, and lymphocytes in patients with chylopericardium.6–8 These complications
can also be life-threatening if left to run their natural course. Therapeutic intervention of some kind is mandatory in large and chronic
pericardial effusions. Traditionally, as in the 2 cases described in the present report, the initial therapy is medical management. It is
only when this approach is unsuccessful that surgical intervention becomes mandatory. The medical therapy for pericardial effusions is based
on the type of fluid encountered. Serous effusions, as in case 1, are treated with pericardiocentesis and judicious fluid and electrolyte
management.9 In addition, chylopericardium, as in case 2, is managed with a medium-chain fatty acid diet because it is directly absorbed
into the portal system, thus bypassing chylomicron creation and deposition via the thoracic duct into the pericardium. If this diet fails,
feedings are stopped and the patient is placed on total parenteral nutrition. Again, failure with this therapy warrants surgical treatment,
as in the present cases.3,5–8,10 Pericardial drainage and pericardiocentesis with dietary manipulation are effective therapy in
approximately 55% of patients with pericardial effusions.5 The remaining patients require surgery. Indications for operative management
include tamponade,5,11,12 as well as patient intolerance of fluid and nutrient loss.3,5,7,12 Multiple options are available to the surgeon
for the treatment of pericardial effusions. Open pericardial window creation has proven a reliable surgical alternative for the drainage of
pericardial fluid. Other methods of drainage, such as pericardioperitoneal windows5,13 and total pericardiectomy,14 have been proposed as
alternative interventions in adults. Thoracoscopic pericardial window creation may be the surgical technique of choice in neonates with
persistent or symptomatic pericardial effusions. Although thoracoscopic surgery is an established approach in adults, experience
demonstrating its usefulness in the pediatric population is limited.15 The present 2 cases, however, demonstrate that thoracoscopic
pericardial window creation with or without thoracic duct ligation is a safe and effective treatment for pericardial effusions in neonates.
The thoracoscopic approach has many advantages over conventional thoracotomy for the drainage of these effusions. The smaller incisions used
result in a decrease in postoperative pain and, subsequently, foster fewer pulmonary complications.6,13 Consequently, these patients have a
shorter hospital stay and a more rapid return to normal activity than those undergoing a classical thoracotomy.9 These factors hold true
even if concomitant procedures, such as thoracic duct ligation, are carried out, as in case 2. It is believed by some that small infants are
not amenable to minimally invasive surgery because of their size. We, however, disagree. Rather, with use of appropriately sized instruments
and careful surgical technique, thoracoscopic pericardial window creation can be performed successfully even in neonates weighing less than
4 kg. The only obvious contraindication for this procedure is the child's inability to tolerate single-lung ventilation during the
procedure.13,15 Such unstable infants should undergo a conventional thoracotomy. Pericardial effusions in neonates require surgical
intervention when medical management fails. It is imperative to intervene in a timely fashion so as to prevent severe sequelae, such as
protein wasting and malnutrition. The ensuing operation should be a thoracoscopic pericardial window creation despite the patient's size at
the time of surgery. Even neonates can benefit from this minimally invasive approach. Therefore, as illustrated by the present cases,
thoracoscopic pericardial window creation with or without thoracic duct ligation provides a safe and effective alternative to classical
thoracotomy in the drainage of pericardial effusions in the pediatric population.
