Biliary ascariasis is regarded as possible etiological factor for hepatolithiasis. Here we report one case of a patient with hepatolithiasis
with biliary ascariasis who developed a liver abscess, which was treated with partial hepatectomy. A young adult female presented with
epigastric pain and vomiting with repeated attacks of cholangitis. ERCP showed evidence of multiple intrahepatic calculi with the
development of abscess in the left lobe of liver. The patient underwent partial hepatectomy and was found to have biliary ascariasis on
histology. She was treated with antihelmenthic therapy and has had an uneventful postoperative period of 2 years. Biliary ascariasis with
hepatolithiasis, although rare, should be considered in endemic countries. Hepatolithiasis is more prevalent in Asian countries and can be
associated with helminthiasis . In India biliary ascariasis has been reported as endemic in Kashmir valley . Elsewhere in country there are
only few reports of biliary ascariasis . We report a patient with a case of hepatolithiasis with ascariasis who developed liver abscess and
was treated with surgical resection. A 35 year old female presented with dull aching epigastric pain and vomiting for 2 days. There was
history of repeated attacks of cholangitis over a 2 year period for which she was being investigated. The patient was averagely built and
poorly nourished. Jaundice was present without signs of liver cell failure. Vital parameters were within normal limits. On investigation,
hemoglobin was 10.5 gm%, total WBC count was 18,500 /cmm. Liver function tests showed serum bilirubin 4.8 mg/dl, alkaline phosphatase 24 IU,
AST 110 U/L and ALT 86 U/L. Ultrasonography showed right and left intrahepatic calculi with an abscess in left lobe of liver, dilated common
bile duct (CBD) and gallstones. CT scan showed an abscess in the left lobe of liver with multiple bilateral intrahepatic calculi (Fig 2 and
3. ERCP revealed dilated CBD, biliary strictures with dilatation of some of the intrahepatic biliary radicals. An attempt was made to remove
some of the calculi. In view of hepatolithiasis the patient was taken up for surgery to remove intrahepatic stones, however during surgery
segment 2 and 3 were found to be destroyed with abscess. Hence segment 2 and 3 were resected with subtotal excision of CBD and Roux-en-Y
hepaticojejunostomy. Intraoperatively stones in right hepatic biliary tract were extracted. Macroscopic examination of left hepatectomy
specimen was dark green and measuring 12 cm × 4 cm × 3 cm in dimensions. A localized area of 4 cm × 3 cm × 3 cm was grayish, dull and
friable and was interpreted as abscess. The wall of the abscess were irregular, necrotic and smooth at places. Surrounding parenchyma showed
dilated biliary radicals, some were impacted with black stones. Histopathology revealed multiple dilated bile ducts. One of which showed
extensive ulceration of mucosa, dense mixed inflammation, filled with bile that was corresponding to an area of abscess. Lumina of some of
the larger bile ducts were filled with tubular structures having smooth, long, linear defects with tapering ends that were surrounded by
bile sludge and inflammatory cell reaction suggestive of adult helminthes with possibility of ascariasis (fig 1). Surrounding liver showed
features of secondary biliary cirrhosis. Postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was given broad-spectrum antihelminthic treatment
orally and discharged. She is on regular follow-up for next 2 years without any complications. Hematoxylin and eosin section showing dilated
bile duct filled with parasite, surrounded by inflammatory reaction. (100×) CT with contrast – Intrahepatic biliary radical dilatation with
biliary calcification. CT plain – Intrahepatic biliary radical dilatation with biliary calcification. Hepatolithiasis or primary
intrahepatic stones are prevalent in the Far East countries such as Japan, Korea, and Taiwan . The relative incidence of hepatolithiasis
against all gall stones in western countries is approximately 1%, whereas in Taiwan, South Korea, China it has been reported to be 20%, 18%,
38–45% respectively . Biliary ascariasis is a common problem in certain areas of world. Although it is not common in developed countries,
with increasing air travel and immigration, one must be aware of this condition. Ascaris lumbricoides is a common parasite and over a
billion people are estimated to be infested worldwide . It is more common than Clonarchis sinensis and other flukes which are associated
with cholangiohepatitis. Biliary ascariasis is predominantly a disease of adult women . Duration of symptoms vary from few months to few
years. These patients usually present with biliary colic (56%), acute cholangitis (25%), acute cholecystitis (13%), acute pancreatitis (6%)
and rarely hepatic abscesses (less than 1%) . Our case also presented with recurrent attacks of cholangitis. Adult forms of Ascaris
lumbricoides are usually passed into the intestine, however worms in the duodenum and invading the ampulla of Vater usually present as
biliary colic or acute pancreatitis due to blocked CBD or pancreatic duct. These worms migrate through CBD, cystic duct and intrahepatic
duct leading to biliary colic and cholangitis. Presence of dead worms form nidus for the CBD or hepatic stone formation. Further migration
of worms into the intrahepatic duct causes secondary biliary cirrhosis, stricture formation, bile duct stenosis, hepatolithiasis and abscess
formation. These worms also have high glucoronidase activity that deconjugates bilirubin and form pigment stones. The diagnosis of
hepatolithiasis with ascariasis is usually possible on ultrasonography of the abdomen and ERCP . However in our case intrahepatic calculi
were diagnosed on CT scan and ERCP but the presence of parasite (ascariasis) was noticed only after histopathology of the resected specimen.
Though ERCP plays a major diagnostic and therapeutic role at times it may not help in the diagnosis of biliary ascariasis. This is due to
active movement of the worms, which are going into and out of the biliary tract . The treatment of hepatolithiasis with biliary ascariasis
is endoscopic extraction of calculi and worms from the bile duct with or with out sphincterotomy which gives immediate relief. However in
presence of complications hepatectomy is the only treatment of choice. Sphincterotomy has disadvantages in endemic areas, as these patients
are prone to develop remigration of worms into biliary tree. Supportive anthelminthic treatment for long periods is required in these cases.
Improvement in sanitation plays crucial role in the epidemiological control of these hepatobiliary diseases. Biliary ascariasis with
hepatolithiasis, although is rare, should be considered in endemic countries. None declared. Complete workup of the patient was done by
surgeons Joshi R M, Shetty T S, Khithani A S Patient was diagnosed as hepatolithiasis with the help of radiologist Chemburkar V V who
performed USG, CT Scan. Further histopathology was carried out and this case was diagnosed as hepatolithiasis due to biliary ascariasis by
Pilankar K S, Amarapurkar A D. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the
patient for the publication of patient's details.
