Carney complex is a multiple neoplasia syndrome, inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, that is characterized by lentigines, cardiac
myxoma, and numerous endocrine and other tumors, including primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease. Here, we describe a typical
case of Carney complex in a 27-year-old female who exhibited spotty skin pigmentation on the lips, oral mucosa, fingers, and toes and
several manifestations of Cushing’s syndrome due to primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease. She also had pituitary adenoma, breast
tumor and thyroid nodule. Only a few cases of this disorder have been reported in the Korean literature. All of them, however, had only two
components of Carney complex: composed of skin pigmentation and primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease. Therefore, the present
case seems to be the first true case of Carney complex reported in Korea. Carney complex is a very rare multiple neoplasia syndrome with
cardiac, endocrine, cutaneous, and neural tumors, as well as a variety of pigmented lesions of the skin and mucosa1, 2). Most cases are
familial, but sporadic cases have also been reported1). Carney complex has also been considered a form of multiple endocrine neoplasia,
because Carney complex patients frequently present more than two endocrine tumors3). In the Korean literature, however, all of the reported
cases had only one endocrine tumor, such as primary pigmented nodular adrenocortical disease (PPNAD)4, 5). We report here a case of Carney
complex with multiple endocrine tumors. A 27-year-old woman was admitted to evaluate the cause of secondary amenorrhea and recent weight
gain. Her menstruation was very irregular and stopped a year ago. She had also gained 10 kg in the last two years. Her past medical history
did not show anything significant. On admission, her blood pressure was 150/90 mmHg, pulse rate, 78/min, body temperature, 36.8°C,
respiratory rate, 20/min, height 168.8 cm, and body weight was 67 kg. On physical examination, she had a moon face central obesity, and
hypertrichosis. She also had many spotty skin and mucosal pigmentation on her lips, oral mucosa, fingers, and toes (Figure 1). Laboratory
studies included WBC 9700/mm3 with 77% neutrophils and 14.7% lymphocytes and platelet 300×103/mm3. Her liver and renal function test results
were normal. Concentrations of Na and K were 144 mEq/L, 4.1 mEq/L, respectively. Blood sugar after fasting was 100 mg/dL, and LH was 2.6
mlU/mL (1.1–7.0), FSH 4.0 mlU/mL (6.3–24), estradiol 24.3 pg/mL (30–400), and testosterone 1.30 ng/mL (0.14–0.76). Looking at her history
and physical examination, we suspected cushing’s syndrome. The levels of plasma ACTH and cortisol at 8 AM were 12.38 pg/mL and 27.8 ug/dL.
The levels of plasma cortisol at 4 PM and midnight were 26.3 ug/dL and 27.5 ug/dL, respectively. The 24 hour urine-free cortisol was 902
ug/day, and the level of 17-ketosteroid slightly increased, while that of DHEA-S was within normal range. The results of low and high dose
dexamethasone suppression test were shown in Table 1. The 24 hour urine-free cortisol excretion was not suppressed by the low and high dose
dexamethasone suppression test. Abdominal CT scan was done under the impression of adrenal Cushing’s syndrome. A 2.3×1.7 cm-sized well
defined homogenous mass was seen in the left adrenal gland (Figure 2). However, at this time, we could not explain her skin pigmentation.
Although the abdominal CT scan findings were not typical of PPNAD, echocardiography was performed to search for cardiac myxoma, so that
Carney complex could be excluded since right adrenal gland atrophy was not identified. However, the result turned out negative, prompting us
to perform pituitary fossa MRI to exclude the diagnosis of adrenal nodular hyperplasia due to pituitary Cushing’s disease. We also measured
the cathecholamine metabolites to exclude ectopic Cushing’s syndrome due to pheochromocytoma. The levels of vanylmandelic acid and
metanephrine had not increased. However, there was a microadenoma in the inferior portion of the right pituitary gland (Figure 3). At that
time, baseline levels of all pituitary hormones were found to be within normal range (growth hormone: 0.63 ng/mL, prolactin: 15 ng/mL, TSH
0.94 ulU/mL, free T4 1.0 ng/dL). Jugular vein ACTH sampling was performed to rule out pituitary Cushing’s disease, but the ACTH level of the
right jugular vein did not increase at twice the level of the peripheral vein (right jugular vein: 28.16 pg/mL, peripheral vein: 17.37
pg/mL). We planned to resect the left adrenal gland only because abdominal CT findings and echocardiographic findings were not typical of
PPNAD, and because pituitary Cushing’s disease was not definitively ruled out by inferior petrosal sinus sampling. Left adrenalectomy was
performed, and the cut surface of the surgical specimen showed a golden yellowish colored dominant nodule with multiple black pigmented
small nodules (Figure 4). On microscopic findings, variable multiple cortical nodules were noted and extracapsular nodules were also noted
at periadrenal fat and abundant lipofuscin pigments were noted at the tumor cytoplasm (Figure 5). We concluded that Cushing’s syndrome
resulted from PPNAD and further studied whether she had other components of Carney complex. She mentioned that her father and grandmother
also had the same skin pigmentation on the lips and oral mucosa, but we did not perform studies on her family. The 75 g oral glucose
tolerance test and the measurement of IGF-1 were performed to exclude growth hormone secreting pituitary adenoma. The level of IGF-1
increased (721.6 ng/mL), but the level of growth hormone was suppressed during the oral glucose tolerance test (Table 2). Ultrasonography of
the thyroid showed a 0.3 cm sized hypoechoic nodule at the right thyroid, while ultrasonography of the breasts showed multiple hypoechoic
masses on both breasts (Figure 6). However, the patient refused breast biopsy. We concluded with a final diagnosis of Carney complex
including spotty skin pigmentation, Cushing’s syndrome due to PPNAD, nonfunctioning pituitary adenoma, and other suggestive findings such as
breast and thyroid masses. After operation, the levels of plasma cortisol and 24 hour urine-free cortisol were normalized. However, 6 months
after operation, 24- hour urine-free cortisol increased slightly (129.6 ug/day), causing us to consider resecting the contralateral adrenal
gland. Carney complex, discovered in 1985, is a multiple neoplasia syndrome that is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner that is
composed of cardiac, endocrine, cutaneous, and neural tumors, as well as a variety of pigmented lesions of the skin and mucosa1, 2). It may
be viewed as a form of multiple endocrine neoplasia, because affected patients often have tumors in two or more endocrine glands, including
PPNAD, growth hormone and prolactin- producing pituitary adenoma, testicular neoplasm, thyroid adenoma or carcinoma, and ovarian cysts3, 6).
Most cases are familial and the median age at detection is 201). The major clinical manifestations of Carney complex are spotty skin
pigmentation, heart myxoma, skin myxoma, PPNAD, large cell calcifying Sertoli cell tumor (LCCSCT), acromegaly, psammomatous melanotic
schwannoma (PMS), thyroid nodules or cancer and breast ductal adenoma. The diagnostic criteria for Carney complex have been recently
reviewed1) (Table 3). Lentigines and blue nevi observed in faces, eyelids, ears, and lips are the most frequent sign of the complex. They
were observed in half of the patients before the evolution of the other components7). After the pigmented skin lesions, cardiac myxomas are
the most common component of Carney complex. They are often multiple, occur in all heart chambers, have no predilection for a particular
gender or age group, and recur quite frequently7). Classic sites for skin myxomas included the eyelid, external ear canal, breasts, and the
genital areas8). Among the endocrine tumors, PPNAD was the most frequent manifestation of the disease, occurring in about one quarter of the
patients9). In our case, we had many difficulties in finding the cause of Cushing’s syndrome. According to hormonal studies and abdominal CT
findings, we suspected adrenal Cushing’s syndrome. However, we could not explain her skin pigmentation with adrenal Cushing’s syndrome.
Although we suspected PPNAD, abdominal CT finding and echocardiographic finding were not typical of PPNAD, as CT scanning of adrenal glands
in PPNAD generally shows normal or slightly enlarged glands without evidence of mass10). We also performed gastrointestinal endoscopy to
search for gastrointestinal tumors so that we could rule out other systemic disease accompanied by hyperpigmentation, such as Peutz-Jeghers
syndrome. However, all our results were negative while, surprisingly, pituitary microadenoma was detected, causing us a lot of confusion.
The possibility of pituitary Cushing’s disease as a cause of her Cushing’s syndrome was low since the ACTH level of the right jugular vein
did not increased twice as much as that of the peripheral vein. Nonetheless, we could not rule out pituitary Cushing’s disease because the
inferior petrosal sinus sampling was not performed due to technical reasons, and also since the sensitivity of jugular vein sampling without
CRH administration in diagnosing pituitary Cushing’s disease was low11). We could not definitively exclude the possibility of pituitary
Cushing’s disease until the typical findings for PPNAD, without any evidence of adrenal cortical hypertrophy, were found microscopically. In
general, the biochemical findings of PPNAD include 1) no suppression of urinary corticosteroid excretion after high dose dexamethasone test
2) no response to metyrapone or ACTH administration and 3) undectable, low, or normal plasma levels of ACTH5). The characteristic
pathological features of PPNAD include 1) decreased, normal, or slightly enlarged adrenal glands 2) multiple small-sized (<4 mm)
unencapsulated pigmented cortical nodules and 3) atrophy of the internodular cortex (this distinguishes these glands from the nodular
hyperplasia of pituitary dependent Cushing’s disease, in which the cortical tissue between the nodules is hyperplasitc)12). However, Travis
et al12), as in our case, described a very unusual pathologic finding of PPNAD: macronodules of up to 3 cm. Since bilateral adrenalectomy is
warranted as a treatment, recognition of PPNAD before operation is very important. However, it was very difficult to have a clear
preoperation diagnosis in our case. As shown in our case, extracapsular nodules are commonly seen in PPNAD12), which initially cause
confusion for pathologists in differentiating PPNAD with adrenal carcinoma. Among male Carney complex patients, LCCSCT is the most common
endocrine abnormality, LCCSCT is almost always benign and only rarely is this tumor is associated with aromatization, gynecomastia and
precocious puberty13). Clinically evident acromegaly is a relatively infrequent manifestation. However, asymptomatic elevation of GH and
IGF-I levels, as well as subtle hyperprolactinemia, may be present in up to 75% of the patients14). In our case, although 75 g OGTT was
negative, we are following the patient up for the possible development of growth hormone secreting pituitary adenoma. Female patients with
Carney complex often have multiple breast masses with variable imaging appearances that probably represent myxoid fibroadenomas or ductal
adenomas. These lesions all demonstrate benign characteristics and should not prompt multiple biopsies15). However, we could not confirm the
histologic diagnosis of breast mass because the patient refused biopsy. Thyroid gland abnormalities, mostly benign non hormone-secreting
follicular adenomas, were found in over two-thirds of patients. Papillary and follicular carcinoma also may occur16). Additional unusual
manifestations include psammomatous melanotic schwannoma, breast ductal adenoma, and osteochondromyxoma (a rare bone tumor). The most common
cause of death in Carney complex is heart-related disease1). Recently, two genetic loci have been identified for Carney complex, on
chromosome 2 in band p16 and chromosome 17 in bands q22–24. This second locus contains the gene encoding the regulatory subunit of the
protein kinase A (PRKAR1A), which has been shown to be mutated in almost half of the Carney complex patients. PRKAR1A acts as a classic
tumor suppressor gene9). Testing for PRKAR1A mutation is not recommended at present for patients with Carney complex, but may be advised for
detection of affected patients in families with known mutations of this gene, so that unnecessary medical surveillance of noncarriers can be
avoided1). For established Carney complex patients, the following studies are generally recommended on a yearly basis, echocardiogram,
urinary free cortisol, serum IGF-1 levels, testicular ultrasonography in male patients; thyroid and pelvic ultrasonography and breast
imaging in female patients1). Pigmented skin and mucosal spots on the lips, oral mucosa, fingers and toes. Adrenal CT shows 2.3×1.7 cm sized
well defined homogenous mass in the left adrenal gland. Magnetic resonance imaging shows focal low signal intensity lesion in right inferior
portion of pituitary gland. The cut surface of surgical specimen shows golden yellowish colored dominant nodule with multiple black
pigmented small nodules. Microscopic finding shows cortical nodules composed of eosinophilic cells containing large bizzare nuclei and
abundant acidophilic cytoplasm. The nodules are circumscribed but not encapsulated (A). Extracapsular nodules are noted at periadrenal fat.
Abundant lipofuscin pigments are noted at tumor cytoplasma (B), (H&E stain, ×200). The ultrasonographic finding of breast shows multiple
benign appearing hypoechoic masses in both breasts. low and high dose dexamethasone suppression test 75 g oral glucose tolerance test
Diagnostic criteria for Carney complex spotty skin pigmentation with a typical distribution (lips, conjunctiva and inner or outer canthi,
vaginal and penile mucosa) myxoma (cutaneous and mucosal) cardiac myxoma Breast myxomatosis or fat suppressed magnetic resonance imaging
findings suggestive of this diagnosis. PPNAD or paradoxical positive response of urinary gluco-corticosteroids to dexamethasone
administration during Liddle’s test Acromegaly due to GH-producing adenoma LCCSCT or characteristic calcification on testicular ultra-
sonography Thyroid carcinoma or multiple, hypoechoic nodules on thyroid ultrasonography, in a young patient Psammomatous melanotic
schwannoma Blue nevus, epithelioid blue nevus (multiple) Breast ductal adenoma (multiple) Osteochondromyxoma Affected first-degree relative
Inactivating mutation of the PRKAR1A gene To make a diagnosis of Carney complex, a patient must either: 1) exhibit two of the manifestations
of the disease listed, or 2) exhibit one of the manifestations and meet one of the supplemental criteria.
