We describe a case of external iliac vein injury, sustained during laparoscopic radical cystectomy, which was managed laparoscopically with
intracorporeal suturing. Vascular injury during laparoscopic surgery is a serious complication and usually requires emergent conversion of
the procedure to control hemorrhage.1,2 We report a case of external iliac vein injury that occurred during laparoscopic lymphadenectomy on
the left side and was managed laparoscopically by intracorporeal suturing. The procedure of laparoscopic radical cystectomy with ileal
conduit formation was completed without conversion to open surgery. A 55-year-old male with invasive muscle carcinoma of the bladder
underwent laparoscopic radical cystectomy and ileal conduit diversion. During pelvic lymphadenectomy on the left side, an inadvertent injury
caused with laparoscopic scissors occurred to the external iliac vein (Figure 1). The tear was repaired by applying continuous
intracorporeal sutures with 5-0 prolene (Figure 2 and 3). The subsequent laparoscopic radical cystectomy and ileal conduit diversion surgery
was completed uneventfully with a total operating time of 5.5 hours and estimated blood loss of 550 mL. Injured external iliac vein.
Laparoscopic repair by intracorporeal suturing. Suturing completed intracorporeally, final picture. Major vascular injuries during
laparoscopy are a common cause of conversion2–4 and are one of the most common intraoperative complications seen during pelvic
lymphadenectomy;5 however, they have not been reported in 3 small series of radical cystectomies until now.6–8 In our series of 13 cases of
laparoscopic radical cystectomy, this is the first case of injury occurring inadvertently while the base of the lymph node was being
divided, which could be managed laparoscopically with intracorporeal suturing. The bleeding was controlled during the repair by maintaining
intraabdominal pressure at 15 mm Hg, putting traction on the vein with a malleable retractor, and keeping the patient in a steep
Trendelenburg position. The tear could thus be seen clearly and subsequently was properly repaired. The intraabdominal pressure was then
reduced to check for bleeding. The entire laparoscopic radical cystectomy procedure could then be completed without conversion. The concern
about pneumoperitoneal pressure of 15 mm Hg is the possibility of an air embolus developing; however, this has not been described in the
literature. Laparoscopic vascular clamps have been tried during experimental studies and have potential use in a clinical setting.9
Laparoscopic repair with vascular suturing of an inferior vena caval injury, sustained during adrenalectomy, has also been reported.2 The
management of a vascular injury depends on its severity, location, and the timing of its recognition. Any vascular injury that results in
hypotension requires immediate open surgical control and repair. Attempts at laparoscopic control of vascular injuries should be limited to
relatively small vessels that are directly visible, accessible, and not an immediate threat to the patient's hemodynamic stability.10 In
this case, external iliac vein injury occurred during the initial part of the procedure while left-sided pelvic lymphadenectomy was being
performed, which was managed effectively and safely.
