We describe an atypical presentation of severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) in a geriatric patient with multiple coexisting conditions.
Interpretation of radiographic changes was confounded by cardiac failure, with resolution of fever causing delayed diagnosis and a cluster
of cases. SARS should be considered even if a contact history is unavailable, during an ongoing outbreak. The recent discovery of the novel
severe acute respiratory syndrome–associated coronavirus (SARS-CoV) responsible for the outbreak of SARS (1–3) in China, Hong Kong, Vietnam,
Singapore, Canada, and Taiwan has caused concern among the medical community because it spreads easily within the hospital environment. An
unprecedented cooperative effort by the international medical research community has seen the rapid development of laboratory tests
consisting of polymerase chain reaction (PCR), antibody testing, and virus isolation (4). However, before these tests were widely available,
the disease was diagnosed on the basis of its clinical presentation, according to the World Health Organization (WHO) case definition (5).
The presence of a fever of more than 38°C, essential and sentinel in the detection of SARS, has been described in papers from Hong Kong and
Canada (1,6–8). Nevertheless, these surveillance case definitions may not be sufficiently sensitive (9) as clinical features and
epidemiologic case definitions may not coincide perfectly (10). We describe a case of SARS (with delayed diagnosis) and a consequent cluster
of cases that resulted because of difficulty in establishing a positive contact history and atypical signs and symptoms. The patient was a
90-year-old Singaporean Chinese woman who was a resident of a nursing home. She had a past history of vascular dementia with dysphagia and
behavioral abnormalities, ischemic heart disease with atrial fibrillation, and congestive cardiac failure. In addition, she also suffered
from type 2 diabetes mellitus, hypertension, osteoporosis, bilateral osteoarthritis of the knees, and an old traumatic fracture of the left
humeral neck. As such, she was fully dependent in her daily activities. She was admitted to the geriatric department of Tan Tock Seng
Hospital (11) on March 7, 2003, for pneumonia and urinary tract infection. These infections responded to a course of intravenous
antimicrobial drugs. She also was assessed to have mild dysphagia, which required thickened fluids and blended diet without nasogastric
feeding. Her chest radiograph before discharge showed persistent bilateral lower zone consolidation (Figure 1), consistent with bilateral
crepitations on auscultation. However, the patient was afebrile and improved functionally to being ambulant with assistance. She was
discharged to the nursing home on March 20. Chest radiograph at first admission. Within the next two days, the patient progressively became
breathless, with nausea and vomiting. There was no associated cough or diarrhea. She was eventually admitted to the medical department of
Changi General Hospital, a designated non-SARS hospital, on March 25. On admission to the isolation room, she had a maximal tympanic
temperature of 38.3°C, with defervescence the next day. She remained afebrile during the remainder of her stay. Her blood pressure was
124/84 mm Hg, pulse rate of 96 beats per minute, and respiratory rate of 32 breaths per minute. Her pulse oximetry was 100% while on 4 L per
minute of intranasal oxygen. The jugular venous pressure was not elevated. Bilateral basal crepitations were heard on examination. All
healthcare workers attending to the patient wore the recommended personal protective equipment, including gown, gloves, and N95 respirators,
each time they entered the isolation room. Investigations on admission showed that the patient’s hemoglobin was 10.6 g/dL, leukocyte count
was 7,200/mm3 (86.3% polymorphs, 8.6% lymphocytes), and platelet count was 304,000/mm3. The serum urea was 6.6 mmol/L; serum potassium, 5.0
mmol/L; serum sodium, 138 mmol/L; and creatinine, 79 μmol/L. The liver function tests showed a total bilirubin, 10.6 μmol/L; serum albumin,
30 g/L, serum alkaline phosphatase, 106 μ/L; serum alanine transaminase, 16 μ/L; serum aspartate transaminase, 33 μ/L. Her creatine kinase
was 45 μ/L, and C-reactive protein was elevated at 147.0 mg/L. She was diagnosed to have aspiration pneumonia, and intravenous ceftriaxone
and metronidazole were prescribed. Her chest radiograph showed infiltrates in the right lower zone. Her urine, sputum, and blood cultures
did not yield any bacterial growth. Serologic testing for Mycoplasma, Legionella, and Chlamydia and nasopharyngeal aspirate for common viral
antigens were not performed, as clinical suspicion was low. She was subsequently transferred to the geriatric unit. Her condition improved,
and she was placed in the general ward on March 28. No protective equipment was used by staff attending her in the general ward. It was
ascertained that she was previously admitted to a non-SARS ward in Tan Tock Seng Hospital. However, on March 29, the patient became restless
and more breathless. A repeat chest radiograph (Figure 2) confirmed congestive cardiac failure. Her repeat leukocyte count was 8,800/mm3
(93.0% polymorphs, 4.5% lymphocytes), and the platelet count was 167,000/mm3. There was mild hyponatremia (133 mmol/L) and worsening
C-reactive protein levels (179.9 mg/L) but a stable creatine kinase (50 u/L). Repeat chest radiograph as second admission. Cases linked to
index D. Since the issue of a global alert on atypical pneumonia by the World Health Organization on March 12, reported cases of SARS
increased daily and appeared in other countries, including Canada, the United States, Europe, and Africa. The first three cases in Singapore
were reported on March 13. These cases were traced to a doctor from Guangdong who infected 13 guests at a Hong Kong hotel (13). The clinical
features of SARS are fairly nonspecific with a body temperature of >38°C, occurring in 100% of patients, being the most sensitive feature in
all the case series published thus far (6–8). Other symptoms described thus far have included nonproductive cough, dyspnea, malaise,
diarrhea, chest pain, headache, myalgia, and vomiting. We describe here a fairly complicated atypical signs and symptoms of SARS in an
elderly patient. The patient had a fever, which responded to a course of broad-spectrum antimicrobial drugs, thus behaving in a manner not
much different from a typical community-acquired pneumonia. The absence of fever during the final course of the patient’s hospitalization
could have been caused by an altered immune response in the geriatric age group, with a resulting normal leukocyte count. Furthermore, prior
usage of antimicrobial drugs and possible aspiration from dysphagia may further complicate detection of the disease. The suspicion of SARS
in this case was thus low before eventual epidemiologic links were established retrospectively. Dyspnea is a common symptom reported
previously, ranging from 60% to 80% of patients. Cough has also been noted in 80% to 100% of cases in previous studies (6,8). However the
absence of cough, especially in the elderly, could be due to an underlying weak cough reflex. Vomiting, though present in our patient, was
only accounted for in 10% of cases in the Canadian series (8). In a frail older person, this could also be caused by a number of
circumstances. Our patient had characteristic lymphopenia, which was seen in about 90% of reported cases. In addition, she also had mild
hyponatremia and elevated C-reactive protein. However, thrombocytopenia, elevated transaminases, or raised creatine kinase levels were
absent. Serial chest radiograph progressed from a predominantly right lower lobe patchy consolidation to a radiographic picture of
congestive cardiac failure. Reports from SARS cases have described mainly basal lung opacities, without any pleural effusion. An underlying
poor cardiac function may masquerade the true picture of the air space disease characteristic of SARS, especially if the stress of infection
decompensates left ventricular ejection fraction. This radiologic interpretation could potentially mislead clinicians and lead to more
patients, family members, and healthcare workers becoming infected. In addition, a bimodal pattern of time to deterioration of clinical
symptoms has been previously reported (14). The information currently available on transmission of SARS has been attributed to respiratory
droplets from close contact which has been defined by WHO to be having cared for, having lived with, or having direct contact with
respiratory secretions or body fluids of a patient known to be a suspected SARS case. As the patient lived in a nursing home, the brief
social contact during visits by family and friends, may prove sufficient for transmitting the virus. Furthermore, the issue of possible
coinfection and the influence of coexisting conditions have not been thoroughly investigated, which may change the clinical picture of SARS
so as to conceal detection. Uncharacteristic clinical signs and symptoms, without any travel or contact history, are difficult to recognize.
Our case serves to highlight atypical signs and symptoms of SARS, especially the resolving fever, delay in establishing a positive contact
history, and the nonspecific chest radiographic appearance that could be affected by concurrent coexisting conditions, such as cardiac
failure. We wish to draw attention to clinicians, so that a high level of suspicion is present as the SARS-CoV is highly contagious and can
cause severe disease. We observed that despite being cared for in the general ward by staff without full personal protective equipment, only
one healthcare worker in Changi General Hospital was infected. This observation supports the hypothesis that the virus may not transmit
effectively under certain conditions. Nevertheless, late diagnosis may lead to large clusters, as delayed isolation of suspect cases
increases the risk of onward transmission in the community (15). A positive contact history may not be obvious, particularly in patients
with cognitive impairment, until retrospective analysis is done. There is thus a need for continued surveillance of fever and clusters of
pneumonia cases to improve the chances of early detection. Nonetheless, with the imminent availability of accurate and rapid diagnostic
tests, there is hope that the diagnosis of SARS can be made with more certainty. This could be further enhanced by a revised case
definition. Suggested citation for this article: Tee AKH, Oh HML, Hui KP, Lien CTC, Narendran K, Heng BH et al. Atypical SARS in geriatric
patient. Emerg Infect Dis [serial online] 2004 Feb [date cited]. Available from: URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol10no2/03-0322.htm We
thank Leo Yee Sin and Mark Chen for their input on the case and T. Ksiazek for providing the antigen for enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays,
according to their method (2). Dr. Augustine Tee is a member of the Royal College of Physicians (United Kingdom). He is currently working as
a registrar in Respiratory and Critical Care Medicine at Changi General Hospital, Singapore.
