Travelers who have visited tropical areas may exhibit aggressive forms of obligatory myiases, in which the larvae (maggots) invasively feed
on living tissue. The risk of a traveler’s acquiring a screwworm infestation has been considered negligible, but with the increasing
popularity of adventure sports and wildlife travel, this risk may need to be reassessed. In November 2001, a 41-year-old Finnish man, who
was participating in an international adventure sports race in Para (a jungle area in Brazil), tripped at night over a loose rock while he
was riding a bicycle. He received a bruised, lacerated wound on his left dorsal antebrachium, which he quickly wiped with paper. The
remaining gravel, dirt, and three unidentified winged insects were removed, and the wound was thoroughly rinsed 3 hours later by medical
personnel. Petrolatum was applied topically and the wound bandaged. The patient continued the jungle race for the next 108 hours, during
which the wound was hastily cleansed and rebandaged twice. The patient repeatedly swam in the Amazon Basin. At the race’s finish, the wound
appeared purulent and was cleansed with tap water, soap, and a brush. Numerous attached ticks were removed from his skin. The arm became
tender, and the patient had bouts of intensified local pain. A possible, round entry wound, about 1 mm in diameter, was noted, at the bottom
of which the patient observed motion. Five days after the accident, a physician explored the wound with scissors at a breakfast table. No
larvae were found. Sugar was applied topically and cefalexine prescribed. Twenty hours later, the bouts of pain recurred with increasing
frequency. The patient believed that something left in the wound “ate his flesh.” Nine days after the accident, at the Frankfurt Airport,
Germany, the patient found a larva (Figure, part a) and an exit site wound (Figure, part b) under the bandage. The bouts of tenderness
subsided. The patient’s wound was reexamined 1 day later and was found to be largely healed; the forming scar remained somewhat tender and
itchy for 2 months. The maggot was sent to the Finnish Museum of Natural History, Helsinki, Finland, and identified as a third-stage larva
of Cochliomyia hominivorax (Coquerel), the New World screwworm fly. In addition to the New World screwworm fly, an important Old World
species, Chrysoimya bezziana, is also found in tropical Africa and Asia. Exit site wound on patient’s arm (a) and a maggot, measuring 16 mm
in length, from patient’s wound (b). Myiasis is the infestation of live humans and vertebrate animals by fly larvae. These feed on a host’s
dead or living tissue and body fluids or on ingested food. In accidental or facultative wound myiasis, the larvae feed on decaying tissue
and do not generally invade the surrounding healthy tissue (1). Sterile facultative Lucilia larvae have even been used for wound debridement
as “maggot therapy.” Myiasis is often perceived as harmless if no secondary infections are contracted. However, the obligatory myiases
caused by more invasive species, like screwworms, may be fatal (2). The screwworms are capable of penetrating through minor cracks in the
skin, entering body openings, and migrating from wounds to living tissue. Most often this is initiated when the flies, attracted by the
wounds, lay their eggs in necrotic, hemorrhagic, or pus-filled lesions. Infestation and penetration of the ocular, nasopharyngeal,
paranasal, and auricular cavities are frequently described. (3). The female flies colonize the wounds with bacteria like Providencia spp.,
which in turn attract more flies by the distinct odor of the bacterial mass. Secondary bacterial infections are common. All conditions
compromising the integrity of skin (like tick bites and skin diseases) predispose to the infestation (4). The eggs of Cochliomyia
hominivorax are laid in batches. Hundreds of maggots of both sexes can be found in a wound. Screwworms can thus be introduced to new areas
by just one index patient. Considerable risk exists of reintroducing C. hominivorax into areas from which it has been eradicated. Within 24
hours of hatching, the larvae begin feeding and cause extensive tissue destruction, pain, and even death. The larvae possess powerful oral
hooks and can invade cartilage and bone (5). After feeding for 4 to 8 days, the larva leaves the wound to pupate in the soil (6,7). The pest
is viable year round in areas with temperatures constantly >16°C. C. hominivorax was first found to be infesting people in the penal colony
of Devil’s Island in French Guiana in 1858. It was originally distributed from the southern United States to Argentina between the 35o north
latitude and the 35o south latitude. Due to a massive sterile male fly release program, C. hominivorax was eliminated from North America. C.
hominivorax is an important insect pest of livestock in the neotropical regions and has caused substantial losses to the livestock
industries of the Americas (7). It is classified as a restricted animal pathogen in the United States. At present, populations of C.
hominivorax are found in Central and South America and in certain Caribbean Islands (4,6,7). Human infestations remain an important health
problem, primarily affecting the severely debilitated or persons with no access to healthcare. In the largest published study, the fatality
rate was 2.8% (7). Isolated reports of infestations in the United States and Mexico are often traced to the importation of infested animals.
Between 1969 and 1988, 39 human cases were reported (7). The potential for the introduction of C. hominivorax into new areas is ever
present. In 1988, the screwworm appeared in Libya, most likely imported by infested livestock. It overwintered and became for the first time
established outside the Western Hemisphere, where it infected 3,000 livestock and >200 persons. From Tripoli, it spread rapidly
approximately 200 km and threatened to spread further to the savannas of sub-Saharan Africa. This possibility presented a potential threat
of enormous proportions to the livestock, wildlife, and human populations of a large part of the Eastern Hemisphere. After a large-scale
campaign, the screwworm was successfully eliminated from the area in 1991 (7,8). In humans, the most common sites of C. hominivorax
infestation are the nose, eyes, and skin. The manifestations depend on the anatomic region affected but are usually characterized by local
pain, intense pruritus, cutaneous nodules, and larvae emerging from wounds or cavities (7,9). Massive infestations can result in the death
of the host, usually attributed to “massive toxic shock” or to penetration of viscera or cavities, especially in the head and neck area
(6,8). Infestation of paranasal sinuses often goes undetected for long periods. When infestation is suspected, a careful search for a larval
infestation of eyes, nose, paranasal sinuses, or wounds should be performed, if necessary with the help of computed tomography or magnetic
resonance imaging (7). Radiographic studies may only show edema. No effective antimicrobial therapy is available, although doramectin and
ivermectin have been investigated for prophylactic use in cattle. Treatment involves removal of the larvae (reviewed in and ). Irrigation
with either chloroform or ether is advocated. Surgery is often required. For identification, the larvae should be hatched to adult flies, or
first killed by immersion in nearly boiling water, then cooled and preserved in 80% ethanol. Secondary bacterial infections should be
treated with local wound care and administration of antimicrobial agents. In industrialized countries wound myiasis is a sign of neglected
wound care, with mostly facultative myiases seen. The patients are often debilitated, of lower economic status, homeless, or substance
abusers. The main focus is in treating secondary bacterial infections and in proper debridement. The risk of a traveler’s acquiring C.
hominivorax is thought to be negligible (3). With the increasing popularity of adventure and wildlife travel, the risk may need to be
reassessed. Travelers can contract aggressive obligatory myiases. This is the third report of C. hominivorax infestation in a tourist in 3
years (4,9). Also, a previous case was reported in a U.S. Army ranger who was wounded in action in Panama (5). In particular, medical
personnel who treat patients who have participated in adventure sports events should recognize the intensity of the exposure to even the
most exotic infectious diseases. Suggested citation: Seppänen M,Virolainen-Julkunen A, Kakko I, Vilkamaa P, Meri S. Myiasis during adventure
sports race. Emerg Infect Dis [serial online] 2004 Jan [date cited]. Available from: URL: http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/EID/vol10no1/02-0825.htm
We thank Pasi Ikonen for providing the photograph in Figure 1a. Dr. Seppänen is a specialist in infectious diseases and internal medicine
and a consultant at Helsinki Central Hospital, Helsinki, Finland. His current research interests include primary immunodeficiencies,
complement deficiencies, and the immunology of herpes simplex virus infections.
