We report the case of a 35-yr-old patient who presented with high fever and chills. He had undergone a patch closure of the ventricular
septal defect 18 yr before. One year later, a VVI pacemaker was implanted via the right subclavian vein because of complete heart block.
Nine years after that, a new VVI pacemaker with another right ventricular electrode was inserted controlaterally and the old pacing lead was
abandoned. Trans-thoracic and trans-esophageal echocardiogram identified the pacemaker lead in the right ventricle (RV) attaching
hyperechoic materials and also a fluttering round hyperechoic mass with a stalk in the RV outflow tract. Cultures in blood and pus from
pacemaker lead grew Achromobacter xylosoxidans. A diagnosis of pacemaker lead endocarditis due to Achromobacter xylosoxidans was made. In
this regards, the best treatment is an immediate removal of the entire pacing system and antimicrobial therapy. Endocarditis related to
pacemaker lead infection is a rare, but serious condition in permanent venous tracing. Staphylococci are involved in the majority of these
infections (1-4) and Achromobacter xylosoxidans is very rare cause of organism. Although some studies reported that medical extraction of
even large vegetation appeared to be safe (5), usually the infected endocardial system must be entirely removed and appropriate antibiotic
therapy pursued for 6 weeks (1, 6). A 35-yr-old patient visited our hospital due to a unremitting high fever and chills for 10 days. He had
undergone a patch closure of the ventricular septal defect (VSD) 18 yr before. One year later, a VVI pacemaker was implanted via the right
subclavian vein because of complete heart block. Nine years after that, a new VVI pacemaker with another right ventricular electrode was
inserted controlaterally and the old pacing lead was abandoned. Several months before admission, he had the scaling and root planning at
local dental clinic. He did not have any intravenous treatment history. On admission, vital signs were blood pressure 120/75 mmHg, body
temperature 39℃, and pulse rate 75/min. Physical examination revealed systolic ejection murmur in the left second intercostal area. The
results of a complete blood count were normocytic, normochromic anemia, and leukocytosis (15,400/µL). An elevated erythrocyte sedimentation
rate (ESR) (135 mm/hr) and positive C-reactive protein (CRP) (13.5 mg/dL) were demonstrated. Chest radiography revealed a mild cardiomegaly
without active lesions in the lung parenchyma. Blood cultures were positive for Achromobacter xylosoxidans (colorless growth on MacConkey
agar, oxidase positive, indole negative, saccharolytic, motile, rod-shaped nonfermenters analyzed by Vitec) 5 times. Susceptibility study
showed that the strain was susceptible to ceftazidime, piperacillin, cefoperazone, imipenem, trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, and was
resistant to aminoglycosides. Trans-thoracic echocardiogram (TTE) (Fig. 1A) and trans-esophageal echocardiogram (TEE) (Fig. 1B) identified
the pacemaker lead in the right ventricle (RV) attaching hyperechoic materials and also a fluttering round hyperechoic mass with a stalk in
the RV outflow tract (RVOT). No shunt flow was detected through the previous patch closure site in TTE and TEE. The function of pacemaker
was normal on pacemaker analysis and 24-hr Holter monitoring. Despite sensitive antibiotics of ceftazidime and piperacillin for 3 weeks,
patient's status was not stabilized. Therefore, the patient underwent a cardiac surgery through median sternotomy under extracorporeal
circulation. Intraoperatively, yellow-brown friable materials attached to the older electrode (Fig. 2) and the septal wall of RVOT were
confirmed. Removal of infected wires, infected Dacron patch, and vegetations in the RVOT, and curretage of infected RV wall were performed.
Cultures for Achromobacter xylosoxidans were positive in the pus attached to the pacemaker lead. With sensitive antibiotics treatment, the
patient was doing well 6 weeks postoperatively without any signs for infection. Epicardial pacing was maintained. There were no adverse
changes in the normalized CRP and ESR. Thus, a transvenous permanent pacemaker implantation was performed after confirming the patency of
the left subclavian vein with venography. A follow-up echocardiogram 1 yr later demonstrated no detectable vegetations. The patients has
been doing well without recurrence of infection for 2 yr. Infection of the pacemaker pouch and lead may occur in 1% to 7% of patients with a
permanent pacemaker (3). The microorganism most responsible for a late pacemaker lead infection is Staphylococcus epidermidis (4).
Achromobacter xylosoxidans is a nonfermentative Gram-negative bacilli. This organism is opportunistic and usually affects severely
immunocompromised patients such as those with neutropenia and those with a malignant or cardiovascular disease (7, 8). To the best of our
knowledge, however, the present case is unique in that there has been no report such as ours. A case report of aortic valve and VSD Dacron
patch infective endocarditis due to Achromobacter xylosoxidans 15 yr after a VSD patch closure appeared on Medline search (9). He did not
have any definite cause of pacemaker lead endocarditis. Several months before admission, he had the scaling and root planning at local
dental clinic. The diagnosis is difficult by using conventional imaging methods such as transthoracic echocardiogram. TEE can facilitate the
diagnosis of pacemaker lead endocarditis, however, it is sometimes not diagnostic (10, 11). In our case, the hyperechoic materials clearly
appeared in TTE and TEE. Some studies reported successful treatment with the use of antibiotics alone in patients with a pacemaker lead
endocarditis, however, the main management modality is cardiac surgery (12). Patients are recommended to be treated with prolonged
antibiotic regimens before and after electrode removal (3). The electrode removal can be achieved by surgery or traction. Percutaneous
traction is not simple and associated with complications, such as a tear of the tricuspid valve. Some patients need a new permanent
pacemaker (3). (A) Transthoracic echocardiogram, apical four-chamber view. A pacemaker lead with attached hyperechoic materials is seen in
the right ventricle. (B) Transesophageal echocardiogram. A hyperechoic mass with a stalk is freely movable in the right ventricular outflow
tract. The removed electrode. It was destroyed and attached with yellow-brown friable materials.
