Parasitic infestation is an uncommon cause of chronic pelvic pain among women of reproductive age. A case of chronic right-sided pelvic pain
associated with appendiceal Enterobius vermicularis infestation was managed with appendectomy and antiparasitic therapy resulting in a
complete resolution of symptoms. Chronic pelvic pain is a common complaint among women of reproductive age often due to infection,
endometriosis, or adhesive disease. However, parasitic infection with resultant pain is usually not considered in the differential
diagnosis. We report a case of chronic right lower quadrant abdominal and pelvic pain associated with appendiceal Enterobius vermicularis
infestation that resolved after appendectomy and antiparasitic therapy. A 35 year-old, white, nulligravid female presented to the University
of South Florida complaining of 2-years duration of chronic pelvic pain, particularly on the right side. The pain was not associated with
her menses and was said to be intermittent in nature. She also complained of right-sided pain with intercourse. She denied any weight loss,
gastrointestinal complaints, or irritation of the vulva, vagina, or anus. She reported no recent travel outside of the country and had no
pets at home. Her gynecologic history was significant for laparoscopy 2 years prior for a left ovarian cyst. A left salpingo-oophorectomy
was performed at that time, and there was no note of endometriosis. She reported regular menses and normal pap smears. Prior treatment with
oral contraceptive pills and nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs provided no relief. On physical examination, her abdomen was soft and
nontender. Her pelvic examination revealed normal external genitalia with tenderness in the right adnexa, but no appreciable masses or
nodularity. A laparoscopy was then performed and right pelvic side wall adhesions involving the appendix were discovered (Figure 1). The
adhesions were thin and filmy and easily lysed. A normal right tube and ovary were appreciated, and there was still no evidence of
endometriosis. The appendix was noted to be full and a laparoscopic appendectomy was performed. Appearance of appendix during laparoscopy.
Pathology reported a specimen measuring 6 cm long with a diameter of 0.5 cm. Fibrous adhesions were noted near the distal end. A nematode
was discovered in the appendiceal lumen consistent with E. vermicularis (Figure 2). The patient was treated with a single tablet of
mebendazole (Vermox) 100 mg orally, with a second dose given 2 weeks later. Postoperative follow-up at 2 weeks and at 4 months posttreatment
revealed complete resolution of her pain. Histologic slide of nematode in appendiceal lumen. E. vermicularis or pinworm is a common
parasitic infection that is found mostly in the pediatric population. The life cycle of this parasite starts with the ingestion of the eggs,
which then hatch in the small intestine where the adult worm resides and mates. The female E. vermicularis then migrates down to and out of
the rectum and deposits her eggs on the perianal skin. The majority of adult patients are asymptomatic; however, symptoms of E. vermicularis
infestation can include perineal puritis, weight loss, vulvovaginitis, and chronic salpingitis. E. vermicularis has been documented on pap
smears and throughout the genital tract including endometrium, fallopian tube, as well as in granulomas involving the ovary and pelvic
peritoneum.1 Presumably, in these uncommon circumstances, the female worm travels from the anus to the vagina and ascends the genital tract
all the way into the pelvic cavity. In 1939, Botsford2 reported a small series of patients presenting with complaints of chronic right lower
quadrant abdominal pain, similar to our case, who were found to have appendiceal Enterobius infestation on pathological examination of the
appendix. In 2 more recent surgical series,3 performed outside of the United States, the incidence of Enterobius infestation was low and
commonly associated with an appendix that appeared normal. Less commonly, the appendix specimen showed acute and chronic inflammatory
changes and peritoneal granulomas and periappendiceal adhesive disease, as in our case. Although these studies demonstrated the importance
of pathological identification of nematodes and their oocytes, to make a specific diagnosis, they did not emphasize the need for any
systemic therapy, as they considered appendectomy as curative.4 In a recent report from the gynecological literature,5 the pathological
specimen from a hysterectomy case for chronic pelvic pain demonstrated the surprise finding of acute and chronic salpingitis due to E.
vermicularis infestation of the fallopian tube. This same patient had an appendectomy 5 years earlier for E. vermicularis-related
appendicitis. It was not clear in this case whether the tubal infestation was caused by local spread from the infested appendiceal stump at
the time of surgery or had later spread via a transperineal route to her upper genital tract. This case clearly demonstrates the importance
of eradicating the entire reservoir of E. vermicularis from the gastrointestinal tract, even after appendectomy. The treatment of E.
vermicularis infection involves one dose of pyrantel pamoate 11 mg/kg, or mebendazole 100 mg orally with a second dose in 2 weeks to treat
possible reinfection.6 It is also recommended that family members be treated to eliminate asymptomatic reservoirs. The differential
diagnosis for chronic pelvic pain includes pelvic infection, endometriosis, adhesive disease, or gastrointestinal pathology. Nematode
infestation of the appendix as a cause of chronic right-sided pelvic pain is an uncommon diagnosis, which should be considered when the more
common etiologies have been ruled out. This particular patient had no identifiable risk factors for parasitic infection, the diagnosis being
made only after microscopic examination of the appendix. Appendiceal nematode infestation manifested by gynecologic complaints, although
rare, can occur and can be easily treated.
