Limb-girdle muscular dystrophy type 2B (LGMD2B), a subtype of autosomal recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (ARLGMD), is characterized
by a relatively late onset and slow progressive course. LGMD2B is known to be caused by the loss of the dysferlin protein at sarcolemma in
muscle fibers. In this study, the clinical and pathological characteristics of Korean LGMD2B patients were investigated. Seventeen patients
with ARLGMD underwent muscle biopsy and the histochemical examination was performed. For the immunocytochemistry, a set of antibodies
against dystrophin, α, β, γ, δ-sarcoglycans, dysferlin, caveolin-3, and β-dystroglycan was used. Four patients (24%) showed selective loss
of immunoreactivity against dysferlin at the sarcolemma on the muscle specimens. Therefore, they were classified into the LGMD2B category.
The age at the onset of disease ranged from 9 yr to 33 yr, and none of the patients was wheelchair bound at the neurological examination.
The serum creatine kinase (CK) was high in all the patients (4010-5310 IU/L). The pathologic examination showed mild to moderate dystrophic
features. These are the first Korean LGMD2B cases with a dysferlin deficiency confirmed by immunocytochemistry. The clinical, pathological,
and immunocytochemical findings of the patients with LGMD2B in this study were in accordance with those of other previous reports. Autosomal
recessive limb-girdle muscular dystrophy (ARLGMD) is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder affecting mainly the pelvic and
shoulder girdle muscles. According to the genetic classification of ARLGMD, it has been divided into ten subtypes, from LGMD type 2A to LGMD
type 2J (1). LGMD type2B (LGMD2B) is caused by mutations in the dysferline gene (DYSF, MIM*603009) located on chromosome 2p13.3, which
induces a dysfunction of dysferlin at the protein level (2). Dysferlin is a member of the FER-1 protein family and contains six putative C2
domains, which can bind to phospholipids, inositol polyphosphates, Ca2+ and intracellular proteins (3). Dysferlin is expressed predominantly
in the skeletal muscle and localizes to the plasma membrane of the muscle fibers. In addition, it has been suggested to be involved in
membrane fusion (4, 5). A recent animal study has suggested that dysferlin plays a role in the sarcolemma repair process (6). The DYSF has
been also shown to cause Miyoshi myopathy (MM), which is a rare form of distal myopathy with the calf muscles weakness. Identical mutations
in patients with LGMD2B or Miyoshi myopathy have been noted in several reports, suggesting a role for the modifier gene(s) (7-11). Both
LGMD2B and Miyoshi myopathy are referred to as "dysferlinopathy" because of the deficiency of the same protein. Because of the clinical and
genetic heterogeneity of the LGMD, the LGMD subtypes are classified based on genetic or protein analysis. The development of antibodies
directed against dysferlin has recently been shown to be useful for making a diagnosis of LGMD2B by an examination of a muscle biopsy with
immunostaining or immunoblotting techniques (4, 5, 10). In the current study, immunocytochemical examination for dysferlin was tested on a
muscle biopsies from 17 Korean ARLGMD patients, and the clinical and pathological characteristics of four Korean LGMD2B patients, who showed
the complete loss of the dysferlin protein on a muscle biopsy, were investigated. From March 2001 to November 2002, 17 unrelated,
nonconsanguineous LGMD patients were enrolled in this study. The diagnosis of LGMD was established by the clinical history and physical
examination, the family history, a normal nerve conduction study and the myopathic pattern on electromyography (12). All the patients
underwent an open biopsy from the quadriceps femoris or biceps brachii muscle under local anesthesia. In all the cases, informed consents
were obtained from the patients or their parents. Transverse serial frozen muscle sections (7 µm thickness) were stained with hematoxylin
and eosin (H&E), modified Gomori trichrome, and a battery of histochemical techniques (NADH-TR, ATPase pH 9.4/4.6/4.3) were applied. All of
them showed normal immunostaining for three domains of dystrophin (N-terminus, C-terminus and Rod-domain) on the muscle specimens, and the
deletion was not found on multiplex PCR for selected exons of dystrophin gene. The tissues were processed for immunocytochemistry as
follows: the 7 m serial sections were fixed in acetone at 4℃ for 10 min, rinsed in 0.05 mol/L Tris-buffered saline (pH 7.5) for 15 min, and
incubated for 30 min with a blocking solution containing 2% bovine serum albumin and 5% normal goat serum as described (13). The sections
were then incubated overnight at 4℃ with one of the following antibodies: α-sarcoglycan (NCL-α-SARC, Novocastra), β-sarcoglycan (NCL-β-SARC,
Novocastra), γ-sarcoglycan (NCL-γ-SARC, Novocastra), δ-sarcoglycan (NCL-δ-SARC, Novocastra), dysferlin (NCL-DYSF, Novocastra),
β-dystroglycan (NCL-β-DG, Novocastra, Newcastle Upon Tyne, U.K.), and caveolin-3 (Transduction laboratory, Lexington, KY, U.S.A.). These
affinity-purified antibodies were well characterized and did not cross-react with each other. After washing for 30 min in Tris-buffered
saline, the sections were examined using secondary goat anti-mouse IgG antibodies conjugated to peroxidase and visualized by a DAB
(diaminobenzidine)-peroxidase reaction (Vector Laboratories, CA., U.S.A.). The sections were also incubated with biotinylated goat anti-
mouse IgG, which was followed by fluorescent isothiocyanate (FITC) avidin D (Vector Laboratory, CA., U.S.A.) for dysferlin. Four (Patient
No. 1-4) of the 17 ARLGMD patients group (24%) showed a selective loss of dysferlin by both DAB and FITC methods on the muscle specimen
(Table 1). Therefore, they were classified as having LGMD type 2B (LGMD2B). Although three patients (patient No. 8-10) showed isolated
deficiency of δ-sarcoglycan, it was regarded as a technical error since the δ-sarcoglycanopathy had always showed combined deficiency of
other sarcoglycans (α, β, and γ) at examination by immunocytochemistry (14). One patient (patient No. 15) showed loss of β and δ-sarcoglycan
with partial deficiency of γ-sarcoglycan. This patient might be tentavely classified as β or δ-sarcoglycanopathy although molecular genetic
diagnosis was not performed. The age of patients at the onset of the disease varied from 9 yr to 33 yr, and the disease duration ranged from
6 yr to 15 yr (Table 2). All four patients showed symmetrical proximal weakness. Although all the patients showed a functional disability in
walking or running, none was wheelchair-bound at the examination. While symmetrical hypertrophy of the calf muscle was noted in two patients
(patient No. 1 & 4), muscle atrophy was not found in any of the four patients. None of the four patients had a cardiac or respiratory
insufficiency nor did they have any bony abnormalities. The serum creatine kinase (CK) level was elevated to approximately 20 times of the
normal level in all the patients. (4010-5310 IU/L). One patient (patient No. 1) had a positive family history. One of her elder brother (41
yr old) had similar symptoms, which presented as a slowly progressive proximal weakness over 15 yr. All the patients showed the following
non-specific myopathic changes in the muscle: increased internal nuclei, a few or many atrophic fibers, degenerating fibers with
regenerating fibers, and an increased fiber size variation (Fig. 1). Type 1 fiber predominance (>60%) was noted in one patient (patient No.
1). There was no endomysial or perivascular inflammatory cell infiltrations in all the patients. In all the patients with LGMD2B,
immunocytochemical reaction against all the subtypes of sarcoglycans, β-dystroglycan, and caveolin-3 was normal (Fig. 2, Table 1), while the
reaction against dysferlin showed complete loss of reactivity at the sarcolemma of the muscle fibers (Fig. 3). The clinical features of our
patients with LGMD2B was similar to those of previous reports (12, 15-17). Symptoms of the disease generally are manifested during the early
adulthood (average onset is noted between the age of 17-30 yr), and the disease generally has a benign course, and confinement to a
wheelchair may occur in approximately 10% of patients (15, 18). Despite of the slow clinical evolution, extremely high CK level (10-20 times
of normal value) was characteristic of LGMD2B, being indicative of protein's role in normal muscle homeostasis ("leaky" membrane) rather
than being essential for structural stabilization of the skeletal muscle (6, 19). A few LGMD2B patients showed symmetrical or asymmetrical
calf muscle hypertrophy, as was observed in two of the patients in this study. Up to date, only several estimates of the frequency of
dysferlinopathy exist. The proportion of LGMD2B is thought to be relatively high in Brazilian and Japanese population (estimated to be
19-25% of all ARLGMD cases) (15, 20) and there is founder mutation of DYSF appears to be present in the Libyan Jews (17). However, another
recent study reported a relatively lower frequency of the dysferlin deficiency in Caucasian patients with the LGMD phenotype (approx. 1%),
indicating a frequency variation according to the ethnicity (21). Although it is not enough to estimate the frequency of LGMD2B in the
Korean ARLGMD patients due to a small number of subjects, these results suggest that the frequency of LGMD2B is relatively high among ARLGMD
in Korea. A detailed population-based study will be needed to determine the exact frequency of the LGMD2B in Korea. In all the cases with
dysferlin deficiency, the immunocytochemical study showed normal reactivity against dystrophin, α-, β-, γ-, δ-sarcoglycans, β-dystroglycan
on muscle specimen, which suggests that there are no interactions between dysferlin and the dystrophin-glycoprotein complex (DGC). This
finding is in accordance with previous studies (22, 23). The DYSF is large, comprising 55 exons that span the genomic region of >150 kb
(24). Although direct gene analysis provides the most reliable diagnosis, it is costly, time-consuming, and labor intensive because of the
large size of the DYSF. Moreover, defects in the dysferlin gene involve mostly single nucleotide changes with no common mutations, gross
rearrangements, or mutational hotspots that could aid detection (2). For this reason, it would be better to initiate screening for the
dysferlin deficiency using antibodies against this protein in muscle biopsies. Complete loss of dysferlin without deficiency of other
proteins appears to be specific for primary dysferlinopathy on immunocytochemistry (24). However, it should be noted that some cases with
sarcoglycanopathy, caveolinopathy can show partial deficiency of dysferlin (secondary deficiency) (25, 26). Therefore, it is recommendable
to perform immunocytochemical analysis using antibodies against other sarcolemmal proteins in addition to the antibodies against dysferlin.
When partial deficiency of dysferlin is present on immunocytochemistry, direct sequencing of DYSF will be needed. In conclusion, the
clinical, pathological, and immunocytochemical findings of patients with LGMD2B in this study were in accordance with those of previous
reports. This work was supported by the Brain Korea 21 Project for Medical Science, Yonsei University. Muscle specimens of the quadriceps
femoris muscle (from patient No. 1) stained by hematoxylin-eosin (A) and modified Gomori Trichrome (B). There were great variation in the
size of fibers, fiber splitting with internal nuclei, and clumps of small fibers (×200). Immunostaining against α-sarcoglycan (α-SG),
β-sarcoglycan (β-SG), caveolin-3 (Cav-3), and β-dystroglycan (β-DG) on the muscle specimen in the four LGMD2B patients by the
diaminobenzidine (DAB)-peroxidase method. All four LGMD2B patients showed a normal immunoreactivity against α-sarcoglycan, β-sarcoglycan,
caveolin-3, and β-dystroglycan (×200). Immunostaining against dysferlin on the muscle specimens from the four LGMD2B patients by a
fluorescent isothiocyanate (FITC) technique. Normal control (A) showed a positive immunoreactivity against dysferlin at the sarcolemma.
However, all four LGMD2B patients (B-E) showed a complete absence of a reaction against dysferlin at the sarcolemma on the muscle specimen
(×200). The Immunocytochemical findings of the 17 ARLGMD patients DAB, diaminobenzidine; FITC, fluorescent isothiocyanate; DPH, dystrophin;
α-SG, α-sarcoglycan; β-SG, β-sarcoglycan; γ-SG, γ-sarcoglycan; δ-SG, δ-darcoglycan; Dysf, dysferlin; Cav3, caveolin-3; β-DG, β-dystroglycan;
+/-, decreased or weakly positive. The clinical and laboratory characteristics of the four LGMD2B patients U/Ex, upper extremity; L/Ex,
lower extremity; prox, proximal; dist, distal; CK, creatine kinase.
