Nail toxicity following systemic chemotherapy is common. Onychopathy during the period of neutropenia following chemotherapy may cause
subungual abscesses and serious infection. Despite taxoid-related toxicity being increasingly reported since 2000, there are still phase II
systemic chemotherapy studies using taxoid that have never mentioned nail changes. Recently, new criteria for the evaluation of nail
toxicity have been suggested. The present report is the first of its kind, in Korea, to describe a case of docetaxel-associated onychopathy,
which improved following a reduction in the docetaxel dose. The cutaneous toxicities following chemotherapy include erythema, desquamation,
hyperpigmentation and onychopathy, such as koilonychia, pitting and onycholysis. Anthracyclines alone, or in combination with mitomycin,
bleomycin and taxanes, are reported to cause onycholysis, a process in which a nail is separated from its bed1). Such nail toxicity may
result in loss of the nail, sometimes leading to serious infection during the period of neutropenia following systemic chemotherapy. A study
has suggested the incidence of nail toxicity associated with taxoids can vary between 0-and 44%2). However, Zero toxicity may reflect the
effects were either unrecorded or underestimated. Despite nail toxicity being a quality of life factor for cancer patients receiving taxane
chemotherapy, there is no consensus regarding nail toxicity severity criteria, or guidelines for appropriate management. Here, a case of
nail toxicity that arose following docetaxel treatment every 3 weeks is reported. A 55-year-old woman presented with advanced gastric cancer
with multiple lymphadenopathy, including a 4×4 cm-sized left supraclavicular lymph node and an intra-abdominal lymph node. There was no
history of previous chemotherapy treatment. Treatment involved the administration of an oral fluoropyrimidine, xeloda, at a dose of 2000
mg/m2/day for 14 days, and docetaxel at a dose of 75 mg/m2 once every 3 weeks, from day 1. A partial response was observed after two courses
of chemotherapy. The patient complained of nail pigmentation on the proximal one third of the nail plates (Beau’s line) of all 10 fingers
after three cycles of chemotherapy. Inflammation of the fingertip skin was also noted (Figure 1). The electromyography data were normal. The
patient experienced febrile grade IV neutropenia twice during the five courses of chemotherapy. A total of six cycles of combination
chemotherapy were administered. Onychopathy is often associated with systemic chemotherapy. The severity of the onychopathy may depend on
the duration and cumulative dose of the chemotherapeutic agents, as well as on the nail constituent involved3, 4). Abnormalities of the nail
plate, as a result of systemic chemotherapy, can involve matrix damage (typically at Beau’s lines), onychomadesis, due to arrest of
epithelial proliferation, and leukonychia, due to abnormal keratinization. The common toxicity criteria of the National Cancer Institute
(version 2.0) describe two types of nail change: grade 1-discoloration, ridging or pitting; and grade 2-partial or complete loss of nail(s),
or pain in nail beds. However, Spazzapan et al. suggested three grades of nail toxicity: grade 1-discoloration, ridging or pitting; grade
2-partial loss of nail(s) or pain in nail beds not interfering with function; and grade 3-partial loss of nail or pain in nail beds
interfering with function, or complete loss of nail(s)5). Chemotherapeutic agents appear to stimulate normally quiescent nail matrix
melanocytes, resulting in nail plate pigmentation and reduced nail growth. Since exposure to sunlight can aggravate nail toxicity, the use
of gloves or artificial nails is advised for patients receiving taxanes or anthracyclines for prolonged periods1). The absence of sebaceous
glands, horny cells and a stratum granulosum, and a relative deficiency in stage IV melanosomes, may make the hyponychium vulnerable to UV
radiation6). Clinicians should be particularly aware that infection, possibly leading to sepsis, may result from nail toxicity during the
period of neutropenia caused by chemotherapy. Taxoid is a chemotherapeutic agent used in the treatment of breast, ovarian, lung and bladder
cancers. Paclitaxel and docetaxel are administered every week or every three weeks. Weekly administration of taxanes is reported to lessen
acute toxicity and enhance the effect of the drug7). The common side-effects of taxane are myelosuppression, neurotoxicity, alopecia,
hypersensitivity reaction and myalgias. Recently, nail toxicity associated with taxanes, paclitaxel and docetaxel has been described, which
manifests in a variety of clinical pathologies, such as onycholysis, splinter hemorrhage, subungual hematoma, subungual abscess and
paresthesia. The incidence of nail toxicity associated with taxanes ranges up to 44% of patients, although some studies do not mention any
adverse nail events3). In terms of neurotropic affects, it has been suggested that taxoid-related nail changes are associated with an
altered integrity of the peripheral nerves, and that this is linked to neuropeptide and prostaglandin release by nociceptive C-fibers and
sympathetic postganglionic terminals, respectively, which may cause neurogenic inflammation8, 9). These studies also noted that
cyclooxygenase-2 inhibitors improved the condition of nails. In the present study, the patient’s onychopathy improved after reducing the
initial dose of docetaxel to 75%. Nail toxicity is likely to impact on the quality of life of cancer patients. Different managements are
required according to the grade of chemotherapy-induced onychopathy. More careful examination of nails is also required during evaluation of
systemic chemotherapy toxicity, and nail events should be documented in phase II studies that use taxane chemotherapy. Brown pigmentation
and Beau’s lines are noted on the finger nail beds.
