Lymphocytic hypophysitis is a rare inflammatory disorder in the pituitary gland. The lesion is usually confined to the adenohypophysis.
Although the involvement of the posterior pituitary gland or the stalk is rare, such patients with diabetes insipidus have been reported.
Surgery has been used to make the definitive diagnosis. Recent studies suggest, however, that the pathologic diagnosis may not be necessary
always. We reported a case of Lymphocytic hypophysitis managed by methylprednisolone pulse therapy. A 50-year-old premenopausal woman with
Lymphocytic hypophysitis and diabetes insipidus was treated with methylprednisolone pulse therapy. Her adenopituitary lesion disappeared and
the diabetes insipidus resolved. The optimal management for patients with lymphocytic hypophysitis may be the high index of the suspicion
prior to the extensive surgical resection. In addition, methylprednisolone pulse therapy may improve the clinical and MRI findings.
Lymphocytic hypophysitis is a rare inflammatory disorder of the pituitary gland confined to the adenohypophysis. Recently, it has been
reported that infundibulohypophysitis is the underlying causality of subsets of central diabetes insipidus. This suggests that lymphocytic
hypophysitis is a syndrome of the disorders of the anterior pituitary and the posterior pituitary. Most lymphocytic hypophysitis patients
are women. Their symptoms are pituitary mass lesions and/or various degrees of pituitary dysfunction1–3). The definite diagnosis of
lymphocytic hypophysitis is based on the pathological findings: lymphocytic infiltration in the pituitary gland without granuloma
formation4). However, some studies have suggested that the histopathological examination may not be required always to diagnose the
hypophysitis if the characteristic clinical features were detected. Most cases have been managed surgically, but steroid therapy is
recommended5,6). In this report, we describe a female patient with lymphocytic hypophysitis presenting with diabetes insipidus. She was
managed medically. A 50-year-old premenopausal woman with two children presented with a vague headache and persistent polyuria. She was
first seen by a local physician who noted polyuric syndrome and pituitary macroadenoma. She was referred to the Endocrinology Clinic at
Chungnam National University. Her bilateral headache was vague, intermittent and had a self-limiting course. She also described a 20-day
history of polyuria and polydipsia (8 liters/day). She denied any visual disturbance, galactorrhea, or motor deficits. She did not have the
significant medical history and the history of peripartum or postpartum hemorrhage. There was no family history of endocrine or autoimmune
disease. Upon admission, the body mass index was 29.5 kg/m2. The results of the physical examination were normal except that the patient was
described as being obese. The visual field test evaluated by computerized perimetry was normal. A laboratory test showed normal blood cell
counts. The plasma glucose and serum electrolyte levels was normal. The urine specific gravity was 1.005. Pyuria or hematuria was not
detected. The plasma osmolality was 293 mmol/kg (normal: 275–295 mmol/kg); urinary osmolality was 73 mmol/kg (normal: 50-1, 400 mmol/kg).
During the water deprivation test, the plasma osmolality remained between 289 and 301 mmol/kg and the urine osmolality was between 58 and
224 mmol/kg. After 5 IU vasopressin injection, the plasma osmolality did not alter significantly but the urinary osmolality rose to 534
mmol/kg. The diagnosis of central diabetes insipidus was made and desmopressin in 0.2 mg bid was prescribed. The baseline hormone test
showed the mild elevation of the prolactin level, 60.8 ng/mL. The normal range is 1.5–23.5 ng/mL. The thyroid function was normal: free T4,
1.1 ng/mL (normal: 0.7–1.9 ng/mL); T3, 1.6 ng/mL (normal: 0.7–1.9 ng/mL); TSH, 2.17 U/mL (normal: 0.25–4.0 U/mL). The antimicrosomal
antibody titer and the antithyroglobulin antibody titer was normal. The basal Cortisol level was 12.4 μg/dL (normal: 5–25 ug/dL), the FSH
was 6.6 IU/L (normal: 2–10 IU/L), the LH level was 2.8 IU/L (normal: 1–8 IU/L), the ACTH level was 19.9 pg/mL (normal: 9.0–52 pg/mL), the GH
level was 0.14 ng/mL (normal: 0.1–7.02 ng/mL), and the Insulin-like Growth Factor-1 level was 224.6 ng/mL (normal: 62–350 ng/mL). The
combined anterior pituitary function test was performed with insulin 0.3 U/kg, TRH 400 μg, and LHRH 100 μg. The result showed partially
retained prolactin respone but TSH, FSH, LH, GH and cortisol responses were normal (Table 1). Magnetic resonance imaging of the pituitary
gland showed the diffused enlarged pituitary gland with an internal nodule, 1.3 cm in size (diameter). In addition the neurohypophysis high
signal on the T1 weighted image was not observed but stalk compression was not detected (Figure 1). Although her anti-pituitary antibody
titer was negative, she was diagnosed as lymphocytic hypophysitis and 1 g methylprednisolone/day was prescribed. After the first 3 days of
treatment, she was discharged on a reducing dose of prednisolone. 1 month later, after intravenous administration of methylprednisolone, the
second MRI was performed. Her anterion pituitary gland was normal:the size was normal and the nodule disappeared completely. The loss of
neurohypophysis signal was persistent, however (Figure 2). At this time of day, her headache disappeared and the polyuric symptoms had
improved. Lymphocytic hyphophysitis is a rare inflammatory disorder in the anterior pituitary gland. The disease was first described in
1962, and more than 120 cases have since been reported7). The increased incidence of lymphocytic hypophysitis may be due to the increased
awareness6). Although the etiology remains unclear, numerous evidences suggest autoimmune pathogenesis8–11). The association with other
autoimmune diseases in 30% of the patients such as thyroiditis, hypoadrenalism, parathyroid failure, atrophic gastritis, systemic lupus
erythematosus and Sjogren’s syndrome may be a diagnostic hint for lymphocytic hypophysitis8–11). Lymphocytic hyphophysitis occurs
predominantly during pregnancy or in postpartum women. Its occurrence after menopause as well as in men has been reported, however.
Aproximately 15% of reported lymphocytic hypophysitis cases are men12–14). Cranial or central diabetes insipidus may be idiopathic.
Alternately, the disease may be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait or an X-linked recessive trait15). In most cases, cranial diabetes
insipidus is secondary to the disturbance of the hypothalamic-neurohypophyseal system, which may be due to a wide range of conditions such
as trauma, infection, tumors, and granulomatous disease16). Although lymphocytic hypophysitis may rarely present with diabetes insipidus,
the sudden onset of diabetes insipidus is a hallmark of lymphocytic hypophysitis6). Lymphocytic infundibulohypophysitis has been suggested
to be the underlying cause in some cases previously labeled “idiopathic” diabetes insipidus cases15). In lymphocytic
infundibulohypophysitis, MR imaging may demonstrate the thickened pituitary stalk or the enlarged neurohypophysis16). In addition, the loss
of the hyperintense signal of the normal neurohypophysis on contrast enhanced T1 weighted imaging may be detected. The anterior pituitary is
spared, however. This distinguishes lymphocytic infundibulohypophysitis from lymphocytic hypophysitis radiologically17). The possible
explanations for diabetes insipidus with lymphocytic hypophysitis are: (1) the extension of the mass into the hypothalamus resulting in the
suppression of vasopressin synthesis and/or (2) the direct involvement of the pituitary and/or neurohypophysis with inflammatory reaction
causing the destruction of the hypothalamic pathways18,19). Other clinical manifestations such as headache, chiosm compression, and diplopia
lack specificity6). In addition to the partial or total hypopituitarism, hyperprolactinemia may be present in lymphocytic hyphophysitis
patients. Furthermore, the elevated prolactin level may represent an endocrine marker in many lymphocytic hyphophysitis patients1). Stalk
compression resulting reduced dopamine delivery to the anterior pituitary may be reason for the hyperprolactinemia. However, an autoimmune
mechanism involving the production of stimulating_antibodies by plasma cells may lead to increased prolactin secretion7,20). Patients with
presumed Sheehan’s syndrome but without clear history of postpartum hemorrhage or sepsis may have lymphocytic hypophysitis.1 Sheehan’s
syndrome is cuased by the ischemic pituitary necrosis due to severe postpartum hemorrhage and almost always characterized by the empty
sella. Such symptoms rarely present in diabetic insipidus21,22). As the prolactin deficiency has been detected in Sheehan’s syndrome, the
evaluation of the prolactin level has been used as its screening procedure. However, hyperprolactinemia has been reported in one Sheehan’s
syndrome patient23). Our patient lacks the typical medical history suggesting Sheehan’s syndrome, such as postpartum hemorrhage,
agalactorrhea, and amenorrhea during the postpartum period. This clearly rules out Sheehan’s syndrome in our patient. In lymphocytic
hypophysitis, MRI reveals the symmetric enlargement of the sellar content with the thickened pituitary stalk, that are homogenously
enhancing. However, the symmetric enlargement of the sellar content, the signal alteration on the native T1 weighted, the inhomogenous
contrast enhancement, the involvement of the carvernous sinus and hypothalamus, the empty sella, or no pathologic findings have been
described6,7). None of the features described above is unique to lymphocytic hypophysitis. Some uncertainty thus will always exist without
the pathologic confirmation. Our patient was a premenopausal woman with vague headache, mild hyperprolactinemia and the 20-day onset of
diabetes insipidus. No evidence of the stalk compression on the MRI has been detected. However, we have observed the diffused enlargement of
the anterior pituitary gland with an internal nodule and the disapperance of the normal bright spot in the posterior pituitary gland. In our
patient, the hyperprolactinemia might be due to the autoimmune reaction and the diabetes insipidus may be due to direct involvement of
neurohypophysis. The hypophysitis may be either primary or secondary. In the secondary hypophysitis, etiologic agents or defined systemic
diseases have been implicated as the causality. The causative agent of the primary hypophysitis is currently unknown. Three distinct
clinicopathological entities, however, have been described: lymphocytic hypophysitis, granulomatous hypophysitis, and xanthomatous
hypophysitis24). Currently, it is unclear whether these three conditions are truly distinct entities or merely different manifestations of
the same disease. They share clinical and radiological features and the reliable way to distinguish them without proper histological
examinations is not available25. Nevertheless, they are important in making a differential diagnosis of the sella mass, and conservative
management may lead to their resolution without surgery24). It has been suggested that if the inflammation of the pituitary gland were left
untreated, lymphocytic hypophysitis may worsen because of the progressive pituitary insufficiency. However, it may improve spontaneously19).
In view of our recent experience, the presumptive diagnosis of lymphocytic hypophysitis may be established by a trial of high dose
methylprednisolone with close monitoring. The follow up at short intervals is required to detect the possible relapse in time. The
indications for surgery are the presence of the gross chiasm compression, the ineffectiveness of corticosteroid therapy, and the
inconclusive diagnosis of lymphocytic hypophysitis by conservative evaluations6). In our patient, the high dose methylprednisolone pulse
therapy induced the complete remission of the pituitary enlargement and improved her subjective symptoms in short time. In conclusion,
lymphocytic hyphophysitis is a rare disorder that should be considered in the diagnosis of pituitary mass. The mass may extend to the
suprasellar region. In addition, lymphocytic hyphophysitis should be suspected in patients with the empty sella, hyperprolactinemia,
hypopituitarism and cranial diabetes insipidus. Furthermore, we recommend the high dose methylprednisolone rather than surgery: it can
resolve the cellar mass and improve the endocrine dysfunction such as the polyuric symptoms. The initial MR image. (A) The coronal magnetic
resonance image shows the diffuse enlargement of the pituitary gland with an internal nodule, 1.3 cm in size diameter (length). (B) The
sagittal T1-weighted image demonstrating the loss of the neurohypophysis high signal. The follow-up MR image performed 1 month after steroid
therapy. (A) the complete remission of the pituitary enlargement and internal nodule. (B) the loss of neurohypophysis high signal. The level
of TSH, prolactin, FSH, LH, GH, and cortisol in the serum after the administeration of TRH, LHRH and insulin.
