Hepatic paragonimiasis is a rare form of ectopic infestation caused by Paragonimus. We experienced a case of hepatic paragonimiasis that
showed characteristic imaging findings. CT and MR images showed a cluster of small cysts with rim enhancement in the subcapsular area of the
liver. This finding seems to be characteristic for hepatic paragonimiasis, considering imaging findings in paragonimiasis involving other
organs. Paragonimiasis is a parasitic infestation caused by the lung fluke, Paragonimus westermani and related species. After ingested,
juvenile worms of Paragonimus migrate to the lung via tortuous tracks (1). For this reason, although primary site of paragonimiasis is the
lung, ectopic infestation can occur in unexpected sites such as the brain, subcutaneous tissue and muscles, omentum and mesentery,
retroperitoneum, adrenal glands, ovary, epididymis and liver (1-13). Liver is known to be an organ in which ectopic paragonimiasis rarely
occurs, and to our knowledge, only several cases of hepatic paragonimiasis have been reported in English and Korean literatures (3, 7-11).
In this case report, we described CT and MR findings of a case of hepatic paragonimiasis that showed characteristic imaging features. A
42-yr-old man visited our hospital with chronic cough, bloody sputum and weight loss of 5 kg for one year. He had a history of ingesting
undercooked freshwater crabs at times. Chest CT scan showed a 2-cm, well-circumscribed nodule in the left upper lobe (Fig. 1). This nodule
appeared to consist of clustered cysts. Several smaller nodules were additionally found in the periphery of both lungs. Liver CT scan at the
arterial phase showed a cluster of small, rim-enhancing cysts at the subcapsular area of the segment VII and wedge-shaped enhancement of
adjacent parenchyma (Fig. 2). Hepatic capsular enhancement and pleural thickening were also noted, adjacent to hepatic parenchymal lesion.
At liver MRI, the lesion appeared low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and bright signal intensity on T2-weighted images, indicating
cystic nature (Fig. 3). Laboratory data including peripheral blood examination and blood chemistry revealed to be in normal range, and stool
examination for various parasitic eggs was also negative. But sputum cytologic examination revealed a few Paragonimus eggs. Transthoracic
needle biopsy was performed under CT guidance for histologic confirmation of the lung lesion. The biopsied specimens were obtained as
yellowish and black pieces and were histologically diagnosed as chronic granulomatous inflammation with Paragonimus eggs (Fig. 4). He was
treated with praziquantel with an oral dose of 75 mg/kg/day for 3 days, and gradually improved clinically. At follow-up CT scan 6 months
after treatment, the hepatic lesions disappeared completely (Fig. 5). The main pulmonary nodule in the left upper lobe showed a marked
decrease in size, while most of smaller nodules resolved completely. Human infestation by P. westermani occurs from ingestion of raw or
incompletely cooked freshwater crabs or crayfish infected with metacercariae. The ingested metacercariae excyst in the upper intestine and
penetrate into the abdominal cavity. The juvenile worms migrate into the abdominal muscles and lodge there for 5-7 days and come back into
the abdominal cavity. About 2-8 weeks after infestation, they migrate through the diaphragm and the pleural cavity, and finally reach the
lung where they become mature adult worms. During the peritoneal stage, the juvenile worms often cause damage to the liver capsule and
parenchyma (1). Clinically, liver involvement by Paragonimus has known to be rare. But in an experimental study reported by Hu et al. (12),
the frequency of hepatic involvement was higher than expected. They fed metacercariae of P. westermani to dogs and found adult worms in the
liver 3 to 49 days after ingestion. The number of adult worms found in the liver was correspondent to 5 percent of the ingested
metacercariae. And they also found P. skrjabini infection caused hepatic damage in all laboratory animals used. The cause of discrepancy
between the incidence of hepatic paragonimiasis and frequency of hepatic damage in the experiment has not been explained. The diagnosis of
paragonimiasis is usually made by detecting eggs in sputum and/or stool or by antibody test. The imaging studies may increase the confidence
of the clinical diagnosis and demonstrate the extent of involvement. Moreover, definitive diagnosis can be led only by imaging studies, if
we are intimate to the characteristic findings of paragonimiasis, and thus allowing to avoid invasive procedure such as biopsy. In the
review of previously reported CT findings, hepatic paragonimiasis was commonly seen as multiple low attenuating lesions which might be
scattered or clustered (3, 7, 13). In two case reports, it manifestated as a single, low attenuating lesion mimicking solid mass and
mandated surgical resection (8, 9). On the other hand, hepatic paragonimiasis might be concomitantly found with intrahepatic cholelithiasis
and incidentally diagnosed by hepatic resection (11). In the present case, hepatic paragonimiasis manifestated as a cluster of rim-enhancing
cysts, which was similar to the findings of cerebral (2) or pulmonary paragonimiasis (14). In abdominopelvic cavity, similar CT appearances
were reported in cases involving the liver, omentum (3) and retroperitoneum (5). The CT and MR imaging features of clustered, rim-enhancing
cysts are reflections of eosinophilic abscesses containing necrotic debris and Paragonimus eggs histologically (2). Hepatic capsular
enhancement and wedge-shaped perilesional enhancement at CT scan can be explained due to inflammatory changes, according to the previously
reported microscopic examination in which acute inflammation of the hepatic capsule and adjacent parenchyma were described to be seen
adjacent to eosinophilic abscess (12). The peripheral location of the lesion reflects that the worms invade into the liver through the
capsule and reside around the capsule rather than in the deep portion, as demonstrated by experimental studies in which metacercariae were
present near to the surface in hepatic paragonimiasis (12, 15). When a cluster of small, rim-enhancing cysts at the subcapsular location in
the liver is encountered at CT or MR imaging, the differential diagnoses include fascioliasis and pyogenic abscesses. In fascioliasis,
eosinophilic microabscesses are arranged in tract-like fashion with one end of the tract subcapsular in location. And concomitant lung and
pleura involvement is more common in hepatic paragonimiasis than in fascioliasis (16). Cystic lesions caused by Paragonimus do not coalesce
while clusters of microabscesses coalesce into a larger abscess cavity in pyogenic abscess. And pyogenic abscess has no preponderance of the
subcapsular area. As shown in the present case, hepatic paragonimiasis has its own characteristic findings at CT or MRI. Thus, knowledge of
these findings is helpful in differentiating various cystic lesions found in the liver. This paper was supported by Wonkwang University in
2002. Contrast-enhanced CT of the chest shows a well-circumscribed nodule composed of clustered cysts in the left upper lobe. Contrast-
enhanced CT of the liver shows a cluster of rim-enhancing, small cysts at the subcapsular area of the segment VII. Note mild enhancement of
the hepatic capsule and pleural thickening (arrow) adjacent to the hepatic lesion. MRI of the liver demonstrate a low signal intensity
lesion on T1-weighted image (A) at the same site as that at CT and a cluster of small bright signal intensities on T2-weighted image (B),
suggestive of cystic nature. Photomicrograph of a specimen obtained by lung biopsy reveals Paragonimus eggs (arrow) of 90×40 µm in size,
with chronic granulomatous inflammation (H-E stain, ×200). Contrast-enhanced CT of the liver after praziquantel treatment demonstrates
complete disappearance of parenchymal lesion in the right lobe.
