The Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is typically recognized as a paraneoplastic syndrome associated with a small cell lung
carcinoma (SCLC), whereas LEMS with other neuroendocrine lung tumors, including carcinoids or large cell lung carcinoma, are highly unusual.
Here, we report a rare case of LEMS with atypical bronchopulmonary carcinoid tumor: A 65-yr-old man presented with progressive leg weakness
and a diagnosis of LEMS was made by serial repetitive nerve stimulation test. Chest CT revealed a lung nodule with enlargement of
paratracheal lymph nodes, and surgically resected lesion showed pathological features of atypical carcinoid tumor. We concluded that LEMS
could be associated with rare pulmonary neuroendocrine tumor other than SCLC, which necessitates pathologic confirmation followed by
aggressive treatment for optimal management in these rare cases. The Lambert-Eaton myasthenic syndrome (LEMS) is an uncommon presynaptic
neuromuscular junction disorder. It is associated with cancer in 50% to 60% of cases, of which the overwhelming majority are small cell lung
carcinomas (SCLC). LEMS associated with atypical pulmonary carcinoid tumor is extremely rare (1-3). Recently, Burns et al. reported two
cases of LEMS with atypical pulmonary carcinoids which remitted after treatment (1). Atypical carcinoid tumors make up about 11% of
bronchopulmonary carcinoids which represent 1 to 5% of all lung tumors (6). The 5-yr survival rate is about 60%, which is intermediate
between that of typical carcinoids (95%) and small cell carcinomas (2%) (6). We describe here a rare case of LEMS with atypical pulmonary
carcinoid tumor, which have shown transient clinical and electrophysiological remission after surgical resection and chemotherapy. A 65-yr-
old man presented with progressive weakness of legs in February 2001. He has noticed worsening difficulty in climbing stairs before five
months, which seemed to be worse in the early mornings and then improved later in the daytime. He has been smoking two packs of cigarettes a
day for 40 yr. The family history was unremarkable. Neurological examination showed mild proximal arm and leg weakness (MRC grade 4+) and
hypoactive tendon reflexes. Cranial nerve and sensory examinations were normal. Nerve conduction study revealed low amplitude compound
muscle action potentials (CMAPs) in peroneal and posterior tibial nerves with normal conduction velocities. In suspicion of LEMS, repetitive
nerve stimulation test (RNST) was performed on abductor digiti minimi (ADM) and tibialis anterior (TA) muscles using Oh's methods (4).
Despite some potentiation of CMAP after 30 sec of maximum voluntary contraction and incremental response at high rate (50 Hz) of stimulation
(HRS) for 1 sec in both muscles, the results did not fully satisfied commonly used diagnostic criteria for LEMS (Table 1). On axonally
stimulated single fiber electromyography (S-SFEMG), the jitter on the extensor digitorum communis muscle (EDC) was markedly increased (mean
of mean consecutive difference: 158 µsec, upper normal limit; 25 µsec) with frequent impulse blockings (67%). Tensilon (Edrophonium) test
and anti-acetylcholine receptor antibody assay were negative. The amount of salivary secretion measured by chewing gauze for 5 min was
within normal limit (7.88 mg for 5 min, low normal limit; 7.5 mg for 5 min) (4). The second RNST 3 weeks later showed classical LEMS
pattern; 133% increment in CMAP after short exercise, and 109% of incremental response at 50 Hz stimulation for 2 sec in ADM (Fig. 1). Chest
radiography on admission revealed a nodule in right upper lung and chest CT disclosed a speculated, 1.4 cm-sized enhancing nodule and
enlarged right upper paratracheal lymph node (Fig. 2A). The material from CT-guided needle biopsy showed malignant tumor cells, which was
initially read out as adenocarcinoma. After two serial courses of chemotherapy with paclitaxol and carboplatin, the nodule in right upper
lobe and mediastinal lymph node were resected in May 2001. Detailed microscopic examination showed mosaic pattern with cellular pleomorphism
and increased mitotic activity, which is considered intermediate between that of typical carcinoid and small cell carcinoma.
Immunohistochemical stains for neuroendocrine markers, such as chromogranin A, synaptophysin, and neuron-specific enolase were all positive
and was finally interpreted as atypical carcinoid (Fig. 2B). The antibody titer against the P/Q type voltage-gated calcium channel, sent
after surgical resection was negative (less than 1.0 pmol/L; upper limit of normal; 20 pmol/L). After surgery, his strength has improved to
almost premorbid level. The typical RNS features of LEMS normalized 2 months later (Table 1) and SSFEMG findings also improved. However, his
improvement was shortlived. In May 2002, he was reevaluated due to clinical worsening, showing a waddling of gait and fatigable weakness of
proximal muscles in all limbs. Tumor recurrence was detected on chest CT. RNST abnormalities recurred as the same patterns as the initial
test; normal CMAP, decremental response at LRS, and mild incremental response at HRS. It was 3 months after tumor recurrence that 145% of
incremental response at HRS was achieved (Table 1). Despite several additional cycles of chemotherapy, he remained mildly disabled. We
describe a rare case of LEMS associated with atypical bronchopulmonary carcinoid tumor. No more than 5 cases could be found in English
literatures (1-3), all of which, however, lacked description of detailed clinical features and electrophysiological patterns. LEMS results
from an autoimmune attack directed against the voltage-gated calcium channels (VGCCs) on the presynaptic motor nerve terminal. It was first
described as a paraneoplastic syndrome in patients with lung cancer but we now know about half of the patients with LEMS do not have cancer.
When tumor occurs in LEMS, it is usually SCLC (5, 9). Recently, Burns et al. (1) reported LEMS associated with other pulmonary
neuroendocrine carcinomas with prolonged remission; two patients with atypical carcinoids and one patient with large cell neuroendocine
carcinoma. In the spectrum of neuroendocrine tumors of the lung, which can be divided into the typical carcinoid, atypical carcinoid, SCLC
and large cell neuroendocrine carcinoma, atypical carcinoids occupy the middle ground in terms of pathological features as well as natural
history and prognosis (6). LEMS in the setting of underlying atypical carcinoid lung tumor, unlike those associated with SCLC, may be better
responsive to treatment with variable long-term remission (1). In our case, clinical and electrophysiological remission was achieved by
surgical resection and chemotherapy, but failed to remain in prolonged remission after tumor recurrence. It is noteworthy that our case
initially did not satisfy the electrophysiological criteria of LEMS, and the follow-up study 3 weeks later revealed marked facilitation of
CMAP compatible with LEMS. It is known that electrophysiologic findings of LEMS may occasionally overlap with those seen in myasthenia
gravis; a decremental response at low stimulations rate, normal CMAP amplitudes and absent facilitation at high stimulation rate.
Furthermore, facilitation up to 50% can also be seen in myasthenia gravis (7), complicating electrophysiologic diagnosis not to be
straightforward between the two myasthenic syndromes. Otherwise, it is believed that these patterns represent a mild form of LEMS, based on
the observation that many LEMS patients show these patterns as they improve with treatment (8). Our case demonstrates how repeated serial
RNST can help diagnosis when initial findings are equivocal. In addition, prolonged stimulation up to 2 sec or more may be needed for full
extent of facilitation (8). We concluded that LEMS could be associated with pulmonary neuroendocrine tumor other than SCLC, which
necessitates pathologic confirmation followed by aggressive treatment for optimal management in these rare cases. Postexercise fascilitation
and incremental response at high rate of stimuration in the abductor digiti minimi muscle. Note definite facilitation at high rate of
stimulation is achieved by prolonged stimulation for 2 sec in second test. (A) Compound muscle action potential (CMAP) before exercise. (B)
CMAP after 30 sec of exercise. (C) Response at 50/sec stimulation for 1 sec. (D) Response at 50/sec stimulation for 2 sec. (A) CT scan of
the chest shows a 1.4 cm nodule (arrow) in the posterior segment of right upper lobe. (B) Atypical carcinoid tumor with mosaic patterns
separated by thin fibrovascular stroma. The tumor cells have central round nuclei with abundant cytoplasm (H&E ×100). Serial data of
repetitive nerve stimulation test and stimulated single fiber electromyography CMAP, compound muscle action potential; LRS, low rate of
stimulation; HRS, high rate stimulation; S-SFEMG, stimulated single fiber EMG; PEF, postexercise fascilitation; ADM, abductor digiti minimi;
EDB, extensor digitorum brevis; +, incremental response; -, decremental response. *S-SFEMG was performed on the extensor digitorum communis
muscle (EDC) at stimulation rate of 10 Hz. †Increased mean of mean consecutive difference (upper normal limits; 25 µsec).
