To the Editor: Moore et al. reported a case series of patients infected with imported gnathostomiasis who had typical intermittent,
migratory skin manifestations or peripheral blood eosinophilia or both, as well as undiagnosed eosinophilia with nonspecific symptoms (1).
We would like to add some comments based on a recent patient treated in Marseille, France. In April 2003, a 66-year-old man living in
Marseille indicated a history of fever for 8 days. He had returned from Vietnam 1 month earlier, where he had stayed for 4 weeks in the Ho
Chi Minh City area and 2 days in the Mekong Delta area. He was well during his trip, and reported no arthropod bites except from mosquitoes.
He had no direct skin contact with river water. Dietary intake included local dishes with rice, fish, pork, shrimp, and chicken. His
symptoms started 3 weeks after he returned to Marseille and included fever (temperature 38°C), asthenia, chills (1 day), moderate dyspnea
during exercise, transient bilateral pain of the testes, and an episode of hemospermia. He was referred by his family doctor to the
Infectious and Tropical Diseases Unit, North Hospital. On admission, the patient's temperature was 38°C. Physical examination of the
patient, including the testes, was normal except for a systolic heart murmur (preexisting and known to the patient), and clinical signs of
left pleural effusion. The effusion was subsequently confirmed by chest x-ray, which also showed a discrete diffuse bilateral lung
infiltrate. Results of routine laboratory tests conducted on blood samples were normal except for an elevated eosinophil count of 5.2 109/L.
Blood smears for plasmodia and microfilaremia were negative. Urologic examination, including echography and prostate-specific antigen,
showed no abnormalities except a prostatic adenoma (preexisting and known to the patient). No eggs or parasites were detected by microscopic
examination in stools or in urine, although both sedimented and centrifuged urine specimens were studied and filtration techniques were
used. After transthoracic aspiration of 100 mL of pleural effusion, cytologic examination showed an eosinophil count of 5,800/L without
parasites. Bacterial culture, including mycobacteria, was negative. On day 4, the patient was afebrile and was discharged. On admission,
results of a first set of examinations involving reactivities to schistosomiasis, paragonimiasis, strongyloidiasis, cysticercosis,
trichinosis, gnathostomiasis, filariasis, and toxocariasis were negative. One month later, the eosinophil count of our patient had decreased
to 1.8 x 109/L. He was afebrile, and his only complaint was asthenia. A new set of serologic examinations was conducted. The Western blot
assay for gnathostomiasis conducted at the Swiss Tropical Institute (Socinstrasse 57, CH-4002, Basel, Switzerland) was positive, showing
immunoglobulin G reactivity to four specific bands including the 24-kDa band, considered pathognomonic for the diagnosis of Gnathostoma
infection (1). The seroconversion confirmed the diagnosis of gnathostomiasis. All other serologic tests remained negative, except an
increase of antibodies against Acanthocheilonema vitae used as antigen for unspecific serologic screening for filariasis (Laboratoire Marcel
Merieux, Lyon, France). After a 21-day course of albendazole and a single dose of ivermectin, the eosinophil count of our patient decreased
to 0.8 x 109/L. Three aspects of gnathostomiasis as an emerging imported disease can complement the findings of Moore et al. (1). First, the
clinical findings in our case are very unusual. Hemospermia is often benign with predominant causes including prostatic and seminal vesicle
disease. Infections, including mainly schistosomiasis and tuberculosis, have been associated with these symptoms (2). Although our patient
had a prostatic adenoma, this is the first time that hemospermia has been associated with gnathostomiasis. Because of the anxiety
hemospermia caused, this symptom was the main reason that our patient consulted our center. Secondly, eosinophilic pleural effusion is also
unusual in gnathosthosmiasis. Although reported as a potential cause in reference books (3), a MEDLINE search (key words: gnathostomiasis
and eosinophilia and pleural effusion or pleuritis or lung) disclosed only two references to pleural effusion as the main symptom of
gnathostomiasis (4,5). The eosinophilic pleural and pulmonary response may be elicited by the larvae of helminths carried hematogenously
into lungs and pleura in an aberrant fashion (3). The last point we stress is that, as shown by Moore et al. (1), patients returning from
disease-endemic areas, mainly Southeast Asia and Central and South America, should be tested systematically for gnathostomiasis. Although
some patients show a typical cutaneous form of gnathostomiasis associated with eosinophilia (6,7), most atypical forms are probably
underdiagnosed, and severe neurologic involvement may occur if treatment is not given (1). However, until recently specific serologic tests
for gnathostomiasis were available only in Asia, mainly in Thailand and Japan. Some laboratories in Europe currently provide testing for
gnathostomiasis, which would be a valuable aid in evaluating patients returning from the tropics. Suggested citation for this article:
Parola P, Bordmann G, Brouqui P, Delmont J. Eosinophilic pleural effusion in gnathostomiasis . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet].
2004 Sep [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1009.030671
