A 68-yr-old man complaining of sudden, postprandial chest pain visited the emergency room. His symptom had been aggravated during the
preceding two days. Upper gastrointestinal contrast study with gastrographin showed leakage of dye from the epiphrenic diverticulum in the
lower third of the esophagus. The primary repair was urgently carried out. Upper gastrointestinal contrast study 14 days after operation
revealed an esophageal leakage which was small and confined. The patient was managed with conservative treatments such as intravenous
hyperali-mentation and broad-spectrum antibiotics. Forty-two days after the operation, a gastrographin swallow study showed the absence of
leaks. This is the first report-ed case of a perforated epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum repaired by delayed primary repair in Korea.
Epiphrenic diverticulum is a rare disease that presents with the primary symptoms of dysphagia and regurgitation (1-3). Esophagitis is the
most frequent complication, and bleeding may also occur (4, 5). Perforation is an extremely rare complication of epiphrenic diverticulum.
The diagnosis of intrathoracic esophageal perforation is frequently delayed. We report here a patient with perforated epiphrenic
diverticulum who was diagnosed 3 days after spontaneous rupture and had a primary repair of his perforation. There are no prior reports of
delayed primary repair of a perforated epiphrenic esophageal diverticulum in Korea. A 68-yr-old man was transferred to the emergency room
because of sudden postprandial chest pain, which had been aggravated during the previous two days. He had a history of stroke, hypertension
and diabetes mellitus for 3 yr, during which time he had been taking antihypertensive, antiplatelet, and antidiabetic medications. Blood
pressure was 110/70 mmHg, pulse 120 bpm, and temperature 39℃. Physical examination demonstrated a subcutaneous emphysema in the neck.
Laboratory data included white blood cell count of 16,400/µL, hemoglobin value 11.3 g/dL, and platelet count 273×103/µL. Chest radiograph
revealed a small air shadow in the neck (Fig. 1). Chest computed tomography showed periesophageal fluid collection in the lower esophagus,
more prominent air collection at the left lateral aspect of the lower esophagus, and bilateral minimal pleural effusion (Fig. 2). The
radiologist suggested an esophageal perforation and recommended an esophagogram with gastrographin. The esophagogram revealed a perforation
with a bulge of 2.5 cm in width in the lower thoracic esophagus (Fig. 3). The patient was emergently operated on, with primary closure for
perforation, and proper drainage with insertion of thoracostomy tubes. At the time of surgery, after esophageal dissection and debridement,
a perforated esophageal diverticulum was identified and the perforation was revealed in the borderline between mucosal protrusion and
muscular fiber (Fig. 4). The mucosal edge of the perforation was identified and approximated using interrupted 4-0 vicryl sutures, and the
muscular edge was closed using interrupted 3-0 silk sutures. The closure was reinforced by stripping a large flap of pleura from the
posterolateral thoracic cavity and stitching it to the muscular coat of the esophagus all round the sutured perforation. The chest was
closed with two thoracostomy tubes. Despite the use of broad spectrum antibiotics postoperatively, the patient's condition deteriorated and
follow-up radiography revealed markedly aggravated pulmonary edema, cardiomegaly, and widened mediastinum (Fig. 5) until the 2nd
postoperative day. After using cardiotonic and diuretics, the patient was improved his symptom and radiography. A gastrographin swallow
study obtained on the 14th postoperative days showed the disappearance of the diverticulum, although there remained small and confined leak
from the esophagus (Fig. 6). The patient was managed with non-surgical treatments, such as intravenous hyperalimentation and broad-spectrum
antibiotics. A gastrographin swallow study performed on the 42nd postoperative day showed the absence of leaks, and the patient was
discharged 2 months after the operation. Esophageal diverticula are divided into those in the transition zone between the pharynx and the
esophagus (Zenker's diverticula), midesophageal diverticula, and those in the lower third of the esophagus (epiphrenic diverticula). Pulsion
diverticula of the epiphrenic portion of the esophagus are not as common as those occurring in the cervical portion. An epiphrenic
diverticulum is generally believed to represent a form of pulsion diverticulum caused by markedly increased intraluminal esophageal
pressures associated with underlying esophageal motility disorders such as diffuse esophageal spasm (1, 2, 6, 7). In some studies (6, 8),
however, diverticula occurred in the absence of esophageal motor disorders and failed to enlarge when low esophageal sphincter pressures
were elevated. These studies suggested that epiphrenic diverticula were not always dependent on an esophageal motor disorder. In the present
study esophageal motility was normal on gastrographin study. An epiphrenic diverticulum should be operated on if symptoms and complications
are related to the diverticulum. Esophagitis is the most frequent complication. Dysphagia and regurgitation are the most common symptoms,
and bleeding ulceration may also occur. Spontaneous perforation is an extremely rare and serious complication of epiphrenic diverticulum,
which has a high mortality and morbidity rate. In esophageal perforation, the gastric contents are expelled into the mediastinum and the
pleural cavity as a resulting esophageal injury. The combination of gastric acid and digestive enzymes cause mediastinitis and sepsis, which
is fatal in most untreated cases. Esophageal perforation is not common and has a variety of symptoms, none of which are diagnostic,
therefore, there is often a delay in diagnosis. When the esophageal perforation is more than 24 hr old, its treatment remains controversial.
Diversion or resection of the esophagus has generally been recommended. Unfortunately, these methods have a high mortality and the
disadvantage of needing further reconstructive surgery (9, 10). In 1975, however, Grillo and Wilkins (11) recommended that primary repair
should be undertaken for esophageal perforation, regardless of the time interval between perforation and operation. However, postoperative
morbidity, including postoperative leakage is a common occurrence after primary repair. These complications can be treated with aggressive
and intensive nursing care, early nutritional support, and a proper antibiotic regimen. Therefore, the overall high morbidity rate does not
correlate with a high morbidity rate and recently there is increasing evidence that primary repair affords the patient the best probability
of survival, regardless of the time interval between esophageal perforation and repair (12, 13) Most benign strictures or motility disorders
may not contraindicate primary closure. However, delayed primary repair of the esophageal perforation is not advisable in all situations. In
addition to malignant disease, an esophagus that is severely damaged from certain benign intrinsic conditions (scleroderma, previous caustic
burn) or extrinsic trauma (acute lye ingestion, blast injury) may not be primarily repairable (13, 14). A number autologous tissue flaps
have been described to reinforce the repaired esophageal perforation, such as pleural flap, pericardium, diaphragm or muscle flaps (15, 16).
It has been suggested that reinforced primary repair should be performed for most thoracic esophageal perforations. In conclusion, a patient
was treated successfully with delayed closure of perforated epiphrenic diverticulum. This study was supported by grants from the Catholic
University of Korea, College of Medicine. Preoperative radiography demonstrates a linear band of air (as shown by the arrow) paralleling to
the trachea. Chest CT scan reveals periesophageal fluid collection in the lower esophagus, along with air collection around the esophagus.
Upright view from contrast study shows a 2.5 cm-wide diverticulum and leak on the diverticulum in the left distal esophagus. During the
surgery, epiphrenic diverticulum is observed as a mucosal protrusion between the muscular fibers on the left side of the lower thoracic
esophagus. The perforation (as shown by the arrow) is revealed in the borderline between mucosal protrusion and muscular fiber. Radiography
on the 2nd postoperative day shows the pulmonary edema, cardiomegaly, and widened mediastinum. Contrast study obtained on the 14th
postoperative day shows the disappearance of the diverticulum, although the small and confined leak from the esophagus remains.
