Enterococcal meningitis is an uncommon disease usually caused by Enterococcus faecalis and Enterococcus faecium and is associated with a
high mortality rate. Enterococcus casseliflavus has been implicated in a wide variety of infections in humans, but never in meningitis. A
77-year-old Italian female presented for evaluation of fever, stupor, diarrhea and vomiting of 3 days duration. There was no history of head
injury nor of previous surgical procedures. She had been suffering from rheumatoid arthritis for 30 years, for which she was being treated
with steroids and methotrexate. On admission, she was febrile, alert but not oriented to time and place. Her neck was stiff, and she had a
positive Kernig's sign. The patient's cerebrospinal fluid was opalescent with a glucose concentration of 14 mg/dl, a protein level of 472
mg/dl, and a white cell count of 200/μL with 95% polymorphonuclear leukocytes and 5% lymphocytes. Gram staining of CSF revealed no
organisms, culture yielded E. casseliflavus. The patient was successfully treated with meropenem and ampicillin-sulbactam. E. casseliflavus
can be inserted among the etiologic agents of meningitis. Awareness of infection of central nervous system with Enterococcus species that
possess an intrinsic vancomycin resistance should be increased. Enterococcal meningitis is an uncommon disease accounting for only 0.3% to
4% of cases of bacterial meningitis which is nevertheless associated with a high mortality rate. It has been described most frequently in
patients with neurosurgical conditions (i.e. head trauma, shunt devices, or cerebrospinal fluid leakage), although it can also occur as a
"spontaneous" infection complicating remote enterococcal infections such as endocarditis or pyelonephritis . Enterococcus faecalis and
Enterococcus faecium are the two species most frequently isolated during the course of meningitis (76%–90% and 9–22% respectively).
Enterococcus casseliflavus, first considered as a subspecies of E. faecium, is a motile enterococcus that produces a yellow pigment in agar
and often has a VanC phenotype determining an intrinsic low level resistance to vancomycin. It has been implicated in a wide variety of
infections in humans, especially immunocompromised hosts, but to the best of our knowledge it has never been associated to meningitis . We
describe here a case of enterococcal meningitis caused by E. casseliflavus that was believed to originate from the gut in an old patient
with bowel erosions. A 77-year-old Italian female presented for evaluation of fever, stupor, diarrhea and vomiting of 3 days duration. She
had no urinary symptoms. There was no history of head injury nor of previous surgical procedures. She had been suffering from rheumatoid
arthritis for 30 years, for which she was being treated with steroids and methotrexate; other medical problems were insulin-dependent
diabetes and moderate renal failure. On admission, she was febrile (temperature, 38.0°C), alert but not oriented to time and place. Her neck
was stiff, and she had a positive Kernig's sign. A CT brain scan showed an increase in subarachnoid space and in the volume of the
ventricular system. Laboratory examinations revealed a white blood cell count of 15,100/μL with 70% neutrophils and 23% lymphocytes. Results
of urinalysis were unremarkable. Cultures of blood and urine were drawn and subsequently resulted negative. The patient's cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) was opalescent with a glucose concentration of 14 mg/dl, a protein level of 472 mg/dl, and a white cell count of 200/μL with 95%
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and 5% lymphocytes. Gram staining of CSF revealed no organisms. Pending the culture results the patient was
empirically treated with intravenous meropenem, cotrimoxazole, acyclovir and dexamethasone. Culture of CSF yielded E. casseliflavus that was
identified using the Vitek-2 system (bioMérieux-Vitek) on the basis of 6.5% NaCl tolerance, bile-esculin hydrolysis, and growth rate at
45°C, arginine hydrolysis, methyl-a-D-glucopyranoside testing, and acid production from ribose, motility testing, and yellow pigmentation
testing. The isolate was sensitive to penicillin, ampicillin, ampicillin-sulbactam, imipenem, teicoplanin, tetracyclines and linezolid; it
exhibited intermediate sensitivity to vancomycin (MIC, ≥8 μg/mL), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (MIC, ≥10 μg/mL), levofloxacin (MIC, 4
μg/mL), norfloxacin (MIC, 8 μg/mL), ciprofloxacin (MIC, 2 μg/mL) and quinupristin-dalfopristin (MIC, 2 μg/mL); it was resistant to
clindamycin (MIC, 4 μg/mL) and showed high resistance to gentamicin, streptomycin and kanamycin (MIC, ≥2000 μg/mL). The patient became
afebrile 48 hours after the beginning of antibiotic therapy with rapid improvement of her mental status and disappearance of meningeal signs
(within 36 hours). Once the organism was identified (4 days later), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole and acyclovir were discontinued and
ampicillin-sulbactam (3 g every 6 hours) was added. After 2 weeks of antibiotic therapy the patient was discharged in good health with
sterilization of the CSF culture. An echocardiogram revealed no vegetations whereas a colonoscopy examination showed two ulcerative lesions
associated with two polyps, oedema and multiple punctuate erosions. Enterococcal infections of the central nervous system are quite rare and
according to a MEDLINE search of the English literature only three cases of CNS infection by a motile Enterococcus identified as E.
gallinarum have been previously documented; they occurred in patients with ventriculoperitoneal shunts for hydrocephalus . E. casseliflavus
and E. gallinarum are responsible for 1–2% of all enterococcal infections and are characterized by the fact that they possess intrinsic low-
level vancomycin resistance . The VanC-1 ligase is specific for E. gallinarum, and the VanC-2/3 ligase is specific for E. casseliflavus .
Organisms with resistance to VanC remain susceptible to teicoplanin. This naturally occurring vancomycin resistance has not been shown to be
transferable, and the related genes are chromosomally encoded in the members of these species . Despite the intrinsic low-level vancomycin
resistance exhibited by E. casseliflavus it is important to remember that most strains are susceptible to penicillin and ampicillin.
Combination therapy of ampicillin with an aminoglycoside such as gentamicin or streptomycin is considered the standard therapy of
enterococcal meningitis due to ampicillin-susceptible strains . Meropenem is not superior to ampicillin for therapy of enterococcal
infections and most species of E. casseliflavus are beta-lactamase negative. There was not therefore a clear indication for the use of
combination therapy with meropenem and a beta-lactamase inhibitor in the case reported. Our patient had gastrointestinal signs and symptoms,
and colonoscopy revealed multiple erosions, which probably were the portal of entry of E. casseliflavus. In fact, enterococcal meningitis
may appear as a complication of diverse gastrointestinal diseases such as enterocolitis, peritonitis, abdominal surgery, or bowel carcinoma.
A case of bowel erosions as the portal of entry of enterococcal meningitis has been previously reported . Several studies have demonstrated
that E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus colonize the gastrointestinal tracts of both hospitalized individuals and nonhospitalized healthy
ones . Therapy with various antimicrobial agents, including cephalosporins and vancomycin, may play a role in increasing colonization with
these organisms. Edlund et al. reported a significant increase in the emergence of E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus in healthy subjects
who were administered oral vancomycin . Our patient was not taking any antimicrobials before hospital admission. E. gallinarum and E.
casseliflavus/flavescens are part of the normal stool flora of the general population; this has perhaps impacted the ability of researchers
to detect specific risk factors . Although our patient had significant underlying conditions this case of meningitis was mild and had most
of the typical features of "spontaneous" enterococcal meningitis (community-acquired infection, severe underlying diseases, and
immunodepression). The clinical significance of the enterococci that are intrinsically resistant to vancomycin has not been fully
established yet. Infection with E. gallinarum and E. casseliflavus has been associated with high mortality, but it is difficult to attribute
their mortality directly to infection or to the underlying conditions of the patient. This case is the first report of E. casseliflavus
meningitis and it is the fourth documented so far with a motile Enterococcus species. Awareness of infection of central nervous system with
Enterococcus species that possess an intrinsic vancomycin resistance should be increased. The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests. IC and RDL carried out the clinical study of the patient and conceived of the study. GS and GBC carried out the microbiologic
studies. AT and AC carried out the clinical study of the patient, conceived of the study and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of study
