Mycobacterium lentiflavum is a recently described nontuberculous mycobacterium that has mainly clinical importance in young children with
cervical lymphadenitis and in immunocompromised patients. We describe a case of chronic pulmonary infection in an immunocompetent patient.
Our observation confirms clinical, diagnostic, and treatment difficulties in the management of M. lentiflavum infection. Mycobacterium
lentiflavum was described as a nontuberculous mycobacterium in 1966 (1,2). Most of the isolates represented fortuitous isolations, although
recently its identification has posed concerns about its possible clinical importance. M. lentiflavum was mainly isolated from lymph nodes
of young children, while isolations from other sites (lung specimens included) were described only in immunocompromised patients (3–9). We
describe, for the first time, a chronic pulmonary M. lentiflavum infection in an elderly immunocompetent woman. Our report confirms the
emergence of this nontuberculous mycobacteria infection in immunocompetent patients and underlines the clinical, diagnostic, and therapeutic
difficulties in its management. In February 2000, dyspnea, productive cough, hemoptysis, weight loss, weakness, and slight fever developed
in a 67-year-old woman with a previous diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis (47 years earlier). A chest radiograph showed post-tuberculous
fibrodystrophy of the right upper lobe. Ziehl-Neelsen smear gave positive results, and a nontuberculous mycobacterium was isolated. Drug-
susceptibility tests, performed on agar medium by proportion method, showed sensitivity to rifampin, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide and
resistance to streptomycin and isoniazid. Treatment with isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol, and rifampin was begun for 3 months without
any microbiologic changes. The persistence of acid-fast bacilli and nontuberculous Mycobacterium–positive cultures in the sputum were
interpreted as a chronic nontuberculous mycobacterial colonization not associated with true pathogenic damage, and no further treatment was
undertaken. In March 2002, the patient was admitted to our hospital because of productive cough, weakness, dyspnea, hemoptysis, fever, and
weight loss. Radiograph and computed tomography scan showed worsening chest abnormalities, with the appearance of a widespread
reticulonodular alteration and an opacity in the left middle lobe (Figure A). A) Pulmonary computed tomographic scan representation of
Mycobacterium lentiflavum lesions. Radiologic image shows the appearance of a widespread reticulonodular alteration and an opacity in the
left middle lobe. B) Chest radiograph evolution after 3 months of treatment shows a sustained improvement of the radiologic alterations to
the left pulmonary middle lobe. The sputum smear was still positive for acid-fast bacilli (polymerase chain reaction specific for M.
tuberculosis and M. avium DNA was negative), and routine cultures for mycobacteria yielded unidentified scotochromogenic mycobacterium. HIV
test was performed to investigate a possible cause of immune impairment, but it was negative. Lymphocyte subsets by flow cytometry were
studied and showed normal values. In addition, a killing test to evaluate macrophage activity was performed, and a diagnosis of chronic
granulomatosis disease was excluded. Concomitantly, cultures from sputum and from broncholavage were performed for either standard bacteria
or fungi (including Pneumocystis carinii). These cultures did not identify other pathogens. Serologic tests to detect Chlamydia pneumoniae,
Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Legionella species (including urinary antigens) were performed and produced negative results, thus confirming the
pathogenic role of the Mycobacterium lentiflavum. Susceptibility tests, using proportion methods, showed sensitivity to clarithromycin,
ethambutol, isoniazid, streptomycin, rifabutin, cycloserine, and terizidon and resistance to rifampin, amikacin, kanamycin, pyrazinamide,
and ofloxacin. According to the clinical history, microbiologic results, and susceptibility pattern (clarithromycin MIC 2 μg/mL), treatment
with clarithromycin was initiated. The patient was released after 10 days with no fever; a slight, yet progressive, improvement of
radiologic features; and a substantial recovery of the clinical conditions. All conventional identification procedures, including cultural,
biochemical, and enzymatic tests, failed to properly identify the species. Moreover, many questions remained unresolved, and further
clarification was needed about the origin and effect of treatment on the clinical response. Because of the need to reach a definitive
diagnosis, we sent the unidentified Mycobacterium culture to one of the Italian reference laboratories for mycobacteria. Two months after
hospitalization, the diagnosis of M. lentiflavum was obtained by analyzing cell wall mycolic acids by using high-performance liquid
chromatographic test and by nucleic acid sequence analysis of PCR-amplified 16S ribosomal RNA gene fragments. After 3 months of
clarithromycin treatment, the patient completely recovered, and chest radiograph showed sustained improvement (Figure B). Mycobacterial
investigations, which had produced negative sputum samples after 1 month of treatment, once again gave positive results. After a new
evaluation of drug susceptibility that showed no change in drug-resistance pattern, a further treatment with clarithromycin, ethambutol,
rifabutin, and ciprofloxacin was undertaken, but it was prematurely ended because of poor patient compliance. At present, after a 3-year
follow up, the patient complains of intermittent hemoptysis, weakness, and dyspnea. Radiographic examinations still show the known
widespread reticulonodular alterations, and sputum cultures are persistently positive for acid-fast bacilli. M. lentiflavum is a recently
described nontuberculous mycobacterium (1,2). Most isolates have represented fortuitous isolations that required critical evaluation about
their clinical importance. Indeed, as summarized in the Table, M. lentiflavum identification has been shown to cause disease in only few
cases. All of these cases were described in Europe. Most reports describe isolates from cervical lymphadenitis of very young children (3–9);
other anatomic sites are less frequently implicated (1,7,8). The few M. lentiflavum pulmonary cases were described in immunocompromised
patients only (5,8,9). *M, male; F, female; ND, not done; COPD, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease; HAART, higly active antiretroviral
therapy; amik, amikacin; clm, clarithromycin; cys, cycloserine; eth, ethambutol, fus, fusidic acid; inh, isoniazid; km, kanamycin; levo,
levofloxacin; oflox, ofloxacin, pza, pyrazinamide; rib, rifabutin; rif, rifampin, str, streptomycin; ter, terizidon. †Treatment duration not
determined. We describe, for the first time, a chronic pulmonary infection due to M. lentiflavum in an immunocompetent patient. Our
observation provides further evidence that this species should be added to the growing list of nontuberculous mycobacteria, which can cause
pulmonary disease in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent patients. Traditional identification techniques are widely insufficient in
providing a correct diagnosis, and more sophisticated diagnostic methods need to be improved. Susceptibility tests have reliability
problems. When the difficulties in reaching a diagnosis are considered, the identification standard techniques, based on the rate of growth,
pigmentation, and biochemical tests, even if well established and relatively inexpensive, are unable to identify most nontuberculous
mycobacteria. Laboratory methods that perform better, such as high-performance liquid chromatography and genetic investigations of the 16S
rRNA gene fragments, through the use of nucleic acid probes, sequencing, and amplification, have to be added to diagnostic protocols for
nontuberculous mycobacteria diagnosis. Moreover, new reference centers should be created and organized. Cooperation programs among research
laboratories, which have provided a structured experience with complex methods, have to be implemented, and an effective collaboration
should be created. In addition to the diagnostic uncertainty, interpreting the sensitivity tests is also of concern. Information provided by
tests performed on solid medium was discordant and created serious misunderstanding in the therapeutic choices. Thus, in the presence of
nontuberculous mycobacteria, the susceptibility profile must be performed on liquid media, and tests on agar by proportion method should be
avoided because of the risk of obtaining false-resistant results. Because of the difficulties in executing these methods and interpreting
their results, we recommend that the tests be performed by experienced laboratories that can maintain feedback for both peripheral
laboratories and clinicians. In 1998, the Italian National Institute of Health launched, in accordance with the World Health Organization
and International Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease, a project to implement proficiency testing; results from the first
(1998–1999) and second surveys (2000) showed substantial improvement in the accuracy of drug-susceptibility testing in the network. These
data demonstrate that establishing and coordinating a focused monitoring program were effective in improving the quality of drug
susceptibility results (10). By describing a recurrent chronic pulmonary infection, our report provides further evidence of the possible
role of M. lentiflavum as an emerging human pathogen. Our data also stress the diagnostic and therapeutic difficulties in the management of
this nontuberculous Mycobacterium infection. Suggested citation for this article: Molteni C, Gazzola L, Cesari M, Lombardi A, Salerno F,
Tortoli E, et al. Mycobacterium lentiflavum infection in immunocompetent patient. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2005 Jan [date
cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1101.040523 We thank the staff of the Department of Infectious Diseases, L. Sacco Hospital. and of the
Institute of Infectious Disease, University of Milan, including Cecilia Paoli and Patrizia Franza for their generous participation, Alan
Michael Rosen for assistance in the English revision of the text, Bianca Ghisi and Pietro Zerbi for the photographic support, and Annalisa
Angelantoni for her continuous support. This work was supported by a grant of the National Institute of Health (ISS), Minister of Health, 1%
2000, project 0AL/F and RF/101, Rome, Italy, and by a grant of the AHSI Company. Dr. Gori is a senior physician in the Institute of
Infectious Diseases and Tropical Medicine, L. Sacco Hospital, University of Milan. His primary research interests include molecular
diagnostics and molecular epidemiology of tuberculosis for clinical applications.
