We describe a fatal case of encephalitis that might be correlated with primary human metapneumovirus (HMPV) encephalitis. Postmortem HMPV
RNA was detected in brain and lung tissue samples from the patient. Furthermore, HMPV RNA was found in culture fluids from cells coincubated
with lung tissue. Human metapneumovirus (HMPV), a new member of the paramyxovirus family closely related to respiratory syncytial virus
(RSV), was first described in 2001 (1). Subsequent reports demonstrated that HMPV is distributed worldwide (2–5), causing mild-to-severe
acute infections of the nasopharyngeal tract (6,7). Although neurologic symptoms have been described for infections caused by other
paramyxoviruses, such as Hendra, Nipah, mumps, and measles (8–12), no such symptoms have been associated with HMPV infection. We describe a
child who died from edema caused by encephalitis probably induced or triggered by HMPV. A 14-month-old boy unresponsive to verbal and
tactile stimulation with high fever (temperature 39°C) was admitted to a primary care hospital ≈30 minutes after the onset of generalized
febrile convulsions that did not respond to 2 doses of rectal diazepam (5 mg). His weight was 8 kg, all extremities were warm and well
perfused, his heart rate was 140 beats per minute (bpm), and oxygen saturation was 93% in ambient air. Initial clinical examination showed
no purpuric or petechial lesions, no heart murmurs or pulmonary rales, and no palpable enlargement of the liver or spleen. The boy had been
healthy until 2 days earlier, when rhinorrhea, mild pharyngitis, and cough developed without signs of lower respiratory tract involvement.
On the day of admission, he vomited once in the morning and than refused to drink. In the afternoon of the same day, a high fever developed,
and seizures began, with extension and struggling of all extremities but without opisthotonos. The patient initially turned both eyes
upwards but later stared straight ahead with no spontaneous eye movements and fixed pupils of 3 to 4 mm in diameter. The boy had been born
at 34 weeks’ gestational age (weight 2,300 g), and he was treated for a few days with antimicrobial drugs after prolonged rupture of
amniotic sac membranes, even though early-onset infection had not been confirmed. His neonatal period was uneventful, with the exception of
moderate withdrawal symptoms (irritability, frequent bowel movements) probably due to tobacco use by his mother during pregnancy. The
primary pediatrician documented a subtle, generalized muscular hypotension at the age of 9 months but did not consider this finding
remarkable enough to investigate further (sonographic examination of the central nervous system showed normal results immediately after
birth and 2 weeks later). Clinical seizure activity subsided ≈2 hours after the intravenous administration of diazepam, clonazepam,
phenobarbital, and lorazepam. Blood pressure was stable without high volume infusion or vasosuppressor support, and oxygen saturation (pulse
oximetry) was 100% with 2 L of supplemental oxygen. Glasgow coma scale (GCS) was 10 at the end of the seizure. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF)
drawn by lumbar puncture showed no pleocytosis, glucose level of 4.6 mmol/L, and a slightly elevated protein content of 116 mg/dL (normal
value <45mg/dL) (Table 1). Although leukocyte count and serum C-reactive protein did not suggest inflammation, empiric antimicrobial
chemotherapy with ceftriaxone, ampicillin, gentamicin, and acyclovir was started immediately. An electroencephalogram showed generalized
slow waves but no seizure activity. On the basis of abnormal findings on a magnetic resonance imaging scan (MRI) performed 12 hours after
admission (Figure 1A and 1B), attending physicians diagnosed meningoencephalitis of unknown origin. During the next few hours, the GCS of
the patient deteriorated to 5. Both pupils were 8 mm in diameter and not reactive to light. The patient was intubated (no gag reflex
observed during the procedure) and mechanically ventilated. He was sent to the pediatric intensive care unit of a tertiary-care hospital 24
hours after admission to have an external ventricular drain inserted. Upon arrival, the patient was deeply comatose (GCS 5) without response
to painful stimuli; he had rectal temperature of 32°C, arrhythmic heart rate (90 bpm), and a mean arterial pressure of 29 mm Hg. Axial
T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan (A) and coronal fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (B) show multifocal, mainly
cortical and subcortical lesions of high signal intensity, which are most probably caused by multifocal encephalitis. C) Nonenhanced axial
computed tomographic (CT) scan performed 2 days after the MRI shows multiple, hypodense lesions and signs of general edema. Additionally, it
shows a hyperdense arachnoid collection that was not yet visible on the MRI 2 days before (panels A and B). Corneal reflexes and gag reflex
were silent. No spontaneous movements were observed; pupils were 5 mm in diameter and fixed. A chest radiograph excluded a pneumonic
infection and confirmed the correct position of the ventilation tube and the central venous catheter tip. After stabilization of vital
signs, the patient’s condition did not change. The abnormal findings on a computed (CT) tomography scan are shown in Figure 1C. Intracranial
pressure measured after inserting an external ventricular drain and repeatedly afterwards was constantly elevated to 90 cm H2O. Brain tissue
extruded locally, and the drain was removed after 2 days. Repeated cultures of blood, urine, CSF, brain tissue, and the tip of the external
drainage did not show any bacterial (culture) or viral pathogen (culture and polymerase chain reaction ) (Table 2). The patient did not
exclusively display symptoms typical of measles or mumps, and neither of these viruses could be isolated from brain tissue. *CSF,
cerebrospinal fluid; HSV, herpes simplex virus; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; ND, not done; VZV, varicella–zoster virus; HHV, human
herpesvirus; HBV, hepatitis B virus; HCV, hepatitis C virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; RT, reverse transcriptase; RSV, respiratory syncytial
virus; ELISA, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay; HMPV, human metapneumovirus. †Before death, viral encephalitis induced by HSV and VZV was
excluded by nested PCR from the CSF and also from a biopsy. Measles and mumps were excluded by the primary anamnestic protocol (no exanthema
or other clinical symptoms). The anamnestic protocol also showed a successful vaccination against those pathogens. Furthermore, no clinical
symptoms of mumps were observed. Postmortem specimens from brain, lung, kidney, liver, spleen, and heart were mounted on different cell
lines. Detailed PCR protocols are available on request. In addition, extensive acute investigations of serum and urine specimens did not
confirm any underlying inborn or acquired metabolic illness. A battered-child syndrome was excluded by a normal ophthalmologic examination
and radiographs of all extremities; no sign of fresh or old fractures was found. After 10 days of supportive intensive care without clinical
improvement, in accordance to the current regulations of German federal law, the child was considered to be dead and extubated after
receiving informed consent from his legal guardian. He died shortly thereafter, and an autopsy was performed. The acute symptoms were
managed sufficiently by the primary intensive care team, particularly in terms of oxygenation, and no signs of dehydration were seen at
admission. Thus, extensive discussion with the attending intensive care, neurosurgery, neuroradiology, and pediatric neurology team led to
the conclusion that the time course of the illness suggested encephalitis as the primary reason for the child’s symptoms and the adverse
outcome. Other differential diagnoses of the MRI and CT findings such as postictal edema after a status epilepticus, edema due to prolonged
hyperpyrexia and dehydration, or hypoxemia were considered highly improbable. Tissue specimens from brain, lung, liver, kidney, and heart as
well as serum and CSF were intensively screened for bacterial and viral infections by using standard techniques (Table 2). No bacterial or
viral pathogens, except HMPV, were detected. RNA of this virus was identified by reverse transcription (RT)–PCR in both brain and lung
tissue specimens. Moreover, all tissue specimens were mounted routinely on different cell lines susceptible to viruses commonly known to
cause encephalitis (Table 3), but HMPV RNA was detected by PCR only in the cell culture supernatant of a Vero culture mounted with lung
tissue for 3 weeks. Although no cytopathic effect was observed in any of the cell cultures, the fluid from the Vero cells mounted with lung
tissue was repeatedly positive for HMPV RNA. None of the other viruses was detected by PCR, and no cytopathic effect was seen in any of the
cell cultures. *The + symbol indicates that the cell line is susceptible to the virus and was used for diagnostic procedures. †HSV, herpes
simplex virus; VZV, varicella zoster virus; CMV, cytomegalovirus; RSV, respiratory syncytial virus; HMPV, human metapneumovirus; LLC-MK2,
kidney cell line from rhesus monkey; MS, monkey stable; MDCK, Madin-Darbin canine kidney; RD, human Caucasian rhabdomyosarcoma; HEF, human
embryonic fibroblasts. Amplified fragments of HMPV DNA derived from the Vero cell culture supernatant were subjected to direct sequencing.
The alignment of the resulting sequences showed close relatedness of HMPV RNA sequences present in brain and lung tissues and those obtained
from the supernatant of infected cell culture (Figure 2). Upon phylogenetic analysis, the identified HMPV sequences were clearly separated
from the sequences of other HMPV isolates obtained by our laboratory (13). These results allowed us to exclude the possibility of
contamination of the brain and lung tissues under investigation with HMPV sequences from another source. Alignment of 302 nucleotide human
metapneumovirus (HMPV) sequences amplified from brain and lung tissues of the patient and from the supernatant of infected Vero cell
culture. Sequence of the HMPV strain NLD00-1 was used as a prototype sequence. Conditions of the reverse transcription–polymerase chain
reaction were described elsewhere (5). Virologic data on the detection of HMPV were complemented by results of histologic and immunochemical
investigations. Thus, both the lung and the brain tissues showed evidence of an active inflammation. The alveolar lumina were partly or
completely filled with fluid mixed with inflammatory cells, and the alveolar walls were thickened. The alveoli in half of the specimens were
atelectatic. Some bronchioles had segmental loss of epithelium; meninges were diffusely thickened by many neutrophils and a few macrophages
mixed with fibrin and a few erythrocytes. Unfortunately, specific immune staining of paraffin-embedded tissues did not allow us to detect
HMPV antigens in the brain or lung of the patient. Several reasons may explain these negative results, including low concentration of viral
antigens in the infected tissues, relatively low sensitivity of the immunochemical procedures, and a high sensitivity of the RT-PCR assay.
Similar observations may be noted, namely, the positive RT-PCR findings of viral RNA and the inflammatory response in investigated tissues
in the case of Nipah virus infection of the brain (11). To our knowledge, this case report is the first of fatal encephalitis that might be
associated with HMPV infection. We base a possible etiologic relationship between HMPV and the observed neurologic manifestations on the
detection of HMPV RNA in the brain and lung tissues. Some clinical observations might serve as circumstantial evidence to support this
hypothesis. The clinical course and MRI data for our patient are very similar to those observed in several patients with fatal encephalitis
associated with Nipah virus infection, another member of the paramyxovirus family (8,11). Definite conclusions on the possible involvement
of HMPV in neurologic disorders might be drawn only after additional studies. At this stage, however, we recommend HMPV screening for
patients, especially young children, with symptoms of encephalitis of unknown origin. These investigations might extend our knowledge of the
clinical manifestations and consequences of HMPV infection. Suggested citation for this article: Schildgen O, Glatzel T, Geikowski T,
Scheibner B, Simon A, Bindl L, et al. Human metapneumovirus RNA in encephalitis patient. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2005 Mar
[date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1103.040676 The authors are grateful to A. Osterhaus, Thijs Kuiken, and Debby van Riel for
excellent histochemistry and critical comments on the manuscript. Sergei Viazov was supported by a grant from the IFORES program of the
Medical Faculty of the University of Essen. Dr. Schildgen received his PhD in molecular biology from the University of Essen. He is
currently performing postdoctoral work on the epidemiology of human metapneumovirus, hepatitis B virus drug resistance, and human
herpesvirus-1 DNA replication.
