Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Author Contributions: SV, RS, and JM cared for the
patient. SDN, SV, and RI wrote the manuscript. A 54-year-old man presented with fever, shortness of breath, and left-sided pleuritic chest
pain. His bilateral pleural effusions and pericardial effusion turned out to be due to sarcoidosis A 54-y-old white male presented to the
hospital during the winter of 2002 with complaints of fever, shortness of breath, and left-sided pleuritic chest pain of 2 d duration. He
was a nonsmoker without any significant family history of pulmonary disease. He was retired, and denied any past exposure to chemicals
including beryllium. On physical examination, the patient was febrile with tachycardia and normal blood pressure. Air entry at both lung
bases was diminished. The remainder of his history and physical examination was unremarkable. He had been hospitalized twice before for
similar complaints during the prior 6 wk. Investigations during the first admission showed mild leukocytosis with normal electrolytes. Chest
radiograph at that time showed bilateral pleural effusions and cardiomegaly, while echocardiography showed cardiac tamponade for which he
underwent emergency pericardiocentesis. A computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest after the pericardiocentesis showed bilateral pleural
effusions without hilar or mediastinal lymphadenopathy. A CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, to look for any occult malignancy, was normal.
Therapeutic thoracentesis was performed to relieve his symptoms. Pleural and pericardial fluid analyses were exudative without malignant
cells, and were negative on culture for bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal organisms. Investigations for HIV, syphilis, rheumatological
diseases, hepatitis, and occult malignancies were all negative. The patient improved symptomatically with pericardiocentesis and
thoracentesis, and he was discharged with the differential diagnosis of an atypical vasculitic syndrome or a paraneoplastic syndrome. On the
second admission, he presented with increasing shortness of breath, and a CT scan of the chest showed recurrent bilateral pleural effusions
without pulmonary disease. Therapeutic thoracentesis was performed, relieving his symptoms, and he was discharged. During his third
(current) admission, laboratory investigations were unremarkable. Repeat CT scan of the chest showed a left-sided pleural effusion, normal
lung parenchyma, a small pericardial effusion, and mediastinal lymph nodes (Figure 1). Video-assisted thoracoscopic pleural biopsy showed
nonspecific chronic inflammation. Mediastinal lymph node biopsy showed benign reactive lymph nodes with focal epithelioid, non-caseating
granulomas consistent with sarcoidosis. The patient was treated with oral prednisone, 20 mg daily. He remained asymptomatic when seen at his
1-y follow-up, when he was taking 7.5 mg of prednisone daily. Sarcoidosis is characterized by non-caseating granulomas in affected organs.
It primarily affects the lungs. Pleural effusion occurs in 5% of patients and may be the presenting feature of the disease . Cardiac
manifestations include bundle branch block, arrhythmia, congestive heart failure, pericarditis, and cardiomyopathy. Asymptomatic minimal
pericardial effusion has been shown to occur in 20% of cases . Sarcoidosis presenting with pleural and pericardial effusion is extremely
rare, and only one previous case has been reported . Patients presenting with coincident pleural and pericardial effusions need to be
investigated for rheumatological diseases, occult malignancies, and chronic infections such as HIV, tuberculosis, hepatitis, and syphilis.
The diagnosis of sarcoidosis requires the presence of clinical and radiographic findings suggestive of sarcoidosis, non-caseating granulomas
found on biopsies obtained from one or more sites, and the exclusion of other granuloma-forming diseases . The differential diagnosis of
non-caseating granulomas includes mycobacterial infections, berylliosis, and sarcoidosis. Our patient had clinical and radiological features
suggestive of sarcoidosis and had non-caseating granulomas on his mediastinal lymph node biopsy, and we excluded other possible causes of
recurrent pleural and pericardial effusions. The optimal management strategy for sarcoidosis still remains uncertain. Asymptomatic pulmonary
sarcoidosis is best treated with a wait-and-watch approach . But steroids remain the mainstay of treatment for systemic sarcoidosis
involving the cardiovascular system, nervous system, or eyes, and for cases with progressive pulmonary involvement . Earlier institution of
steroids in cardiac sarcoidosis may prevent progressive disease and improve outcomes . Cytotoxic agents are used as steroid-sparing agents
in patients requiring large doses of steroids and who experience serious side effects . • Patients with recurrent pleural and pericardial
effusion should be investigated for chronic infections, rheumatological illnesses, and malignancies. • Sarcoidosis should be included in the
differential diagnosis of patients presenting with bilateral pleural and pericardial effusion, as early treatment may improve the outcome in
cardiac sarcoidosis. • Steroids remain the mainstay of treatment for systemic sarcoidosis involving the cardiovascular system, nervous
system, or eyes, and for cases with progressive pulmonary involvement. computed tomography The CT shows mediastinal lymphadenopathy (pink
arrows) and left pleural effusion. Citation: Navaneethan SD, Venkatesh S, Shrivastava R, Mehta J, Israel R (2005) Recurrent pleural and
pericardial effusions due to sarcoidosis. PLoS Med 2(3): e63.
