Laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding is an effective and safe surgical modality for the treatment of morbid obesity. Erosion of the band
into the stomach has been reported. No reports are available on erosion of the Lap-Band following diverticulitis of the colon. A 31-year-old
female with a body mass index (BMI) of 52 underwent an uneventful laparoscopic Lap-Band placement. Postoperative contrast study revealed
good positioning of the band and no evidence of leakage. The patient's recovery was uneventful except for an elevated temperature of 101.5°F
that was attributed to her atelectasis. She had lost 52 lbs. and remained asymptomatic for 3 months. Following this period of successful
weight loss, she presented with complaints of abdominal pain for 3 days associated with diarrhea of 7 days' duration. A Gastrografin
contrast study showed no evidence of a leak or band slippage but erosion was suspected. Upper endoscopy confirmed erosion of the band into
the stomach. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen revealed thickening of the sigmoid and descending colon with mesenteric fat stranding
consistent with diverticulitis. Laparoscopic removal of the Lap-Band system was performed. We postulate that colonic diverticulitis could
have been a precipitating factor in the development of band erosion. Intraabdominal sepsis resulting in subacute infection of the Lab-Band
system may be the underlying factor. Since its introduction in 1993,1 laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding has been shown to be a safe
procedure for the surgical treatment of morbid obesity. Laparoscopic placement of a Lap-Band system is the least invasive method for the
restriction of caloric intake in morbidly obese patients. The minimally invasive nature, adjustability, reversibility, and quick
postoperative course have made it the desirable treatment for some patients. The potential advantages of this procedure over traditional
gastroplasty and bypass operations include reversibility and low systemic and operative complication rates. Complications may involve the
access port (leakage, dislocation, infection, inaccessibility), pouch dilation, prolapse (slippage) of the stomach through the band, balloon
rupture, and erosion of the band into the stomach.2 Migration of the band through the stomach wall (erosion) is a well-known late
complication, which usually requires removal of the band. The incidence of intragastric band erosion varies between different series and was
reported in 0.5% to 11% of cases.3–5 Studies reporting a high rate of intragastric band migration use gastroscopy routinely to follow up on
these patients.5 Laparoscopic removal of the eroded band and repair of the gastric wall is feasible.6 Placement of a new Lap-Band during the
same procedure has been reported.7 Interval replacement of the Lap-Band system8 or conversion to another restrictive or malabsorptive
operation,9 although technically challenging, should be considered if maintenance or further weight loss is desired. No report to date is
available on erosion of the Lap-Band system following an episode of an acute intra-abdominal infection. A 31-year-old female with a BMI of
52 kg/m2 underwent an uneventful laparoscopic Lap-Band (Inamed, Santa Barbara, CA, USA) placement. Postoperative contrast study showed no
evidence of a leak. The patient's recovery was uneventful except for 4 days of unexplained fever of 101.5° F. An x-ray finding of bilateral
atelectasis was suspected as the most likely cause, and she was discharged home. She had lost 52 lbs and remained asymptomatic for 3 months.
Following this initial period, she presented with complaints of abdominal pain for 3 days associated with 7 days of diarrhea. Her
temperature was 100.5°F, and her white blood cell count was 19 000. A contrast study revealed no evidence of leakage or slippage but the
possibility of erosion was suspected (Figure 1). Upper endoscopy confirmed the presence of erosion (Figure 2), and the computed tomography
scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed thickening of the sigmoid and descending colon with mesenteric fat stranding consistent with
diverticulitis (Figure 3). The patient was admitted for 3 days of intravenous antibiotics, and her clinical status improved. However, due to
persistence of her symptoms of epigastric discomfort and the left lower quadrant abdominal pain associated with localized tenderness, she
returned for removal of the Lap-Band system. Barium swallow suggests erosion of the Lap-Band. Upper endoscopy confirms the erosion of the
Lap-Band into the stomach. Computed tomography scan showing mesenteric fat stranding in the area of the descending colon. At the operation,
no evidence of infection was noted at the reservoir site. Through the laparoscopic approach, the buckle was freed from the surrounding
adhesions, the band was cut at its inflatable part just to the left of the buckle, and the band was pulled out of its capsule. The opening
was closed by using intracorporeal suturing. The band and access port were removed. Air insufflation via the nasogastric tube and
instillation of methylene blue did not reveal any air leak or contrast extravasation.7 Postoperative contrast radiograms did not reveal any
evidence of leakage, and the patient recovered well. Late erosion (more than 6 months) of the Lap-Band is well documented and is thought to
be due to chronic infection or to be a consequence of different mechanisms such as direct pressure of the band caused by tight gastrogastric
plication over the buckle of the band, extensive dissection that impairs blood supply, band inflation immediately postoperatively, or use of
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs.10 The causes of early erosions are mostly secondary to undetected intraoperative perforation of the
esophagus or stomach.11 Good surgical technique and avoidance of gastric or esophageal injury is essential in minimizing the possibility of
an early erosion. Any suspicion of erosion warrants timely investigation including radiological contrast study and upper endoscopy.12 If
left untreated, the band could migrate completely into the gastric lumen and cause an obstruction.13 Symptoms suspicious of band erosion
include the inability to regulate the stoma, cessation of weight loss or unexplained weight regain, port-site infection, excessive vomiting,
low-grade infection, or abdominal pain.10 We present a complication of Lap-band erosion with the possibility of a colonic infectious process
as the underlying cause. The presence of a Lap-Band as a foreign body renders the patient more susceptible to infectious complications. A
possible cause of the band erosion in the presented case includes an intense inflammatory reaction due to infection.14 We postulate that the
band infection due to diverticulitis could have created a subacute infection of the band resulting in erosion of the band into the gastric
lumen. The recommended treatment of band erosion is the surgical removal of the band. Some authors recommend postponing band removal until
the erosion is complete, so that the gastric wall completely overgrows the band.9 If the device is located completely intragastrically,
gastroscopic removal could be attempted.5 We suggest close follow-up of the Lap-Band patient suffering from an intraabdominal infection
because a subacute infection of the Lap-band system may ensue. Should erosion of the band into the stomach develop, the band should be
removed. The timing of the intervention and the choice of the revision operation remain to be established. Presented at the SAGES 2004
Annual Meeting, Denver, Colorado, USA, March 31–April 3 2004.
