We present two patients who had acute paraplegia with sensory loss due to spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma (SSEH). One had myocardial
infraction and the other had deep vein thrombosis, and the former was treated with anticoagulants and the latter was treated with
thrombolytic agent. We analyzed the neurological status of our two cases each between its preoperative and postoperative state.
Postoperatively both showed no improvement of neurologic symptom, and on follow-up of 12 months, one showed no neurologic improvement and
the other showed a insignificant improvement of lower extremity muscle power (trace knee extensor/ankle dorsiflexor). We thought that this
poor outcome was due to delayed operation, which was done more than 24 hr after the symptom onset. The outcome in SSEH is essentially
determined by the time taken from symptom onset to operation. Therefore, early and precise diagnosis such as careful history taking and MRI
evaluation is necessary. Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma (SSEH) represents 0.3-0.9% of spinal epidural space-occupying lesions. The
clinical course has characteristics: without preceding trauma, patients experience an acute onset of local discomfort or pain, sometimes
with radicular paresthesia. Within hours, signs of spinal cord compression appear, presenting as progressive paraplegia and loss of sensory
function. Despite the clinical syndrome of SSEH is relatively characterized, its exact diagnosis may be difficult. It is important to
recognize these signs since early diagnosis and prompt surgical evacuation provide the maximum chance of functional recovery. A 51-yr-old
man with a history of myocardial infarction was treated with percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty. After being discharged, he
visited the department of internal medicine for three months and was taking 200 mg/day of Aspirin. The patient felt the discomfort of
midback area and mild lower extremity weakness 11 days before admitted to emergency room (ER). He ignored these discomforts which was not a
great deal in his daily activity and on the 11th day from the onset of symptoms, he swam as usual in a pool for about 1 hr. After swimming,
he felt worsening back pain and aggravated lower extremity weakness and so he visited ER and was examined by a physician in ER. His
physician noticed the rapidly progressive paraplegia and a loss of leg sensory function, and consulted the department of neurology.
Neurologic physician who suspected the acute spinal cord disorder, ordered high dose steroid injection and serial neurologic examination.
The neurologist thought this patient's symptom was not a surgical condition but a medical condition. The following day neurologist
reexamined the neurologic status. The patient's neurologic status showed complete paraplegia in the lower extremity, T10-T12 dermatome
hypesthesia, L1 below dematome anesthesia, no bladder function, patella tendon reflex (-/-), and ankle jerk (-/-). His coagulation profile
showed PT: 0.85 (0.9-1.10 INR), aPTT: 40.2 (29.8-41.8 sec). The neurologist ordered MRI. MRI scan showed an epidural hematoma with spinal
cord compression from T8 to L2 (Fig. 1, 2). Then the neurologist consulted department of orthopedic surgery. It was 28 hr after symptom
onset, we performed the bilateral decompressive laminectomy from T 8 to L2 immediately. A large posterolateral hematoma and old blood clot
was found within the epidural space (Fig. 3). No neurologic improvement was noted after surgery. On follow-up 21 months, his neurologic
status showed a complete paraplegia, L1 below anesthesia, no bladder function and no deep tendon reflex. A 39-yr-old man was diagnosed with
deep vein thrombosis (left common iliac, external iliac, superficial femoral, common femoral vein) at department of general surgery, and he
was treated with the infusion catheter urokinase (1,100,000 unit/14 hr). The following day, he was performed with aspiration thrombectomy
and stent at the department of diagnostic radiology, followed by the infusion catheter urokinase (1,000,000 unit/6 hr) treatment. During
that evening, at 6:00 p.m., he felt the lower back discomfort and mild pain. And the physician ordered a pain killer. Because this pain
disappeared soon, the physician was not in an account. The morning after onset of symptom, he felt decreased motor and sensory loss. His
physician ordered MRI. MRI scan showed an epidural hematoma with spinal cord compression from T11 to L2 (Fig. 4, 5). His physician consulted
department of orthopedic surgery. At 24 hr after symptom onset, we examined the neurologic status. The patient's neurologic status showed a
complete motor loss except a right iliopsoas muscle power trace, L1-2 dermatome hypesthesia, L3 below dermatome anesthesia, perianal sense
(-), patella tendon reflex (-/-), and ankle jerk (-/-). His coagulation profiles showed PT: 1.3 (0.9-1.10 INR), aPTT: 34.8 (28-40 sec). We
performed the bilateral decompressive laminectomy from T 12 to L2 immediately. A large posterolateral hematoma was found within the epidural
space (Fig. 6). Postoperative MRI shows extended dural sac and cord but no neurologic improvement was noted after surgery. On follow-up 12
months, his neurologic status showed a complete motor loss except the right iliopsoas, quadriceps, tibialis anterior muscle power trace, no
sensory recovery, no bladder function, and no deep tendon reflex. Spontaneous spinal epidural hematoma occurs infrequently. Approximately
350 cases have been reported in the medical literature, and the annual incidence has been estimated at 0.1 per 100,000. Predisposing factors
such as inherited coagulopathy, spinal vascular malformation, anticoagulant therapy, therapeutic thrombolysis, and epidural analgesia, have
been implicated, along with hypertension and antiplatelet therapy (1, 2). The clinical course is characteristic: without preceding trauma,
patients experience an acute onset of local discomfort or pain, sometimes with radicular paresthesia. Within hours, signs of spinal cord
compression appeared, and paraplegia and loss of sensory function progress. Despite the clinical syndrome of SSEH is relatively
characteristic, its exact diagnosis may be difficult. Differential diagnosis includes spinal abscess, tumor, ischemia, transverse myelitis
or acute vertebral disc disease (3). Because the results of operative decompression of the spinal cord mainly depend on the duration of the
symptoms, the time lost for diagnostic measures may have negative influence on the functional outcome. Therefore, immediate neuroradiologic
confirmation of the clinical diagnosis is necessary. Currently, MRI has been used as the first choice of diagnostic method for spinal
emergencies because it allows rapid evaluation of large parts of the vertebral column and the spinal cord. The prognosis of neurologic
deficits predominantly depends on the time interval between the onset of symptoms and the surgical decompression (2-6). In our patients,
surgery was delayed because patient and physician made light of symptom. So the preoperative neurologic status was aggravated, and
unfortunately as a result no improvement of symptom showed. Both the patient and the doctor should not take early, but mild, signs lightly
which may result in delayed diagnosis, like our two cases. In SSEH, the small signs such as minor pain and slight discomfort appear,
followed by rapid neurological disorder, thus, these small signs should be considered prudently and immediately carry out MRI to make quick
and accurate diagnosis before the patient's neurological state is aggravated. The prognosis appears to be related to the severity of the
preoperative neurologic deficit and early operation for rapid decompression of the spinal cord is crucial. Lawton et al. (7) confirmed the
relationship between neurologic recovery, the timing of surgery (operation time) and the preoperative neurological status. They showed
functional recovery to correlate inversely with the duration of spinal cord compression and the degree of severity. Our patients' symptoms
evolved rapidly and by the time of surgical decompression, 24 hr after onset, he was completely paraplegic. There was no postoperative
improvement. There is a evidence to suggest that functional recovery might have been better if the preoperative deficit was less severe.
Surgery performed more than 12 hr after symptom onset is unlikely to be successful (6). Immediate drainage is recommended by most surgeons.
In our patients, no improvement in the neurologic status was seen after surgery. We thought that this unsuccessful result was due to the
complete paraplegia preoperatively which was caused by delayed diagnosis. The time interval between onset of symptoms and surgery is
determined by how long it takes for a patient to recognize symptoms and enter into the medical system, and how long it takes for the
physicians to recognize clinical signs and obtain radiological studies. Although physicians can do nothing about the patient's response
time, they can accelerate the diagnostic evaluation, thereby minimizing the surgical delay. The outcome is mainly depended on the time taken
from symptom onset till operation, therefore early and accurate diagnosis such as careful history taking and immediate MRI evaluation is
necessary. These symptoms initially appear as mild back pain and discomfort, which should not be ignored, instead close observation should
be made to contribute to make early and accurate diagnosis. Saggital T2 weighted MR Image shows the heterogenous hyperintense lesion with
focal areas of hypointensity posterior to the compressed spinal cord in T8-L2 level. Axial T2 weighted MR image shows the spinal cord
compressed by the hyperintense lesion posterior to it in T10 level. Operative finding: Spinal cord is compressed by extensive blood clot and
old hematoma. No other vascular abnormality. Saggital T2 weighted MR Image shows the heterogenous hyperintense lesion with focal areas of
hypointensity posterior to the compressed spinal cord in T12-L2 level. Axial T2 weighted MR image shows the spinal cord compressed by the
hyperintense lesion posterior to it in T12 level. Operative finding: The spinal cord is compressed by hematoma and blood clot. No other
vascular abnormality.
