This report presents a rare example of a bilateral congenital anophthalmos and an agenesis of the optic pathways. The MR imaging studies
revealed that the eyeballs, optic nerves, optic chiasm, optic tracts and optic radiation were absent. The chromosomal examination was
normal. Mild mental retardation was also observed. Apart from the rarity of the anophthalmos and the total absence of the optic pathways, no
etiologic reason for this pathology could be detected, which makes this case more significant. A maldevelopment of forebrain structures is
known to be a result of insults occurring during the first few weeks of gestation. Anophthalmos, which is an absence of the eye, is an
example of this maldevelopment that can also be found with associated intracranial anomalies, namely the absences of the optic nerves, optic
chiasm, optic tracts, optic radiations and anomalous corpus callosum. The insults that cause this maldevelopment can be summarized as
trauma,1 congenital infections,2 heredity3-5 and several syndromes.2,5 Here we present a case of congenital anophthalmos and agenesis of the
optic pathways with no convincing etiologic reason. The patient is a 24-year old female who had bilateral congenital anophthalmos. Her
family has three girls and the patient is the oldest. She was born after an uneventful pregnancy. Her parents were healthy and showed no
consanguinity. The ophthalmologic examination after birth showed an absence of the eyeballs. She was accepted as an isolated congenital
anophthalmos case. Since then, she has had no radiological examinations, especially a CT or an MRI procedure, which would have allowed the
pathologies to be observed within the brain. The family history was unremarkable. The chromosomal examination was normal. The other two
sisters of the family were completely normal. In the current ophthalmologic examination after 24 years, the patient had hypoplastic orbits
and well formed but rudimentary eyelids and brows. She had a bilateral anophthalmos. MR imaging studies revealed that the eye bulbs were
absent and replaced by residual soft tissue (5 mm in diameter) which was isointense with muscle in the T1-weighted sequences (Fig. 1 and 2).
The extraocular muscles were inserted to the residual bulb and were medially displaced (Fig. 1). The optic nerves, the optic chiasm, the
optic tracts and the optic radiations were all absent (Fig. 1-4). The lateral ventricles were enlarged on both sides (Fig. 2). The corpus
callosum was present and was slightly diminished in size (Fig. 3). The patient also had mild mental retardation. Eye development is first
evident at the beginning of the fourth week.6 The optic grooves appear in the neural folds at the cranial end of the embryo. As the neural
folds fuse to form the forebrain, the optic grooves evaginate to form the optic vesicles, which project from the wall of the forebrain into
the adjacent mesenchyme. As the optic vesicles grow, their distal ends expand and their connections with the forebrain constrict to form
optic stalks, which are the precursors of the optic nerves. The optic nerve is formed by more than a million nerve fibers that grow into the
brain proceeding centrally to decussate through the primitive chiasmal commissura. A deficiency in the proper formation of the connections
between the globes and the optic pathways results in hypoplasia or an absence of related white matter tracts.4 An interruption of
embryogenesis within the first few weeks of gestation is the main cause of the primary form of congenital anophthalmos, which encompasses
the aplasia of the eyeballs and the absence of the optic pathway. Various factors have been reported to be the cause of this extremely rare
anomaly. Among those trauma,1 congenital infections,2 heredity,3,7 and several syndromes2,4,5 have been reported. Anomalous corpus
callosum,2,8 neurocutaneous disorders (incontinentia pigmenti) and, particularly in unilateral ones, some craniofacial syndromes may
accompany the congenital anophthalmos. However, a case of a total absence of the optic pathways was also reported without any accompanying
pathology.9 Diagnostic amniocentesis has been reported to be a factor responsible for the congenital anophthalmos without the absence of
optic pathways.1 In our case, there is no possibility that the anophthalmos resulted from a diagnostic amniocentesis. Congenital infections,
such as toxoplasmosis and rubella, may be a factor in congenital anophthalmos.2,10 However, there was no history of such infections in our
case. Heredity has been showed to be a cause of anophthalmos.1,3,7 Most anophthalmos cases are sporadic and probably have a multifactorial
etiology. Nevertheless, some authors have reported an autosomal or X-linked recessive inheritance. Brunquell, et al. reported a case of an
X-linked anophthalmos.3 The patient was a 27-year-old man with severe developmental defects and accompanying pathologies such as seizures,
small head, clubbed feet, and locomotor deficiencies. He also had a maternal male cousin with unilateral anophthalmos and contralateral
microphthalmia. On the other hand, Sensi et al. reported a family with congenital anophthalmos with a dominant pattern of inheritance.7 Two
children of the family were affected with anophthalmos, of whom only one was bilateral. That case differed from the others by an absence of
accompanying anomalies as mental retardation, congenital malformations and other ocular anomalies. Our case did not have any congenital
malformations except for mild mental retardation but had a total absence of the optic pathway. In addition, the family history showed that
there was no other member with anophthalmos. Anophthalmos may accompany several syndromes.2,4,5 Marcus, et al.4 reported an anophthalmos
case with focal dermal hypoplasia. Although the primary feature of this disorder is an undeveloped dermal connective tissue, additional
congenital defects of the eye, skeleton and soft tissues are common. None of the features of our case is related to any of these symptoms.
Albernaz, et al. reported the most similar case to ours.2 In their article, they demonstrated 8 children with congenital anophthalmos of
whom only 3 had bilateral anophthalmos. Among those three, two had a thinner corpus callosum and the third one had none. Our case differs
from the case reported by Albernaz in that she had a normal corpus callosum. Scott, et al. reported a similar case of congenital
microphthalmos and aplasia of the optic nerves, chiasm and tracts in an otherwise healthy subject.9 No etiologic factor was given in this
article. The difference in our case was that the patient has an anophthalmos instead of microphthalmos. An individual developmental anomaly
of the orbits, optic nerves and chiasm may be encountered in otherwise healthy subjects. In a recent article, Pearce described a case of the
aplasia of the optic chiasm with a unifocal polymicrogyria.11 Patients with polymicrogyria have also epilepsy, mental development delays and
focal neurological symptoms. The MR images of our case did not detect any polymicrogyria. No epilepsy and focal neurological symptoms were
encountered either. Only mild mental retardation was found in our case. None of the above-mentioned factors (trauma, heredity, congenital
infections, syndromes, neurocutaneous disorders), which could explain the total absence of visual pathways, was identified in our case. The
present case is not only a congenital bilateral anophthalmos case but also has a total absence of the optic pathway without any etiologic
factors. In contrast to previous reports, there are no accompanying anomalies except for the mild mental retardation. Axial T1-weighted MR
image shows bilateral fibrotic eye bulbs in both orbits (arrow). The rudimental medial and lateral recti are medially displaced (arrow
head). Minimal enlargement of the lateral ventricles but no hypotense signal changes of the optic radiation can be observed. Inversion
recovery sequence shows the enlarged ventricles and an absence of the optic radiations (arrow). Midsagittal T1-weighted MR image shows an
absence of the optic chiasm (arrow) and a normal corpus callosum. Coronal T1-weighted MR image shows an absence of the optic chiasm (arrow).
