Most broncholiths are related to infection with fungus or tuberculosis and they involve the lymph nodes; those cases that are caused by
silicosis are rarely seen. Broncholith might lead complication such as bronchial rupture into the mediastinum, which can result in
hemoptysis, cough, repeated pneumonia and so on. Flexible bronchoscopy plays an important part in the diagnosis of broncholithiasis, but its
therapeutic application in the clinical setting is controversial. We report here on two cases of broncholith removal without complication
with the use of a balloon catheter and tripod forceps using flexible bronchoscopy. Broncholith is an uncommon medical problem. When
considering broncholiths from a therapeutic standpoint, the role of bronchoscopy has been somewhat controversial. We report here on two
cases of successful removal of broncholith that were done without any clinically significant complications by using flexible bronchoscopy. A
65-year-old male patient was admitted to the hospital for the evaluation of atelectasis, and he had a history of recurrent hemoptysis and
pneumonia for a few years. The broncholith was impacted at RB9, and there was inflammation of the surrounding mucosa on bronchoscopy. We
removed the broncholith using a tripod forcep and the inflammation subsided afterwards (Figure 1). A 37-year-old female patient was referred
from a general hospital due to a calcified lymph node from an unknown cause that was discovered on computerized tomography during the
treatment for her pneumonia and parapneumonic effusion. Bronchoscopy revealed the impacted broncholith and exudate at the right lower
opening. Fungus was cultured from the bronchoaleveolar lavage fluid. We removed the broncholith using a balloon catheter and tripod forcep
after antifungal treatment (Figure 2). Broncholiths are calcified peribronchial lymph nodes that encroach upon the adjacent airways and they
cause clinical and roentgenographic abnormalities1). Mycobacterial and fungal granulomatous lymphadenitis are the most frequently cited
infections that are responsible for tissue calcification, although silicosis is a less commonly associated noninfectious cause. The most
common infectious complication resulting from broncholithiasis appears to be bacterial pneumonia that is generally due to airway obstruction
by a broncholith and also to the associated airway inflammation and edema. Lung abscesses along with bronchoesophageal and
bronchomediastinal fistulas are potentially more serious complications arising from symptomatic broncholithiasis, and these complications
are responsible for cases of prolonged or recurrent infection2). In our case, both patients had recurrent and prolonged pneumonia.
Bronchoscopy is considered the most important diagnostic test for broncholithiasis. However, its role in the treatment of broncholithiasis
is controverial. Olson and his coworkers3) reported that 100% of their patients with loose (free in the airway) broncholiths underwent
flexible and rigid bronchoscopic extraction attempts without severe complications. Massive life-threatening hemoptysis secondary to fistula
or rupture of aorta or pulmonary arteries is a possible complication, but generally, massive hemoptysis caused by broncholithiasis is a rare
complication3-5). As compared with the morbidity and mortality associated with surgical intervention, bronchoscopic management appears
favorable for patients with loose or partly eroded broncholiths6). Loose, movable broncholiths are especially suitable for removal by
bronchoscopic extraction in the clinical setting having capabilities for rigid and flexible bronchoscopy and immediate thoracic surgical
support, and after the relation of the broncholith to adjacent vascular structures has been studied by computerized tomography3). Case 1.
Bronchoscopy reveals the broncholith occluding the right lower basal bronchial opening before the bronchoscopic removal (left lower) and
after extraction (right lower). Plain chest X-ray (left upper) and Chest CT (right upper) show both the hilar calcifications and calcific
lesion beside the right lower bronchus without invasion to the adjacent vessels. Case 2. Bronchoscopy reveals the almost totally occlusive
stony foreign body on right lower basal opening (left lower) and after (right lower) bronchoscopic extraction. The broncholith seems to be
an intrapulmonary calcific lymph node, and massive right lower lobe consolidations are seen on plain chest X-ray (left lower) and chest CT
(right upper).
