Diagnostic and therapeutic instrumentation of the lower gastrointestinal tract has been reported to result in bacteremia and endocarditis.
No such case has been reported in persons with a history of rectal foreign body insertion despite its potential for greater trauma. A
58-year-old male was admitted with confusion and inability to speak. His past history was notable for hospitalization to extract a retained
plastic soda bottle from the rectosigmoid two years prior. On examination, he was febrile, tachycardic and hypotensive. There was an apical
pansystolic murmur on cardiac examination. He had a mixed receptive and expressive aphasia, and a right hemiparesis. On rectal examination
he had perianal erythema and diminished sphincter tone. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed infarction of the occipital and
frontal lobes. Transesophageal Echocardiography of the heart revealed vegetations on the mitral valve. All of his blood culture bottles grew
methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. He was successfully treated for bacterial endocarditis with intravenous nafcillin and
gentamicin. The rectum is frequently colonized by Staphylococcus aureus and trauma to its mucosa can lead to bacteremia and endocarditis
with this organism. In the absence of corroborative evidence such as presented here, it is difficult to make a correlation between
staphylococcal endocarditis and anorectal foreign body insertion due to patients being less than forthcoming There is a potential risk of
staphylococcal bacteremia and endocarditis with rectal foreign body insertion. Further studies are needed to explore this finding. Detailed
sexual history and patient counseling should be made a part of routine primary care. There is a large body of surgical literature reporting
anal eroticism resulting in rectal trauma and retained foreign bodies , but there is no report of bacteremia or endocarditis occurring in
these patients. Staphylococcus aureus is an aggressive pathogen and bacteremia with this organism can infect healthy heart valves. The
rectal mucosa is a major site of colonization by this organism. We describe a patient with a past history of surgical extraction of a
retained plastic soda bottle from the rectosigmoid, who later developed staphylococcal endocarditis resulting in septic embolism and stroke.
No such case has been reported in the literature. A 58-year-old male was brought to the emergency room with confusion and an inability to
speak for 1 day. He had a past history of hypertension and hypomania. He was single and he lived alone. On physical examination, his blood
pressure was 80/63 mm of Hg, heart rate 126/minute, and temperature 102°F. He was awake but unable to speak due to a mixed receptive and
expressive aphasia. He had right homonymous hemianopsia and hemiplegia. Cardiac examination was positive for a pansystolic murmur in the
apical area. The abdominal examination was unremarkable. On rectal examination there was perianal erythema and diminished sphincter tone.
Complete blood count showed WBC 15,400/mm3 with a left shift, hematocrit 49%, and normal platelets. Serum chemistries showed glucose 84
mg/dl, albumin 2.9 mg/dl, and calcium 8.5 mg/dl. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the brain, including diffusion weighted imaging, revealed
acute hemorrhagic infarction of the left occipital lobe and acute embolic infarctions of the left frontal and right occipital lobes (Fig 1
and 2). Transesophageal Echocardiogram demonstrated mitral regurgitation and large vegetations on the posterior leaf of the mitral valve.
Splenic and renal infarcts were visible on Computerized Tomography of the abdomen. All of the blood culture bottles and the urine culture
grew methicillin sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. Treatment of the bacterial endocarditis was started with intravenous nafcillin and
gentamicin. The patient had a significant recovery of speech and motor function within a few days. When asked about recent dental work, he
gave a history of a tooth extraction 2–3 days before the hospitalization but was unable to provide information about his dentist. A dentist
from the hospital examined the patient and found no clinical evidence of the extraction. The patient underwent a complete neuropsychiatric
evaluation. He displayed confabulation and perseverance (marriage, retirement, hospitalization were reported using the same date which was
his birthday). He also had significant executive dysfunction including concrete thinking and poor insight regarding his health and cognitive
problems. On hospital day 12 the patient had mitral valve replacement surgery using a bioprosthetic valve. He completed a six-week course of
intravenous antibiotic treatment. He also underwent extensive rehabilitation therapy and was sent home after 8 weeks of hospitalization. On
subsequent follow-up visits the patient showed complete recovery from the stroke and was back to his baseline. In response to questions
about his sexual history the patient indicated having heterosexual relations with multiple partners. However, his answers were inconsistent
and seemed unreliable. Contrast enhancing infarction in occipital lobe (arrow) A closer examination of his medical records revealed that two
years prior to this hospitalization, the patient was admitted with a plastic soda bottle retained in the rectosigmoid for 3 days. The bottle
had been filled with warm water and inserted into his anal canal for sexual stimulation. It slipped all the way into the rectum and could
not be retrieved. His attempts to extract it at home were unsuccessful. In the emergency room his physical examination was normal except for
a palpable mass in the suprapubic area, decreased anal sphincter tone and a dilated rectal vault. On X-ray of the abdomen, the outline of a
plastic bottle was visible in the rectosigmoid (Fig 3). The patient was taken to the operating room and under spinal anesthesia the bottle
was extracted. He had multiple lacerations of the rectal mucosa but there was no perforation. He went home the next day. On follow-up visits
to primary care he was noted to be overall healthy except having mild hypertension. His behavior was indicative of hypomania, but he did not
get a formal psychiatric evaluation. Contrast enhancing infarction in the frontal lobe (arrow). X-ray of abdomen 2 years prior showing
outline of plastic soda bottle in sigmoid colon (arrows). Foreign bodies in the rectum and methods of their extraction have been amply
chronicled in the surgical literature . Sexual stimulation is the reason in a majority of these cases . Local trauma, perforation, and
resultant peritonitis are well known complications . An unlimited PUBMED search for articles on bacteremia or endocarditis related to rectal
foreign body insertion was unfruitful (We tried MeSH terms anal/rectal/colorectal/foreign bodies/anorectal /sexual deviation for the
purpose). Bacteremia and septicemia from barium enema , and therapeutic anal dilatation have been published. Procedures like fiberoptic
sigmoidoscopy are known to cause endocarditis , but septic stroke resulting from endocarditis related to lower gastrointestinal
instrumentation has also not been reported. The patient's history of anorectal insertion of a plastic soda bottle for sexual gratification
is consistent with published reports of use of large objects for this purpose . The resultant rectal trauma can easily lead to bacteremia.
Rectal carriage of Staphylococcus aureus is well documented and is a potential source of infection . This organism tends to be more abundant
on the rectal mucosa than within the feces . In a study of gastrointestinal colonization, Staphylococcus aureus grew from the culture of
rectal swabs in 60% cases versus 53% positive culture of nasal swabs taken from the same subjects . This organism is known to cause
endocarditis of normal heart valves . Neurologic complications of infective endocarditis, particularly embolic events, tend to be higher in
cases of endocarditis caused by Staphylococcus aureus . It is known that few patients with rectal foreign bodies will freely admit to
transanal introduction . This explains to some extent the paucity of literature linking this practice with bacteremia or endocarditis. We
believe our patient was habituated to rectal insertion of foreign bodies and that is evident from his previous history along with the
clinical findings of perianal erythema and diminished sphincter tone . In the absence of a reliable history from the patient, the link
between endocarditis and rectal trauma in this case is based on circumstantial evidence. A further study of patients with well-documented
evidence of rectal foreign body insertion could be the next step to explore this important observation. The rectum is a frequent site of
Staphylococcus aureus carriage. Trauma from foreign objects in the rectum carries a risk of staphylococcal bacteremia that is known to
result in endocarditis of both normal and abnormal heart valves. Further studies are needed to explore this finding. It is important to get
a detailed sexual history from patients visiting primary care clinics. Patient education and warning may help prevent catastrophic
complications of this risky practice. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. BBP carried out the clinical study of the
patient, conceived the study, researched the literature, and wrote the article. TCD carried out the clinical study of the patient,
researched the literature, and edited the article. JFH provided radiological diagnosis, figure legends and computerized figures. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Claudia Hall, NP for providing additional clinical information. A written consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of study.
