Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) is a common retinal vascular disorder with potentially complications: (1) persistent macular edema and
(2) neovascular glaucoma. No safe treatment exists that promotes the return of lost vision. Eyes with CRVO may be predisposed to vitreous
degeneration. It has been suggested that if the vitreous remains attached to the macula owing to a firm vitreomacular adhesion, the
resultant vitreous traction can cause inflammation with retinal capillary dilation, leakage and subsequent edema6. The roll of vitrectomy in
ischemic CRVO surgical procedures has not been evaluated. This is a non comparative, prospective, longitudinal, experimental and descriptive
series of cases. Ten eyes with ischemic CRVO. Vitrectomy with complete posterior hyaloid removal was performed. VA, rubeosis, intraocular
pressure (IOP), and macular edema were evaluated clinically. Multifocal ERG (m-ERG), fluorescein angiography (FAG) and optic coherence
tomography (OCT) were performed. Follow-up was at least 6 months. Moderate improvement of visual acuity was observed in 60% eyes and
stabilized in 40%. IOP changed from 15.7 ± 3.05 mmHg to 14.9 ± 2.69 mmHg post-operative and macular edema from 976 ± 196 μm to 640 ± 191 μm
to six month. The P1 wave amplitude changed from 25.46 ± 12.4 mV to 20.54 ± 11.2 mV. A solo PPV with posterior hyaloid removal may help to
improve anatomic and functional retina conditions in some cases. These results should be considered when analyzing other surgical maneuvers.
Central retinal vein occlusion (CRVO) is a common retinal vascular disorder with potentially complications like reduced vision resulting
from extensive intraretinal hemorrhage, retinal ischemia and persistent macular edema and neovascular glaucoma secondary to iris
neovascularization. Severe visual loss may develop, including blindness. Capillary nonperfusion and retinal ischemia develop in 34% of
patients with CRVO. Iris neovascularization and neovascular glaucoma may occur in 45–85% of ischemic CRVO . No safe treatment exists that
promotes the return of lost vision. Treatments that target the secondary effects of venous occlusion, such as grid laser photocoagulation
for macular edema and prophylactic panretinal laser photocoagulation for nonperfused CRVO, were shown to be ineffective in improving visual
acuity in the Central Vein Occlusion Study (CVOS) . Attempts to bypass venous obstruction in CRVO using laser chorioretinal anastomosis have
been performed with limited success and significant complications . Radial optic neurotomy has been shown to be beneficial for the treatment
of CRVO . Most patients who develop CRVO (50 – 70%) have associated hypertension, cardiovascular disease, or diabetes mellitus . The
treatment of these systemic conditions is not effective in the management of the ocular complications. It has been postulated that vitreous
traction may play a role in the pathogenesis of cystoid macular edema . Eyes with CRVO may be predisposed to vitreous degeneration. It has
been suggested that if the vitreous remains attached to the macula owing to a firm vitreomacular adhesion, the resultant vitreous traction
can cause inflammation with retinal capillary dilation, leakage and subsequent edema . Pars plana vitrectomy is believed to eliminate this
mechanical traction and increase oxygenation to the retina and to reduce the risk of macular edema and neovascularization. The purpose of
this study was to perform an assessment of the safety and efficacy of pars plana vitrectomy combined with complete posterior hyaloid removal
in ischemic CRVO. Non comparative, prospective, longitudinal, experimental and descriptive series of cases of patients with ischemic CRVO
referred to Hospital Luis Sanchez Bulnes, Asociación para Evitar la Ceguera en México, México City. The study was approved by Hospital
Review Committee The inclusion criteria were: confirmed presence of central retinal vein occlusion, less than 6 months evolution with visual
acuity (VA) of <20/100 or those whose VA decreased more than 50% during the follow-up, an over 10 disc diameter area of nonperfused retina,
intraocular pressure ≤ 21 mmHg, age ≥ 21 years old, afferent pupillary defect, ability to obtain good quality fundus photographs and
angiograms and absence of neovascularization. The exclusion criteria in the study eye were: intercurrent eye disease that is likely to
affect VA over study period, presence of any diabetic retinopathy, other retinal vascular disease, vitreous hemorrhage, presence of
neovascularization (iris, angle, retina and disk) or previous laser treatment. Best corrected ETDRS visual acuity (BCVA), relative afferent
pupillary defect (RAPD), slit-lamp examination, indirect ophthalmoscopy, fundus photography, fluorescein angiography (FA), multifocal
electroretino*graphy (mERG) and optic coherence tomography (OCT) were performed preoperatively and at 1, 3, and 6 months postoperatively.
Follow-up was at least 6 months. After informed consent was obtained and a full explanation of the risks and benefits and the experimental
nature of this procedure were conveyed to the patient (in accordance with the Helsinki declaration), patients underwent a standard three
port pars plana vitrectomy was performed, during which the posterior hyaloid was removed using active aspiration. The sclerostomy sites and
conjunctiva were closed in the usual fashion. No panretinal photocoagulation and gas tamponade were used. Macular thickness was analyzed
with OCT (Humphrey 1000; Humphrey Instruments, San Leandro, California). Measurement of central macular thickness was evaluated according to
Hee protocol , which in each eye, six consecutive tomographic cuts were obtained in a radial pattern, surrounding the fovea at similar
angular distances among them. Each one of these cuts was oriented along a line that intersects the foveal center. The central foveal
thickness was registered at the intersection of the 6 cuts. The electrical function of the macular area was determined by multifocal
electroretinography (mERG). The RETI-scan™ multifocal system, produced by Roland Consult, was used for this purpose. The stimulation and
recording of the mERG were performed using the m-sequence technique. Contact lens ERG-JET electrodes as well as one ground electrode in the
center of forehead and two reference electrodes in the temporal region of the patient were placed. The stimulus, consisting of 61 hexagons
covering a visual field of 30°, was presented on a monitor (ELSA 20"-VGA-monitor) with a frame rate of 75 Hz at a distance of 28 cm from the
patient's eye. Each element alternated between black and white (93% contrast, mean luminance 51.8 cd/m2). The patient was instructed to
maintain fixation on longitudinal axes intersecting one focal point. The amplifier setting was 100 μV; the lower cut off frequency was 10 Hz
and the upper cut off frequency was 100 Hz. No notch filter was used. Each recording session was subdivided into 8 recording segments of
approximately 47 seconds. The signals were registered with sampling intervals of 83 mseg. The results were distributed in 5 concentric rings
obtaining for each ring, the N1 amplitude, P1 amplitude, and the implicit times of N1 and P1. The amplitude of the positive component P1 was
measured, and the response density (nV/deg2) was calculated by dividing the response amplitude (nV) by the retinal area (deg2). The study
data are displayed in Table 1 and 2. Patient's age ranged from 57 to 74 years, with a mean of 65.13 years. There were 4 females and 6 males.
All patients were Hispanic. Initial treatment was attempted between January 2002 and February 2003. The time interval range from diagnosis
to treatment was 37 to 270 days, with a mean of 103.13 days. In all patients, the post treatment follow-up examination was at least 6
months. Four patients had diabetes mellitus type 2 and six patients had systemic arterial hypertension. The median preoperative BCVA was
20/600 (range, 20/1600 to 20/300). The median postoperative BCVA was 20/300 (range, 20/1600 to 20/100). VA was unchanged in 4 of 10 eyes
(40%) and improved in 6 of 10 eyes (60%). None eye had no light perception. The median preoperative PIO was 15.7 ± 3.05 mmHg and the median
postoperative PIO was 14.9 ± 2.68 mmHg. Central macular edema registered by OCT changed from 976 ± 196 μm to 640 ± 191 μm to six month. The
P1 wave amplitude of the central ring varied from 25.46 ± 12.4 mV to 20.54 ± 11.2 mV to final follow up. None eye suffered retinal o disc
neovascular membrane. The iris neovascularization was presented in 3 eyes (30%). All these eyes were treated with extensive
photocoagulation. None of these eyes suffered neovascular glaucoma. Eight eyes presented middle opacity of lens. Fine and Brucker and Wallow
and 3 colleagues demonstrated that cystoid macular edema began with ischemia and intracytoplasmic swelling of Müller cells, and speculated
that an intrinsic metabolic agent could cause these changes. The vitreous is believed to store pharmacologic agents that may cause macular
edema. Hikichi and 2 colleagues proposed that in eyes with vitreous macular attachment, the macular edema is persistent because those
metabolic agents remain in contact with the macula. Also they observed that a complete posterior vitreous detachment seems to protect
against retinal or optic disc neovascularization. Another theory asserts that because vitreous fibres extending from the vitreous base to
the macula and Müller cell attachment to the internal limiting lamina are prominent in this region centripetal traction caused by vitreous
contraction after CRVO and transmitted to Müller cells by the vitreous fibres attached to the macula may cause swelling of these cells. Kado
and 6 colleagues showed that macular edema lasted longer in eyes with vitreous macular attachment than in those whose vitreous was
detachment from the macula, due to centripetal traction transmitted to the Müller cells by vitreous fibres inserted into the macula. Based
on these facts, we proposed that a vitrectomy could eliminate the metabolic agents present in the vitreous as well as the mechanical
traction, and in this way might protect against retinal and optic disc neovascularization. Also, pars plana vitrectomy may beneficial
effects upon retinal ischemic by allowing circulation in the vitreous cavity of fluid oxygenated by unaffected retina or others sites in the
eye such as the ciliary body . In our patients, a standard three port pars plana vitrectomy was performed followed by creation of posterior
hyaloid separation and removal of the posterior cortical vitreous. The central macular edema registered by OCT changed from 976 ± 196 μm pre
operative to 640 ± 191 μm to six month. All patients presented persistent cystoid macular edema to six month. The level of visual
improvement seems relatively good when compared with the results of conventional treatment such as retinal photocoagulation, or only
observation. Although 40% of eyes maintained stable visual acuity and 60% of eyes had visual improvement, there was still considerable long-
term visual morbidity in this series. Only two eyes had final VA better than 20/200 (20/100 in both eyes). The rest of eyes had a final VA
of 20/200 or less. Long-term visual morbidity may be corresponding to residual perfused cystoid macular edema or to degenerative squealer of
previous chronic edema. None patient presented significant complication post treatment such as neovascular glaucoma or retinal detachment.
Most patients with CRVO lose their visual acuity permanently because they develop macular edema or ischemia. The degree of retinal hypoxia
and infarction and probably the extent of abnormal vascular permeability may be are reflected in electroretinogram (ERG) amplitude and
timing changes. In our patients, the P1 wave amplitude changed from 25.46 ± 12.4 mV pre operative to 20.54 ± 11.2 mV to six month. Once the
VA of these patients is severely reduced, 80% of them cannot expect any improvement spontaneously . In this study, the pre treatment visual
acuity in all eyes ranged from 20/800 to 20/300 (20/300). It is recognized that earlier intervention probably is favourable to later to
prevent macular scarring from longstanding edema . In our series, in eyes with early treatment (≤90 days), 4 eyes (67%) improved VA and 2
eyes (33%) were unchanged. In eyes with later treatment (>90 days), 2 eyes (50%) improved VA and 2 eyes (50%) were unchanged. In severe
cases of ischemic CRVO, the role of the vitreous was not observed. Increased venous pressure, which leads to damage of the capillary
endothelium and breakdown of the blood-retinal barrier, was reported to be the main cause of macular edema in CRVO . Because capillary
damage may be aggravated sufficiently to negate the effect of complete posterior vitreous detachment on macular edema resolution in severe
cases, the vitreoretinal relationship can only influence the prognosis of macular conditions when there is mild capillary damage in the
macular region. In the ischemic type of CRVO, the reported prevalence of posterior segment and iris neovascularization ranges from 0% to 55%
and from 16% to 67%, respectively . In our series, none eyes presented retinal or optic neovascularization membrane. The iris
neovascularization was presented in 3 patients (30%). The posterior vitreous detachment seems to play a protective role against retinal or
optic disc neovascularization in central retinal vein occlusion , although the vitreoretinal relationship may not influence the development
of iris neovascularization. The efficacy and safety of vitrectomy in these patients is still in question. Further studies such as a
randomized controlled clinical trial are needed to determine whether vitrectomy is of benefit in ischaemic CRVO. Our results suggest that a
solo PPV with posterior hyaloid removal may help to improve anatomic and functional retina conditions in some cases. These results should be
considered when analyzing other surgical maneuvers. A solo PPV with posterior hyaloid removal may help to improve anatomic and functional
retina conditions in some cases. These results should be considered when analyzing other surgical maneuvers. The author(s) declare that they
have no competing interests. CLF: participated in the sequence alignment and drafted the manuscript LST: participated in the sequence
alignment and drafted the manuscript HQM: participated in the sequence alignment JCL: participated in the sequence alignment, sending the
manuscript and doing the corrections JFG: participated in the design of the study and performed the statistical analysis JMJS: participated
in doing and analysis of electrophysiological studies JLGN participated in doing all surgical procedures VMC: participated in its design and
coordination and helped to draft the manuscript The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Patients Characteristics
HBP: high blood pressure; DM: diabetes mellitus; VA: visual acuity; IOP: intraocular pressure; M: masculine; F: feminine; Y: yes; N: no *
Time interval range from diagnosis to treatment IOP, macular thickness and mERG values IOP: intraocular pressure; OCT: optic coherence
tomography; mERG: multifocal electroretinogram; Preop: preoperative; Postop: postoperative
