Catherine Burton is Clinical Research Fellow in the Department of Haematology, University College London, United Kingdom. E-mail:
cb@ctc.ucl.ac.uk Competing Interests: The author declares that she has no competing interests. In this case-based Learning Forum, Burton
takes clinicians through the key steps in diagnosing and managing this patient. A 61-year-old male carpenter presented with ten months'
history of dyspepsia. More recently he had developed epigastric pain and had lost four kilograms in weight because of anorexia. He was
otherwise asymptomatic and in particular there was no history of nausea, vomiting, abdominal distension, melaena, haematemesis, diarrhoea,
constipation, night sweats, or fevers. There was no past medical history of note, and he had a performance status of zero (see Table 1). His
only medication was lansoprazole. He drank no alcohol and smoked 40 cigarettes/day. Examination was unremarkable. All blood tests, including
full blood count, biochemistry, and lactate dehydrogenase, were normal. The differential diagnosis in a patient with dyspepsia, epigastric
pain, and weight loss is gastro-oesophageal reflux, gastritis, gallstones, peptic ulcer, oesophageal/gastric carcinoma, lymphoma, and
inflammatory bowel disease. The patient underwent an endoscopy which showed a 4–5-cm ulcer with rolled edges on the greater curve of the
antrum of the stomach. Appearances were suggestive of a malignant lesion. The likely diagnosis was therefore either gastric carcinoma or
lymphoma—most likely non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL)—specifically, either gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT) lymphoma or diffuse
large B cell lymphoma (DLBCL). Histology revealed a diagnosis of DLBCL (see Figures 1 and 2). The biopsy was positive for surface markers
CD20 and CD79a and surface immunoglobulin (IgM). These markers are found on B cells, and positivity confirmed the B cell origin of the
lymphoma (see Figures 3 and 4). The biopsy was negative for BCL-2 protein expression. Positive BCL-2 expression is associated with an
adverse prognosis. Staining for Helicobacter pylori antibody was negative. In view of the diagnosis of lymphoma, staging investigations were
performed. Computed tomography (CT) imaging showed thickening of the gastro-oesophageal junction (see Figure 5). Multiple subcentimetre
lymph nodes within the abdomen were also noted, but these were not enlarged by CT criteria. CT chest was normal. A bone marrow biopsy was
normal. The patient was therefore diagnosed with stage IE (see Table 2) DLBCL of the stomach. His international prognostic index (IPI) score
was one (see Table 3). The patient was treated with R-CHOP chemotherapy (rituximab, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and
prednisolone). He received four initial courses administered once every three weeks. His chemotherapy course was complicated by a hospital
admission with Klebsiella pneumonia that responded well to antibiotics. After four courses of treatment he underwent a restaging CT and
endoscopy. The CT scan showed improvement in the thickening of the gastro-oesophageal junction and no significant lymphadenopathy (see
Figure 6). The repeat endoscopy and biopsy were normal. The patient went on to have two further courses of consolidation R-CHOP
chemotherapy. Repeat CT imaging after six courses of chemotherapy showed no further change in the thickening of the gastro-oesophageal
junction. In view of the fact that there had been no further response between the fourth and sixth courses of chemotherapy and a biopsy had
been negative, no further consolidation chemotherapy was given. The final CT also showed collapse of the left lower lobe of the patient's
lung. In view of these findings and the patient's history of being a heavy smoker, he underwent a fibre optic bronchoscopy. This revealed a
mucus plug at the orifice of the left lower lobe, probably secondary to his previous pneumonia. The mucosa was normal. A repeat chest X ray
showed re-inflation of the left lower lobe of his lung. At follow-up this patient remains well and asymptomatic and is gaining weight. His
last blood tests were normal. He remains under standard review every three months. Symptoms of dyspepsia and epigastric pain are common,
especially in the Western world. There is a one in ten lifetime risk for people in the Western world of developing a peptic ulcer . If
symptoms persist or clinical history is suggestive of significant pathology, an endoscopy with biopsies is mandatory. Although not at the
top of the list of differential diagnoses, this case highlights the fact that lymphoma needs to be considered as a possible diagnosis. NHL
is the 11th commonest malignancy worldwide. It is increasing in incidence, with more than 300,000 cases worldwide and 9,000 cases in the
United Kingdom diagnosed each year . DLBCL is the most frequently occurring NHL, constituting about one-third of all adult NHL . There is a
slight male predominance, and median age of presentation is in the seventh decade , as in this patient, although the age range is broad.
Patients can present with nodal or extra-nodal disease. Up to 40% of cases are initially confined to extra-nodal sites . The most common
extra-nodal site is the gastrointestinal tract , especially the stomach, although any extra-nodal location can be a primary site. Lymphomas
of the stomach can either be indolent MALT lymphoma or DLBCL, which may or may not be on the background of a MALT lymphoma. For MALT
lymphoma the median age of presentation is in the seventh decade—median age is 61 years—with a slight female predominance . There is a close
association between gastric MALT lymphoma and Helicobacter pylori infection; over 90% of cases are H. pylori positive . For MALT lymphoma,
if the lesion is limited to the gastric mucosa, eradication of the bacteria with triple antibiotic therapy is often sufficient to cause
regression of the lymphoma , whereas DLBCL also requires treatment with chemotherapy. Use of the IPI score , defined by clinical prognostic
factors, is currently the standard approach to stratify patient risk in DLBCL (see Table 3). Difference in outcome, though, between groups
of patients with similar IPI scores indicates that DLBCL encompasses a clinically and biologically heterogeneous group of tumours, which
vary in response to chemotherapy. Combining the IPI risk score with cellular and molecular markers may improve patient risk stratification
at presentation. For example, germinal cell phenotype, defined by BCL-6 and CD10 positivity, has been associated with a better outcome , and
BCL-2 protein expression has been shown to be predictive of a worse outcome . Both have been demonstrated immunohistochemically and
confirmed by gene microarray analysis . Combining cellular prognostic factors with the IPI is likely to become increasingly important in
predicting outcome and tailoring therapy for DLBCL . DLBCL is an aggressive lymphoma but potentially curable. Treatment for DLBCL is
combination chemotherapy plus the monoclonal antibody rituximab . CHOP chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, and
prednisolone) is given every three weeks. Rituximab is a chimeric monoclonal antibody containing human IgG lambda and kappa constant regions
with murine variable regions, which has a high affinity for the CD20 antigen. A dose of 375 mg/m2 given every three weeks with CHOP
chemotherapy is now considered standard therapy for DLBCL. The mechanisms of action of anti-CD20 antibody are multiple and include induction
of antibody-dependent cell-mediated cytotoxicity, induction of complement-mediated lysis, induction of apoptosis, and sensitisation of
resistant lymphoma cells to chemotherapeutic agents. Rituximab and CHOP chemotherapy have non-overlapping toxic effects, with emerging
evidence of synergy . The French GELA group (Groupe d'Etude des Lymphomes de l'Adulte) showed that addition of rituximab to CHOP (R-CHOP)
had significant activity in elderly patients newly diagnosed with DLBCL . CHOP plus rituximab was associated with significantly better
overall response rate (94%), complete response rate (76%), event-free survival, and overall survival than CHOP alone. This survival
advantage in elderly patients (>60 years) with DLBCL following R-CHOP represents the first major therapeutic advance for this group of
patients since the introduction of CHOP nearly 30 years ago. Recent studies show similar benefits in younger patients , so rituximab in
combination with CHOP should be used for all newly diagnosed patients with DLBCL. General toxicity associated with chemotherapy includes
mucositis, gastrointestinal disturbance, myelosuppression (increasing the risk of infections and bleeding), alopecia, parathesiae, and
infertility. Specific side effects of chemotherapeutic agents used for treating NHL are shown in Table 4. Side effects of rituximab include
fevers, headache, nausea, lethargy, myalgia, arthralgia, skin erythema, pruritus, and hypotension. Most of these symptoms disappear upon
temporary slowing or discontinuation of the treatment or after the administration of paracetamol and/or anti-allergic medication. Fatalities
following severe cytokine release syndrome—which is characterised by severe shortness of breath and associated with features of tumour lysis
syndrome—have occurred 1–2 hours after infusion of rituximab(, Section 8.2.3; ). Patients with a high tumour burden as well as those with
pulmonary insufficiency or infiltration are at increased risk and should be monitored very closely, and a slower rate of infusion should be
considered as necessary. Related to this case in particular, patients with gastric ulcers are at risk of perforation on initiation of
treatment. Such patients should receive proton-pump inhibitor prophylaxis during chemotherapy. There is a need for close observation when
chemotherapy is started, but the presence of a gastric ulcer is not an indication for dose reduction. Response to chemotherapy needs to be
monitored on a regular basis. Patients should be restaged after four courses of R-CHOP chemotherapy with CT scanning. If the bone marrow was
involved at diagnosis, then a repeat biopsy is required. In cases such as our patient where disease was apparent elsewhere, a repeat biopsy
of that lesion should be performed. In the UK, standard practice for those in complete remission with no evidence of disease is to receive a
further two courses of R-CHOP consolidation. Those in partial remission (≥50% improvement) after four courses are restaged after six
courses, and if they are improving they go on to receive two further courses of R-CHOP. If there is no further improvement, consolidation
radiotherapy is considered. Those in partial remission after four courses with no further improvement after six courses of R-CHOP receive
consolidation radiotherapy or are considered for second-line treatment with an alternative regimen containing different chemotherapeutic
agents. Practice elsewhere in Europe varies, with up to eight courses of R-CHOP being given regardless of remission status. Although not
universally available, FDG-PET (2-fluoro-2-deoxy-d-glucose positron emission tomography) is a functional imaging technique that is currently
the most accurate modality to identify residual disease and differentiate it from scar tissue in patients with residual radiological
abnormalities . In general, re-biopsy of suspicious lesions should be considered. In all patients a careful history of the nature of the
dyspepsia and the associated symptoms should be taken. All patients over 45 years with dyspepsia should have an endoscopy performed. For
younger patients, those with persistent symptoms or clinical history suggestive of significant pathology such as weight loss should also
undergo endoscopy.Not all gastric lesions require complete surgical resection. It is imperative that an endoscopy with biopsies is performed
to allow histological diagnosis.Patients with DLBCL require staging to ascertain the extent of disease and for comparison with post-therapy
imaging. Determination of the IPI score is important to assign risk group and to predict prognosis.Optimal treatment for DLBCL is CHOP
chemotherapy in combination with rituximab. Patients should receive 6–8 courses. In all patients a careful history of the nature of the
dyspepsia and the associated symptoms should be taken. All patients over 45 years with dyspepsia should have an endoscopy performed. For
younger patients, those with persistent symptoms or clinical history suggestive of significant pathology such as weight loss should also
undergo endoscopy. Not all gastric lesions require complete surgical resection. It is imperative that an endoscopy with biopsies is
performed to allow histological diagnosis. Patients with DLBCL require staging to ascertain the extent of disease and for comparison with
post-therapy imaging. Determination of the IPI score is important to assign risk group and to predict prognosis. Optimal treatment for DLBCL
is CHOP chemotherapy in combination with rituximab. Patients should receive 6–8 courses. computed tomography diffuse large B cell lymphoma
international prognostic index mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue non-Hodgkin lymphoma DLBCL is composed of large transformed lymphoid cells,
with oval to round nuclei with fine chromatin and membrane-bound nucleoli. Surface and/or cytoplasmic immunoglobulin (IgM > IgG > IgA) is
demonstrated in 50%–75% of cases. BCL-2 is positive in approximately 30%–50% of cases and is associated with a poorer prognosis. DLBCL
usually expresses various pan-B markers, e.g. CD20 and CD79a. MIB-1 staining demonstrates proliferative activity of DLBCL. Proportion of
cells stained is usually greater than 40%. aSuffix “E” added to the stage denotes involvement of extra-nodal organ or site. Source: . aFive
clinical features at presentation, indicative of a poor prognosis, used in calculating the IPI score are age greater than 60, Ann Arbor
stage III or IV, elevated serum lactate dehydrogenase, performance status 2–4, and having more than one extra-nodal disease site. One point
is given for each criterion met. Patients are assigned to one of four risk groups on the basis of their number of presenting risk factors.
Citation: Burton C (2005) A 61-year-old man with dyspepsia and weight loss. PLoS Med 2(6): e154.
