Postoperative wound dehiscence is a difficult problem for the general surgeon. Often, patients are too sick, or the wound environment is too
hostile, to undergo primary repair. When an eventual repair is performed, a variety of methods are available, but most are associated with
unacceptably high morbidity rates, specifically high incidences of recurrences and poor cosmetic outcome. We present here a case of
postoperative wound dehiscence following a colostomy takedown repaired in a previously undescribed way—a laparoscopically assisted ventral
incisional hernia repair. The method of repair is described, and the current literature regarding alternatives is reviewed. The treatment of
ventral incisional hernias has undergone a significant evolution in the age of laparoscopy. Laparoscopic surgery has offered the advantages
of minimal pain, ease of dissection of adhesions, quicker return to activities, shorter stay in the hospital, and the ability to identify
additional defects. It also has a lower recurrence rate compared with that with primary repairs and open mesh repair. Many general surgeons
now consider the laparoscopic method the method of choice for the repair of incisional hernias. The problem remains of what to do with the
ventral incisional hernia that occurs after a wound dehiscence. These defects are very large, with thin overlying skin that is prone to
vascular compromise. Even after laparoscopic repair, the patients are often unhappy with the cosmetic appearance of their wound. We propose
a combination of the 2 approaches to maximize the benefits of the primary repair, specifically the cosmetically pleasing single mid-line
incision, with the multiple benefits of laparoscopy, specifically the low recurrence rate, ease of adhesiolysis, and the ability to identify
other defects of laparoscopic surgery. The patient is a 52-year-old male who is HIV positive and underwent an emergent Hartmann's procedure
for a rectosigmoid perforation secondary to a foreign body. The patient recovered from that procedure well, then underwent an uneventful
colostomy takedown. This postoperative course was complicated by a wound infection at the midline incision and eventual complete wound
dehiscence. The wound was allowed to heal by secondary intention. The patient presented 2 years later with a very large ventral incisional
hernia and requested laparoscopic repair. After an appropriate preoperative workup, the patient was taken to the operating room where an
uneventful laparoscopic ventral incisional hernia repair with a Bard Composix mesh was performed. The overlying skin of the defect was thin,
but viable. Postoperatively, the patient did well initially, however, still did complain about the size of his scar and his increased (and
unchanged) waist size. At 4-weeks after surgery, the patient was noted to have erythema and induration at the midpoint of his defect. He was
started on oral antibiotics and the cellulitis resolved. At subsequent follow-up, mesh was exposed (Figure 1). The patient was then offered
excision of the mesh and another repair of the ventral incisional hernia in a “laparoscopic-assisted” fashion. Cosmetic appearance at
4-month follow-up after initial laparoscopic repair with exposed mesh present at mid-point of incision. The patient was taken to the
operating room, and an initial exploratory laparoscopy was performed. An extensive lysis of adhesions was accomplished and an additional,
occult hernia defect at the previous colostomy site was identified. The insufflation was then released and a scar revision, followed by
exploratory laparotomy, was performed. Two 8 x 10-inch pieces of Surgisis Gold mesh were placed into the abdomen through the midline
incision. The midline defect was closed primarily with interrupted figure of 8 sutures of #1 PDS. Two drains were placed in the subcutaneous
tissues, and the skin was closed with staples. The abdomen was then reinsufflated, and the meshes were fixated to cover both defects with an
approximate 7-inch overlap with an Autosuture Hernia Tacker. The patient was treated for a significant amount of postoperative pain,
however, at one-month follow-up, had a straight, single midline incision, minimal pain, and noted a decrease in his waist size of 6 inches
(Figure 2). At 6-month follow-up, the patient had no evidence of recurrence and was pain free (Figure 3). Initial postoperative appearance
after second operation: laparoscopic-assisted repair. Postoperative appearance 3 months after laparoscopic-assisted repair. Any incision in
the abdominal wall weakens it, and no current method for incisional closure is perfect. Incisional hernias complicate approximately 10% of
laparotomies.1 They are even more common in the presence of wound infection or elevated body mass index (BMI). The choice of repair depends
on many factors, including anatomy of the abdominal wall, contamination, the condition of the patient, BMI, surgeon preference, and
location/size of the defect. This has lead to a variety of methods for closure of the hernia defect. Common methods for closure include
primary closure, open or laparoscopic mesh repair, and component separation technique. The primary suture repair of a defect is followed by
recurrence in 20% to 50% of patients.1–3 Open mesh repairs have a recurrence rate of 10% to 20% with an associated high-morbidity rate
related to pain, infection, and seroma formation. The component separation technique is useful in large abdominal wall defects but is
associated with a high recurrence rate. In one series, 12 of 43 patients had recurrences, possible explanations thought to be recurrence
secondary to tension on the repair and ischemia from transection of perforating branches of the epigastric artery.4 Other methods for repair
include tissue expansion, pedicled flap, and free flap techniques, but these are limited in their availability to the average general
surgery patient. The laparoscopic mesh repair has rapidly become accepted among general surgeons for multiple reasons. It was first reported
in 1993, and it has a remarkably low recurrence rate across many series. Berger et al5 reported 4 recurrences in 150 patients after
laparoscopic repair with no reported mesh infections. Carbajo and colleagues6 described a remarkably low recurrence rate of 4.4% after an
average 4 years of patient follow-up. Just recently, Gillian et al7 reported a consecutive series of 100 patients undergoing laparoscopic
ventral incisional hernia repair with only one recurrence and that was repaired laparoscopically. Other authors8 have highlighted the lower
incidence of perioperative complications and shorter hospital stay in patients undergoing laparoscopic hernia repair. Another value of the
laparoscopic approach has been the improved visualization offered by the laparoscope to reduce the incidence of missed hernias. One study6
reported an average of 4.8 abdominal wall defects identified during the laparoscopic approach to incisional hernias. Lastly, any surgeon who
has performed laparoscopy will offer the ease of adhesiolysis and the ability to place a larger mesh than during open surgery. The benefits
of laparoscopy in the obese patient with regards to exposure and decreased wound complications make the laparoscopic approach ideal.9 Still
some problems with the laparoscopic approach remain, including the frequency of seromas, unchanged scar appearance, and the limitations
based on surgeon experience. Some authors10 also argue that the recurrence rates are comparable to those for open mesh hernioplasty for
larger hernias. The treatment of a wound dehiscence is even more complicated. A high incidence of recurrence exists no mater what method is
used to “close” the abdomen. Frequently, very dense adhesions limit the amount of fascia available for wound closure. The use of special
devices to allow the gradual closing of wound edges together, such as Velcrolike products (Wittmann Patch) that are sutured temporarily to
the fascial edges to allow sutureless reentry and primary closure as abdominal swelling decreases, are still complicated by infection, bowel
injury during multiple reentries, and recurrent incisional hernias. Laparoscopic repair is hampered by vascularity of the thick overlying
tissue—the granulation tissue from secondary wound healing or skin grafting are both very susceptible to vascular compromise during
adhesiolysis after a laparoscopic repair is performed. A marriage of 2 techniques— combining the multiple benefits of laparoscopic hernia
repair with the improved cosmetic outcome of primary repair—should maximize the benefits of both. By combining the 2 techniques, the
ultimate outcome would be the minimal recurrence similar to laparoscopic mesh repair with the cosmetic appearance of a single, midline
incision. A similar technique has been described in open, complicated incisional hernia repair. A method for closing large midline
incisional hernias by using both the fascia and a mesh was described with no recurrences in 10 patients with large ventral incisional
hernias (median follow-up 1 year 5 months).11 By using a laparoscopic-assisted approach as described in this case report, several benefits
accrued to this patient: first, the easy placement of 2 very large pieces of mesh through an open abdomen to be later fixated to the
abdominal wall rather than creating incredibly large tissue flaps that are prone to seroma formation; second, the ease of adhesiolysis
especially in this patient where an inflammatory response to an infected mesh occurred; third, an additional defect was recognized that was
not detectable by physical examination and was easily repaired laparoscopically. The patient also voiced extreme satisfaction with the
repair on several follow-up visits and noted his single, midline scar, where previously a rather large accumulation of granulation tissue
was present, and the decrease in his waist size from a size 38 to a 32. We used an absorbable, bioprosthetic mesh in this patient because of
the presence of infection. Several such meshes are currently available, and all provide a 3-dimensional lattice for tissue ingrowth while
enhancing wound strength. Ultimately, they are completely absorbed and replaced by the body's own scar tissue. The difficulties with placing
a nonabsorbable mesh in an infected field are obvious. Other authors have suggested “combining minimally invasive” and “open” surgery
techniques. Schneider and colleagues12 recently described the combination of laparoscopic and open dissection in melanoma patients. By using
endoscopic deep pelvic dissection combined with superficial open inguinal dissection, they accomplished a complete oncologic dissection
while decreasing the morbidity associated with open deep iliac node dissection. The vascular literature is also currently seeing a marriage
of endovascular and laparoscopic techniques. As surgeons become more familiar with the laparoscope, minimally invasive techniques will
likely become more and more a part of, rather than a replacement for, traditionally “open” procedures. We recommend a combination of
approaches, first a laparoscopic adhesiolysis, then an open scar revision, placement of mesh and primary hernia repair, to be followed by a
laparoscopic “buttressing” of the primary repair and repair of any additional defects if present. This combined method achieves a better
cosmetic outcome than the completely laparoscopic ventral incisional hernia repair and still takes advantage of the multiple benefits
afforded to laparoscopic surgery. Disclosure: The authors have no financial interest in any commercial device, equipment, or instrument
mentioned in this article.
