This report depicts the feasibility of the concomitant repair of a large direct inguinal hernia with mesh by using the intraperitoneal onlay
approach after extra-peritoneal laparoscopic radical prostatectomy. A 66-year-old man with localized adenocarcinoma of the prostate was
referred for laparoscopic radical prostatectomy. The patient also had a 4-cm right, direct inguinal hernia, found on physical examination.
To minimize the risk of infection of the mesh, an extraperitoneal laparoscopic prostatectomy was performed in the standard fashion after
which transperitoneal access was obtained for the hernia repair. The hernia repair was completed by reduction of the hernia sac, followed by
prosthetic mesh onlay. In this fashion, the peritoneum separated the prostatectomy space from the mesh. A single preoperative and
postoperative dose of cefazolin was administered. The procedure was completed with no difficulty. Total operative time was 4.5 hours with an
estimated blood loss of 450 mL. The final pathology revealed pT2cN0M0 prostate cancer with negative margins. No infectious or bowel
complications occurred. At 10-month follow-up, no evidence existed of recurrence of prostate cancer or the hernia. Concomitant
intraperitoneal laparoscopic mesh hernia repair and extraperitoneal laparoscopic prostatectomy are feasible. This can decrease the risk of
potential infectious complications by separating the mesh from the space of Retzius where the prostatectomy is performed and the lower
urinary tract is opened. It is estimated that 5% to 10% of patients who are candidates for radical retropubic prostatectomy have a
concomitant inguinal hernia. The anatomic view and simultaneous repair of inguinal hernias during radical retropubic prostatectomy has been
well described.1,2 Laparoscopic repair of inguinal hernias with mesh is also well described and can be performed safely and with a low
recurrence rate.3,4 Both laparoscopic inguinal hernia and laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (LRP) can be performed in an extraperitoneal or
transperitoneal fashion. Although rare, the possibility of exposure of the mesh to urinary extravasation and subsequent infection is a
concern. Herein, we describe the technique of concomitant repair of a large inguinal hernia defect with mesh utilizing the intraperitoneal
onlay approach (IPOM) in the same setting and immediately after extraperitoneal laparoscopic radical prostatectomy (EP-LRP). A 66-year-old
man with Gleason 7 (3 + 4) adenocarcinoma of the prostate was referred for laparoscopic radical prostatectomy. He had no major co-
morbidities but complained of a bulge in his groin, which had been present for 5 years. The prostate specific antigen (PSA) was 9ng/dL, and
digital rectal examination revealed an enlarged prostate with no nodules (clinical stage T1c.) The patient also had a 4-cm right direct
inguinal hernia, found on physical examination. He was 6 feet tall and weighed 240 lbs. An extraperitoneal nerve-sparing laparoscopic
prostatectomy and a bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy were performed in the standard fashion with a 5-trocar approach. The space was
developed with the Oval-Preperitoneal Distention Balloon (United States Surgical, Norwalk, CT). After 5 minutes, the balloon was removed,
and the Blunt Tip Trocar with cuff (United States Surgical, Norwalk, CT) was introduced. Insufflation was carried out to 15 mm Hg under
direct vision. A large hernia defect could be seen and contents could be easily reduced while the extraperitoneal insufflation pressure was
maintained at 15 mm Hg (Figure 1). Large amounts of preperitoneal fat were encountered. The prostate was enlarged with a prominent median
lobe, necessitating a wide bladder neck resection and laparoscopic bladder neck reconstruction. Bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection was
performed in the standard fashion. The specimen was extracted through an extension of the umbilical port. To minimize the risk of mesh
infection, we elected to perform the hernia repair intraperitoneally. The blunt tip trocar with cuff was inserted and secured in the
peritoneal space by dividing the posterior rectus sheet and peritoneum under direct vision. All other trocars were reinserted through the
same skin incisions into the peritoneal cavity under direct vision. The hernia defect was visualized intraperitoneally (Figure 2). Direct
inguinal hernia defect as viewed through the extraperitoneal space of Retzius. The hernia defect as viewed intraperitoneally. Note the
peritoneum loosely hanging medially and anteriorly due to previous dissection of the space of Retzius. The hernia sac was reduced. A 5-cm ×
10-cm Gore-Tex mesh was laid on the defect to cover it completely. The mesh onlay was secured with the laparoscopic tack device Protac
(United States Surgical, Norwalk, CT) to Cooper's ligament, the rectus sheath, and laterally to the iliopubic tract (Figure 3). In this
fashion, the posterior rectus sheet and peritoneum separated the space of Retzius from the mesh. A single preoperative and postoperative
dose of cefazolin was administered. The completed mesh onlay hernioplasty. Total operative time was 270 minutes. This included 225 minutes
for the prostatectomy and 45 minutes for the hernioplasty. Estimated blood loss was 450 mL. The pelvic drain was removed on postoperative
day 1, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 3. The catheter was removed on postoperative day 10, as was routine for all our
LRP patients at the time. The final pathology revealed pT2cN0M0 prostate cancer (Gleason score 4+ 4=8) with negative margins. Total urinary
control was regained at 4 months postoperatively. At 10 months postoperatively, the PSA remained undetectable at <0.04 ng/dL, and the
patient had no evidence of hernia recurrence, infection, or bowel obstruction. The presence of inguinal hernias at the time of planned,
radical retropubic prostatectomy is not uncommon.1 Choi et al2 have described the technique of preperitoneal prosthetic mesh hernioplasty
during radical retropubic prostatectomy and found it to be superior to the nonmesh technique with no significant complications. Recently,
the laparoscopic approach to inguinal hernia repair has emerged as an acceptable alternative to the open approach with minimal morbidity and
faster recovery with comparable minimal recurrence rates of 0% to 4.5% with experience.5 Recent meta-analysis of randomized clinical trials
comparing open and laparoscopic inguinal hernia repair revealed equivalent efficacy and low recurrence rates combined with faster recovery
and significantly fewer postoperative complications in the laparoscopic group.6 Various techniques have been developed for the laparoscopic
hernia repair including the totally extraperitoneal repair, the transabdominal preperitoneal repair (TAPP), and the intraperitoneal mesh
onlay repair (IPOM).3,5,6 As with hernia repairs, laparoscopic prostatectomy can be performed in a transperitoneal or extraperitoneal
approach. Stolzenburg et al, who have described their technique of extraperitoneal radical prostatectomy, recently reported their technique
of simultaneous extraperitoneal laparoscopic hernia repair with mesh in 10 patients.7 No infectious complications occurred in this group.
Allaf et al8 have reported on a case where both operations were done transperitoneally with no complications. Although reassuring, the
theoretical risk of mesh infection resulting from a urine leak from the urethro-vesical anastomosis does exit. In addition, an external
drain is routinely placed in the proximity of the anastomosis after a radical prostatectomy. Even after a watertight anastomosis is ensured,
the possibility of prolonged drainage due to lymphorrhea, resulting from pelvic lymph node dissection always exits. The possible prolonged
presence of an external drain, in the same space where a synthetic mesh is used can raise the stakes for foreign body colonization and
infection. The TAPP procedure is generally regarded as the laparoscopic procedure of choice for inguinal hernia repairs and is associated
with minimal morbidity and low recurrence rates.9 In this operation, the parietal peritoneum and preperitoneal contents are dissected to
expose the myopectineal orifice.5,9 After placement of the appropriate size mesh prosthesis, the peritoneal defect is re-approximated over
the mesh. However, during transperitoneal LRP and pelvic lymph node dissection, there is wide dissection of the parietal peritoneum to
mobilize the bladder. Attempts to retroperitonealize the mesh onlay are futile and not possible. This can leave the mesh in close proximity
to the anastomosis and the pelvic drain. We elected to perform the laparoscopic intraperitoneal mesh onlay inguinal hernia repair (IPOM)
with Gore-Tex after an EP-LRP and lymphadenectomy in our patient. The IPOM method is easy to perform and is a viable alternative in this
clinical scenario that ensures the separation of the prostatectomy space (space of Retzius) and the mesh by the posterior rectus sheet and
peritoneum. No contact occurred between the mesh and the anastomosis or pelvic drain. The IPOM method is a simple procedure that can be used
to cover large defects and to treat both direct and indirect hernias successfully.10–12 The downside of an intraperitoneal mesh onlay
inguinal hernioplasty has been suggested to be bowel adhesions to the mesh, resulting in bowel obstruction or subsequent fistula
formation.13 These complications are rare and decrease with surgical experience.5 We elected to use Gore-Tex, because the rate of adhesions
has been found to be significantly less with its use while providing equivalent tensile strength compared with the strength of Marlex
(polypropylene).14 Furthermore, intraperitoneal mesh onlay techniques are routinely used in laparoscopic ventral or umbilical hernia
repairs. The larger risk for mesh hernioplasties is not bowel obstruction or fistula formation but potential infection in the setting of a
clean contaminated case where the urinary tract is entered. Complications such as hematoma and seroma have been reported after open and
laparoscopic inguinal hernia repairs.5 Coupled with lymphatic drainage and possibly urinary extravasation in the same space, infection of
the prosthetic mesh can occur that can necessitate removal of the mesh. Choi et al2 do not report a case of mesh infection in 35 patients
who underwent mesh hernioplasties during radical retropubic prostatectomy. When a chance exists of significant urinary leakage or lymphatic
drainage, however, they suggest a nonmesh repair.2 Current surgical practice favors the use of tension-free repairs with mesh for large
inguinal defects.5 Our patient had an obese pelvis and had a large prostate removed with significant laparoscopic bladder neck
reconstruction and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection. We deemed our patient at higher than average risk for urinary extravasation and
lymphatic drainage. Simultaneous EP-LRP and IPOM hernioplasty is a unique combination in the surgeon's armamentarium to treat localized
prostate cancer patients with concomitant inguinal hernias. As such, both surgical objectives can be attained efficiently in the appropriate
patient with minimal morbidity.
