Massive splenomegaly due to multifocal littoral cell angioma was discovered incidentally in a 55-year-old man during a workup for an
unrelated condition. The tumor was removed successfully by laparoscopic splenectomy. We report the second case of littoral cell angioma of
the spleen treated laparoscopically. Littoral cell angioma (LCA) of the spleen is a new subtype of benign vascular tumor that involves the
cells that line the splenic sinus channels. This tumor expresses both vascular and histiocytic antigens. Splenectomy is both diagnostic and
therapeutic. We present a case of LCA of the spleen treated successfully with laparoscopic splenectomy. Our review of the literature
revealed only 1 other report of splenic LCA treated laparoscopically.1 A 55-year-old man with a history of right-sided flank pain presented
to the emergency department. The pain was caused by a right renal stone that passed without treatment. Incidentally on the computed
tomographic (CT) scan that was part of his workup, an abnormally large spleen with numerous poorly defined hypodense areas was noted (Figure
1). His past medical history was significant for hypertension, type 2 diabetes mellitus, Crohn's disease, and obesity, but negative for any
family history of cancer. His previous surgical history included laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The patient had no known drug allergies, and
his current medications included calan SR, enalapril, doxazosin, glyburide, metformin, and asacol. He had a distant history of tobacco use
and used alcohol occasionally. He denied any constitutional symptoms, such as fever, night sweats, and chills. Computed tomographic scan
demonstrating abnormally large spleen (arrow) with multiple hypodense areas. On physical examination, he was a well appearing, obese man who
was 71 inches tall and weighed 315 lbs. His blood pressure was 176/70 and his heart rate was 92. Abdominal examination revealed an obese
abdomen without tenderness, distension, masses, hernias, or organomegaly. The rest of his physical examination was un-remarkable. Laboratory
results revealed normal white blood cell count and platelet count. He was slightly anemic with a hemoglobin of 13.7 g/mL (normal range, 14.0
to 18.0). The differential count was also within normal limits. The basic metabolic panel was within normal limits except for glucose of 225
mg/dL (normal range, 70 to 130). Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed multiple abnormal areas of very low signal intensity on T1-weighted
images, and mixed signal intensity was present on the T2-weighted images. Postcontrast films showed abnormal enhancement in all of the
abnormal areas except 1 medial area, which resembled a simple cyst. The differential diagnosis at this point was lymphoma, metastatic
disease, or an infectious process with microabscess formation. During laparoscopic splenectomy, the spleen was noted to be very large with
multiple irregularities on its surface. It was removed through one 5-mm viewing port and two 5-mm and one 12-mm working ports. The 12-mm
port was enlarged to a 4-cm incision to remove the spleen. On gross pathology, the spleen weighed 788 grams and measured 19x10x6 cm. The
patient had several spongy hemorrhagic circumscribed nodules that measured up to 6 cm in diameter. On microscopic pathology, the sectioned
specimen revealed splenic parenchyma with nodular collections of varying sized vascular channels forming discrete but not circumscribed
angiomas, some of the spaces of which showed organizing thromboses separated by compressed red pulp. The cells lining these varied from flat
to polygonal to cuboidal and had benign uniform nuclei, sometimes containing hemosiderin pigment, sometimes were vacuolated, and rarely
showed erythrophagocytosis. Histiocytic markers factor 8 immunoperoxidase stain and CD68 stained brightly to light up these cells. No
evidence was present of a malignant component. The patient did well postoperatively and was discharged to home on postoperative day 2
tolerating a regular diet. One year postoperatively, he is doing well. Vascular tumors, the most common primary tumors of the spleen, have
been divided into 3 types as differentiated by level of aggressiveness: benign (hemangiomas, lymphangiomas, and hamartomas), intermediate
(hemangioendotheliomas), and malignant tumors (angiosarcomas).2 LCA of the spleen was first described in 1991 as a new subtype of vascular
tumor that arises from the normal littoral cells that line the sinus channels of the splenic red pulp and expresses both vascular and
histiocytic antigens.3 A malignant subtype, littoral cell angiosarcoma has also been described and possesses cytologically atypical cells
and malignant morphologic features, such as invasion of surrounding organs.4 Clinically, patients with LCA present with splenomegaly,
thrombocytopenia, anemia, or with constitutional symptoms, such a fever of unknown origin. Patients can also present completely
asymptomatically. The male-to-female distribution is nearly equal. CT findings consistent with LCA are multiple small ovoid areas of
hypoattenuation on contrast-enhanced CT performed during the portal venous phase. These findings can also be seen in other primary splenic
neoplasms that lead to diffuse involvement of the spleen. Consequently, metastatic disease, lymphoma, sarcoidosis, Kaposi's sarcoma, or
infectious processes that lead to microabscess formation may mimic LCA.2 LCA has characteristic morphologic and immunohistochemical
characteristics that differentiate it from other vascular splenic tumors. Gross pathology often reveals a large spleen with multiple nodular
lesions. Microscopically, the lesions vary from narrow sinus-like channels to large spaces lined with cuboidal to tall pseudopapillated
cells, sometimes containing hemosiderin and red cells. These spaces are surrounded by compressed red pulp, all different findings from the
more common cavernous hemangioma. Immunohistochemical staining for factor 8 and CD68 are characteristic of LCA, showing both vascular and
histiocytic phenotypes.5 Our patient's specimen revealed gross, microscopic, and immunohistochemical changes diagnostic of splenic LCA. The
treatment for LCA is splenectomy, which is both diagnostic and therapeutic. Interestingly, one third of the previously reported cases were
associated with either malignant lymphomas or visceral organ cancer,6 a correlation that was not seen in our patient. Although LCAs of the
spleen are considered a benign clinical entity, scattered reports7 have been made of tumors with more malignant behavior presenting with
metastatic disease. These patients were found to have microscopic changes consistent with LCA with malignant areas and areas with cellular
atypia. These cases suggest that due to the subtle differences between benign and malignant tumors, patients should be followed for signs of
recurrence and metastasis. Our search of the literature revealed only 1 other report in English of laparoscopic splenectomy for LCA.1
Studies8 have shown laparoscopic splenectomy to be superior to open splenectomy for certain diseases, such as idiopathic thrombocytopenic
purpura, with its attendant benefits of decreased pain medication needed, earlier oral intake, and decreased length of stay. Kercher et al9
found that a laparoscopic approach was beneficial for massive splenomegaly (defined as craniocaudal dimension ≥17 cm and weight ≥600 grams),
which is also supported by our experience with this patient. Brodsky et al10 also support laparoscopic splenectomy for an assortment of
diseases, even in the setting of splenomegaly. Rosen et al1 found laparoscopic splenectomy to be safe for both benign and malignant
hematologic conditions, including Idiopathic Thrombocytopenic Purpura and a case of LCA, with a conversion rate in their series of 5%. The
ability of our patient to tolerate a regular diet and be discharged by postoperative day 2, as well as the avoidance of a large painful
subcostal incision that would have hindered pulmonary toilet in this obese patient, underscore the benefit of laparoscopic splenectomy.
Primary tumors of the spleen are quite rare when lymphoid and hematologic tumors are excluded. LCA should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of multinodular splenectomy, especially in the presence of anemia, thrombocytopenia, or splenic lesions in the absence of
associated adenopathy. LCA with splenomegaly is amenable to laparoscopic splenectomy diagnostically and therapeutically.
