Torsion of the gallbladder is an unusual cause of gangrenous cholecystitis. Even with the advent of recent radiological imaging modalities,
the preoperative diagnosis of this entity remains elusive. Herein, we present a case of gallbladder torsion in a 76-year-old lady who
successfully underwent laparoscopic derotation and cholecystectomy. Gallbladder torsion, though first described by Wendel1 in 1898 is an
extremely rare cause of abdominal pain. Its incidence has been variously reported in different literature. The treatment of choice
traditionally has been exploratory laparotomy with cholecystectomy. Herein, we present a case of gallbladder torsion diagnosed at emergency
laparoscopy followed by derotation and laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The patient was a 76-yearold female physician, hypothyroid and
hypertensive, admitted as an emergency patient with complaints of upper abdominal pain of 3-day duration. Pain was greater in the
epigastrium and was radiating to the right hypochondrium. She had been examined earlier and diagnosed with acute cholecystitis at another
center where she was managed conservatively with IV fluids, antibiotics, and analgesics with no relief. At the time of admission, she was
pyrexial with a temperature of 37.92°C. Her pulse was 98 beats per minute, and her blood pressure was 130/90 mm Hg. No icterus was present,
and her hydration was good. Abdominal examination showed tenderness in the epigastrium and right hypochondrium with guarding. Laboratory
investigations showed a grossly raised white cell count with neutrophil leucocytosis and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR). Her
thyroid profile as well as liver function tests were normal. An ultrasound of the whole abdomen showed a distended horizontally placed
gallbladder with irregular wall thickening containing multiple calculi. (Figure 1). Ultrasound abdomen showing distended, horizontally
placed gallbladder with calculi. Since the patient's temperature and abdominal pain did not settle within the first 24 hours with
antibiotics, an emergency laparoscopy was done. At laparoscopy, a grossly distended, gangrenous gallbladder was seen. To facilitate further
progress, the gallbladder was decompressed by aspiration and lifted up (Figure 2). The Calot's triangle area was edematous. To our surprise,
on dissection, we noticed that the gallbladder had undergone complete rotation along its long axis (Figure 3). It was derotated in a
clockwise fashion (Figure 4). After untwisting, it was found that the anticlockwise twist had occurred above the impacted stone at the neck
of the gallbladder. The mesentry attached to the gallbladder neck was dissected. The Calot's triangle was opened. The cystic artery was
clipped and divided. The cystic duct stone was milked, and the duct was clipped and divided. The gallbladder was dissected off the liver
surface with a diathermy hook, put in an endobag, and extracted through the epigastric port. A suction drain was placed in the right
subhepatic space. Distended gangrenous gallbladder being decompressed. Torsion of the neck of the gallbladder. The gallbladder being
untwisted in a clockwise fashion. The postoperative period was uneventful. The patient was started on clear oral fluids on the second
postoperative day, followed by a soft solid diet. She was discharged on the fourth postoperative day. The histopathology report of the
specimen showed gangrenous necrotizing cholecystitis. Numerous cases of gallbladder torsion have been reported though the cause is still
elusive. This case exemplifies the age and sex distribution of patients who are predisposed to torsion (Age – greatest in the eight and
ninth decade with a female preponderance ratio of 3:1).2–4 The prerequisites for gallbladder torsion are (1) anomalies in peritoneal
attachment of the gallbladder allowing greater mobility2,5 and (2) an inciting event causing gallbladder rotation around a fixed point,
usually the cystic duct. Though the variation in peritoneal attachment of the gallbladder is congenital, the predisposing factor is more
commonly acquired with age. Wendel1 coined the phrase “floating gallbladder” to describe a gallbladder that was pedunculated, hanging
completely free from the liver, suspended only to a cystic duct mesentry. The gallbladder can also be connected to the liver by a mobile
mesentry extending to various lengths towards the fundus. The inciting events of torsion may be either mechanical or hormonal changes that
affect the gallbladder. The mechanical events may be sudden shifts in body position, intense peristalsis of adjacent viscera, and blunt
trauma. Increased cholecystokinin production leading to gallbladder peristalsis after a fatty meal has been proposed as the hormonal basis
of gallbladder torsion. In this particular case, the free-lying gallbladder suspended by the cystic duct mesentry with stone impacted at the
neck of the gallbladder formed the basis of torsion with the cystic duct as the axis point. Gallbladder torsion may occur in a clockwise or
counterclockwise fashion. Two types of gall bladder torsion have been described: (1) Incomplete torsion with <180 degree rotation, and (2)
Complete torsion with >180-degree rotation. Whatever may be the cause of torsion, the outcome is obstruction of bile or blood flow, or
obstruction of both. Obstruction of bile and blood flow leads to empyema formation followed by necrosis of the wall of the gallbladder. The
clinical features of gallbladder torsion are nonspecific, making a preoperative diagnosis difficult on the basis of history and physical
examination alone.2 A low-frequency of fever and jaundice, poor response to antibiotic therapy, and acute onset of abdominal pain may be
helpful in the differential diagnosis of acute cholecystitis. Ultrasound and computed tomographic (CT) scan have complemented the diagnosis
of gallbladder torsion. The presence of the gallbladder outside its fossa and inferior to the liver with an echogenic conical structure has
been found specific to gallbladder torsion. Kitagawa et al6 formulated the following criteria for the diagnosis of gallbladder torsion: (1)
Fluid collection between the gallbladder and the liver bed indicating a “floating gall bladder”(2) A gallbladder positioned horizontally
along its long axis indicating a free-lying gallbladder, as was the case in our patient.(3) The presence of a well-enhanced cystic duct
located on the right side of the gallbladder that may also be visualized on CT scan(4) Signs of inflammation, ischemia, or necrotic change
in the gallbladder (1) Fluid collection between the gallbladder and the liver bed indicating a “floating gall bladder” (2) A gallbladder
positioned horizontally along its long axis indicating a free-lying gallbladder, as was the case in our patient. (3) The presence of a well-
enhanced cystic duct located on the right side of the gallbladder that may also be visualized on CT scan (4) Signs of inflammation,
ischemia, or necrotic change in the gallbladder Treatment is surgical derotation and cholecystectomy. In the past, open procedures were
carried out. With experience in laparoscopic cholecystectomy, laparoscopic derotation and cholecystectomy will become the preferred
approach. If treated laparoscopically, gallbladder decompression and detorsion prior to cholecystectomy are helpful techniques to avoid bile
duct injury. Though improved diagnostic imaging techniques can aid in the diagnosis of this entity, definitive diagnosis is made only during
surgery. Early laparoscopic intervention can result in rapid resolution thus preventing the potential complication of perforation of the
viscus into the peritoneal cavity.
