The occurrence of calcitonin-secreting primary carcinoid tumor of the urinary bladder is extremely rare. The case of a 68-year-old male with
carcinoid tumor arising in the urinary bladder is presented. Transurethral resection of a polypoid small tumor 0.4 cm in diameter was
performed. Immunohistochemical study using neuroendocrine markers allowed a straightforward diagnosis of a low-grade neuroendocrine
carcinoma (carcinoid tumor) of the urinary bladder. Immunohistochemistry demonstrated calcitonin immunoreactivity in the most of the tumor
cells. This tumor shows specific clinical, macroscopical and histological features and must be considered in the differential diagnosis of
bladder neoplasms. The occurrence of primary carcinoid tumor of the urinary bladder is extremely rare. Two cases of these neoplasms have
been reported recently by Martignoni and Eble . According to a critical review of the literature performed by these authors, only four of
twelve previously reported cases showed convincing evidence od neuroendocrine differentiation and might therefore be regarded as pure
carcinoid tumors of the urinary bladder. We report a case of a primary calcitonin-producing carcinoid tumor of the urinary bladder. A
68-year-old man was admitted in January 2004 for a macroscopic hematuria. The patient had no relevant past medical or family history, and
laboratory data were all within normal limits. A cystoscopic examination was performed and a transurethral resection of a tiny, sessile
polypoid lesion of the bladder neck was carried out. Clinical evaluation included ultrasonography and computerized tomography (CT) scan. The
patients was seen at last follow-up 14 months after diagnosis and he was completely negative. Grossly, the tumor was a well-circumscribed,
small ovoid nodule of 0.4 cm in diameter. Histologically a polypoid tumor appeared to be covered by slightly attenuated normal urothelium.
The tumor filled-up the lamina propria showing a predominantly glandular arrangement (Fig 1A), with scanty anastomosing cords of cuboidal
cells with fairly regular nuclei. Foci of von Brunn nests were seen at the periphery near the urothelium (Fig 1B). Mitoses and necrosis were
not seen. A panel of immunostains, including antibodies against keratin 7, βHCG, chromogranin, synaptophysin, S-100 protein, NSE, serotonin,
calcitonin, TTF-1, progesteron, and p53 protein was applied to representative sections of the tumor using the avidin-biotin complex
technique (tab 1). Immunohistochemically the tumor strongly reacted with synaptophysin (Fig 1C), chromogranin (Fig 1D), calcitonin (Fig 1E),
keratin 7 (Fig 1F), and NSE. βHCG was positive in about 10% of the neoplastic cells. p53 protein, progesteron, S-100 protein, serotonin and
TTF-1 were negative. The urinary bladder can be the site of tumors exhibiting various degrees of endocrine differentiation. It has become
the most common site of extrapulmonary small cell undifferentiated carcinoma . The spectrum of endocrine tumors of the urinary bladder has
widened considerably in the past concerning both its morphological feature and its clinical behaviour. The better differentiated members of
this group, carcinoid tumors, have an organoid arrangement, with trabecular and glandular patterns of growth, and its origin in the urinary
bladder is extremely rare. To the best of our knowledge only 6 cases of primary carcinoid tumor of the bladder have been reported . The
present case shows clinically and microscopically the same features showed by two cases of carcinoid of urinary bladder reported recently by
Martignoni and Eble . Their review of the literature disclosed 4 previously reported pure carcinoid tumors of the urinary bladder. These 6
cases and the present case show a striking clinical and pathological overlapping, as shown in tab 2. All 6 cases presented with hematuria,
most of the patients aged of seven decade. All tumors were small, polypoid nodules at cystoscopy and most of them were localized in the neck
of the bladder or trigone. All previously reported 6 tumors and the present case show a glandular architecture. Previous study, and our
results have demonstrated the neuroendocrine differentiation. Strikingly the present case showed, immunohistochemically, a strongly
reactivity with calcitonin. To the best of our knowledge this is the first case of a well-differentiated neuroendocrine carcinoma of the
urinary bladder reported positive with this neuropeptide. Some tumors could simulate carcinoid of the bladder, in particular the nested
variant of transitional cell carcinoma; differences in the cytologic features and immunohistochemistry should establish the diagnosis. The
distinction between carcinoid tumor and inverted papilloma with glandular differentiation can be very difficult, however strong staining for
neuroendocrine markers support the diagnosis of carcinoid tumor. Like the classic carcinoid tumors of the appendix, small bowel, or lung,
all of the carcinoid tumors of the bladder are histologically and clinically not aggressive. In conclusion, we here add another case of
carcinoid tumor of the urinary bladder to the existing literature, this tumor shows specific clinical, macroscopical and histological
features and must be considered in the differential diagnosis of bladder neoplasms. The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests. MM participated to write the manuscript VA operated the patient and participated to draft the manuscript CM carried out
imunohistochemical study GN operated the patient and participated to draft the manuscript GDR participated in the design of the study LI
participated in the design of the study The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Composite figure of carcinoid tumor
of urinary bladder. A) a glandular arrangement of tumor cells is evident. B) normal urothelium lined the tumor. A von Brunn nest entrapped
by the tumor is seen. C-D-E) diffusely positive synaptophysin, chromogranin, and calcitonin immunostaining of tumor cells, respectively. F)
urothelium and tumor cells strongly reacted with keratin 7. Primary antibodies used for immunophenotyping Clinicopathologic profiles of
patients with carcinoid tumor of the urinary bladder.
