Supravalvular mitral stenosis is a rare condition characterized by an abnormal ridge, with one or two orifices, covering and obstructing the
mitral valve. Preoperative diagnosis is difficult with transtoracic echo (TTE), angiography and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). In this
case, a 36-year-old male, was admitted to our Heart department: He experienced progressive dyspnea on effort and at rest. Diagnosis was made
by transesophageal echocardiography which showed, on apical 4-chamber section, an anulare structure attached since a membrane to the atrial
wall anterior mitral valve leaflet and just proximal to the posterior mitral leaflet. Pre-operative identification of the supravalvular
mitral ring is the target for obtaining good surgical results. Cineangiography and MRI both failed in reaching this objective, whereas,
transesophageal echocardiography is the best method to identify this congenital heart disease. Using TEE the identification is not only
possible but also easier. Mitral supravalvular ring is a rare congenital heart defect, as descibed by Fisher , characterized by an abnormal
ridge of connective tissue on the atrial side of the mitral valve. Often the supravalvular ring may enroach on the orifice of the mitral
valve leaflets and restrict their movements. While a supravalvular mitral ring may allow normal haemodynamic flow from the left atrium to
the left ventricle, it often causes an obstruction of the mitral valve inflow . It can occur as an isolated defect, but in nearly 90% of the
patients, the supravalvular ring is found in conjunction with other congenital heart defects . In the "Shone syndrome", it coexists with
parachute mitral valvar, subvalvar aortic stenosis and aortic coartation. These two conditions have to be determined from the abnormal
partition of the left atrium (cor triatriatum). The supravalvular mitral ring is a ridge or membrane arising from the left atrial wall
overlying the mitral valve and is sometimes attached to the mitral valve anulus, variable in thickness and extension it can range from being
a thin membrane to a thick fibrous ridge. The membranous variety may be difficult to detect, since the membrane often adheres to the
anterior mitral valve leaflet while remaining just proximal to the posterior mitral leaflets . In the same case, adhesion to the valve may
impair opening movement of the leaflets, what's more, the ring may be large enough to protrude into the mitral valve inflow and cause
obstruction. Sometimes, the ring may also be incomplete and eccentric, thereby, for an unobstructed flow through the mitral valve. No data
are available on the incidence of supravalvular mitral ring; in most patients it is detected during investigation for other congenital heart
disease No specific sex and race predilection exists . A 36-year-old male, was admitted to our Heart department: He experienced progressive
dyspnea on effort and at rest. During the physical examination, he was found to have low blood pressure (90/60 mmHg), sinusal tachycardia
and gallop rhythm. An olosistolic murmur was heard in the mitral area. Rales were available on pulmonary auscultation. The electrocardiogram
(ECG) revealed sinus rhythm and left ventricular hypertrophy (Fig. 1). The transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) showed left ventricular
enlargment, atrial dilatation, moderate/severe mitral regurgitation and moderate aortic regurgitation mitral valve masses were suspected.
Chest x-ray showed left atrial and ventricular enlargement; alveolar edema in the hilar regions of both lung fields. The echocardiogram
(TTE) showed left ventricular enlargment, atrial dilatation, moderate/severe mitral regurgitation and moderate aortic regurgitation; mitral
valve masses were suspected. Based on this diagnosis, the patient underwent a transesophageal-echo (TEE). TEE showed, on apical 4-chamber
section, an anulare structure attached from a membrane to the atrial wall anterior mitral valve leaflet and just proximal to the posterior
mitral leaflet (Fig. 2, 3). TEE showed, on apical 4-chamber section, an anular structure attached like a membrane to the atrial wall
anterior mitral valve leaflet and just proximal to the posterior mitral leaflet. MRI cine turbo-flash images acquired on a 1.5 T
scanner(Magnetom Vision-Siemens) in four-chamber (3A) and transverse plane, short-axis view (Fig. 4). These images didn't show congenital
heart disease. This supravalvular ring was proximal to the left atrial appendage, in contradistinction to "cor triatriatum"; it restricted
the leaflets movement and impaired their opening. A severe mitral regurgitation (IV grade PISA) and mild diastolic gradient (6 mm/Hg DP
mean) was detected by the Doppler-echocardiography (see additional file 1). MRI cine turbo-flash images acquired on a 1.5 T scanner(Magnetom
Vision-Siemens) in four-chamber (3A) and transverse plane, short-axis view. These images did n't show congenital heart disease. A
moderate/severe aortic regurgitation was seen. Mitral vegetations were not identified. Coronary angiography was normal; left
cineventriculography showed a severe aortic and mitral regurgitation, but a mitral supravalvular structure was not noticed. Based on TEE
diagnosis, the patient underwent surgery in November 2002. A left atriotomy enabled the identification of a membrane right above the mitral
valve with 2 small openings that allowed blood to flow from the atrium to the left ventricle. The membrane was excised and the mitral and
aortic valves were replaced. Follow up: after 6 month, the patient was in I NYHA class. The transtoracic echo showed a normal function of
prostesis. Supravalvular mitral ring rarely occurs as an isolated defect, and other congenital heart defects coexist in most (90%) patients
. The mitral valve itself is often abnormal and stenotic at the valvar or subvalvar level with fusion of leaflets, small valve orifice, and
abnormal papillary muscle being common abnormalities. The Shone syndrome describes 4 congenital heart defects: mitral supravalvular ring,
parachute mitral valve, subvalvar aortic stenosis and aortic coartation . Obstruction to mitral inflow comes from reduction in the mitral
valve orifice area. When significant, a diastolic pressure difference occurs between the left atrium and left ventricle and this
haemodinamic condition causes, in severe cases, pulmonary edema. Other common associated lesions in patients with supravalvular mitral ring
are ventricular septal defect and tetralogy of Fallot . Even in the rarest cases, such as the case described above, its occurrence can be
isolated, as first described by Chung . Pre-operative identification of the membrane is possible by TEE , where angiography often fails .
However, there are still many limitations in visualization of the membrane, that is usually very thin; in this case, we performed an MRI
examination, but as described in other papers , there was a failure in the detection of the supravalvular mitral ring. Pre-operative
identification of the supravalvular mitral ring is the target for obtaining good surgical results. Cineangiography and MRI both failed in
reaching this objective, whereas, TEE is the best method to identify this congenital heart disease. Using TEE the identification is not only
possible but also easier. NYHA New York Heart Association TTE Transthoracic echocardiography TEE Transesophageal echocardiography MRI
Magnetic resonance imaging W. Serra has performed echocardiographic examinations for this article and has prepared the manuscript. P. Testa
has performed the literature rewiew. All the authors have approved the final review of the manuscript. We thank mr M. Conca, Techinician
E-mail: maurizio.conca@unipr.it and mrs R. Bandini, librarian E-mail: rina.bandini@unipr.it Department of Environmental Sciences University
of Parma for having helped to prepare video-clips and to supply bibliographic research. TEE showed, on apical 4-chamber section, an anulare
structure attached like a membrane to the atrial wall anterior mitral valve leaflet and just proximal to the posterior mitral leaflet. This
supravalvular ring was proximal to the left atrial appendage; a severe mitral regurgitation (IV grade PISA) and a mild diastolic gradient (6
mm/Hg DP mean) was detected by the Doppler-echocardiography. A moderate/severe aortic regurgitation was seen. Click here for file
