Cerebral infarction is an uncommon complication in multiple myeloma with hyperviscosity. Serum hyperviscosity may cause a variety of
clinical manifestations including bleeding from mucosal membranes, congestive heart failure, retinopathy, and various neurologic deficits.
These manifestations have been attributed to the presence of large quantities of asymmetrical molecules of high molecular weight in the
serum. We recently experienced a case of multiple myeloma with acute cerebral infarction, which caused by hyperviscosity, as an initial
manifestation in IgG multiple myeloma, and reviewed the relevant literature of myeloma presenting with the stroke. A 68-yr-old woman
abruptly developed hypesthesia and monoplegia in the left leg. The stroke confirmed by the brain MRI and MR angiography, which revealed
acute infarction at the right anterior cerebral artery territory. On admission, routine blood tests showed a slight decrease in hemoglobin
and a marked increase in erythrocyte sedimentation rate. Peripheral blood smear, serum protein electrophoresis, serum visocity, and bone
marrow aspiration showed that she had IgG multiple myeloma with hyperviscosity. She was treated by chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide and
discharged with the improved clinical condition. Multiple myeloma (MM) is a human B-cell neoplasm characterized by the clonal expansion of
malignant plasma cells in the bone marrow. The cause of this disease is only partially understood, but the production of soluble factors by
the myeloma cells is likely to be involved. The most important complications are hypercalcemia associated with rapid skeletal dissolution,
acute or chronic renal insufficiency, and infection. All these, along with less common complications such as the hyperviscosity syndrome,
hyperuricemia, and neurologic involvement, must be recognized and managed appropriately to achieve optimal results from primary therapy. The
serum hyperviscosity syndrome has been described clinically as the triad of bleeding, visual signs and symptoms, and neurologic
manifestations (1, 2). This oncologic emergency occurs in patients with IgM, IgG, and IgA monoclonal gammopathies as well as in some
patients with polyclonal immunoglobulin disorders (3). We reported a patient with hyperviscosity-induced cerebral infarction as the first
sign of IgG multiple myeloma based on clinical, laboratory, brain MRI, and bone marrow biopsy. A 68-yr-old right-handed woman was admitted
to Chonnam National University Hospital on 6 March, 2002 due to hypesthesia and monoplegia in the left leg. She also complained of headache
and dizziness. Mild anemia had been discovered three months before admission, but was not treated. The patient had no risk factors of stroke
except old age. On admission, physical examination revealed an anemic conjunctiva without icteric sclera. She had no lymphadenopathy, and no
palpable mass on her abdomen. Vital signs were normal. Dilated fundoscopic examination revealed no abnormalities. There was no abnormality
in EKG and echocardiography. Her mental status was alert. Other neurological examinations were normal except monoplegia, hypesthesia,
increased deep tendon reflex (3+) with ankle jerks, and up-going Babinski in the left leg. Diffusion- and T2-weighted MRI revealed a
hyperintense lesion in the callosomarginal territory of the right anterior cerebral artery, and MR angiography did not show significant
stenosis on the intra- and extracranial artery (Fig. 1). Laboratory data were as follows: hematocrit 26.6% (normal, 37-52), hemoglobin 8.2
g/dL (normal, 12-18), erythrocyte sedimentation rate 127 mm/hr (normal, below 20), leukocyte 4.6×103/µL (normal, 4.3-10.8) and platelet
counts 190×103/µL (normal, 130-400). A peripheral blood smear showed extensive rouleaux formation. The prothrombin time was 80.8%
(13.3/80.8/1.13; sec/%/INR) of that of control; partial thromboplastin time was 27.1 sec (normal, 26.5-41). The plasma level of Protein C
and S activity were in the normal range. Serum creatinine was 0.6 mg/dL (normal, 0.6-1.5), serum sodium 137 mEq/L (normal, 135-153),
potassium 4.1 mEq/L (normal, 3-5), total calcium 7.1 mg/dL (normal, 8.6-10.6), ionized calcium 2.4 mEq/L (normal, 2.0-2.4), and uric acid
1.5 mg/dL (normal, 2.4-7). The total serum protein concentration was 9.6 g/dL (normal, 6.0-8.0), albumin was 1.8 g/dL (normal, 3.5-5.5), and
globulins were 7.8 g/dL. Serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) revealed hyperproteinemia, hypoalbuminemia and a prominent spike at the gamma-
globulin region (Fig. 2). Levels of immuno-globunins were as follows: IgG 6,060 mg/dL (normal, 700-1,600), IgA 23.1 mg/dL (normal, 70-400),
IgM 55.4 mg/dL (normal, 40-230), IgE 17.8 mg/dL (normal, 0.0-100) and β2-microglobulin 1.08 mg/L (normal, 0.7-3.4). Her relative serum
viscosity at 37℃ was 5.2 (normal, 1.4 to 1.8). Random urine protein was 23 mg/dL (normal, 1.0-14.0), but Bence-Jones protein was negative in
urine. Osteolytic areas in several bones were detected. Roentgenograms revealed multiple lytic lesions of the skull and right 6th rib, and
compression fracture of 9th thoracic vertebrae body. Bone marrow examination confirmed the diagnosis of myeloma. She was treated by
chemotherapy (Cyclophosphamide 200 mg/m2 per day) with steroid pulse and then prednisone (70 mg/day) for 5 days, where and she remained on
intermittent chemotherapy. Every four weeks, routine blood tests and levels of immunoglobulins were performed. At 3 months, her laboratory
data were within normal limits. There was no recurrence of hyperviscosity syndrome or stroke during the follow-up of 25 months. The typical
features of multiple myeloma include bone pain, weakness, fatigue, fever and infection. Neurologic symptoms occur in a minority of patients
with multiple myeloma: Hypercalcemia may produce lethargy, weakness, depression, and confusion; bony damage and collapse may lead to spinal
cord compression, radicular pain, and loss of bowel and bladder control; a bulky cranial multiple myeloma invading cerebrum may result in
quadriparesis and headache (4); infiltration of peripheral nerves by amyloid can be a cause of carpal tunnel syndrome and other sensorimotor
mono- and polyneuropathies; hyperviscosity may lead to headache, fatigue, visual disturbances, retinopathy, dementia (5, 6), and cerebral
infarction (7, 8). However, one bears in mind that multiple myeloma may be present with a neurological disease. Hyperviscosity is defined on
the basis of the relative viscosity of serum as compared with water. Whereas normal relative serum viscosity is 1.8, symptoms of
hyerviscosity occur at a level of 5 to 6, a level usually reached at paraprotein concentrations of approximately 40 g/L for IgM, 50 g/L for
IgG3, and 70 g/L for IgA (9). Hyperviscosity occurs relatively infrequently in patients with multiple myeloma, but one study reported an
incidence of 4.2% among patients with IgG protein (10). The hyperviscosity syndrome is an uncommon complication in IgG multiple myeloma. Its
occurrence has been ascribed to the presence in the serum of high molecular weight polymers of the IgG proteins. In our case, the serum
viscosity was 5.2, and the serum IgG 6,060 mg/dL. Major neurologic deficits occur in more than 25% of patients with myeloma and
hyperviscosity syndrome (10-12). Lethargy, hemiparesis, seizures, coma, and acute confusional states are most frequently cited. Minor
complaints include dizziness, vertigo, headache, and impaired learning. Meanwhile, hyperviscosity caused by multiple myeloma might also have
contributed to the stroke. We reported a 68-yr-old patient who developed monoplegia of the left leg as the first manifestation of multiple
myeloma with hyperviscosity. This case was rare in that it involved plasma cell leukemia with cerebral infarction associated with serum
hyperviscosity. We searched for cases of multiple myeloma with hyperviscosity presenting with cerebral infarction, and found only 2 reports
(13, 14). Clinical conditions in which this possible role of hyperviscosity in cerebral infarction could be demonstrated have not been
reported so far. In another reported cases of cerebral infarction in multiple myeloma, the serum hyperviscosity was not studied. Our case
had no significant atherosclerotic lesion on intra- and extracranial vessels, and no risk factors of stroke except old age. Therefore, we
suggest that hyperviscosity plays a key role in the pathogenesis of stroke in her with multiple myeloma, our case then, is consistent with
the hypothesis that chronic blood hyperviscosity antedates the onset of symptomatic cerebrovascular disease. Thus, in patients with multiple
myeloma, the monitoring of plasma viscosity was of major importance in order to evaluate the risk of cerebral infarction and decide the
management for the prevention of stroke. We believe that our patient represents a rare case of IgG multiple myeloma associated with blood
hyperviscosity and cerebral infarction. Based on our case study, and a review of the literature, we suggest that markedly elevated level of
serum globulin in a patient with cerebral infarction requires measurement of blood viscosity, especially in patients with multiple myeloma.
T2-weighted (A) and diffusion-weighted (B) axial MRI scans show acute cerebral infarction on the callosomarginal territory of right anterior
cerebral artery. MR angiography (C) has no stenosis on intracranial arteries. Serum protein electrophoresis (SPEP) shows a sharp peak in the
gamma globulin region. Relative fraction of gamma globulin region on SPEP was 42.6% of the total (9.3 g/dL).
