Choriocarcinoma is one of the malignant tumors of trophoblastic cells characterized by the secretion of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG)
(1-3). Cutaneous metastasis is a rare presentation of choriocarcinoma but a poor prognostic sign because it is associated only with
widespread disease (3-5). A 52-yr-old female complaining of dyspnea for 2 months, presented with fingertip sized erythematous nodules on the
left side of the neck and the right side of the upper back of 1 month duraton. She has suffered from Behçet's disease since 1999.
Microscopic examination of a nodule of upper back demonstrated biphasic pattern of cytotrophoblasts and hCG-positive syncytiotrophoblasts,
and the typical histologic features of choriocarcinoma. She was referred to the gynecological oncology department. After 17 cycles of
combination chemotherapy, the serum hCG level has fallen from 700,000 to under 2.0 mIU/mL and the skin lesions have almost disappeared.
However, after 3 months, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy were performed due to elevated serum hCG level
(4,447.7 mIU/mL), and she is scheduled to receive post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy. Choriocarcinoma is one of the malignant tumors
arising from trophoblastic cells characterized by the secretion of human chorionic gonadotrophin (hCG). The tumor consisted of two basic
cell types: cytotrophoblast and hCG-positive syncytiotrophoblast, the typical histologic features of choriocarcinoma (1-5). The serum hCG
level is typically elevated, with resultant isosexual pseudoprecocity in children, and menstrual abnormalities, breast enlargement,
androgenic changes, or combinations thereof, in adults (1, 2). It usually arises from fetal trophoblasts and rarely arises from germ cells
in the testis or ovary or derives from dedifferentiation of other carcinomas (2, 3). The most common sites of systemic metastatic disease
are lungs, liver and brain via hematogenous spread (1). Skin is a rare site for metastatic choriocarcinoma, and even more rare as the
initial presenting site for the disease (3-5). To the best of our knowledge, about 10 cases of cutaneous metastatic choriocarcinoma were
reported in the literature. We describe a case of 52-yr-old Korean female patient with cutaneous metastasis of choriocarcinoma, diagnosed
from a skin biopsy that provided important diagnostic clues to the primary lesion. A 52-yr-old Korean female presented with dyspnea of 2
months duration and cutaneous nodules of 1 month duration on the left side of the neck and the right side of the upper back. Both lesions
were fingernail sized rubbery-hard, rapidly growing erythematous nodules. Subjective symptoms such as pruritus or tenderness were not
present (Fig. 1). On physical examination, breathing sound was decreased. She had vaginal spotting for 10 days, 1 month prior to her visit.
Her past medical history was significant for Behçet's disease, which had been treated with colchicine for the past 4 yr. Routine blood tests
showed leukocytosis with a WBC of 17,780/µL, anemia with a hemoglobin of 9.4 g/dL and slightly elevated hepatic enzyme levels of GOT/GPT at
45/51 IU/L. Chest radiography, chest and abdomen-pelvis CT revealed pleural effusion, innumerable variable sized pulmonary metastatic
nodules on both lungs and multiple metastatic lesions on the liver, left adrenal gland and left kidney. A skin biopsy was performed on the
nodule at the right side of upper back. At low magnification, there were several hemorrhagic foci and multiple cellular infiltrations
throughout the dermis (Fig. 2A). At high magnification, the infiltrated tumor cells consisted of two cell types, and a biphasic pattern, in
close proximity. One element had polygonal shaped, clear cytoplasm and large, irregular shaped, vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli,
which were identified as cytotrophoblasts. The other cell population showed eosinophilic cytoplasm with cytoplasmic vacuoles and many dark
nuclei, which were identified as syncytiotrophoblasts (Fig. 2B). The immunohistochemical staining for hCG antigen (1:600, Polyclonal rabbit,
Dakocytomation, Denmark) in the cytoplasm of syncytiotrophoblasts (Fig. 2B inset) was strongly positive, confirming the diagnosis of
metastatic choriocarcinoma. Magnetic resonance (MR) images of the abdomen-pelvis detected diffuse enlargement of the uterus body and a
protruding mass in the uterine cavity, which was the primary origin of the tumor (Fig. 3). Her serum hCG level was 700,000 mIU/mL (upper
normal limit: 10 mIU/mL). The patient was diagnosed as having a stage IVc disease. She was referred to the gynecological oncology
department, where combination chemotherapy was commenced. During combination chemotherapy, the serum hCG level has fallen off under 2.0
mIU/mL and her skin lesions have almost disappeared. However, 3 months after 17 cycles, total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-
oophorectomy were performed due to elevated serum hCG level (4,447.7 mIU/mL), and she is scheduled to receive post-operative adjuvant
chemotherapy. Compared to other organs, skin is an uncommon site of metastatic cancer in the body as it is usually associated with a
disseminated disease and grave outcome. Occasionally, however, as in our case, cutaneous metastasis may be the first harbinger of a visceral
malignancy of unknown origin and gives an important diagnostic clue (3, 4, 6-8). Cutaneous metastasis of a visceral malignancy has been
estimated to be in the wide range of 1.4% to 10.4% according to the type of study undertaken and the site of primary tumor studied (6-11).
Involvement of the skin is likely to be near the area of the primary tumor and in proportion to the incidence of internal malignancy. The
chest, abdomen, and scalp are common anatomic sites to which metastasis localize with the back and extremities being relatively uncommon
areas. Breast cancer in women and lung cancer in men are the most common causes of chest metastatic lesion (6-8). Occasionally, a cutaneous
metastatic lesion may show typical histologic features which give a decisive diagnostic clue to the primary origin. Such cases include
mucin-containing cells in colon cancer, bile-containing glandular structure in hepatoma, clear cells in renal cell carcinoma and, like our
case, cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts in choriocarcinoma (6). Choriocarcinoma, in women, is often preceded by a gravid state,
which is most often hydatidiform mole (50%), less frequently abortion (25%), and normal term pregnancy (15%). Rarely, it is derived from
germ cells in the ovary. In men, it commonly arises from germ cells in the testis (1-5). The gross appearance of choriocarcinoma is often
dark red or purple colored and resembles that of a friable segment of placenta (1). Microscopically, it is characterized by multiple foci of
hemorrhage and necrosis around the neoplastic cells, by large sheets of cytotrophoblastic and syncytiotrophoblastic cells, biphasic pattern,
and by the absence of hydropic villi. Two populations of the infiltrated tumor cells are mixed in close proximity. The cytotrophoblasts have
cuboidal shaped, pale cytoplasm and large, irregular shaped, vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli. The syncytiotrophoblasts show
eosinophilic cytoplasm with cytoplasmic vacuoles, many hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nuclei with indistinct border, looking like
multinucleated giant cells, and may form syncytial knots. The immunohistochemical staining for hCG antigen is positive in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblasts but not in cytotrophoblasts (1-5). Other germ cell tumors such as polyembryoma, embryonal carcinoma, dysgerminoma and
mixed germ cell tumor can also show hCG positive syncytiotrophoblastic cells but these tumors do not demonstrate a biphasic pattern
consisting of cytotrophoblasts and syncytiotrophoblasts, as in choriocarcinoma (1). Choriocarcinoma is notorious for its tendency of
hematogenous spreading. The most common metastatic sites are, in a descending order of frequency, lung (60-95%), vagina (40-50%), vulva
(10-15%), brain, liver (10%), kidney and spleen (<5%). Although choriocarcinomas respond relatively well to chemotherapy, cutaneous
metastasis is an extremely uncommon presentation and a poor prognostic sign as it is associated only with disseminated disease (1-5).
Chhieng et al. reported a case of cutaneous metastatic testicular choriocarcinoma where the patient died 10 days after the initiation of
chemotherapy (4). Shimizu et al. also reported a case of metastatic disease to the upper back of testicular choriocarcinoma, where the
patient died 3 months after the appearance of a cutaneous metastatic lesion. In their literature review, of 7 patients with metastatic
choriocarcinoma to the skin, 5 patients died within 3 months after the appearance of skin metastasis (3). Chama et al. reported another case
of choriocarcinoma with metastasis to the chest wall, which responded well to 12 cycles of combination chemotherapy (5). Our case also
responded well to combination chemotherapy. Her cutaneous lesions and symptoms almost disappeared with a striking decrease of serum hCG. We
described an extremely rare patient with metastatic choriocarcinoma presenting initially as a cutaneous lesion. The diagnosis was made from
the typical histological findings of a cutaneous metastatic lesion, which was confirmed by immunohistochemical staining for hCG and from the
abdomen pelvis MR images. This case highlights the importance of a histological examination of skin metastatic lesion, which can provide
conclusive evidences to the diagnosis. Fingernail sized erythematous nodules. (A) left side of neck, (B) right side of upper back. (A)
Several hemorrhagic foci and multiple cellular infiltration throughout the dermis (hematoxylin and eosin, ×40). (B) Infiltrated tumor cells
are composed of two populations of cells. One element exhibits clear cytoplasm and large, vesicular nuclei with prominent nucleoli, which is
identified as cytotrophoblasts. The other cell population shows eosinophilic cytoplasm with cytoplasmic vacuoles and many dark nuclei, which
is identified as syncytiotrophoblasts (hematoxylin and eosin, ×200). (Inset) hCG was positively stained in the cytoplasm of
syncytiotrophoblasts but not the cytotrophoblasts (hCG stain, ×400). Abdomen pelvis MR images shows a protruding mass from low uterine
cavity to vaginal canal (short arrow) and diffuse enlargement of uterus body showing heterogenous signal intensity, suggesting myometrial
invasion (long arrow).
