Stress echocardiography is a cost-effective tool for the modern noninvasive diagnosis of coronary artery disease. Several physical and
pharmacological stresses are used in combination with echocardiographic imaging, usually exercise, dobutamine and dipyridamole. The safety
of a stress is (or should be) a major determinant in the choice of testing. Although large scale single center experiences and multicenter
trial information are available for both dobutamine and dipyridamole stress echo testing, complications or side effects still can occur even
in the most experienced laboratories with the most skilled operators. We decided to present a case collection of severe complications during
pharmacological stress echo testing, including a ventricular tachycardia, cardiogenic shock, transient ischemic attack, torsade de pointe,
fatal ventricular fibrillation, and free wall rupture. We believe that, in this field, every past complication described is a future
complication avoided; what happens in your lab is more true of what you read in journals; and Good Clinical Practice is not "not having
complications", but to describe the complications you had. The safety of the stress test is a major issue in deciding its practicability and
cost-effectiveness – yet, many major complications remain "unmentioned and unheard", for several reasons – mainly related to the "file
drawer" bias, lack of time ("busy agenda bias") or unfamiliarity with the technicalities of scientific communication (editorial "black box
bias"). Stress echocardiography is a cost-effective tool for the modern noninvasive diagnosis of coronary artery disease . Several physical
and pharmacological stresses are used in combination with echocardiographic imaging, usually exercise, dobutamine and dipyridamole. The
safety of a stress is (or should be) a major determinant in the choice of testing. Although large scale single center experiences and
multicenter trial information are available for both dobutamine and dipyridamole stress echo testing, complications or side effects still
can occur even in the most experienced laboratories with the most skilled operators. We believe that, in this field, every past complication
described is a future complication avoided; what happens in your lab is more true than what you read in journals; and Good Clinical Practice
is not "not having complications", but to describe the complications you had. Therefore, we decided to present an unusual case series,
consisting in a collection of severe complications during pharmacological stress echo testing. A 73 year-old male patient, with a previous
PTCA (percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty) of the left anterior descending artery and ramus intermedius, underwent a dipyridamole
stress testing following a nondiagnostic exercise EKG (the exercise was terminated because of the occurrence of non sustained ventricular
tachycardia). The baseline echo revealed an apical hypokinesis (additional file 1) which did not change during the test, however ventricular
tachycardia developed again during dipyridamole echo (additional file 2). Lesson: it is useless to expose a patient with known coronary
artery disease and a previously complicated test to another stressor. Indication must be appropriate. An 81 year-old female, with
symptomatic and hemodynamically significant aortic stenosis and normal coronary angiogram underwent a high dose dipyridamole stress echo
testing. The baseline wall motion was normal (additional file 3). The patient fell in cardiogen shock and had a transient ischemic attack of
the brain following a negative test (additional file 4). Lesson: another dangerous experiment on a patient with already diagnosed normal
coronary arteries. Indication must be always appropriate. A 57 year-old male patient with abdominal pain and claudicatio intermittens was
studied with dobutamine echocardiography. Soon after the first (5 mcg/Kg/min) dose the patient had ventricular extrasystoles (additional
file 5) and during the 20 mcg/Kg/min dose of dobutamine, Torsade de points ventricular tachycardia evolved (additional file 6). Lesson: in
patients with arrhytmias in resting conditions, dobutamine can often provoke dangerous tachycardias. In this group of patients dipyridamole
could be the first choice. A 55 year-old male patient with previous posterior myocardial infarction, quadruple by-pass, depressed left
ventricular function and chest pain was sent to the echo lab for assessment of myocardial viability (additional file 7). Low dose dobutamine
echo was performed, however, following the 10 mcg/Kg/min dose a fatal ventricular fibrillation developed (additional file 8). Lesson: there
must always be an attending physician during pharmacological stress echo testing with all necessary equipment for reanimation. Dobutamine
can provoke arrhytmias even in low doses. A 66 year-old male patient with a recent (12 days old) inferior infarction and inferior aneurysm
underwent a high dose dobutamine stress test. A huge aneurysm of the inferior wall was present on the baseline echocardiogram (additional
file 9). The patient died following an acute cardiac rupture (additional file 10). Lesson: indications for testing must always be first
class, and in patients with recent infarction and aneurysm dipyridamole should be the first choice. As stated in the American College of
Cardiology/American Heart Association Clinical Competence Statement on Stress Testing, cognitive skills are required to attain competence in
the direct supervision of stress echocardiographic tests, but not only the knowledge of the complications of different pharmacological
agents but also the knowledge of their complication rate is important . Therefore, both the patient and the physician, should be fully aware
of the rate of complications during the application of all forms of stress. It is our stress policy, in the everyday echo lab activity, to
strictly adopt the following criteria based on conventional wisdom and evidence-based medicine: 1) Avoid contraindications; 2) Never exceed
standard dosages; 3) Perform the test after signed information consent has been obtained; 4) There must always be an attending physician; 5)
Outpatients should be kept for 60' in the waiting room after testing; 6) Indications for testing must be class first class. The baseline
echo (apical 4 chamber view) with apical hypokinesis. Click here for file No change in wall motion, but ventricular tachycardia developed at
peak stress. Click here for file Resting parasternal short axis view and apical 4 chamber view with normal regional left ventricular wall
motion. Click here for file Following the dipyridamole administration cardiogenic shock occurred. Depressed global left ventricular function
can be seen both from parasternal long axis view and apical 4 chamber view. Click here for file Apical 4 chamber view during low dose
dobutamine. Click here for file Parasternal long axis view. The initiation of the torsade de pointe ventricular tachycardia. Click here for
file Apical 4 chamber view and apical long axis view. Apical and posterior akinesia on the resting images. Click here for file Ventricular
fibrillation following a low dose dobutamine. Click here for file Quad-screen image of a patient with inferior aneurysm. Click here for file
The image of the heart following a cardiac rupture with huge pericardial effusion. Click here for file
