We present here a case in which functional MR imaging (fMRI) was done for a patient who developed retrograde psychogenic amnesia for a four
year period of her life history after a severe stressful event. We performed the fMRI study for a face recognition task using stimulation
with three kinds of face photographs: recognizable familiar faces, unrecognizable friends' faces due to the psychogenic amnesia, and
unfamiliar control faces. Different activation patterns between the recognizable faces and unrecognizable faces were found in the limbic
area, and especially in the amygdala and hippocampus. Psychogenic amnesia is a dissociative disorder characterized by a sudden memory loss
that concerns important personal information and there is usually selective retrograde amnesia too, but this condition is not due to an
organic mental disorder. The amnesia may follow severe psychological stress or it may be an unconscious response to an internal conflict or
to an intolerable life situation (1). The patient with psychogenic amnesia usually has difficulties for face recognition and the affective
response to faces in relation to the faces' familiarity during the selective amnesic period (2). The human memory system is a complex series
of functional neuroanatomical events (3). Some experimental data have been presented to elucidate the brain changes associated with
psychogenic amnesia (4-6). However, to the best of our knowledge, there has been no report of performing functional MR imaging (fMRI) during
psychogenic amnesic states. We report here on a case of a patient's functional MR imaging (fMRI), and the patient had selective amnesia
after a severe psychological stress and further, this patient had no evidence of an organic disease background. A 22-year-old, right-handed,
unmarried woman was admitted to the psychiatric unit due to her selective retrograde amnesia that occurred after a severe stressful event.
She could remember nothing of the autobiographical events for the preceding four years, that is, her university life period. She was aware
only of a hallucinatory vision of a parking lot in which she was kidnapped and violated by a masked robber. However, she could recount in
detail the events of her high school life and also the events of her life before that. There were no neurological signs, no suspicion of
head trauma and no epileptic discharge on the electroencephalography. Her brain MRI was normal. To examine the underlying brain functional
disturbances associated with psychogenic amnesia, we performed a fMRI study for a face recognition task. The patient viewed three kinds of
face photographs: recognizable faces of familiar high school friends, unrecognizable faces of familiar university friends, and unfamiliar
control faces. The patient was instructed to try to recognize the faces that were shown to her. All faces were presented to the patient
through a mirror located at the top of the head coil that received the face photographs from outside of the magnetic room during the fMRI
procedure. The T1-weighted images (time to repeat/echo time/flip angle = 500 ms/50 ms/90°) were obtained for anatomical localization by
using a 1.5 T MRI scanner (GE Medical System, Horizon Milwaukee, WI, USA). The BOLD-contrast fMRI images were acquired from 11 slices that
covered the limbic areas with using gradient-echo EPI (time to repeat/echo time/flip angle = 3000 ms/50 ms/90°). Post-processing of images
was performed with MATLAB (MathWorks, Natick, MA, USA) and SPM99 (Statistical Paramatric Mapping software; Wellcom Department of Cognitive
Neurology, London, UK). The SPM99 software was used for image realignment, normalization, smoothing and to create the statistical maps of
the significant relative changes in the regional blood oxygenation level-dependent (BOLD) response. The blocked design fMRI paradigm, which
was preceded by three dummy scans to allow the magnetic resonance signal to reach a steady state, was comprised of seven repetitions with
nine seconds of rest (fixation cross), and six repetitions of a nine seconds activation state (three kinds of photograph that were randomly
comprised of three seconds of recognizable faces of high school friends, three seconds of unrecognizable faces of university friends, and
three seconds of unfamiliar control faces). A correlation coefficient algorithm was used to correlate the time course data sets with the
periodic boxcar function. Three different subsets of the activation periods were independently compared with those of the rest periods. The
BOLD signals were estimated for the comparison of whole brain signals across all the experimental conditions. Specific effects were tested
for by applying appropriate linear contrasts to the parameter estimates for each condition, and this resulted in a Z-score for each voxel.
The voxels were identified as being significant only if they passed a height threshold of Z = 3.5 and they belonged to a cluster of at least
30 activated voxels. The data were analyzed for the main effects of each stimulation: the recognizable faces of high school friends, the
unrecognizable faces of university friends and the unfamiliar control faces. For the recognizable condition, different patterns of brain
activation were found as compared with the unrecognizable condition. The functional maps of the representative brain slices demonstrated
differences for activation in the limbic areas: the amygdala, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus and insula. Especially, the activation of
the amygdala and hippocampus was significantly greater during the stimulation with recognizable faces of high school friends (Fig. 1).
However, the activation patterns stimulated with the unrecognizable faces of university friends and the unfamiliar control faces were
similar to each other. They showed significantly less activation in the limbic area than the recognizable faces (Fig. 2). In our case, we
found significantly different patterns of activation in the limbic system, especially in the amygdala and hippocampus areas, during the
stimulation with recognizable faces of high school friends and the unrecognizable faces of university friends. Well-known faces have the
potential to elicit retrieval of affective responses and personal episodic incidents, and they may evoke activation of the limbic system,
especially the amygdala (7). The amygdala is located in the anterior medial portion of the temporal lobe, and it is connected with the
hippocampal formation and with further cortical and subcortical structures. The amygdala is primarily involved in the acquisition and
expression of emotional memories (8). Presumably, this patient has an abnormality for the expression of emotional memories during the
amnesic period. Emotional overflow could have resulted in the memory impairments. For instance, traumatic stress may lead to remarkable
encoding and retrieval disturbance, and this is probably due to the increased release of stress-related hormones such as glucocorticoids.
The intense release of glucocorticoids may result in morphologic and functional alterations of the limbic structures, especially in
mediotemporal regions. These can cause broad changes in the neurotransmitter systems of the brain. In a recent study, the relation between
the traumatic stress and functional brain alterations was described in terms of "psychogenic amnesia" (9). The hippocampal region is
concerned with explicit judgments that are related to the identification of faces. The lack of activation in the hippocampal region might be
related to an abnormality in the explicit components of the face judgment (10). This hippocampal abnormality may be related to the symptoms
of psychogenic amnesia. In conclusion, this fMRI study could give objective evidence and illustrate that a psychogenic amnesic patient has
an abnormality in the retrieval of emotional memories during the amnesic period. These findings suggest that changes in the limbic functions
are related to the symptoms of psychogenic amnesia. This work was supported by a grant (R01-2004-000-10912-0) from the Korea Science and
Engineering Foundation. These axial (A) and coronal (B) MR images were activated by stimulation with the recognizable faces of high school
friends, where distinct activation was shown in the limbic areas: the amygdala, hippocampus, parahippocampal gyrus and insula. The
activation patterns stimulated with the unrecognizable faces of the university friends (A) and the unfamiliar control faces (B) were similar
to each other.
