Retroperitoneal cystic lymphangioma is a rare congenital malformation. The majority of lymphangiomas are present at birth and nearly all
present before the age of two years. We report a case of giant cystic retroperitoneal lymphangioma in a patient who first presented with
symptoms at the age of 7, underwent surgery, and who then suffered a recurrent mass 11 years later. Abdominal cystic lymphangiomas are rare
benign tumors of the lymphatic vessels.1 They are characterized by the appearance of uni- or multi-septate cystic masses.2 The incidence of
cystic lymphangioma is approximately 1/6000 live born and localization of the retroperitoneum is less than 5%.3 More than half (50-65%) of
neck and axillar lymphangiomas are present at birth and 90% present symptoms before the age of two years.4 Cystic lymphangiomas of the
retroperitoneum are frequently found in older children or adults.5 Although the lesion is benign in nature, it causes pressure on vital
organs by mass effect and can therefore cause symptoms. Here, we present a case of a giant retroperitoneal cystic lymphangioma which first
presented with symptoms in a 7-year-old who underwent surgery and who returned with a recurrent mass 11 years later. An 18-year-old male was
admitted with epigastric and left upper quadrant pain. Distention due to an abdominal mass was detected on physical examination. The patient
had also suffered from abdominal distension, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting 11 years previously and sonographic findings revealed a
hypoechoic mass with smooth margins which lay between the liver hilus and splenic hilus. Laparotomic measurement of the mass, which
contained multiple cysts, was 30×20 cm. It was localized between the stomach and transverse colon and filled the bursa omentalis. During
laparotomy, the cysts and bursa omentalis were drained, the vessels and capsule of cysts were excised and capitonnage were performed. The
cysts contained 2.5 liters of yellow, transudative fluid. Microscopically, the tumor consisted of dilate, large, lymphatic channels of
different sizes growing in loose connective tissue. These channels were lined by flattened endothelium. A few bundles of smooth muscle were
present in the walls (pathologic number: B-1895/92). In the current hospitalization, ultrasound examination (US) showed an anechoic
multicystic mass of 14×15×20 cm with thick septations. There were echogenic areas within the lesion consistent with calcifications (Fig. 1).
On CT following the administration of contrast material, there was a non-enhancing mass lesion having low attenuation values (+ 12 HU) while
including hyperdense calcific foci. The mass surrounded the body and tail of the pancreas and extended to the right side of the midline. It
also had extensions into left renal spaces on its posterior aspect, and thereby created a mass effect. The internal septations that were
observed on US could not be identified by CT. The body and tail of the pancreas were displaced to the anterior due to compression from the
mass. The mass extended to the abdominal wall on the left anterior region (Fig. 2). In order to obtain multiplanar views and identify the
accompanying lesions, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed. The lesion was hypointense on T1 weighted and hyperintense on T2
weighted sequences and extended down to the neighborhood of the gall bladder (Fig. 3). Laparotomic findings revealed a cystic lesion which
contained viscous yellow fluid and lay between the tail of the pancreas and the left lobe of the liver. Together with the previous history
and US, CT and MR findings this case was evaluated as recurrent cystic lymphangioma. Postoperative pathological examination confirmed the
radiological diagnosis (Fig. 4). Lymphangiomas are lesions of lymphatic vessels that present as hemangiomas and it is difficult to evaluate
whether they are real tumors like hamartomas or only lymphangiectasis.6 However, it is currently accepted that lymphatic vessel tumors are
developmental malformations rather than being real tumors.7 Abnormal lymphatic channels dilate in an attempt to produce uni- or multi-
locular cystic masses. The opacification of the locules during lymphangiography also supports this hypothesis.8 The most common location is
the neck (cystic hygroma) in 75% of the cases, followed by the axilla in 20%. In the remaining 5%, other areas of the body are affected.
Abdominal lymphangiomas most commonly occur in the intestinal mesentery, retroperitoneum being the second location of choice.9 Multisystem
involvement is very rare and has a bad prognosis. Complications include anemia, hemorrhage, infection, torsion, volvulus and rupture of the
mass and intestinal and ureteric obstructions.10 Lymphangiomas have been classified into three groups: capillary (or simple), cavernous and
cystic, depending on the size of the lymphatic spaces. Simple lymphangiomas are composed of small, thin-walled, lymphatic channels with
considerable connective tissue stroma. Cavernous lymphangiomas consist of dilated lymphatic channels, whereas cystic lymphangiomas contain
single or multiple cystic masses.1,5,11 These tumors can recur.12 Recurrence of mass 13 years after the first operation in a 52-year-old
female has been reported only once in the literature before.1 The cause of recurrence is unclear but may be due to incomplete resection of
the mass. Long term follow-up is needed to determine the exact reason and incidence of recurrence. The differential diagnosis possibilities
are limited for large, cystic, intraabdominal masses of childhood. These are ovarian masses such as teratoma, serous cystadenoma and
mucinous cystadenoma. The most commonly encountered ones are the teratomas that demonstrate bone and calcific foci on US and radiographs.
Pancreatic pseudocysts, multiloculated cystic nephromas, and liver and spleen cysts originate from the cited organs. Smaller lesions such as
traumatic hematomas and urinomas can be clinically diagnosed. In enteric duplications, US can generally demonstrate the significant muscular
and mucosal layers and the hyperechogenicity at the periphery of the mass.7 Abdominal lymphangiomas are often discussed in conjunction with
mesenteric cysts, but lymphangioma presents earlier in life.13 Nevertheless, the presentation age of our case contradicted with this
classical information. Our case was different in the sense that it first presented at the age of 7 years, showed a recurrence after 11 years
and had a mass in the retroperitoneum, which is a very rare location. The cyst contents of the present case did not show enhancement after
postcontrast images, similar to that reported in a study by Bonhomme et al,14 but in contrast we could not obtained fibrous capsula. Though
numerous publications have stated that lymphangiomas of the retroperitoneum do not calcify, at least two prior case reports have
demonstrated calcification.10,15 The series by Davidson et al. includes two examples of unicameral lymphangiomas with a thick layer of mural
calcium.8 US, CT and MR appear to be complementary in the evaluation of cystic lymphangiomatosis. US is useful in demonstrating the internal
structure of lymphangiomas, particularly septations.16 CT may help distinguish retroperitoneal and mesenteric lymphangiomas from adjacent
bowel loops. CT may also be able to distinguish parapelvic renal lymphangiomatosis from hydronephrosis. The ability of MR to provide images
in multiple planes without loss of resolution may demonstrate additional lesions and further delineate their boundaries.1 The final
diagnosis of lymphangioma is achieved by pathological examination of the specimen after surgical or laparoscopic examination17 and is based
on well-established criteria.18 These include a well circumscribed, cystic lesion with or without endothelial lining; a stroma composed of a
meshwork of collagen and fibrous tissue; and a wall containing focal aggregates of lymphoid tissue.6,19 Total surgical resection, when
possible, is recommended to avoid superinfection, progressive growth, rupture or bleeding.1,17 In conclusion, retroperitoneally located
lymphangiomas are rare pathologies of the lymphatic vessels. Although they are benign lesions, postoperative recurrence can occur. US
follow-ups at certain intervals can be beneficial in the identification of any recurrence that might develop. Transverse sonogram of the
left flank demonstrating a large mass with multiloculated, thick septum and having hyperechogenic calcific foci (arrow). Transaxial
abdominal CT scan demonstrating low attenuation cysts of the retroperitoneum displacing the pancreas (arrow) anteriorly and mildly
compressing the adrenal and left kidney. Calcification is seen as high attenuation foci in the cyst. A. Axial T2 weighted MR (TR 3000 ms, TE
112 ms) and B. Coronal T2 weighted MR showing a high signal intensity mass lesion in the retroperitoneum. Pathologic specimen showing
multiple cystic spaces containing lymphoid and endothelial cells (hematoxylineosin ×100).
