Anomaly of the left anterior descending (LAD) coronary artery arising from the right sinus of valsalva is frequently seen with tetralogy of
Fallot (TOF). The association of the LAD coronary artery with ventricular septal defect (VSD) is uncommon. We described an anomalous origin
of the LAD coronary artery from the right sinus of valsalva with ventricular septal defect in a 38-year-old male patient suffering from
atypical angina. The LAD coronary artery arose from the right sinus of valsalva, just next to the right coronary artery. There was a single
opening in the membranous part of the interventricular septum. From this case, we suggest that angiography is useful for both documenting
anomalies of the LAD coronary artery associated with VSD and for determining the safest surgical procedures. Coronary anomalies are usually
compatible with normal prenatal myocardial development, postnatal myocardial development and postnatal growth and function, and even permit
intense athletic activity.1 Congenital anomalous origins of the coronary arteries have been implicated in chest pain, sudden death,
cardiomyopathy, syncope, dyspnea, ventricular fibrillation and myocardial infarction.1 The determination of variations in the course and
origin of the major coronary arteries is important in coronary surgery and angiography. Coronary artery anomalies have been discovered as
incidental findings during angiography, surgery and autopsy. Coronary anomalies affect about 1% of the general population; this percentage
is derived from angiographies performed for suspected obstructive disease.1,2 The reported prevalence of ventricular septal defect (VSD) has
varied from 0.3 to 3.3 per 1,000 live births.3 It is a solitary opening, varying in diameter from a few millimeters, but often equaling the
diameter of the aortic orifice early in development.4 In adults, VSD constitutes about 10 percent of the congenital cardiac malformations.5
Studies concerning coronary artery anomalies are rather limited in patient with congenital heart defects.6,7 The left anterior descending
(LAD) coronary artery arises from the right coronary artery in 4% of the patients with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF).8 The surgical management
of TOF may be complicated by anomalies in the course and distribution of coronary arteries.9 A 38-year-old man was hospitalized for
evaluation of angina pectoris. Coronary angiography and left ventriculography were performed through the right femoral artery. In coronary
angiography, the right coronary artery was arising from the right sinus of valsalva. The LAD coronary artery arose from the right sinus of
valsalva anomalously, just next to the right coronary artery (Fig. 1). The LAD coronary artery was anterior to the right ventricular outflow
tract and descended along the anterior interventricular groove. At the beginning, the left main coronary artery arising from the left sinus
of valsalva passed between the left auricle and the pulmonary artery. Then, it formed the circumflex branch of the coronary artery. The
circumflex coronary artery reached the left atrioventricular groove, and then ran along the posterior part of this groove and terminated to
the left of the posterior interventricular groove by giving off branches to the left ventricle and atrium (Fig. 2). In order to determine
whether the interventricular opening is congenital or not, it is essential to perform left ventriculography. In the left ventriculogram, a
normal chamber and wall motion were observed. We found only a single opening in the membranous portion of the interventricular septum. As a
result of this opening, contrast agent was passing from the left ventricle into the right ventricle (Fig. 3). Coronary anomalies may be a
part of complex congenital malformations of the heart or may be an isolated defect.10 Congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries may be
asymptomatic, or may cause myocardial infarction and sudden death.2 Coronary artery anomalies and VSD are detected by two-dimensional
echocardiography, catheterization, surgery, or autopsy.1,3 The anatomic course of the anomalous vessel is found easily through noninvasive
imaging techniques, such as MR coronary angiography.2 In our patient, coronary angiography presented an anomaly of the LAD coronary artery
and VSD. VSDs are quite common in children but rare in adults because the majority either close spontaneously or are operated on.11 However,
it is very rare that the LAD coronary artery originates from the right sinus of valsalva. The anomaly of the LAD coronary artery associated
with VSD in our patient is important clinically, since care should be taken in surgical procedures and angiography. In these patients, as
angina may be due to compression of the LAD coronary artery between the aorta and pulmonary artery, we are of the opinion that it may be the
result of increased pulmonary artery pressure caused by VSD, as in our case. Presurgical coronary angiography is helpful for documentation
of coronary anomalies (in origin, course and distribution) and can help determine the most appropriate surgical approach.12 Congenital
coronary artery anomalies were the most common causes (11.8%) of death in US high school and college athletes.13 Yamanaka and Hobbs14 showed
that the incidence of anomaly of the LAD coronary artery originating from the right sinus of valsalva was reported to be 0.03% among 126,595
cases. Screening of all subjects with this anomaly is not easy because of its rarity. Therefore, the subjects with this anomaly were found
incidentally in angiography or autopsy. Isolated LAD coronary artery originating from the right sinus of valsalva was reported only in seven
patients.15-20 Harikrishnan et al.19 reported only one case among 7,400 patients, and Barriales Villa et al.20 two among 13,500 patients. An
LAD coronary artery arising the right coronary artery is usually most commonly associated with TOF.6,21 Massoudy et al.7 investigated 200
postmortem hearts with great arteries transposition. They determined LAD coronary artery anomaly originating from the right coronary artery
in 2 out of 78 VSD cases (2.6%). These studies included LAD anomaly with complex cardiac anomalies and could not represent the true
incidence of LAD in the general population.6,7 The course of the LAD coronary artery originating from the right sinus valsalva was generally
over the right ventricular outflow tract and afterward it reached the anterior interventricular groove.6 In our case, the LAD coronary
artery originate from the right sinus of valsalva and crossed anterior to the right ventricular outflow tract and in front of the pulmonary
artery, after which it descended to the anterior interventricular groove. In the literature, ours was the first case of LAD anomaly
associated with isolated VSD. In conclusion, we suggest that angiography should be taken for the documentation of anomalies of the LAD
coronary artery associated with VSD as it aids in determining the safest surgical procedures. A. Anomaly of LAD coronary artery originating
from the right sinus of valsalva, B. Right coronary artery (from LAO 45° projection). Left coronary artery, circumflex coronary artery and
its branches (LAO 45° cranial projection). Contrast agent administered to the left ventricle can be seen passing by VSD (arrow) to the right
ventricle. RV, right ventricle; LV, left ventricle (LAO 70° cranial projection).
