Median survival of metastatic malignant melanoma is 6.0 to 7.5 months, with a 5-year survival of ~6.0%. Although long-term complete
remissions are rare, few reports describe cases after chemotherapy. Fifty-three patients with metastatic melanoma were treated with
Cystemustine, a chloroethyl nitrosourea (CENU) (60 or 90 mg/m2). We describe 5 cases, presenting with complete response with long-term
disease-free survival of long-term remission of 14, 12, 9, 7 and 6 years after Cystemustine therapy alone. Long-term survival has already
been described in literature, but in all cases they have been obtained after chemotherapy associated with or followed by surgery. But
despite these noteworthy and encouraging but also rare results, it appears essential to increase cystemustine efficiency. Melanoma has
become an important public health issue because of its rising incidence in the Caucasian population. Even though, most cases are cured by
surgery alone in the early stages of the disease, advanced melanoma has a poor prognosis. Therapeutic strategies of metastatic malignant
melanoma are based on multiple treatment including chemotherapy (dacarbazine, platinum analogs, chloronitrosoureas (CENU), vinca alkaloïds
or taxanes) and immunotherapy (interferon α, interleukine 2), both as single agents or in association. Median survival of metastatic
malignant melanoma is 6.0 to 7.5 months, with a 5-year survival of approximately 6% . Although long-term complete remissions are rare, some
authors have reported cases after chemotherapy treatment . Cystemustine {N'-(2-chloroethyl)-N- [2-(methyl sulphonyl)ethyl]-N'-nitrosourea}
is a CENU derived from 2-chloro-ethylnitroso-carbamoylcysteamine (CCNC); it is synthesised in INSERM U484, Clermont-Ferrand . This new
compound has demonstrated an equivalent and often better chemotherapeutic index for solid tumours than other chloroethylating agents
currently in use . We describe 5 cases treated with Cystemustine (60 or 90 mg/m2) for metastatic melanoma showing complete responses with
long-term survival (survival time 24 months or longer). A series of 53 patients has been treated with Cystemustine administered as a 15 min
iv infusion every 2 weeks. 30 patients were included in a phase II national and multicentric study, whereas other 23 patients received a
Cystemustine compassionate treatment. In the phase II study, patients provided written informed consent after they were informed about the
objectives of the study. The protocol designs and relative modifications were fully approved by the ethic committee. The patients received
Cystemustine 60 or 90 mg/m2. The median number of Cystemustine cycles was 3 (range, 2 to 7 cycles). 28 out of 30 patients were assessed for
disease response (2 patients were included without measurable disease according to World Health Organisation (WHO) criteria. The overall
response rate was 17.9%, with 3 complete responses and 2 partial responses. Two patients showing complete response had been treated with
Cystemustine 90 mg/m2, the third patient received Cystemustine 60 mg/m2. Patients given "compassionate treatment" received 60 mg/m2 of
Cystemustine. The median number of Cystemustine cycles was 3 (range, 1 to 27 cycles). Among these 23 patients, 15 were assessed for disease
response (i.e. patients with measurable disease according to WHO criteria). Four complete and two partial responses were observed. All
patients were treated with Cystemustine 60 mg/m2. Among these 53 patients, 5 complete responses with long-term survival occurred. In 4
cases, complete responses were obtained after Cystemustine treatment alone, whereas, for the fifth patient, one of the metastatic lesions
was excised at the early beginning of the treatment. The characteristics of these 5 patients are summarised in the "patient characteristics"
table 1. Patient characteristics. Patient 1 was a 55 year woman presented with a level III Clark right ankle malignant melanoma excised on
April 1981. In 1988, she displayed an inoperable popliteal mass associated with a large right inguinal adenopathy. Between March and August
1988, she received 13 cycles of Cystemustine 90 mg/m2. CR was documented by clinical and echographic exams in August 1988. The main
toxicities of treatment were nausea, vomiting and thrombopenia. These last ones have led to dose reduction and treatment delay. This patient
died of stroke on November 2000 without any recurrence of the disease. Patient 2 was a 33 year woman presented with a level IV Clark left
calf malignant melanoma excised on August 1985. Between 1986 and 1990, several relapse of melanoma were diagnosed. The patient has been
successively treated with vindesine/dacarbazine, vindesine/dacarbazine, and dacarbazine/interferon α. Hormonotherapy with tamoxifene was
then introduced with close clinical follow-up. In 1990, she presented with right tibiae metastasis and two pulmonary lesions. Treatment with
Cystemustine 60 mg/m2 was introduced for 18 cycles. After 6 cycles, complete regression of pulmonary lesions was observed, but bone lesions
were always present in spite of a significant improvement. Tumour assessment after 17 cycles revealed CR to treatment. The main toxicity was
haematological, with neutropenia and thrombopenia, that necessitated course delay and dose reduction. Patient 3 was a 63 year woman
presenting with Clark level IV malignant melanoma on left ankle, excised in January 1984. Three years later, tumour recurrence was diagnosed
on the left calf. An adjuvant treatment with interferon was introduced (but interrupted after the first infusion because of an allergic
reaction), followed by 3 × 18 Gy cycles of radiotherapy in June 1987. In August 1988, a node was detected at the lower part of the left
popliteal pit, and was excised in December 1988. In September 1990, supra-clavicular and lombo-aortic nodes were detected. The patient
received 11 cycles of Cystemustine 90 mg/m2, and a CR was obtained after 8 cycles. Haematological toxicities occurred with severe
thrombopenia, leading to course delays and platelet transfusion after the 8th infusion. Except for the haematological toxicity, treatment
was well tolerated. However, a systematic exploration of respiratory function in January 2000 showed a severe hypoxia and confirmed the
diminution of carbon monoxide capacity found 5 years earlier. In July 1998, myelodisplasic syndrome was diagnosed. She died in March 2000
during severe aplasia, nevertheless her meanoma was still in complete remission for 9 years and a month. Patient 4 was a 44 year male
presenting Clark level III malignant melanoma located on left arm. Tumour excision was performed on January 1997 and completed with a node
dissection. One node of 11 removed was metastatic. Imaging assessment found also a superficial 2 cm left axillary node as well as 2 – 3
infracentimetric metastatic subcutaneous nodes in the chest wall. The patient received 6 cycles of Cystemustine 90 mg/m2. Target size
decreased after 2 cycles, and the patient was CR at the end of treatment. No relevant toxicity was reported, except an episode of febrile
aplasia after the 6th cycle leading to red blood cells and platelets transfusion. Patient 5 was a 43 year male presenting with a Clark level
III cutaneous thoracic melanoma lesion excised on August 1993. Surgery was completed by a wide local excision margin of 3 cm of the scar.
Disease assessment imaging revealed no metastasis. The patient was then followed every 3 months. Several pulmonary node metastasis were
found in March 1998. The patient received 8 cycles of dacarbazine, and because of new disease progression, he received six cycles of
Cystemustine 60 mg/m2 every 2 weeks. The patient was considered in complete remission after 2 cycles of Cystemustine. No significant
toxicity was reported during the treatment. Among these five patients, three remain in long-term remission for 14, 7 and 6 years after
Cystemustine monotherapy. Of the other 2 patients, one (patient 1) died from a stroke after a 12 years survival without disease recurrence.
The second (patient 3) presented with a myelodysplastic syndrome treated with cytarabine. This patient died in March 2000 from severe
aplasia, and at this time her melanoma was still in complete remission after 9 years. Although some reports had already described long-term
survival in patients with metastatic melanoma treated with chemotherapy, most of these results were observed for patients treated with
chemotherapy in association, or with chemotherapy alone followed by surgery. In a phase III study, 580 patients were treated with
dacarbazine (Deticene®) alone or in association with carmustine, lomustine, vincristine or an hydroxyurea. Hill et al. reported 8 patients,
with complete response who survived 6 years after the treatment. Ahmann et al. gave results for 15 clinical studies. Among the 503 patients,
6 presented with complete response and long term survival of seven years or longer. Four patients have been treated with a semustine based
regimen, one with a combination of vinblastine, bleomycin and cisplatin, and the last one with dianthydrogalacticol. Petit et al. described
5 out of 160 patients who went into long-term remission 7 years after fotemustine chemotherapy followed by surgery. In Samuel et al. , 40
patients with symptomatic metastatic melanoma were treated with procarbazine, vincristine and lomustine (POC). Among them, two remained in
complete remission at 6 and 6.5 years. Berd et al. treated 147 patients with a combination of carmustine, dacarbazine and cisplatin. Among
the 17 complete response, 7 patients presented with long-term survival (19 to 82 months). Coates et al. also described the case of 8
patients who remain in long-term remission 4 to 15 years after chemotherapy for visceral metastatic melanoma among some 1100 patients with
visceral melanoma who have received chemotherapy, almost always with single agent dacarbazine or a nitrosourea treatments. For these
patients, the mechanism remains uncertain, but the author suggested that chemotherapeutic agents can cause mutations that allow expression
of antigenicity in tumour cells . Despite these noteworthy and encouraging but also rare results, it appears essential to increase
cystemustine efficiency. The main antitumor target of CENU is DNA with generation of O6-chloroethylguanine and cross-linking with cDNA
strands . The MGMT (O6-methylguanine-DNA methyltransferase) protein removes O6-alkylguanine by accepting the alkyl group on the cystein
residue of its active site. MGMT level varies considerably in normal and tumor cells, and cells that exhibit a low MGMT level are more
sensitive to CENU . Methionine restriction is known to inhibit growth of human and animal tumor (in vitro, and in vivo) . It decreases MGMT
mRNA and activity in tumoral cells . Furthermore, the potentiating effect of methionine depletion on Cystemustine treatment has been shown
in B16 melanoma-bearing mice . On the basis of these previous experimental results, we have initiated a phase-I clinical trial of dietary
methionine restriction, in association with Cystemustine treatment for adults with recurrent metastatic melanomas. In conclusion, we
described case of five out 53 patients with metastatic melanoma, treated with Cystemustine, 60 or 90 mg/m2, and presented with complete
response and long-term disease-free survival. Despite these encouraging results, it appears crucial to increase cystemustine efficiency. The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. XD was involved in patient treatment and participated in writing the manuscript. ET
was responsible for data management, and participated in writing the manuscript. MD'I, AS and PC were involved in patient treatment and
participated in drafting the manuscript. JCM has provided Cystemustine and participated in drafting the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
