Transverse myelitis (TM) extending from midbrain to the entire spinal cord accompanied by internuclear ophthalmoplegia is extremely rare but
cause serious central nervous system complications in patients with systemic lupus erythematosus. We report a case of a 28-yr-old woman with
TM extending from the midbrain to the conus medullaris longitudinally and internuclear ophthalmoplegia associated with systemic lupus
erythematosus. Her neurological symptoms had an abrupt catastrophic onset and rapidly progressed to respiratory failure within 24 hr.
Bilateral internuclear ophthalmoplegia was also followed by TM. Brain MR images showed definite brainstem lesions, which were deeply
associated with internuclear ophthalmoplegia, and diffuse signal changes in the whole spinal cord, medulla, pons and midbrain. Clinical
improvement of her ophthalmoplegia and of neurological dysfunction of the upper extremities was noted after prompt and aggressive treatment
with intravenous pulsed methylprednisolone and cyclophosphamide. However, the neurological dysfunction of the lower limbs and bladder and
colon paralysis were almost unchanged until six months passed. Transverse myelitis (TM) is a rare neurological complication in patients with
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) (1-3). Moreover TM involving the entire spinal cord longitudinally has only been reported in only a few
SLE cases (4, 5). In particular, the medulla oblongata involvement was reported in two cases only (6, 7). Internuclear ophthalmoplegia (INO)
presents either as an isolated condition or as one associated with other neurological symptoms (8). INO is an uncommon neurological
complication in SLE, and several cases of INO associated with SLE have been observed (9). In particular, the case of TM longitudinally
involved accompanied by bilateral INO has never been reported in patients with SLE. Steroid therapy seems effective in improving INO (9),
but the outcome of TM involving the entire spinal cord longitudinally is unfavorable despite an aggressive treatment with high dose of
steroid and cyclophosphamide in several cases (4, 5). Here, we describe a patient who was diagnosed as having catastrophic-onset
longitudinal myelitis involving the entire spinal cord accompanied by bilateral INO associated with systemic lupus erythematosus. A 28-yr-
old woman was hospitalized due to a cough, coryza, fatigue, a mild headache, and low-grade fever for three days. Four years ago, she was
diagnosed as type IV lupus nephritis by renal biopsy, and had been treated with methylprednisolone pulses and monthly intravenous (i.v.)
cyclophophamide pulses for two years. She experienced complete remission and had subsequently been maintained with 300 mg of
hydroxychloroquine and 7.5 mg of prednisolone daily. On admission, her vital signs and neurologic examination were normal. Laboratory data
showed a white blood cell count of 3,200/µL, hemoglobin of 10.1 g/dL, and a platelet count of 235,000/µL. Her erythrocyte sedimentation rate
(ESR) was 80 mm/hr (normal <20). Urine analysis, serum electrolytes and creatinine, liver and thyroid function test, prothrombin time, and
activated partial prothrombin time were normal. Her antinuclear antibody (ANA) titer was 1:320 (homogenous pattern) and anti-double-stranded
DNA antibody level was over 107 IU/mL (normal 0-7). Serum complement levels were C3 of 27.2 mg/dL (normal 65-125) and C4 of 7.23 mg/dL
(normal 12-43), which were lower than those of previous tests. Anticardiolipin antibodies, lupus anticoagulant, anti SSA/SSB antibodies,
anti Sm and RNP antibodies, and the Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL) test were all negative. Plain radiography examination
revealed pansinusitis of both maxillary and fronto-ethmoidal sinuses. She was initially treated with antibiotics and 20 mg of prednisolone
per day under the diagnosis of sinusitis and flares of lupus. On the third day of the admission, her previous symptoms became aggravated and
she developed a severe headache, nausea, and vomiting. Aspirated cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) contained leukocytes of 54/HPF (neutrophils 87%,
lymphocytes 13%), protein of 49.1 mg/dL (15-45), and glucose of 31 mg/dL (50-75). Subsequently, the Gram stain and culture of CSF were found
to be negative and aseptic meningitis was diagnosed. On the fourth day of the admission, the patient presented with an abrupt onset of
nystagmus, horizontal diplopia, and mild tingling sensation of the anterolateral aspect of the left thigh. An ophthalmic examination showed
medial gaze disturbance of the both eyeballs (Fig. 1), but reduction of visual power, visual field defect, and optic disc abnormality were
not detected. We observed bilateral adduction weakness and concomitant abducting nystagmus with intact vertical eyeball movement. Thus, she
was diagnosed as having bilateral INO. In addition, a weakness of both legs and voiding difficulty developed. The sensory deficit was
consistent with below T10 level, and bladder catheterization yielded 800 mL of residual urine. After 12 hr, flaccid paralysis developed in
both upper and lower extremities. The sensory deficit was consistent with below T4 level, and bladder and colon paralysis persisted. An MRI
scan of the brain and whole spine showed a diffuse swelling and high signal intensities involving the whole spinal cord, pons, and medulla
oblongata (Fig. 2A). Bilateral high signal intensities in T2-weighted image were pronounced in the lower midbrain, pons, medulla oblongata,
and periaqueductal region (Fig. 3A). With a diagnosis of acute catastrophic-onset longitudinal myelitis, aggressive treatment with i.v.
pulsed methylprednisolone was started immediately. Nonetheless, vigorous dyspnea occurred several hours later and mechanical respiratory
support was performed due to respiratory failure and stuporous mental state. Intravenous pulsed methylprednisolone was given for 5 days and
i.v. pulsed cyclophosphamide was added in the intensive care unit. Her mental status and respiratory function were slowly improved and
returned to normal. On the ninth day of the admission, motor and sensory functions of the upper extremities were restored to the T10 level,
and motor function of both eyeballs was recovered. However, the neurological dysfunction of the lower limbs, and bladder and colon paralysis
were almost unchanged. Follow up MR images, which were taken one month later, showed decreased high signal intensity of the cervical spinal
cord and brainstem. However, remnant and worsened abnormal changes in the thoracic spinal cord extending to the conus medullaris were
identified (Fig. 2B, 3B). The patient was discharged to a rehabilitation clinic and six month later her neurological deficit was unchanged
despite monthly i.v. pulsed cyclophosphamide and 20 mg prednisolone a day. TM is a rare neurological manifestation, but causes serious
complication in patients with SLE (1-3). Previous reports have indicated about 1-2% prevalence. (10). Moreover, a small number of reports
concern MRI-depicted longitudinal myelitis of the entire or the greater part of the spinal cord in SLE (4, 5). Deodhar et al. (11) reported
the case of a patient with continuous involvement of the spinal cord from C3 to T2 and from T7 to the conus medullaris. This is the first
report of a longitudinal myelitis. Especially, two cases of medulla oblongata involvement have been reported (6, 7). In the case of our
patient, the TM extended from the midbrain to the conus medullaris, which has never been reported previously. This patient's neurological
symptoms showed an abrupt catastrophic onset, and rapidly progressed to respiratory failure within several days. TM with an acute
catastrophic onset is rarer than acute or subacute onset in SLE (2, 3). Study of Ropper and Poskanzer (3) suggested that three distinct
types of onset occur in TM; the largest group has ascending paresthesia at onset, usually with a course that evolves over one to fourteen
days; the smaller group has an evolving syndrome over ten days to four weeks with a stuttering course; another group coming on suddenly and
evolving over several hours. In particular, the last group showing hyperacute and catastrophic onset followed by the development of a
'spinal shock syndrome' tends to have a poor prognosis. Thus, our patient's case represents the most severe form of the disease. One of the
focal neurological manifestations of SLE is INO. It is defined as a lesion of the medial longitudinal fascicle, which connects the nucleus
of the VI cranial nerve pair with the contralateral III pair during horizontal movement (8). INO presents almost invariably during periods
of SLE activity and is either isolated or, more often, is associated with other neurological symptoms. However, its prevalence in SLE is low
and only a few cases of bilateral INO have been reported (9). This is the first case in the literature of bilateral INO accompanied by TM.
MRI has shown brainstem lesions in only two of the literature-reported INO patients (12, 13). Our patient's MR images showed definite
brainstem lesions, which were deeply associated with internuclear ophthalmoplegia. Usually, treatment with high-dose corticosteroids has
been found to resolve the eye derangement in INO (9). This treatment was also found to be effective with our patient. Three types of
pathological changes have been reported in SLE-related myelopathy (2). The first is an extensive spinal cord softening limited to a specific
cord level, accompanied by vascular alterations ranging from perivasculitis to thrombosis. The second is a large subdural hematoma in the
spinal cord without vasculopathy. The third, the most common change, is a peripheral white matter degeneration, often at multiple spinal
cord levels, which is called subpial leukomyelopathy. Pathogenic mechanisms of TM in SLE include vascular injuries secondary to immune-
complex mediated vasculitis, non-vascular injuries due to antineuronal antibodies, and white matter degeneration (14). In addition,
longitudinal myelitis might be related to either a vascular occlusive phenomena of the spinal cord associated with antiphospholipid antibody
(aPL) or to a direct interaction between aPL and spinal cord phospholipids (15). Though we did not perform assays for antineuronal and
antiribosomal P antibodies, it is quite likely that humoral factors other than aPL were implicated in the pathogenesis of the TM in this
case because of negative results of aPL. Further research will be necessary to delineate the precise relationship between these laboratory
parameters and spinal cord disease in TM. The outcome of TM associated with SLE is favorable (16). It has been postulated that aggressive
treatment early in the course of the disease is crucial for a favorable response (17). Therapy with i.v. pulsed cyclophosphamide, when given
in conjunction with high dose corticosteroids, has been successful in TM (18). However, Tellez-Zenteno et al. (5) indicated that aggressive
treatment with high dose corticosteroids and cyclophosphamide can not prove useful in the treatment of longitudinal myelitis, and found that
the outcome is unfavorable in most cases. Also, Ropper and Poskanzer (3) emphasized that a hyperacute, catastrophic onset with the
development of a total neurological deficit within 12 hr results in a poor outcome. Our patient received prompt treatment with
corticosteroid and i.v. pulsed cyclophosphamide resulting in the restoration of a respiratory failure and the partial return of function of
the upper extremities. However, neurological deficit below the T10 level, and bladder and colon paralysis persisted for six months. In
summary, this patient has the following characteristics. First, this is the first case of transverse myelitis involving the entire brain
stem and spinal cord. The lesions are continuous from the midbrain to the conus medullaris longitudinally. Second, this patient's severe
neurological symptoms had an abrupt catastrophic onset and rapidly progressed to respiratory failure within several days. Third, this
patient is the first reported case of bilateral INO accompanied by transverse myelitis involving entire spinal cord longitudinally, and her
MRI showed definite brainstem lesions deeply associated with INO. (A) Left lateral gaze and (B) Right lateral gaze. This patient shows
marked bilateral limitation of adduction not crossing midline (arrows), but no limitation of abduction, elevation and depression in eyeball
movement. (A) Sagittal T2-weighted MR image of the brainstem and the spinal cord before treatment. This image shows generalized multifocal
high signal intensities involving midbrain, pons, medulla and whole spinal cord longitudinally. (B) This T2-weighted MR image after one
month shows decrease in the previous high signal intensities in the midbrain, pons, medulla, and cervical spinal cord. However, more
increased high signal intensities and distorted conus medullaris are seen in the thoracic and lumbar spinal cord. (A) T2-weighted brain MR
image before treatment. This image shows nodular high signal intensity in periaqueductal region of the midbrain (arrow). (B) This follow up
image after treatment shows decrease in the previous high signal intensities in periaqueductal region of the midbrain (arrow).
