Infradiaphragmatic extralobar pulmonary sequestration is an extremely rare congenital malformation. It is more frequently diagnosed in the
antenatal period due to routine ultrasonic examination of the fetus or in the first 6 months of life, though on rare occasions it is
discovered incidentally in adults. A 32-yr-old man presenting with epigastric discomfort and fever was referred. Computed tomographic
scanning showed that a 16-cm, multiseptated, dumbbell-shaped, huge cystic tumor was located beneath the diaphragm. On the next day, 850 mL
of thick yellowish pus was drained by sonography-guided fine needle aspiration for the purpose of infection control and diagnosis, but no
microscopic organisms were found in repeated culture studies. Surgical removal of the cyst was performed through thoracoabdominal incision
and most of these pathologic lesions were removed but we could not find the feeding arteries or any fistulous tract to surrounding
structures. Histopathologic study revealed that it was extralobar pulmonary sequestration and culture study showed that many WBC and
necrotic materials were found but there were no microorganisms in the cystic contents. We report the first case of an infected
infradiaphragmatic retroperitoneal extralobar sequestration which was administered a staged management and achieved an excellent clinical
course. Infradiaphragmatic extralobar sequestration (ELS) is extremely uncommon. Most ELS are asymptomatic. They rarely have a fistulous
communication with the respiratory or gastrointestinal tract, and thus cystic overinflation and infection are unlikely. To our knowledge,
this is the first report of infradiaphragmatic retroperitoneal ELS complicated with infection. A 34-yr-old male who presented with a 3-week
history of epigastric discomfort and a 1-week history of fever was referred to our hospital. He had been treated with intravenous
antibiotics for 1 week at the other hospital. On admission the patient's body temperature was 37.7℃ and blood laboratory studies suggested
an infectious condition (WBC 15,700/µL, ESR ≥120 mm/hr, CRP 63.2 mg/L, amylase 96 IU/L). Chest radiograph showed an elevated left
hemidiaphragm and a calcified mass in the left upper abdomen and computed tomographic scanning revealed that a 16-cm, multiseptated,
dumbbell-shaped, huge cystic tumor containing dense mural calcifications was located in the medial aspect to the left lobe of the liver and
spleen, and in the upper anterior aspect of the left kidney. The mass extended to the pancreatic tail and its apex was abutting the heart
(Fig. 1). On the following day, 850 mL of thick yellowish pus was drained by sonography-guided fine needle aspiration for the purpose of
infection control and diagnosis, but no microscopic organisms were found in repeated culture studies. On the 8th day of admission, magnetic
resonance imaging showed a much reduced cyst size, and patient's body temperature was normalized but blood laboratory data revealed still
infectious condition (WBC 9,700/µL, ESR ≥120 mm/hr, CRP 44.7 mg/L). The clinical diagnosis was of a subphrenic abscess or pancreatic
pseudocyst and surgical treatment was needed. On the 10th day, the procedure was performed with the patient in the left semi-lateral
position with a small roll placed posterior to elevate the left side. A thoracoabdominal incision was made through the 11th intercostal
space and a careful inspection of the pleural and retroperitoneal spaces was performed. No abnormal findings were revealed in the pleural
space but a cystic mass with adhesion to the surrounding organs was found in the retroperitoneal space. Calcified materials and thick
yellowish pus were drained from the cyst (Fig. 2). Careful dissection of the adhesions between the cyst and the surrounding structures was
performed and most of these pathologic lesions were removed but a severe adhesive lesion between the aorta and diaphragm beneath the heart
could be not removed. And neither could the feeding arteries be identified. This lesion was revealed as extralobar pulmonary sequestration
finally. Histopathologically, the cyst was lined by ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium and surfactants secreted by type II
pneumocytes were observed by special staining (Fig. 3). In the cystic contents, many WBC and necrotic materials were found but there were no
microorganisms in culture study. The patient was discharged 10 days after the operation and the remnant mass had nearly disappeared at a
chest radiograph obtained 3 months later. The etiology of infradiaphragmatic extralobar pulmonary sequestration has been suggested to be
caused by the trapping of sequestered tissue within the infradiaphragmatic space just before pleuroperitoneal membrane closure between
gestation weeks 5 and 8 (1). Infradiaphragmatic ELS is extremely uncommon with an estimated incidence of 2-5% of pulmonary sequestration,
and of 10-15% for ELS below the diaphragm (2). It is most frequently seen in the first 6 months of life, but is found incidentally, though
rarely, in older children and adults (3). Grossly, ELS is usually a single pyramidal to round or oval lesion, ranging from 0.5-15 cm in
largest diameter. It is covered by a smooth to finely wrinkled pleura, and may be adherent to adjacent structures if previously infected
(3). The arterial supply in 80% of ESL cases comes directly from the thoracic or abdominal aortas; around 15% receive blood from another
systemic artery (celiac, renal artery) and 5% from the pulmonary artery, and venous drainage is predominantly into the systemic circulation,
though about 25% drain completely or partially via the pulmonary veins (4). In most cases the sequestration is close to the diaphragm in the
left suprarenal area, and is associated with other congenital malformations in approximately 50% of cases. Diaphragmatic hernia, pericardial
defects, pectus excavatum, and congenital heart disease are the most frequently reported associated anomalies (5). Most ELS are
asymptomatic. However, the lack of communication between an ELS and the tracheobronchial tree results in fluid accumulation in sequestered
tissue, which results in a large size and extrinsic compression. They rarely have a fistulous communication with the respiratory or
gastrointestinal tract, and thus cystic overinflation and infection are unlikely. To our knowledge, this is the first report of
infradiaphragmatic retroperitoneal ELS accompanied with infection, but we were unable to find any fistulous tract to the respiratory or
gastrointestinal tract and any infection source. Arterial shunting and congestive heart failure also are uncommon (6). Spontaneous
regression has been reported in patients with intralobar or extralobar intrathoracic sequestration (7) and several hypotheses have been
suggested to explain spontaneous involution of the sequestered lung. Progressive fibrosis of dysplastic tissue, or thrombosis and fibrosis
of the feeding vessel leading to progressive infarction of the abnormal lung would seem to be the most feasible (7). Accordingly, some
authors advocate close follow-up with imaging studies. The treatment of infradiaphragmatic ELS is controversial, however, operative
resection is still the mainstay of treatment. Removal allows confirmation of diagnosis and reassures that a neuroblastoma or a cystic
adenomatoid malformation is not being left untreated. Resection also eliminates any risk of malignant transformation, which has been
reported in other congenital cystic lung lesions (8). In addition, exploration allows the opportunity to address associated anomalies, such
as, congenital diaphragmatic hernias. In summary, we describe the first case of an infected infradiaphragmatic retroperitoneal ELS, which
occurred in a 32-yr-old man, and which presented with epigastric discomfort and fever. We administered a staged management of the infected
ELS and achieved an excellent clinical course. There is no conflict of interest. Computed tomographic scan of the abdomen with contrast
enhancement. A huge calcified cystic mass is located in the retroperitoneal space on the left side. Macroscopic appearance of the lesion.
The cyst walls are thick and calcified with an irregular red inner surface. (A) Glandular epithelium is lined by tall columnar ciliated
cells (hematoxylin-eosin stain, ×200). (B) Surfactants secreted by type II pneumocytes (arrow) (Papanicolau stain, ×200).
