Occult bladder injury may sometimes go unrecognized during tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) procedures. We report a case of occult
intraperitoneal bladder injury that occurred during a TVT procedure. There was no sign of bladder perforation on the initial cystoscopy,
which was performed just after the insertion of the trocar. Signs of general peritonitis appeared after the patient started to void the next
day. A postoperative cystogram and cystoscopy showed an intraperitoneal bladder injury and a pinhead-sized ulcerative lesion in the right
lateral wall of the bladder. We suspect that at the time of initial cystoscopy, the trocar passed through the submucosal area without
violating the bladder mucosa. The occult bladder injury may have been caused after the initial cystoscopy by advancing the rough edge of the
prolene tape during the extraction of the trocar. This report is the first description of such an occult bladder injury during a TVT
procedure. The tension-free vaginal tape (TVT) procedure is simple, minimally invasive, and has become the most popular treatment for stress
related urinary incontinence in females.1,2 However, there is growing evidence that this procedure may be associated with serious
intraoperative complications, such as vascular injury, obturator nerve injury, and intestinal perforation.2,3 We report an unusual case of
intraperitoneal bladder rupture, without concomitant bowel injury, that was unrecognized during a TVT procedure. A 35-year-old multiparous
woman with no history of surgery or illness presented with a genuine stress related urinary incontinence. She had normal urethral closure
pressure and no bladder instability. The patient was selected for TVT placement under spinal anesthesia. Just after insertion of the TVT
trocar, the bladder was examined by cystoscopy and there was no sign of perforation. We did not perform an additional cystoscopy after
extraction of the trocar. The remainder of the procedure was uneventful. A 16-Fr urethral Foley catheter was used to drain the bladder, and
the patient was hospitalized overnight. The next morning, approximately 24 h after surgery, the catheter was removed and she voided without
residual urine. Approximately one hour after removing the catheter, she developed acute abdominal pain and a fever. An examination of the
suprapubic area revealed diffuse abdominal rebound tenderness without any discharge from the operation site. Vital signs, urinary drainage
and laboratory studies showed normal results. Computerized tomography of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated multiple dilated bowel loops
and abnormal fluid collection in the peritoneal space (Fig. 1). A cystogram demonstrated a leakage of contrast media into the peritoneal
cavity (Fig. 2). Cystoscopy also revealed a pinhead-sized ulcerative lesion on the right lateral wall, but with no visible perforation into
the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 3). Emergency exploratory laparotomy via a lower midline incision revealed general peritonitis, as well as a
large intraperitoneal hematoma, with the tape penetrating the pelvic peritoneum without concomitantly causing bowel injury. The right tape
penetrated the deep layers of the bladder muscle and mucosa, close to the site of right trocar's passage. The hematoma around the perforated
lesion was removed. The retroperitoneal portion of the right tape, just below the bladder rupture site, was cut as low as possible and the
tape above the cut area was removed. We did not remove the periurethral and left portions of the tape. The bladder and peritoneum were
repaired. The patient recovered with antibiotic management and was discharged one week after laparotomy. The patient's stress-related
urinary incontinence remains resolved. Mesh placement using a TVT procedure has unique aspects.2 A curved, five mm needle is placed
transvaginally through the periurethral endopelvic fascia, traversing the retropubic space in an upward direction, and is aimed to pierce
the anterior abdominal wall close to the pubic symphysis.3 However, the TVT needle may be misdirected at the site of insertion. Bladder
perforation caused by a trocar is a common perioperative complication, reported in up to 10% of patients.2,4 Cystoscopy must be performed
carefully to detect the misplacement of the tape and penetration of the bladder mucosa. Typical findings of bladder injury are bleeding or
erosion of the mucosa.5 However, in this case, we did not observe any perforation during the procedure. Shobeiri et al.4 suggested the
possibility of unrecognized bladder lacerations at the initial cystoscopy, and found that three out of six bladder lacerations went
unrecognized. Their cadaveric study showed that the trocar might be close to the bladder wall, without necessarily violating the bladder
mucosa, at the time of initial cystoscopy. However, occult bladder injury could have been caused after the initial cystoscopy by the rough
edge of the plastic covering of the prolene tape advancing during the extraction of the trocar.4 They concluded that such missed occult
bladder injury during a TVT procedure was not necessarily caused by a technical failure during the cystoscopy. Because of the close
anatomical proximity, the lower urinary tract structures and viscera are evidently susceptible to surgical injury by the trocar during these
procedures.3,4 In the present case, we suspect that the right trocar perforated the peritoneal reflection and the bladder, without
concomitant perforation of the bowel or the bladder mucosa. The perforation allowed urine to enter the peritoneal cavity when the patient
voided and this led to peritonitis. The patient had no signs of bladder rupture at the time of surgery. However, because of the subsequent
discovery of perforations, we believe that meticulous care should be taken to pass the trocar close to the posterior surface of the
symphysis. Additional cystoscopy at the end of the procedure may be helpful to detect such complications, and thus help avoid the need for
emergency treatment. Computerized tomography of the abdomen and pelvis shows multiple dilated bowel loops and abnormal fluid collection in
the intraperitoneal space. This cystogram shows extravasation of contrast media from the bladder to the intraperitoneal space. This
cystoscopic finding shows a pinhead-sized ulcerative lesion on the right lateral wall of the bladder. This did not form a distinct visible
passage to the peritoneal cavity.
