Intussusception of the appendix is an extremely rare condition. Although approximately 200 cases of appendiceal intussusception have been
reported in the literature, very few have ever been diagnosed preoperatively. We report a case of appendiceal intussusception secondary to
endometriosis in an otherwise healthy female. The case was diagnosed preoperatively by colonoscopy and treated surgically at laparoscopy. We
review the literature of appendiceal intussusception and discuss the associated conditions, diagnosis, and a classification scheme for this
unusual finding. Intussusception of the appendix is an extremely rare condition. Although approximately 200 cases of appendiceal
intussusception have been reported in the literature, very few have ever been diagnosed preoperatively. We report a case of appendiceal
intussusception secondary to endometriosis in an otherwise healthy female and review the literature regarding this rare finding. A 45-year-
old female presented as an outpatient complaining of a several year history of rectal bleeding and intermittent right lower quadrant pain.
She reported an association of her pain and rectal bleeding with her menstrual periods, and she stated that her symptoms were gradually
worsening. An anorectal examination revealed external and internal hemorrhoids as well as a 1.5-cm pedunculated rectal polyp. A full
colonoscopy was scheduled. At colonoscopy, 3 benign rectosigmoid polyps were removed. In the cecum, she had an appendiceal intussusception
(Figure 1). A computed tomograhic scan was ordered that did not reveal any evidence of intraabdominal disease. After appropriate counseling,
the patient was taken to the operating room for laparoscopy. Intraoperative findings showed an intussuscepted appendix (Figure 2) as well as
multiple scattered small peritoneal and mesenteric deposits (Figure 3) consistent with endometriosis. A partial cecectomy was performed
including the intussuscepted appendix while preserving the ileocecal valve. Final pathology of the specimen (Figure 4) showed extensive
adherent endometriosis along the appendix and mesoappendix. The patient's postoperative course was unremarkable, and 12 months after
surgery, she is doing well and is without symptoms. Endoscopic view of cecum and intussuscepted appendix. Intraoperative laparoscopy with
view of patient's right lower quadrant. Only tip of appendix was visualized secondary to intussusception into the cecum (center).
Endometrioma is noted at bottom center. Small endometriomas were visualized upon perito-neal, mesenteric, and bowel surfaces. Resected
specimen including intussuscepted appendix and portion of cecum removed via laparoscopy. First reported in a 7-year-old boy in 1858 by
McKidd,1 intussusception of the appendix is an extremely rare entity. It more frequently occurs in males and in the first decade of life.2
Approximately 200 cases of appendiceal intussusception have been reported in the surgical literature, but very few have been diagnosed
preoperatively as in this case.3 In fact, less than 10 cases have been reported in which a preoperative diagnosis had been made; ultrasound
and barium enema were useful in diagnosing many of these,4–8 whereas diagnosis by colonoscopy has been noted in only a select few.3,9,10
Although the cause of intussusception is unknown, the postulated mechanism for its occurrence is abnormal peristalsis provoked by local
irritation.11 Possible intrinsic causes of intussusception are varied and include foreign body, fecalith, polyp, carcinoid or other
neoplasm, mucocele, Crohn's disease, parasites, lymphoid hyperplasia, or endometriosis. The appendix may be completely normal or may harbor
a malignancy, endometriosis, or any of the other conditions listed. The appearance of intussusception may mimic that of acute appendicitis
or, as in this case, may present as a constellation of vague and non-specific symptoms. Radiologic studies may be helpful in diagnosis, but
they are rarely diagnostic for intussusception, as supported by the majority of cases being diagnosed at laparotomy. A “coiled-spring” or
“spiral shell” appearance of the appendix may be seen with abdominal ultrasound or contrast enema.12 Computed tomography may also be useful
in establishing a diagnosis by demonstrating a “target” appearance or concentric rings of intussuscepted appendix and cecum. Absence of
filling of the appendix with barium enema is suspicious but neither sensitive nor specific for intussusception. A classification scheme for
appendiceal intussusception was proposed by McSwain13 and modified by Langsam et al.8 A type I intussusception begins at the appendix tip
that intussuscepts (the intussusceptum) into the more proximal appendix (the intussuscipiens). In type 2, the base of the appendix is the
intussusceptum that invaginates into the cecum. Type 3 intussusception occurs when the proximal appendix is the intussusceptum and
invaginates into the distal portion of the appendix. A type 4 intussusception is a complete appendiceal inversion into the cecum with
associated ileocecal intussusception. The case report described here correlates with a type 2 intussusception. Recognition of appendiceal
intussusception is important in avoiding misdiagnosis and misguided attempts at endoscopic removal or inappropriate surgery. An appendiceal
intussusception may be mistaken for a polyp or carcinoma, and failure to accurately diagnosis this condition has resulted in patients
undergoing colonoscopic polypectomy with resultant perforation and peritonitis.14 Alternatively, patients have also undergone unnecessary
hemicolectomy when the intussuscepted appendix is regarded as a malignancy.15–17 Although reduction of the intussuscepted appendix may occur
via increased cecal luminal pressure from barium enema or colonoscopy, the definitive treatment requires surgical resection. As in this
case, preoperative identification by colonoscopy facilitates selection of appropriate surgical management and ultimate treatment of this
rare condition.
