Our case report deals with the importance of detailed echocardiographic examination for differential diagnosis of coronary sinus dilation
and development of abnormalities of great thoracic veins. A 49-year-old man underwent transthoracic echocardiography for atypical chest
pain. A dilated coronary sinus was found and venous contrast echocardiography raised the suspicion of absent right and persistent left
superior vena cava. Transesophageal echocardiography showed absence of right superior vena cava. The echocardiographic findings were
confirmed by upper venous digital subtraction cavography. combination of agenesia of right SVC and isolated persistent left SVC in adult
patients is a very rare abnormality. Both clinicians and sonographers should be alerted to the possible presence of this combined venous
anomaly. Transthoracic echocardiograpy – including agitated saline infusion to the antecubital vein – is an important diagnostic tool for
accurate diagnosis of this congenital thoracic venous malformation. The presence of left superior vena cava (SVC) occurs in approximately
0.3% to 0.5% of the general population . In most of patients with left SVC right SVC is present. However very rarely right SVC may be absent
and in these cases a persistent left SVC drains the venous blood of both upper extremities and the head into the heart. We present one case
of isolated persistent left SVC with absence of right SVC. Our case report deals with the importance of detailed echocardiographic
examination for differential diagnosis of coronary sinus dilation and development abnormalities of great thoracic veins. A 49-year-old man
was hospitalized due to pleuropneumonia. Transthoracic echocardiography in parasternal and modified apical view showed a markedly dilated
coronary sinus (Figures 1 and 2). There was no evidence of valvular heart disease and diameters of cardiac chambers were within normal
limits. Systolic and diastolic function of the left ventricle and estimated pulmonary systolic pressure were in normal range. All pulmonary
veins drained into the left atrium. In order to reveal the cause of coronary sinus dilation an agitated saline injection was given into the
left antecubital vein. The contrast entered first into the coronary sinus and subsequently appeared in the right atrium. Similarly, when the
saline injection was given into the right antecubital vein, the contrast agent appeared first in the dilated coronary sinus and thereafter
entered into the right atrium (Figure 3, additional file 1). Transesophageal echocardiography showed absence of right SVC, presence of left
SVC at lateral border of left atrium and no evidence of any other structural abnormalities of the heart and great thoracic vessels (Figure
4additional file 2). An upper venous digital subtraction cavography confirmed the absence of the right SVC and the presence of persistent
left SVC (Figure 5). Surface electrocardiogram and laboratory exams were within normal limits. Abdominal sonography verified normal position
and structure of visceral organs. Parasternal long axis two-dimensional echocardiographic view showing dilated coronary sinus. (LA = left
atrium, LV = left ventricle, CS = coronary sinus). Modified apical 4 chamber two-dimensional echocardiographic view showing dilated coronary
sinus with 2.8 cm in diameter. (LA = left atrium, LV = left ventricle, CS = coronary sinus) Injection of agitated saline into both left and
right antecubital vein results in filling of coronary sinus first followed by the filling of the right atrium (LA = left atrium, LV = left
ventricle, CS = coronary sinus). Transesophageal echocardiography in right atrial long axis two-dimensional echocardiographic view
demonstrates absence of right vena cava superior (black star) (LA = left atrium, RA= right atrium). Upper venous digital subtraction
cavography which indicates absence of the right superior vena cava and a persistent left superior vena cava (PLSVC) in the left lateral part
of the thorax (white arrow). Left SVC is a relatively rare congenital venous development anomaly occurring in approximately 0.3% to 0.5% of
the general population . It incidence is ten fold higher in patients with congenital heart malformation . During normal cardiac development
the left-sided anterior venous cardinal system disappears, leaving only the coronary sinus and a remnant known as the ligament of Marshall.
Failure of closure of the left anterior cardinal vein results in persistent left SVC. In vast majority of cases the persistent left SVC
drains into the right atrium via an enlarged coronary sinus. On rare occasions, the persistent left SVC enters directly into the left
atrium, resulting in partial anomalous systemic venous return . Besides being associated with other congenital heart malformations, the most
relevant clinical implication of left SVC is the association with disturbances of cardiac impulse formation and conduction . Persistent left
SVC is generally associated with right SVC and very rarely with absent right SVC. In these rare instances both right and left
brachiocephalic vein drain into the persistent left SVC at the leftinternal side of the thorax. Bartram et al. reviewed 121 patients with
persistent left SVC and absent right SVC . About half of these cases had no other congenital malformations. Most common congenital defects
associated with combined great venous malformation were various types of atrial septal defects, endocardial cushion defects and tetralogy of
Fallot. Other reported co-existent congenital anomalies were coarctation of aorta, ventricular septal defect, double aortic arch,
transposition of great arteries, dextrocardia and asplenia. In our case an echocardiographically detected dilated coronary sinus raised the
suspicion of con genital heart malformation. Simple agitated saline bolus injections into the antecubitalveins can add an important clue for
differential diagnosis of coronary sinus dilation. When scanning healthy individuals in modified four-chamber view the saline contrast
administered thorough both upper extremity vein first appear in the right atrium. The contrast given into the left antecubital vein will
first appear in the dilated coronary sinus then in the right atrium, if there is a persistent left SVC that drains to the coronary sinus. In
rare cases of right SVC agenesia and persistent left SVC the contrast enters first into the markedly dilated coronary sinus from both
brachial vein, as in our case. Transesophageal echocardiographic examination can add further information on possible co-existent congenital
heart defects causing coronary sinus dilation and verify agenesia of right SCV . Venous angiography is a widely available and low cost
imaging method for definite confirmation of the presented combined venous malformation. Other alternative imaging methods include computed
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging scan . The hemodynamics of patients with agenesia of right SVC and isolated persistent left SVC
connected to the right atrium is the same as that of health y individuals, as a result, patients are mostly asymptomatic. However it may
cause difficulties and serious complications in central venous catheterization, intracardiac electrode placement or during cardiopulmonary
bypass . Detailed and accurate echocardiographic studies may identify this rare combined congenital defect, hence preventing future
complications during invasive procedures. Combination of agenesia of right SVC and isolated persistent left SVC in adult patients is a very
rare anomaly. Both clinicians and sonographers should be alerted to the possible presence of this combined vnous anomaly. Transthoracic
echocardiograpy – including agitated saline infusion to both antecubital vein – is an important diagnostic tool for accurate diagnosis of
this rare congenital thoracic venous malformation. Authors have read and approved submission of the manuscript, and no conflict of interest
exists for any of the authors AP carried out the contrast echo examination and wrote the paper EdN did the baseline echo and followed the
patient TF supervised the TEE ZM and EnN performed the digital subtraction cavography AV carried out the TEE and wrote the paper Echo
contrast in the right atrium via sinus coronaries. Click here for file Transesophageal clip demonstrating the absence of right vena cava
superior. Click here for file
