A rare case of laminitis was recorded in an adult camel that was kept in confinement without giving any exercise and fed daily with
considerable quantity of pearl millet grains (Pennisetum typhoideus) for more than five months. Laminitis, which results into severe
lameness, has been reported commonly in equine, bovine, caprine, and porcine . There isn't any report on laminitis in dromedary. This paper
reports on the case of laminitis in a male camel, which was confined in stall and fed daily with pearl millet grains (Pennisetum
typhoideus). About six year old medium sized male camel was presented at the hospital for treatment of severe lameness. On clinical
examination enormous onyx enlargement was observed in both forelimbs (Fig. 1, 2 and 3), and left hind limb (Fig. 4) but onyx of right
hindlimb was normal. The digital veins of affected limbs were engorged (Fig. 2, 3 and 4). On progression animal was walking with short
strides and putting weight on heels with leaning on left side. The onyx of left forelimb turned from anterior border of toe towards ventro-
caudal direction and occupied 1/4th of cranial solar surface (Fig. 1 and 2); in right forelimb it turned from cranial border toward ventro-
medial direction (Fig. 3), whereas, in left hindlimb the onyx growth from cranial border was turning towards ventral direction (Fig. 4).
Anamnesis revealed that due to scarcity of roughage during the famine period, the animal was kept under confinement and fed with pearl
millet grains without the roughage as daily ration for more than five months. The animal was sedated with xylazine (0.1 mg/kg, IM) and
restrained in lateral recumbancy. The onyxes were trimmed at the level of cranial border of the toe. The pain was not resolved even at 24
hrs. after the nail trimming. Non steroid anti inflammatory drug, phenylbutazone sodium (5 mg/kg, IM) was administered for 7 days and
feeding schedule was changed to incorporate the roughage in daily ration of the animal. Though continuous improvement in gait was observed
on consecutive days but the draught capability of the animal was re-attained after about ten days. Onyx enlargement is a common feature in
canine and felines that warrants trimming at regular interval. Enormous hoof enlargement in bovine, caprine, equine and porcine species has
been reported due to laminitis . Present findings resembles the grain founders in bovine and equine where eating of considerable quantities
of grains as a daily ration alters the bacterial balance resulting in increased lactic acid producing bacteria, primarily lactobacillus and
streptococcus. The lactic acidosis even in mild form may be a major factor in the development of acute laminitis . The increased lactic acid
and decreased pH causes lyses of cell wall of Gram-negative bacteria with resultant release of endotoxins, these events ultimately
contribute to the onset of laminitis . In present case enlarged onyxes and engorged digital veins were similar to elongated hooves,
engorgement of digital veins and walking with short strides as reported in the early stages of bovine and equine laminitis . Nonsteroid
anti-inflammatory drugs administered at early stage of laminitis have been reported to resolve the condition , similar results were observed
in present case. Rotation of distal phalanx associated with chronic laminitis in bovine and equine was not found in present case probably
due to earlier detection and therapeutic measures taken for resolving the lameness. Left forelimb (Palmer view). Left forelimb (Dorsal
view). Right forelimb. Left hindlimb.
