Limb shaking Transient Ischemic Attack is a rare manifestation of carotid-occlusive disease. The symptoms usually point towards a seizure
like activity and misdiagnosed as focal seizures. On careful history the rhythmic seizure like activity reveals no Jacksonian march mainly
precipitated by maneuvers which lead to carotid compression. We here present a case of an elderly gentleman who was initially worked up as
suffering from epileptic discharge and then later on found to have carotid occlusion. Elderly gentleman presented with symptoms of rhythmic
jerky movements of the left arm and both the lower limbs. Clinical suspicion of focal epilepsy was made and EEG, MRI-Brain with MRA were
done. EEG and MRI-Brain revealed normal findings but the MRA revealed complete occlusion of right internal carotid artery. On a follow-up
visit jerky movements of the left arm were precipitated by hyperextension and a tremor of 3–4 Hz was revealed. Based on this the diagnosis
of low flow TIA was made the patient was treated conservatively with adjustment of his anti-hypertensive and anti-platelet medications.
Diagnosis of limb-shaking TIA is important and should be differentiated from other disorders presenting as tremors. Timely diagnosis is
important as these patients are shown to benefit from reperfusion procedures either surgical or radiological reducing their risk of stroke.
Transient ischemic attacks typically present with neurological deficits such as loss of muscle power, reduced sensation, or loss of vision.
Symptoms such as involuntary movements are not generally regarded to be a feature of cerebral ischemic episodes. Often confused with focal
motor seizures, limb shaking TIAs are a rare form of TIAs that present as such and therefore pose a diagnostic challenge . This distinction,
however, is crucial as this form of TIA is often an indicator of severe carotid occlusive disease and patients are at high risk of stroke .
Moreover, such attacks may be relieved by surgical revascularization procedures in select cases In the following, we present a case of limb
shaking TIA and review the clinical manifestations, diagnosis, and management of this condition. A 65-year-old gentleman presented to us
complaining of episodes of tremor of the lower limbs. These episodes would occur at 3–4 Hz, lasting for 1 to 2 minutes each in duration, and
occur about once per month for the past 5 months, precipitated by standing up and extending the neck. At the time of the episodes, the
patient also felt numbness in his left arm leading to decreased strength and a tremor of 3–4 Hz. Consciousness was never impaired and there
was no other symptom. The patient had a past history of diabetes and hypertension, and was on anti-hypertensive and oral hypoglycemic
medications. On examination the patient was found to have no neurological deficit. However, upon standing and extension of the neck, the
patient became dizzy and felt numbness in his left arm. In addition, a swinging tremor of 3–4 Hz was noted in the same arm. These symptoms
resolved on sitting. Further investigations were needed. Interictal electroencephalography (EEG) and Video-EEG were normal, while EMG and
nerve conduction studies revealed findings suggestive of mild peripheral sensory motor polyneuropathy. MRI of the brain was found to be
normal; however, MRA of the anterior circulation revealed lack of flow signals in the right internal carotid artery consistent with complete
occlusion. There was good compensatory filling of right anterior and middle cerebral arteries via cross flow from left internal carotid
artery. Consistent with the above findings, Doppler ultrasound of the neck showed complete occlusion of the right internal carotid artery,
with normal right common carotid, external carotid, and vertebral arteries. The diagnosis of low flow TIA was made. The patient refused to
undergo cerebral angiography for possible reperfusion intervention and was treated conservatively with antihypertensive and anti-platelet
medications. Anti-lipidemics were also added and the patient hasn't complained of any symptoms for the past 6 months. Since Miller Fisher's
first description of temporary limb-shaking syndrome (LSS) associated with carotid stenosis in 1962, this diagnosis has been reported
regularly and to date there are about 45 such cases reported in literature . The clinical features of LSS comprise a group of rhythmic or
arrhythmic involuntary hyperkinesias affecting the hand, arm, leg, hand-arm, or hand-arm-leg unilaterally. When involving the hand-arm-leg,
there is no Bravais-Jacksonian march and the face muscles are always spared; upper limbs are more evidently affected. Occasionally, jerking
may be seen in both arms, asymmetrically, however. Most often, limb shaking is regular in frequency . Patients describe movements as
"swinging", "jerking", "twitching", "shaking", "trembling", inability to control the arm" and "lack of coordination". When observed by an
examiner, LSS may assume either a choreic or a coarse tremor-like appearance. The shaking spells occur with a variable frequency; from
single episodes to several times a day. Associated symptoms may include ataxia, myoclonic jerks, dystonic limb posturing, and parkinsonism,
the latter manifested as micrographia, paroxysmal tremor and rigidity . An almost invariable clue clinically is that symptoms arise after
maneuvers that theoretically provoke cerebral blood hypoperfusion, such as arising from a bed or a chair, as well as hyperextending the
neck. One patient had a repeated tendency to drop his key when leaving his car along with an associated tremor-like sensation and clumsiness
of his left arm . There is a short latency between standing and symptoms starting, usually of a few seconds. Conversely, limb shaking,
lasting from a few seconds to minutes, ceases when the patient sits or lies down. These characteristics were present in our patient's
historical account and we were able to elicit them in the clinic as well. Though not seen with our patient, other associated neurological
features suggestive of the vascular nature of LSS are transient dysphasia and/or dysarthria, numbness of the shaking extremity, and
ipsilateral hemiparesis. According to Galvez-Jimenez et al., limb-shaking syndrome (LSS) is considered to be one of the many secondary or
symptomatic dyskinesias of vascular etiology . Like other vascular paroxysmal dyskinesias, it can be explained by the "hypoperfusion
theory," in which carotid stenosis and orthostatism lead to decrease cerebral blood flow in critical watershed territories. In an assessment
of 51 patients with infarcts in watershed cerebral territories, 12 percent were found to experience focal limb shaking by Bogousslavsky and
Regli In his physiological studies, Tatemichi et al used xenon-133 to detect regional decreases of cerebral blood flow and found significant
hypoperfusion of the right dorsofrontal and upper rolandic regions contralateral to the shaking limb in a 63 year-old patient . Baumgartner
et al. used transcranial Doppler and showed reduced vasomotor reactivity to hypercapnia in all hemispheres opposite the involuntary limb
movements in 5 patients. Later, in a another study, PET scan imaging revealed acetozolamide-induced hypoperfusion of corresponding cerebral
territories in a patient with LSS, further suggesting that hemodynamic failure as the cause of transient ischemic attacks with limb shaking
. Electroencephalographic studies have failed to show epileptiform activity associated with limb-shaking syndrome, although some patients
have contralateral slow activity . Induction of repetitive involuntary movements in nine electroencephalographically monitored patients
rendered abnormal findings in two; one had diffuse delta slowing and the other temporal delta slowing . The most striking feature of LSS is
severe internal carotid artery stenosis, necessitating the examination of carotid bruits in the elderly with orthostatic and/or episodic
movement disorder. All 12 patients described by Yanangihara et al had occluded or critically compromised contralateral carotid artery . Our
patient was found to have complete occlusion of the internal carotid artery on the side opposite of the involuntary movements. Nonetheless,
normal carotid angiographies with small vessel disease and discrete thalamic and midbrain infarction have also been reported in literature
as a cause of LSS . Management of low flow TIAs focuses on maintaining or improving cerebral blood flow by careful control of blood pressure
and surgical revascularization. This divides the approach in surgical and medical modalities. In several cases an improvement of symptoms
has been reported after raising blood pressure . In the presence of concomitant cardiac and renal disease, this may be harmful. In such
cases, more aggressive treatment of hypertension is possible after surgical revascularization, which is also effective in abolishing the
attacks . In patients with internal carotid stenosis, endarterectomy is the procedure of choice to abolish symptoms and reduce stroke risk .
In patients with complete occlusion, extra cranial-intracranial bypass surgery usually stops the attacks, though not reducing the stroke
risk . This is an old surgical technique which was abandoned after no outcome benefit was shown in a EC-IC bypass study . However, the
emergence of cerebral blood Flow monitoring techniques have brought EC-IC bypass in the front . Currently, the potential use of superficial
temporal artery to middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA) bypass for carotid occlusion is being re-evaluated by the Carotid Occlusion Surgery
Study and the Japanese EC-IC Bypass Trial (JET) . These two studies will determine the fate of EC-IC bypass for carotid occlusion.
Endovascular procedure for carotid chronic carotid occlusion has not been reported. However acute carotid occlusions have been stented
following angioplasty showing favorable results but further studies are required for evaluation . In summary, limb shaking is a rather
uncommon form of transient ischemic attack that should be recognized and differentiated from conditions like focal motor seizures. We add to
literature another case of this rare condition. Recognition will almost invariably point to carotid artery occlusion and timely treatment
may not only abolish the attacks in patients but also reduce their risk of stroke. The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests. SA carried out the literature search of limb shaking TIA cases and collected all the data so far published. He then worked with
the other two in writing down the paper. MAK was involved in the initial diagnosis of the limb-shaking TIA and management of the patient.
Later on worked with the two authors in manuscript preparation. He is the corresponding author as well. BK is the treating neurologist of
the patient and was involved in the initial diagnosis of the limb-shaking TIA and management of the patient. Reviewed the manuscript and
helped in completing the final draft. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
