To the Editor: Mammonogamus laryngeus (Syngamus laryngeus) is a nematode parasite found in the larynx of tropical mammals (1), especially
cattle and cats and occasionally humans (2). We report a case in a 65-year-old Caucasian man who visited Brazil from July 20 to September 9,
2004. The patient stayed in Rio de Janeiro and Ilhéus in northern Brazil. He ate local food, including salads, raw vegetables and fruits,
and drank what he assumed was safe water. Upon return to Portugal in September 2004, the patient experienced a cough and fever. He was seen
in an emergency service and chest radiograph indicated infiltration in the left inferior lobe, the right basal hilum, and right apex. A
complete blood count revealed a leukocyte count of 9,700/mm3, 81% polymorphonuclear leukocytes and 2.1% eosinophils. He was treated with
antimicrobial drugs; a week later a radiograph showed bronchovascular markings. The patient failed to follow recommendations and in mid-
October, he returned to the hospital with a persistent cough and expectoration. In late November the patient had a persistent cough with
hemoptysis. He was given antimicrobial drugs; a computed tomographic scan showed an infiltration, a sequela to pneumonia, localized in the
left superior lobe. Symptoms persisted, and bronchofibroscopic examination in January 2005 showed thickening of the bilateral
bronchovascular bundles and discrete diffuse inflammation in the bronchial mucosa. A Y-shaped worm, moving and wrapped in viscous, bloody
mucus, was seen around the right medial bronchus. A worm was seen in the left main bronchus and, upon closer examination, a male and female
worm in copula were seen. The worms removed with forceps and identified as M. laryngeus (Figure). Eggs from the female were characteristic
of the species. Male and female Mammonogamus laryngeus recovered from the bronchial mucosa. The patient was treated with albendazole 200 mg,
3×/day for 3 days, followed by mebendazole 100 mg, 3×/day for 3 days. The cough and hemoptysis clinically improved and abated by early
February. The genus Mammomonogamus consists of 2 major species, M. laryngeus and M. nasicola. The former is a parasite of the
laryngotracheal region of bovids and felines, and the latter is found in the nasal fossa of bovids. M. laryngeus and M. nasicola belong to
the family Syngamidae that contains the gapeworm of birds, S. trachea. Possibly 100 human infections (3), most caused by M. larygeus, have
been reported from the Caribbean Islands and South America, especially Brazil, with other reports from Australia, Canada, the United States,
France, United Kingdom (4), the Philippines (2), Thailand (5), and Korea (6). Many of the cases reported outside of the Caribbean and South
America were usually acquired while the patient was visiting areas where M. larygeus was endemic. Naturally infected ruminant host are found
in tropical America, India, Africa, Malaysia, the Philippines, and Vietnam (7). M. laryngeus is blood red; the males are joined permanently
to the female and are characteristically Y shaped (Figure). The males are ≈3 mm and the females are ≈10 mm in length. The mouth opening is
wide, and the buccal capsule is cup-shaped with 8–10 small teeth. The worms attach to the mucosa of the larynx in animals and cause
bronchitis and cough. The means of transmission of M. laryngeus is unknown but it is assumed to be similar to that of S. trachea, which is
acquired by ingesting an embryonated egg, hatched larvae, or a paratenic host such as earthworms, snails, or arthropods. The patient in our
case could have been infected by eating contaminated raw vegetation or drinking contaminated water while traveling through Brazil. The life
cycle of M. laryngeus is not completely known, but it is assumed to be similar to S. trachea, which penetrates the intestinal wall and
migrates through the body of the animal to the tracheolaryngeal region (8). Eggs produced are deposited in the tracheal mucosa, swallowed,
and pass in the feces. Chronic cough and fever are the major symptoms associated with M. laryngeus in humans, with occasional reports of
hemoptysis when the worms are in the bronchus. Worms in the larynx may cause irritation and a crawling or scratching sensation. Symptoms of
asthma have been reported, and leukocytosis and eosinophilia may occur. Our patient had respiratory symptoms, persistent cough, and
hemoptysis, without leukocytosis or eosinophilia. The diagnosis of parasitosis is usually made by finding expectorated worms or visualizing
by bronchoscopy and removal by forceps. Eggs may be found in sputum or feces. In our case, eggs were not found in sputum or feces. The worms
are coughed up by the patient or removed with forceps during bronchoscopy. When antihelmintics such as mebendazole and albendazole have been
used, patients have reported improvement. Although mammomonogamiasis may not be considered an emerging parasitosis, physicians should be
aware of the condition especially in patients with pulmonary symptoms who visited disease-endemic areas. Suggested citation for this
article: da Costa JC, Delgado ML, Vieira P, Afonso A, Conde B, Cross JH. Syngamoniasis in tourist . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2005 Dec [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1112.050713
