Wright and colleagues discuss the diagnosis and management of trachoma, both at the individual and community level. A young nurse,
undertaking a working holiday in Australia, sees a 5-year-old Aboriginal girl while doing a locum in a remote coastal community of the
Northern Territory. The young girl has been brought in by her grandmother because she has discharge coming from her eyes. From the notes,
the nurse sees that the child has had multiple presentations for ear and skin infections but is otherwise well. The child's immunisations
are up to date. The girl denies having any pain but otherwise cannot provide much history; neither can her grandmother, who states that the
girl has been staying with an aunt. Upon examination there is a small amount of mucopurulent discharge, her visual acuity is normal, and the
rest of the examination is unremarkable. A diagnosis of bacterial conjunctivitis is made, and the nurse is about to send the young girl home
with some antibiotic eyedrops, when she decides to mention the girl's problem to the senior clinic nurse. The senior nurse agrees that a
mucopurulent discharge suggests a mild bacterial infection, but is concerned about the possibility of a chlamydial infection. Trachoma is
known to be hyperendemic in Central Australia; however, the prevalence in coastal communities is not well documented. Trachoma thrives in
dry, dusty regions and is less common in tropical or coastal areas; however, the disease can thrive anywhere that overcrowding and poor
hygiene is prevalent. When they examine the patient's everted eyelids with 2.5× loupes and the aid of good illumination, they find follicles
clearly visible on the underside of the upper eyelid. Trachoma is a keratoconjunctivitis caused by the bacterium Chlamydia trachomatis. It
is a disease with distinct stages ( Figure 1). These stages generally correspond to the five signs that are assessed by the World Health
Organization (WHO) simplified grading system ( Table 1); however, the stages are not mutually exclusive and more than one and sometimes all
can coexist in the same eye [ 1]. Active inflammation results from repeated or persistent infection, predominantly in children, and is
characterised by the presence of follicles on the tarsal conjunctiva (undersurface of the eyelid). Such active inflammation is graded as
trachomatous inflammation follicular (TF) and/or trachomatous inflammation intense (TI) ( Figure 2). Cicatricial disease is the end result
of scarring that occurs in individuals who suffer from severe, persistent, or frequent infections in childhood. Trachomatous scarring (TS)
is recognised by the presence of easily visible white bands on the underside of the upper eyelid, and is more prevalent with increasing age
( Figure 3). Severe scarring can result in contraction of the tarsal conjunctiva; this causes the lid margin to roll inwards and results in
lashes contacting the globe. Called trachomatous trichiasis (TT), this is more common with increasing age; however, the age of onset varies
according to the severity of disease within the community. The constant abrasions of the lashes on the cornea are painful and rapidly
produce scarring and corneal opacities (CO) ( Figure 4). Once the cornea has become opaque, visual loss is essentially irreversible.
Trachoma is generally diagnosed as a part of a screening program, and will not be diagnosed unless specifically looked for. It is generally
asymptomatic, and only a minority of cases will have a mucopurulent discharge. In a patient presenting with a mucopurulent discharge, one
should consider trachoma or another bacterial infection. The presence of follicles in the case of this Aboriginal girl would support the
diagnosis of trachoma. However, most patients with follicles will be asymptomatic. ( Table 2 provides a differential diagnosis for
follicular conjunctivitis.) If available, polymerase chain reaction (PCR) can be used to distinguish between these different conditions in
the differential diagnosis (direct fluorescence antibody techniques, if available, can be substituted for PCR). However, these laboratory
techniques are generally not of much practical benefit. Not all people with active trachoma (TF and TI) will be positive for C. trachomatis,
and both tests (PCR and DFA) will be positive in paratrachoma (a disease caused by the genital strains of C. trachomatis). Therefore, the
diagnosis of trachoma in an individual should be made on the basis of clinical signs and epidemiology of the disease within the community.
The presence of conjunctival follicles in an area known to have hyperendemic levels of trachoma is highly suggestive of C. trachomatis
infection. A swab of the young girl's eyelid was taken and sent to Darwin (capital of the Northern Territory). PCR analysis confirmed the
diagnosis of trachoma. The girl was given presumptive treatment, at the initial consultation, with a single dose of oral azithromycin
(20mg/kg), and reviewed a week later. At review the discharge had cleared up, but the follicles remained. Follicles are thought to remain
for up to three months or so, even after infection has been cleared. The Centre for Disease Control in Darwin was notified, and an action
plan was implemented. An ophthalmologist was flown into the community, and all children aged 1–10 years were screened. Each child was
examined in the shade; their upper eyelids were everted and inspected with the aid of 2.5× loupes and a good light source. The presence of
TF and/or TI was recorded. The prevalence of trachoma (TF or TI) was 35%, with 5% having TI. The results of the survey were reported back to
the Centre for Disease Control, and a decision was made to initiate a mass treatment campaign. The effective treatment of trachoma requires
the implementation of the SAFE (surgery, antibiotics, facial cleanliness, and environmental improvements) strategy. A repeat survey was
conducted 12 months later, and the prevalence of trachoma was considerably decreased. Trachoma is the leading cause of infectious blindness
worldwide; it is endemic in 48 countries throughout the world and may affect as many as 84 million people [ 2]. Treating individuals with
trachoma in isolation is futile because the disease is characterised by easy transmission and repeat infections. Therefore, a treated
individual will be rapidly re-infected by those who have not been treated. At a bare minimum all household contacts must be treated, and
ideally all components of the SAFE strategy should be implemented on a community-wide basis. The first step in doing this is to estimate the
prevalence of trachoma. Instigation of a trachoma treatment program should follow guidelines provided by the WHO. Such a program will depend
on the prevalence of active disease in children 1–10 years old, the availability of resources, and the acceptance the program will have in
the community. In larger communities or where resources are scarce, it may be impractical to examine all children. In such cases, one of a
number of survey techniques can be used to estimate the prevalence of trachoma [ 3]. Population-based prevalence surveys are the gold
standard for estimating the level of trachoma within a community, and the WHO has published guidelines detailing how these surveys can be
conducted [ 4]. Prevalence surveys, however, are expensive, time consuming, and may use resources that could be better spent on intervention
programs. Alternate tools have been developed that more efficiently estimate the burden of disease (these tools do not provide prevalence
estimates). This tool, developed by the WHO [ 5], attempts to quickly, cheaply, and efficiently obtain the information needed to identify
and prioritize areas for intervention programs. It uses a two-phase sampling technique to optimally bias the sample to detect people most
likely to have trachoma. The first phase selects “at-risk” communities from a region on the basis of existing trachoma data and known
socioeconomic conditions. This phase was not relevant in the above case of the Aboriginal girl, as the identification of an individual with
trachoma immediately classifies the community as “at risk.” Once a community is considered to be “at risk,” 50 children from the “worst
areas” of that community should be examined. The term “worst area” relates to those houses that can be identified as having risk factors for
trachoma ( Table 3). This technique does not provide prevalence data, but what it does very well is exclude the presence of trachoma as a
public-health problem. If the children living in houses with the greatest risk factors for trachoma do not have the disease, then it can be
said with some degree of certainty that there is no trachoma within the community. This is another alternative tool for the efficient
assessment of trachoma. The method has long been used in manufacturing to monitor production quality [ 6]. When used as a tool for the rapid
assessment of trachoma, the technique has been referred to as Acceptance Sampling Trachoma Rapid Assessment (ASTRA). Children are examined
until either a predetermined number of cases with active disease is identified (high prevalence) or a total of 50 children are sampled
without the cut-off point being reached (low prevalence). This method has the benefit of allowing the survey to stop as soon as it has
sufficient information about the likely prevalence of trachoma to allow an intervention strategy to be planned. Clinical examination, in the
form of the simplified WHO grading system, has proven to be easily learnt by local health workers and has generally shown a high level of
reproducibility [ 7]. It is an essential tool in the effort to identify populations with trachoma and to monitor the progress of
intervention programs. However, the need for laboratory-based confirmation of C. trachomatis infection, by the use of PCR testing, has been
suggested. It is argued by some that clinical examination is unreliable, as it has only a 70% correlation with PCR in high-prevalence areas,
and a 10% correlation with PCR in low-prevalence areas [ 8–10]. Moreover, after antibiotic treatment there is a more rapid decrease in PCR
evidence of infection than there is an improvement of clinical signs [ 11, 12]. These findings have raised the concern that the use of
clinical examination alone may result in the overtreatment of communities. The lack of a strong correlation between clinical examination and
PCR tests does not represent a deficiency in either test; rather, it reflects the complicated relationship between chlamydial infection and
clinical signs of trachoma. Active inflammatory trachoma can be thought of as consisting of three distinct stages ( Figure 5). An initial
incubation stage, during which infection can be identified but clinical signs are absent, is followed by frank disease, where clinical signs
and infection coexist. The recovery phase may persist for a considerable period of time as clinical signs slowly resolve; however, during
this time the infectious agent is not present. The duration of each stage is poorly understood; however, it is thought that the recovery
stage may persist for three months or longer [ 13]. The picture is further complicated by repeat episodes of re-infection or persistent
infection. Episodes of chlamydial infection are a prerequisite for blinding trachoma; however, lack of demonstrable infection does not
exclude trachoma. Current research is attempting to develop a cheap point-of-care PCR test. However, until such a product is available and
its cost-effectiveness proven, clinical examination should remain the mainstay for assessing the need for, and monitoring the progress of,
intervention programs [ 14]. The SAFE strategy is being implemented on a global scale as part of the WHO initiative to eliminate trachoma as
a cause of blindness by the year 2020. The strategy focuses on prevention; blindness from trachoma is essentially irreversible. Although
international and national health bodies are generally responsible for the implementation of the SAFE strategy, it is community involvement
and education about the disease at a local level that will result in elimination of trachoma as a blinding disease. The SAFE strategy has
been shown to be an effective tool in reducing the blinding complications of trachoma and consists of four inter-related components [ 15].
Individuals with trichiasis have a greatly increased risk of becoming blind. These individuals need to be identified and operated on to
reduce the pain of TT and to prevent or slow the progression toward blindness. The WHO recommends the bilamellar tarsal rotation procedure [
16]. The finding of trachoma in children should prompt the active search for trichiasis in adults, particularly those over 40 years of age.
Antibiotics are the mainstay of treatment, and the two recommended antibiotics are azithromycin (single dose of 20 mg/kg) and tetracycline
eye ointment (six-week course). Both have been shown to be effective in eliminating chlamydial infection and decreasing the prevalence of
clinical signs [ 17]. Azithromycin is expensive; however, a donation program set up by Pfizer provides the drug free of charge to many
countries in which trachoma is endemic. If the prevalence of trachoma is greater than 10% in children 1–10 years of age, then everyone in
the community should be treated with antibiotics annually for at least three years [ 2]. Annual mass treatment should continue until the
prevalence of trachoma is less than 5%. If available, azithromycin should be used, as compliance may be an issue with tetracycline. Facial
cleanliness needs to be promoted within the community, and adequate facilities for children to clean their faces need to be developed.
Clean-face campaigns can significantly reduce trachoma, particularly intense trachoma. Children with dirty faces are two to three times more
likely to have trachoma [ 18]. Environmental changes should attempt to address the risk factors for trachoma: overcrowding, poor access to
adequate latrines, flies, and poor access to water. Once a treatment program has been instituted, it is important to monitor the effects of
the program. A brief survey of selected areas should be conducted each year to ensure the performance of the program. If the prevalence of
trachoma has risen again, then any problems in program implementation need to be developed and changes made. The institution of a trachoma
intervention program will be different in every setting and should reflect the resources available to that area and must respect the
cultural sensitivities of the population. Trachoma will not be seen unless it is specifically looked for, and if it is seen it should prompt
the initiation of a community-wide public-health campaign.The magnitude of the problem, including the prevalence of active trachoma in
children and trichiasis in adults, should be estimated.The individual components of the SAFE strategy should then be incorporated in a
manner specific to the cultural, geopolitical, and financial constraints of the community.An ongoing process to monitor the prevalence of
disease and the mechanics of the intervention program must then be set up.Without the institution of a coordinated community-wide public-
health program, the treatment of individuals with trachoma is a futile gesture. Trachoma will not be seen unless it is specifically looked
for, and if it is seen it should prompt the initiation of a community-wide public-health campaign. The magnitude of the problem, including
the prevalence of active trachoma in children and trichiasis in adults, should be estimated. The individual components of the SAFE strategy
should then be incorporated in a manner specific to the cultural, geopolitical, and financial constraints of the community. An ongoing
process to monitor the prevalence of disease and the mechanics of the intervention program must then be set up. Without the institution of a
coordinated community-wide public-health program, the treatment of individuals with trachoma is a futile gesture. This research at the
Vision Cooperative Research Centre was partly supported by the Australian federal government through the Cooperative Research Centres
Program and by a grant from Christian Blind Mission International. corneal opacity polymerase chain reaction surgery trachomatous
inflammation follicular trachomatous inflammation intense trachomatous scarring trachomatous trichiasis World Health Organization Trachoma
has a natural history consisting of three stages: active disease with inflammatory follicles, scarring, and trachomatous blindness. Signs
are considered only if they appear within the area denoted by the dotted line. (A) Normal conjunctiva. (B) TF. (C) TI. (D) TF and TI. (A)
TS: fine transverse lines crossing over the vessels. (B) Severe scarring. (A) TT scarring and contraction has pulled the lid margin in, and
eyelashes now touch the globe. (B) CO results from the constant abrasion of lashes on the cornea. Citation: Wright HR, Keefe JE, Taylor HR
(2006) Trachoma and the need for a coordinated community-wide response: A case-based study. PLoS Med 3(2): e41. Heathcote R. Wright, Jill E.
Keeffe, and Hugh R. Taylor are at the Centre for Eye Research Australia, University of Melbourne, WHO Collaborating Centre for the
Prevention of Blindness, East Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, and at Vision Cooperative Research Centre, University of New South Wales,
Sydney NSW, Australia. Competing Interests: The authors declare that no competing interests exist.
