Castleman disease is a relatively rare disorder of lymphoid tissue that involves the gastrointestinal tract in a variety of clinical and
pathologic manifestations. A submucosal location has never been described in the medical literature. We report a case of esophageal
Castleman disease involving thesubmucosal layer in a 62-year-old man, which was confirmed on pathology. Esophagography and CT demonstrated
an intramural tumor, and a leiomyoma or leiomyosarcoma was suspected based on the known incidence of such tumors. Castleman disease, or
giant lymph node hyperplasia, is a rare disorder most often located in the visceral mediastinum (1, 2). We present a patient in whom a
double-contrast esophagography and contrast-enhanced computerized tomography (CT) revealed a polypoid mass in the esophageal wall that,
based on pathology, was diagnosed as a Castleman disease. A 62-year-old man was referred to our hospital for further examination and
treatment of an asymptomatic esophageal mass (1, 2). At the time of admission, he had no dysphagia or any other digestive tract symptoms,
but an endoscopic examination for a routine medical health exam showed a protruding mass in the distal esophagus. He was a heavy alcohol
drinker. A physical examination and laboratory data showed mild hepatic dysfunction, and an abdominal sonography revealed a liver with
heterogeneous echotexture and blunt margins, suggestive of chronic liver disease. A double-contrast esophagography showed a 2.5×6 cm
polypoid mass arising in the distal esophageal wall, located just above the gastroesophageal junction (Fig. 1A). Contrast-enhanced chest CT
demonstrated a 2.5×6 cm, well-defined lesion in the esophagus. A coronal image showed that the tumor was located in the esophagus and showed
a well-circumscribed soft-tissue density mass with a homogeneous enhancement after the injection of contrast material. The mean density of
the mass was 50 HU at precontrast scan and 100 HU at postcontrast scan. CT depicted no lymph node enlargement in the mediastinum or upper
abdomen (Figs. 1B-D). Endoscopic observation revealed one column of elevated sausage-like lesion at approximately 28 cm from the incisor
teeth of the esophagus, a possible varix, leiomyoma, or submucosal hemorrhage. The surface of the proximal portion of the tumor was slightly
reddish, but smooth and covered with normal mucosa (Fig. 1E). Preoperative preliminary diagnosis was an esophageal submucosal lesion, and a
leiomyoma was strongly suspected based on the incidence of such lesions. After incision of the esophageal muscle layer, the mass was exposed
and enucleated from the esophageal wall. The lesion was located in the submucosal layer of the esophagus. The specimen was reviewed by two
pathologists (with 10 and 25 years of experience in pulmonary and lymphoreticular pathology, respectively) and they agreed with the
diagnosis of Castleman disease. The excised mass showed a multilobulated mass with whitish color and a smooth margin (3×3×7 cm) at the
distal esophagus (27-34 cm from incisor). On sectioning, the mass had a yellowish gray multinodular appearance (Fig. 1F). Microscopically,
the esophageal mass revealed nodular lymphoid areas, a marked expansion of the mantle zone, and small, relatively inconspicuous germinal
centers (Fig. 1G). The follicles show marked vascular proliferation with hyalinization (Fig. 1H). The final diagnosis of this tumor was
Castleman disease of the hyaline vascular type, lymphoid subtype. Castleman disease is a disease of unknown etiology, and also referred to
as angiofollicular lymph node hyperplasia, angiomatous lymphoid hamartoma, and giant mediastinal lymph node hyperplasia. Based on
histological differences, the disease has been divided into two variants, and the hyaline vascular variant comprise 91% of cases and is
usually asymptomatic. Typically this variant appears as a hypervascular mass with strong enhancement on CT. The plasma cell variant of
Castleman disease is often concomitant with systemic manifestations, such as fever, anemia, hypergammaglobulinemia, and increases in acute
phase proteins (3). Pathologically, the hyaline vascular type Castleman disease is characterized by small hyaline vascular germinal centers
and interfollicular capillary proliferation. However, the proportion of the two components - abnormal lymphoid follicles and increased
interfollicular vascularity - may vary, from cases featuring predominantly large mantle zones with inconspicuous germinal centers ("lymphoid
variant") to cases with a predominantly vascular component and fibrosis (4). The most common locations of Castleman disease are the thorax
(63%), abdomen (11%), and axilla (4%), although extrathoracic sites have been reported in the neck, axilla, shoulder, orbit, pelvis,
pancreas, leptomeninges, and retroperitoneum (3, 5-8). There are some reports of gastrointestinal involvement in castleman disease, such as
gastric or colonic erosion, gastric outlet obstruction, intestinal obstruction or, rectal cancer (1, 2). Most cases are caused by pressure
from abdominal, retroperitoneal lymph node enlargement. To our knowledge, Castleman disease of the esophagus has not been previously
reported in the literature. There were two reports of mediastinal Castleman disease with esophageal varices, which formed in response to
copious blood flow (because of increased blood drainage) from the angiomatous tumor to the esophageal veins (9, 10). In our case,
esophagography and CT manifestations were similar to those considered characteristic of leiomyoma. It seems to be difficult to diagnose
submucosal Castleman disease without any histological findings. In conclusion, the imaging findings of Castleman disease localized in the
esophagus were homogeneous well enhancing mass at CT. From a clinical standpoint, establishing an accurate preoperative diagnosis is
difficult, and Castleman disease should be included in the differential diagnosis of asymptomatic, well-enhancing esophageal mass. A
62-year-old man with esophageal Castleman disease. A. Spot radiograph from a single-contrast esophagogram reveals a 6-cm filling defect
(arrows) arising from the lateral esophageal wall. B. Coronal reformation CT image shows a definite extent of the disease. C, D. Axial CT
images, before (C) and after contrast injection (D), display focal thickening in the anterior wall of the lower esophagus, with
circumferential luminal air, and the intramural mass shows homogeneous enhancement. E. Endoscopy reveals a smoothly bulging mass with smooth
surface and focal reddish coloration on the distal esophagus. F. Macroscopy of the excised tumor demonstrates a multilobulated mass with
whitish color and smooth margin without hemorrhage or necrosis. G, H. Microscopically, the esophageal mass reveals nodular lymphoid areas, a
marked expansion of the mantle zone, and small, relatively inconspicuous germinal centers (H & E staining, ×10). The follicles show marked
vascular proliferation with hyalinization (H & E staining, ×200).
