Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Creative Commons Deed, Attribution 2.5, which does not permit commercial
exploitation. Hodgkin's disease is recognized as part of the spectrum of post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLD), although
it is still an uncommon de novo malignancy in this population. Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) has been linked to both post-transplant non-
Hodgkin's lymphomas and Hodgkin's disease. We report a case of recurrent Hodgkin's disease in a patient who received a renal transplant in
childhood and later developed EBV-associated Hodgkin's disease with remission after chemotherapy until subsequent relapse 9 years later that
was successfully treated. To our knowledge, this is the first report of recurrent Hodgkin's disease in a transplant recipient. We briefly
discuss the pathogenesis of and risk factors for EBV-related PTLD, utility of EBV load surveillance, and the options for treatment of PTLD
including immunosuppression reduction, antiviral therapy, anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, cytotoxic T cells, and the possible roles of
interferon-α and rapamycin. The patient is a 27-year-old white man who received a living-related donor transplant from his father at 11
years of age in 1986 for end stage renal disease secondary to posterior urethral valves. The patient was seronegative for cytomegalovirus
(CMV) and Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) prior to transplantation. His father's EBV and CMV status were unavailable. The transplant course was
complicated by immediate postoperative acute renal artery thrombosis, which required transplant nephrectomy. He then received a deceased
donor renal transplant 10 days later. Maintenance immunosuppression consisted of cyclosporine (Sandimmune formulation), azathioprine, and
prednisone. He received 12 doses of Minnesota equine antilymphocyte immunoglobulin (MALG) for induction followed by 10 doses of murine anti-
CD3 monoclonal antibody (OKT3) for two episodes of acute graft rejection over the 7 weeks following the transplant. The deceased donor's EBV
and CMV status were unavailable from medical records. The patient developed acute infectious mononucleosis 2 months after transplantation
demonstrated by positive EBV serology. He was treated with acyclovir and the infectious mononucleosis resolved. At the age of 18, he
presented with 5 months of fever, weight-loss and night sweats, and was found to have axillary adenopathy, splenomegaly and bulky right
mediastinal adenopathy. A right anterior, thoracotomy and lymph node biopsy demonstrated Hodgkin's disease, nodular sclerosing subtype.
Hodgkin's–Reed–Sternberg (HRS) cells were strongly positive for CD30 and EBV-latent membrane protein (LMP)-1. He was staged as Hodgkin's
disease-IIIB. His EBV serology demonstrated elevated antiviral capsid antigen (VCA) IgG titers and positive anti-VCA IgM, consistent with
reactivation of EBV infection. He was given six cycles of adriamycin, bleomycin, vinblastine, and dacarbazine (ABVD) chemotherapy, without
significant side effects, and his Hodgkin's Disease went into remission. His serum creatinine after therapy was 2.3 mg/dl. Azathioprine was
discontinued for leukopenia, and cyclosporine and prednisone continued until he developed renal insufficiency, with a serum creatinine of
7.8 mg/dl 5-years later. A biopsy showed severe chronic rejection. The patient was changed from Sandimmune to Neoral, and mycophenolate
mofetil (MMF) was added. Notably, his CMV IgG and IgM were positive at this time, indicating seroconversion in the preceding 2 years since
his CMV status had last been determined. His renal function improved to his baseline serum creatinine of 2.4 mg/dl. Four years later, serum
creatinine was 3.2 mg/dl and a biopsy demonstrated chronic allograft nephropathy with moderate interstitial fibrosis. Neoral was changed to
tacrolimus, and he continued on MMF and prednisone. His creatinine stabilized at a new baseline of 2.7 mg/dl. Nine years after remission,
the patient was found to have hypercalcemia of 15.4 mg/dl associated only with irritability. He was found to have retroaortic and
retrocrural lymphadenopathy with mild paratracheal lymphadenopathy on Computed Tomography scan. Excisional biopsy showed Hodgkin's disease-
IIIA of mixed cellularity subtype. The HRS cells were strongly positive for CD15, CD30, and EBV LMP-1. The patient's serology showed
elevated anti-VCA IgM and anti-VCA IgG titers. Tacrolimus and MMF were discontinued, and ABVD and valganciclovir commenced. He achieved
remission of his recurrent HD with chemotherapy and immunosuppressive withdrawal. Adriamycin was subsequently changed to doxorubicin to
prevent cardiotoxicity, and bleomycin was discontinued from his regimen secondary to lung toxicity. His chronic renal insufficiency
worsened, and he returned to hemodialysis 9 months after diagnosis of recurrent Hodgkin's Disease. At the time of his return to dialysis, he
was found to have a positive hepatitis C antibody. Although several case reports of Hodgkin's disease and Hodgkin-like PTLD (HL-PLTD) after
organ transplantation have been published, no case of recurrent classic Hodgkin's disease has yet been reported . Our patient is remarkable
for late recurrent Hodgkin's disease after renal transplantation in association with reactivation of EBV infection, similar to his initial
episode. Epstein–Barr virus genomes have been detected in 60% of Hodgkin's disease in immunocompetent individuals, and EBV viremia is common
with infectious mononucleosis . Expression of EBV-encoded proteins in HRS is limited to the latency II pattern with EBNA1, LMP-1, 2A, 2B
proteins, and EBV early RNAs (EBERS) . The most important of the EBV genome products is an LMP-1 protein, which is highly expressed in HRS
cells in EBV-associated Hodgkin's disease. Latent membrane protein (LMP)-1 is an integral membrane protein that mimics a constitutively
active CD40 receptor on B cells . The LMP-1 is a target epitope for cytotoxic T cell recognition for EBV-infected cells, and transplant
patients are unable to recognize and destroy these cells because of immunosuppression. Certain immunosuppressants increase the likelihood of
PTLD by the suppression of cytotoxic T cell surveillance. Other risk factors for the development of PTLD include intensity of
immunosuppression, EBV seronegative status, young age, induction therapy with antilymphocyte agents such as OKT3, and infection with CMV or
hepatitis C [5, 6]. Our patient received OKT3 prior to his first episode of Hodgkin's disease, had been treated with tacrolimus for several
years before recurrence of Hodgkin's disease, and had become CMV and hepatitis C seropositive in the interval between his first and second
episodes of Hodgkin's disease. Monitoring EBV loads may allow for detection of early PTLD, but the utility of following EBV viral loads is
unclear. Assays are not standardized, and it is not known which tissue to sample, or when to test . In pediatric organ transplant
recipients, high viral loads are sensitive but not specific for the development of PTLD. In adults, high EBV levels are not sensitive but
are specific for the development of PTLD. EBV-associated PTLD has been demonstrated in patients with low or undetectable EBV loads, and
elevated EBV viral loads develop in patients with EBV-associated viral syndromes . Monitoring viral loads during the treatment of EBV may
aid management. Persistently elevated titers necessitate alternative treatment. A novel method for detection of EBV-mediated transformation
of B-cells was recently described in which a spontaneous EBV B-cell transformation assay (SET) was used to monitor an EBV-specific immunity
in vivo. A positive SET correlated with a decrease in EBV-peptide-specific CD8+ T cells and a higher rate of EBV replication and B-cell
transformation in the absence of cytotoxic T-cell suppression. Reduction of immunosuppression resulted in negative SET assays, and this
approach may allow for surveillance of EBV-mediated lymphoproliferation in transplant patients . Treatment of PTLD includes reduction of
immunosuppression, antiviral therapy, anti-CD20 monoclonal antibodies, intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG), cytotoxic T cells, radiation and
surgery. Reduction of immunosuppression is first-line therapy and enables native immune function to clear the EBV-viremia and associated
PTLD . The utility of antivirals for treatment is unclear. Most EBV-infected cells within PTLD lesions are in the latent phase of
replication, and antivirals such as acyclovir and ganciclovir target the lytic phase. There is an increasing evidence, however, that the
lytic viral phase plays a larger role in PTLD than previously thought . The use of anti-B cell monoclonal antibodies is increasing. In a
recent retrospective study of 30 solid organ transplant patients with PTLD at the Mayo Clinic, 15 CD20 and EBER-positive patients who did
not respond to reduction of immunosuppression were treated with rituximab . Rituximab was associated with a significantly improved survival
by multivariate analysis. Complications included profound hypogammaglobulinemia, CMV reactivation with intestinal perforation, hepatitis B
and C reactivation, and parvovirus-induced red blood cell aplasia . Therapy with cytotoxic T cells for prevention and treatment of EBV-
related PTLD has been investigated in solid organ transplant and bone marrow transplant (BMT) patients. Comoli et al. developed autologous
EBV-specific CTLs for 23 patients at high risk for PTLD because of elevated EBV DNA loads. Seven patients received EBV-specific CTLs and a
stable decrease in EBV load was detected in five without graft function compromise, and in a 30-month follow-up no patients developed PTLD,
even in the two patients who did not respond. Interferon-α and rapamycin have also been used in treatment of PTLD. The potential for
eliciting acute allograft rejection with interferon-α limits its use . Rapamycin, a transplant immunosuppressant, has antiproliferative
activity against EBV-associated PTLD in vitro, and inhibits the growth of solid tumors from EBV-infected B cell lines in a xenogeneic mouse
model of PTLD . Rapamycin may therefore be useful for both immunosuppression and treatment of EBV-associated PTLD but more data are needed.
Prophylaxis for PTLD with antivirals has been used. Despite a greater degree of immunosuppression in the ganciclovir group, prophylaxis with
ganciclovir was more effective than acyclovir in a high-risk group of 198 patients, with solid organ transplants, who received OKT3
induction therapy. PTLD developed in 0.5% in the ganciclovir group and 3.9% in the acyclovir group . Prophylaxis with ganciclovir may have
been more effective, indirectly, as it is more effective than acyclovir against CMV. In summary, we report the first case of recurrent
Hodgkin's disease in a renal transplant patient with numerous risk factors for PTLD. Our case is notable for several features: (i) initial
EBV seronegativity, (ii) subsequent conversion after an acute infectious mononucleosis infection early after transplantation, (iii) the
subsequent development of Hodgkin's disease with successful treatment, (iv) and then recurrent Hodgkin's disease successfully treated. Both
instances of Hodgkin's disease were associated with reactivation of EBV. Further investigation of the complex mechanisms promoting the EBV
transformation of B cells in immunocompromised hosts is necessary, and options for treatment of PTLD continue to broaden. The authors
acknowledge that they have no conflict of interests and appreciate the assistance of Kimberly Knolhoff with preparation of the manuscript.
