SRY (sex-determining region, Y) is the gene responsible of gonadal differentiation in the male and it is essential for the regular
development of male genitalia. Translocations involving the human sex chromosomes are rarely reported, however here we are reporting a very
rare translocation of SRY gene to the q -arm of a deleted X chromosome. This finding was confirmed by cytogenetic, fluorescent in situ
hybridization (FISH) and polymerase chain reaction (PCR). A 7-month infant was clinically diagnosed as an intersex case, with a phallus,
labia majora and minora, a blind vagina and a male urethra. Neither uterus nor testes was detected by Ultrasonography. G-banding of his
chromosomes showed 46,X,del(X)(p11) and fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) analysis showed a very small piece from the Y chromosome
translocated to the q-arm of the del(X). Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) analysis revealed the presence of material from the sex-determining
region Y (SRY) gene. It is suggested that the phenotype of the patient was caused by activation of the deleted X chromosome with SRY
translocation, which is responsible for gonadal differentiation. The SRY (sex-determining region Y), which is normally located in the distal
part of the short arm of the Y chromosome is a genetic 'master switch' of gonadal differentiation , the product of which is present in the
male genital ridge before testis formation and is required for the regular development of male genitalia . SRY encodes a transcription
factor that is a member of the high mobility group (HMG)-box family of DNA binding proteins and in mammals triggers the development of
undifferentiated gonads towards a testicular phenotype . In humans, zygotes bearing mutations in SRY develop into XY females , while XX
individuals with the presence of SRY typically show a normal male phenotype , but may occasionally show ambiguous genitalia . One example is
testicular regression syndrome (XY gonadal regression syndrome), in which there are no gonads, and variable development of Mullerian and
Wolfian ducts depending on the stage of fetal development at which the embryonic testis involutes; in most cases this happens before
Mullerian tissues have regressed and before testosterone synthesis has started, the etiology is unknown but affected siblings have been
reported . A 7- month old infant, raised as a male, was clinically diagnosed as an intersex case. On examination the patient showed a big
phallus, labia majora and minora, a blind vagina and a male urethra (Fig. 1). Ultrasonographic investigations did not detect the presence of
uterus or testes. The patient was referred for chromosomal analysis. The external genitalia of the 7- month Sudanese infant who was
clinically diagnosed as intersex. Patient peripheral blood was subjected to short-term culturing in RPMI 1640 medium for 72 hours. After
metaphase arrest through exposure to Colcemide, cells were harvested, treated with hypotonic solution, and then fixed with methanol and
acetic acid according to standard procedures. The harvested cells were dropped on clean slides and stained with Wright's stain, for
chromosome banding . The clonality criteria and the karyotypic descriptions were according to the ISCN recommendations . FISH with whole
chromosome painting, and X centromeric probe, and the SRY gene specific probe (Vysis, Naperville, IL) was applied to fixated metaphases
cells according to standard procedures . DNA extraction and amplification methods were according to . Primers were designed for PCR
amplification using Genosys primer.3 software (Table 1). Analysis of 11 metaphase cells showed 46,X,del(X)(p11) in all cells, which is a
deletion within the breakpoint in band 11 in the p arm of one of the X chromosomes (Fig 2). Metaphase cell showing 46,X,del(X)(p11). FISH
analysis with whole chromosome painting probes and gene specific probes for the SRY gene showed a translocation of SRY material to the q-arm
of the del(X) (Fig 3). FISH analysis by whole chromosome painting shows a translocation of SRY material to the q-arm of the del(X). The X
chromosome is painted in green and the Y chromosome in red/orange. Normal cross hybridization of the Y painting probe is seen in proximal Xq
of both the normal X chromosome and the del(X), whereas normal cross hybridization to Xp is only seen in the normal X chromosome as these
sequences are missing from del(X). The del(X) also shows a signal at distal Xq, corresponding to translocated Y sequences. Inset (A): SRY
material (red/orange) is located at distal Xq while X centromere is in green. Inset (B): The G- banding of del(X) and normal X. PCR analysis
corroborated the presence of SRY material in the peripheral blood of the patient (Fig 4). The PCR analysis showing the presence of SRY
material in patient blood. Lane 1 patient sample, lane 2 positive control, lane 3 negative control, lane 6 123 DNA markers. Translocations
involving the human sex chromosomes are rarely reported. One of the best-known consequences of such exchanges is sex reversal in 46,XX males
and some 46,XY females, due to exchange in the paternal germ line of terminal portions of Xp and Yp, including the SRY gene . The presence
of the SRY gene in the normal male zygote leads to the development of male genital organs and the absence of this gene leads to the
development of the female genitalia. Patients who carry a structural abnormality of the X chromosome and ambiguous genitalia have provided
opportunities to elucidate the genotype/phenotype correlation in relation to the X and Y chromosome content and X chromosome inactivation.
At least one previous intersex case with an Xp deletion has been reported . However, SRY sequences could not be detected in that patient and
the authors suggested that the phenotype resulted from unmasking of recessive mutations in Xp by activation of the abnormal X chromosome in
the majority of cells. In the present case, G-banding showed one ostensibly normal X chromosome and one X chromosome with deletion of most
of the short arm. However, FISH and PCR analyses showed that there was also a translocation of SRY gene material to the long arm of abnormal
X, which could potentially lead to development of normal male genitalia. In the present case, development of normal male genitalia presumes
a skewed inactivation, allowing expression of the SRY in the gonadal cell population . We hypothesize that the incomplete masculinisation of
our patient is due to activation of the abnormal X to which SRY sequences had been translocated in a subpopulation of gonadal cells. This is
the first case of this rare intersex condition reported from the Sudan. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. ME has
collected the sample, cultured it, and harvested metaphase chromosomes; ME has also participated in the design and coordination of the study
and drafted the manuscript. DG and TN performed the cytogenetic analysis; DG has performed FISH. DG and TN as also participated in the
design of the study and helped to draft the manuscript. SA and ME has performed the PCR analysis, helped to draft the manuscript. TA has
performed the ultarsonography and also helped to draft the manuscript. AE, and IF participated in the design of the study, and helped to
draft the manuscript. All authors have given final approval of the final version of this paper. Table 1: Primer, DNA sequence, and
temperature used in DNA analysis The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: We are grateful to the Alf Hanssons
minnesfond, the ASTRA-Zeneca traveling fund, the Lund Medical Society and the Royal Physiographic Society of Lund. Written consent was
obtained from the patient relative for publication of this study.
