Symptomatic respiratory tract involvement is not common in Crohn's disease. Upper-airway obstruction has been reported before in Crohn's
disease and usually responds well to steroid treatment. We report a case of a 32-year old patient with Crohn's disease who presented with
progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the chest and bronchoscopy revealed severe tracheal stenosis and
marked inflammation of tracheal mucosa. Histopathology of the lesion showed acute and chronic inflammation and extended ulceration of
bronchial mucosa, without granulomas. Tracheal stenosis was attributed to Crohn's disease after exclusion of other possible causes and oral
and inhaled steroids were administered. Despite steroid treatment, tracheal stenosis persisted and only mild symptomatic improvement was
noted after 8 months of therapy. The patient subsequently underwent rigid bronchoscopy with successful dilatation and ablation of the
stenosed areas and remission of her symptoms. Respiratory involvement in Crohn's disease might be more common than appreciated.
Interventional pulmonology techniques should be considered in cases of tracheal stenosis due to Crohn's disease refractory to steroid
treatment. Crohn's disease (CD) is a nonspecific chronic inflammatory disease that most commonly affects the distal ileum and colon and
occasionally exhibits extra-intestinal manifestations. Symptomatic respiratory tract involvement is not common, pulmonary lesions, however,
have been reported in CD, including chronic bronchitis , bronchiectasis , upper-airway obstruction , bronchiolitis obliterans organizing
pneumonia , granulomatous lung disease and interstitial lung disease . This report describes a young patient with CD who developed severe
tracheal stenosis. A 32-yr old Caucasian female patient presented in September 2004 with progressively worsening dyspnea on exertion. Since
2002, she had suffered from typical CD with arthritis, which had been diagnosed on clinical, endoscopic and histological grounds. She had
undergone colonoscopy and biopsy in order to investigate symptoms of persistent diarrhea with abdominal pain, weight loss and fever.
Colonoscopy had revealed mucosal ulcerations involving the distal ileum and right colon alternating with areas of normal-appearing mucosa
and histological examination had shown transmural inflammation and epithelioid granulomas, typical of CD. In the following years, her
gastrointestinal symptoms were well-controlled on sulphasalazine 3000 mg·day-1, azathioprine 100 mg·day-1 and folic acid 5 mg·day-1 and she
experienced no exacerbations. Over the past year she has suffered from recurrent episodes of acute bronchitis. She has been repeatedly
treated with antibiotics and short courses of oral steroids, followed by improvement of symptoms of infection (cough and sputum production).
She complained, however, of progressive deterioration of her dyspnea and was referred by her family doctor to the Thoracic Department of the
University Hospital of Heraklion for further evaluation and treatment. On presentation, severe dyspnea on exertion subsiding at rest was
noted. On physical examination, the patient was tachypnoeic and had stridor, reduced breath sounds and diffuse wheezing on auscultation. She
was a lifelong non-smoker and had no history of occupational or environmental exposure relevant to lung disease. Her temperature was 36.6°C
and her arterial oxygen saturation at rest was 97% (room air). Post exertion arterial blood-gas analysis did not reveal hypoxemia (alveolar-
arterial oxygen tension gradient at peak exercise was 10 mmHg). The electrocardiogram and chest radiographs were normal. Laboratory
investigations showed normal serum values of electrolytes, glucose, protein, liver function tests, urea and creatinine. Other laboratory
tests showed a moderately increased erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 31 mm·1 h-1, and normal C-reactive protein (< 0.32 mg/dl). Complete
blood count revealed mildly elevated white blood cell count (12.3 K·μl-1, 90.8% neutrophils). Assessments of anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-
DNA antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA, both cytoplasmic- and perinuclear-ANCA), and serum angiotensin-converting
enzyme (sACE) were normal. Serologic tests for Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Chlamydia pneumoniae, respiratory syncytial virus, adenovirus, and
influenza viruses were all negative. Tuberculin skin test was negative. Sputum cultures for mycobacteria and fungi were negative. Pulmonary
function tests showed airway obstruction (Table 1) and flow-volume curve intra-extrathoracic airway obstruction. There was no improvement in
forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) following inhalation of β2-agonist. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the trachea revealed a
2-cm region of severe subglottic tracheal stenosis with marked increase in tracheal wall thickness (Figure 1). High resolution computed
tomography scan (HRCT) of the thorax did not show any abnormalities. A fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB) was performed, and showed severe
circumferential tracheal stenosis, greater than 70%, 1–2 cm beneath the vocal cords and marked inflammation of tracheal mucosa (Figure 2A).
The patient did not tolerate penetration of the bronchoscope through the obstruction. Bacteriologic studies of bronchial washings, including
cultures for mycobacteria and fungi, were negative. Cytologic studies of bronchial washings showed inflammatory cells and no malignant
cells. Histological examination of several biopsies of the stenosed areas revealed acute and chronic inflammation and extended ulceration of
bronchial mucosa, without granulomas (Figure 2B). The patient received inhaled budesonide 800 μg·day-1 and methylprednisolone 120 mg·day-1
iv for 5 days. Then she continued on oral methylprednisolone 24 mg·day-1 and inhaled budesonide 800 μg·day-1. During the following months
she reported improvement of her shortness of breath, accompanied by gradual improvement of her lung function tests (Table 1). In May 2005
she was referred to the Complex Airway Center of the Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center for further evaluation. On presentation in the
Complex Airway Center, her throat on auscultation revealed mild inspiratory stridor. There was otherwise no wheezing, chest exam was normal,
as was the remainder of her examination, and room air oxygenation was 99%. A specialized airway CT was performed, which demonstrated a 2-cm
region of circumferential subglottic stenosis with focal narrowing that did not spare the membranous portion of the trachea (Figure 3). The
remainder of the trachea appeared unremarkable without evidence of tracheobronchomalacia. There were regions of patchy ground glass opacity
in the superior segment of the right middle lobe, with some centrilobular nodular opacities and patchy opacities in the right lower lobe
superior segment with air trapping. At flexible bronchoscopy a high-grade subglottic obstruction was visible at about 7 or 8 mm diameter
opening. The obstruction was complex, reaching from the posterior subglottic area close to the vocal cords and posterior arytenoids all the
way down to the cricoid ring in a circular fashion. Rigid bronchoscopy confirmed the subglottic stenosis and showed that it extended into
the first tracheal ring. The area was biopsied, dilated sequentially to 12 mm and the remaining tissues were cleanly ablated with the help
of a microdebrider. The diameter achieved in the end was approximately 14 mm and appeared normal for her size. Five cc of 0.04% mitomycin-C
was also applied for four minutes. During the rigid bronchoscopy several additional abnormalities were visualized. The left upper lobe was
near-totally occluded by a web-like obstruction, which was also biopsied and dilated. Moreover, the right medial segment of the right lower
lobe was near-totally occluded with what appeared to be mucosal and submucosal swelling, which was again extensively biopsied and a lumen
was reestablished. The pathology results revealed partially ulcerated respiratory mucosa with squamous metaplasia, lamina propria fibrosis,
recent hemorrhages and acute and chronic inflammation in all three locations, but no granulomas. This treatment led to complete remission of
the patient's respiratory symptoms up to the point that this report is written, 10 months after dilatation. She continued treatment with
oral methylprednisolone 24 mg·day-1, inhaled budesonide 800 μg·day-1 and oral omeprazole 20 mg·day-1. The patient will be closely followed
with pulmonary function tests and endoscopic approaches, if necessary, and progressive tapering of oral steroid treatment over the following
months will be attempted. The authors report a case of a young female with CD, who developed tracheal inflammation and stenosis that
improved but persisted, despite corticosteroid treatment. Although the lungs are not a common site of involvement, pulmonary lesions have
been reported in CD. Latent pulmonary involvement might be more frequent than considered and subclicinal abnormalities, like increased
bronchial hyperresponsiveness , impairement of lung function parameters , increased lymphocyte numbers in bronchoalveolar lavage and induced
sputum and increase of lung permeability , have been well-described. In the present case, other disease processes that might cause a similar
picture had to be excluded. Tuberculous stenosis is an endobronchial complication of pulmonary tuberculosis. In this patient, mycobacterial
infection could be excluded by the absence of caseating granulomas, negative tuberculin skin test, and failure to identify mycobacteria on
culture. Sarcoidosis and CD share pathologic and immunologic features . In this case, there was little evidence in favor of sarcoidosis:
there was no extrapulmonary sarcoid involvement, no mediastinal lymph node involvement, sACE level was normal and typical sarcoid
granulomata in bronchial biopsies were absent. Moreover, the absence of histological findings suggestive of Wegener's granulomatosis, the
lack of cytoplasmic-ANCA and no extrapulmonary involvement, made the diagnosis of Wegener's granulomatosis unlikely. Relapsing
polychondritis was excluded on the basis of clinical, radiological and histological criteria. Tracheobronchial involvement is rare in CD,
but has been reported before . Mucosal inflammation of the trachea and bronchi may be observed, with or without upper airway stenosis, in
any age group. Histologically, there may be airway infiltration by inflammatory cells and mucosal ulceration, but non-caseating granulomas
are not always present . The diagnosis of CD usually precedes the presentation of pulmonary manifestations, but previously undiagnosed CD
presenting with airway manifestations has also been reported . Symptoms of tracheobronchial involvement usually respond well to appropriate
doses of inhaled and/or systemic steroids. In the present case, however, although the patient reported improvement with steroid treatment,
she still complained of symptoms compromising her quality of life, making a more invasive approach necessary. Bronchoscopic dilatation led
to complete remission of her symptoms. Stent placement was not feasible as the lesion was in the glottic and subglottic space involving the
vocal cords. The lesions were not approachable surgically as they were multifocal and still revealed chronic inflammation. Surgery could be
indicated at a later point when the inflammation has turned into fibrosis. Aggressive treatment with inhaled and oral steroids is still
necessary for this patient to avoid relapse, since inflammation is an ongoing process. In summary, this is a report of a patient with CD who
developed severe airway obstruction, despite the fact that gastrointestinal symptoms were well-controlled on conventional CD treatment.
Systemic and inhaled steroid treatment led to some improvement, in agreement with previous reports of the effectiveness of steroid
administration in similar cases . In this case however, mucosal inflammation and symptoms persisted, making a more invasive approach
necessary. Interventional pulmonary medicine has made great progress during recent years, proving to be a valuable tool for respiratory
physicians. To our knowledge this is the first report of a patient with tracheal stenosis from CD successfully treated with rigid
bronchoscopy and dilatation. Respiratory involvement in CD might be more common than appreciated and the need exists for early diagnosis and
appropriate treatment of airway complications, which might otherwise prove to be life-threatening. anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies
(ANCA), Crohn's disease (CD), fiberoptic bronchoscopy (FOB), forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1), high resolution computed
tomography scan (HRCT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), serum angiotensin-converting enzyme (sACE) The author(s) declare that they have no
competing interests. MP and ET were responsible of patient management and drafted the manuscript. IL carried out flexible bronchoscopy and
participated in patient follow-up. EG carried out pathology tests. AE was responsible of all interventional pulmonology procedures. NMS
critically revised the manuscript and gave final approval of the version. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of study. Magnetic
Resonance Imaging (MRI). MRI_axial: (A) Axial T1-weighted Spin Echo (SE) MRI shows circumferential thickening of the trachea (white arrow)
with intermediate signal intensity of the thickened mucosa/submucosa. (B) T2-weighted Turbo SE MRI at the same level. Note the pathological
high signal intensity of the thickened mucosa/submucosa, which corresponds to mucosal inflammation. MRI_sag: (C) Sagittal T1-weighted SE MRI
shows irregular narrowing of the airway (white arrow). (D) Sagittal T2-weighted Turbo SE MRI of the subglottic trachea shows thickening of
the tracheal lumen with high signal intensity due to inflammation. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy and histological examination of tracheal
stenosis. (A) Circumferential tracheal stenosis, greater than 70%, 1–2 cm beneath the vocal cords and marked inflammation of tracheal mucosa
was noted at fiberoptic bronchoscopy. (B) Histological examination revealed acute and chronic inflammation and extended ulceration of
bronchial mucosa, without granulomas. Computed Tomography (CT). (A) CT_ volume rendering technique (VRT): The VRT of the tracheobronchial
tree, clearly demonstrates the segment of irregular stenosis of the subglottic trachea (white arrow). (B) CT _axial: CT scan shows marked
circumferential narrowing of the subglottic part of the trachea. No calcification can be seen. (C and D) CT_sag_multi planar reconstruction
(MPR): On (C) end-expiration and (D) end-inspiration sagittal MPR of CT scan, a dynamic collapse of the trachea can not be documented.
Sequential evaluation of pulmonary function tests. Data in parentheses are percentage of predicted value. Measurements in September 2004
were taken on admission; those in October 2004 and December 2004 were after 4 weeks and 12 weeks of oral and inhaled steroids, respectively;
those in February 2005 were after 20 weeks of therapy; and those in July 2005 after bronchoscopic dilatation and 40 weeks of therapy. FVC:
forced vital capacity; FEV1: forced expiratory volume in one second; FEF25–75: forced mid-expiratory flow.
