Mycobacterium haemophilum is a slow-growing, fastidious, iron-requiring microorganism that, relative to other non-tuberculous mycobacterial
species, has rarely been documented as a cause of human infection. This microorganism appears to be acquired via environmental exposure
although its natural habitat and mode of acquisition are unknown. It has primarily been implicated as a cause of ulcerating cutaneous or
subcutaneous nodular skin lesions, particularly in immunocompromised patients, although infections at extracutaneous sites have also been
described. Osteomyelitis, while rarely documented, appears to be an important complication of infection with M. haemophilum in these
patients. We describe a unique case of culture-confirmed M. haemophilum osteomyelitis in an adult woman with polycythemia vera and review
the world literature on bone infections due to this organism. Mycobacterium haemophilum is an important but infrequently encountered cause
of osteomyelitis in immunocompromised patients, often requiring months to years of medical therapy, with or without surgery, to effect a
clinical cure. Mycobacterium haemophilum is a slow-growing, fastidious, iron-requiring microorganism that, relative to other non-tuberculous
mycobacterial species, has rarely been documented as a cause of human infection. This microorganism appears to be acquired from
environmental exposure although its natural habitat and mode of acquisition are unknown. It has primarily been implicated as a cause of
ulcerating cutaneous or subcutaneous nodular skin lesions, particularly in immunocompromised patients, although infections at extracutaneous
sites have also been described. Like other nontuberculous mycobacteria, M. haemophilum can cause chronic cervicofacial lymphadenitis,
particularly in immunocompetent children . Osteomyelitis, while rarely documented, appears to be an important complication of infection with
M. haemophilum in these patients. We report a case of M. haemophilum osteomyelitis in a patient with polycythemia vera and provide a summary
review of the world literature on M. haemophilum bone infections. A 56-year-old businesswoman with a 16-year history of polycythemia vera,
apparently well controlled with busulfan, presented for medical attention with a 1-month history of painful ulcerating nodular skin lesions
on her right wrist and right ankle. The lesions were biopsied, with Ziehl-Neelsen stains demonstrating the presence of acid-fast bacilli
(AFB). She had lived in Canada for most of her adult life aside from yearly, extended vacations in Arizona, USA. She was not aware of any
contact with tuberculous individuals, and had no history of exposure to fish tanks. She recalled experiencing minor trauma to her right
wrist just prior to the emergence of the nodular lesions. A Mantoux test was not performed. Physical examination revealed tender nodular and
erythematous ankle and wrist lesions (3 cm and 1 cm in diameter, respectively), with full thickness skin ulceration. Chest X-ray was normal.
While awaiting culture results, she was started on clarithromycin 500 mg orally twice daily, ciprofloxacin 500 mg orally twice daily, and
rifabutin 300 mg orally once daily, after which her wrist lesion slowly healed. The ankle lesion did not respond significantly to medical
therapy. X-rays demonstrated osteolysis of the distal tibia consistent with osteomyelitis. She developed gastrointestinal intolerance to
ciprofloxacin and rifabutin, and was continued on clarithromycin alone. At this time, her polycythemia treatment was subsequently switched
from busulfan to hydroxyurea. The wrist and ankle bone biopsy specimens were inoculated onto plain and hemin-supplemented Middlebrook 7H10
agar media and BACTEC 12B blood culture bottles incubated at 30°C in an aerobic atmosphere (National Mycobacteriology Laboratory, Edmonton,
Canada). After 1 and 6 weeks, respectively, growth of acid-fast bacilli was observed only on the hemin-supplemented Middlebrook slants
inoculated with the wrist and ankle specimens and definitively identified as M. haemophilum by high-performance liquid chromatography
(Laboratoire de sante publique du Quebec, Montreal, Canada). Susceptibility testing was performed using Etest (AB BIODISK, Solna, Sweden) on
Mueller-Hinton agar supplemented with sheep blood. The organism was susceptible to clarithromycin (MIC ≤ 16 μg/ml) and rifabutin (MIC ≤ 0.12
μg/ml) but resistant to ciprofloxacin (MIC 4 μg/ml), amikacin (MIC ≥ 8 μg/ml), and ethambutol (MIC ≥ 8 μg/ml) based on unofficial
breakpoints proposed by the National Mycobacteriology Laboratory, Edmonton, Canada. Re-biopsy of the ankle lesion demonstrated the presence
of AFB but no evidence of superinfection with other pathogens. An HIV test was ordered at this time but was negative. An MRI scan 6 months
later demonstrated a significant soft tissue inflammatory mass underlying the ulcer with extension through the cortex of the tibia and into
the marrow cavity. After debridement, the ulcer began to granulate and heal over. After one year of follow-up, our patient's ankle lesion
had completely epithelialized, aside from the development of a small intermittently draining sinus. Repeat MRI another 6 months later
demonstrated resolution of the original soft tissue inflammatory mass but without evidence of bony healing. She improved after 2 years of
clarithromycin therapy, with plans to continue therapy indefinitely until there was radiologic evidence of bony healing, although she
eventually died of transformation to acute leukemia. Mycobacterium haemophilum is a slow-growing, fastidious, nontuberculous mycobacterial
species that was first isolated and described by Sompolinsky in 1978, who recovered the organism from chronic ulcerating subcutaneous
lesions in a woman with Hodgkin's disease . Since then, approximately 100 cases of infection have been described worldwide, with the
majority of affected individuals being immunocompromised by virtue of organ or bone marrow transplantation, haematological malignancy, or
advanced HIV infection/AIDS . In such individuals, the classical clinical presentation has been that of multiple tender ulcerating cutaneous
or subcutaneous nodular skin lesions, commonly on the extremities and often overlying joints . Occasionally, lesions have been associated
with cellulitis or complicated by abscess formation, fistula development, osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, or bacteremia . Cases of
pneumonia, pulmonary nodules, or sinusitis without skin lesions have also been described in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent
individuals . Several cases of localized lymphadenitis, particularly of the cervical, submandibular, and perihilar regions, have been
reported in immunocompetent patients, especially children . The natural habitat and mode of acquisition of M. haemophilum are unknown.
However, the geographic distribution of M. haemophilum is thought to be ubiquitous . Evidence from reported cases points to an environmental
reservoir, possibly aquatic, although attempts to recover the organism through environmental sampling have been unsuccessful . A few
patients have reported antecedent trauma at the site of infection . Although the pathophysiology of M. haemophilum infection is not well
understood, cell-mediated immunity appears to play a key role in disease pathogenesis and outcome . In common with most other nontuberculous
mycobacterial infections, disease is usually chronic . The organism is difficult to cultivate in the laboratory, and is unique among the
mycobacteria in its requirement for iron-containing compounds in growth media . Furthermore, M. haemophilum requires low incubation
temperatures (30–32°C) for growth . Hence, cases of infection due to M. haemophilum are likely under-reported. However, advances in
molecular biology have greatly facilitated our understanding of the clinical spectrum of infection caused by this microorganism and have
paved the way for sensitive and specific detection of M. haemophilum directly from clinical specimens or for definitive characterization of
suspect clinical isolates using tools such as PCR, real-time PCR, or 16S ribosomal RNA gene sequencing . Mycobacterium haemophilum appears
to be the most important cause of non-tuberculous mycobacterial osteomyelitis infections in humans . Over 30 cases of M. haemophilum bone
infections have been described to date, with most occurring in patients with advanced HIV disease or bone marrow/solid organ transplants
(Table 1) . Infections may involve multiple sites, are frequently associated with septic arthritis and/or overlying cutaneous infection, and
usually involve the bones of the foot, ankle, knee, elbow, and fingers . These and other sites may be involved via contiguous spread or
hematogenous dissemination from a pulmonary or cutaneous source. Affected patients may or may not report a history of antecedent trauma.
Infections of bone typically develop over the course of several weeks. Plain film radiographs and MRI scans often reveal well-marginated
osteolysis, cortical bone destruction, and adjacent soft tissue inflammation . In a 3-year review of atypical mycobacterial skeletal
infections in 25 HIV-infected patients, M. haemophilum accounted for 44% (11/25) of cases, followed by infection with M. kansasi and M.
avium-intracellulare . A study from January 1989 to September 1991 at seven metropolitan hospitals in New York City identified 13 patients
with culture-confirmed M. haemophilum infections (11 with HIV infection and 2 with bone marrow transplants), of which 6 had osteomyelitis .
While our case may be the first report of M. haemophilum osteomyelitis in a patient with polycythemia vera, our patient's predisposition to
infection was likely a result of myelosuppression from long-term busulfan/hydroxyurea therapy. A case of fatal disseminated non-M.
haemophilum atypical mycobacterial infection was reported in a woman with pulmonary fibrosis secondary to long-term busulfan use . Summary
of reported cases of M. haemophilum osteomyelitis in the world literature. AA, Aplastic anemia; AIDS, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome;
AK, amikacin; AML, acute myelocytic leukemia; AZI, azithromycin; BMT, bone marrow transplant; CIP, ciprofloxacin; CLO, clofazamine; CLR,
clarithromycin; CYC, cycloserine; DOX, doxycycline; ETH, ethambutol; INH, isoniazid; MIN, minocycline; PYZ, pyrazinamide; RB, rifabutin;
RIF, rifampin; RYF, rifamycin (rifampin or rifabutin). N/A = information not available. Most strains of M. haemophilum demonstrate in-vitro
susceptibility to ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, rifamycins, and clofazimine . Isolates are usually resistant to isoniazid, ethambutol, and
pyrazinamide, while susceptibility to doxycycline, minocycline, amikacin, and para-aminosalcylic acid is variable . There is no consensus on
the optimal modality or duration of treatment of M. haemophilum bone infections. However, successful treatment of osteomyelitis may require
several months of antimicrobial therapy but should be guided by the patient's underlying condition and clinical response. Based on
information from previously reported cases, combinations of drugs, including ciprofloxacin, clarithromycin, and/or rifabutin appear to be
associated with the greatest potential success when used for the treatment of osteomyelitis or localized skin and soft tissue infection .
Patients should be monitored periodically while on combinations of rifamycins and macrolides due to the potential for drug-drug
interactions. Rifabutin induces hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzymes, which may result in increased metabolism of clarithromycin, leading to
potentially subtherapeutic concentrations of the latter drug. However, clarithromycin inhibits the hepatic cytochrome P-450 enzymatic
pathway, leading to potentially toxic concentrations of rifabutin . Rifamycins should not be used alone due to the potential for rapid
development of resistance. Patients with localized disease usually respond favorably to medical treatment, although deaths have been
reported, especially for disseminated infection . It has been observed that improvement of immune function during the course of disease may
lead to an improve outcome but this has not been well documented in osteomyelitis cases. Surgery has occasionally been used, often in
combination with antimicrobial agents, for the treatment of M. haemophilum bone infections but the impact of surgery on patient outcome is
unknown. M. haemophilum is a clinically significant mycobacterial species with a predilection for causing bone infection in
immunocompromised individuals. In the appropriate clinical setting, M. haemophilum osteomyelitis should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of immunocompromised patient presenting with nodular or ulcerative skin lesions in conjunction radiographic evidence of adjacent
bone destruction, especially if tissue biopsies reveal the presence of AFB. Successful outcomes usually require months or even years of
medical therapy. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. RR was directly involved in the patient's care. SE was the
laboratory physician involved in the patient's care. SE performed the literature review. Both authors wrote the manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: While the patient was alive, informed verbal consent was obtained to publish this
report.
