Autoimmune hemolytic anemia associated with an ovarian teratoma is a very rare disease. However, treating teratoma is the only method to
cure the hemolytic anemia, so it is necessary to include ovarian teratoma in the differential diagnosis of autoimmune hemolytic anemia. We
report herein on a case of a young adult patient who had severe autoimmune hemolytic anemia that was induced by an ovarian teratoma. A
25-yr-old woman complained of general weakness and dizziness for 1 week. The hemoglobin level was 4.2 g/dL, and the direct and indirect
antiglobulin tests were all positive. The abdominal computed tomography scan revealed a huge left ovarian mass, and this indicated a
teratoma. She was refractory to corticosteroid therapy; however, after surgical resection of the ovarian mass, the hemoglobin level and the
reticulocyte count were gradually normalized. The mass was well encapsulated and contained hair and teeth. She was diagnosed as having
autoimmune hemolytic anemia associated with an ovarian teratoma. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first such a case to be reported
in Korea. Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA) can be induced by a variety of causes. The tumors that induced AIHA are usually hematologic
neoplasms such as malignant lymphoma (1, 2). There have been a few reports of AIHA associated with ovarian tumors worldwide, and most of
them were ovarian dermoid cysts (3-6). The mechanism of hemolysis has not yet been defined. However the only effective treatment for
hemolysis is tumor removal (3-6), so it is important for physicians to know that teratoma is one of the etiologies of autoimmune hemolytic
anemia. Ovarian mature cystic teratoma is very rare cause of AIHA, and we could not find any reports on this in the KoreaMed. We report here
a case of severe AIHA associated with an ovarian mature cystic teratoma, and the patient's hemolysis was successfully treated via tumor
resection. A 25-yr-old female was admitted to our hospital with complaints of weakness and dizziness of one week's duration. She also
complained of fever, vague abdominal pain, and dark colored urine. She did not have any significant prior medical history and there was no
recent drug exposure. The initial blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, the pulse rate was 100/min, and the body temperature was 38℃. There was
neither palpable abdominal mass nor other specific findings on the physical examination except for her pale appearance. At the time of
admission her hemoglobin level was 4.2 g/dL, and the reticulocyte count was 23.5% (corrected count: 5.74%). Marked polychromasia with
spherocytosis and nucleated red blood cells were noted on the peripheral blood smear. The serum lactate dehydrogenase level was 1,842 IU/L
(240-460 IU/L), total bilirubin, 2.73 mg/dL (0.4-1.3 mg/dL), haptoglobin, 38 mg/dL (70-380 mg/dL), and vitamin B12, 369 pg/mL (225-1,100
pg/mL). The blood group was A, Rh-positive. The direct and indirect antiglobulin tests were all positive. Serum autoantibody testing against
red blood cells was positive, and anti-nuclear antibody and anti-double-stranded DNA antibody tests were negative. The abdominal computed
tomography revealed a huge left ovarian cystic mass and hepatosplenomegaly (Fig. 1). We started to treat her with prednisolone, 1.5
mg/kg/day. However the hemoglobin level gradually decreased to 3.3 g/dL, and she complained of resting chest discomfort 2 days after
prednisolone. We performed transfusion with packed red blood cell in spite of the positive cross matching, and the persistent autoantibody.
We stopped treating her with prednisolone after 7 days, and then resected the ovarian tumor. The tumor was 13×9×7 cm sized, well
encapsulated mass and the mass was cystic and multiloculated. The cystic content was greasy, and composed of keratin, sebum, and hairs.
Teeth were also present. Microscopically, the cyst was lined by mature epidermis with skin appendages, neural tissue and adipocyte (Fig. 2).
After surgical resection of the teratoma, the hemoglobin level stopped decreasing, and it then gradually increased (Fig. 3). She was
diagnosed as having AIHA induced by an ovarian teratoma. She did not have any evidence of hemolysis and anemia, but the direct antiglobulin
test was still positive 4 months after the surgery. The etiological causes of AIHA are variable. Common causes are various drugs, systemic
lupus erythematosus and hematologic malignancies (7), yet teratoma has rarely been associated with AIHA. The mechanism of hemolysis is not
currently defined, although several hypotheses have been proposed such as cross-reactivity of tumor and RBC antigens, production of RBC
auto-antibodies by the tumor or alteration of the RBC molecules by the tumor, which renders them antigenic to the host (4, 5). The features
of AIHA associated ovarian dermoid cyst or teratoma are palpable abdominal mass and severe anemia (4). Our case had a huge ovarian teratoma;
however we could not find it on the gynecologic examination. Hepatosplenomegaly is also the feature of AIHA, and this patient displayed
hepatosplenomegaly on the abdominal computed tomography. The patient also had a fever at the time of diagnosis, and we could not find any
infection foci, and no organism was grown during the the blood culture study. So we thought that the fever was also the phenomenon of severe
hemolysis (7). Glucocorticoids and splenectomy are the treatment of choice of AIHA; however, these were ineffective for the AIHA induced by
the ovarian tumor. Only tumor removal is an effective treatment (3-6). In this case, the patient did not respond to the corticosteroid
therapy, so we stopped the corticosteroid therapy and performed tumor resection; after the surgery, hemoglobin level slowly increased.
However the antiglobulin antibody still persisted 4 months after tumor resection. The auto-antibodies persisted from 2 weeks to 10 months in
the previous case reports (3-5). In the AIHA, blood transfusions should be avoided; however they should never be withheld from those
patients in extremis (7). Our case was refractory to corticosteroid therapy, the hemoglobin level decreased and she complained of resting
chest discomfort, so we performed transfusion in spite of positive cross matching, and no complications of transfusion occurred. Moreover
transfusions were performed in the other case reports. AIHA induced by teratoma is a very rare paraneoplastic phenomenon. The only effective
treatment is the tumor removal, so it is important to include ovarian tumor such as teratoma in differential diagnosis of AIHA, especially
the case of refractory to glucocorticoid therapy. Abdominal computed tomographic scan shows a huge ovoid mass (arrows) with multiple
calcific nodules anterior to rectum. Stratified squamous epithelium with skin appendage including sebaceous glands and hair follicle are
noted (A, H & E, ×200). Neural tissue and adipocytes are present (B, H & E, ×100). Laboratory data after admission. DAT, direct antiglobulin
test; IAT, indirect antiglobulin test.
