Spillage of gallstones within the subcutaneous tissue during laparoscopic cholecystecomy may lead to considerable morbidity. We describe an
abdominal wall abscess formation in a 50-year-old female that developed 24 months after a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Spilled gallstones
at the umbilical port site went undetected. Subsequently, an umbilical port-site abscess formed and was treated 2 years later. Any patient
with a foreign body in the subcutaneous tissues after a laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be considered to have a retained stone. Use
careful dissection, copious irrigation, and a retrieval device to avoid stone spillage. If spillage does occurs, percutaneous drainage and
antibiotics followed by open retrieval of the stones should achieve adequate results during those delayed presentations of abdominal wall
abscesses. The spillage of gallstones is not an uncommon occurrence in this era of laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Removal of the stones can
be a difficult process and is often incomplete or avoided altogether. Numerous articles have outlined the delayed complications of
intraabdominal retained gallstones.1,2 However, there is a paucity of reports regarding the delayed presentation and treatment of
subcutaneous abscess formation from spilled gallstones.3,4 We report a case of an abdominal wall abscess due to retained gallstones
presenting 24 months after laparoscopic cholecystectomy. A 50-year-old Hispanic female presented to the emergency department with complaints
of an abdominal mass, pain, and fever. She stated that this mass had been present for 2 weeks and was increasing in size and becoming more
symptomatic. She denied any weight loss, anorexia, or gastrointestinal symptoms. The remainder of her review of systems was negative, and
her past medical history was noncontributory. Twenty-four months earlier, she had undergone an uncomplicated laparoscopic cholecystectomy
for biliary pancreatitis. Her postoperative course was uneventful. On physical examination, the patient was afebrile with a soft,
nondistended abdomen. A large, fluctuant mass was present lateral to the umbilicus that was mildly painful and had moderate surrounding
erythema. Laboratory tests revealed leukocytosis of 12,200. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated an 11x8-cm anterior abdominal
wall, complex cystic mass (Figure 1). Sonographic-guided percutaneous drainage catheter was placed within the mass and returned 800 mL of
purulent material. This resulted in near resolution of the mass. Cultures were obtained and a Jackson-Pratt (JP) drain was left within the
abscess cavity. The patient was then admitted for intravenous antibiotics and observation. One day after initial drainage, a repeat CT scan
demonstrated calcified foreign bodies within the abscess (Figure 2). The patient was discharged home on hospital day 2 with the JP in place.
She continued on oral antibiotics, ciprofloxacin and metronidazole, for 14 days. Anterior abdominal abscess with calcified objects. Abscess
and calcified objects after drainage. Bacteriologic cultures of fluid were positive for Klebsiella, Escherichia coli, Enterobacter, and
Bacteroides fragilis. Given the patient's history of laparoscopic cholecystectomy, it was suspected that the foreign bodies represented
retained gallstones from extraction of the gallbladder through the umbilical port site. The drain was left in place for 2 weeks to allow
healing of the abscess cavity. She then underwent successful local exploration where the abscess capsule and multiple foreign bodies were
removed from the abdominal wall. Pathology examination determined the masses to be granulation tissue with chronic inflammation and golden-
yellow crystals of bile consistent with cholesterol gallstones. The patient did well and was discharged home the same day of surgery.
Postoperatively, she had complete resolution of her symptoms at 2-week and 4-week follow-up visits. With shorter hospital stays and greater
patient satisfaction, laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the treatment of choice for patients with gallbladder disease. However, this
procedure brings increased inherent risks, such as gallbladder tears and spilled stones, when compared with the conventional open
technique.5,6 Some studies report the frequency of stone spillage to be from 5.7% to 36%.7 However, complications from retained stones are
reported to occur in only 0.08% to 6% of laparoscopic cholecystectomies.8 The majority of discussion about the topic of retained stones
regards those within the peritoneum. However, some consideration must be given to other types, such as abdominal wall abscesses, as these
represent 18% of all complications from retained stones.9 The cause of retained stones within the subcutaneous tissues can be attributed to
several factors. Hawasli et al2 noted that the incidence increases when the operation is performed for an acutely inflamed gallbladder, in
males, the elderly, obese patients, or in the presence of adhesions. These patients typically have either a greater degree of inflammation
or a more friable gallbladder. These issues may lead to the tearing of a friable gallbladder wall during retraction or dissection.
Additional causes of gallstone spillage include the loss of a cystic duct clip, laceration by an instrument, and tearing during retrieval
through a port site. Regardless, spillage of the gallbladder contents is not an indication for conversion to the open technique.10 To
prevent spillage from occurring, careful dissection between the wall of the gallbladder and surrounding structures should be strictly
adhered to during the removal of the gallbladder from the hepatic fossa.2 Aspiration of a distended gallbladder before dissection may help
to ease tension on the wall and, thus, facilitate dissection. Stones can also be spilled from the gallbladder during extraction from the
umbilical port site. These stones may not be noticed because often visualization of the specimen as it passes from within the abdominal
cavity is inadequate. The most efficient method of preventing retained subcutaneous gallstones is to use a retrieval bag. The use of a bag
avoids further contamination of the peritoneal cavity and protects the port site from stones or contaminated fluids. Further measures to
prevent a retained, subcutaneous stone would be palpation of the preperitoneal tissue and flushing the port site with saline to dislodge any
remaining stone.5 Retained stones are a serious condition and great effort should be taken to retrieve any spilled stones. In the event of
contamination, the peritoneal cavity should be irrigated with saline to dilute any infected bile and an extraction device, such as a
retrieval bag, used to retrieve the gallbladder and any free peritoneal stones. Other techniques recommended are placement of extra ports,
use of 30-degree to 45-degree telescopes, and copious irrigation.8 Any suspected spillage of stones should be documented clearly in the
operative report so that any future complications from such stones can be more easily diagnosed. Perioperative antibiotic treatment is
recommended by some authors in an attempt to sterilize the surrounding tissues in hopes that any missed stone will result in adhesions
rather than abscesses.2 In the event that a gallstone abscess does occur, as in the case of our patient, simple or percutaneous drainage
should be performed to resolve the patient's acute symptoms. The patient may then be placed on antibiotics to cover biliary tract organisms.
Once the acute inflammation has resolved, the stones and abscess capsule should be removed by operative measures. This is usually best
accomplished by local exploration with removal of the abscess cavity along with the stones. No clear mechanism is available for the
development of a delayed abscess versus one that is of an acute nature. Any patient with a foreign body in the subcutaneous tissues after a
laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be considered to have a retained stone. The best approach is to avoid stone spillage and its sequelae
during the initial procedure by using careful dissection, copious irrigation, and a retrieval device. Regardless, percutaneous drainage and
antibiotics followed by open retrieval of the stones can be expected to achieve adequate results during those delayed presentations of
abdominal wall abscesses.
