Three of 2000 diagnostic hysteroscopies revealed residual fetal bony fragments in women with abnormal uterine bleeding. Removal of bony
fragments by hysteroscopy is associated with therapeutic success. The presence of intrauterine bone structures is a rare condition. The
exact incidence is unclear.1 In our hospital, we found 3 cases of retained fetal bone fragments in 2000 diagnostic hysteroscopies (0.15%).
We describe herein 3 patients referred to our clinic because of a foreign body in the uterine cavity and persistent uterine bleeding. A
30-year-old woman, G6P1A5, was referred to our Hysteroscopic Unit because of irregular vaginal bleeding. A routine pelvic ultrasound
performed before hysteroscopy revealed the presence of a foreign body. Hysteroscopy revealed an endometrial cavity without intrauterine
device (IUD) and a fundal endometrial mass that was removed with a resectoscope. On histological examination, these specimens proved to
contain fragments of bone. A 28-year-old woman, G3P2A1, was referred to our Hysteroscopic Unit complaining of irregular vaginal bleeding. A
routine pelvic ultrasound performed before hysteroscopy revealed the presence of a foreign body. Hysteroscopy revealed longitudinal
structures (Figure 1). that were removed by the resectoscope. On histological examination these specimens were seen to contain 4 fragments
of bone. Hysteroscopic view of the retained bone fragments. A 37-year-old woman, G3P2A1, was referred to our Hysteroscopic Unit because of
irregular vaginal bleeding. A routine pelvic ultrasound performed before hysteroscopy revealed a 1.5-cm mass in diameter at the fundus of
the uterus. On day 1 of the next menstrual period, the woman received 3.75 mg of Arvekap (IPSEN, Sweden). Hysteroscopy was performed 20 days
after this injection. Hysteroscopy revealed bony fragments that were removed resectoscopically. The presence of intrauterine bony structures
has been reported in the literature.2,3 These structures are most commonly believed to be due to retained fetal bone fragments, but some
cases may be due to metaplasia of mature endometrial stromal cells, in response to chronic inflammation or trauma.4,5 In a number of cases
reported in the literature,6,7 the major patient complaints were secondary infertility, irregular vaginal bleeding, cervicitis, vaginitis,
and spontaneous passage of fetal bones. In our study, all 3 women presented with irregular vaginal bleeding. Kazakov et al8 reported
removing 69 foreign bodies hysteroscopically from the uterine cavity; 11.9% of them were fetal bone fragments. In our study, the 3 foreign
bodies removed hysteroscopically from the uteri were fetal bone fragments. In a recent publication, Elford and Claman9 suggest dilatation
and curettage with intraoperative abdominal ultrasound assistance to ensure that all abnormal tissue is removed. In our studies, ultrasound
showed an echogenic area, and hysteroscopy revealed the bone fragments. In the third case, we used GnRh analogues before the procedure. This
preoperative drug therapy helped us to see all the abnormal tissue and to remove these retained bones more easily. In a recent publication,
Bakhshi et al10 demonstrated that diagnostic hysteroscopy followed by an operative procedure using a loop resectoscope is invaluable in both
establishing the diagnosis and removing bony fragments. The differential diagnosis of endometrial ossification with abnormal uterine
bleeding should include other endometrial pathologies, such as mixed mesodermal tumors of the endometrium. For these reasons, in our
opinion, hysteroscopy with biopsies remains the first choice in the evaluation of abnormal uterine bleeding. This study attempts for the
first time to give the incidence of retained fetal bone (0.15%) in women undergoing diagnostic hysteroscopy. This also demonstrates that
retained fetal bone in the uterus could occur as a result of mid-trimester abortion causing abnormal uterine bleeding. In our study all
women had previous abortion. Removal of bony fragments by hysteroscopy was associated with therapeutic success in all 3 cases.
