We report a novel off-pump technique for the surgical closure of post-infarct ventricular septal defects (VSDs). The case report describes
the peri-operative management of a 76 year old lady who underwent the 'Hamburger procedure' for closure of her apical VSD. Refractory
cardiogenic shock meant that traditional patch repairs requiring cardiopulmonary bypass would be poorly tolerated. We show that
echocardiography guided off-pump posterior-anterior septal plication is a safe, effective method for closing post-infarct VSDs in unstable
patients. More experience is required to ascertain whether this technique will become an accepted alternative to patch repairs. Ventricular
septal defect (VSD) is a rare but significant complication following myocardial infarction. Medical management alone is inadequate, and
although recent advances in transcatheter closure have been promising , surgical repair if often the only option. Various surgical
techniques have been described including single or double patch procedures with infarct exclusion . These open procedures require the use of
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) and 30-day mortality ranges from 23 to 42% . Recently, an off-pump closure technique called the 'Hamburger
procedure' has been pioneered as an alternative to open procedures that require CPB and ventriculotomy . The aim of our report is to
describe how a post-infarct VSD may be repaired without CPB and to highlight the importance of echocardiography to guide VSD closure. A 76
year-old female smoker was thrombolyzed with Tenecteplase after an acute anterior myocardial infarction. Unfortunately she remained
hypotensive and so she underwent emergency angiography which showed patent coronary arteries except for the left anterior descending artery
which was occluded distally. After this procedure she was noted to have a pansystolic murmur and transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) using
a Vivid 7 Pro (GE Vingned, Norway), confirmed a 1 cm antero-apical VSD and an akinetic ventricular apex. To manage her hypotension inotropes
were commenced and an intra-aortic balloon pump was inserted. After stabilization for 5 days, diuretics and nitrates were added for
progressing pulmonary oedema. Repeat TTE images showed no change, and although the right ventricle was mildly dilated, global left
ventricular function was preserved. A decision was made to perform a delayed surgical repair to reduce operative risk. She was reviewed in
the local multi-disciplinary meeting and transcatheter closure was not thought to be appropriate. Four weeks after admission, she developed
short episodes of ventricular tachycardia which were controlled by amiodarone. Two days later she deteriorated becoming hypotensive with
worsening pulmonary oedema. She became hypoxic and hypercarbic and dobutamine infusion was added along with an escalation in her diuretic
therapy. Sedation and mechanical ventilation were then required. Repeat TTE remained unchanged. A pulmonary artery flotation catheter was
inserted and norepinephrine was commenced to treat persistent hypotension. Renal function began to deteriorate with serum creatinine rising
to 190 μmol l-1. Thirty days after myocardial infarction, she underwent an off-pump 'Hamburger' post-infarct VSD repair. The heart was
approached through a median sternotomy and a posterior-anterior septal plication was performed using three double-armed Teflon felt
supported interrupted 1.0 Ticron sutures (Syneture™, USA). The Teflon strip was preloaded with sutures and from below the needles were
passed through the posterior (inferior) interventricular septum aiming for the anterior part of the septum where the tip of the needle is
retrieved. The sutures run just lateral to the LAD to ensure plicating the thicker left ventricular wall rather than the thinner right
ventricular wall (Figure 1). The needles were then passed through the second Teflon strip and then tied starting at the apex and working
more proximally (Figure 2). VSD closure was assessed using transesophageal (Figure 3) and epicardial echocardiography as well and by
epicardial auscultation. Diagram of the heart demonstrating suture position for the 'Hamburger procedure'. AO = aorta, LAD = left anterior
descending artery, LV = left ventricle, PA = pulmonary artery, RA = right atrium, RV = right ventricle, SVC = superior vena cava. Operative
photograph of the heart following the 'Hamburger procedure'. Mid-esophageal, 4 chamber, 2D Transoeophageal echocardiogram showing septal
plication. IVS = interventricular septum. Soon after surgery, she began to improve and her inotropes and frusemide were discontinued.
However she required a tracheotomy to facilitate weaning from mechanical ventilation. She was transferred to a rehabilitation facility 4
weeks after the operation. She was found to be asymptomatic and mobilising independently at 6 month follow-up. Here we show that the
'Hamburger procedure' was an effective method for repair of a post-infarct VSD. By bringing the left and right ventricles into close
apposition with Teflon supported plication sutures, the defect was closed with moderate reductions in cardiac chamber size. A dramatic
reduction in pulmonary arterial pressure and inotropic doses occurred immediately after surgery. As our technique was performed off-pump,
potential sequelae of CPB (ie adverse haemodynamic, neurological and inflammatory effects) were obviated. This lady benefited from a short
operative time of 40 minutes compared with a longer, more complex open patch repair requiring CPB and ventriculotomy. One important factor
associated with poor outcome is a short VSD to operation time . Surgery was postponed for 4 weeks which allowed the fibrotic process in the
infarcted myocardium to become established. This delay helped in allowing the Teflon supported plication sutures to hold. It is uncertain
whether the friable myocardium would have supported such sutures if surgery was performed sooner. We demonstrate that echocardiography is
not only essential in the diagnosis of post-infarct VSDs but also plays an important role in guiding VSD closure when the 'Hamburger
procedure' is utilized. In this case, extra sutures were added to the initial plication after echocardiography had demonstrated that VSD
closure was incomplete. Both transoesophageal and epicardial imaging enabled us to ensure that successful closure was achieved. TTE was used
in the post-operative period to show that there was no residual VSD prior to discharge. The 'Hamburger procedure' is a promising alternative
method for post-infarct VSD repair. It appears to be suitable in patients with a VSD in the antero-apical septal position. We feel this
technique would not be appropriate for posterior VSDs or VSDs higher up the septum closer to the atrioventricular valves. A randomised
controlled trial would be needed to compare outcomes after this technique with those after conventional methods. VSD recurrence rates,
functional outcome and mortality would be important factors that could be assessed. In this case, we believe that the risk of morbidity and
mortality was reduced by avoiding CPB and therefore we are confident that the 'Hamburger Procedure' may become an accepted and useful
technique in the future. We would like to acknowledge the work of Mr A Wood based at St Bartholomew's Hospital, London, UK. He initially
pioneered this off-pump VSD closure technique and should therefore be credited with the initial experience of this procedure. Also we would
like to thank Ms Naseeba Hussain for help with preparation of the images.
