Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests. The authors' funding bodies had no role in the preparation
of this article. P. N. Newton, R. McGready, S. Proux, N. P. J. Day, F. Nosten, and N. J. White are at the Centre for Clinical Vaccinology
and Tropical Medicine, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, United Kingdom. P. N. Newton, N. P. J. Day, and N. J. White are at
the Wellcome Trust–Mahosot Hospital–Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Collaboration, Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, Lao PDR. R. McGready, S.
Proux, and F. Nosten are at the Shoklo Malaria Research Unit, Mae Sot, Tak Province, Thailand. R. McGready, S. Proux, P. Singhasivanon, N.
P. J. Day, F. Nosten, and N. J. White are at the Faculty of Tropical Medicine, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. F. Fernandez is at the
School of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Georgia Institute of Technology, Atlanta, Georgia, United States of America. M. D. Green is at the
Division of Parasitic Diseases, National Center for Infectious Diseases, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, Georgia,
United States of America. M. Sunjio and P. Millet are at EA3677 Bases Thérapeutiques des Inflammations et des Infections, Université Victor
Segalen, Bordeaux, France. C. Bruneton is at Réseau Médicaments et Développement, Paris, France. S. Phanouvong is at the Drug Quality and
Information Program, Global Assistance Initiatives, United States Pharmacopeia, Rockville, Maryland, United States of America. C. J. M.
Whitty, H. Kaur, and B. M. Greenwood are at the Department of Infectious and Tropical Diseases, London School of Hygiene and Tropical
Medicine, University of London, London, United Kingdom. A. O. Talisuna is at the East African Network for Monitoring Antimalarial Treatment,
and Ministry of Health, Uganda. E. M. Christophel and K. Palmer are at the Western Pacific Regional Office of the World Health Organization,
Manila, Philippines. G. Malenga is at the Malaria Alert Centre, Bantyre, Malawi. K. Bojang is at the MRC Laboratories, Fajara, Banjul, The
Gambia Fake artesunate could compromise the hope that artemisinin-based combination therapy offers for malaria control in Africa and Asia.
Falciparum malaria kills, and it particularly kills the rural poor. Artemisinin derivatives, such as artesunate, are a vital component of
Plasmodium falciparum malaria treatment and control in the face of globally increasing antimalarial drug resistance. Since 1998 a worsening
epidemic of sophisticated counterfeit “artesunate” tablets (containing no artesunate) has plagued mainland Southeast Asia (see Figure S1).
In some countries, most of the available artesunate is fake [ 1–5]. Artemisinin derivatives are remarkably rapid in their antimalarial
effects, and they are very well tolerated. So where these medicines are available, they are sought after. But as they are relatively
expensive, a demand is created for cheaper versions amongst the poorest and most vulnerable people, upon whom the counterfeiters have
preyed–with fatal results. The death of patients with untreated falciparum malaria, as a result of unwittingly taking fake artesunate, is
hidden in the inadequately documented mortality statistics of the relatively voiceless rural poor. But there is no doubt that such deaths
occur, and they are probably common. In February 2005, a 23-year-old man presented with fever to a rural hospital in eastern Burma where he
was diagnosed as having uncomplicated hyperparasitaemic falciparum malaria by microscopy (4.2% infected red blood cells). He was treated
with oral artesunate, labelled as made by Guilin Pharmaceutical (Guangxi, People's Republic of China), 4 mg/kg once a day, the treatment of
choice in this area. Since artemisinin derivatives have been used in this area, not one of 600 patients prospectively studied with ≥4%
parasitaemia has died [ 6]. However, on the third night the young Burmese man became unconscious and was transferred to another hospital
where he was found to be in a coma (Glasgow Coma Score = 3/15), with renal failure and a higher parasitaemia (5.5% infected red blood
cells). He was perfused with intravenous fluids and received an injection of intravenous artesunate (2.4 mg/kg) and transferred to a third
hospital where he died within 12 hours of arrival from cerebral malaria. The original hospital sent the artesunate used to treat the patient
for analysis by the Fast Red dye test [ 7]. We found that the artesunate was counterfeit. Based on the appearance of the counterfeit
hologram affixed to the blister pack, it was identified as a Type 9 counterfeit artesunate (see Figure S1). Accurate mass measurements by
direct time-of-flight mass spectrometry [ 8] revealed that the main active ingredient in this “drug” was paracetamol (acetaminophen), but
that artesunate was also present in the tablet [ 9]. Quantification using high-performance liquid chromatography determined that the
artesunate content was 10 mg per tablet, instead of the ∼50 mg of artesunate present in the genuine product [ 9]. The hospital where he was
originally treated had, in good faith, recently purchased a large quantity of artesunate tablets. They were dismayed to learn from this
death that their entire stock was fake. The village committee, which now had a clear idea of what was responsible for the man's death, was
so angered by this avoidable death that they collected all the artesunate, fake and genuine, that they could find in local shops and
destroyed it on a public bonfire in front of the whole village, to stress the lethal dangers of fake antimalarials. Counterfeit artesunate
continues to circulate on a vast scale in mainland Southeast Asia, where between 38% and 52% of “artesunate” blister packs sampled contain
no active ingredient [ 1–5]. So far, only the Guilin Pharmaceutical brand of artesunate has been counterfeited. We make no apology for the
use of the term manslaughter to describe this criminal lethal trade. Indeed, some might call it murder. Somewhere, people are directing a
highly technical and sophisticated criminal trade. They are making tablets out of starch, chalk, and a variety of wrong active ingredients,
such as erythromycin [ 9, 10], for a life-threatening disease that particularly affects the poor and underprivileged. The criminals are
making these fakes in the full knowledge that their ineffective product might kill people who would otherwise survive their malaria
infection. There are now at least 12 different types of fake artesunate, classified by the sophisticated counterfeit holograms that are
affixed to the blister packs (see Figure S1). Evidence suggests that production is on an industrial scale and from multiple sources; 100,000
counterfeit artesunate tablets were purchased from one large pharmacy [ 2]. This epidemic of a counterfeit, vital, life-saving medicine has
received little practical attention over the last eight years, in comparison with the considerable efforts in other aspects of malaria
control [ 3, 11]. In addition to unnecessary loss of life for profit, it has led to a loss of confidence in these very effective medicines
and given rise to false reports of artemisinin resistance [ 1, 12]. Much more needs to be done in Asia to combat this scourge. This criminal
activity is unlikely to remain a local difficulty, and there are serious implications from this major public health problem for the wider
world beyond Asia that deserve attention. In the industrialised North, with carefully regulated trade, the implications are limited.
However, especially as the artemisinin derivatives have a natural plant origin, tourists commonly buy them in the tropics as a standby
treatment [ 13]. Indeed, Web sites encourage this practice [ 14], which is likely to be compounded by the availability of artemisinin
derivatives on the Internet [ 15]. It is inevitable that counterfeit artesunate will seep into this trade. We suggest that travel clinics
should warn those going to the tropics of the potential dangers of buying such drugs. Unfortunately, in our discriminatory world, the
unnecessary death of a tourist, journalist, or of a diplomat or military personnel, from a wealthy, influential country after self-
medicating with fake artesunate, may be required to trigger the political will required to eradicate this lethal trade. Of far greater
concern is that counterfeits may follow in the wake of the genuine artesunate that is increasingly being imported for use in sub-Saharan
Africa, where the burden of malaria is greatest. Since 2001, the World Health Organisation has recommended that malaria-endemic African
countries should consider changing to artemisinin derivative– based combination therapy (ACT) as first-line malaria treatment. In the past
two years, most countries in Africa (34 in 2004) have made this change [ 16]. Implementing this new policy will not be easy because of the
high cost of ACTs and a temporary shortage of the plant raw material. It is estimated that 130 million courses of ACT will be used in Africa
in 2006 [ 16]. High cost and shortage of ACT provide a favourable situation for the spread of fake artemisinins that could put the lives of
thousands of African children at risk. There is already a thriving fake antimalarial drug industry in Africa [ 17], suggesting that it is
highly likely that counterfeit artesunate or ACTs will follow in the wake of the genuine products, and in bulk. Counterfeit
dihydroartemisinin (60 mg per tablet; Cotexcin) was reported from Tanzania in 2001 [ 18], labelled as made by Beijing COTEC New Technology
Corp, and containing no dihydroartemisinin or other active drug when analysed by thin layer chromatography and high-performance liquid
chromatography ( Figure 1, collection and analysis of the sample by MS, CB, and PM). In 2005, counterfeit artesunate tablets, mimicking
Arsumax (50 mg per tablet; Sanofi Synthelabo, Bridgewater, New Jersey, United States) were found in Cameroon ( Figure 2, collection and
analysis of the sample by MS, CB, and PM). These were labelled as Arsuman manufactured by Sanofi Synthelabo, who confirmed that the
packaging was counterfeit. On high-performance liquid chromatography analysis, these tablets did contain 50 mg of artesunate (MS, CB, PM),
and this counterfeit is a look-alike copy of the genuine product. That at least two different counterfeit artemisinin derivatives have
already been distributed in Africa is of considerable concern. Because of inadequate systems for the monitoring of the quality of
antimalarial medicines, and because few have looked for it, counterfeit artesunate may already be widespread. It is likely that, initially,
most ACTs in Africa will be provided through the public health system where it should be relatively easy to control quality by purchasing
only from established companies or from an international purchasing facility and by providing strong support to national quality control
laboratories. However, the possibility of corruption within the national purchasing process cannot be excluded, as the potential financial
gains for those involved could be very high. In many parts of Africa, most patients with uncomplicated malaria obtain treatment from the
private sector. Provision of free, or heavily subsidised, highly effective ACTs through public health facilities may reduce this proportion.
However, it is likely that for the foreseeable future a substantial proportion of antimalarials used in Africa will be obtained through the
private sector and it is here that the danger from fake artemisinins is greatest. Official promotional campaigns are likely to create
immense demand for ACTs through the private system even though many potential users will struggle to meet their cost. In such a situation,
introduction of a relatively inexpensive fake ACT product could lead to widespread usage of the fake drug with disastrous consequences. How
might the spread of fake artesunate be prevented? Control of medicine importation is a first barrier of defence, but this is difficult to
maintain and antimalarials are readily shipped across porous frontiers. There are at least 11 different brands of oral artesunate available
in sub-Saharan Africa, including the genuine Guilin Pharmaceutical product. One of the authors was recently offered seven different
artemisinin derivative brands in one small-town West African pharmacy—it is unlikely that all of these had been imported through official
channels. A second more radical option is to ensure that ACTs provided through the private sector are relatively inexpensive and locally
affordable so that there is no financial advantage to looking elsewhere and thereby unwittingly purchasing a fake. This would require some
form of central subsidy, as recently suggested in an Institute of Medicine (Washington D. C., United States) report [ 19]. This
recommendation was made primarily to increase access to ACTs and to discourage monotherapy with artemisinins or the partner medicine (the
co-drug in ACT) and thus to protect the ACT from the emergence of resistant parasites. Such an approach would have the additional advantage
of discouraging the use of fake artemisinin-based medicines, as the counterfeit manufacturers would have little margin to make a profit. We
strongly suggest that African countries and health organisations support such strategies to try to prevent counterfeit artemisinins from
infecting Africa, to establish effective systems to carefully monitor their antimalarial drug supply, and to prepare to counter a problem
that, as is evident from Asia, is very difficult to eradicate once established. Of global concern for the future of malaria control, some
counterfeit artesunate samples (Types 4, 10, and 11) recently collected in eastern Burma do contain small subtherapeutic quantities of
artesunate (3.5–12.1 mg/tablet [ 9]). P. falciparum parasites with stable in vivo resistance to the artemisinin derivatives have not yet
been described from the wild, but parasites with reduced in vitro sensitivity to artemether have recently been reported [ 20]. The in vivo
exposure of parasites to low concentrations of artesunate from fake products will greatly increase the risk of the selection and spread of
artemisinin resistant parasites, leading to the catastrophic loss of these essential medicines and an entirely avoidable failure of malaria
control. We cannot afford to lose these drugs, as we have lost chloroquine and sulphadoxine–pyrimethamine—most current combinations depend
on ACTs. In addition, the presence of small quantities of artesunate in tablets may mean that the Fast Red dye test [ 7], widely used for
screening the quality of artesunate tablets, may give false positive results depending on how much artesunate is present in these fakes.
Fake artesunate could compromise the hope that ACT therapy offers for malaria control in Africa and Asia. Fakes containing subtherapeutic
amounts of artesunate could also result in the emergence and spread of resistance to the artemisinin drugs, shortening the useful life of
these vital medicines. But this tragedy is avoidable, if there is sufficient political will. As global efforts to control malaria rely
heavily on these drugs, these issues deserve overdue, urgent action to prevent a public health disaster in the malarious world. At least 12
different types of fake artesunate are being sold in mainland Southeast Asia. This warning sheet gives some key features to aid
identification of these fakes. (1.1 MB PDF). Click here for additional data file. We are very grateful to anonymous colleagues for their
considerable help, to all who have helped with the collection of artesunate samples, and to Hubert Berennes and Michel Strobel. artemisinin
derivative–based combination therapy Note that the genuine Arsumax bears a hologram from Guilin Pharmaceutical, which manufactures the
tablets (see Figure S1). Funding: P. Newton, R. McGready, S. Proux, N. Day, F. Nosten, and N. White are supported by the Wellcome Trust of
Great Britain. C. Whitty, H. Kaur, and B. Greenwood are supported by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation through the Gates Malaria
Partnership. The authors received no specific funding to write this article. Citation: Newton PN, McGready R, Fernandez F, Green MD, Sunjio
M, et al. (2006) Manslaughter by fake artesunate in Asia—Will Africa be next? PLos Med 3(6): e197. DOI: 10.1371/journal.pmed.0030197
