Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. All procedures were approved by the Mbarara University of
Science and Technology Human Subjects Committee, University of California Human Subjects Committee, and the Ugandan National Council of
Science and Technology. Funding was provided by NIMH 54907, NIAAA 15287, UCSF-GIVI Fogarty, and The Doris Duke Charitable Foundation. Castro
has advocated that adherence to HIV antiretroviral therapy should be understood within a patient's clinical and social context [ 1]. Over
90% of worldwide HIV infection occurs in resource-limited settings [ 2]. Some have suggested that individuals living in extreme poverty may
have difficulties with adherence to medication [ 3], including Andrew Natisios, who said Africans “don't know what Western time is” [ 4].
While recent reports suggest that adherence to HIV antiretroviral therapy in resource-limited settings may be as good as or better than
resource-rich settings [ 5–7], the question remains: how do people take medications on time without a watch? In rural western Uganda, there
is, for example, a 40-year-old man who is HIV-positive, has no education, and works as a farmer. He lives with his brother, sister-in-law,
and three nieces in a three-room, mud-walled house without electricity. He owns a lantern, a bed, a sofa, a bike, and a radio, but does not
own a watch. He was diagnosed with HIV in April 2005 and started generic D4T/3TC/NVP (Triomune) four months after developing disseminated
herpes zoster and Kaposi sarcoma with a CD4 count of 151. His adherence was measured with an electronic medication monitor that records a
date-time stamp in flash memory each time the pill container is opened. Over the 89 days of monitored treatment, he had 98.9% adherence by
electronic monitor and took 90% of prescribed doses within ten minutes of 7:20 a.m. and within 17 minutes of 7:20 p.m. When asked how he
knew when to take his dose, he said that he knows it is time to take his medications by “listening to Radio West's ‘News and Announcements’
every morning and evening.” While population levels of adherence will likely drop as treatment access expands and people begin to experience
toxicities of long-term therapy, he is an example of how patients can have precise, if not perfect, adherence with creative solutions in a
resource-limited setting. Citation: Maier M, Bwana M, Emenyonu N, Pepper L, Bangsberg DR (2006) How to take HIV antiretroviral medications
on time without a watch in rural Uganda. PLoS Med 3(3): e161.
