Methicillin-resistant S. aureus (MRSA) with low susceptibility to glycopeptides is uncommon. The case of a 50-year-old non-drug addict
patient presenting with tricuspid valve infective endocarditis (IE) by MRSA resistant to vancomycin and linezolid is presented. There was
response only to quinupristin/dalfopristin. He had a motorcycling accident four years before undergoing right above-the-knee amputation and
orthopaedic fixation of the left limb. There were multiple episodes of left MRSA-osteomyelitis controlled after surgery and vancomycin
therapy. MRSA isolated from the blood at the time of IE presented with the same profile than the isolated four years earlier. Sequential
treatment with teicoplanin-cotrimoxazole and Linezolid associated to vancomycin – rifampicin – cotrimoxazole had no improvement. Infection
was controlled after 28 days of therapy with quinupristin/dalfopristin. The literature presents only a few cases of MRSA IE not susceptible
to glycopeptides in not drug addicted patients. This case shows the comparison of a highly-resistant MRSA after previous S. aureus
osteomyelitis treated with glycopeptides. This is the first description of successful treatment of resistant-MRSA IE of the tricuspid valve
complicated by multiple pulmonary septic infarction with quinupristin/dalfopristin Infective endocarditis was an invariably fatal infection
before the availability of antimicrobials. A significant percentage of patients still succumb to it despite aggressive treatment especially
when infected with virulent organisms such as Staphylococcus aureus. Overall, approximately 20% of S. aureus isolates in Europe are reported
as methicillin-resistant, whereas in US hospitals the prevalence ranges from 33% to 55%. The past few years have also witnessed an increase
in life-threatening community-acquired infections caused by MRSA. Most infections with VISA (vancomycin-intermediate S. aureus) and VRSA
(vancomycin-resistant S. aureus) have occurred in a setting of heavy prior use of glycopeptides and other antimicrobial agents. Emergence of
reduced vancomycin susceptibility and clinical resistance in S. aureus increases the possibility that currently available antimicrobial
agents may become ineffective for treating systemic infections. A 50 year-old non-insulin dependant diabetic male was admitted with the
chief complaints of three-day fever and poor general status. He had a 3/6 diastolic murmur over the xyphoid process. Chest X-ray did not
show abnormalities. Abdominal ultrasound showed splenomegaly. His past history included the following: In June 2000 he had a road traffic
accident resulting in multiple trauma, requiring right above-the-knee amputation and orthopaedic fixation of the left lower limb. He later
presented with multiple episodes of osteomyelitis of this limb treated with iv. antibiotics. Prosthetic shafts were removed in June 2002 and
MRSA isolated. Three months later he presented with a spontaneous fracture of the limb and required new surgical fixation due to infectious
pseudoarthrosis. MRSA was isolated again. In October 2003 he was re-operated and underwent auto-transplantation of corticospongiosa. During
these episodes he was given teicoplanin, cotrimoxazole, rifampicin, tetracycline and quinolones at intervals of 7 to 20 days at another
institution in a distant site. Table 1 shows the summary of the multiple events. Summary of multiple events In June 2004 he was admitted to
our institution with the above mentioned complaints. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) showed a large vegetation (size 2.5 × 0.8 cm) on
the anterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve (Figure 1) and severe valve insufficiency, with a normal left ventricular ejection fraction.
Transesophageal echocardiography (TEE) disclosed other pathologic findings. A total body computed tomography scan was performed showing
multiple bilateral areas suggesting pulmonary infarction (Figure 2). A labelled leucocyte scintigraphy didn't reveal any specific infective
localization. Transthoracic echocardiogram showing a vegetation on the septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve. CT scan showing multiple areas
of pulmonary infarction. The patient was treated with an association of oxacillin 16 gr/day and gentamycin 240 mg/day that was shifted two
days later to teicoplanin (1200 mg/12 h/IV) for the first 3 days followed with 1200 mg/day/IV) and cotrimoxazole (480 mg/12 h/IV) as MRSA
was isolated. The MRSA was resistant to clindamycin (MIC>8 mcg/ml), erythromycin (MIC>8 mcg/ml), gentamycin (MIC>16 mcg/ml), norfloxacin
(MIC>16 mcg/ml), ofloxacin (MIC>8 mcg/ml), oxacillin (MIC>4 mcg/ml), penicillin (MIC>0.8 mcg/ml), and tobramycin (MIC>16 mcg/ml). The MRSA
resulted susceptible to rifampicin (MIC<0.5 mcg/ml), teicoplanin (MIC<0.5 mcg/ml), tetracicline (MIC<1 mcg/ml), cotrimoxazole (MIC<10
mcg/ml) and vancomycin (MIC<1 mcg/ml). Linezolid 600 mg daily iv was started 8 days later because of worsening condition (Linezolid was not
tested in-vitro). However this proved to be ineffective as the patient still presented fever and positive blood cultures for MRSA
maintaining the same strains. A new TTE was performed showing the presence of a new vegetation on the anterior leaflet of the tricuspid
valve. Linezolid was then replaced with vancomycin (500 mg/6 h/IV), rifampicin (600 mg/8 h/IV) and cotrimoxazole (480 mg/8 h/IV) that was
again ineffective and after 12 days of therapy was suspended. After 27 days of ineffective therapy the patient condition was very poor; TTE
showed new vegetations on the posterior leaflet of the tricuspid valve with severe insufficiency and large pulmonary infarctions.
Quinupristin/dalfopristin were at 7.5 mg-Kg/8 h/IV. After three days of therapy the patient became afebrile and his condition improved.
After 25 days of therapy with quinupristin/dalfopristin, biological markers for infection became normal and the patient underwent left
above-the-knee amputation as prevention treatment for new infections. The therapy with quinupristin/dalfopristin was suspended after 42
days. A Transesophageal echocardiography and a thoracic computed tomography scan were performed at the end of antibiotic therapy and at 18
months after discharge showed complete regression of the tricuspid vegetation, only mild valve insufficiency and absence of residual
pulmonary infarction. Infective endocarditis is an uncommon disease. A recent publication has shown that the incidence of IE is about 31
cases per million inhabitants. Right-sided IE represents 10% of all cases with tricuspid valve involvement in 90% of cases. Moss and Munt
showed the right-sided IE is more frequent in drug-addicts (63%) . We present a case of tricuspid IE complicated by multiple pulmonary
septic infarctions originated probably from a focus of chronic osteomyelitis. The interesting aspect of this case is not only the acute
clinic presentation but also the high grade of clinical resistance to the different antibiotic regimens used . The patient did not respond
to the use of glycopeptides, teicoplanin and vancomycin always in association with other drugs despite the positive in vitro susceptibility
to these antibiotics . The use of linezolid , a wide spectrum antibiotic, with a very good reported action on the lungs resulted ineffective
with a concomitant dramatic deterioration of the clinical condition of the patient. The use of quinupristin/dalfopristin as salvage therapy
resulted in a very quick improvement after three days and resulted in complete cure of tricuspid valve IE and septic embolic lung abscesses.
The antibiotic therapy was continued for four weeks as recommended by the American Heart Association guidelines for complicated right-sided
endocarditis diminishing the rate of relapses due. The decision to perform a left above-the-knee amputation was considered as the only
possible guarantee of removal of chronic osteomyelitis focus and was performed with the patient on quinupristin/dalfopristin antibiotic
treatment. In this paper, we firstly reported a non-operated patient with tricuspid valve endocarditis by MRSA complicated by multiple
pulmonary septic infarction cured with quinupristin/dalfopristin. The use of these antibiotic agents opens new perspectives in the
management of severely ill patients with invasive valve endocarditis infection. MRSA: Methicillin-resistant S. aureus IE: infective
endocarditis TTE: Transthoracic echocardiography TEE: Transesophageal echocardiography MIC: minimal inhibitory concentration The author(s)
declare that they have no competing interests. AC, GC, were involved in conception, design and drafting. CAM and TG made a critical revision
of the manuscript. FB, GG participated in the writing of the first draft. All authors improved the manuscript and approved its final
version. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
