Intestinal ischemia is a rarely reported complication following laparoscopic cholecystectomy. We describe a case of massive small intestinal
necrosis 3 days following this procedure. An autopsy determined the cause to be splanchnic hypoperfusion, likely due to the physiologic
changes induced by the pneumoperitoneum necessary to conduct the surgery. We sought to determine whether all reported cases of intestinal
ischemia following laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) shared the same etiology, and if faulty operative technique could be invoked. A review
of all known published cases of intestinal ischemia following LC was conducted to determine the underlying etiology of ischemia, and whether
adequate operative technique had been observed. Multiple causes of intestinal ischemia following LC have been described: splanchnic
hypoperfusion, thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery, and thrombosis of the inferior mesenteric vein. All occurred despite correct
operative technique. Intestinal ischemia following LC has diverse causes. Patient factors rather than faulty operative technique would
appear to underlie the development of this rare complication. Intestinal ischemia following laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is a rarely
reported complication, but one that often results in a fatal outcome. Several case reports in the past decade have served to illustrate that
ischemia in this context has diverse causes.1–7 Most have been due to thrombosis of the superior mesenteric artery. In this report, we
describe a case of fatal intestinal ischemia following LC of which splanchnic hypoperfusion during pneumoperitoneum was the most likely
cause. We review the pathologic diversity of intestinal ischemia following LC. A 57-year-old woman was referred for LC following a several
month history of biliary colic. She was moderately obese but otherwise in good health, without any history or known risk factors for
cardiovascular disease. LC was performed without complication according to the standard technique with maintenance of the intraperitoneal
pressure between 12 mm Hg to 15 mm Hg. The patient was discharged home the same day with a prescription for analgesics to be taken as
necessary. Shortly afterwards, she began to experience epigastric pain that responded well to analgesics. However, at home on the third
postoperative day, she suddenly vomited a large volume of blood and died several minutes later in front of her husband. The coroner was
consulted, and an autopsy performed at his request. At autopsy, the operative site was unremarkable. However, the entire small intestine was
green and obviously necrotic; the lumen contained a large amount of blood, as did the stomach. Microscopic examination confirmed the
presence of full thickness necrosis of the small bowel wall. The mesenteric vessels were meticulously examined: these were normal without
evidence of atheromata, arterial thromboembolia, or venous thrombus. The aorta was free of plaque. The heart was normal except for mild
atheromatosis of the left descending coronary artery; the other coronary vessels were normal. The other organs showed no abnormality. The
cause of death was recorded as massive small bowel ischemic necrosis due to arterial hypoperfusion, the latter most likely due to elevated
intraabdominal pressure during the laparoscopic cholecystectomy procedure. Intestinal ischemia following LC is a rare but devastating
complication. A literature review using PubMed and pertinent search terms revealed 7 cases before the present report (Table 1). All but 2
patients died as a consequence. The causes of ischemia in the context of LC are diverse, and likely depend on the underlying cardiovascular
health of the affected patient. Reported Cases of Intestinal Ischemia After Laparoscopic Cholecystectomy IAP = intraabdominal pressure; SMA
= superior mesenteric artery; IMV = inferior mesenteric vein. LC requires the creation of a pneumoperitoneum via insufflation of carbon
dioxide; resulting increases in pCO2 and intraperitoneal pressure lead to changes in pulmonary function and hemodynamic measurements.8
Pulmonary function is altered as a consequence of increased pCO2 that is directly absorbed into the circulation from the peritoneal cavity
as well as by increased intraperitoneal volume: vital capacity is diminished with increased dead space and V/Q mismatch. Increased
intraabdominal pressure leads to decreased blood flow through the splanchnic vessels with relative hypoperfusion of the celiac, superior
mesenteric, and renal arteries, despite normal blood pressure.9 Although these physiologic changes create a theoretical risk of compromised
intestinal blood flow in all patients, in the vast majority they are well tolerated with no clinical consequences. The patient we describe
had no clinical or autopsy evidence of significant cardiovascular disease. The absence of atheromatosis of the major intraabdominal and
mesenteric vessels, and the absence of venous thromboembolism, both excluded by detailed examination at the time of autopsy, eliminates
these as causes of ischemia. Likewise, faulty operative technique or intestinal obstruction due to external compression or herniation may
also be eliminated. We conclude that the massive small intestinal ischemia in this patient is therefore most likely splanchnic hypoperfusion
occurring at the time of pneumoperitoneum, the physiologic basis of which is described above. Splanchnic hypoperfusion is but one cause of
intestinal ischemia following LC. As seen in the accompanying table, the most common cause in this small number of cases is thrombosis of
the superior mesenteric artery (SMA). Patients with underlying atheromatous disease involving the abdominal vessels may be at risk for this
complication.2 However, an alternative explanation in this context is that symptomatic episodes of intestinal ischemia (mesenteric angina)
before LC have been misinterpreted clinically as symptomatic cholelithiasis.7 The resulting laparoscopic intervention may have created a low
blood perfusion state resulting in further intestinal ischemia. One patient died from thrombosis of the inferior mesenteric vein, the cause
of which is unexplained, and 1 patient, similarly to our case, developed ischemia secondary to splanchnic hypoperfusion; he subsequently
recovered. The specific cause of ischemia was not given for the remaining 2 cases. The 2 patients who survived were relatively young with
limited bowel involved. Of note, in all cases, there was correct operative technique reported; where pCO2 is specified, it was 15 mm Hg or
lower. The question arises whether patients at risk for developing intestinal ischemia during LC can be identified and, if so, can any
preventive steps be taken? Given the very small number of cases in which this complication has occurred amid the large number of LCs
performed, the negligible incidence of intestinal ischemia likely makes any attempt at screening of the average LC patient– even if reliable
screening criteria could be identified—a futile endeavor. The patient we describe is illustrative: a previously healthy 57-year-old,
moderately obese woman without any other known risk factors for cardiovascular disease would not be considered at increased risk for this
complication. Similarly, most of the patients described in the small number of case reports had no identifiable risk factor. Thus, at best,
an individualized approach is warranted: measures such as use of lower peritoneal pressure, if technically feasible, and assurance of proper
hydration might be considered for those patients with precarious cardiovascular status or a prior history of ischemic enteritis or colitis.
Intestinal ischemia following LC is rare. Autopsy in the present case was essential to determine the cause of death. SMA thrombosis,
inferior mesenteric vein thrombosis, and splanchnic hypoperfusion are all potential causes, all occurring despite correct operative
technique. Compromised cardiovascular function may play a role in the development of ischemia in certain patients. The possibility of
survival would appear to correlate with patient age and extent of bowel involved. Preventative measures may be considered on an
individualized basis for those patients with severe cardiovascular disease or a prior episode of intestinal ischemia.
