The patient's recurrent hypoglycaemia was found to be due to non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia. A 79-y-old man presented with obstructive
jaundice in July 2001 and was diagnosed with carcinoma of the head of the pancreas. He underwent a total pancreatectomy, as well as
resection of the distal stomach, duodenum, spleen, and gall bladder. Histology showed a 9 × 10 × 6.5–cm tumour at the head of the pancreas
that, upon microscopic examination, showed a moderately differentiated invasive adenocarcinoma displaying a mixed papillary and glandular
growth pattern. The resection margins were free of tumour, and all resected lymph nodes were clear of metastases. The patient developed
diabetes following his pancreatectomy and was started on insulin. His diabetes was managed with human isophane insulin injections, 18 units
in the morning, 6 units in the evening with HbA1c of 8.2% (normal range 5.1%–6.4%). In June 2003, the patient was noted to have hepatomegaly
on follow-up and was found to have liver and portal lymph node metastases on a computed tomography scan of the abdomen (Figure 1). The
result of the carbohydrate antigen 19–9 test was elevated at 139 U/ml (normal <37 U/ml). Metastatic adenocarcinoma was diagnosed, and the
patient opted for conservative management. In January 2004, the patient was admitted following an episode of loss of consciousness. He was
diagnosed with hypoglycaemia with an unrecordable haemastix reading on arrival and a random plasma glucose level of 2.9 mmol/l after
receiving intravenous dextrose. His renal function tests were normal, and liver function tests were normal except for an elevated alkaline
phosphatase of 116 IU/l (normal 40–100 IU/l). A short synacthen test was normal. During admission, the patient had further episodes of
documented hypoglycaemia with plasma glucose down to 1.8 mmol/l. His insulin dose was therefore reduced to isophane insulin 12 U once daily.
The patient was admitted again in March 2004, following an episode of confusion during which he stabbed himself with a knife. He underwent
emergency surgery for haemostasis and removal of the knife. A psychiatric evaluation after his operation found no evidence of depression or
suicidal ideation. The patient was transferred to the palliative care ward and was noted to have recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia despite
progressive reduction of his insulin dose to isophane insulin 4 U daily. He was on no other medications except frusemide for mild ankle
oedema. Liver function tests were normal except for a mildly elevated alkaline phosphatase of 144 IU/l (normal 40–100 IU/l). The
international normalised ratio was 1.26 (normal range 0.9–1.1). His chest x-ray was normal. In view of the recurrent episodes of symptomatic
hypoglycaemia, he was eventually taken off all insulin injections. A fasting blood sample taken 2 d after stopping insulin showed blood
glucose 5.4 mmol/l, C-peptide <0.5 μg/l (normal range 1.1–5 μg/l), and insulin level <2 mIU/l (normal range 6–35 mIU/l). Repeated urine
analysis was negative for ketones. 10 d after stopping insulin, the patient developed further episodes of hypoglycaemia, with blood glucose
levels of 1.7 mmol/l and 2.1 mmol/l. Insulin levels were undetectable. A repeat short synacthen test showed a raised baseline cortisol of
1,082 nmol/l (reference range 171–536 nmol/l) and post-stimulation cortisol of 1,145 nmol/l, indicating activation of the hypothalamic-
pituitary-adrenal axis from the recurrent hypoglycaemia. Insulin-like growth factor (IGF)-I level was <2 nmol/l (normal range 5–22.5
nmol/l). Total IGF-II was 35.6 nmol/l. The IGF-II/IGF-I ratio was raised, at >18 (normal <10). The IGF-BP3 level was low, at 0.4 mg/l
(normal 0.7–4.4 mg/l). Growth hormone (GH) level was undetectable. The patient was diagnosed as having non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia
(NICTH) due to metastatic adenocarcinoma. His hypoglycaemic episodes were stabilized with an intravenous dextrose infusion, and the patient
remained relatively free of neuropsychiatric symptoms or psychospiritual distress. The patient eventually died of cancer cachexia 2 wk
later. An autopsy was not performed. Spontaneous hypoglycaemia is suggested by the presence of Whipple's triad: symptoms suggestive of
hypoglycaemia, biochemical confirmation of hypoglycaemia, and reversal of symptoms following correction of hypoglycaemia. Neuroglycopenic
symptoms tend to predominate as autonomic warning symptoms, and counterregulatory hormonal responses are often impaired in the setting of
recurrent hypoglycaemia . Hypoglycaemia in patients with cancer may be secondary to medications, liver failure, renal failure, severe
sepsis, or adrenal insufficiency. In addition, NICTH is increasingly recognized as an important cause of hypoglycaemia in such patients.
NICTH has been reported to occur in association with a variety of malignant tumours, including hepatomas, colorectal carcinomas, breast
carcinomas, renal cell carcinomas, and lung carcinomas, as well as haematological malignancies and benign tumours such as mesenchymal
fibromas . The occurrence of NICTH in association with adenocarcinoma of the pancreas is extremely rare , but dramatically illustrates the
hypoglycaemic potential of the condition. In our patient, who had undergone a total pancreatectomy resulting in insulin deficiency and
diabetes, the tumour was able to cause reversal of his diabetes and induce recurrent hypoglycaemia, even in the absence of any endogenous
insulin secretion. The hypoglycaemia in NICTH is believed to be due to tumour production of a prohormone form of IGF-II, termed “big” IGF-
II. IGF-II is normally sequestered and inactivated by binding to specific binding proteins such as IGF-BP3 to form a 150-kD ternary complex.
The elevated IGF-II levels inhibit the secretion of endogenous insulin and GH. The low GH levels in NICTH in turn result in decreased levels
of IGF-BP3, thereby impairing the formation of the ternary complexes (Figure 2). As a result, a larger proportion of IGF-II can circulate
freely as binary complexes, which causes hypoglycaemia by inhibiting hepatic glucose production and enhancing glucose disposal to muscle .
The diagnosis of NICTH can be confirmed by finding suppressed insulin, C-peptide, and GH concentration in the setting of hypoglycaemia
(confirmed by laboratory measurement of blood glucose), along with elevated total and “big” IGF-II levels. A total IGF-II/IGF-I ratio of >10
is thought to be diagnostic. It is important to take blood for the above measurements (and in some cases, to screen for sulphonylurea) at
the time of symptomatic hypoglycaemia, and to document symptoms and the response to glucose treatment. Adrenal insufficiency due to adrenal
metastases should be excluded. Surgical resection is the treatment of choice for tumours causing hypoglycaemia due to NICTH, and should
result in normalization of blood glucose and the biochemical abnormality. However, this may not be possible in patients with metastatic
disease. Debulking the tumour with radiotherapy or chemotherapy has been reported to be effective in controlling the hypoglycaemia . If
surgery is not feasible, the hypoglycaemia can be treated with repeated glucagon injections or intravenous glucose. Glucocorticoids are very
effective in preventing hypoglycaemia and have been shown to reduce tumour production of “big” IGF-II in a dose-dependent manner . A dose of
prednisolone 30–60 mg/d or dexamethasone 4 mg/d has been reported to be effective . Recent advances in understanding the pathophysiology of
NICTH should be helpful for clinicians in the management of recurrent hypoglycaemia in patients with cancer. (136 KB PDF) Click here for
additional data file. The authors thank Dr G. Wark, Royal Surrey County Hospital, Guildford, United Kingdom, for help in measuring IGF-II.
growth hormone insulin-like growth factor non-islet cell tumour hypoglycaemia Hypoglycaemia in patients with known malignancy may be due to
medications, liver failure, renal failure, sepsis, adrenal insufficiency, or NICTH. In the investigation of spontaneous hypoglycaemia, it is
important to document hypoglycaemia with a reliable laboratory blood glucose measurement and to take blood at the time of hypoglycaemia for
measurement of insulin, C-peptide, and other hormones before treatment with glucose has been given. NICTH can occur in association with a
variety of malignant tumours, but can also occur secondary to haematological malignancies and some benign mesenchymal tumours. The
hypoglycaemia that occurs in NICTH is not dependent on endogenous insulin secretion, but instead is caused by tumour production of a
prohormone form of IGF-II. Unprovoked hypoglycaemia or unexplained changes in insulin sensitivity in a patient with known malignancy should
alert physicians to the possibility of NICTH. Enhanced computed tomography scan of abdomen showing heterogenous liver metastases with
irregular rim enhancement as well as hypodense lesions in the portal region suggestive of metastatic lymphadenopathy. Funding: The authors
received no specific funding to write this case report. Competing Interests: The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Author contributions. RM and RL were involved with the care of the patient. All authors participated in the writing and critical review of
the manuscript.
