We report the sonographic features of an intracystic papillary carcinoma of the breast presenting as recurrent hemorrhagic cysts following
trauma. A 56-year-old woman presented with palpable breast masses after a traumatic event; sonography showed multiple, well-defined,
hemorrhagic cysts. Hemorrhagic fluid was evacuated by fine needle aspiration with no residual lesions. Cytology was negative for malignancy.
Five months later, the mass reappeared; sonography demonstrated multiple cysts with solid nodules. US-guided core biopsy and surgery
revealed invasive papillary carcinoma. We suggest close follow-up of cystic masses, even with negative cytology, and performance of surgical
excisional biopsy in cases of rapid refilling after aspiration. It is well known that bloody cysts are suspicious and should be closely
monitored for risk of intracystic neoplasm.1-4 However, in patients with history of trauma, the diagnosis of choice for cysts with bloody
aspirate and negative cytology is trauma associated hemorrhagic cyst. In this report, we describe a case of intracystic papillary carcinoma
that presented as recurrent hemorrhagic cysts after trauma. A 56-year-old woman presented with multiple, soft, palpable masses in her right
breast. Three months earlier, heavy falling boxes injured her breast; soon after she noted gradually increasing multiple masses. Medical
history was negative for any hematologic disease or bleeding tendency. Mammogram showed multiple, hyperdense masses with well-defined
margins in the right subareolar and upper outer quadrant areas (Fig. 1A). Ultrasonogram (US) of the right breast showed multiple, round-
shaped cysts with floating echogenic debris (Fig. 1B a,b); there were no suspicious echogenic lesions projecting from the wall. Fine needle
aspiration biopsy was performed; aspirate was blood-stained, but there was no remaining residual mass and cytologic evaluation was negative
for malignancy. Our impression was post-traumatic hemorrhagic cysts, and we recommended a three month follow-up US. The patient returned two
months later for recurrence of the masses. The second US revealed recurrent cysts at the same site. Surgical excision and follow-up was
recommended, however, the patient refused. After an additional three months, symptoms worsened and the patient complained of growing masses
and circumferential, painful, nodular lesions. The third US revealed marked enlargement of the cystic masses with irregular, thickened,
echogenic solid lesions along the cyst walls (Fig. 1B, c). Blood flow signals of the papillary solid portion were seen on color Doppler
sonography (Fig. 1B, d). A biopsy of the solid portion was performed using a 14-gauge automated gun; the mass was diagnosed as papillary
carcinoma. The patient was treated with modified radical mastectomy and axillary dissection. The gross sample was ill-defined with dark
reddish colored cystic masses with polypoid projections from the wall. The confirmed final diagnosis was intracystic papillary carcinoma
with invasion. Axillary dissection found metastasis at two lymph nodes among twenty resected nodes. Cystic carcinomas of the breast
encompass a heterogeneous spectrum of tumors. These include intracystic papillary carcinoma with or without invasion, ductal carcinoma with
cystic degeneration, such as comedo forms of ductal carcinoma in situ, medullary carcinoma, squamous carcinoma, and cystic hypersecretory
ductal adenocarcinoma.1-3 The prognosis of high-grade ductal carcinomas with cystic degeneration is poor, while that of intracystic
papillary carcinoma is excellent. The mammographic findings of intracystic papillary carcinomas are usually well-defined, high density
masses, thought to be from hemosiderin hemorrhage deposits. Routine sonogram demonstrates solid or complex cystic and solid masses with
posterior acoustic enhancement. By detecting vascularities or large feeding vessels, color Doppler sonogram is useful as a diagnostic method
for solid portion differentiation of the cystic mass from echogenic debris.3,4 It is rare, but possible, that a cystic carcinoma has no
solid portion. Liston et al. reported imaging of an intracystic breast carcinoma without solid component, masquerading as a simple cyst.5
Sonography and aspiration biopsy are the first steps in the diagnosis of cystic carcinomas. However, cytological examination alone has high
false-negative rates due to sparse cellularity, abundant obscuring blood, necrotic debris, and degenerative changes in the diagnostic
cells.6,7 The fluid appearance can give clues for the differential diagnosis and for the benign or malignant nature of the cyst. In
malignant cysts, aspirate is usually bloody, however, the presence of blood is not pathognomic for cancer and conversely, its absence does
not exclude malignancy.8,9 The combination of clinical criteria such as patient age, presence of residual mass after aspiration, and fluid
character are valuable for accurate diagnosis.9 Core needle biopsy is a useful diagnostic tool for cystic carcinomas, however, it may be
unable to distinguish between in situ and invasive lesions, as the center of the lesion is often targeted yet invasion is often identified
at the periphery.10,11 In cases of complicated cysts, some authors have suggested measuring the CEA value of aspirated fluid, using anti-CEA
monoclonal antibody, as this is easy, safe, and helpful for definitive diagnosis of intracystic carcinoma.12 Considering the patient's age,
bloody nature of the cyst, and rapid refilling after aspiration, we should have performed an excisional biopsy at the second visit. Based on
our experience, we suggest close follow-up of hemorrhagic cystic masses, regardless of trauma history, and consideration of surgical
excisional biopsy for cysts that rapidly grow post-aspiration, even those with negative cytology. (A) Mammogram. Both mediolateral oblique
(a) and craniocaudal mammogram (b) showed multiple round shape masses with well-defined margins in the subareolar area and upper outer
quadrant of the right breast. (B) Ultrasonogram. The initial sonogram shows well-circumscribed cystic masses with echogenic floating debris
(arrows) at the subareolar (a) and upper outer quadrant (b) of the right breast. Sonograms obtained at 5 month follow up. Cystic mass size
was markedly increased, with irregular shaped soft tissue (arrows) along the cyst walls (c). The blood flow signals of the papillary solid
portion are shown on color Doppler sonography (d).
