Traumatic injuries occurring in agricultural settings are often associated with infections caused by unusual organisms. Such agents may be
difficult to isolate, identify, and treat effectively. A 4-year-old boy developed an extensive infection of his knee and distal femur
following a barnyard pitchfork injury. Ultimately the primary infecting agent was determined to be Myceliophthora thermophila, a
thermophilic melanized hyphomycete, rarely associated with human infection, found in animal excreta. Because of resistance to standard
antifungal agents including amphotericin B and caspofungin, therapy was instituted with a prolonged course of terbinafine and voriconazole.
Voriconazole blood levels demonstrated that the patient required a drug dosage (13.4 mg/kg) several fold greater than that recommended for
adults in order to attain therapeutic blood levels. Unusual pathogens should be sought following traumatic farm injuries. Pharmacokinetic
studies may be of critical importance when utilizing antifungal therapy with agents for which little information exists regarding drug
metabolism in children. Myceliophthora thermophila is a thermophilic phaeoid mould found in pasture soil, wood chips, straw, mouldy hay,
compost piles and other environmental settings where heat is generated. It is also found in the excreta and rumen of cattle and is a
pathogen of cultivated mushrooms . A rare cause of invasive human infections, it can be difficult to isolate and identify in clinical
specimens. We recently cared for a 4-1/2 year old boy who developed osteomyelitis of the distal femur caused by direct inoculation of
Myceliophthora thermophila via a pitchfork injury to his knee. The patient demonstrated severe destructive osseous and cartilaginous
infection, with slow clinical improvement, requiring the prolonged use of multiple antifungal agents. Due to the limited number of agents to
which this organism was susceptible, voriconazole therapy was instituted despite limited pharmacokinetic data in children. Prolonged therapy
with terbinafine, a drug generally employed for superficial saprophytic infections of skin and nails also was utilized. This case
demonstrates the difficulties that can be encountered in identifying and treating this unusual but aggressive fungal organism. A 4-1/2 year
old boy presented with a swollen right knee after being impaled in that area by a pitchfork. The pitchfork was observed to be contaminated
with cow manure and hay. The knee was washed with soap and water. The following morning the knee was swollen and the boy was treated with
orally administered antibiotics. The mobility of the knee progressively decreased, and four days later the child was admitted to the
hospital. Bacterial cultures of joint fluid yielded Bacillus and Enterococcus species. After a brief course of intravenous antibiotic
therapy, the boy was discharged to continue orally administered antibiotics. At home, he developed increasing knee pain with inability to
walk. A magnetic resonance image (MRI) obtained at transfer to our institution was consistent with infection involving the synovium, the
medial femoral condyle and adjacent articular cartilage. Intravenous antibacterial therapy was instituted with vancomycin, piperacillin-
tazobactam and amikacin. Twenty seven days after the initial pitchfork injury, the patient was returned to the operating room because of
persistent leg and knee swelling as well as increasing elevation of inflammatory markers with an ESR of >100 and a CRP of 6.5. An MRI
revealed apparent osteomyelitis of the medial femoral condyle. New bone cultures were obtained which grew what was initially identified as a
dermatophyte. Orally administered terbinafine, 125 mg (6.7 mg/kg) daily, was initiated, and the patient began to improve clinically. His CRP
declined to a nadir of 1.8 with absence of fever and better movement of his leg. However, 45 days following the initial injury and 14 days
after wound closure, an elevation in the CRP to 2.6, as well as an increase of purulent drainage from the knee prompted another surgical
exploration of the distal femur and the addition of intravenous Ambisome, 90 mg (4.8 mg/kg) daily. At surgery, progressive bone loss was
noted as well as necrosis of knee cartilage. Fungal organisms with irregular branching hyphae were noted throughout the excised cartilage,
and fungus was recovered in culture two weeks later. Meanwhile, the fungal agent that had been isolated previously was forwarded to the
Fungus Testing Laboratory at the University of Texas Health Science Center in San Antonio for identification and susceptibility testing and
accessioned into their stock collection as UTHSC 05-3365. There, the organism was identified as Myceliophthora thermophila, based upon
observation of: 1) tan to brown powdery colonies with ill-defined margins when grown on potato flakes agar at 42°C; 2) more luxuriant growth
at elevated temperatures of 35°C and 42°C than at 26°C; 3) septate vegetative hyphae with conidial production from ampulliform swellings;
and 4) obovoid (inverted egg shaped) or pyriform (pear-shaped) conidia measuring 4.5–11.0 × 3.0–4.5 μm that were hyaline and smooth when
immature, becoming darker and roughened at maturity (Figure 1). Antifungal susceptibility testing was performed according to the Clinical
Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) M38-A document for filamentous fungi . Although standardized susceptibility breakpoints have not been
established for this organism, the isolate appeared resistant to a variety of standard antifungal agents (Table 1). Based upon these
susceptibilities, voriconazole (4 mg/kg/12 hrs after a loading dose of 6 mg/kg/12 hrs for 24 hours) was added to the patient's antifungal
regimen, and Ambisome was discontinued. Subsequently, the patient underwent numerous debridement procedures with gradual improvement in
clinical picture and CRP. A series of progressive increases in voriconazole dosage was required based upon periodic pharmacokinetic studies
to achieve appropriate blood levels (Table 2). Conidia of Myceliophthora thermophila being produced from ampulliform swellings. Note both
smooth, hyaline, immature conidia, and darker, more mature roughened conidia. Lactofuschin stain, approximately 1000×. Susceptibilities of
Myceliophthora thermophila isolate *There are no published breakpoints for this organism against any of the antifungal agents tested.
Interpretations are based upon normally achievable concentrations of the drug using standard dosing regimens. Voriconazole plasma
concentrations (body weight 18.6 kg)* *Patient also receiving terbinafine 6.7 mg/kg/day aIV peak @ 50 minutes post infusion b PO peak @ 2–3
hours post ingestion c PO peak @ <2 hours post ingestion After his CRP had normalized, the patient was discharged home receiving
voriconazole, 250 mg (13.4 mg/kg) orally, every 12 hours, and terbinafine 125 mg (6.7 mg/kg) orally once daily. Anti-fungal therapy is to be
continued for a total of one year. The leg wound has healed, but the patient has had significant bone loss in his distal femur with
involvement of the growth plate, as well as damage to the articular cartilage of the knee. Myceliophthora thermophila is a melanized
filamentous hyphomycete that initially grows as a white cottony colony and subsequently turns pale brown and becomes granular on a variety
of media recommended for mould identification, such as potato dextrose or 2% malt agar. Its optimal growth is at 30–36°C. However, it also
grows well at 42°C, with maximal growth near 50°C. Thus it is considered a thermophilic organism. Myceliophthora thermophila is found in dry
pasture soil, birch chips, wood pulp, and straw compost . Its cell wall contains melanin resulting in dark pigmentation, and it is
considered one of the etiologic agents of phaeohyphomycosis. Phaeohyphomycosis includes those conditions in which the pathogenic mould forms
fungal elements which contain melanin within their cell walls . Despite the presence of melanin, cell walls of phaeoid moulds may appear
hyaline or clear upon routine microscopy. Hyphal elements usually demonstrate pigment when stained with Masson-Fontana melanin stain,
allowing identification of a dark fungus . A recent review reports that the number of publications related to phaeohyphomycotic infections
in the 1990's numbered only 150 . Phaeohyphomycosis most commonly manifests as a cutaneous infection, but deep infections with invasion of
the sinuses, lungs, brain, blood, and bone have also been reported . Disseminated disease was reviewed by Revankar et al. who found 72 cases
reported between 1966 and 2001 . Notably, the majority of cases involving disseminated phaeohyphomycosis were in immune-compromised
patients. The mortality rate in these individuals was high and many isolates were resistant to amphotericin B. In immunocompetent patients,
most infections were associated with direct inoculation of the organism from an environmentally contaminated source. There are just three
previously reported cases of phaeohyphomycosis caused by Myceliophthora thermophila (Table 3). In the first two patients, the source of the
Myceliophthora thermophila was uncertain, and both patients died despite standard anti-fungal therapy with amphotericin B. The most recently
reported case of infection with this organism involved a 21-month-old boy who sustained a penetrating head injury. A brain abscess developed
from which both Clostridium perfringens and Myceliophthora thermophila were isolated. The patient was treated successfully with enbloc
resection of the lesion, six weeks of amphotericin B, and four months of itraconazole . Prior Case Reports of Myceliophthora thermophila
infection Despite convincing evidence of progressive infection in each of the three previously reported cases, it was not until well into
the clinical course or even after death that identification of the etiologic agent was confirmed. It is unknown why recovery of
Myceliophthora thermophila from clinical specimens is so difficult. However, the situation may be analogous to mycotic infections with more
common agents such as Aspergillus, in which microbiologic isolation of the etiologic agent from grossly infected tissue can be difficult.
The identification of Myceliophthorathermophila, once recovered, is also problematic, as most microbiology laboratories lack experience with
this organism. In our patient, despite evidence of ongoing infection, both operatively and preoperatively, only two samples of debrided bone
or cartilage yielded Myceliophthora thermophila, despite numerous cultures of infected surgical specimens in which fungal elements could be
seen histologically. Given the thermophilic nature of this organism, incubation of inoculated media at elevated temperatures may enhance
recovery. Cultures of most clinical specimens are incubated at 30°C, but such a temperature would be less than optimal for growth of
Myceliophthora thermophila. Because our patient's positive cultures was obtained after approximately 2 weeks of terbinafine therapy and the
organism was found to be resistant to amphotericin B, voriconazole was added to terbinafine therapy. Terbinafine is a broad-spectrum
allylamine with fungicidal activity against dermatophyte species, Aspergillus species, Sporothrix schenckii, Blastomyces dermatitidis,
Histoplasma capsulatum, Cryptococcus neoformans, Malassezia furfur and other important fungi. It shows in vitro synergism with amphotericin
or triazoles and has been effective in combination therapy in individual patients . It has been administered safely in a large number of
children, and at high doses or for up to 12 months for invasive mycoses . Voriconazole is a potent antifungal agent effective against a
number of pathogens, including Aspergillus, Cryptococcus, and Candida species. It also has excellent oral bioavailability and a low rate of
adverse effects [16, 17]. However, it is not approved by the Food and Drug Administration for use in children, and the appropriate dose for
pediatric patients is not known. Recommendations in authoritative sources suggest the same intravenous weight-based dosages in children and
adults: a loading dose of 6 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours × 1 day and a maintenance dose of 4 mg/kg/dose every 12 hours. Oral dosage is
suggested at 100 mg every 12 hours for patients less than 40 kg, and 200 mg every 12 hours for patients more than 40 kg . Recent
investigations by Walsh et al. demonstrated that pediatric patients have a much higher rate of elimination of voriconazole per unit of body
weight than do adults. Thus, children may require higher dosages to achieve blood levels consistent with adults treated at a dosage of 3–4
mg/kg [16, 17]. Additionally, the elimination of voriconazole from the blood in children appears linear when doses of 3 mg/kg to 5 mg/kg are
administered every 12 hours. This is in distinction to elimination of similar doses in adults, which is non-linear or saturable. Although
the exact relationship between the plasma concentration of voriconazole and the drug's clinical effectiveness is uncertain, infected adults
improve at doses achieving recommended plasma concentrations. Therefore, the goal in our patient was to achieve voriconazole blood levels
similar to those achieved in adults. Assuming linear pharmacokinetics, it was suggested by Walsh that a pediatric dosage of up to 11 mg/kg
twice a day might be necessary to achieve drug levels equivalent to those seen in adult patients receiving 4 mg/kg of the agent every 12
hours . We increased the dose of voriconazole in our patient, in stepwise fashion based upon measurements of Cmax, from 4 mg/kg to 13.4
mg/kg every 12 hours, reaching a voriconazole serum peak levels in the range of 2–5 mcg/ml, equivalent to the typical adult given only 3–4
mg/kg every 12 hours. Kinetics of voriconazole in our patient were potentially affected by concurrent administration of terbinafine. The
current case demonstrates the vigilance required in patients with traumatically induced osteomyelitis, particularly when related to direct
implantation from a grossly contaminated source. Relapse of apparently appropriately treated infection while on therapy demands reassessment
to be certain that an unusual or emergent microorganism is not present within the depths of the wound. In the case of a contaminated farm
implement, the possibility of recovery of an unusual agent like Myceliophthora thermophila is high, potentially requiring the usage of
antimicrobial agents for which there is scant pharmacologic data in children. Clinicians should be careful to obtain appropriate
pharmacologic studies in order to be assured that the appropriate doses of such drugs are employed. LD conceived the report and helped in
its writing. DS oversaw antimicrobial susceptibility testing and voriconazole blood level determinations. AH performed voriconazole
pharmacokinetic analysis. PH provided clinical care and editorial assistance. JT provided surgical care and the tissue specimens from which
the pathogen was recovered. RW provided clinical care and conceived the antimicrobial regimen for this patient. MC provided clinical care,
editorial support and helped conceive this paper. The authors would like to acknowledge Elizabeth Thompson and Gen Pennick of the Fungus
Testing Laboratory for their work in the identification of the isolate and performance of voriconazole levels, respectively. The patient's
parents agreed in writing to the publication of this report.
