Basidiobolomycosis is a rare disease caused by the fungus Basidiobolus ranarum, member of the class Zygomycetes, order Entomophthorales,
found worldwide. Usually basidiobolomycosis is a subcutaneous infection but rarely gastrointestinal manifestations have been described; 13
adults and 10 children and a few retroperitoneal or pulmonary cases. In gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis the colon is most frequently
involved, usually presenting with subacute mild abdominal pain. In contrast to children only very few described adult patients had hepatic
masses. Definitive diagnosis requires culture, serological testing can be helpful. The fungal morphology and the Splendore-Hoeppli
phenomenon are characteristic histological features. There are no prominent risk factors. Usually surgery and prolonged antifungal therapy
are required. A 61 year old man presented with progressive left abdominal pain and constipation since a few months. Colonoscopy showed an
obstructing tumour in the descending colon, and a hemicolectomy was performed. Histology showed inflammation, possibly caused by a fungal or
parasitic infection, without definite identification of an organism. A few weeks postoperatively a CT scan made because of abdominal
discomfort, revealed a livermass (6 cm). Treatment with metronidazole, directed against an amoebic liver abscess, was unsuccessful. He
developed a marked eosinophilia (27.7%). A liver biopsy was performed and the patient was referred to a university hospital. A repeated CT
scan showed a livermass of 9 cm diameter. Review of colon and liver biopsy samples showed extensive necrosis and histiocytes, multinucleated
giant cells and numerous eosinophils. Grocott stained sections contained unusually large hyphae surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material
in haematoxylin and eosin stained sections (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon). A presumptive diagnosis of Basidiobolus spp. infection was made
and treated with amphotericin B (Itraconazol contra-indicated because of renal insufficiency). A few days later the patient died of a septic
shock. After autopsy Basidiobolus ranarum was cultured from liver, gallbladder and colon. Our patient died of gastrointestinal
basidiobolomycosis with an obstructing colon tumour and a large hepatic mass. This was a rare presentation of basidiobolomycosis and the
second fatal case described worldwide. Basidiobolomycosis is a rare disease caused by the fungus Basidiobolus ranarum, an environmental
saprophyte, member of the class Zygomycetes, order Entomophthorales, found worldwide . Usually basidiobolomycosis is a subcutaneous
infection that is transmitted through traumatic inoculation . Gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis is rare with only 13 cases reported
worldwide in adults and 10 in children. . Only a few cases of retroperitoneal or pulmonary basidiobolomycosis have been reported. In
gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis the colon is the most frequently involved part of the gastrointestinal tract, and patients usually
present with mild abdominal pain with a subacute onset, eosinophilia, and on histopatologic examination inflammatory changes with many
eosinophils . In contrast to pediatric patients only very few of the reported adult patients also had a hepatic mass . Definitive diagnosis
requires culture of the organism, serological testing via an immunodiffusion method can be helpful . Because a fungal infection is not
always suspected, in a number of patients the diagnosis must be made on histology alone. The fungal morphology and the Splendore-Hoeppli
phenomenon, although not entirely specific, are characteristic histological features. There are no prominent risk factors for this disease .
For treatment surgery is usually required, followed by prolonged antifungal therapy . The preferred drug is itraconazole . A 61 year old man
presented with progressive lower left abdominal pain and constipation since a few months. Colonoscopy showed a large obstructing tumour in
the descending colon, and a hemicolectomy was performed. Histology showed an inflammatory reaction, possibly caused by a fungal or parasitic
infection, but no definite identification of an organism was made. Postoperatively his complaints disappeared, but after a few weeks he
developed abdominal discomfort in his right upper abdomen, and six weeks postoperatively a CT scan revealed a large mass with a diameter of
6 cm central in the right liver lobe. Treatment with metronidazole, directed against an amoebic liver abscess, was unsuccessful. A
subsequent four-week course with fluconazole resulted in a small decrease of the liver abscess, without clinical improvement. He developed a
marked eosinophilia (27.7%). A liver biopsy was performed and the patient was referred to a university hospital. A repeated CT scan showed a
large mass with a diameter of 9 cm central in the liver, with extension to the right liver lobe (figure 1A). Review of the slides from the
colonic mass and the liver biopsy showed similar features, with extensive necrosis and a mixed inflammatory cell infiltrate containing
histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells and numerous eosinophils. In Grocott stained sections, many unusually large hyphae could be
recognized which were surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material in haematoxylin and eosin stained sections (Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon)
(figure 2). A. CT scan of the abdomen showing a large mass central in the liver, with extension to the right liver lobe. B. Postmortem
aspect of the liver, with extensive fungal infection. Liver biopsy, showing large hyphae surrounded by strongly eosinophilic material and an
inflammatory cell infiltrate containing histiocytes, multinucleated giant cells and numerous eosinophils. (a) H&E stained (b) Grocott
stained sections. On the basis of this morphology, a presumptive diagnosis of infection with Basidiobolus spp. was made. A percutaneous
cholangiodrain was placed to treat the cholestasis caused by the hepatic mass. A few days later, the patient developed a septic shock,
probably of hepatic origin. Blood cultures yielded Escherichia coli and Clostridium perfringens. The patient was treated with broad-spectrum
antibiotics. The presumed basidiobolomycosis was treated with amphotericin B intravenously, because the preferred therapy, intravenous
itraconazole, was contra-indicated because of severe renal insufficiency. A few days after initiation of the antifungal therapy the patient
died of multiple organ failure. Postmortem autopsy showed signs of extensive fungal infection of the liver (figure 1B), gallbladder and
sigmoid colon. Culture of liver, gallbladder and sigmoid colon yielded Basidiobolus ranarum. Our patient died of gastrointestinal
basidiobolomycosis with an obstructing colon tumour and a large hepatic mass. There was difficulty in reaching the diagnosis. The case
provides a teaching point, because although gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis is a rare disease, the clinical presentation of our patient
was characteristic for this disease. The prognosis of gastrointestinal basidiobolomycosis is usually favourable, our patient is the second
in whom the outcome was fatal . Better familiarity with this condition may prevent a fatal outcome like in our patient The author(s) declare
that they have no competing interests. All authors read and approved the final manuscript 1) GEL participated in the clinical care of the
patient and the writing of the case report. Furthermore, he has seen and approved the final version. 2) LA participated in reviewing the
samples of colon and liver of the patient described and in the writing of the case report. Furthermore, he has seen and approved the final
version. 3) RJ participated in the clinical care of the patient described, in reviewing the samples from colon and liver and in the writing
of the case report. Furthermore, he has seen and approved the final version. 4) J participated in the clinical care of the patient and in
the writing of the case report. Furthermore, he has seen and approved the final version. 5) WA participated in the clinical care of the
patient and in the writing of the case report and I have seen and approved the final version. Furthermore, he has seen and approved the
final version. 6) JM participated in the clinical care of the patient and in the writing of the case report. Furthermore, he has seen and
approved the final version. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Hereby we want to acknowledge the patients wife
for giving us written informed consent for publication of this case report. There was no source of funding for this manuscript.
