Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Creative Commons Deed, Attribution 2.5, which does not permit commercial
exploitation. A 33-year-old woman underwent unrelated cord blood transplantation (U-CBT) for myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-related
secondary AML. She showed impressive increases in the number of CD19+ B cells in bone marrow and CD19+27−IgD+ B cells in peripheral blood
from about 1 month to 3 months after U-CBT. The serum level of IL-6 temporarily increased after transplantation, and this increase seemed to
be correlated with the expansion of CD19+ B cells. Although, compared with BMT, little is known about the kinetics of hematological and
immunological reconstitution in U-CBT, there was initial B-cell recovery after CBT as some described. This B cell recovery may be associated
with a high number of B-cell precursors present in cord blood (CB). The phenomenon of naïve B lymphocyte expansion that we found might be
associated with a high number of B-cell precursors present in CB. A 33-year-old woman with myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS)-related secondary
acute myelogenous leukemia (AML) underwent unrelated cord blood transplantation (U-CBT) from HLA 1-antigen (DRB1) mismatched donor in April
2003. The conditioning regimen consisted of total body irradiation (TBI, 12 Gy) on days −9, −8, and −7, and cytarabine (Ara-C) at 3 g/m2
every 12 h on days −6 and −5, and cyclophosphamide (CY) at 60 mg/kg once daily on days −4 and −3. FK 506 and short-term methotrexate (MTX)
were used for graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) prophylaxis. The number of infused nucleated cells and CD34+ cells were 3.0 × 107/kg and 2.8
× 104/kg respectively. Neutrophil and platelet engraftment was achieved on day 18 and day 28 respectively. We examined donor-type chimerism
in the peripheral blood (PB) mononuclear cells by the procedure reported in detail previously (Tsutsumi et al., 2002), complete donor type
revealed on day 28. Acute GVHD was observed about 2 weeks after transplantation (skin, stage 2; gut, stage 3; overall, grade III), but the
symptoms gradually subsided after prednisolone administration at a single dose of 1 mg/kg. FK506 therapy was stopped on day 31 when GVHD
symptoms had disappeared. The patient showed an impressive increase in the number of CD19+ B cells in bone marrow (BM) and PB starting
approximately 1 month after U-CBT (Figure 1a,b). Bone marrow aspirate on day 62 showed various types of blastic-appearing lymphocytes
(47.4%) with a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and a fine nucleoreticulum (Figure 2). These lymphocytes also had markedly reduced
granulation. These lymphocytes also expressed CD20 antigen (data unshown). This increase was not apparently related to a defective control
of Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) infection or reactivation, which was confirmed by the negative results of PCR and Southern blot analysis on day
62. EBV serological examination before U-CBT revealed viral capsid antigen (VCA)-IgG 40×, VCA-IgM < 10×, VCA-IgA < 10×, early antigen for DR
components (EADR)-IgG < 10×, EADR-IgA < 10× and EBV nuclear antigen (EBNA) 10×. Moreover, EBV serological examination on day 62 after U-CBT
revealed VCA-IgG 160×, VCA-IgM < 10×, VCA-IgA < 10×, EADR-IgG < 10×, EADR-IgA < 10× and EBNA 40×. The patient remained afebrile, and there
was no newly emerged lymphadenopathy. Cytomegalo virus (CMV) antigenemia was negative at all times after the transplantation, and there was
no indication of any bacterial infection. Results of serological examinations of Parvovirus B19 and Herpes simplex virus (HSV) were
negative, and Human papiloma virus- 6 (HHV-6) was not examined. Immunoglobulin heavy chain (IgH) clonality analysis showed negative
rearrangement. To evaluate the correlation between immunological reconstitution and circulating serum cytokines, serum levels of
interleukin-2 (IL-2), interleukin-6 (IL-6), interleukin-10 (IL-10) and interferon-γ (IFN-γ) were also examined. We found that the serum
level of IL-6 temporarily increased after transplantation and that this increase correlated with the expansion of CD19+ B cells (Figure 1b).
However, IL-2, IL-10 and IFN-γ were not detected. The CD19+ B cells were analyzed in detail using anti CD27 Ab and anti IgD (Figure 3a,b).
IgD+ CD27− cells (naïve B cells) in the CD19+ B cells increased in BM and PB. Results of other routine examinations were unremarkable except
for the presence a relatively high percentage of lymphocytes in PB. Sequential analysis of chimerism status of CD19+cells was performed, and
complete donor chimerism persisted after transplantation. Taking all of these facts into consideration, we regarded this phenomenon as a
nonmalignant state that resulted from a peculiar immunologic reconstitution after U-CBT, and we just followed up the patient carefully. The
number of CD19+ B cells in BM and PB gradually normalized afterwards. Further, we observed that CD4+CD8+ cell ratios in PB were 0.42, 1.17
and 1.29 at 1, 3 and 4 months respectively. Absolute counts of CD3+ cells, CD4+ cells and CD8+ cells of >500/μl were achieved at 3, 4 and 4
months respectively. Immune reconstitution in these lymphocyte subsets was earlier than that reported by Giraud et al. (2000). Levels of
WBCs, peripheral lymphocytes, peripheral CD19+ lymphocytes, and CD20+ lymphocytes after U-CBT (a) and levels of CD19+ lymphocytes and CD20+
lymphocytes in BM and serum IL-6 after U-CBT (b). CD19+ and CD20+ lymphocyte counts peaked on day 63. Bone marrow smear. (May-Gimza stain
×1000). Bone marrow aspirate on day 62 shows various types of blastic-appearing lymphocytes with a high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and a fine
nucleoreticulum. These lymphocytes also had markedly reduced granulation. Phenotype analysis of PB (a) and BM (b) B lymphocytes. Three
B-cell subsets were separated according to surface IgD and CD27 expression on CD19+ B cells. Although >95% of CD19+ B cells in PB showed
IgD+CD27− naïve B cell type, we could not detect them in BM. An increase in lymphocytes in PB approximately 2 months after U-CBT has been
described in a few reports (Locatelli et al., 1996; Elhasid et al., 2000; Moretta et al., 2001) but there was no mention of lymphocytes in
BM in these reports. It has been reported that CD19+ B cells showed prompt recovery after CBT (Giraud et al., 2000, Niehues et al., 2001;
Inoue et al., 2003). Giraud et al. (2000) found that B cells the recovered early and at 6 and 9 months they constituted the predominant
lymphocyte subset. They also found that the absolute CD19+ B cell number was elevated at 12 months in all of their child patients except for
the one with severe chronic GVHD after unrelated CBT. Inoue et al. (2003) compared immune reconstitution after allogeneic CBT and CD34+ stem
cell transplantation (CD34− SCT) with that after BMT in children and found that both the number and percentage of CD19+ B cells were higher
after CBT. Moreover, B cell recovery may be associated with a high number of B-cell precursors present in CB (Arakawa-Hoyt et al., 1999;
Knutsen & Wall, 2000). However, there were no data of subpopulations of B cells after CBT. We analyzed the B lymphocytes of the adult
patient after U-CBT using three subpopulations on the basis CD27 and IgD expression. Klein, Rajewsky and Kuppers (1998) reported that PB of
healthy donors showed considerable variation in the percentages of the B-cell subsets, with 29–65% IgD+CD27−, 6.5–22% IgD+CD27+ and 13–43%
IgD−CD27+ B cells. Although the percentages of B-cell subsets in BM were unclear, our case showed a clear increase in naïve B cells. It has
been hypothesized that this striking expansion of B cells is due to the absence of long-term memory B cells; long-term memory B cells are
usually found in adult BM, whereas only immature naïve B lymphocytes are found in cord blood (Locatelli et al., 1996). It is conceivable
that neonatal B lymphocytes or their precursors present in cord blood maintain an efficient self-renewal capacity even after being
transplanted into an allogeneic host. We studied serum levels of IL-2, IL-6, IL-10 and IFN-γ to examine the relationship between
immunological reconstitution and circulating serum cytokines. IL-6 was the only cytokine that increased after U-CBT, and its increase was
correlated with the expansion of CD19+ B cells (Figure 2-b). In regard to the increases of serum IL-6 level in allogeneic BMT, this
phenomenon was observed early after the transplantation and appeared to be one of the causative cytokines for GVHD induction (Imamura et
al., 1994). We cannot demonstrate a clear cause-and-effect relationship between the increases in serum level of IL-6 and number of CD19+ B
cells, however, this correlation is interesting and further studies are expected. In conclusion, an impressive increase in CD19+ B cells,
especially naïve B cells, in BM and PB starting about 1 month after U-CBT was found, and this phenomenon of naïve B lymphocyte expansion
might be associated with a high number of B-cell precursors present in CB. We sincerely thank Ms M.Yamane and Mrs M Mayanagi for their
assistance in this study.
