A 58 year old man underwent 6 surgical interventions for various complications of massive biventricular myocardial infarction over a period
of 2 years following acute occlusion of a possibly "hyperdominant" left anterior descending coronary artery. These included concomitant
repair of apicoanterior post-infarction VSD and right ventricular free wall rupture, repeat repair of recurrent VSD following
inferoposterior extension of VSD in the infarcted septum 5 weeks later, repair of delayed right ventricular free wall rupture 4 weeks
subsequently, repair of a bleeding left ventricular aneurysm eroding through left chest wall 16 months thereafter, repair of right upper
lobe lung tear causing massive anterior mediastinal haemorrhage, mimicking yet another cardiac rupture, 2 months later, followed, at the
same admission, 2 weeks later, by sternal reconstruction for dehisced and infected sternum using pedicled myocutaneous latissimus dorsi
flap. 5 years after the latissimus myoplasty, the patient remains in NYHA class 1 and is leading a normal life. Surgery is required
immediately following acute myocardial infarction for the mechanical complications like VSD, mitral regurgitation and free wall rupture of
ventricle, mostly left, and subsequently for left ventricular aneurysm repair with or without coronary artery bypass grafting, or coronary
bypass grafting alone. An acute occlusion of an anterior descending coronary artery presents with an anterior myocardial infarction and
occasionally with an anterior post-infarction VSD and rarely with a free wall rupture of left ventricle. The mortality for emergency or
salvage surgery for either post-infarction VSD or free wall rupture continues to be high. Concomitant repair of post-infarction VSD and free
wall rupture has a prohibitively high mortality. Described below is the successful outcome in a patient who sustained a massive
biventricular infarction following an acute occlusion of a possibly "hyperdominant" left anterior descending coronary artery. This led to a
large post-infarction anterior VSD and, surprisingly, a right ventricular free wall rupture requiring a concomitant repair of the two
pathologies. This was followed by a number of delayed catastrophic complications of biventricular infarction, over a period of 2 years,
involving ventricular septum and the two ventricles involved requiring multiple salvage procedures. Each of these successful surgical
rescues made it possible for the next event in the natural history of massive biventricular infarction with its early and delayed
complications to unfold. A 58 year old man presented to Accident and Emergency with acute chest pain on 6/6/99. Examination revealed
tachycardia, a loud pansystolic murmur along left sternal edge and bilateral basal crackles. Chest x-ray suggested pulmonary oedema. ECG
demonstrated ST elevation in leads 1, AVL, V1–V5. He was thrombolysed with streptokinase. Transthoracic echo revealed an apicoanterior VSD
with a significant shunt and akinesia of the anterior left ventricular wall. Coronary angiography demonstrated normal left main stem,
occlusion of LAD just beyond the first septal and first diagonal (figs 1 and 2), and normally distributed and disease free circumflex and
right coronary arteries. RCA was a normal sized vessel which supplied PDA which fell short of the apex. Circumflex artery, too, was a normal
sized vessel with an average sized OM branch. The first diagonal was a good sized vessel which reached almost ¾ of the way down to apex. He
was diagnosed to have anteroseptal myocardial infarction secondary to an occluded LAD, and a large anteroapical VSD. An IABP was introduced
percutaneously. He continued to deteriorate clinically and became anuric and went into shock. On emergency median sternotomy on 7/6/99, the
operative findings included hemopericardium, large anteroapical infarct of LV and anterior surface of RV, free wall rupture of infarcted RV
wall just below RVOT and large 3 cm VSD in the anterior septum. Under CP bypass, moderate hypothermia and antegrade cardioplegic arrest,
left ventriculotomy was made lateral to the diagonal branch of LAD. The septal myocardium surrounding the VSD was necrotic and mushy. The
VSD was closed using a Teflon patch using interrupted pledgetted sutures placed well beyond the unhealthy septal myocardium surrounding the
VSD in the inferior half and incorporating the superior half in sutures used for LV closure, which was done in two layers using Teflon
bolsters on either side of ventriculotomy. The ruptured infarcted area of RV was incorporated in the suture line with the suture for
ventriculotomy closure coming out well beyond the macroscopically identifiable right limit of RV infarction. All sutures in septum, left
ventricle and right ventricle were placed through grossly uninfarcted myocardium. The distal half of the diagonal branch had to be
incorporated in the ventriculotomy repair as it was involved in the infarcted myocardium. Bypass was discontinued easily in sinus rhythm on
a small dose of ionotropes and IABP. Postoperative echo on 8/6/99 showed no residual VSD. He made satisfactory progress and was transferred
to the ward on 6th postop day and went home on 17/6/99, 10 days following his surgery. Left coronary angiogram (LAO view) showing occluded
LAD. Left coronary angiogram (RAO view) showing an occluded LAD just beyond the first septal and the first diagonal branches. He represented
on 14/7/99, 5 weeks after his previous VSD repair, from which he had been making satisfactory progress at home, with a 3 day history of
progressively worsening shortness of breath. Clinical picture was that of pulmonary edema. TTE showed large VSD with 3:1 L-R shunt and
moderate left ventricular function. He was taken to theatre and IABP introduced percutaneously through right groin. Femorofemoral bypass was
instituted through left groin and patient cooled to 17°C. Secondary median sternotomy was made and heart dissected out with considerable
difficulty. Aorta was not cross clamped and the previous ventriculotomy was reopened with the heart in VF. There was a recurrent VSD
occupying a position inferoposterior to the Teflon patch with a serpiginous extension of septal infarct inferiorly and posteriorly over a
wide area well beyond what was seen at the first operation, extending almost to the inlet of the trabecular septum. This was repaired using
a much larger Teflon patch, anchoring the superior margin of the patch to the inferior margin of the previous patch and stitching the
inferior margin well beyond the infarcted septum. This effectively excluded the entire area of the infarcted septum well beyond the VSD. The
anterior wall of right ventricle in its left half was scarred and thinned out. Ventriculotomy was closed in two layers patient rewarmed, and
bypass discontinued after heart defibrillated spontaneously into sinus rhythm. Postoperative echo on 21/07/99 showed a small L-R shunt and
significantly impaired biventricular function. Despite this patient made a surprisingly quick recovery and was transferred to the ward on
day 4 and home on 30/07/99. On 06/08/99 he represented to the Accident and Emergency with a 4 cm subcutaneous swelling in the lower part of
the sternal wound. This was incised, a small amount of pus drained which was sent for bacterial culture and the wound managed with daily
dressings. On 11/08/99 when he was making preparations for his discharge, he suddenly collapsed after a bout of exsanguinating haemorrhage
from the lower part of his sternal wound. He was resuscitated and transferred to theatre while bleeding was partially controlled by hand
pressure. Femorofemoral bypass was instituted and the sternum reopened with an oscillating saw and heart dissected out. There was a 3 cm by
3 cm rupture of the right ventricular free wall about 5 cm inferior to the pulmonary valve and 5 cm to the right of the previous
ventriculotomy repair. This was repaired directly using Teflon bolstered interrupted mattress sutures, on bypass, without cross clamp and
with the heart beating. Bypass was discontinued easily and patient made satisfactory postop recovery. A TTE revealed dyskinetic anterior
wall with moderate function elsewhere and no residual VSD and he was discharged home on 20/08/99. Except for a grumbling sternal wound for
which he underwent removal of top three sternal wires, patient remained symptomatically well and led a healthy outdoor life for the next
more than a year. On 01/11/00, 14 months after his last admission, however, a CT scan showed a large left ventricular aneurysm, involving
the entire anterior and apical surface of left ventricle and including the previous ventriculotomy repair. This had partially eroded through
left anterior chest wall and was lying under left pectoralis minor. An MR scan on 02/11/00 revealed a large left ventricular aneurysm
extending from diaphragm to the level of pulmonary bifurcation with extension of aneurysm through intercostal space into left pectoralis
minor. There was an area of fluid collection under the pectoralis minor which probably was altered blood secondary to a contained rupture of
the aneurysm. (Figs 3 and 4). A left ventriculogram on 23/11/00 confirmed a large left ventricular aneurysm involving more than half of the
total left ventricular cavity with moderate residual function, but with no evidence of active leak from the aneurysm (Fig 5). It was not
clear if LV aneurysmectomy would leave sufficient LV mass to sustain life in view of the sheer proportion of LV involved in aneurysmal
change. Heart transplantation was clearly not an option in light of sternal infection and multiple previous surgeries. MR scan showing left
ventricular aneurysm (arrow) and blood from contained aneurysmal rupture lying under pectoralis minor (small arrow). MR scan, lateral view,
showing LV aneurysm (large arrow), contained aneurysmal rupture(small arrow) and small LV cavity (posterior to LV aneurysm). Left
ventricular angiogram showing large aneurysm (catheter tip inside the aneurysm). On 26/12/00, however, he presented with a tense pulsatile
mass in the third left intercostal space extending to a sinus under mid sternum (Fig 6) followed later by slow bloody discharge from the
sternum (Fig 7). Faced with the prospect of exsanguinating haemorrhage from the chest wall eroding aneurysm, it was elected to surgically
intervene. The sternal skin was incised, the left pectoralis major was reflected upto mid axillary line and the left ventricular aneurysm
eroding through the third intercostal space was exposed (Fig 8). Femorofemoral bypass was instituted and secondary median sternotomy
performed. Heart was dissected out with difficulty and patient cooled to 18°C. The aneurysm involved almost the entire anterior and apical
surfaces of left ventricle and included the previous ventriculotomy repair. The aneurysm was completely excised, the Teflon of the previous
ventriculotomy repair and the clots within the aneurysm removed and the new left ventricle reconstituted employing linear closure using long
strips of Teflon on either side of ventriculotomy. Aortic cross clamp or circulatory arrest was not necessary. Patient made good recovery
and was weaned off ventilation, ionotropes and IABP over the next 3 days. Excised ventricular aneurysmal tissue grew coagulase negative
staph and staph epidermidis for which he received for the next 4 weeks followed by oral flucloxacillin for next 2 weeks. On 02/01/01, a
repeat MR scan showed significantly improved LV, no residual aneurysm and no residual VSD. He was discharged home on 02/01/01. Left
ventricular aneurysm with impending cutaneous rupture. Ruptured left ventricular aneurysm – a left ventriculocutaneous fistula. Pectoralis
major reflected to reveal left ventricular aneurysm eroding through intercostal space (arrow). He remained well till 25/02/01 when he
presented with 2 day history of shortness of breath, cough and haemoptysis. Examination revealed an inflamed and tender swelling in the
lower sternal area. MR scan on 26/02/01 demonstrated a large anterior mediastinal collection (Fig 9). It was not clear from the films if
there was any communication between either ventricle and anterior mediastinal clot or indeed the tracheobronchial tree. Meanwhile on
01/03/01, the subcutaneous swelling progressively increased in size and was close to bursting. It was felt this was once again an impending
rupture of heart and therefore, the regional transplantation team was contacted who felt heart transplantation would be inappropriate. The
patient was keen to have something done and he was transferred to theatre on 01/03/01. MR scan showing large anterior mediastinal collection
of clot and blood (arrow). The subcutaneous swelling over the lower sternum was aspirated and this was frank blood. Femorofemoral bypass was
established through left groin and patient cooled to 28°C. Left anterolateral thoracotomy was made through 4th space to avoid going through
the sternum the 5th time. The whole of the anterior mediastinum and the upper third of right hemithorax were filled with clot. After the
fresh clot was evacuated from the mediastinum, we were pleasantly surprised to find that heart was pristine clear with healthy previous
suture line and nothing to suggest rupture. Instead after sucking out clots from right hemithorax, it was clear there was ongoing fresh
bleeding from the apex of right lung. Visualisation of this was not possible from left thoracotomy and therefore sternum was reopened the
5th time. There was a large vascular adhesion at the apex of the right lung that had torn and both the pleural and parenchymal ends were
bleeding actively. There was an associated tear in the upper lobe of lung with a substantial air leak. The vascular adhesions were secured,
bleeding controlled and lung tear controlled with difficulty with sutures and glue. Bypass was discontinued easily but the sternum looked
quite unhealthy with substantial loss of bone and multiple fractures and I closed it with heavy ethibond in preparation for what I felt
would be an inevitable plastic repair in future. Patient made a good haemodynamic recovery but expectedly the sternum did not heal and there
was a persistent air leak from the right pleural drain. On 16/03/01, he was returned to theatre. Radical debridement of most of necrotic
sternum and 3rd to 7th costal cartilages was done. The patient was turned on the side and a large 10 cm × 27 cm musculocutaneous latissimus
dorsi flap was raised including a patch of lumbar fascia. Flap was passed under skin into sternal region. The flap was inserted into the
resultant sternal space, lumber fascia used to close off the abdominal cavity and a muscle tongue directed into the apex of right pleural
cavity to seal off the still persistent air leak. Patient was re-explored for bleeding underneath the patch on the same evening and
haemostasis secured from an arterial spurter from the bleeding bone. Postop course was complicated by persistent air leak which eventually
stopped on 18/04/01. Thereafter he made good recovery and was discharged home on 19/04/01 on long term antibiotics. His postoperative MR
scan showed no residual VSD, no LV or RV aneurysm and a healthy latissimus myoplasty (Fig 10) Postoperative MR scan showing latissimus dorsi
myocutaneous flap (arrow) covering the heart after sternectomy. There is no residual VSD and left and right ventricles are of normal size.
Patient remains well and has required no hospitalisations or operations since. His antibiotics were stopped on 04/03/02. He is seen in
outpatient clinic at 6 monthly intervals and leads a purposeful life and remains asymptomatic with a well healed sternal scar (Fig 11).
Sternal scar 5 years following sternectomy and reconstruction with latissimus dorsi myocutaneous flap. Post infarction VSD complicates
approximately 1% to 2% of patients after myocardial infarction and accounts for 5% of early deaths after myocardial infarction . The quantum
of right ventricular infarction is much greater in hearts with septal defects than in those without septal defects . A substantial right
ventricular infarction is common with postinfarction VSDs and contributes significantly towards cardiogenic shock and subsequent death .
However, right ventricular infarction is associated much less often with anterior VSDs than with inferior VSDs . Anterior VSDs constitute
60% of all postinfarction VSDs, usually as a complication of first acute MI, in patients with an acute occlusion of LAD with a relatively
poor collateral circulation with or without a concomitant right coronary stenosis and . Amongst anterior VSDs, there is evidence that a
rupture located more proximally is associated with a worse prognosis . Acute rupture of the free wall of the LV complicates 4% to 24% of
patients with acute MI. and is the second most common cause of death following acute infarction, next only to myocardial pump failure,
responsible for as many as 20% of early deaths . It is usually categorised as acute blowout generally not amenable to treatment, sub acute
rupture presenting commonly with cardiac tamponade and a chronic rupture with false aneurysm . In an autopsy series of patients of deaths
from AMI, cardiac rupture was present in 30.7% patients, with LV rupture in 98% (anterior wall 45%, posterior wall 38%, lateral wall 9% and
apex 6%) and RV rupture in 2% . Rupture of both ventricular free wall and septum is an unusual event. In a large series of 3284 patients
with AMI, double rupture was observed in 0.30% patients only, but in 3% of those with free wall rupture, and, interestingly, in 16.1% of
those with ventricular septal rupture . A ventricular septal rupture in the apical region was the greatest risk factor for free wall
rupture, although age, hypertension, ionotropes, thrombolytic agents, delayed reperfusion and reinfarction play a subsidiary role . However,
an RV rupture associated with an anterior postinfarction VSD is an extremely rare event with a few isolated case reports although combined
septal and biventricular free wall rupture repair has been successfully reported once . Our patient presented with an anteroseptal and right
ventricular infarction and pulmonary oedema with a large left to right shunt secondary to a large anteroapical VSD. There was a sub acute
oozing type of RV rupture with hemopericardium, the site of rupture being in the infarcted RV anterior wall below the outflow tract. The
rupture probably occurred just before his transfer to theatre, as his echo on admission showed only VSD and no pericardial effusion or
tamponade, and would correspond to the acutely deteriorated clinical state of anuria and shock just before surgery. Association of anterior
VSD with right ventricular rupture is an extremely rare event, having been previously reported only twice. This is not surprising in light
of the fact that, in most individuals, LAD supplies only small branches to the right ventricular free wall, one of the larger ones of which
anastomoses with the infundibular branches of the proximal right coronary artery forming the loop of Viuessens, which can be an important
route of collateral blood supply. The fact that acute occlusion of LAD in our patient, even though it was beyond the first septal, led to a
massive biventricular infarction, VSD, RV free wall rupture and delayed LV aneurysm and rupture points towards the "hyperdominant"role it
played in the blood supply of this heart. Arguably, it might have supplied important branches to right ventricle in the absence of a good
blood supply from RCA. The fact that PDA from RCA fell well short of apex leads one to believe that LDA, before occlusion, went all the way
round the apex and supplied distal posterior ventricular septum as well. The principles underlying surgery for postinfarction VSD include:
1) avoiding multiorgan damage by expeditious institution of cardiopulmonary bypass 2) transinfarct left ventriculotomy 3) a variable degree
of left, right and septal infarctectomy 4) generous use of prosthetic material in closure of VSD and ventriculotomy . Over the last 6 years,
there has been a move away from infartectomy. The rationale for infartectomy of the ventricles was a) the desirability of avoiding delayed
aneurysm formation or rupture at the infarcted ventricular suture line b) avoiding tearing of sutures through the ventricular suture line c)
improving exposure of the VSD . The purported rationale of infartectomy of the septum was the facilitation of placement of full thickness
sutures through indisputably viable septum. There is evidence, however, that extensive infarctectomy compromises ventricular function . The
endeavour to place full thickness sutures through normal septal muscle, besides, is rarely successful despite septal debridement owing to
complex, serpiginous and, quite often, wide involvement of the septum well beyond the visual boundaries of the VSD . Securing a patch of
pericardium or prosthetic material instead to the endocardium and partial thickness myocardium by means of interrupted or running sutures
well beyond the physical limits of either the VSD or the surrounding septal infarct excludes the infarct, remodels the acutely infarcted
left ventricle, avoids further damage to right ventricle, septum and papillary muscles through avoidance of full thickness tissue
strangulating sutures and enhances survival . Concomitant coronary artery surgery in patients with postinfarction VSD and single vessel
disease has been shown to confer no survival benefit . The results of concomitant CABG in patients with multivessel disease vary with no
statistical benefit in early mortality or actuarial survival in some series to significant benefit in terms of midterm mortality rates . Our
own results, which shall form the basis of a separate article, suggest indisputable benefit of revascularisation in patients with
multivessel disease. Interestingly, postinfarction VSD has been reported in the absence of coronary artery disease . Our patient underwent
exclusion of infarct and VSD using a large Teflon patch which was stitched to endocardium and partial thickness myocardium using interrupted
sutures. The superior 1/3 of the patch was incorporated in the Teflon bolstered ventriculotomy closure. Other minor modifications of infarct
exclusion have been described. These include use of GRF biological glue as a sealant between the patch and the infracted myocardium , use of
acrylic glue to reinforce the pericardial patch for VSD closure , use of two patches, one to close VSD and the other to exclude the
infarcted myocardium and GRF glue applied between the two patches . There have been occasional reports of repair of postinfarction VSDs on
beating hearts, the authors believing them to be of benefit in elderly patients . postinfarction VSDs have been repaired through right
atrium and right ventricle , almost exclusively these having been repairs of inferior VSDs, although trans-atrial mid septal rupture repair
has been described . Failure to wean from bypass following repair of postinfarction VSD has resulted in use of femorofemoral circulatory
assist with centrifugal pump which was, subsequently, successfully weaned . Addition of a bidirectional cavopulmonary shunt to the septal
repair has been described in a patient with severe right heart failure as an alternative to the use of a ventricular assist device . There
have been at least two reports of ventricular device failure in patients with postinfarction VSD without septal repair . Right to left
shunting across the VSD with hypoxic brain injury in a patient on HeartMate LVAD has been reported . In a report using Hemopump axial flow
device, 2 of 2 patients supported experienced lethal pump failure . A greater number of patients have had left ventricular assist devices as
bridges to subsequent heart transplantation following either intractable heart failure or failure to wean from bypass after postinfarction
VSD repair. The repair of postinfarction VSD continues to be associated with high mortality ranging from 13.4% to as high as 40.8% . The
NACSD 2003 reported a UK national mortality rate of 35.4% to 36.7%. Preoperative cardiogenic shock, early post infarction septal rupture,
deterioration of hemodynamic status between admission and surgery , right ventricular dysfunction , left main stem involvement, renal
failure, old age, posterior VSDs , proximal and not necessarily posterior VSD and prolonged CP bypass times remain important predictors of
grave prognosis. Many of the predictors are surrogates for the sheer size and extent of the initial infarct. The SHOCK multi-institutional
study which tracked 55 patients in cardiogenic shock with postinfarction VSD confirmed the toll this complication exacts with just 4%
survival rates with medical treatment and 19% survival with surgery . High operative mortality has sparked interest in percutaneous balloon
and percutaneous device occlusion using CardioSEAL septal occluder , Rashkind double umbrella and the Amplatzer muscular VSD occluder device
combined with multivessel stenting . Results of a recent US registry report suggest immediate mortality comparable with surgery using the
Amplatzer post infarct muscular VSD device (PIMVSD) in selected patients . Diagnosis of postinfarction VSD is an indication of immediate
operation. These patients die of multiorgan failure as a result of shock and not primarily due to cardiac failure, and supportive, expectant
management deprives a vast majority of patients of the benefits of surgery . Only 5% of patients survive medical treatment to undergo
delayed in hospital surgery and this dismal statistic fails to justify the often futile attempts at prolonged "stabilisation" of these ill
patients prior to surgery. Recurrent or residual septal defects are present in 10% – 25% of patients following initial repair . These are
due to overlooked defects, reopening of previously intact repairs, technical difficulty in repairing large, complex VSDs, development of new
septal ruptures or, rarely, due to the presence of an undiagnosed septal dissection . A septal rupture only 5 weeks after previous
postinfarction VSD repair can represent a new infarct but more commonly occurs as a result of the process of infarct extension. When patient
is symptomatic or shunt greater than 2:1, the VSD should be closed. Trans-catheter closure offers an alternative to reoperation in many of
these critically ill patients . Right atrial approach in posterior recurrent VSDs avoids hazardous dissection often around patent coronary
grafts and avoids further ventriculotomy on an already impaired ventricle . Left thoracotomy and re-repair under circulatory arrest
successfully has been described . Small residual or recurrent VSDs benefit from reoperation through standard secondary median sternotomy but
a new septal rupture with large left to right shunt is a catastrophic event with extremely high mortality. Successful orthotopic heart
transplantation has been described 3 months after postinfarction VSD repair with new septal rupture . Our patient presented suddenly with a
new septal rupture 5 weeks after his first postinfarction VSD repair, the immediate postoperative echoes showing no shunt. He was in
pulmonary oedema with a 3:1 shunt. The operation was done, through median sternotomy, under profound hypothermia without aortic crossclamp
or circulatory arrest using an oversized Teflon patch to exclude a VSD extending serpiginously inferoposteriorly from the previous repair.
RV free wall rupture has diverse etiology ranging from MI , medistinitis , high pressure suction drainage , indwelling catheter injury ,
blunt cardiac trauma , closed chest resuscitation , bone fragment penetration , minimally invasive CABG , severe lipomatosis , severe fatty
infiltration , chronic Chagas disease , Right ventricular dysplasia , etc. Our patient's right ventricular free wall rupture occurred 3
months after the RV infarct and was obviously predisposed to by acute regional thinning and dilatation of the previously infarcted RV wall
and possibly by an infected sternotomy wound communicating with anterior mediastinum in the xiphisternal area. Patient did not exsanguinate
because massive blood loss was prevented by covering the xiphisternum wound and yet he did not tamponade because substantial amount of blood
did find egress through the xiphisternal wound Over 95% of true LV aneurysms reported in English literature result from coronary artery
disease and MI . The rest arise from trauma , Chagas disease , sarcoidosis and congenital diverticula of LV . Of the aneurysms caused by
coronary artery disease, 86% are anteroapical or apical, 8.6% posteroinferior and the rest 5.3% lateral. Two, three or LAD coronary artery
alone were involved in 38.9%, 33.6% and 26.6% respectively . False aneurysms of LV occur 5 to 10 days after occlusion most commonly of
circumflex coronary artery following a contained LV rupture , or after contained submitral rupture of LV after MVR , or any surgery on LV or
aortic or mitral annuli , and finally from septic pericarditis . There are no reports of a true LV aneurysm eroding through the anterior
chest wall with slow rupture in literature either with or without previous postinfarction VSD repair. Combination of large anterior infarct,
3 previous operations and possibly the absence of a radical infarctectomy at the initial surgery contributed to the event. The
aneurysmectomy was done using femorofemoral bypass and systemic hypothermia to 18°C but without aortic cross clamp or circulatory arrest. A
2 cm rim of scar was left to allow a linear reconstruction but still there were concerns about the ultimate size of the residual left
ventricular cavity which, however, proved adequate. An aneurysm resection or patch that leaves a poststoperative LV enddiastolic volume of
about 150 mls is ideal . A postoperative echo suggested reasonable function in the residual left ventricle. The last presentation of the
patient with spontaneous rupture of a vascular adhesion between upper lobe of lung and the chest wall with associated tear of the lung,
filling the upper half of the right pleural cavity and the anterior mediastinum with a massive collection of blood mimicking cardiac
rupture, is again without precedent in reported literature. Four previous sternotomies in emergency and salvage settings with frequent
sternal wound problems would have been the substrates of a continuing and recurrent low grade mediastinitis which predisposed to this
unusual site and presentation of secondary hemorrhage. In light of the absence of conclusive MR evidence to the contrary, as also the
history of the frequent cardiac ruptures (thrice, first concomitant RV and VSR, second delayed RV free wall and third LV aneurysmal
rupture), there perhaps was a morbid bias towards expecting the worst. What was also interesting was the fact that the bleeding took place
into a space that normally would have gotten obliterated by adhesions postoperatively. Even though the right pleural cavity had been opened
at the previous aneurysmal repair, it was instructive to note that even 2 months after the previous surgery, the upper half of the right
pleural cavity was in free communication with anterior mediastinum. Five sternotomies over a relatively short period of time with continuing
infection set the stage for a mediastinal dead space and an infected non healing sternum and a continuing air leak. This required further
operative intervention when sternectomy and mediastinal debridement was combined with a latissimus dorsi myocutaneous transposition flap, a
tongue of the muscle being used to cover the lung tear. Omentum, pectoralis major, trapezius, rectus abdominis, latissimus dorsi have all
been used for reconstruction after mediastinitis . For reconstruction after total sternectomy with substantial infected mediastinal and
right pleural space, total latissimus myocutaneous flap on its supraclavicular arterial pedicle provided the ideal bulk to obliterate the
space and provide protection to the heart. Patient's oral antibiotics were continued in a rotating fashion almost a year into his last
discharge from the hospital. Patient leads a normal and productive life 5 years after his last discharge from the hospital. His latest
echocardiogram shows moderate LV function, no residual VSD and no LV or RV aneurysm. Was there a way of avoiding these multiple operations?
Only an extensive infartectomy of the entire anterior ventricular septum, the entire anterior and apical surfaces of left ventricle and at
least one third of the anterior wall of the right ventricle would have prevented recurrent VSD due to infarct extension, delayed rupture of
thinned RV wall and sternal erosion and rupture of LV aneurysm. This would have been in the realm of experimental surgery which he would
never have survived. Alternatively, a heart transplant would have been an option, but he would never have been accepted in the presence of a
correctable defect. At a time when surgeon specific mortality data for UK surgeons is freely available on the internet, and there are
growing concerns that surgeons might be forced to practice more defensively to protect their results, it is cases like this that help to
generate the hope that sometimes, albeit rarely, a surgeon is given a choice which, should he exercise it, shall invest his practice with
some focus, some purpose that transcends cynicism and fear. At a more philosophical and ethical level, this patient taught the author how
the indomitable will of one man to live can still defeat death, in its various guises. In an era when "do not resuscitate" orders are
becoming more and more frequent and when manager-driven, insurance-driven, media-driven and, frequently, industry-driven considerations,
ever so insidiously, under the posture of realism and practicality, compete to affect our clinical judgements and dictate our choices, it is
patients like these and surgical decisions that they impel us to make, such as these, that make our surgical journeys meaningful and
substantial. I am grateful to Professor Mohan Sivanathan (consultant in cardiac imaging and intervention), Stuart Powell (Medical
Illustration Unit) and James Peckover (IT deptt), all at Leeds General Infirmary, for their help with imaging. I am indebted to all the
anaesthetists and the trainee surgeons at the Infirmary who helped me in the multiple salvage operations this patient needed.
