Benign metastasizing leiomyoma (BML) is composed of well-differentiated smooth muscle cells and dense connective tissue. BML affects middle-
aged women who have had previous hysterectomies due to a histologically benign-appearing uterine leiomyoma. We report here on a case of BML
from the uterine leiomyoma in a 39-year-old woman that involved the soft tissues, skeletal muscles, lungs and breasts. She underwent a
hysterectomy for the uterine leiomyoma, double oophorectomy for hormonal ablation and lung wedge resection to confirm the diagnosis. The
microscopic findings of the breast and lung tumor were similar to those of the benign uterine leiomyoma. Therefore, we consider that these
lesions were breast and pulmonary metastases of the uterine leiomyoma. We report here on a rare case of benign metastasizing uterine
leiomyoma that involved the soft tissue, skeletal muscles, lungs and breasts, and we include a review of the relevant literature. Benign
metastasizing leiomyoma (BML) was first identified by Steiner in 1939, and as he believed it to be a primary lung neoplasm, BML was first
referred to as fibroleiomyomatous hamartoma. About 100 cases have been reported in the literature through 20031). The term refers to a type
of lesion that is characterized by well-circumscribed, singular or often multiple nodules of proliferating smooth muscle cells in the lungs
of women who have a history of hysterectomy. Such lesions have commonly been reported in young premenopausal women whose resected uteri have
displayed leiomyomatous alterations without any indication of malignancy. Most women are diagnosed after an incidental abnormal chest
radiograph. Because both the benign uterine tumors and the pulmonary tumors have been found to depend on the estrogen/progesterone status,
this tumors' growth is mainly hormone dependent2). Hormone-level changes that occur during pregnancy and menopause may have an affect on the
general course of the disease. We report here on a rare case of multiple BML in a woman with a history of uterine myomectomy that involved
her soft tissue, skeletal muscle, lungs and breasts. A 39-year-old woman was referred to our hospital. At the age of 19, she was treated for
miliary pulmonary tuberculosis because multiple pulmonary nodules were found on her chest radiograph, although she had no symptoms. At the
age of 31, she was diagnosed uterine leiomyoma, but she was not treated; four years later, she underwent myomectomy. At the age of 39, she
visited a local clinic due to bilateral, multiple small nodular lesions that were seen on a chest radiograph and both breasts had palpable
breast masses. She had undergone excisional biopsy of the breast before being referred to our hospital. The patient was asymptomatic on
admission to our clinic, but bilateral, multiple small nodular lesions were still noted on the chest radiograph (Figure 1). There was no
abnormality on the physical examination, and her breathing sounds were clear. A complete blood count, blood chemistry, c-reactive protein,
arterial blood gas analysis and pulmonary function test were all within the normal ranges. The serum levels of tumor markers including
alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) antigen and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), CA19-9, CA-125 and CA15-3 were within the
normal ranges. The chest radiograph showed multiple, variable-sized nodules in both lungs, suggesting hematogenous metastasis (Figure 1A).
Chest CT scans with intravenous contrast enhancement demonstrated multiple well-enhancing masses in both breasts (Figure 1B), the left
pectoralis minor muscle (Figure 1C), and the right infraspinatus muscle (Figure 1D). A CT scan obtained with a lung window setting showed
multiple variable-sized nodules in both lungs, which suggested hematogenous metastasis (not shown). We initially planned to treat her with
progesterone under the clinical impression of BML or lymphangioleiomyomatosis (LAM). However, the follow-up chest radiologic findings showed
progressive disease, and so we performed a hysterectomy, bilateral oophorectomy and wedge resection of the lung for the purpose of both
treatment and diagnosis. The pathologic findings of the lung, breast (Figure 2A), and retroperitoneal tissue showed nodular proliferations
of spindle cells. The tumor showed occasional mitotic activity (4-7/50HPF) (Figure 2B), but no nuclear atypia, hemorrhage or necrosis.
Immunohistochemial staining of the lung mass showed a positive reaction for smooth muscle actin and a negative reaction for thyroid
transcription factor-1 (TTF-1), a 10% positive cell area with a weak intensity for estrogen receptor, a 95% positive cell area with a strong
intensity for progesterone receptor and a low mitotic index (less than 5%) for Ki-67. After surgical hormonal ablation, she was prescribed
tamoxifen. Follow-up chest radiography (Figure 1E) showed the decreased size of the multiple nodular lesions. This response has been
sustained until the present. In 1939, Steiner first proposed the contradictory term of benign metastasizing fibroleiomyoma. This mainly
occurs in the uterus, but it can occur in other locations such as skin, lung, trachea, bladder, esophagus, liver and adrenal gland.
Leiomyoma is a benign tumor of well-differentiated smooth muscle tissue and vascular collagenous tissue, and it mainly occurs in the uterus.
BML has been described as originating from a uterine smooth muscle tumor of unknown malignant potential, but because of the limits of
histopathologic testing, this tumor cannot easily be classified as having a malignant potential3). This disease is common in middle-aged
women. Bachmann and Wolff reported that BML occurs in 36- to 64- (average 44-) years-old women and it shows variable clinical courses from
chronic inactive lesions to acute respiration distress syndrome (ARDS) followed by death4). The chromosomal abnormalities associated with
BML have been difficult to characterize. Approximately 25% of the uterine leiomyomas may have a balance translocation, the most common of
which are t(12;14)(q13-15;q23-24), del(70q21.2q31.2), trisomy 12 and rearrangements of 6p5). Tietze et al. have reported a case of BML in
which tumors from both the uterus and lung were characterized as being monoclonal smooth muscle proliferations with identical X-chromosome
inactivation and a balanced karyotype; this is very consistent with a clonal metastasizing process6). Pulmonary tumors in BML can be treated
with bronchoscopic resection, conservative pulmonary surgery and hormonal manipulation. Surgical hormonal management can be accomplished
with performing bilateral oophorectomy. The medical hormonal management includes the use of luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue,
tamoxifen, progesterone, and aromatase inhibitors. Because of the limited number of therapeutic options, the use of new drugs or new
therapeutic modalities should be considered. The recent interest in the c-kit expression in low-grade leiomyosarcoma and gastrointestinal
stromal tumor has led investigators to explore using the novel tyrosine kinase inhibitor, STI571 (Gleevec, Novartis Pharmaceuticals, Basel,
Switzerland). STI571 has been reported to suppress the expression of c-kit, abl and platelet-derived growth factors. The histologic
similarities between low-grade leiomyosarcoma and BML led us to test for c-kit (CD117) because we thought that the presence of c-kit
expression in BML may be of academic interest. However, the c-kit was negative in this case. The treatment modalities for BML are
administering progesterone, medical castration using luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone analogue, bilateral oophorectomy, radiation
therapy to the ovary and chemotherapy. It is thought that progesterone down-regulates the estrogen receptor so that estrogen is less active.
Because our patient's radiographic findings did not show regression despite progesterone therapy, she underwent a hysterectomy with
oophorectomy for achieving surgical hormonal ablation. When possible, a combination of medical and surgical treatment has to be considered
to arrive at an effective therapeutic plan. We report here on a rare case of BML with multiple metastasis in the soft tissue, skeletal
muscle, lungs and breasts. Radiologic findings of benign metastasizing leiomyoma in a 39-year-old woman. The chest radiograph (A) shows
multiple, variable-sized nodules in both lungs, suggesting hematogenous metastasis. Chest CT scans with intravenous contrast enhancement
demonstrate multiple, well-enhancing masses in the left breast (B, arrow), the left pectoralis minor muscle (C, arrow), and the right
infraspinatus muscle (D, arrow). The follow-up chest radiography (E) showed the decreased size of the multiple nodular lesions. Breast (A,
H&E stain ×200) showed nodular proliferation of smooth muscle cells. The tumor shows occasional mitotic activity (4-7/HPF) (B, H&E stain
×400), but no nuclear atypia, hemorrhage or necrosis.
