Necrotising Fasciitis is a life threatening soft tissue infection which requires aggressive, early surgical management. We present a rare
case of a retroperitoneal perforation of a carcinoma of the caecum presenting as a necrotising fasciitis of the anterior abdominal wall.
This case highlights the importance of early aggressive debridement to healthy tissue limits, the consideration of a rare underlying cause,
and the scope for plastic surgical reconstruction in order that aggressive initial surgery can be adequately performed. Necrotising
Fasciitis is a life threatening soft tissue infection which requires aggressive, early surgical management. The precise aetiology of
necrotising fasciitis is unclear in many cases. We present a rare case of a retroperitoneal perforation of a carcinoma of the caecum
presenting as a necrotising fasciitis of the anterior abdominal wall. A 52 year old male presented with a one week history of discomfort and
swelling in the right iliac fossa, and 12 hours of skin erythema which was rapidly progressing. Within 2 hours of assessment, the cellulitis
was noted to have spread outside the boundaries marked on admission. He was hypotensive, tachycardic, febrile and noted to have an elevated
white cell count. On examination of the area there was diffuse oedema of the skin with marked erythema and heat in the area of skin from the
right loin to groin across to midline. Subcutaneous crepitus was present. A lateral abdominal X-Ray revealed free gas within the
subcutaneous tissues (Fig. 1). A presumed diagnosis of necrotising fasciitis was made and the patient commenced on intravenous antibiotics,
resuscitated with intravenous fluids, and taken immediately to the operating theatre. Extensive debridement of the affected cutaneous,
subcutaneous tissue, and muscle was performed and pus noted to extend to the right loin area. Histology and bacteriology confirmed a
diagnosis of necrotising fasciitis, with a β-haemolytic group streptococcus cultured. Exploration revealed a retroperitoneal abscess arising
as a result of a perforation of a caecal carcinoma. The caecum was resected and a right hemicolectomy performed, with a large defect
resulting in the anterior abdominal wall from the extensive debridement (Fig. 2). The patient was admitted to the intensive care unit for
inotropic support and management of sepsis, and 2 days later proceeded to have a rectus femoris myocutaneous flap fashioned to close the
defect in the abdominal wall. He made a good post-operative recovery, with adequate skin closure on the abdominal wall (Fig. 3), and was
discharged from hospital 8 weeks post-operatively. The patient subsequently died at home, from a myocardial infarction, five months after
surgery. Informed consent for publication and use of images had been received from the patient and his family. Retroperitoneal, or psoas,
abscess is an unusual problem, which has insidious and occult characteristic. There are often delays in the diagnosis of retroperitoneal
abscess due to its insidious nature, and it frequently extends beyond the peritoneum before being identified. Even in those cases with
contamination from the gastro-intestinal tract, the course appears relatively benign. Retroperitoneal abscess rarely results from
perforation of the colon as most perforations occur into the peritoneal cavity. Those that perforate into the retroperitoneum rarely result
in formation of a psoas abscess. Conversely, necrotising fasciitis is a soft tissue infection associated with high morbidity and mortality.
Necrotising soft tissue infections have been recognised and reported for centuries the earliest dating back to Hippocrates in the 5th
century BC. A rapidly progressive soft tissue infection (synergistic undermining gangrene) caused by the synergistic action of a
β-haemolytic group streptococcus +/- staphylococcus, was described in 1924 by Meleney. Wilson subsequently re-termed this observed
phenomenon as necrotising fasciitis, in 1952. Necrotising fasciitis is rare within the UK with an estimated at 500 new cases each year,
however this is difficult to confirm, as different eponyms are given to describe the same condition, as outlined above. The aetiology of
necrotising fasciitis is not fully understood, with patients often having a history of trauma, including insect bites, scratches, or
abrasions. However in some cases no primary cause can be found. Patients that have pre existing conditions which increase susceptibility to
infection seem to be at an increased risk of developing necrotising fasciitis these conditions include diabetes mellitus, peripheral
vascular disease, chronic renal failure, drug misuse, and advanced age. The cornerstone of management of necrotising fasciitis is recognised
as being aggressive surgical debridement and intensive support, whilst other severe soft tissue infections do not necessarily require the
same amount of aggressive debridement. Therefore it is important that clinicians are able to differentiate between the two. Necrotising
fasciitis should be considered in those patients who have rapidly progressing cellulitis, and palpable subcutaneous crepitus, in association
with tachycardia, hypotension, neutropenia or neutrophilia, and hyponatraemia. Adjuvant diagnostic tools for necrotising fasciitis include
CT scanning and plain radiography. In this case the clinical finding of crepitus, and soft tissue air on plain radiograph were both present,
however these signs are only seen in 37% and 57% of patients respectively. The finding of necrotising fasciitis of the anterior abdominal
wall associated with a carcinomatous perforation of the colon is rare, having only previously been described with perforation of a sigmoid
colon carcinoma directly adherent to the anterior abdominal wall. In addition, this case is unusual in that retroperitoneal abscesses have
been described to track along psoas, or through the obturator foramen to give swellings in the thigh or gluteal region, but not to give rise
to infection of the anterior abdominal wall. This case illustrates that the principles of management should be two-fold; 1) To rapidly and
unequivocally control infection and sepsis through extensive radical debridement of necrotic tissue and; 2) Identify and treat any
underlying condition giving rise to the infection, in this case removing the caecal tumour. Intravenous antibiotics should be started
promptly and modified when sensitivities return. However, it is essential to ensure that adequate necrotic material is removed at the first
opportunity to reduce the risk of further progression, regardless of the defect that will remain. Defects may be closed using a variety of
techniques, including split skin grafts, Vacuum Assisted Closure (VAC) therapy, and flap procedures, including myocutaneous flaps .
Hyperbaric oxygen therapy in the treatment of necrotising fasciitis remains controversial, conflicting studies have reported contradicting
results as to potential benefits. Early recognition of important signs of necrotising fasciitis is essential to effective management of this
condition, and clinicians assessing patients with rapidly progressive cellulitis should be aware of these vital features. In cases
presenting with necrotising fasciitis there should be consideration given to an underlying cause for the infection. Aggressive surgical
management is the cornerstone to management of this condition, and is the key to survival for these patients. This case demonstrates that
extensive debridement can be performed with resulting large defects, which can be adequately closed at a later time, and therefore this
should not be thought of as a barrier to adequate surgical debridement and definitive treatment. The author(s) declare that they have no
competing interests. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript. CM was involved in the conception for the idea
for the report, and was involved with the diagnosis, operative, and post-operative management of the patient. He is responsible for
preparation of the manuscript for submission GMcA was responsible for up to date literature review, re-writing of manuscript prior to
submission, gaining of consent for use of images, and management of the patient. MR was responsible for ward care of the patient, review,
and re-writing of manuscript prior to submission. SS was the senior consultant Plastic Surgeon responsible for the patients operative
management and post-operative care and was involved in review and alteration of the manuscript prior to submission. RM was the Senior
Consultant General Surgeon involved with operative and post-operative management of the patient and was responsible for critical review of
the manuscript prior to submission. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Lateral Abdominal X-Ray demonstrating
subcutaneous gas within the abdominal wall. Extensive debridement of abdominal wall leaving small bowel and kidney exposed. Defect in
abdominal wall closed using rectus femoris myocutaneous flap.
