Intracranial cavernous angiomas are benign vascular malformations and can be divided into intra-axial and extra-axial lesions. Extra-axial
cavernous angiomas are relatively rare and usually arise in relation to the dura mater and mimick meningiomas. We report a case of cavernous
angioma that occured in the falx cerebri of a 22-yr-old female patient with the special focus on neuroradiologic findings. This is the
fourth case of cavernous angioma in the falx cerebri reported in the literature to our knowledge. The cavernous angioma, also known as the
cavernous malformation or cavernoma, is one of the vascular malformations characterized by the presence of sinusoid-like capillary vessels
containing blood in very sluggish circulation (1). Intracranial cavernous angiomas are mostly parenchymal lesions and extra-axial cavernous
angiomas are relatively rare, accounting for only 0.4 to 2% of all intracranial vascular malformations (2). Extra-axial cavernous angiomas
usually arise in relation to the dura mater intracranially or at the spinal level and often mimick meningiomas. Most of these lesions have
been found in the middle fossa at the level of cavernous sinus and they are rarely found in other dural locations outside the middle fossa.
Other dural locations include the tentorium, the convexity, the anterior cranial fossa, Meckel's cave, the cerebellopontine angle, the
sellar turcica, internal auditory canal, and cranial nerves (2-4). Only 3 cases of cavernous angiomas originated from the falx cerebri have
been reported in the literature (3, 5, 6). We report a case of cavernous angioma occured in the falx cerebri with the neuroradiologic
features, which is the fourth case to our knowledge. A 22-yr-old female patient presented with an episode of generalized tonic-clonic type
seizure. She had no focal neurologic deficit. Computerized tomography (CT) scan showed a 5×6-cm, well-defined, and lobulating iso-
attenuation mass in the right frontal region with dense and scattered calcifications. The mass showed mild enhancement following contrast
media administration (Fig. 1). Magnetic resonance image (MRI) showed an extra-axial lobulating lesion abutting on the right to the falx with
slightly hypointense signal intensity on T1-weighted image (T1W) and mixed hyper- and hypointense signal intensity on T2-weighted image
(T2W). Following administration of gadolinium contrast agent, mass showed heterogeneous enhancement with dural tail sign. Multiple dot-like
and linear signal voids were also seen in the mass (Fig. 2). Angiography showed the displacement of anterior portion of the both anterior
cerebral arteries to the left side. No definite abnormal capillary blush or malformed vessels was seen on the right external cerebral artery
or internal cerebral artery angiography (Fig. 3). There was no abnormal hot uptake lesion in the brain Thallium201 SPECT scan. When the dura
was opened, thickening of the dura was noticed. The surrounding brain parenchyma was gliotic and stained yellowish by hemosiderin. The mass
was originated from the falx, having a various consistency from soft to hard with areas of thrombosis and calcifications. Even though the
lesion was highly vascular, there was no difficulty in bleeding control and it was totally excised en bloc using microsurgical techniques. A
histologic examination showed numerous large, dilated, blood-filled vessels lined by a flattened endothelium with a single cell layer, and
marked calcification within the mass as well. Vascular channels were separated by fibroconnective tissue stroma. The vascular spaces within
the lesion were predominantly occupied by numerous capillaries (Fig. 4). Histopathologically, intracerebral and extra-axial cavernous
angiomas seem to be identical lesions. Cavernous angiomas consist of abnormally dilated, thin-walled vascular channels with walls composed
of collagen lined by a layer of endothelium. Surrounding brain parenchyma is often gliotic and hemosiderin-stained and the lesions may
contain feeding arteries and draining veins of slow flow. It can vary from a small petechial lesion of a few millimeters to a larger, well-
circumscribed, ''mulberry-like'' hemorrhagic mass of many centimeters in size (1, 2, 7, 8). Intracranial cavernous angiomas are generally
found in middle-aged women (3), though its cause is uncertain. Previously reported 3 cases of cavernous angiomas of falx cerebri were found
in 47, 62, and 63-yr old women (3, 5, 6), respectively. Though there is no specific neuroradiologic finding for extra-axial cavernous
angiomas, the MRI pattern was known to reflect the histological appearance (7). The most common form of MRI findings such as speckled mixed
intensity may reflect vascular lumens, their thromboses, and calcifications in the lesion. Intra-axial cavernous angiomas usually have a
multifocal hyperintense center surrounded by a hypointense rim which results from the blood products in different stages of evolution (1,
9-11). However, the characteristic peripheral low-signal rim is usually absent in extra-axial cavernous angiomas, and this was true in our
case. Extra-axial cavernous angiomas also have been reported as a soft mass often with a pseudocapsule that is formed by the dura mater,
mimicking meningiomas. Guermazi et al. (12) demonstrated that dural tail sign could be rarely seen in cavernous angioma from the dura in the
cerebral convexity, and differential diagnosis from meningioma is even more difficult to eliminate when the dural cavernous angioma shows a
dural tail. In our case, dural tail sign and calcifications were very prominent (3, 13). In intracranial cavernous angioma, angiography
usually reveals the flecked lesion stain at middle arterial to late venous phases due to slow blood flow, delayed stain, or an avascular
mass. The sunburst of vessels radiating outwards from the central vascular pedicle, a typical finding of meningiomas, was reported that it
was not found in cavernous angioma (3, 6, 8). Only an avascular mass effect was present in our case. Little is known about the role of
Thallium201 SPECT in the diagnosis of cavernous angioma. Seo et al. (14) reported that Thallium201 SPECT is useful in diagnosis of cavernous
sinus hemangioma, presenting low uptake within the tumor in contrast to meningioma or malignant tumors which present high uptake due to
increased tumor viability or tumor blood flow. The uptake of Thallium201 within the brain is associated with tumor viability and tumor blood
flow, and is much higher within meningiomas than malignant tumors. In this case, no definite abnormal Thallium201 accumulation was observed,
as same as the result of Seo's study. In relation to the surgery of cavernous angioma at the cavernous sinus, bleeding was reported to be a
major problem and preoperative differential diagnosis of extra-axial cavernous angioma from meningioma may be most important. However,
little blood loss was reported in the surgery of cavernous angiomas of the falx cerebri (6). In our case, blood loss was only a little, and
total removal was achieved without difficulty. No adjuvant therapy was required during the follow-up period. We reported a very rare case of
cavernous angioma that occured in the falx cerebri which was successfully removed, with special interest on its neuroradiologic features.
Pre- (A) and post contrast (B) CT scans show a well-defined, lobulating, iso-attenuation mass in the right frontal region with dense and
scattered calcifications in the central and peripheral regions, respectively. The mass shows no definite enhancement except for anterior
falx enhancement following contrast media administration. Axial T2-weighted magnetic resonance (MR) (A) and coronal T1-weighted MR
gadolinium-enhanced (B) images show an extra-axial, lobulating lesion abutting on the right side to the falx cerebri with heterogeneous
enhancement with dural tail sign, CSF cleft, and cortical buckling. Multiple dot-like and linear signal voids are also seen in the mass. On
cerebral angiography, the anterior portion of the bilateral anterior cerebral arteries are displaced to the left side. There are no definite
abnormal capillary blush or malformed vessels on the right external cerebral artery or internal cerebral artery angiography. Low-power
photomicrographs showing various thrombosis and calcifications within the cavernous vascular spaces. Also noted are thin-walled vascular
channels with little intervening brain (H&E, ×100).
