Western bioethics is insufficient, say the authors, to solve the problems created by the adoption of allopathic medicine in non-Western
contexts. Over the past decade, several scholars have advocated for international standards in medical ethics and human rights . Others have
countered that such standards risk ignoring important cultural differences in the way people conceptualize medical decision-making . Within
this debate hangs a question for international bioethics: as developing countries build allopathic medical systems, what should their
bioethics be? In this essay, we explore possible answers to this question, ultimately arguing that Western bioethics is insufficient to
solve the problems that arise in the practice of allopathic medicine in non-Western contexts. As an example, we discuss recent conflicts
over the use of mechanical ventilators in Thailand. Thailand is a center of cutting-edge allopathic medical care in Asia. It has a universal
health-care system, which provides many Thais with access to mechanical ventilation. So many Thais are placed on mechanical ventilators at
the end of life that it has become one of the largest drains on Thailand's universal health-care system . Furthermore, the use of
ventilators has become a source of vehement national debate, mostly as a result of several prominent political figures who received overly
aggressive medical care at the end of life . As in Western hospitals, the ascension of mechanical ventilation has introduced a host of
difficult ethical dilemmas for doctors, families, and patients . How will Thais go about solving these dilemmas? On which principles of
bioethics will they rely? (Photo: Scott Stonington) To answer these questions, we start with a case that illustrates a common ethical
dilemma about withdrawal of mechanical ventilation in Thai intensive care units. We then explore some concepts from Western bioethics to see
if they help resolve this dilemma. Finally, we explain some of the local ethics behind the case and discuss the concept of a Thai bioethics
to address the use of ventilators in Thailand. The following fictional case is based on 30 ethnographic interviews and two months of
participant-observation fieldwork by one of us (SS) in 2005. The case contains themes that arose frequently during this research. Gaew, a
39-year-old Thai construction worker, falls from a scaffold and hits his head on the pavement. He is unconscious by the time he arrives at
one of Bangkok's cutting-edge emergency rooms. He is intubated and placed in the intensive care unit. Gaew's physician, Dr. Nok, informs
Gaew's brother, Lek, that Gaew has little chance of recovery due to his lack of brain activity. Lek does not know what to do—he wants to
give his brother the best care possible, but he knows his brother is suffering. He would like to remove Gaew's ventilator. Dr. Nok replies
that this is impossible because it is unethical to remove ventilators. Very few physicians in Thailand withdraw ventilators from patients .
They have a complex array of reasons for declining to withdraw ventilator support, including their medical training, fear of litigation, and
belief in the sanctity of life. As with most Thai physicians, Dr. Nok's refusal to withdraw the ventilator is explicitly Buddhist. The first
precept of Buddhism forbids killing. Other Buddhist doctrines teach that the last part of the body to die is the breath. For a Thai Buddhist
physician, pulling out a patient's ventilator may feel like pulling out the patient's soul. If Dr. Nok withdraws Gaew's ventilator, she will
necessarily have “ill-will” or “repugnance” in her mind . In Buddhist terms, Dr. Nok's own karma is at stake. Karma is a moral law, central
to lay Thai Buddhism, which describes chains of cause and effect that result from individual behavior. Actions generate either merit or
demerit, and the balance of these two currencies determines one's spiritual future . If Dr. Nok's mind contains ill-will or repugnance, she
will accrue demerit, which will negatively affect her in this and future lifetimes. Neither Lek nor Dr. Nok ask what Gaew would have wanted
in his current situation. They do not ponder this question because in lay Thai Buddhism, the self is seen as different from moment to
moment—so Gaew is not the same person now as he was ten days ago. To Dr. Nok and Lek, an advance directive seems ludicrous. How could a
person know what he would want years later, in a different state of consciousness ? Dr. Nok is ready with a strategy for circumventing their
dilemma. She tells Lek that together they must help Gaew “let go.” She explains that it is Gaew's mental attachments that are keeping him
alive and suffering on the ventilator. When Dr. Nok says “attachments,” she uses the Thai word for “knot of problems” (bpom bpan ha),
implying a gnarled set of worries tangling Gaew's mind and keeping him from achieving mental clarity and letting go of life. She asks Lek
what Gaew might be worried about. Lek replies that Gaew wanted to ordain as a monk before dying. Although they cannot know what is in Gaew's
mind in his new state of consciousness, this is a possible element in his “knot.” Dr. Nok suggests that Lek go to Bangkok and ordain as a
monk for several days in Gaew's stead, then return to tell Gaew what he has done. She explains that even though Gaew has little brain
activity, when all of the senses subside, the spirit may still take in sound . She hopes that when Gaew hears about his brother's
ordination, he may let go and die with the ventilator still attached and running. This way, she and Lek can relieve Gaew's suffering without
compromising their karma. There has been a recent fervor of discussion in many Western medical schools about culture and bioethics . Medical
students and physicians are being trained in “cultural competence” to help them handle a culturally diverse society. This training usually
focuses on prototypic cases meant to exemplify particular cultural or ethnic groups. In general, it is assumed that the principles of
Western bioethics—autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence, truth-telling, and justice—are universal. Different cultures are seen as
emphasizing these principles differently, rather than as operating on unique principles of their own. A classic example, taught in many
United States medical schools, is the story of the “Asian” elder who comes into the hospital, and whose son says “please, do not tell my
father that he has cancer.” Most Western physicians would analyze this situation as follows: the son believes that knowing about the illness
will hurt his father; the son values beneficence (doing what is best for the patient) over autonomy (the patient's prerogative to make
decisions for himself) and thus wants to conceal the illness from his father. In this analysis, the principles of bioethics are held to be
universal—the son's culture simply makes him value these principles in a unique proportion. (Photo: Scott Stonington) This approach proves
unhelpful in understanding Gaew's case. Dr. Nok's refusal to remove the ventilator is not based on Gaew's wishes; it is not based on what is
best for Gaew; and it is not about what is most truthful, or what is best for Thais as a whole. None of these fundamental principles of
Western bioethics—autonomy, beneficence, non-maleficence, truth-telling, or justice—sufficiently explain Lek and Dr. Nok's dilemma. Even
though the hospital taking care of Gaew is a center of allopathic medicine—a form of medicine grown out of the West—it is nonetheless a zone
governed at least partially by non-Western bioethical principles. A tool central to the practice of bioethics in Western hospitals is
delineating between different kinds of dilemmas. The most widely read textbook of bioethics in the West, by Beauchamp and Childress,
distinguishes between at least three kinds of dilemmas: (1) ethical dilemmas, where two ethical principles dictate opposite actions; (2)
self-interest dilemmas, where the decision-maker's own self-interest conflicts with a decision dictated by an ethical principle; and (3)
practical dilemmas, where something logistical prevents an ethical decision from being enacted . Making these distinctions is often the
first task that a physician must complete during an ethics consult. One must separate the entangled needs of doctors and family members from
the ethical principles that determine how to treat a patient. So what kind of dilemma are Lek and Dr. Nok confronting? Are the principles
governing their behavior ethical, practical, or self-interested? Take, for example, Dr. Nok's reason for not withdrawing the ventilator: to
do so would be revoking a patient's life. At first, this sounds like an ethical principle, a kind of non-maleficence. But on closer
inspection, the principle beneath her action diverges significantly from non-maleficence. In a Buddhist framework, killing is ethically
wrong because it defiles the mind of the killer. Even if Dr. Nok thinks that withdrawing the ventilator is the most compassionate thing for
Gaew, it would be spiritually disadvantageous for her. As one Thai physician explained, “it may be the best thing for the patient [to
withdraw the ventilator], but how could you find someone who would do it?” A Thai physician would not want to take the risk of acquiring
spiritual demerit. It would then be tempting to say that Dr. Nok's situation represents a self-interest dilemma. An ethical
decision—compassionately relieving suffering by removing the ventilator—is in conflict with Dr. Nok's concern for her own spiritual fate.
But this interpretation also breaks down because the precise thing that would generate demerit for Dr. Nok is ill-will toward Gaew. In a
Buddhist ethical framework, it is impossible to withdraw a ventilator with beneficent intent. In Dr. Nok's case, self-interest and ethical
duty are so intertwined as to be indistinguishable. The distinction made between self-interest and ethical dilemmas collapses. The first
task of a Western ethicist—to determine the type of dilemma at work—proves an impasse in Gaew's case. The fact that a Western bioethical
approach fails in Gaew's case may be an indication of the limitations of the “one-size-fits-all” bioethics used in Western hospitals as much
as it is an illustration of local differences in ethical reasoning (Damien Keown, personal correspondence). Western bioethics is a young
discipline, and draws on only a minority of the rich history of Western ethical philosophy . Nonetheless, the conceptual tools of Western
bioethics dominate policy, law, bureaucracy, and physician decision-making in Western hospitals. These concepts are beginning to have weight
in policy-making in Thailand . Gaew's case makes it clear that one must examine local ethical concepts before uncritically importing Western
bioethical tools. Dr. Nok's solution to Gaew's end-of-life is instructive as an introduction to what a Thai bioethics might look like. Dr.
Nok and Lek cannot remove Gaew's ventilator, and yet their compassion and duty demand that they relieve his suffering. They circumvent this
dilemma by helping Gaew to let go of his life peacefully. This strategy has a positive effect on the karmic fate of everyone involved. They
relieve Gaew's suffering. Lek acquires merit by ordaining as a monk. These decisions are based on the logic of karmic morality. They also
illustrate the Buddhist principle of interdependence. Interdependence means that doctors, patients and relatives must think about the
emotions and interests of all parties involved in a medical decision. This is in contrast to the Western concept of autonomy, which allows a
patient to make decisions without consideration of the feelings and responsibilities of other people concerned. Dr. Nok's solution to Gaew's
end-of-life is not just for Gaew, it is also for herself and for Lek. It is an ethics of compassion that must relieve the suffering of all
people concerned. One of us (PR), as a member of a team of Thai scholars, has worked for the last ten years to develop an applied ethics
using principles such as karma, compassion, and interdependence . In the West, the main purpose of a country-wide policy is to resolve
conflicts between individuals over medical decisions. However, because the concept of interdependence is so central for most Thais,
Thailand's bioethical policies may differ dramatically from those found in the West. The purpose of this exploration has been to illustrate
the need for Thailand and other countries to develop bioethical systems using local concepts. It would be a mistake, however, to leave our
analysis of Thai bioethics without considering the term “Thai.” This has long been a problem with writings on “Asian values” or “Asian
thinking.” In this article, we have emphasized Buddhism as a major ethical system, but it is one of many such systems engaged in decisions
about the end-of-life in Thailand. Buddhist monasteries, lay Buddhist organizations, advocates of medical technology, public health
officials, and lobbyists for the booming medical tourism industry are all engaged in vehement debate over what should guide Thailand in
making medical decisions . As with other countries, Thailand is not a place with a single ethics. In the same way that one cannot import
concepts from the West to solve dilemmas in Thailand, one cannot haphazardly select a view within Thailand and label it as “Thai.”
Nonetheless, there is an urgent need for solutions to the “ventilator problem”—both to patch the failing universal health-care system and to
help Thais make difficult decisions about intervention at the end-of-life. Thailand is just beginning the long process of integrating its
multitude of local voices and concepts into nationwide ethical standards. This new Thai ethics promises to be much more effective at solving
Thailand's ethical problems than tools imported uncritically from the West. This research was made possible by the University of California
Pacific Rim Research Program and the University of California San Francisco Office of International Programs. I would like to thank Warapong
Wongwachara for translation, insight, and comments in all phases of fieldwork. I would like to thank Gay Becker, Vincanne Adams, China
Scherz, Olivia Para, Sherry Brenner, and Damien Keown for help with this manuscript. Scott Stonington is in the Department of Anthropology,
History and Social Medicine and the Department of Internal Medicine, University of California San Francisco, San Francisco, California,
United States of America. Pinit Ratanakul is Director of the College of Religious Studies, Mahidol University, Bangkok, Thailand. Competing
Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this article.
