Left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) is a fearful complication of acute myocardial infarction in which a swift diagnosis and emergency
surgery can be crucial for successful treatment. Because a significant number of cases occur subacutely, clinicians should be aware of the
risk factors, clinical features and diagnostic criteria of this complication. We report the case of a 69 year-old man in whom a subacute
left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) was diagnosed 7 days after an inferior myocardial infarction with late reperfusion therapy. An
asymptomatic 3 to 5 mm saddle-shaped ST-segment elevation in anterior and lateral leads, detected on a routine ECG, led to an urgent bedside
echocardiogram which showed basal inferior-wall akinesis, a small echodense pericardial effusion and a canalicular tract from endo to
pericardium, along the interface between the necrotic and normal contracting myocardium, trough which power-Doppler examination suggested
blood crossing the myocardial wall. A cardiac MRI further reinforced the possibility of contained LVFWR and a surgical procedure was
undertaken, confirming the diagnosis and allowing the successful repair of the myocardial tear. This case illustrates that subacute LVFWR
provides an opportunity for intervention. Recognition of the diversity of presentation and prompt use of echocardiography may be life-
saving. Left ventricular free wall rupture (LVFWR) is a dramatic complication of acute myocardial infarction (AMI) and is presumably
responsible for as much as 20 to 30% of all infarct related deaths . Given the widespread use of reperfusion therapy, particularly
mechanical reperfusion, the rate of occurrence as well as its classical clinical characteristics may have changed in the last one or two
decades. However, the relatively consistent decrease in the autopsy rates probably renders its incidence under-reported . Even considering
that the occurrence of LVFWR may be substantially lower when a primary PCI can be performed , its incidence has been estimated to range from
0.7 to 8% and still, although rare, it appears to be 8 to 10 times more frequent than other fearsome mechanical complications of MI such as
papillary muscle or interventricular septum rupture . Historically, the first clinical reference to post-infarction left ventricular wall
rupture was reported by William Harvey in 1647 , but it wasn't until 1972 that Fitz Gibbon and Montegut conducted the first successful
operation for the correction of LVFWR due to ischemic heart disease . We describe the case of a 69 year-old patient with sub-acute
"contained" LVFWR which was successfully treated through surgical correction. The diagnosis was preliminarily established by bedside
transthoracic echocardiography, driven by an unexpected change on a routine ECG. The patient was a 69 year-old caucasian male with recently
diagnosed diabetes and a history of non-disabling stroke several years before. There was no record of hypertension, hypercholesterolemia,
tobacco use or previously known coronary artery disease. Importantly, he was not taking any cardiovascular medication, including ASA. The
patient first presented to the emergency department of a referral hospital complaining of lower chest pain and vomiting. The ECG showed no
signs of acute ischemia and, as biomarkers of myocardial necrosis tested negative, the patient was discharged with no further evaluation.
During the next days, chest pain persisted and, on day five after the initial symptoms, he went back to the emergency. At that time the ECG
showed inferior pathological Q waves, slight (~1 mm) ST-segment elevation and biphasic T waves on the inferior leads and a test for cardiac
troponin I was positive. The patient was admitted with the diagnosis of subacute inferior myocardial infarction with recurrent angina and
anti-thrombotic and anti-ischemic medications (including low molecular weight heparin and GP IIb/IIIa inhibitors) were started. Due to the
persistence of chest pain the patient was referred for urgent coronary catheterization, which was performed at our institution on day five
after symptom onset. Angiography showed a critical stenosis of the right coronary artery with TIMI 2 grade flow, with no other significant
coronary lesions. An angioplasty procedure with deployment of a drug-eluting stent was successfully undertaken and the patient transferred
to the CCU for routine monitoring. On day seven after the first chest pain episode, clinicians were surprised by a new and persistent 4 to 5
mm ST-segment elevation affecting leads V1 to V5, I and aVL (Figure 1). The patient's clinical status remained remarkably stable as he
experienced no recurrent chest pain, heart sounds could be eared clearly, there were no murmurs or bruits and blood pressure was in a
somewhat expected range (~120/80 mmHg), considering that pressure lowering drugs had been newly introduced in incremental dosage. Serial
evaluation of biomarkers of myocardial necrosis showed no increase relative to earlier post-PCI values, but white cell counts and CRP levels
were both slightly elevated. At this point, a bedside transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was performed, showing a global small-to-moderate
echodense pericardial effusion, somewhat larger in the posterior and inferior aspects of the heart, with no signs of tamponade (Figure 2 and
Additional file 1). There were no regional wall motion abnormalities of the anterior wall and, in addition to basal inferior-wall akinesis,
a canalicular tract from endo to pericardium was seen along the interface between the necrotic and the normal contracting myocardium (Figure
3, Additional file 2, Additional file 3, Additional file 4). Power-Doppler evaluation additionally suggested an abnormal blood leak across
the inferior LV wall (Figure 4, Additional file 5) and, on the basis of these findings, a LVFWR was suspected. While the transoesophageal
echocardiogram with intravenous echocontrast brought no further input, cardiac MRI images (Figure 5) corroborated the TTE findings and
reinforced the diagnostic suspicion of LVFWR, leading to urgent surgery. After pericardiotomy and cloth evacuation there was a significant
increase in the systemic blood pressure, suggesting that tamponade might have been impending. The myocardial tear was identified and
successfully repaired with a tephlon band supported suture technique. Recovery was uneventful allowing hospital discharge 5 days after the
operation. Two years after the event the patient is still alive and leading a normal life. Surface 12-lead ECG on day 7 after the first
episode of chest pain showing inferior Q-waves, "saddle-shaped" ST segment elevation and PR segment depression. 2D-Echo: apical four-chamber
view showing a small global echodense pericardial effusion. 2D-Echo: apical two-chamber (A) and parasternal short axis (B) views showing a
myocardial tear in the left ventricular inferior wall. 2D-Echo: apical two-chamber view with Power-Doppler suggesting blood flow across the
inferior myocardial wall. Cardiac MRI in short (A) and long (B) axis views showing pericardial effusion (large arrows) and thinning and
dissection of the left ventricular inferior wall (small arrows). As previously mentioned, mechanical complications of acute MI, including
LVFWR, apparently tend to become less frequent in day-to-day practice, at least in part due to the our growing ability to deliver safe and
effective reperfusion therapies (both pharmacological and mechanical) to a wide range of MI patients. The time frame for the occurrence of
LVFWR may vary widely. In the pre-thrombolytic era incidence peaked between days 5 and 7 after the MI, but rupture has been reported to
occur as late as one month or even beyond . Traditionally, factors considered to increase the risk of LVFWR would include advanced age (6th
decade or later), female gender, hypertension without left ventricular hypertrophy, delayed or no reperfusion, the anterior location of the
AMI, no prior angina, a first myocardial infarction, poor collateral circulation to the infarct related area, use of NSAIDs or steroids
during the acute phase, and high serum levels of C-reactive protein . Although cardiac rupture following AMI cannot be explained by any
single factor, in this particular case, variables predicting the anticipated risk of cardiac rupture were related mainly to treatment delay
and patient's age. Gender differences regarding the outcome after AMI have been well established, and even in the direct PCI (d-PCI) era,
female sex has still been reported to be an independent predictor of LV rupture . Despite being theoretically more probable in the inferior-
lateral wall, it seems that the fact that anterior infarcts are more common, renders anterior wall ruptures more frequent . However, a
thorough literature review showed that, in the specific case of subacute LV wall rupture, inferior infarctions seem to be involved in the
majority of the cases . It has been stated that this might be due to the fact that patients with anterior wall ruptures may be less
protected because blood tends to accumulate and to form adherent cloths in the posterior-inferior wall . Despite age and general clinical
status would have made this patient eligible for on site reperfusion therapy, absence or delay of timely reperfusion (owing to late
diagnosis) was perhaps the major risk factor for LVFWR. The reported decrease in the incidence of MI-related cardiac rupture in the
thrombolytic and subsequently in the d-PCI era is relatively consistent. Regarding the absolute risk of mechanical complications, there is
general agreement in that any reperfusion is better than no reperfusion. However, perhaps particularly in elderly patients, the relation
between the use and the timing of thrombolytic treatment (which is the most widely used reperfusion strategy) and the risk of LV rupture,
has been matter of concern . This is due to the fact that up to 30% of MI patients arrive to the hospital later than the optimal time-frame
for thrombolysis to be potentially beneficial . Although still controversial, there is evidence to suggest that, contrary to data provided
by previous reports and post-hoc analysis of pivotal clinical trials , neither thrombolysis itself nor the time delay to thrombolytic
treatment actually seem to increase the absolute risk of LVFWR. In the LATE trial , Becker et al. found no significant differences in the
incidence of LVFWR in patients treated with a rt-PA based regimen within the 6 to 12 hour period after symptom onset and those randomized to
the active treatment arm between 12 and 24 hours. However, there was a significant interaction between the assignment to active treatment
and the time of rupture occurrence, as thrombolysis appeared to accelerate rupture events, typically to within 24 h after treatment .
Several possible mechanisms underlying this paradoxical effect of fibrinolysis have been proposed, such as extension of myocardial
hemorrhage, weakening and dissection of the necrotizing zone , diminishing of the myocardial collagen content , and digestion of collagen by
collagenases and plasmin . Whether or not d-PCI would have similar effects has been recently examined in a retrospective analysis of a
single centre registry of 1250 patients treated with d-PCI. In the 12 patients who had LV rupture (including free wall rupture and VSD),
this complication occurred somewhat later than with thrombolysis, but earlier than that reported for non-reperfused patients . The relative
advantages of PCI versus lytics in this high risk group of patients have been evaluated in the SENIOR-PAMI trial . In this yet unpublished
study, 483 patients aged ≥ 70 years old were randomized to primary PCI or thrombolysis; despite a small difference favoring PCI, it failed
to significantly reduce the 30-day mortality rate (10% vs 13%), thus suggesting that the incidence of fatal mechanical complications could
have been quite similar. However, as the overall reduction in the incidence of the composite endpoint of death, MI or stroke favored PCI
over thrombolysis (11.6 vs 18%; p = 0.05), this study might have been underpowered to evaluated the benefits of PCI in isolated hard
endpoints such as MI-related death. When the acute form of LVFWR occurs, it usually results in an abrupt haemodynamic collapse with cardiac
tamponade and electromechanical dissociation. Death ensues in a matter of minutes to hours in the large majority of cases, as
cardiopulmonary resuscitation maneuvers are uniformly unsuccessful. Less frequently, in up to one third of the cases, the rupture can be
sealed by the epicardium or by a haematoma on the epicardial surface of the heart, forming a "LV diverticulum" or contained myocardial
rupture. This situation represents a subacute pathologic condition standing somewhere between free rupture into the pericardial cavity and
formation of a pseudoaneurysm . This much less spectacular scenario – gradual or "oozing type" rupture – may evolve over hours or even days,
and presents mainly with pericardial effusion related signs and symptoms. Myocardial free wall rupture should be suspected in patients with
recent MI who have recurrent or persistent chest pain, sometimes of the pericardial type, haemodynamic instability, syncope (resulting from
transient electromechanical dissociation), and pericardial tamponade. New ST segment changes ("saddle shaped ST-segment elevation") may be
the chief clinical manifestations . In fact, electrocardiographic findings in LV rupture patients may be related to its type and severity.
Electromechanical dissociation (with a diagnostic accuracy that reaches 97%) and bradycardia are features of the acute variety, while new
ST-elevation in the affected leads or persistent non-inversion of T-waves may suggest the less noisy "stuttering" type of rupture . In this
setting, interventions that can dramatically change prognosis can be employed, as long as an accurate diagnosis can be timely established.
Clinical course depends mainly on the rate of bleeding and the compliance of the pericardial sac. Signs of restricted ventricular filling
may be absent if the effusion develops slowly enough and bleeding ultimately subsides . In a scenario of relatively low threshold for
clinical suspicion, the unexpected ECG changes were the key to the diagnosis. Otherwise, patient was only to be exposed to the natural
history of the disease which, at this point, may be rather unpredictable . In our institution, the risk stratification protocol after an
acute MI includes an echocardiographic examination. However, unless a complicated clinical course ensues, it is performed only after the
patient has stepped down to the ward. Thus, no additional investigations were to be made at that time. In those who are haemodynamically
unstable, which was not the case of our patient, right heart catheterization will usually provide useful information and may help in the
differential diagnosis with other life threatening complications, such as VSD. In the typical patient, right atrial pressure will be
comparable to pulmonary capillary wedge pressure . Emergency pericardiocentesis has the potential for the identification of haemopericardium
and relief of cardiac tamponade. Despite rarely seen in the acute MI setting, cardiac tamponade may be caused by serous or serohaemorrhagic
pericardial effusions; also, the risk of chamber puncture and the theoretical possibility of "thrombus displacement" and "decompression" of
the contained rupture, can, not only hamper the diagnostic accuracy of pericardiocentesis, but also make it potentially harmful. Given these
considerations, we strongly feel that this procedure should not be "routinely" used as a diagnostic tool and should be kept for situations
of absolute need for tamponade relief . If a mechanical complication is suspected, emergency bedside transthoracic and/or contrasted
transesophageal echocardiograms are considered the gold standard diagnostic tools . Pericardial effusion is the most common finding, usually
with echodense intrapericardial echoes. The absence of pericardial effusion in a patient with AMI excludes the diagnosis of myocardial
rupture, but its presence as an isolated finding in this context does not definitively confirm the diagnosis. Right atrial and right
ventricular wall compression as well as Doppler signs of a compromised ventricular filling, can also be identified by 2D echocardiography.
Direct signs of rupture like a myocardial tear, as in this case, will be seen only occasionally . In a prospective study involving 1247 MI
patients (33 with subacute LV rupture), the presence of cardiac tamponade, pericardial effusion greater than 5 mm, high density
intrapericardial echoes or right atrial or right ventricular wall compression had a high diagnostic sensitivity (≥ 70%) and specificity (≥
90%). Despite data reporting on high positive predictive values of intrapericardial echoes and echocardiographic signs of tamponade alone,
still the number of false-positive findings for every single variable may be relatively high (>20%) . However, when combined with syncope,
in the appropriate clinical setting, their diagnostic accuracy may reach 100% . In our case, Doppler examination suggested an abnormal
intramyocardial tract, but could not definitely demonstrate active bleeding into the pericardium. The detection of blood flow at the site of
rupture may not be feasible in many cases, as the myocardial tear is most often anfractuous and sometimes covered by thrombi and thus blood
flow velocities may be low. Despite the potential ability of contrast echocardiography to decrease the number of false-positive diagnoses –
by showing leakage of contrast from the left ventricle into the pericardial effusion – it was of no help in our patient. The role of new
imaging techniques in this setting, such as cardiac MRI, although promising, remains observational and anecdotic . Trials assessing the
relative value of echocardiography and high resolution CT scans or cardiac MRI are limited not only by clinical, but also by obvious ethical
and logistic issues. The wide availability of ultrasound makes this technique "difficult to beat" in the clinical ground, as the expensive
technology and expertise needed for cardiac MDCT or MRI imaging are not promptly available in the majority of the hospitals, even in those
where cardiac surgery is promptly available. Nevertheless, we should emphasize the high grade of concordance between echocardiographic and
MRI images (Figure 4 and Figure 5). Although MRI had, in our case, a paramount importance in the establishment of the diagnosis and in the
decision to proceed to surgical treatment, standard and/or contrast enhanced echocardiograms, in expert hands, will generally be trusted as
the ultimate diagnostic tools. Despite cases of a fairly good long term survival following a conservative approach have been described ,
there is general agreement in that surgery provides the only potentially definitive treatment option and that the diagnosis of subacute
LVFWR usually requires a surgical decision . However, the finding that patients presenting with LV pseudoaneurisms might have survived to
subacute forms of LV rupture (with only mild hypotension or asymptomatic pericardial effusions) may argue against the absolute need for
surgery, suggesting that a conservative management can be an acceptable choice in carefully selected patients, namely those at high surgical
risk. One prospective study reported a 44% survival rate among MI patients with confirmed or strongly suspected LVFWR who survived
resuscitation maneuvers after electromechanical dissociation (EMD) or presented only with hypotension without EMD and were treated
conservatively. However, in this study there wasn't a surgically treated group suitable for comparison and the possibility of other causes
of cardiac tamponade could not be definitely ruled out. Medical management included pericardiocentesis as needed, prolonged bed rest and
strict control of LV pressure (preferably with beta blockers) and avoidance of obstipation. Blinc et al., in a retrospective analysis,
reported much poorer results with a survival rate of only 10% . Intra-aortic balloon pumping has also been employed effectively in unstable
patients unresponsive to inotropic agents and fluid replacement but some have found its use to be debatable, unless persistent ischemia
and/or LV pump failure also ensues . The very high surgical risk, which can be unacceptable if the procedure is to end up as "blank"
sternotomy, is the major drawback posed to surgeons. Thus, all efforts should be made to confirm the diagnosis in order to reduce the number
of false positives. The goals of surgery are to stop bleeding, to relieve cardiac tamponade and to prevent a second rupture. When possible,
off-pump sutureless techniques using biocompatible glues and patches to cover the necrotic/ruptured area are increasingly being preferred to
infarctectomy and direct myocardial suture, and are thought to yield better results . However, some reports have suggested that inferior-
lateral ruptures – as in the case of our patient – may be adequately treated with direct suture. Coronary artery bypass grafting is also
indicated as needed. Emergency coronary angiography in order to determine which coronary arteries to bypass is warranted in the subacute
setting, although the possibility of proceeding directly to surgery and perform empirically based bypassing of all of the major epicardial
coronary arteries as also been described . Despite high perioperative mortality rates (33 to 55%), a rather well preserved post-procedure
left ventricular function, as well as a fairly good functional long term prognosis are increasingly being reported . This case illustrates
that LVFWR is not always fatal especially in patients with the subacute form of presentation, which occurs in about one third of the cases.
The diagnosis can be made accurately using bedside echocardiography, as long as clinicians are aware of the risk factors, clinical signs and
other subtle manifestations, such as ECG changes. Because the clinical course is unpredictable, excessive confidence in the stability of the
patient can be misleading and even fatal. Considering that surgery yields fairly good immediate and long term results, we feel that surgical
treatment should be promptly advised to most patients regardless of the clinical status, unless the diagnosis is doubtful and the surgical
risk is unacceptably high. PCI – Percutaneous Intervention CRP – C-Reactive Protein MRI – Magnetic Resonance Imaging NSAIDs – Non-Steroid
Anti-Inflammatory Drugs The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. LR was responsible for the initial clinical assessment
of the patient and diagnostic workup, performed the literature review and wrote the manuscript. MJA performed the bedside echocardiogram,
participated in the drafting, and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. JF and CA participated in the clinical
assessment of the patient and diagnostic workup, and revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. RC revised the document for
important intellectual content. MC performed the transesophageal echocardiogram. NJT performed the cardiac MRI. MA performed the surgical
procedure. JAS gave final approval to the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Movie 1 – 2D-Echo: Subcostal view
showing echodense pericardial effusion. Echoes correspond to blood cloths and/or fibrin. Click here for file Movie 2 – 2D-Echo: Parasternal
short axis view showing a myocardial tear in the left ventricular inferior wall. Click here for file Movie 3 – 2D-Echo: Two-chamber view
showing the myocardial tear in the left ventricular inferior wall. Note that it is particularly evident during diastole. Click here for file
Movie 4 – 2D-Echo: Magnified two-chamber view showing the myocardial tear in the left ventricular inferior wall. Note that it is
particularly evident during diastole. Click here for file Movie 5 – 2D-Echo: Apical two-chamber view with Power-Doppler suggesting blood
flow across the inferior myocardial wall. Click here for file
