Progressive non-infectious anterior vertebral fusion is a unique spinal disorder with distinctive radiological features. Early radiographic
findings consist of narrowing of the anterior aspect of the intervertebral disk with adjacent end plate erosions. There is a specific
pattern of progression. The management needs a multi-disciplinary approach with major input from the orthopaedic surgeon. We report a
12-year-old-female with progressive anterior vertebral fusion. This occurred at three vertebral levels. In the cervical spine there was
progressive fusion of the lateral masses of the Axis with C3. Secondly, at the cervico-thoracic level, a severe, progressive, anterior
thoracic vertebral fusion (C7-T5) and (T6-T7) resulted in the development of a thick anterior bony ridge and massive sclerosis and thirdly;
progressive anterior fusion at L5-S1. Whereas at the level of the upper lumbar spines (L1) a split cord malformation was encountered. Situs
inversus visceralis was an additional malformation. The role of the CT scan in detecting the details of the vertebral malformations was
important. To our knowledge, neither this malformation complex and nor the role of the CT scan in evaluating these patients, have previously
been described. The constellations of the skeletal abnormalities in our patient do not resemble any previously reported conditions with
progressive anterior vertebral fusion. We also emphasise the important role of computerized tomography in the investigation of these
patients in order to improve our understanding of the underlying pathology, and to comprehend the various stages of the progressive fusion
process. 3D-CT scan was performed to improve assessment of the spinal changes and to further evaluate the catastrophic complications if
fracture of the ankylosed vertebrae does occur. We believe that prompt management cannot be accomplished, unless the nature of these bony
malformations is clarified. Progressive non-infectious anterior vertebral fusion is a unique spinal disorder with distinctive radiological
features. Early radiographic findings consist of narrowing of the anterior aspect of the intervertebral disk with adjacent end plate
erosions. There is a specific pattern of progression. The management needs a multi-disciplinary approach with major input from the
orthopaedic surgeon. The child was referred to our department at the age of 12 years because of progressive thoraco-lumbar kyphoscoliosis
and progressive limitations of neck movement (fig 1). She was born at full term, the product of an uneventful gestation. At birth her
length, weight, and OFC were around the 10th percentile. The mother was a 27-year-old-healthy woman, gravida 1 abortus 0, married to a
32-year-old unrelated man. At birth the parents observed a patch of hair over the lumbar region, and the child was investigated for this. A
split cord malformation was identified, but the parents refused further interventions. At the age of 9 years the parents observed marked
worsening of the spinal tilting and problems in bending over. Her head movements became difficult, particularly flexion, and this was
accompanied by pain, more marked in the occipital and suboccipital regions. Walking a distance was difficult. Her subsequent course of
development has been described as within the normal limits, except for a moderate delay in motor development. There was no history of
serious illnesses. Physical examination at the age of 12 years revealed; short stature. Her height was 121 cm (-3SD) and her head
circumference was 53 cm (+2SD). She was of normal intelligence, and neurological examination, apart from a neuropathic bladder was
unremarkable. Hearing and vision were normal. Stiffness of the neck was noted, with limitation of neck movement, particularly in flexion.
Musculo-skeletal examination showed relative ligamentous hyperlaxity in the limbs, normal hands and feet, and the skeletal survey did not
reveal limb abnormalities. The spinal column showed; severe, rigid, thoraco-lumbar kyphoscoliosis (fig 2, 3, 4, 5, 6). Laboratory tests
included hematological indices, urine screening for metabolic abnormalities, karyotype (for the child and her parents) and rhematological
screening. These were all normal and the HLA B-27 was negative. Family history was unremarkable. Parents were reluctant to give any relevant
information. Progressive, non-infectious anterior vertebral fusion is a rare disorder; which is often referred to as the Copenhagen syndrome
. In the classical form, there may be a characteristic anterior defect in the affected vertebrae from shortly after birth, associated with
narrowing of the anterior part of the disc space. This is accompanied by erosion and irregularity of the anterior end plates, and when the
process of narrowing progresses with age, there is eventual disc space obliteration and bony ankylosis anteriorly, via a thick bony ridge .
It is important, to differentiate progressive non-infectious anterior vertebral fusion from the congenital form of block vertebrae, firstly
by its clinical history and secondly, by using CT scanning (fig 3, 4, 5) Scoliosis and kyphoscoliosis in children can occur either in
isolation or as a part of a number of syndromes. Spinal malsegmenatation occurs in many of these syndromes, and this includes
spondylocarpotarsal synostosis, spondylothoracic dysplasia, and other rare conditions . All of these disorders have characteristic patterns
of vertebral malformation, such as a posterior unsegmented spinal bar, congenital block vertebra, carpal and tarsal malformations . Knutsson
et al., and others reported children with progressive anterior vertebral fusion as the only malformation, and in none was this part of a
syndrome. Hughes et al., reported three children with progressive fusion, and other congenital and developmental abnormalities. However,
there were no distinctive clinical or radiological features signifying a syndromic association, apart from one child, who presented with
spinal dysraphism, but neither cervical vertebral fusion nor situs inversus visceralis were described. Philip et al. described involvement
of both the upper thoracic (T2-T5) and lower thoracic (T10-S1) vertebrae, associated with radio-ulnar synostosis, exostosis, short and broad
clavicles, and a balanced t(10;20)(p11;p13) translocation. There was no cervical vertebral fusion, spilt cord malformation or situs inversus
visceralis. Farrior et al., described a male child with progressive vertebral fusion of the cervical, thoracic, and lumbar vertebrae, with
additional manifestations, such as absence of one cervical vertebra, clefting of the vertebral bodies, and other few minor non-spinous
abnormalities. The overall features were different from these found in our patient. Fryns et al., , described a child who presented with
progressive anterior vertebral body fusion, and other abnormalities such as a generalised overgrowth, especially of the hands and feet, and
unusually thick skin and subcutaneous tissue of upper and lower limbs. There was facial dysmorphism. These features were not seen in our
patient. Tubbs et al., reported split cord malformation in association with Klippel-Feil syndrome, and another child presented with split
cord malformation and situs inversus totalis and scoliosis. They focused on the possibility that defects of the midline and laterality
defects (situs inversus) are etiologically related. However, the reported patient manifested congenital blocked vertebrae and not the
progressive condition as described here (fig 3, 4, 5, 6). McRae and Barnum reviewed 25 patients who presented with atlanto-occipital fusion.
They found a bony continuity between the anterior arch of the atlas and the anterior lip of the foramen magnum. However, it is uncertain
given the absence of sophisticated imaging techniques whether the bony continuity was because of progressive fusion, or was congenital.
Situs inversus was not documented. Kalifa et al., described the nature of progressive non-infectious vertebral fusion, in which the lesions
involved mainly the anterior end plates and sparing the posterior parts, whereas in congenital vertebral blocking (failure of segmentation)
it usually involves the posterior part of the disk. The constellations of the skeletal abnormalities in our patient do not resemble any
previously reported conditions with progressive anterior vertebral fusion. We also emphasise the important role of computerized tomography
in the investigation of these patients in order to improve our understanding of the underlying pathology, and to comprehend the various
stages of the progressive fusion process. 3D-CT scan was performed to improve assessment of the spinal changes and to further evaluate the
catastrophic complications if fracture of the ankylosed vertebrae does occur. We believe that prompt management cannot be accomplished,
unless the nature of these bony malformations is clarified. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. All authors
contributed to this work and all read and approved the final manuscript. A A: Was responsible for, writing the manuscript, Conception and
design and data analysis. F B C, and M B G: Data analysis. F G and K K: Conception and design. The pre-publication history for this paper
can be accessed here: We wish to thank Dr. Michael Baraitser (Institute of Child Health-Clinical and Molecular Genetics-University College
London) for his unlimited help. And we thank Dr. Marwa Hilmi, West Hertfordshire Hospitals, Watford Herts, UK, for her technical help. We
also thank the patient's family for their cooperation and a written consent was obtained from the patient's family for publication of study
Lateral radiogram showed the severe kyphosis. Early stage of progressive vertebral fusion in which C4-C6, showed progressive anterior disc
narrowing and end plate irregularities (arrows; a-b), whereas (arrow c) showed the development of a thick anterior and posterior bony ridge.
End stage of the progressive anterior vertebral fusion and the multi-level anterior fusion with disc space obliteration (T1-T5). There is a
massive bony ridge extending anteriorly and in some vertebrae, posteriorly as well. However, (arrow b) note the sparing of the disc space
posteriorly, whereas the anterior end plate is totally obliterated (arrow a). Absence of the normal concavity of the anterior body surface.
There is a proliferation of sclerotic bone. 3 d reconstruction CT scan showed the massive anterior fusion of (C7-T5) and (T6-T7), and the
apparent anterior thick bony ridge (arrow), the latter developed secondary to progressive ossification of the anterior longitudinal
ligament. from T7-T12; note the narrowing of the anterior part of the disc space, accompanied by erosion and irregularity of the anterior
end plates. Note sparing of the lumbar spines and progressive anterior fusion of L5-S1, and the exaggerated lumbar lordosis secondary to
massive fusions of the thoracic vertebrae. sagittal MRI imaging showed a split cord malformation, atthe level of L1, with a bony bar at the
L1 level. It also revealed situs inversus visceralis. MRI imaging of the brain did not show any abnormality, and sagittal MRI of the
cervical region did not reveal any Arnold-Chiari malformation. Other imaging studies such, as echo-cardio-Doppler was normal. The pelvic
ultrasound showed normal ovaries, uterus and vagina, and renal ultrasound showed a normal genito-urinary system.
