Plasma cell granuloma (PCG) of the lung is a rare disease that usually presents as a pulmonary nodule or mass on incidental radiographic
examination without symptoms. Although the etiology of PCG is still controversial, many findings have lent support to the lesion being a
reactive inflammatory process rather than a neoplastic one. We describe a 53-yr-old male who presented with a hemoptysis and have a lung
mass at the left upper lobe on chest radiograph. The lung mass was primarily diagnosed as PCG by percutaneous needle aspiration and biopsy,
and the patient was treated with oral steroid because he and relatives refused the operation. However, the size of the lung mass did not
change and open thoracotomy and lobectomy were done therefore. He was confirmed as having pulmonary actinomycosis with PCG after surgery. To
our knowledge, this is the first report of PCG associated with actinomycosis in Korea. Plasma cell granuloma (PCG) is uncommon lesion
consisting of spindle cells and mononuclear inflammatory cells (1). The lung is the most common site of such lesions, which are frequently
detected incidentally on chest radiograph as a solitary lung mass or nodule in asymptomatic patients. Symptomatic patients may complain of
cough, chest pain, fever, hemoptysis, and dyspnea (2). PCGs of the lung can occur in any age group, but over half of the patients are less
than 40 yr of age. Usually, PCG has been confirmed after surgery for the treatment of lung mass. It most likely represents a non-neoplastic
inflammatory reaction to a previous pulmonary infection, but no specific infectious agent has yet been directly linked to PCG (1, 3).
Pulmonary actinomycosis is also rare chronic suppurative inflammatory disease that is caused by Actinomyces species. We herein present an
interesting and very rare case of PCG probably associated with pulmonary actinomycosis. A 53-yr-old male visited the emergency room with
hemoptysis of 10 days' duration. He had type II diabetes and had been treated with oral hypoglycemics for one year. He had a personal
smoking history of 60 pack years. His vital signs and routine blood tests were nonspecific. Simple chest radiograph and computerized
tomography demonstrated a well demarcated 3×2 cm-sized heterogeneous mass with central cavity and peripheral spiculation in the left upper
lobe (Fig. 1A, B). The bronchoscopic findings were nonspecific except for the blood clots impacted into the lingular opening. Percutaneous
needle aspiration and biopsy were done for tissue diagnosis, and the findings were compatible with PCG (Fig. 2). The patient and relatives
refused the operation and he was treated with oral prednisolone at the dose of 1 mg/kg/day for 4 weeks. However, the size of the pulmonary
mass did not change after the steroid therapy (Fig. 1C, D). Open thoracotomy and lobectomy were done thereafter. The surgical specimen
showed a 2×2.5 cm-sized lesion in the resected left upper lobe that was composed of central solid components with surrounding necrotic and
fibrotic tissues. The lesion demonstrated the characteristic sulfur granule peripherally lined with squamous epithelium and the neutrophils.
Gomori methenamine silver staining showed lots of dark-stained and rod-shaped Actinomyces (Fig. 3). The peripheries of the specimens
obtained by lobectomy was microscopically composed of spindle-shaped cells and inflammatory cells. Immunohistochemical studies of the lung
tissues were performed to clarify the nature of the spindle-shaped cells, which were positive for CD68 and negative for muscle specific
actin. The patient was confirmed as having pulmonary actinomycosis with PCG, and he was treated with 20 million units of penicillin G per
day for 4 weeks and then oral amoxicillin for 6 months. He completely recovered without any complication. Actinomycosis is a chronic
suppurative infection due to Gram positive, nonspore-forming, anaerobic or microaerophilic bacteria, Actinomyces species (4-7). Although
Actinomyces can be a part of the normal oral flora, these are considered to be pathogenic if they invade beyond the mucosal barrier.
Pulmonary actinomycosis is a rare condition, but it is an important and challenging diagnosis to make. Even when the clinical suspicion is
high, the disease is commonly confused with other chronic suppurative lung diseases and with malignancy (4). Sputum and bronchoscopic
diagnostic work up for the pulmonary actinomycosis can not be useful. Tissue diagnosis is usually needed and the sulfur granule needs to be
demonstrated. If early diagnosis and treatment with proper antibiotics are established, cure and prevention of serious complications can be
achieved. PCGs of the lung include a spectrum of lesions ranging from benign masses to frankly malignant sarcomas (8). The most consistent
pathological feature of these lesions is a background proliferation of spindle cells associated with a variable density of polymorphic
infiltrate of mononuclear inflammatory cells. Several findings support a reactive inflammatory process as the most probable pathogenesis
rather than a neoplastic process. Consistently with this hypothesis, it has been observed that as many as one third of these lesions have
developed after a respiratory infection (2, 9, 10). Most of the infectious organisms that were associated with PCG are uncommon and
fastidious. These organisms include Norcardia nova, Mycobacterium malmoense, Elikenella corrodens, Pseudomonas veronii, and Mycoplasma
pneumoniae (11-15). Previous studies have suggested that the infection-associated PCG is a spindle cell lesion with histocytic or follicular
dendritic, rather than a myofibroblastic immunophenotype (16, 17). Consistently with these findings, in this case the immunohistochemical
studies of the lung tissues showed that the spindle cells had the phenotype of histiocytes. How an initial infection might develop into PCG
is not well understood and no specific infectious agent that directly linked to PCG has yet been. The association of Actinomyces with plasma
cells has been demonstrated in the murine model. The histopathologic features of experimental actinomycotic lesions that were produced in
mice by Actinomyces have contained lobulated advancing fronts as well as areas of resolution showing heavy penetration by phagocytic cells,
and the main cells involved are polymorphonucleocytes and plasma cells (18). Radhi et al. reported on a case of a 7-yr-old boy who presented
with a retroperitoneal mass which biopsy results showed features consistent with PCG and actinomycosis (7). Dweik et al. suggested that
chronic inflammation such as Actinomyces infection might be cause of PCG in a case of pulmonary actinomycosis that presented with what
appeared to be a PCG (19). In our case, fine needle aspiration and biopsy demonstrated that abundant plasma cells, inflammatory cells
including lymphocytes, and muscle fibers were mainly observed, which was compatible to the diagnosis of PCG. In addition, the surgical
specimen showed typical sulfur granule and Actinomyces on the special staining. These different histologic findings between the find needle
biopsy and the surgical resection can be resulted from the inadequate targeting of the approach of the fine needle biopsy, or another
suggestion that chronic infection such as Actinomyces infection may be closely associated with PCG. The association of pulmonary
actinomycosis with PCG raises the possibility that Actinomyces may be a cause of PCG. Other possibilities may be that the presence of the
plasma cells is part of the pathology of pulmonary actinomycosis, or a coincidence. Although the etiology and pathophysiology of PCG require
further investigation, we suggest that a reactive inflammatory process secondary to chronic infection, particularly actinomycosis, may be
cause of PCG. To our knowledge, this is the first report of PCG associated with actinomycosis in Korea. Chest PA (A) and chest CT (B) at
admission demonstrate a well demarcated 3×2 cm-sized heterogeneous mass with central cavity and peripheral spiculation in the left upper
lobe. Chest PA (C) and chest CT (D) after one-month steroid treatment show a similar or mildly increased size of the mass. The tissue
obtained by percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy shows spindle cells (A) and plasma cells (B) (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×400). (A)
The 2×2.5 cm-sized mass in the resected left upper lobe is composed of central solid components with surrounding necrotic and fibrotic
tissues. (B) notes the sulfur granule (arrowheads) in the cavity lined with squamous epithelium (hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×100). (C)
Gomori methenamine silver staining shows a lot of dark-stained and rod-shaped Actinomyces (×400). (D) shows the peripheries of the specimens
obtained by needle biopsy and lobectomy, respectively. The microscopic finding consists of spindle-shaped cells and inflammatory cells
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, ×200).
