HSK and YSC equally contributed to this work. Drug hypersensitivity syndrome to both vancomycin and teicoplanin has not been previously
reported. We describe here a 50-yr-old male patient with vertebral osteomyelitis and epidural abscess who developed hypersensitivity
syndrome to both vancomycin and teicoplanin. Skin rash, fever, eosinophilia, interstitial pneumonitis, and interstitial nephritis developed
following the administration of each drug, and resolved after withdrawing the drugs and treating with high dose corticosteroids. The
vertebral osteomyelitis was successfully treated with 6-week course of linezolid without further complications. Skin patch tests for
vancomycin and teicoplanin was done 2 months after the recovery; a weak positive result for vancomycin (10% aq.,+at D2 and +at D4 with
erythema and vesicles; ICDRG scale), and a doubtful result for teicoplanin (4% aq.-at D2 and±at D4 with macular erythema; ICDRG scale). We
present this case to alert clinicians to the hypersensitivity syndrome that can result from vancomycin and teicoplanin, with possible cross-
reactivity, which could potentially be life-threatening. Drug hypersensitivity syndrome is a severe, idiosyncratic multi-system reaction
caused by drugs, defined by the clinical triad of fever, rash and internal organ involvement (1). It is potentially life-threatening with
significant morbidity. Drug hypersensitivity syndrome due to glycopeptide antibiotics, such as vancomycin or teicoplanin, is a rare
phenomenon. While cases of suspected drug hypersensitivity syndrome due to vancomycin have been reported previously (2-4), only one case of
drug hypersensitivity syndrome due to teicoplanin has been reported in literature (5). Here, we describe a patient with vertebral
osteomyelitis and an epidural abscess who developed hypersensitivity syndrome to both vancomycin and teicoplanin. A 50-yr-old man with a
long-standing history of low back pain presented with rapidly increasing pain and mild fever persisting for a month following the third
session of acupuncture. His medical history included alcohol-related Child-Pugh class A liver cirrhosis. Examination at a local orthopedic
clinic revealed tenderness at the lumbar spine. His initial body temperature was 37.5℃. Complete blood count was normal except for mild
anemia (Hgb 11.0 g/dL) and leucocytosis (11.8×103/µL). The ESR value was 58 mm/hr. Blood chemistries showed increased C-reactive protein
(CRP) (2.3 mg/dL ) and mild derangement in liver function (bilirubin 0.9 mg/dL , alkaline phosphatase 388 IU/L , AST 95 IU/L , ALT 45 IU/L
). L-spine MRI showed the possibility of infectious vertebral osteomyelitis with epidural abscess extending to the paravertebral area. After
blood was taken for culture, he was empirically started on vancomycin intravenously at a dose of 1 g every 12 hr. Blood cultures were
negative. His body temperature dropped below 37℃ after the fifth day of vancomycin treatment. On day 18 of vancomycin treatment, he
presented with a generalized maculopapular rash and his body temperature rose up to 39℃. The blood chemistry showed increased CRP (12.1
mg/dL ) and creatinine (2.2 mg/dL ) level. The white blood cell count was 16.9×103/µL and the eosinophil count was 1,605/µL. The ESR was 55
mm/hr. Vancomycin was stopped and intravenous ceftriaxone was started at a dose of 1 g every 8 hr for 2 days. Because he remained febrile
and the skin rash persisted and desquamated, all antibiotics were withdrawn. Gradually, skin rash improved and he became afebrile. The
follow-up L-spine MRI showed slight improvement of the vertebral osteomyelitis and epidural abscess. Four days after discontinuing all the
antibiotics, he was started on teicoplanin intravenously at a dose of 600 mg every 48 hr. However, on the third day of teicoplanin
treatment, a generalized cutaneous maculopapular rash developed accompanied by respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms; non-productive
cough, dyspnea, wheezing, abdominal pain, nausea and vomiting. Crackling sounds were heard on both lung fields. The white blood cell count
was 15.2×103/µL and the eosinophil count increased to 3,648/µL. The serum creatinine level was elevated up to 4.4 mg/dL and the CRP level
was 12.85 mg/dL. The chest radiography and chest computed tomography scan suggested the possibility of a hypersensitivity pneumonitis. All
drugs were stopped and he was referred to our department. Under the diagnosis of drug hypersensitivity syndrome with hypersensitivity
pneumonitis and nephritis, methylprednisolone was started with 30 mg every 6 hr. After 3 days of the treatment, the serum creatinine
decreased to 1.6 mg/dL and the eosinophil count decreased to 136/µL. The respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms disappeared, and skin
rash and fever improved. The L-spine MRI showed aggravated osteomyelitis and paravertebral abscess. Endoscopic surgery was done for
curettage. Microscopic examination and culture studies of the resected bony tissue were negative for microorganisms. PCR study for
Mycobacterium tuberculosis was negative. After the surgery, linezolid was started at a dose of 600 mg every 12 hr. Prednisolone was slowly
tapered over 2 weeks. The patient was successfully treated with 4 weeks of intravenous and 2 weeks of oral linezolid without further
complications. The skin patch tests for vancomycin and teicoplanin was done 2 months after the hypersensitivity syndrome resolved. The patch
tests showed a weak positive result for vancomycin (10% aq.,+at D2 and +at D4 with erythema and vesicles; ICDRG scale), and a doubtful
result for teicoplanin (4% aq. -at D2 and±at D4 with macular erythema; ICDRG scale). Patch tests for ceftriaxone and 27 other control drugs
showed negative results. The patch tests with 10% aq. vancomycin and 4% aq. teicoplanin were done in 20 control patients who had experienced
drug hypersensitivity to drugs other than vancomycin and teicoplanin, and they all showed negative results to vancomycin and teicoplanin.
Hypersensitivity syndrome, or drug rash with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS), is a well known finding with anticonvulsants and
sulfonamide drugs (6). Bocquet and his group proposed a criteria for the diagnosis for DRESS syndrome: cutaneous drug eruption,
hematological abnormalities (eosinophilia more than 1.5×109/L or presence of atypical lymphocytes) and systemic involvement (adenopathies
more than 2 cm in diameter or hepatitis or interstitial nephritis or interstitial pneumonitis or carditis) (6, 7). The patient presented
here meets the criteria: skin rash resulting in exfoliative dermatitis, eosinophilia, interstitial pneumonitis, and possible interstitial
nephritis suggested by azotemia. Severe adverse drug reactions such as drug hypersensitivity syndrome caused by vancomycin is a rare
phenomenon with only few cases reported in literature, despite its relatively more frequent incidences of cutaneous hypersensitivity
reactions (2-4). Drug hypersensitivity syndrome due to teicoplanin has been reported in only one case recently (5). The diagnosis was made
on the basis of signs and symptoms associated with the syndrome which rapidly resolved after withdrawal of the drug. Our patient had not
only the hypersensitivity syndrome to vancomycin, but also to teicoplanin. Improvement of the maculopapular skin rash and pyrexia after
discontinuation of vancomycin, worsening of the skin lesions and newly developed respiratory and gastrointestinal symptoms after starting
teicoplanin clearly suggest that both of these drugs caused hypersensitivity syndrome. The symptoms and signs of hypersensitivity syndrome
diminished after removal of all antibiotics and starting treatment with high dose corticosteroids. It has been reported on the possible
allergic cross-reactivity between vancomycin and teicoplanin in a few previous reports; maculopapular rash (8), erythrodermic rash (9),
vasculitis (10), and drug fever after vancomycin induced red man syndrome (11). Only one report showed positive patch tests for both
vancomycin and teicoplanin in a patient with hypersensitivity to vancomycin. However, teicoplanin was not used and its potential
hypersensitivity was not determined (12). Our case clinically suggested a possible cross-reactivity between these glycopeptide antibiotics
in the hypersensitivity syndrome. The reason for this cross-reactivity is unclear, but it may well be due to the fact that both of these
antibiotics share the similar glycopeptide structure (Fig. 1). Previous reports used 4% diluted teicoplanin (12) and 0.05-5% diluted
vancomycin in the patch tests (12, 13). However, the optimal concentration of vancomycin in the patch tests has not yet been established. We
used 10% diluted vancomycin in the patch test because 10% dilution is the most commonly used concentration used in drug patch tests. We have
done the patch tests with 10% aq. vancomycin and 4% aq. teicoplanin in 20 control patients who had not experienced any type of
hypersensitivity reaction against vancomycin or teicoplanin, and they all showed negative results. Our experience supports that 10% diluted
vancomycin can be used in patch tests. Linezolid is reported to be an effective agent in treating patients with osteomyelitis due to
linezolid-susceptible Gram positive bacteria, who are intolerant to vancomycin or have resistant Gram-positive infection (14). Despite the
absence of identifiable microorganisms in our patient, empirical targeting of Gram (+) bacteria and the use of linezolid resulted in
successful treatment of the vertebral osteomyelitis and epidural abscess. We present this case to alert clinicians to the hypersensitivity
syndrome that can result from both vancomycin and teicoplanin, which may present as a life-threatening emergency. Furthermore, we suggest
the possible cross-reactivity of these glycopeptide antibiotics in the hypersensitivity syndrome and show that linezolid is an effective and
safe alternative. This work was supported by grant 03-PJ10-PJ13-GD01-0002 from the Ministry of Health and Welfare, Korea. Chemical
structures of vancomycin and teicoplanin. The core common to these molecules is shown in bold (Adapted from Van Babeke F. Curr Opin
Pharmacol. 2004; 4: 473).
