There are few reports in the literature of invasive infection caused by Brevundimonas vesicularis in patients without immunosuppression or
other predisposing factors. The choice of antimicrobial therapy for bacteremia caused by the pathogen requires more case experience to be
determined. The case of a 40-year-old previously healthy man with subacute endocarditis proposed to be contributed from an occult dental
abscess is described. The infection was found to be caused by B. vesicularis on blood culture results. The patient recovered without
sequelae after treatment with ceftriaxone followed by subsequent ciprofloxacin therapy owing to an allergic reaction to ceftriaxone and
treatment failure with ampicillin/sulbactam. To our knowledge, this is the first report of B. vesicularis as a cause of infective
endocarditis. According to an overview of the literature and our experience, we suggest that third-generation cephalosporins,
piperacillin/tazobactam, and ciprofloxacin are effective in treating invasive B. vesicularis infections, while the efficacy of ampicillin-
sulbactam needs further evaluation. Brevundimonas (formerly Pseudomonas) vesicularis is an aerobic nonsporulating and nonfermenting gram-
negative bacillus that has been isolated from the external environment and human clinical specimens . There have been only eight
descriptions of infections in human beings caused by the microorganism, with only four cases of bacteremia reported in the literature [Table
1, . Five cases of B. vesicularis infection were attributed to community sources and three to nosocomial sources . Such underlying diseases
as autoimmune disorders associated with long-term steroid use, end-stage renal disease treated by hemodialysis, and sickle cell anemia with
functional asplenia contributed to B. vesicularis infections in 6 of the 8 reported cases due to the patients' immunocompromised state
[Table 1, . B. vesicularis infection has therefore been classified as opportunistic . We report here a case of infective endocarditis caused
by B. vesicularis in a patient without comorbid disease. The low number of cases reported of B. vesicularis infection in humans limits the
body of knowledge on the spectrum of disease caused by this pathogen as well as optimal treatment regimens. The treatment course of the
current case and previous cases of B. vesicularis infection is further discussed. Summary of reported cases of Brevundimonas vesicularis
infection in humans Abbreviations: CA = community-acquired infection; NI: nosocomial infection. Nosocomial infections are those that
originate or occur in a hospital if they first appear 48 hours or more after admission or hospital-like settings. The patient was a 40-year-
old male admitted for chronic cough and a 2-month history of intermittent afternoon fever. He denied both a history of traveling and contact
with animals over the previous 3 months. Associated symptoms included general malaise, anorexia, and the loss of 6 kg body weight within the
previous 2 months. On admission, the vital signs were shown as blood pressure: 124/68 mmHg; pulse rate: 80/min; respiratory rate: 22/min;
body temperature: 38.5°C. Physical examination revealed a pansystolic murmur over the apex and left lower sternal border. An abscess in a
molar cavity that required debridement was found, although the patient had not complained of dental pain. Laboratory tests revealed a WBC
count of 9250/μL with elevated neutrophils (82.7%); normocytic anemia with a hemoglobin level of 10.4 g/dL; an elevated ESR level (123 mm/1
hr); and abnormal liver function with AST/ALT of 49/79 IU/L. A chest x-ray film revealed increased infiltration over the right upper and
lower lobes, and abdominal sonography showed mild splenomegaly. Diagnosis of pulmonary tuberculosis was excluded by negative results from
serial acid-fast stain and culture of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed a vegetation with size of 0.9 cm
over the anterior leaflet of mitral valve, and moderate mitral regurgitation. However, the cardiac systolic and diastolic functions were
normal with the ejection fraction of 78.9%, fraction shortening of 47.8%. Ultimately, definite subacute endocarditis was diagnosed according
to the Duke criteria, including two blood culture results of B. vesicularis; the presence of vegetation on the mitral valve revealed by an
echocardiogram (Fig. 1); and such clinical and laboratory features as fever, splenomegaly, heart murmur, anemia, Osler's node (Fig. 2),,and
Roth's spot (Fig. 3). Transthoracic echocardiogram showing vegetation (0.9 cm) over the anterior leaflet of mitral valve. Osler's node on
the fourth digit of the left hand. Roth's spot on the retina of the left eye. The pathogen was identified as B. vesicularis on the basis of
the biochemical characteristics tested by the API ID 32 GN automatic identification system (bioMérieux, Marcy I' Étoile, France). These
included the characteristics of positive activity of D-maltose/D-glucose oxidation; negative activity of inositol/D-sorbitol/L-arabinose
oxidation; negative activity of L-alanine/capric acid/potassium 5-ketogluconate/trisodium citrate decarboxylation; negative activity of
nitrate reduction and indole production. The organism was susceptible to amikacin, gentamicin, piperacillin, aztreonam, cefepime, meropenem,
netilmicin, ampicillin, amoxicillin, ciprofloxacin, cefazolin, cefmetazole, ceftazidime, cefotaxime, ceftriaxone, and ticarcillin, according
to the susceptibility test performed by the disc diffusion method with interpretation criteria for Pseudomonas . The patient was treated
with a combination of cefazolin (2 gm/8 hr) and gentamicin (80 mg/8 hr) as empiric antibiotics during the first 3 days and fever subsided
gradually. Ampicillin/sulbactam (3 gm/6 hr) was used alternatively for covering the infection of oral anaerobes while the patient underwent
removal of the abscessed tooth. Treatment with amipicillin/sulbactam failed, however; the patient developed a flare-up of fever, the
appearance of a new Osler's node on the fourth digit of the left hand (Fig. 2), and pain in the right femur with right inguinal
lymphadenopathy. Treatment with a combination of ceftriaxone (2 gm/12 hr) and gentamicin (80 mg/8 hr) was administered subsequently. The
femoral-inguinal symptoms and fever improved gradually with the antimicrobial therapy and therefore were ascribed to embolism. Although the
clinical symptoms and signs improved after use of these antibiotics, ciprofloxacin (400 mg/12 hr) was administered as an alternative due to
the eruption of a skin rash from an allergic reaction after 7 days' treatment with ceftriaxone. Ultimately, the patient received the
treatment regimen for one month and was discharged. There were no sequelae at 6-month follow-up and the mitral vegetation disappeared in the
follow-up echocardiogram performed one month after discharge. Subacute infective endocarditis commonly involves heart valves already damaged
in some way and is most often caused by one of the Viridans streptococci, such as Streptococcus sanguis, S. mutans, S. mitis, or S. milleri,
which normally live in the mouth and throat. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first presentation of B. vesicularis manifesting as
subacute endocarditis of the native valve. The dental cavity, which was the only infective focus noted, was proposed to be the origin of the
infection even though no direct evidence of Brevundimonas was isolated from the dental abscess. B. vesicularis has been isolated from pus
culture with tonsil swabs , suggesting the existence of the pathogen in the oral cavity. Furthermore, in the cases of tonsillitis and septic
arthritis, the subjects had been immunocompetent before the occurrence of Brevundimonas infection . Therefore, the clinical significance of
the pathogen should not be confined solely to infections in immunocompromised hosts. According to researchers at the CDC, B. vesicularis is
highly sensitive to all aminoglycosides (98%), piperacillin (100%), carbenicillin (94%), and ceftizoxime (94%), with moderate susceptibility
to cefamandole (50%) and cefoxitin (75%), and lower susceptibility to penicillin (12%) and ampicillin (22%) . The antibiograms of isolates
from clinical cases were variable, however; most were determined by the disc diffusion method , Table 2]. Our reported case was treated with
cefazolin and gentamicin as empiric antibiotics initially, followed by amipicllin/sulbactam, then ceftriaxone and gentamicin, followed with
ciprofloxacin. The failed clinical response in our case to ampicillin/sulbactam therapy even though susceptibility testing has demonstrated
that the organism is susceptible to ampicillin/sulbactam, indicates that results from the disc diffusion method with reference to
Pseudomonas species are not suitable in guiding antimicrobial therapy for B. vesicularis endocarditis. For endocarditis, minimum inhibitory
concentration (MIC), minimum bactericidal concentration and serum bactericidal titer determination are appropriate to guide antimicrobial
therapy. Our report has the limitation of lacking MIC determination as the antimicrobial susceptibility testing method. It is difficult to
decide on the best antimicrobial for invasive infection due to B. vesicularis because of the low number of reported cases in humans caused
by this pathogen; the fact that isolates come from various countries or findings from different laboratories; and the lack of standarized
testing. Five of the reported cases , Table 1] were successfully treated with a second- or third-generation cephalosporin with or without an
aminoglycoside; two cases were treated with a β-lactam/β-lactamase inhibitor , Table 1]; Two cases were treated with ciprofloxacin alone or
combined with a monobactam [current case, , Table 1]. Our experience in this case and previous cases of bacteremia suggest that a third-
generation cephalosporin, piperacillin/tazobactam, aztreonam and ciprofloxacin are effective in treating infection due to B. vesicularis.
Though subacute bacterial endocarditis caused by Pseudomonas spp. should be appropriately treated for 6 weeks , our reported case was
successfully treated with four-week antimicrobial therapy. To decide the optimal duration of therapy for B. vesicularis endocarditis, more
experience with such case is required. In-vitro antibiotic susceptibility of Brevundimonas vesicularis Abbreviations: S = susceptible; R =
resistant; N = not determined * Susceptibility was determined by disc diffusion. ‡ Susceptibility was determined by automatic
microdiffusion. # Susceptibility was determined by an unknown method. In conclusion, since cases of infection due to B. vesicularis are
reported with increasing frequency, our endocarditis case report reinforces the hypothesis that bacteria can cause invasive disease in a
person without predisposing disease. More treatment experience and more exact results from antimicrobial susceptibility testing are required
to improve on present treatment regimens for invasive B. vesicularis infection. ALT: alanine aminotransferase AST: aspartate
aminotransferase CDC: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, U.S.A. ESR: erythrocyte sedimentation rate IU/L:
international units per liter SLE: systemic lupus erythematosus WBC: white blood cell MIC: minimum inhibitory concentration The author(s)
declare that they have no competing interests. ML Yang and PL Lu took care the patient during hospitalization and prepared the manuscript.
YH Chen, TC Chen, WR Lin and CY Lin participated in the the diagnosis and treatment of the disease. All authors read and approved the final
version of the manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
