Extramedullary haematopoiesis (EMH) is a reactive mechanism by which blood cells are produced outside of the bone marrow to supplement
insufficient production or increased destruction of erythrocytes. EMH is uncommon in sickle cell anaemia (SCA). We report the first case of
focal intra-hepatic EMH in SCA depicted on MRI occurring in a 32-year-old woman with homozygote SCA and in view of previously published
data, highlight the diagnostic features suggesting a differential diagnosis with other focal liver lesions including infectious,
inflammatory or primary liver tumors. Extramedullary haematopoiesis (EMH) is a reactive mechanism by which blood cells are produced outside
of the bone marrow to supplement insufficient production or increased destruction of erythrocytes. EMH is observed in marrow depletion or
infiltration such as lymphoma, leukaemia or with marrow hyperactivity in conditions such as congenital haemolytic anaemia (thalassaemia and
hereditary spherocytosis) . Common sites of EMH include the mediastinum, spleen, and lymph nodes [2, 3]. Very little is known about the MR
appearance of intra-hepatic EMH. Iron overload is frequent in congenital haemolytic anaemias and is usually related to chronic transfusion .
Although unusual, focal intra-hepatic EMH in this setting can mimic other solid lesions of the liver leading to a troublesome differential
diagnosis with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) [5, 6]. To our knowledge the specific MR features of intra-hepatic EMH have been reported in
just four separated case reports [1, 5, 7, 8]. EMH is however uncommon in sickle cell anaemia (SCA) . We report the first case of focal
intra-hepatic EMH in SCA depicted on MRI and in view of previously published data, highlight the diagnostic features suggesting a
differential diagnosis with HCC. L.F., a 32-year-old woman with homozygote sickle cell disease and a 15-year history of transfusion was
referred to our institution in May 1998 with elevated ferritine levels suggesting haemosiderosis. Her past medical history included
respiratory infections and cholecystectomy. Biochemical liver tests were normal apart from a two-fold increase in bilirubin levels.
Fetoprotein level was normal and hepatitis C serology was positive for chronic infection. Ultrasound examination of the upper abdomen showed
a liver size within normal limits without any detectable focal lesions. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the liver was performed for
assessment of iron overload. The liver and spleen showed a diffuse low signal intensity compared to that of muscle on all MR imaging
sequences (Siemens ® Symphony 1.5 T; Erlangen, Germany) with multiple nodular lesions that were hyperintense to the liver and isointense to
the muscle on gradient echo (GE) T1 weighted images (WI) (TR = 178; TE = 3; slice thickness = 7 mm; α=70) with or without selective fat
saturation (Fig. 1(a)) and on 3D GE T1 WI (VIBE, volume interpolated breathheld examination; Siemens ®; Erlangen, Germany) (TR = 4; TE =
1.5; slice thickness = 3 mm; α=20) (Fig. 1(a)) and slightly hyperintense to the liver and isointense to the muscle on fast spin echo (TSE)
T2 WI (TR = 384; TE = 92; slice thickness = 7 mm) (Fig. 1(b)). These lesions showed absent enhancement on arterial phase and moderate
enhancement on the later phases following the injection of 0.1 mmol /kg of Gd-DOTA (Dotarem ®, Guerbert, Aulnay, France) (Fig. 1(c)).
Multiple para-aortic nodes showing low signal intensity on T2 WI (Fig. 1(d)) were simultaneously demonstrated. A triple phase computed
tomography (CT) scan (5 mm collimation; CT Twin ® Elscint ®; Haifa, Israel) of the liver showed multiple nodular lesions isodense to the
liver prior to injection, with absent enhancement on arterial phase and homogeneous enhancement on portal phase imaging following the
injection of 90 cm 3 of Iohexol (Omnipaque300 ®; Guerbert, Aulnay, France). The largest lesion located in segment V was 1.5 cm in diameter.
CT guided liver biopsy within the lesion showed periportal fibrosis and sinusoid dilatation with megakaryocytes suggesting EMH. MRI control
performed 5 years later (not shown) showed similar findings, without any increase in the size of the previously identified liver lesions.
SCA is a haemolytic anaemia characterised by the presence of abnormally shaped erythrocytes, which are destroyed at increased rates, leading
to chronic anaemia . In order to sustain the needs of the organism demands, extramedullary production of erythrocytes can be stimulated.
Common sites of EMH include the mediastinum, spleen, and lymph nodes [2, 3]. In the liver, both diffuse microscopic infiltration or focal
mass-like lesions have been reported with EMH [2, 9, 10]. Focal nodular intra-hepatic EMH is a rare disorder presenting as well defined,
regular shaped focal liver lesions on all imaging modalities . The ultrasound (US) appearance of focal intra-hepatic EMH is however non-
specific. Both hypo-echoic, or hyper-echoic generally inhomogeneous nodules have been associated with intra-hepatic EMH . On CT, intra-
hepatic EMH lesions are usually hypodense to the liver, frequently hetereogeneous, and can show patchy or no enhancement following contrast
injection [2, 11]. Intra-hepatic EMH are generally multiple, but solitary lesions have been reported [9, 12]. Therefore, the number of
lesions cannot help in the differential diagnosis. The presence of extra-hepatic EMH can on the other hand provide additional clues. In ten
previously reported cases of intra-hepatic EMH, extra-hepatic EMH were present in five cases, absent in two and not evaluated in three cases
. The MR features of intra-hepatic EMH have been rarely reported and never in SCA. In addition to our case we reviewed the four previously
published literature cases. The results are summarized in Table 1. The baseline signal intensity of intra-hepatic EMH relative to the
adjacent liver varies between case reports: (1) according to Elsayes et al., the signal intensity of the mass is primarily related to the
presence of active or inactive haematopoiesis. Active lesions show intermediate signal intensity on T1 WI, mild high signal intensity on T2
WI, and some enhancement after intravenous contrast medium injection. Older lesions may show low signal intensity on T1 and T2 WI and may
not show any enhancement . (2) In our report, intra-hepatic EMH were isointense to the muscle but hyperintense to the liver on T1 WI because
of hepatic iron overload. This confirms that the relative signal intensity of focal intra-hepatic EMH to adjacent liver on MR is influenced
by the degree of iron deposits in the liver. Haemosiderosis of the liver is indeed a common finding in patients with chronic haematological
impairment requiring repeated transfusions and was present in our case. It has been demonstrated that liver iron overload leads to
progressive fibrosis, which in turn can lead to cirrhosis. The increased risk of HCC in cirrhotic liver is well documented . However, our
study suggests that the presence of isointense or very mild hyperintense lesions on T2 WI in patients at risk for EMH is less suggestive of
HCC, especially in liver with iron overload . Furthermore, although non-specific, the isointensity or mild hyperintensity of intra-hepatic
EMH nodules on T2 WI which we report on MR are not suggestive of cavernous haemangioma . The differential diagnosis of multiple splenic and
hepatic lesions such as those we present should also include sarcoidosis and atypical infection. Sarcoidosis is a granulomatous systemic
disease of unknown aetiology that can involve numerous sites. Nodular sarcoidosis has been reported to demonstrate low signal intensity on
all MR imaging sequences. The lesions are most conspicuous on T2-weighted fat-suppressed or early phase contrast-enhanced images.
Sarcoidosis lesions enhance in a minimal and delayed pattern [10, 14]. Candidiasis is the most common infection involving the liver and
spleen in immunocompromised patients. The lesions appear as multiple hypointense, ring-enhancing lesions less than 1 cm in diameter on
gadolinium-enhanced images [10, 14]. Although seen in patients with competent immune systems, the prevalence of histoplasmosis is greater in
immunocompromised patients. MR imaging demonstrates the acute and subacute phases of this disease as scattered hypointense lesions on both
T1 and T2 WI, with no significant enhancement following contrast material administration. Old granulomas can be calcified [10, 14]. Thus,
clinical, biological and imaging data did not favour sarcoidosis or atypical infections in our patient. Based on our case and in review of
the literature data, we believe that the most distinctive feature of intra-hepatic EMH is progressive and delayed enhancement after Gd-
chelates injection. Delayed enhancement following contrast injection was present in our case and was also reported in all but one previously
published case where no mention of contrast injection was provided. We believe that this feature could help to differentiate intra-hepatic
EMH from HCC in patients with haemolytic anaemia as arterial enhancement of larger than 10 mm nodules in cirrhotic liver is in favour of HCC
. Wong reported the first description of stellate scars occurring within intra-hepatic EMH showing low signal intensity on T1 WI, high
signal intensity on T2 WI and delayed enhancement . More recently, focal intrahepatic extramedullary haematopoiesis has been reported to
contain fat . We did not encounter these patterns in our report. The performance of liver MR was not compared in our case with that of
scintigraphic studies. The sensitivity of 99Tcm scintigraphy in detecting intra-hepatic EMH is poor . However, 52Fe imaging could be helpful
in confirming the diagnosis . Our study suggests that when in doubt, the diagnosis of intra-hepatic EMH can be confirmed by CT or US guided
biopsy . With the increasing use of MR in the evaluation of hepatic masses, EMH should be remembered as a rare cause of focal liver lesion,
especially in patients presenting disturbed medullary haematopoiesis, often accompanying congenital haemoglobinopathies. Most intra-hepatic
EMH lesions appear as well defined nodules. The presence of isointense or only slightly hyperintense liver nodules on T2 WI, with delayed,
enhancement after dynamic contrast injection, possibly associated with other locations of EMH are suggestive of intra-hepatic EMH. Although
some of these imaging features may overlap those of focal infections or inflammatory lesions, these findings could help in excluding the
diagnosis of primary liver tumors in such patients. A 32-year-old woman with homozygote sickle cell disease and a 15-year history of
transfusion. The liver shows diffuse low signal intensity on all sequences. (a) Fat saturation GRE images show the presence of multiple
nodules hyperintense within the liver and remaining isointense to the muscle (arrow and double arrows). Nodules displaying a similar pattern
of signal intensity are identified in the spleen (arrowhead). (b) T2 WI TSE fat saturation images show that the multiple nodes are slightly
hyperintense to the adjacent liver, and isointense to the muscle (arrow). (c) Following injection of Gd-DOTA (Dotarem ®, Guerbet, Aulnay,
France), previously identified nodes show absent enhancement on arterial phase and moderate enhancement on portal phase imaging (arrow and
double arrows). Nodules displaying a similar pattern of signal intensity are identified in the spleen (arrowhead). (d) Multiple para-aortic
nodes showing low intensity on TSE T2 WI (arrow) consistent with iron accumulation were discovered incidentally. Focal intra-hepatic extra-
medullary haematopoiesis: review of the literature L, liver; M, muscle.
