We report a male child with Oromandibular-limb hypogenesis (OMLH), the main features being bilateral sixth and seventh nerve palsies, limb
anomalies and hypoplasia of the tongue. Additional features were shortness of the neck associated with torticollis. Radiographs of the
cervical spine were non-contributory, but 3D computed tomography (CT) scanning of this area identified: a) congenital hypoplasia of the
atlas; b) the simultaneous development of occiput-atlas malformation/developmental defect. To our knowledge, this is the first clinical
report assessing the cervico-cranium malformation in a child with OMLH-Möbius syndrome. Trauma is the main cause of occiput-atlas
abnormality in pediatric acute care practice. Young children are especially vulnerable to this injury because of their small occipital
condyles and horizontally oriented atlanto-occipital joints . Trauma can cause injury or rupture of the tectorial membrane and the alar
ligaments that allow movement of the cranium relative to the spine . We report a 5 years old boy who presented with the full clinical
criteria of the Oromandibular-limb hypogenesis (OMLH)-Möbius syndrome. Additional unusual features were short neck and torticollis. Computed
tomography (CT) of the craniocervical region was the imaging of choice, and features compatible with occiput-atlas developmental defect and
a hypoplastic atlas were identified. Previous reports have discussed the hazardous outcome of occiput-atlas developmental abnormality in the
normal pediatric population, but none has related the occiput-atlas injury to a preexisting craniocervical defect. In our knowledge, this is
the first report of an association of occiput-atlas developmental abnormality with OMLH-Möbius complex. The patient was born at full term
following an uneventful gestation, to a 33 years old mother, with a four-year history of unexplained, primary infertility. At birth, he
weighed 2750 g (50 centile), and had a length of 46 cm (3rd centile) and an occipitofrontal circumference (OFC) of 32 cm (50th centile). The
mother was married to a 36-year old man who was her first cousin. The family history was non-contributory. No relevant family history of
thromophilic disorders or any history of acquired thrombophilia has been identified. Presentation at birth was vertex, and a number of
congenital malformations were noted, including malformations of the hands and feet, bilateral strabismus and a small tongue. Respiratory
functions were normal, although syringe feeding was necessary for the first seven months of life. On examination at nine months of age
(Figure 1), the child had a normal motor development and hearing, but the coordination was impaired. The body length and weight, and OFC
were around the 25th centile. It has been noted an expressionless face (due to bilateral VII nerve palsies), a prominent forehead, depressed
nasal bridge, bulbous nose, defective ocular rotation and bilateral strabismus (due to VI nerve palsies). The philtrum was long, with a very
thin upper lip and inwardly depressed lower lip, micrognathia, and low set ears. The neck was short with limitations of head movements.
Proband phenotype. Although the chest was normal (no associated Poland anomaly), the hands were abnormal with a sub-total absence of the
phalanges and preservation of hypoplastic thumbs and hypoplastic 5th fingers (Figure 2). There was also a bilateral adactyly of the feet.
The pelvic bones, spinal column and genitalia were normal, as was the ultrasound scan of the kidneys. The sagittal magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed a hypoplastic tongue but no associated Arnold-Chiari malformation was detected (Figure 3). Proband phenotype and hands:
Subtotal absence of the phalanges (preservation of the hypoplastic thumbs and hypoplastic 5th fingers, respectively). Sagittal MRI imaging,
showed markedly hypoplastic tongue. Examination at five years revealed short stature, height being 109 cm (-3SD), and a normal skull
circumference of 50 cm. The boy had normal comprehension and receptive language development, but difficulties in expressive language. There
were no abnormal neurological findings, except for the cranial nerve palsies (bilateral facial and abducens nerve palsies), which were
unchanged. Severe myopia (-8 diopters), shortness of the neck and torticollis have been found and was investigated accordingly (Figures 4,
5, 6). Metabolic screening, chromosomal studies, and hormonal studies of Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone (TSH), Triiodothyronine (T3) and
Thyroxine (T4) gave normal results. All basic hematological tests were within normal limits. 3D reconstruction CT scan ; Hypoplastic
anterior arch of the atlas and the impacted os terminale of the odontoid (arrow) between the two halves of the maldeveloped anterior arch of
the atlas-the os terminale usually fuses at 12 years of age-this can be confused with fracture. 3D sagittal CT scan; Agenesis of the
posterior arch of the atlas (arrow-a). Arrow (b) notes the Wachenheim clivus line, which is drawn along the posterior aspect of the clivus
toward the odontoid process; in our patient the line does not intersect or is it tangential to the odontoid process. The latter confirms the
existence of progressive craniocervical abnormality. 3D reconstruction CT scan showed agenesis of posterior arch of the atlas. Cerebral MRI
and CT scan showed no associated cerebral abnormalities. Renal and abdominal ultrasound examination showed normal genito-urinary system. The
hypoglossia/hypodactyly syndrome, the Möbius syndrome, the Hanhart syndrome, the Charlie M syndrome and OMLH are possibly variants of the
same condition, and it is often difficult to define the phenotypic boundaries between them . There have been a number of studies that
reported additional abnormalities but none of these studies have investigated the craniocervical junction . Congenital absence or hypoplasia
of the posterior arch of the atlas may be associated with several conditions, such as gonadal dysgenesis, and Klippel-Feil, Turner and Down
syndromes. In Down syndrome, the hypoplasia of the posterior arch of C1 may lead to a compensatory hypertrophy of the anterior arch of C1
and the spinous processes of C2 , whereas in our patient there was a total agenesis of the posterior arch and simultaneous hypoplasia of the
anterior arch. Occiput-atlas abnormality/injury as a result of trauma has been frequently reported in the pediatric emergency practice. It
is often fatal, or there may be severe neurological sequelae . Occiput-atlas injury can also occur in otherwise normal children. Under
normal circumstances, there is a minimal rotation between the occiput and atlas, and 50% of cervical rotation occurs between the C1 and C2
articulation . However, when a hypoplastic atlas exists, the rotation can be problematic and can lead to abnormal rotation of the upper
cervical spine. Rotation then exceeds its normal safe limits, and the spinal cord might be injured. Index that measures the craniocervical
integrity is the atlantodens interval (ADI). It is defined as the distance between the anterior aspect of the dens and the posterior aspect
of the anterior ring of the atlas, and it should be 5 mm or less . ADI is a marker indicating the normality of the transverse ligament and
the alar ligaments, but in patients with hypoplastic atlas, proper measurements cannot be made and the absence of distinctive dens/atlas
boundaries make this evaluation most difficult. We believe that this is the first report of a craniocervical junction malformation in
association with OMLH-Möbius syndrome. The hypoplastic atlas abnormality may have an important impact, as it has the propensity to develop
into a more profound craniocervical complication. As the conventional radiographic evaluation of the craniocervical junction can be
difficult and insufficient to recognize the abnormality (due to rotation and superimposition of the structures), CT imaging is highly
recommended. This study demonstrates the association of OMLH-Möbius syndrome with torticollis and underlying malformation of the atlas. The
latter anomaly may alter the bone-ligament complex and its control on the functions of the craniocervical junction, which is composed of
three bones (occipital bone, atlas-axis) and their ligaments. Therefore, the craniocervical junction risks should be carefully assessed and
CT is proposed as a valuable neuroimaging technique for craniocervical junction evaluation. OMLH (Oromandibular-Limb Hypogenesis) OFC
(Occipito-Frontal-Circumference) TSH (Thyroid-Stimulating Hormone) T3 (Triiodothyronine) T4 (Thyroxine) ADI (Atlantodens Interval) The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. AAK: Own work. Responsible for: a) Writing the manuscript; b) Conception and
design; c) Analysis of data. FBC, HS, and MBG: Data analysis. FG and KK: Conception and design. We wish to thank Dr Michael Baraitser
(Institute of Child Health-Clinical and Molecular Genetics-University College London) for his help in reviewing the paper. We thank Dr.
Marwa Hilmi, West Hertfordshire Hospitals, Watford Herts, UK for her technical support.
