A pneumatized superior turbinate is a rare cause of headache. Nasal endoscopy alone, does not provide us with adequate information for this
inaccessible area of the superior nasal cavity. A coronal computed tomography (CT) must be obtained to confirm the diagnosis. We present a
40-year-old female with migraine-type headache and nasal obstruction. Nasal endoscopy revealed a mild septal deviation, a right middle
concha bullosa and a paradoxically curved middle turbinate on the left side. Coronal CT-scan showed also the presence of a superior concha
bullosa on the left, which was in close contact with the nasal septum. The patient underwent septoplasty and bilateral endoscopic sinus
surgery, including partial removal of both the pneumatized middle turbinates in conjunction with gentle lateralization and resection of the
lower half of the left superior turbinate. Prompt relief from headache and nasal symptoms was obtained. Pneumatized superior concha causing
migrainous headache is a rare finding. Endoscopic surgery may provide permanent relief of symptoms. The otorhinolaryngologic causes of
headaches in most cases may be included in one of the following categories : (1) Headaches associated with various sinus problems, most
commonly acute or chronic rhinosinusitis; (2) headaches clearly connected to specific, easily recognizable nonsinus causes, such as
neuralgias, migraine, otalgia, temporomandibular joint disease or vascular headaches; (3) non typical headaches, in patients with absence of
sinus pathology. In the last group, midface discomfort, presenting as either pressure, fullness or even intense pain is a common occurrence.
Its source may be dental, neural or nasal, presenting thus a challenge to the rhinologist. Nasal causes of headaches include deviated nasal
septum, engorgement of the turbinates, nasal neoplasm, pneumatized agger nasi cells, unusual deflections of uncinate process, paradoxically
bent middle turbinate and variations of ethmoid bulla . Pneumatized turbinates have been reported as rare causes of headache that deserve
further evaluation . The aim of this study is to present a rare case of a patient with headache of nasal origin, owed to the presence of
enlarged pneumatized superior turbinate. A 40-year-old female, non smoker was referred by her family physician with migraine-type headache
complaints and mild nasal congestion. The pain was located over the forehead and behind the left eye. Headaches occurred once every 3 weeks,
triggered by weather and barometric changes with mild improvement during the menstruation. The duration of the headache was 3 days
approximately and the pain was not associated with nausea, photophobia, vertigo or tinnitus. Its intensity was 9 on a 0–10 visual analogue
scale. The patient reported nephrotic syndrome at the age of 3, for which she had been on prednizolone for 10 years. A history of recurrent
episodes of rhinosinusitis was also obtained. Nasal endoscopy revealed a mild septal deviation, a right concha bullosa of the middle
turbinate and a paradoxically curved middle turbinate on the left side. Coronal computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the above findings
and additionally revealed a superior concha bullosa and mild mucosal disease on the left side (Fig. 1). Coronal CT scan revealing
pneumatization of the superior left turbinate (arrow). The patient underwent a detailed laboratory examination to exclude any other possible
causes of headache. Whole blood cell count, urinalysis, thyroxin level, biochemical tests, tumor markers, as well as Mantoux test and
monotest were normal. Chest radiography, electrocardiography, and ultrasonography of the thyroid gland were also normal. Biochemical and
serologic tests of hepatic dysfunction were negative. Serologic tests of complement fixation titers of the plasma antibodies against various
common viruses were performed and were found normal as well. The patient underwent nasal rigid endoscopy after application of local
anesthetic and decongestant, which revealed the presence of a large superior concha in close contact with the nasal septum (Fig. 2). Direct
application of local anesthetic (1% tetracaine hydrochloride solution) at the point of contact between the superior concha and the nasal
septum improved headache by 4 points (score 5 at the scale of 0–10). Injection of local anesthetic (0.5 ml of 2% xylocaine with epinephrine
1:100.000) into the superior turbinate under endoscopic visualization eliminated the pain completely. Endoscopic view of the left nasal
cavity (ST: superior turbinate; S: septum; MT: middle turbinate). The patient was given endonasal steroids for 20 days without improvement.
Then she was advised surgical intervention which she initially denied. The patient was followed for 3 months without any improvement and
she, finally, decided to undergo surgery. Septoplasty and bilateral endoscopic sinus surgery was performed, including partial removal of
both the pneumatized middle turbinates in conjunction with gentle lateralization and resection of the lower half of the left superior
turbinate. The interior of the superior turbinate was found devoid of fluid or any other content. The patient reported prompt relief of her
headache and at 13 months of follow-up postoperatively she remains free from headache or any other nasal symptoms. Although the patient did
never report anosmia, she was examined by using the "Sniffin' sticks" test 1-year-postoperatively . The examination showed that odor
threshold, odor discrimination and odor identification were within normal limits. It appears, thus, that although part of the olfactory
mucosa might had been removed by the partial resection of the superior turbinate, sufficient olfactory epithelium had remained intact,
resulting in preservation of normal olfactory function. Although pneumatization of the middle nasal turbinate has been occasionally reported
, pneumatization of the superior and inferior turbinates are very rare findings . The presence of a superior concha bullosa is not always
recognizable with nasal endoscopy alone, due to the minimally accessible area of the upper nasal cavity. For this reason, the superior nasal
turbinate has been called the forgotten turbinate . Coronal CT-scan provides useful information for this inaccessible area. Association of a
massive extensively pneumatized superior turbinate with headache is very rare. In these cases the superior turbinate is forced anteriorly
and inferiorly at the area between the middle turbinate and the nasal septum, leading to intranasal mucosal contact . Although the
phenomenon of referred headache owed to intranasal mucosal contact was recognized as early as 1888 by Roe and has been since, occasionally,
reported, with the advent of functional endoscopic sinus surgery and CT imaging, resurgence of interest in headache of nasal origin has been
observed. Stammberger and Wolf reviewed the possible mechanisms involved in the genesis of referred headaches in the nasal area. According
to them, afferent fibers from pain receptors in the nasal mucosa terminate in the same group of sensory neurons in the sensory nucleus of
the trigeminal nerve, as fibers innervating cutaneous receptors, located at several peripheral segmental dermatomes of the ophthalmic and
maxillary divisions of the trigeminal nerve. These two common pathways converge along the same final neurons to a common area of the cortex.
Accordingly, the cortical center can not distinguish the original peripheral source of the pain impulses and they may be misinterpreted as
coming from other skin areas, such as the temple, the zygoma or the forehead. The pain may be perceived also from other end-organs
innervated by terminal branches within the trigeminal system, such as dura, intracranial and scalp vessels or the eye . An important issue
in the generation of headaches of nasal origin is mediation of neuropeptides, such as substance P . These may be released by mechanical
pressure induced in areas of contacting opposing mucosal surfaces, such as the superior turbinate and the nasal septum. Substance P can be
liberated at both the central and the peripheral ends of a sensory neuron, mediating not only central pain reflexes, via afferent C fibers,
but at the same time local reflexes at the nasal mucosa, resulting from reverse impulses and manifestating as vasodilation, extravasation of
plasma, hypersecretion, and smooth muscle contraction. This axon reflex can explain why an initial small localized lesion, such as a limited
mucosal lesion or area of nasal mucosal contact, may trigger severe long-standing headaches, frequently projecting to different areas of the
head. Many areas of the nose and the paranasal sinuses have been implicated as causes of referred headaches, including superior concha
bullosa as a rare occurrence. Clerico was the first who suggested the superior turbinate as a source of referred headache, with features
consistent of common migraine. Two more reports on this issue followed . Clerico proposed that before surgery, the application of local
anesthetic and/or decongestant (diagnostic block) on the area of the superior turbinate, under endoscopic visualization, might confirm this
anatomic variation as the source of headache. We performed this test, and although significant reduction of the pain was obtained, the pain
was not completely eliminated. This was probably due to the fact that local decongestants and anesthetic sprays are deposited primarily in
the anterior half of the nasal cavity and may not adequately reach the superior turbinate. Complete relief of headache was obtained only
after injection of local anesthetic into the superior turbinate under endoscopic guidance. The positive finding of this diagnostic test and
resolution of the symptoms after surgical intervention prove the association of our patient's headache with the presence of the massive
superior concha bullosa. Finally, the presence of a nasal osteoma as a rare cause of headaches of nasal origin should be mentioned.
Paranasal sinus and intranasal osteomas are histologically benign and slow-growing tumors, which are usuallly asymptomatic, but when they
enlarge they may produce pressure symptoms such as headaches. They occasionally cause obstruction or infection and may grow into the orbit
or intradurally causing neurological manifestations. Paranasal sinus osteomas usually occur in the frontal sinus and less frequently in the
other sinuses . A few cases of intranasal osteomas were also reported, mainly in the middle turbinate and once in the superior turbinate .
All cases of turbinal osteomas were characterized by accompanying headache, probably due to the same pathogenetic mechanisms implicated in
headache caused by the presence of a pneumatized superior concha, as previously mentioned. CT scan may assist in differential diagnosis by
depicting the lesion and providing detailed information concerning the bony structures of the region. Pneumatized superior concha is a rare
anatomic variant that is usually combined with other anatomic abnormalities of the nasal cavity and the lateral nasal wall. Resulting nasal
mucosal contact may cause migraine-type headache, even without evidence of mucosal disease. The diagnosis of a pneumatized superior concha
is based primarily on CT scans, because this area is usually inaccessible through nasal endoscopy. Endoscopic surgery may provide permanent
relief of the headache. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. EH diagnosed and treated the patient and drafted the
manuscript. DGB diagnosed and treated the patient and assisted in drafting the manuscript; GA assisted in the diagnostic work-up of the
patient; AK assisted in the diagnostic work-up of the patient; MK examined the patient and assisted in drafting the manuscript. VD has been
involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
