We report a case of extensive venous thrombosis of the upper extremity in a patient with a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS).
Thrombosis of the upper extremities is generally found in 4% of cases with deep venous thrombosis. Extensive, symptomatic venous thrombosis
of the upper extremity, as seen in this patient, is rare except with catheter-related thrombosis. Recent studies have supported the safety
and efficacy of catheter-directed thrombolysis in patients with no contraindication to thrombolytic therapy, and have recommended early
catheter-directed thrombolysis. Therefore, our patient was treated with early catheter-directed thrombolysis followed by anticoagulation.
Diabetes mellitus is considered to be a hypercoagulable state and is recognized as a risk factor for arterial thromboembolism in coronary,
cerebral, mesenteric and peripheral vessels1). However, venous thromboembolism has rarely been reported as a complication of diabetic
ketoacidosis or a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state (HHS)2). Upper extremity venous thrombosis accounts for only 4% of cases of venous
thrombosis; symptomatic cases are uncommon, accounting only for 0.15% of upper extremity venous thromboses, including catheter-related
thrombosis3-5). We report here a case of extensive symptomatic venous thrombosis of the upper extremity, which developed after subclavian
vein catheterization, in a patient with Type 2 diabetes and a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state. A 38-year-old man with diabetes mellitus
presented to the emergency room with a five day history of vomiting, lethargy and drowsiness. 5 days prior to admission he had been drinking
heavily. He had a 10 year history of diabetes, treated with an oral hypoglycemic agent. On admission he was afebrile, severely dehydrated
and drowsy. No infectious focus was found on clinical examination, and there were no neurological manifestations. Admission laboratory data
were notable for a plasma glucose of 1314 mg/dL (72.2 mmol/L), a serum osmolarity of 423 mOsm/kg, a potassium level of 5.1 mEq/L and a
creatinine level of 2.1 mg/dL. Arterial blood gas analysis on room air showed a pH of 7.37, PaO2 of 74.5 mmHg, PaCO2 of 53.1 mmHg, and HCO3-
level of 30.1 mmol/L. There was 1+ ketonuria. The blood count demonstrated a polycythemia, with a hemoglobin of 20.2 g/dL, a white cell
count of 12,400/µL and a platelet count of 256,000/µL. The coagulation screen, PT and aPTT were normal. His electrocardiogram revealed a
sinus tachycardia. The diagnosis of a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state with severe dehydration was made. A right subclavian catheter was
placed for fluid replacement in the emergency room. The patient was treated with intravenous insulin, fluid infusion and empirical
antibiotics. By the next day, his condition was much improved and he was mentally alert. Thirty hrs after central venous catheter placement
the patient complained of pain in his right arm; moderate edema and erythema of the arm were noted. The right subclavian catheter was
removed and the patient was closely observed. On hospital day three, his right arm edema was aggravated, and he developed neck edema.
Thrombocytopenia was observed. A color Doppler ultrasonogram of the extremity demonstrated acute thrombosis from the right internal jugular
and subclavian veins to the brachial and basilic vein. An upper extremity venogram confirmed occlusion at these sites (Figure 1). The
patient denied any prior history of venous thromboembolism. Coagulation profile studies including plasma prothrombin time, antithrombin III,
homocysteine, protein C, protein S, lipoprotein and Factor VIII concentrations were within normal limits. The patient was treated with
intravenous heparin and thrombolysis. Thrombolysis was performed using a bolus injection of urokinase, 300,000 units, with a multisided hole
infusion catheter positioned at the right basilic and cephalic veins. The thrombolytic infusion was continued overnight via catheter. The
next day, a follow-up venogram showed partial lysis of the clot. On discharge, the swelling and pain in the right arm were much improved;
the platelet count improved and the patient was kept on warfarin until follow up. Two months later, the patient had no symptoms and the
follow up color Doppler ultrasonogram showed no evidence of a thrombus in the previously damaged vein (Figure 2, 3). Our patient was
admitted in a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state with severe dehydration. Thirty hours after placement of a subclavian venous catheter, he
developed symptomatic deep vein thrombosis of the upper extremity, from the right internal jugular vein to the brachial vein. This patient
had no prior history of venous thromboembolism and his admission coagulation profile was within normal limits. There was no evidence of
cancer. It is well known that arterial thromboembolic events, such as myocardial infarction, cerebrovascular accidents and peripheral and
mesenteric arterial thrombosis, occur more frequently in diabetic patients6, 7). In contrast to these arterial thrombotic events, diabetes
has not been identified as a risk factor for venous thromboembolism2, 8). However, recent studies show that the risk of venous
thromboembolism, among diabetic patients, is greater than in the non-diabetic population8). Several potential mechanisms might account for
an increased tendency for thrombosis with hyperglycemia1, 9). All components of the hemostatic system may be altered with diabetes mellitus.
Vascular endothelium abnormalities, the activation of platelets and clotting factors, elevated coagulation activation markers, decreased
levels of the anticoagulant protein C, and a relatively inhibited fibrinolytic system are all associated with the mechanism of thrombosis in
hyperglycemia1, 11). Increased circulating platelet aggregates and higher plasma levels of platelet release products demonstrate platelet
hyperactivity in diabetes mellitus. Dehydration associated with hyperglycemia may be a contributing factor for enhancing venous stasis as
part of Virchow's triad of the pathogenesis of deep vein thrombosis. This constellation of findings supports the clinical observation that
diabetes is a hypercoagulable state1, 10, 11). In contrast to the high prevalence of deep vein thrombosis, upper extremity thrombosis is
relatively infrequent. Thrombosis of the upper extremities accounts for only 1% to 4% of all case of deep vein thrombosis4, 5). Symptomatic
and extensive upper extremity venous thrombosis, as in our patient, is rare5, 12, 13). A well established risk factor for deep venous
thrombosis of the upper extremity is placement of a central venous catheter13, 14). Catheter related thrombosis may be caused by several
factors. Venous stenosis and stasis is thought to develop from a combination of local venous wall irritation during catheter insertion or
during infusion of medicine, as well as a foreign body response. Patients with incorrectly placed catheter tips are more likely to develop
deep vein thrombosis15, 16). In our case, a number of veins, from internal jugular and subclavian to brachial and basilic, showed
thrombosis. There was swelling, erythema and pain of the upper arm and neck. Symptomatic and extensive central venous catheter related
thrombosis is infrequent, although the incidence of asymptomatic central venous catheter-related thrombosis diagnosed by venographic studies
has been reported to be as high as 66%.17) Deep venous thrombosis is closely associated with age. Secondary upper extremity deep vein
thrombosis usually occurs in patients older than 50, with a slightly increased incidence in women. Our patient was young compared to cases
previously reported5). The utility of routine anticoagulation in hyperosmolar hyperglycemic patients after placement of a central venous
catheter is unclear. There is inadequate clinical evidence for full anticoagulation in these patients, and the practice significantly
increases the risk of bleeding18). With the use of intravenous unfractionated heparin, the risk of major bleeding can be as high as 7%, and
the rate of fatal bleeding has been reported to be up to 2%19). However, the results of catheter-directed thrombolysis for upper extremity
deep vein thrombosis are encouraging, with nearly complete thrombus clearance reported in 72% to 88% of cases. The response appears to
depend primarily on the chronicity of the thrombus20). Current experiences support the safety and efficacy of catheter-directed thrombolysis
in patients with no contraindication to thrombolytic therapy21). Symptomatic extensive thrombosis in our patient was found within 30 hrs
after central venous catheter placement, and he was treated promptly with catheter-directed thrombolytic therapy. This case illustrates that
central venous catheterization can result in severe symptomatic upper extremity thrombosis in a young diabetic patient with a hyperosmolar
hyperglycemic state. Although the central venous catheter has a potential risk of inducing thrombus formation, it is used frequently in
patients with a hyperosmolar hyperglycemic state for fluid replacement. However, the central venous catheter should be removed as soon as
possible after the initial treatment. If edema develops in the extremity, after central venous catheter placement, the patient should be
carefully evaluated for the possibility of thrombosis, even at a younger age. Right upper arm venography shows axillo-subclavian vein
thrombosis (A) and thrombosis of the brachial and basilic veins (B). Initial color Doppler ultrasonogram (A) shows obstruction of the right
internal jugular vein (white arrow). Two months later color Doppler ultrasonogram (B) demonstrates a completely resolved thrombosis within
the right internal jugular vein (black arrow). Initial color Doppler ultrasonogram (A) shows obstruction of the right axillary vein (white
arrow). Two months later color Doppler ultrasonogram (B) demonstrates a completely resolved thrombosis within the right axillary vein (black
arrow).
