Transverse myelitis is an acute spinal cord demyelination giving rise to dysaesthesia across chest or abdomen with sphincter dysfunction
following viral, bacterial infection or vaccination. Annually millions of active immunization with vaccines are carried out globally with
occasional case reports of transverse myelitis as adverse reactions1. Acute transverse myelitis (ATM) following rabies,rubella,measles2,
influenza, polio, cholera, diphtheria, pertusis and tetanus3 has been reported in the literature but typhoid vaccine (ViCPS) induced acute
myelitis has not been documented in the recent literature. We report a case of typhoid vaccine induced ATM. A 19-year-old man presented with
paraesthesia and weakness in both legs 5 days after intramuscular ViCPS typhoid vaccine [Aventis, Pasteur]. The day after vaccination he
developed fever, malaise and pain and swelling at the injection site (right deltoid). On the 5th day post-injection, he developed sensory
loss of all modalities (pain, touch, temperature, vibration and joint sensation) from his lower abdomen to both legs. There was gradual,
progressive, symmetrical weakness of both legs - initially flaccid - followed by spastic paraplegia with retention of urine and overflow
dribbling. Lower limb power was reduced to 3/5 with bilateral hypertonia after a week of onset of weakness. Abdominal reflexes were absent.
Deep tendon reflexes of the lower limbs were exaggerated with a prominent ankle clonus. Both plantars were extensor. Other systems were
normal. Investigations revealed a normal haemogram, biochemistry, chest skiagram and electrocardiogram. Cerebrospinal fluid: 5
lymphocytes/mm3, 80mg/dl protein, 44mg/dl sugar [blood sugar 110mg/dl] and sterile culture. Oligoclonal bands were not detected. Spinal
X-rays, nerve conduction studiey and visual evoked potentials were normal. Other relevant investigations including ANF, anti-dsDNA antibody,
VDRL and p24 antigen were negative. To exclude compressive myelopathy, a magnetic resonance imaging with gadolinium contrast was done and
revealed a centrally located high intensity signal in the T2 weighted film extending over several spinal segments at T12-L4 level (Fig 1a &
1b). T1WT: Low signal T2WT: High signal Intravenous pulse methylprednisolone was given for 3 days followed by oral prednisolone tapering
over 2 weeks. The patient started feeling better after receiving active aerobic physiotherapy and was subsequently sent to a neurology
centre. In 1990 D'Costa reported a case of ATM following cholera, typhoid and polio vaccination4 and in 1955 McKelvy reported a case
following TAB inoculation5. Our case is similar as evidenced by paraesthesia and leg weakness with upgoing plantars, exaggerated reflexes,
loss of all modalities of sensation from lower abdomen to both feet and urinary retention. Here lower spinal demyelination involved
pyramidal and lateral spinothalamic tracts, posterior column and the autonomic nervous system. Neurological complications of vaccination,
namely, convulsion, coma, hemiparesis, paraparesis, blindness and even multiple cranial nerve palsies6 mostly occurred within 24 hours of
vaccination. In our case, symptoms appeared 5 days after vaccination and complete neurological deficit was established within 7 days. It
fulfilled the proposed diagnostic criteria and nosology of acute transverse myelitis as described by the Transverse Myelitis Consortium
Working Group7. Nucleus pulposus embolism (NPE) has bimodal peak of 22 and 60 years, presents with sudden, severe pain in the neck and
interscapular region (70%) and rapid onset (minutes to hours) paralysis. These features distinguish it from the present ATM. Though
influenza-like side effects are commonly seen after vaccination, there was no temporal evidence of upper respiratory viral infection at the
time of vaccination. We suggest that TAB vaccination triggered the development of ATM; post-vaccination fever may have played secondary role
in pathogenesis of ATM. The pathogenesis of ATM is unclear. Immunologically mediated direct insult on the central nervous system by antigen-
antibody reaction has been postulated8. Other aetiologies of ATM (including systemic lupus, sarcoid, Sjogren syndrome, Bechet disease,
syphilis, Lyme disease and HIV) have been excluded by history and laboratory tests. The spinal form of multiple sclerosis was excluded by
contrast enhanced MR imaging which revealed the centrally located high signal intensity occupied more than two thirds of the cross-sectional
area of the cord. There were no peripheral plaques. The peripheral contrast enhancement of high intensity signal excludes multiple sclerosis
in which enhancement in the central zone of peripherally located high signal intensity on T2 weighted images are seen9. The best treatment
often depends on a timely and accurate diagnosis. Identification of the aetiology may suggest some medical treatment, whereas no clearly
established treatment currently exists for idiopathic ATM. Establishment of a diagnostic algorithm will likely lead to improved care,
although it is recognized that the entire evaluation may not need to be performed for each patient. Prognosis of vaccine induced transverse
myelitis is unsatisfactory and tends to linger for prolonged period with residual paralysis. Typhoid vaccine-induced myelitis has not been
reported in Nepal though the prevalence of typhoid is high. It is pertinent to mention that in this era of prevention we should be cautious
about rare uncommon complication of vaccination against common diseases and to follow the universal rule of avoidance of vaccination during
intercurrent illness. We are grateful to Prof. PVS Rana, Consultant neurologist, Manipal Teaching Hospital, Pokhara, Nepal and Dr.TK
Banerjee, Senior Consultant neurologist, Peerless Superspeciality Hospital, Kolkata, India, for their valuable guidance in writing this
paper. The Authors have no conflict of interest to declare
