To report an effect of the full tendon transposition augmented with posterior intermuscular suture and recession-resection surgery, for the
patient with monocular elevation deficiency (MED) and large exotropia. Interventional case report. Full tendon transposition augmented with
posterior intermuscular suture and recession-resection surgery was performed for a 26-year-old male patient had monocular elevation
deficiency (MED) and large exotropia. Preoperative angle of deviation was 56 prism diopters (PD) hypotropia and 45 PD right exotropia,
compared with 18 PD left hypertropia and 10 PD right esotropia postoperatively. Essotropia persisted after 2.5 years, however, and so the
right medial rectus was recessed after removal of the previous posterior intermuscular suture. At a three-year follow-up after the second
surgery, alignment was straight in the primary position at near and far distances. Full tendon transposition augmented with posterior
intermuscular suture and recession-resection surgery was effective for a patient with MED associated with significant horizontal deviation,
and a second operation was easily performed when overcorrection occurred. Monocular elevation deficiency (MED) is a syndrome characterized
by unilaterally impaired upgaze above the midline. About 60% of patients with MED have associated significant horizontal deviation that
necessitates multiple extraocular muscle surgery or normal fellow eye surgery.1-3 However, these interventions carry a risk of serious
complications such as anterior segment ischemia following multiple extraocular muscle surgery, and many patients refuse operation on their
normal eye. Full tendon transposition augmented with posterior intermuscular suture and recession-resection surgery effectively corrected a
patient with MED associated with significant horizontal deviation. Additionally, the second recession surgery was easily performed when
overcorrection occurred. A 26-year-old male patient had MED and large exotropia from birth, and a marked limitation of supraduction in the
affected eye. He had no significant medical or ophthalmic history of prior trauma. An examination revealed best corrected visual acuities of
20/40 in his right eye and 20/20 in his left eye. Preoperative angle of deviation was 56 prism diopters (PD) hypotropia and 45 PD exotropia
of the right eye (Fig. 1a). The intraoperative force duction test was negative. The full tendon transposition of horizontal recti muscles to
superior rectus muscle parallel to the spiral of Tillaux was performed after lateral rectus muscle recession 9.0 mm and medial rectus muscle
resection 5.0 mm (Fig. 1b). The transposed horizontal recti muscles were augmented with a posterior intermuscular suture as we previously
described.4 Briefly, the posterior augmentation consisted of a 5-0 non-absorbable polyester suture with a T-5 spatulated needle (Dacron;
Ethicon) that was placed through 25% of the belly of each transposed and paralytic rectus muscle at 7 mm posterior from the original muscle
insertion. Postoperative angle of deviation improved to 18 PD hypertropia of the left eye and 10 PD esotropia of the right eye (Fig. 1a).
Binocular single visual fields improved to 65° from 0°. 10 PD esotropia of the right eye persisted after 2.5 years, leading the patient to
complain about the cosmetic problem. Accordingly, the right medial rectus was recessed 5.0 mm from the spiral of Tillaux after removal of
the posterior intermuscular suture. At a three-year follow-up, alignment was straight in the primary position at near and far distances.
There were no complications such as anterior segment ischemia during the surgery and postoperative follow-up. Surgery is indicated in MED if
there is vertical deviation in the primary gaze, deviation causing suppression and amblyopia, diplopia in the primary gaze, and contracted
binocular fields. In patients with MED associated with a significant horizontal deviation, multiple extraocular muscle surgery or normal
fellow eye surgery are generally necessary.1-3 Most patients or their parents, however, do not allow surgery in the normal fellow eye, and
surgery on the multiple extraocular muscles may cause anterior segment ischemia. Full tendon transposition augmented with posterior
intermuscular suture and recession-resection surgery can effectively correct patients with MED associated with significant horizontal
deviation, while reducing the risk of anterior segment ischemia and avoiding an operation on the normal eye. Additionally, the intermuscular
suture can be easily removed even when a second operation is needed. In this case report, full tendon transposition augmented with posterior
intermuscular suture and recession-resection surgery was an effective and safe procedure in a patient with MED associated with significant
horizontal deviation. Additionally, the second recession surgery was easily performed when overcorrection was occurred. This manuscript was
presented as a poster at the 91st Meeting of the Korean Ophthalmological Society, Busan, Korea, April 23-24, 2004. Authors do not have any
financial conflict of interest in the subject matter in this manuscript. (a) Photograph of a patient with monocular elevation deficiency
associated with significant exotropia. Preoperatively 56 PD right hypotropia and 45 PD right exotropia (Top). Postoperatively 18 PD left
hypertropia and 10 PD right esotropia (Bottom). (b) Treatment of the condition with full tendon transposition augmented with posterior
intermuscular suture and right lateral rectus muscle recession-right medial rectus muscle resection.
