We describe our successful experience using a capsular tension ring (CTR) and iris repair during cataract surgery in a patient with
bilateral coloboma. A 67-year-old woman had no history of trauma, but had zonular deficiency and inferonasal iris defects in both eyes. An
extracapsular cataract extraction and intraocular lens (IOL) scleral fixation was performed in the left eye. A CTR was implanted in the
right eye through a sclerocorneal incision. After the IOL was placed centrally in the capsular bag, two paracenteses were made at the limbus
(5 o'clock and 7 o'clock). A long, straight needle was passed through the 7 o'clock paracentesis site into a angled, blunt tipped 27 gauge
needle inserted from the 5 o'clock paracentesis. The two needles were pulled out at 5 o'clock. After inserting the long needle into the
blunt tipped needle at 7 o'clock, both were passed back through the 7 o'clock paracentesis site. The needles were pulled out again at the 5
o'clock paracentesis site tied. Equal tension was used to tie both sides. Visual acuity improved to 20/20 in the right eye. Both capsular
tension ring implantation and iris repair was successfully performed at the time of cataract surgery in a coloboma patient, which resulted
in improvements in visual function and cosmesis. The term coloboma refers to "a notch, hole, or fissure in any ocular structure from a
congenital malformation or an acquired process".1 Eyes with congenital colobomata and cataracts are at greater risk for complications during
cataract surgery because of ocular malformations resulting from embryological maldevelopment.2 Given the abnormal development of the sclera,
uvea, and zonules, the structural integrity of the globe may be compromised, increasing the risk of vitreous loss during cataract
extraction. The development of phacoemulsification, and continuous curvilinear capsulorhexis (CCC) techniques have made it possible to
improve cataract surgery outcomes. However, visual function may not become normal after surgery due to iris malformation and zonular
defects. Nevertheless, the insertion of a capsular tension ring (CTR) into the capsular bag to maintain its circular contour has improved in
both visual outcomes and surgical safety. The use of CTRs has been proven to be beneficial for IOL centration.3 When a zonular defect is
present and a CTR is inserted at any stage of the procedure to reestablish the capsule's contour, the CTR protects against capsular fornix
aspiration, consecutive zonular dialysis extension, irrigation fluid flow behind the capsule, vitreous herniation into the anterior chamber,
IOL decentration and closure of the capsular opening. Our modified iris suture technique provides an acceptable functional and cosmetic
repair of iris coloboma. In addition, the iris repair is beneficial for stabilization of the IOL in the event of capsular rupture. We
describe our successful experience using a CTR, and the repair of the iris during cataract surgery in a patient with bilateral coloboma. A
67-year-old woman presented to department of ophthalmology, Hanyang University Guri Hospital in April 2004 reporting visual deterioration in
both eyes. Aware of her poor vision, the patient had no history of oculopathy, ophthalmic surgery, trauma, or disease. On initial
examination, the manifest refraction was -1.50 diopters (D) with a best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/200 in the right eye and -2.00D
with a BCVA of hand motion in the left eye. Intraocular pressure was 15 mmHg in the right eye and 14 mmHg in the left eye. A slit lamp
examination with mydriasis revealed a corticonuclear cataract and dehiscence of the inferior zonules without phacodonesis or subluxation of
the lenses. Fundoscopy showed a tessellated fundus with inferior chorioretinal coloboma that did not involve the macula or optic nerves in
the right eye. We were not able to observe the retina in the left eye due to a dense brunescent cataract. Ascan biometry demonstrated an
axial ocular length of 24.29 mm in the right eye and 25.38 mm in the left eye. Under retrobulbar anesthesia, phacoemulsification was
attempted on the left eye. Because the brunescent lens could not be phacoemulsified, we performed extracapsular cataract extraction (ECCE).
During the operation, a posterior capsule rupture and a serious zonule defect was detected, so a scleral fixation of the IOL was performed.
After two days, the procedures were done in the right eye by the same surgeon (J.H. Kim) according to a standardized protocol. Under
retrobulbar anesthesia, a 3 mm sclerocorneal incision, paracentesis at the 2 o'clock position, CCC with a bent 25-gauge needle, and
hydrodissection were performed uneventfully. Despite mild phacodonesis, the lens was normally located. Phacoemulsification was done in the
bag using a stop and chop technique. Subsequently, high viscosity sodium hyaluronate was injected in order to expand the lens capsule
completely. Because zonular weakness can cause lens decentration, a CTR was implanted through a sclerocorneal incision using a Sinskey hook.
After the IOL (MA 60BM, Alcon速, USA) was placed centrally in the capsular bag, acetylcholine chloride 1:100 (Miochol速, Novartis速, USA) was
injected through a side-port. Two paracenteses at 5 o'clock and 7 o'clock limbus were prepared for the iris repair. A long, straight needle
(10-0 prolene Ethicon 1713; Johnson & Johnson速, USA) was introduced into the anterior chamber through the 7 o'clock paracentesis site. The
right and left iris borders were picked up by the long, straight needle while the angled, blunt tipped 27 gauge needle, inserted from the 5
o'clock paracentesis, countered the pressure of the long, straight needle (Fig. 2) The straight needle was then inserted into the blunt
tipped 27 gauge needle (Fig. 1). Both needles were pulled out through the 5 o'clock paracentesis (Fig. 3). After inserting the long needle
into the blunt tipped needle from 7 o'clock, both were passed back through the 7 o'clock paracentesis site (Fig. 4). During this procedure,
the blunt end of the long needle must be inserted first into the anterior chamber. If the sharp end of the needle gets into the anterior
chamber first, it could go through the limbal tissue around the paracentesis and the thread could get caught on the limbal tissue. A single
knot was loosely made (Fig. 5) and slowly tightened. The needles were pulled out again at the 5 o'clock paracentesis site to be tied (Fig.
6). Equal tension was used to tie both sides (Fig. 7). The knot was trimmed using vannas scissors through the sclerocorneal incision. This
iris repair procedure was repeated three times. At 2 weeks postoperatively, visual acuity was 20/20 in the right eye and 20/40 in the left
eye. In comparison with the left eye, the right inferonasal coloboma showed significant cosmetic and functional improvement (Fig. 8). At 3
months postoperatively, the IOL and pupil were centrally positioned in the left eye and no secondary problems were present. Two points
should be considered regarding ocular coloboma during cataract surgery. Zonular and iris defects create potential misalignment problems of
the pupillary center and the center of the intraocular lens.4 Moreover, iris defects may be associated with photophobia, and glare. We used
CTR and repaired iris defects to improve this problem. The use of CTRs has been proven to be beneficial for IOL centration. When a zonular
defect is present and a CTR is inserted at any stage of the procedure to reestablish the capsule's contour, the CTR protects against
capsular fornix aspiration, consecutive zonular dialysis extension, irrigation fluid flow behind the capsule, vitreous herniation into the
anterior chamber, IOL decentration, and closure of the capsular opening.5 We performed a phacoemulsification with CTR implantation in the
right eye. The IOL was also centrally stabilized. In the case of Mizuno et al.6, before performing phacoemulsification, they inserted a CTR
in order to perform the phacoemulsificaiton in a stabilized condition. However, in our case we inserted the CTR following the
phacoemulsification. In contrast to Mizuno, we attempted to well centralize the IOL in the capsular bag. Iris suture and prosthetic iris
devices improve postoperative outcomes by reducing glare disability in iris deficiency and absence. An iris suture method is generally used,
because prosthetics are generally implanted only in special situations and are very expensive.7 Therefore, we repaired the iris using the
modified suture method. Moreover, a small stab incision is made in the clear cornea at 6 o'clock to retrieve the thread at the point when
most surgeons repair the inferior iris defect.4,8-10 In the modified McCannel suture method used by Blackmon, a long, straight needle was
employed, similar to our method in limbus, but the thread was retrieved at 6 o'clock.10 In Siepser's slip knot method, tying was done on one
side.11 However, these methods sometimes make it difficult to retrieve a part of the thread, especially when repairing a large iris defect.
If the iris is excessively strained, iridodialysis may occur. Siepser's method requires a larger wound so that the thread can be pulled out.
The surgical technique used on our patient differs from these techniques. We retrieved one end of the thread at the opposite site using a
blunt 27 gauge needle, and tied it with same tension on both sides. Our technique has no need for an additional wound through which to pull
out the thread because we use the cataract operation incision. Additionally, this method does not have a steep learning curve. This same
technique can be used to repair other pupillary abnormalities such as those following trauma, previous sector iridectomies, and pupils that
are permanently dilated. We had to perform scleral fixation in the left eye because the posterior capsular rupture occurred due to a zonular
defect during ECCE. Moreover, we did not restore the iris defect. Consequently, instability of the lens and a permanent iris defect
remained, causing glare and a cosmetic problem in the left eye. Despite this problem, at 3 months postoperatively, the IOL and pupil were
well positioned in the center due to CTR and iris repair. The patient did not suffer from glare and has good visual acuity (20/20) in the
right eye in comparison to the left eye (20/40). In conclusion, we recommend using CTR and iris suturing techniques for functional and
cosmetic iris abnormalities in coloboma while performing cataract surgery. A long, straight needle was passed through the 7 o'clock
paracentesis into the angled, blunt needle coming from 5 o'clock. The right and left iris borders were picked up by the long, straight
needle while the angled, blunt needle countered the pressure of the needle. The needle was pulled out to the opposite site (5 o'clock).
After inserting the long needle into the blunt needle again, both were passed back through the 7 o'clock. A single knot was made loosely.
The needle was pulled out through the 5 o'clock limbus to be tied. The tying was made with equal tension in both sides. Comparison between
the preoperative and postoperative eye. Inferonasal coloboma showed significant cosmetic and functional improvement (10A: preoperative eye,
10B: postoperative eye).
