Apical ballooning syndrome (or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy) is a syndrome of transient left ventricular apical ballooning. Although first
described in Japanese patients, it is now well reported in the Caucasian population. The syndrome mimicks an acute myocardial infarction but
is characterised by the absence of obstructive coronary disease. We describe a serious and poorly understood complication of Takotsubo
cardiomyopathy. We present the case of a 65 year-old lady referred to us from a rural hospital where she was treated with thrombolytic
therapy for a presumed acute anterior myocardial infarction. Four hours after thrombolysis she developed acute pulmonary oedema and a new
systolic murmur. It was presumed she had acute mitral regurgitation secondary to a ruptured papillary muscle, ischaemic dysfunction or an
acute ventricular septal defect. Echocardiogram revealed severe mitral regurgitation, left ventricular apical ballooning, and systolic
anterior motion of the mitral valve with significant left ventricular outflow tract gradient (60–70 mmHg). Coronary angiography revealed no
obstructive coronary lesions. She had an intra-aortic balloon pump inserted with no improvement in her parlous haemodynamic state. We
elected to replace her mitral valve to correct the outflow tract gradient and mitral regurgitation. Intra-operatively the mitral valve was
mildly myxomatous but there were no structural abnormalities. She had a mechanical mitral valve replacement with a 29 mm St Jude valve.
Post-operatively, her left ventricular outflow obstruction resolved and ventricular function returned to normal over the subsequent 10 days.
She recovered well. This case represents a serious and poorly understood association of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy with acute pulmonary
oedema, severe mitral regurgitaton and systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve with significant left ventricular outflow tract
obstruction. The sequence of our patient's presentation suggests that the apical ballooning caused geometric alterations in her left
ventricle that in turn led to acute and severe mitral regurgitation, systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve and left ventricular
outflow tract obstruction. The left ventricular outflow tract obstruction and mitral regurgitation were corrected by mechanical mitral valve
replacement. We describe a variant of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy with acute mitral regurgitation, systolic anterior motion of the mitral valve
leaflet and left ventricular outflow tract obstruction of a dynamic nature. Apical ballooning syndrome (or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy) is a
syndrome of transient left ventricular apical ballooning. It was first described in Japanese patients and is now well reported in the
Caucasian population. The syndrome mimicks an acute myocardial infarction but is characterised by the absence of obstructive coronary artery
disease. We describe a serious and poorly understood complication of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy. We present the case of a 65 year-old lady
referred to us from a rural hospital where she was treated with thrombolytic therapy for a presumed acute anterior myocardial infarct. She
had presented with central chest pain radiating down her left arm with ECG findings of 2 mm ST elevation in V2 and V3. There was no recent
history of psychological stress although she had been on antidepressant drugs for two years. Four hours after thrombolysis she developed
acute pulmonary oedema and a new systolic murmur. At this stage it was presumed she had acute mitral regurgitation secondary to a ruptured
papillary muscle, ischaemic dysfunction or an acute ventricular septal defect. She was transferred on heparin and glyceryl trinitrate
infusion, in acute pulmonary oedema (confirmed by chest X-ray), with a systolic blood pressure of 110 mmHg, and heart rate of 130/minute.
Urgent echocardiogram showed severe mitral regurgitation (see Figure 1). Her mitral valve annulus was slightly widened at 3.2 cm and
subvalvular structures were intact. She also had left ventricular apical ballooning (LVAB) and systolic anterior motion (SAM) of the mitral
valve leaflet with septal contact – left ventricular outflow tract gradient (LVOT) 60–70 mmHg (see Figures 2 and 3). Coronary angiography
fourteen hours after her presentation showed no obstructive coronary lesions. Ventriculogram revealed akinesis of the anterolateral wall and
apex of her left ventricle, more extensive than any single coronary territory, and grade 4/4 mitral regurgitation (see Figures 4 and 5).
Mitral regurgitation. Left Ventricular Apical Ballooning (LVAB). Systolic motion of the anterior leaflet of the mitral valve (SAM).
Ventriculogram (Diastole). Ventriculogram (Systole). She had an intra-aortic balloon pump (IABP) inserted and was transferred to theatre
shortly thereafter. She was in cardiogenic shock, with severe MR and SAM still prominent, despite the IABP. We elected to replace her mitral
valve, and at operation, the mitral valve was mildly myxomatous but there were no structural abnormalities, chordae and papillary muscles
being intact. She had a mechanical mitral valve replacement (MVR) with a 29 mm St Jude valve. The anterior leaflet was excised and PTFE
(gore-tex CV4) was used to reconstruct the subvalvular apparatus. The posterior leaflet was plicated to the annulus. Post-operatively there
was no LV outflow obstruction and ventricular function improved to within normal limits by the 10th post-operative day. She recovered well.
Apical ballooning syndrome (or Takotsubo cardiomyopathy) is a syndrome of transient left ventricular apical ballooning which resembles a
Japanese octopus trap ("tako-tsubo"). It was initially described in Japanese patients and was thought to be secondary to multivessel
coronary spasm . The syndrome mimicks an acute myocardial infarction but is characterised by the absence of obstructive coronary artery
disease. In a large series of 88 patients with the syndrome, LV function was abnormal at presentation but improved rapidly from 41± 11%
(range: 10–62%) to 64 ± 10% (range: 44% to 88%, p < 0.0001) in a period of 21 ± 11 days (range: 14 to 46 days) . There have been increasing
reports of this syndrome in Caucasians, with the majority of patients being post-menopausal women (82–100%, mean age 62 to 75 years) .
Several reports have found that preceding psychological stresses act to trigger the syndrome . Our patient had a complex presentation with
echocardiogram revealing extensive anteroapical akinesis, SAM and MR. The sequence of our patient's presentation suggests that the apical
ballooning caused geometric alterations in her LV that in turn led to acute and severe MR, SAM and LVOT obstruction. Despite maximal medical
therapy including IABP placement, the SAM persisted and probably prevented the usual recovery seen in this syndrome. Intra-operatively,
there was no obvious acute alteration in the anatomical structure of her mitral valve, but given the degree of MR and haemodynamic collapse
despite IABP, she had a mechanical MVR. This case represents a serious and poorly understood association of Takotsubo cardiomyopathy with
acute pulmonary oedema, severe MR and SAM with significant LVOT gradient. The sequence of presentation suggests that the apical ballooning
caused geometric alterations in the LV that in turn led to acute and severe MR, SAM and LVOT obstruction. We describe a variant of Takotsubo
cardiomyopathy with acute MR, SAM and LVOT obstruction of a dynamic nature. ECG – Electrocardiogram IABP – Intra-aortic balloon pump LV –
Left ventricle LVAB – Left ventricular apical ballooning LVOT – Left ventricular outflow tract MR – Mitral regurgitation MVR – Mitral valve
replacement SAM – Systolic motion of the anterior mitral valve leaflet The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. MC cared
for the patient and drafted the manuscript. DS cared for the patient, performed the investigations that led to the patient's diagnosis and
assisted in the formulation of the manuscript. MW cared for the patient, performed the operation, prepared the images for publication and
assisted in the formulation of the manuscript All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
