We report serologic and molecular evidence of acute, febrile illness associated with Rickettsia conorii in 3 male Yorkshire terriers from
Sicily (Italy). Rickettsia conorii, transmitted by Ripicephalus sanguineus, causes Mediterranean spotted fever (MSF) in humans in
Mediterranean countries, Sub Saharan Africa and Asia (1). Rickettsia spp. seroprevalence in dogs is high (26%–60%) in disease-endemic
regions, and proximity to seroreactive dogs is a risk factor for MSF in humans (2,3). Recent studies reported the detection of Rickettsia
DNA in the blood of European dogs (4,5). However, evidence that R. conorii infection causes illness in dogs is lacking (2,3,6). Illness has
been associated with R. conorii natural infection in only 2 dogs since human MSF was described in 1932 (6). Moreover, the only clinical
signs observed in experimentally infected dogs were pain, erythema, and edema at the injection site; and regional lymphadenopathy (6). We
report infection with R. conorii ssp. conorii in 3 acutely ill, febrile Yorkshire terrier dogs, supported by PCR, DNA sequencing, and
seroconversion. Between May and September 2005, three unrelated intact male Yorkshire terriers with a mean age of 4.3 years from Catania,
Sicily, were brought to a local veterinarian; the dogs had the following histories: anorexia and lethargy of 2 days' duration (dog 1);
anorexia, lethargy, and intermittent lameness of a few days' duration (dog 2); and intermittent vomiting, anorexia, and lethargy of a few
days' duration (dog 3). Despite living mostly indoors, all 3 dogs had a recent history of tick exposure. All dogs had received current
vaccination histories and had no history of serious illness. Results of the physical examination and hematologic, biochemical, and serum
electrophoresis abnormalities at the time of onset of clinical signs and after 1 month (dogs 2 and 3) and 2 months (dog 1) of follow-up are
provided in Table 1. Treatments instituted for all 3 dogs at onset of illness are described in Table 1. *ALT, alanine aminotransferase; CRP,
C-reactive protein; GGT, γ-glutamyl transferase; MCHC, mean cell hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean cell volume; Hct, hematocrit; BUN,
blood urea nitrogen; ↑­, increase. †Reference interval: Hct 38.6%–54.5%; MCV 61–72 fL; MCHC 34–38 g/dL; segmented neutrophils
3,800–8,800/μL; bands neutrophils 0–300/μL; lymphocytes 1,300–4,100/μL; platelets 160–440 × 103/μL); total protein 5.5–7.5 g/dL; globulins
2.6–4.0 g/dL; albumin 53%–65%; α2-globulins 8.0%–14.0%; β1-globulins 2.0%–5.0%; β2-globulins 3.0%–9.0 %; γ-globulins 6.0%–15.0%); BUN 18–43
mg/dL; CRP 0.0–0.15 mg/dL; ALT 15–65 IU/L; GGT 2.0–8.0 IU/L. ‡Treatment with doxycycline (10 mg/kg/once a day by mouth/1 month) was
started. §Intravenous fluids were administered. ¶CRP was not measured. #Treatment with ceftriaxone (30 mg/kg/twice a day intravenously/for 5
days) was started. EDTA-blood and serum samples were obtained by the attending veterinarian at the time of clinical assessment (before
treatment), then 1 week later and 1 month (dogs 2 and 3) or 2 months later (dog 1). DNA extraction was performed from whole blood samples
(5,7). A quantitative PCR (qPCR) for detection of Rickettsia spp., Anaplasma phagocytophilum, Ehrlichia canis, and Leishmania infantum in
DNA samples was performed by using a Light Cycler (Roche, Mannheim, Germany). PCR amplification was carried out with Rickettsia (Rr-prim3
5´-GAAACCGAAAGAGAATCTTCCGAT-3´ and Rr-prim4 5´-TCCTAGTGTAGAGGTGAAATTCTTA-3´ ), E. canis, A. phagocytophilum (fragment of 16S rRNA gene), and
L. infantum LCSet primers and probes following manufacturer's instructions (TIB Molbiol, Centro Biotecnologie Avanzate, Genova, Italy)
(5,7). Conventional Babesia genus PCR was performed (9). Borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato qPCR was performed by a commercial laboratory
(http://www.scanelis.com). PCR results for all infectious agents listed above, with the exception of Rickettsia, were negative in all dogs.
PCRs for Rickettsia that use the outer membrane protein A (ompA) gene to amplify 632 bp (10) and 212 bp (107F 5´-GCTTTATTCACCACCTCAAC-3´ and
299R 5´-TRATCACCACCGTAAGTAAAT-3´) (7) amplicons were performed. For dog 1, a 632-bp amplicon was cloned by using the TOPO TA Cloning
(Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and sequenced (GenBank accession no. DQ518245) (7). For dogs 2 and 3, a 212-bp amplicon was subjected to
direct sequencing (accession no. DQ518246, DQ518247) (7). PCR results are summarized in Table 1. Consensus sequences were aligned [(BIOEDIT
version 7.0 (ClustalW)] with known sequences in GenBank using the basic local alignment search tool (BLAST; available from
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST/). The sequence obtained from all 3 dogs was 100% homologous to a portion of the complete genome sequence
corresponding to the ompA gene from R. conorii (Malish 7, accession no. AE008674). Immunofluorescent assays to detect antibodies to R.
rickettsii, R. conorii, B. burgdorferi sensu stricto, E. canis, Babesia canis, A. phagocytophilum, L. infantum, Bartonella henselae, and B.
vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi antigens were performed (3,7). Results are presented in Table 2. *IFA, immunofluorescence assay; Ig, immunoglobulin;
Neg, negative. †All dogs were seronegative for L. infantum, E. canis, B. canis, B. henselae, and B. vinsonii ssp. berkhoffi at all time
points. Clinicopathologic abnormalities detected in these dogs at initial examination, including acute onset of fever, lethargy,
thrombocytopenia, anemia, mildly increased liver enzyme activities and hypoalbuminemia, were very similar to abnormalities associated with
spotted fever group (SFG) rickettsioses in dogs and humans (1). In addition, R. conorii DNA was amplified in all dogs during the acute
illness. Further evidence for R. conorii infection as a cause of the associated clinical signs was provided by the subsequent failure to
detect DNA in dogs 1 and 2, 1 week after treatment with doxycycline and the rapid resolution of clinical signs 2 days after initiating
doxycycline therapy. Clinical signs in dog 3 resolved in 4 days, while the dog was receiving ceftriaxone, which has no known anti-
rickettsial efficacy (1). Spontaneous immune clearance of R. conorii likely accounted for the resolution of clinical signs in dog 3 (6). The
4-fold increase in IgG antibody titers in dogs 2 and 3 supports seroconversion, which is consistent with an acute R. conorii infection (11).
Additionally, the initially high IgM titer in dog 1 after the onset of illness compared with a much lower IgM titer after 65 days is also
supportive of an acute infection and is consistent with observations of human serologic test results (1). IgM titers rise rapidly and then
disappear by day 35 and 80 in dogs experimentally infected with R. conorii and R. rickettsii, respectively (6,11). However, high R.
rickettsii IgM titers are detected in dogs that do not seroconvert, based upon IgG antibodies (11). Thus, the presence of IgM supports but
does not prove acute SFG infection in dogs. Coinfection with A. phagocytophilum or B. burgdorferi could have contributed to clinical signs
observed in dog 1. This dog had a low serum A. phagocytophilum titer 7 days after initial examination and also seroconverted to B.
burgdorferi. A. phagocytophilum causes an acute febrile illness in dogs and humans, similar to the findings described here (12). B.
burgdorferi does not cause clinical signs in dogs until 60–150 days after experimental infection (13); therefore, despite seroconversion,
the acute clinical signs in dog 1 were not likely to have been related to B. burgdorferi infection. Moreover, PCR amplification of DNA from
organisms other than R. conorii was not found in any dog. All dogs were intact, male, genetically unrelated Yorkshire terriers. Although an
increased risk for Rocky Mountain spotted fever has not been reported in Yorkshire terriers, purebred dogs infected with R. rickettsii
appear to be more prone to clinical illness (14). Notably, this breed seems to be at increased risk for Babesia canis infection (15). Male
dogs and men may be at increased risk for infection and may develop more severe illness with R. rickettsii and R. conorii (1,14), and male
dogs are more likely to be R. conorii seroreactive (3). It has been suggested that more severe illness may develop in English springer
spaniels with suspected phosphofructokinase deficiency and persons with glucose 6-phosphate dehydrogenase deficiency when infected with R.
rickettsii and R. conorii (1,14). Although inherited immunodeficiencies have not been reported in Yorkshire terriers, and all dogs were
previously healthy, an inherited metabolic or immunologic defect cannot be ruled out because specific testing was not performed. Although a
metabolic or immunologic defect may be necessary for illness to develop in dogs of various breeds after R. conorii infection, other
potential explanations can be made for the discrepancy between high R. conorii seroprevalence rates among healthy dogs and lack of reports
of clinical illness. The high R. conorii seroprevalence in healthy dog populations suggests that exposure to SFG rickettsiae is common.
However, the acute, nonspecific, and potentially self-limiting nature of R. conorii infection, combined with a low index of suspicion by
regional veterinarians and a historical lack of specific diagnostic techniques, may have precluded the prior association of clinical signs
with R. conorii infection in dogs. Further evidence should be gathered regarding the extent to which R. conorii causes clinical disease in
dogs. Suggested citation for this article: Solano-Gallego L, Kidd L, Trotta M, di Marco M, Caldin M, Furlanello T, Breitschwerdt E. Febrile
illness associated with Rickettsia conorii infection in dogs from Sicily. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2006 Dec [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1212.060326 We thank Silvia Beccaro, Julie Bradley, and Matthew Poore for serologic testing, Claudia Zampieron
for molecular testing, and Barbara Hegarty for helpful discussions. Dr Solano-Gallego is a veterinarian at the Private Veterinary Hospital
and Laboratory San Marco (Padua, Italy). Her primary research interests include the study of vectorborne zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats.
