Metastases to the breast from extramammary tumours are uncommon, and metastatic renal cell carcinoma to the breast is extremely rare. We
report a metastasis to the breast from a renal primary with the radiological and histopathological features. An 81-year-old lady was seen in
the breast clinic for a right breast mass after sustaining a fall. Clinical examination and investigations revealed a metastatic cancer from
a renal primary. She received surgical treatment only and is under regular follow-up in the oncology clinic. The treatment strategy for
metastatic breast diseases is based on a proper assessment of such cases by surgeons, radiologists and histopathologists. Metastases to the
breast from extramammary tumours are uncommon, and metastatic renal cell carcinoma to the breast is extremely rare . We report a metastasis
to the breast from a renal primary with the radiological and histopathological features. An 81 years old lady had a right radical
nephrectomy in 1999 for conventional renal cell cancer (RCC). She was discharged from the urology and oncology clinics in 2004 after 5 1/2
years follow-up with no signs of local or regional recurrence. In December 2004, she noticed a lump in the right breast after sustaining a
fall. She was referred to the breast clinic in July 2005 for further assessment. Clinically, she had a mass in the upper outer quadrant of
the right breast. The left breast was normal and there was no axillary lymphadenopathy. Abdominal examination was normal. Radiology
confirmed a 17 × 13 × 9 mm well circumscribed hypoechoic mass in the right upper quadrant of the right breast (Figure 1). The mass was core
biopsied. Ultrasonography showing hypoechoic mass in the right breast. The histopathological examination revealed tumour growth consistent
with conventional renal cell carcinoma. Tumour cells strongly expressed vimentin. CT scan of the chest and abdomen showed a 12 mm mass in
the right breast and a 2.7 cm metastatic deposit at the right renal bed (Figures 2 and 3). The lungs and the liver were normal. The lump was
excised in October 2005. Computed tomography showing well-defined, round mass in the right breast (arrow). Computed tomography showing
tumour mass in the renal bed (arrow points to surgical clips). The gross examination of the specimen confirmed metastasis from a renal
primary (Figure 4). There was no evidence of in situ ductal or lobular disease. Photomicrograph showing islands of tumour cells with clear
cytoplasm, lying in fibrovascular stroma (Hematoxylin & Eosin, 10×). The patient was offered Interferon treatment, but she preferred to hold
on therapy as an alternative. She is under regular follow-up in the oncology clinic. Metastases to the breast from extramammary primary
malignancies are rare. The incidence of metastasis to the breast in various clinical autopsy studies ranges from 5%–6.6% . Both breasts are
equally affected and bilateral involvement is not uncommon. Solitary discrete lesions occur in 85% . The primitive neoplasms that most
frequently metastasise to the breast are malignant melanoma, lymphoma, lung cancer and in men, prostatic cancer . Breast metastasis from a
renal tumour is extremely rare, accounting for 3% of the cases. Clinically, metastatic lesions in the breast present as painless swellings
with rapid growth . Unlike primary tumours, the skin is not involved and the axillary node involvement is variable . Mammogram shows well-
circumscribed lesions, which lack microcalcifications . The course of renal cell carcinoma is extremely variable and unpredictable both in
its clinical development and metastasis . Most patients with renal cell carcinoma following nephrectomy develop multiple metastases and die
within 10 years . A preceding history of extramammary carcinoma can be helpful in suspecting a mass as a possible metastasis, as radical
surgery can be avoided and appropriate chemotherapy or radiation therapy can be ensured . A treatment strategy for metastatic breast
diseases is based on a proper assessment of such cases by surgeons, radiologists and histopathologists. The author(s) declare that they have
no competing interests. AA performed literature review, drafted and revised manuscript AV evaluated histopathological features, edited and
revised the manuscript HM evaluated radiological images MS contributed to the conception of the report NS contributed to collection of the
clinical data All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written consent of the patient was obtained for publication of this case
report.
