A 52-year-old female presented to an otolaryngologist with a hoarse voice. An endocrine opinion was sought to exclude an underlying
endocrinopathy. She had been investigated three years previously by a neurologist for right-sided facial pain. A magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scan had shown a small “cyst” in the pituitary gland. She had been reassured that this was a coincidental finding. The patient did not
volunteer any specific symptoms and had no complaints other than a hoarse voice. Her appearance is shown in Figure 1. The above scenario is
increasingly common as a result of the advent of powerful imaging techniques such as MRI and computerised tomography scanning, which
identify “coincidental” pituitary abnormalities in a significant minority of the adult population. Nonetheless, when such lesions are
identified they warrant further characterisation. The clinician confronted with such a case should ask the following questions: Is there
evidence of over secretion of pituitary hormone(s)?Is there evidence of deficiency of pituitary hormones?Is there evidence of pressure on
structures surrounding the pituitary fossa? Is there evidence of over secretion of pituitary hormone(s)? Is there evidence of deficiency of
pituitary hormones? Is there evidence of pressure on structures surrounding the pituitary fossa? The commonest cause of excess pituitary
hormone secretion is a prolactinoma. It usually presents with galactorrhoea, oligo- or amenorrhoea, and hirsutism in premenopausal women and
with hypogonadism in men. Cushing disease and acromegaly are less common and gonadotrophin-secreting adenomas and thyrotrophinomas are rare.
Mild hyperprolactinaemia is commonly found in association with large pituitary tumours and is usually due to distortion of the pituitary
stalk. This “disconnection” syndrome must be distinguished from a true prolactin-producing adenoma, as the treatment of the latter (with
dopamine agonist drugs) is radically different from that of other types of pituitary adenomas. Hypopituitarism can present with features of
hypogonadism (amenorrhoea, loss of body hair, loss of libido and impotence), hypothyroidism, and hypoadrenalism. The latter, in addition to
symptoms of hypocortisolism (tiredness, dizziness, fatigue) may also be associated with loss of ability to tan and generalised
hypopigmentation. Expansion of a pituitary mass superiorly can compress the optic chiasm, thus giving rise to bitemporal hemianopia. Lateral
extension can compress cranial nerve III, IV, or VI. Occasionally pituitary tumours can bleed or infarct to cause pituitary apoplexy (sudden
headache, photophobia, cranial nerve palsies, and collapse due to hypoadrenalism and in some cases hypoglycaemia). Investigations include
pituitary function tests, formal visual field assessment, and in some cases further more detailed imaging. Despite the absence of
spontaneous symptoms, the patient admitted to increasing hand and shoe size when specifically asked, associated with a hoarse voice of three
years duration. She had also suffered from frontal headaches as well as tingling of the right index finger. Previously, she had surgery for
temporomandibular joint dysfunction. On closer inspection, there was a suggestion of some broadening of the nose and prominence of the lips,
rather large hands, and increased skin thickness (Figure 1). Visual fields were normal and Tinel's sign was positive. Blood pressure (BP)
was 160/96 mm Hg. Blood tests showed normal urea, creatinine and electrolytes, fasting glucose of 6.6 mmol/l (normal range, <5.6 mmol/l),
prolactin 330 imu/l (normal <550 imu/l), and thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) of 1.4 mIU/l (normal 0.3–4.7 mIU/l) with free T4 of 16 pmol/l
(normal 11–23 pmol/l). The sensory disturbance in the distribution of the median nerve is typical of right carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). CTS
typically presents as pain in the medial three fingers radiating into the arm, worsening during the night. Thickening of tendons or
synovitis in the carpal tunnel area causes CTS. The history, in this patient, is typical of CTS and is characterised by pain, tingling, and
numbness in the median nerve distribution. This patient does not have hypothyroidism (normal thyroid hormone and serum TSH levels) or
diabetes mellitus (although she has impaired fasting glycaemia), was not pregnant or obese, and did not have a history or clinical
manifestations of rheumatoid arthritis. The cause could be idiopathic, but the other features in the history and examination point towards
endocrinopathy as being the underlying aetiology. The diagnosis of CTS can be confirmed by an electromyogram. Hypertension associated with
problems with glucose metabolism is a common feature usually seen in people with the metabolic syndrome. Less commonly, it can be seen in
endocrine diseases like Cushing syndrome and acromegaly. The reason for hypertension and hyperglycaemia in Cushing syndrome is due to the
excess glucocorticoid levels whereas in acromegaly, it is due partly to the direct action of excess growth hormone (GH) on sodium retention
and increased insulin resistance, respectively . The symptoms of increasing soft tissue size, CTS, hypertension, hyperglycaemia, and
temporomandibular joint dysfunction make acromegaly a possible diagnosis (Box 1). The duration of symptoms as well as the previous surgery
for temporomandibular joint dysfunction suggests that the disease has been active for at least three years . The usual (in 98% of cases)
cause of acromegaly is a GH-secreting pituitary adenoma, usually a macro-adenoma (>1 cm). Other rare causes are pituitary carcinoma or GH-
releasing hormone tumours. Symptoms due to direct effect of the tumour HeadacheVisual impairmentHypopituitarismHyperprolactinaemia Headache
Visual impairment Hypopituitarism Hyperprolactinaemia Symptoms due to GH excess Soft tissue enlargementHeadacheIncreased skin tagsIncreased
sweatingAcanthosis nigricans Soft tissue enlargement Headache Increased skin tags Increased sweating Acanthosis nigricans Cardiovascular
features HypertensionBiventricular hypertrophyDiastolic dysfunction at rest and systolic dysfunction on effortEndothelial dysfunction
Hypertension Biventricular hypertrophy Diastolic dysfunction at rest and systolic dysfunction on effort Endothelial dysfunction Metabolic
and other endocrine features Impaired fasting glycaemiaImpaired glucose toleranceType 2 diabetes mellitusInsulin
resistanceDyslipidaemiaMultinodular goitreHypercalciuriaHyperparathyroidism Impaired fasting glycaemia Impaired glucose tolerance Type 2
diabetes mellitus Insulin resistance Dyslipidaemia Multinodular goitre Hypercalciuria Hyperparathyroidism Musculoskeletal features Joint
stiffnessArthropathy and osteoarthritisCarpal tunnel syndromeOsteopenia Joint stiffness Arthropathy and osteoarthritis Carpal tunnel
syndrome Osteopenia Respiratory disease Upper airway obstruction and snoringMacroglossiaObstructive sleep apnoeaThickened vocal chords and
hoarse voice Upper airway obstruction and snoring Macroglossia Obstructive sleep apnoea Thickened vocal chords and hoarse voice Neoplastic
disease Colorectal polyps and cancerProbable breast, prostate, and thyroid cancer Colorectal polyps and cancer Probable breast, prostate,
and thyroid cancer Baseline GH levels are of limited value in diagnosing acromegaly since GH is normally secreted episodically, and high
levels can also be seen in pregnancy, puberty, in response to pain, stress, malnutrition, and after a prolonged fast. The diagnosis can be
confirmed by measuring GH levels in response to an oral glucose tolerance test (OGTT) (Box 2 outlines the protocol for OGTT to diagnose
acromegaly). Insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF 1) is a protein modulated by GH and produced in many body tissues, primarily in the liver.
Serum levels of IGF 1 are fairly stable throughout the day and correlate closely with mean GH serum concentration. Fast the patient from
midnight.Insert venous cannula prior to basal sample.Administer oral 75 grams glucose at time 0 (just prior to basal blood sample) and
collect blood samples for GH and glucose at 30-minute intervals up to 120 minutes.Measure IGF 1 level with basal sample. Fast the patient
from midnight. Insert venous cannula prior to basal sample. Administer oral 75 grams glucose at time 0 (just prior to basal blood sample)
and collect blood samples for GH and glucose at 30-minute intervals up to 120 minutes. Measure IGF 1 level with basal sample. Further
investigation and management of patients with suspected pituitary disease should be undertaken in specialised endocrine centres, to which
such patients should be referred. The patient's random GH level was 55 mu/l (0–20) along with an elevated IGF 1 level of 78 nmol/l (age-
matched normal range being 12–44). She then proceeded on to an OGTT with glucose and GH level measurements; the results are outlined in
Table 1. The OGTT confirms failure of GH to suppress to levels below 2 mu/l (<1 mcg/l) as well as impaired fasting glycaemia and impaired
glucose tolerance. Other tests of anterior pituitary function (prolactin, thyroid function tests, luteinising hormone, and follicle-
stimulating hormone) as well as dynamic testing of adrenal reserve in response to synthetic ACTH (short synacthen test) were normal. MRI
studies of the pituitary gland revealed a pituitary micro-adenoma (Figure 2). This patient's case highlights the dilemma clinicians are
facing today as a result of the increasing use, availability, and precision of imaging techniques. She had a MRI scan previously that
detected a pituitary tumour. Pituitary tumours that are detected coincidentally (so called “incidentalomas”) are not uncommon with reports
of prevalence of up to 10% in adults. Given the limitations of diagnostic testing, biochemical screening requires sufficiently high pre-test
probability to make it effective. Apart from the cost factor, an imaging-first principle in any field in medicine that relies on biochemical
proof of disease leads to a cascade of tests and pursuit of false-positive results. Therefore, appropriate clinical evaluation should
precede biochemical investigations, which then may need to be confirmed by imaging techniques . The pathologic effects of increased GH
levels are progressive and are associated with increased morbidity and mortality. People with acromegaly have a 2- to 4-fold increase in
mortality rate, mostly due to cardiovascular disease . Many of the soft tissue overgrowth features as well as the increased cardiovascular
risk can be reversed, at least partly for soft tissue and completely for cardiovascular disease, by appropriate therapy . Appropriate
therapy may also reduce or even prevent mass effects caused by tumour growth in the pituitary area. It is therefore important that diagnosis
and treatment are instituted quite promptly. The underlying treatment strategy of acromegaly is to remove the pituitary tumour (especially
macro-adenomas causing mass effects), normalise GH and IGF 1 levels whilst preserving normal residual pituitary function, and relieve
symptoms. Medical, surgical, and radiotherapeutic means or, more commonly, some combination of the three can be used to try and achieve
this. Currently five different modalities of treatment are available, although surgery remains the treatment of choice. Table 2 outlines the
advantages and limitations of each modality. In this patient, it was decided that it would be prudent to try and regress some of the soft
tissue changes of acromegaly to minimise the risks of intubation during anaesthesia (although this approach is empirical and not widely
practised). This was achieved by a somatostatin receptor analogue therapy, given every month. This reduced GH levels to 35 mu/l and IGF 1
levels to 56 nmol/l. After four monthly injections of long-acting somatostatin receptor analogue therapy, the patient went on to have an
endoscopic pituitary adenomectomy. Histology of the resected adenoma revealed a GH cell pituitary adenoma. The currently accepted criteria
for cure of acromegaly is a random or mean GH level of <5 mu/l or a nadir GH level of less than 2 mu/l during an OGTT and a serum IGF 1
level within the age-adjusted normal range . The patient had an OGTT eight weeks after surgery as well as tests of anterior pituitary
function. Nadir GH levels were 8.6 mu/l with a slightly raised IGF 1 level of 51 nmol/l, signifying partial resolution of acromegaly. Other
anterior pituitary function tests were normal. Repeat MRI scan showed no definite target for further surgical intervention. She was then
started on somatostatin analogue therapy to achieve better GH level control. This reduced mean GH levels to 2.9 mu/l and normalised IGF 1
levels to 32 nmol/l. After discussion with the patient, it was decided not to proceed with radiotherapy since the acromegaly was well
controlled with medical therapy and due to the high probability of hypopituitarism associated with radiotherapy. She remains asymptomatic
and is under regular endocrine follow-up. Acromegaly is a rare condition with prevalence rates of 60 per million population. The condition
can cause significant morbidity and mortality but may present with vague features; therefore a high index of clinical suspicion is
warranted. The average delay in diagnosis after onset of the disease is about eight years. It can cause hypertension and disorders of
glucose metabolism, which are increasing in prevalence, as well as soft tissue enlargement, which may take years to be noticed. The
increasing use of imaging techniques has invented a new disorder—the incidentaloma. When incidentalomas are found in the pituitary, a
thorough history and examination is required with relevant biochemical tests. The biochemical diagnostic criteria for acromegaly have
changed over the past decade, bringing the GH diagnostic threshold to lower levels. The advent of better and more sensitive GH assays and
better imaging have helped to diagnose more subtle forms of the disease, which would not have been picked up earlier, and may therefore
hopefully reduce morbidity and mortality. Furthermore, newer treatment options, whilst expanding the therapeutic armour, also pose a
challenge to the treating endocrinologist in deciding what best suits the patient. Acromegaly is a rare but easily diagnosed condition that
can cause significant morbidity and mortality. Increasing use of imaging has led to an increase of incidental findings—the “incidentaloma”.
Symptoms of acromegaly may persist for many years before the diagnosis is made. Newer modalities of GH assays and treatment have led to
earlier diagnosis and may reduce symptoms and mortality. carpal tunnel syndrome growth hormone insulin-like growth factor 1 magnetic
resonance imaging oral glucose tolerance test thyroid stimulating hormone The patient's facial appearance shows some broadening of the nose
and supra orbital ridges (left). At right, the patient's large hands are shown. MRI of the pituitary gland showing a non-enhancing lesion
occupying the bulk of the pituitary fossa (yellow arrow). The remaining normal pituitary is pushed to the left, as is the pituitary stalk.
The optic chiasm can be seen just superior to the pituitary gland (white arrow). Salman Razvi is with the Endocrine Unit, Royal Victoria
Infirmary, Newcastle upon Tyne, United Kingdom. Petros Perros is with the Endocrine Unit, Freeman Hospital, Newcastle upon Tyne, United
Kingdom. Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this article. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no
competing interests exist.
