One of the primary forms of congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries is coronary artery fistula (CAF). It is defined as a direct
communication between the coronary artery and any surrounding cardiac chamber or vascular structure, which bypasses the myocardial capillary
bed. We present a newborn baby with a large coronary artery fistula connecting the left anterior descending (LAD) artery to the left
ventricular (LV) apex. Associated cardiac abnormalities were found: a ventricular septal defect (diameter 4 mm), a patent foramen ovale as
well as trivial tricuspid and mitral regurgitation. Here we demonstrate the echocardiograms of an extremely rare form of CAF diagnosed
within the first days of postnatal life. Normal coronary artery anatomy is characterized by two ostia placed centrally in the right and left
sinus of Valsalva. The three main coronary arteries branch superiorly to the atria and inferiorly to the ventricles; they end in broom-like
arborizations, which penetrate the myocardium . Clinical suspicion that a patient's problem may be the result of coronary anomalies remains
an important challenge in diagnosis, especially in children. Hemodynamically significant congenital anomalies of coronary arteries are shown
in Table 1. One of the primary forms is coronary artery fistula (CAF), that are defined as a direct communication of a coronary artery with
a cardiac chamber, great vessel or other vascular structure, bypassing the myocardial capillary bed. Embryologically, these fistulae seem to
represent persistent junctions of primordial epicardial vessels with intramyocardial sinusoidal circulation. CAF accounts for 0.27–0.40% of
all congenital defects and was first described by Krause in 1865 . Some studies showed that the source is most often the right coronary
artery (RCA) with the left coronary artery (LCA) being much less involved , while other studies found that the origin is 50% the RCA and 50%
LCA . Furthermore, there are studies showing that the LCA is more often the origin than RCA . The exit of the CAF is in decreasing order of
frequency the right ventricle, right atrium and the pulmonary artery . Consistent in all studies is that the LV is a very uncommon exit of a
CAF . Considering the rarity of this, we present a case of a CAF with the diagnosis and echocardiogradphic evaluation within the first days
of life. Hemodynamically significant congenital anomalies of the coronary arteries AA: aortic atresia; CHD: congenital heart disease; IVS:
interventricular septum; MS: mitral stenosis; PA: pulmonary atresia – modified from We report about a newborn baby which was noted to have a
murmur on the first day of life. The child was 39 weeks of gestation and was born by repeat cesarean section to a 26-year-old gravida 4,
para 3 mother. Apgar scores were 9 and 9, the birth weight was 3.57 kg. The family history was significant for a sister with a PDA, status
post ligation. The physical examination was negative except for a 3/6 holosystolic murmur at the mid left sternal border. An echocardiogram
(performed with HP Sonos 7500, 5 MHz transducer, Philips Medical Systems, Germany) demonstrated a large coronary artery fistula connecting
the left anterior descending artery to the left ventricular apex. The proximal coronary artery measured 4.4 mm in diameter and was dilated
along its course (Figure 1) and showed a diastolic flow in the Doppler evaluation. A moderate-sized apical muscular ventricular septal
defect (VSD; diameter 4 mm) was seen. There was also a patent foramen ovale (PFO) as well as trivial tricuspid and mitral regurgitation. The
right ventricular pressures appeared elevated and were estimated to be near systemic. No evidence of regional wall motion abnormalities
suggestive of ischemia was seen. Due to the risk for ischemia secondary to steal from the coronary fistula, daily electrocardiograms were
obtained after admission to the cardiovascular intensive care unit (CVICU) for monitoring. At no point of time during the patient's care a
pathological ECG was obtained. Due to the infant demonstrating mild and intermittent tachypnea, diuretic therapy was started on day five.
The child was discharged home on day 8 without any complications on diuretic therapy and monitored closely on an ambulant manner as an
attempt for conservative therapy on request of the parents. Two dimensional (left) and color Doppler (right) on day one (atypical short axis
view of LV). The large coronary artery fistula drains (arrow) into the left ventricular apex (*). The LAD (#) was dilated up to 4.4 mm in
diameter along its course. CAF diagnosed in the neonate is very rare. Symptoms of the disease at older age may be continuous systolic-
diastolic murmur, congestive heart failure, pulmonary hypertension, bacterial endocarditis, premature arteriosclerotic changes within the
fistulae and thromboembolic events. Angina is uncommon and myocardial infarction rare. It is postulated that these ischaemic symptoms are
caused by coronary steal . If the fistula drains into a right-side chamber or vessel, including the right atrium, right ventricle, or
pulmonary artery, it can cause a left to right shunt with increased flow to the pulmonary circulation and ultimately to the left heart. If
the fistula drains into the left atrium and ventricle, it can produce an isolated volume overload of those chambers similar to the overload
that occurs in aortic reurgitation . A CAF that has not been detected or closed in childhood has been reported to become symptomatic in
adulthood because of this chronic volume load and ischaemia. Therefore it has been recommended that these fistulae be closed in childhood,
either surgically or by transcatheter coil occlusion. Liberthson et al. and Sunder et al. found that patients greater than 20 years of age
had significantly higher rates of symptoms and complications of CAF . But there is still discussion about recommending the elective closure
of asymptomatic patients. A good argument in favour of a conservative approach is the unexpectedly high incidence of spontaneous closure of
CAF . On the one hand, the life long risk of the complications of the CAF is not known, but on the other hand any intervention to close such
fistulae is associated with risk of morbidity and the benefit of such intervention is questionable. If the decision is made for elective
closure surgical ligation versus coil embolisation should be individualized. Factors that favor surgical ligation include large fistulas,
multiple fistulous connections, extreme vessel tortuosity, presence of an aneurysm, need for concomitant distal bypass, or the presence of
large branch vessels that can be inadvertently embolized . Factors that favor transcatheter coil embolisation (TCE) include single drain
site, older age, presence of a fistula arising as an accessory coronary artery and absence of an adjacent vessel . Surgical ligation results
in a high closure rate if there are not multiple sites, but the major disadvantage is the morbidity associated with the surgery. Some
disadvantages associated with catheter closure of the fistulae are transient arrhythmias, coil embolization into the great vessels or recoil
into the major coronary artery leading to acute mycardial infarction and occasionally sudden death. Also, complete obliteration of the CAF
can be achieved in only 80–85% of the patients . Differential diagnosis includes persistent ductus arteriosus, pulmonary arteriovenous
fistula, ruptured sinus of Valsalva aneurysm, aortopulmonary window, prolapse of the right aortic cusp with a supracristal ventricular
septal defect, internal mammary artery to pulmonary artery fistula and systemic arteriovenous fistula. In conclusion, CAF are rare
congenital lesions, especially our presented case. Doppler echocardiography is a proper noninvasive method to recognize CAFs and their
courses. The management should be individualized according to the configuration of the CAF and the advantages and disadvantages of
conservative therapy, coil embolization and surgical ligation. Apical site of the CAF insertion into the LV (*) and the adjacent muscular
ventricular septal defect shown by color Doppler.
