Spinal cord infarction is uncommon and usually presents with sudden onset of paralysis and sensory disturbances. A variety of causes are
described, but rarely with multiple factors involved. We report a case of a 63-year-old man with a history of diabetes mellitus,
hypertension, and osteoarthritis who presented with acute onset of chest pain, numbness, and weakness associated with episodic hypotension.
He had incomplete tetraplegia and was areflexic without spasticity. Pain and temperature sensations were impaired below the C7 dermatome and
absent below the T4 dermatome bilaterally. Proprioception and vibration sensations were diminished on the right below the C6 dermatome.
Magnetic resonance imaging showed spinal cord infarction affecting C6–T3 segments, and severe cervical and lumbar spine degenerative
changes. This case illustrates an unusual presenting symptom of spinal infarction, the need to identify multiple risk factors for spinal
cord infarction, and the importance of optimal preventive therapy in patients at risk. Spinal cord infarction (SCI) is uncommon compared to
cerebral stroke, but the outcome may be more disabling. Due to its rarity, reliable estimates of incidence are scarce; however, one study
noted SCI accounted for 1.2% of all strokes.1,2 SCI due to occlusion of the anterior spinal artery, the principal vascular supply to the
spinal cord, characteristically presents with an abrupt onset of bilateral weakness, especially the lower limbs, sudden back pain that
radiates caudad, flaccid paraplegia, areflexia, loss of pain and temperature sensations below the level of the lesion, sparing of
proprioception and vibration sense, and autonomic dysfunction involving the bladder and bowel.3 Other SCI syndromes involve disease
affecting the aorta, intrinsic spinal arteries, or the radicular artery (see Table 1). Recent literature mentions atherosclerosis and
hypertension occurring in approximately 50% of cases of SCI, and disease of the aorta as the most common location of
pathology.4Table 1Spinal Vascular Syndromes and Location of InfarctionVascular syndromeAnatomical location of infarctionParaplegia,
areflexia,, sensory loss, dysautonomia, proprioception sparedAnterior spinal artery territoryDysautonomia, bladder distension, erectile
dysfunction, paralytic ileusIntermediolateral cell column, sympathetic involvementBrown–Sequard hemisection: ipsilateral paralysis and loss
of proprioception, and contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensationSulcocommissural artery territoryOrthostatic hypotensionT4–9
segments, splanchnic nerveCardiac substernal painT4, , sympathetic pathwaysRespiratory distressC3–C5, diaphragm involvementWatershed zoneT4,
, Spinal TIA, episodic painless paraparesis or diplegiaAnterior spinal artery territoryAcute loss of proprioception sensationPosterior
spinal artery territory Spinal Vascular Syndromes and Location of Infarction Etiologies listed in a review of 44 cases of SCI seen at two
university hospitals over a 10-year period include aortic aneurysm repair, traumatic aortic rupture, arteriovenous malformation, cryptogenic
(spontaneous), transient ischemic attack, and cardiac arrest as the most frequent diagnoses.4 Aortic disease has replaced syphilitic
arteritis as the most frequent cause of SCI since the introduction of penicillin.4 Cervical spondylosis, stenosis of intervertebral
foramina, hypotension, and arteritis secondary to diabetes mellitus are reported as infrequent causes of SCI in some series.2,4–9 We report
a case of SCI with an unusual presentation and no definite cause but having multiple etiologic factors known to predispose to arterial
infarction. These include chronic diabetes and hypertension, osteoarthritic degenerative changes of the spine that may cause direct
occlusion or impingement of the spinal vessels as they transverse the intervertebral foramina, and an episode of recorded hypotension that
may have worsened the extent of the SCI. Because the response to therapy and outcome are poor, the recognition of vascular risk factors and
their prevention are emphasized in the discussion. A 63-year-old man with a history of diabetes mellitus type 2, hypertension, and
osteoarthritis was transferred to our tertiary-care facility after an acute onset of chest pain, numbness, and weakness while recovering
from a mild ileus at a community hospital. While bending over, he experienced sudden substernal pain that did not radiate, lasted 10 min,
and was relieved by sitting down. His blood pressure was initially recorded as 205/81 mmHg and he was administered a diuretic and beta-
blocker. He was treated with empiric aspirin and clopidogrel at that time; however, an electrocardiogram and serial serum cardiac enzymes
were nondiagnostic for myocardial injury. Over the next several hours, he developed urinary retention followed by sudden onset of numbness
and weakness in the upper and lower extremities. Systolic blood pressure was recorded at 60 mmHg, and treatment of hypotension with
intravenous fluids was initiated. On admission to our hospital, systolic blood pressure was maintained above 120 mmHg. Neurological
examination revealed normal speech, cognition, and cranial nerve function. Motor examination was normal for shoulder abduction (5/5), elbow
flexion (5/5), and wrist extension (5/5). Wrist flexion was 3/5, grip strength 1/5, thumb abduction 1/5, and interossei 0/5: all
bilaterally. Hip flexion was 0/5 right, 2/5 left; hip extension 0/5 right, 2/5 left; hip adduction and abduction 0/5 right, 3/5 left; knee
extension 0/5 right, 3/5 left; knee flexion 0/5 right, 3/5 left; ankle dorsifexion 0/5 right, 5/5 left; ankle plantarflexion 0/5 right, 5/5
left; and foot eversion and first-toe extension 0/5 right, 4/5 left. Passive range of motion in all extremities was full without spasticity.
Rectal examination revealed absent tone. Coordination in the upper limbs, evaluated by point-to-point, finger-to-nose and finger-to-thumb
tests, was performed slowly, without tremor or ataxia. In the lower limbs, flaccidity precluded evaluation of coordination by heel-to-knee
testing or foot tapping. Reflexes were absent bilaterally in the biceps, triceps, brachioradialis, patellar and Achilles tendons. Plantar
responses were equivocal and the cremasteric reflex was absent. Rectal sensation was intact. Pain and temperature sensations were impaired
below the C7 dermatome and absent below the T4 dermatome bilaterally. Proprioception and vibration senses were diminished in the right wrist
and lower extremity, consistent with an ipsilateral dorsal column lesion involving C6 dermatome and below. The initial differential
diagnoses for the chest pain and bilateral extremity weakness included acute coronary syndrome and acute inflammatory demyelinating
polyradiculoneuropathy. On admission to our hospital, the unfolding history and specific physical findings allowed a narrowing of the
differential diagnosis to include spinal cord ischemia and possible cord compression. With further questioning, the patient reported
paresthesias of the hands associated with movement of the back and neck over several months’ duration. After prompt neurologic consultation,
immediate magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the spine was performed that showed abnormal T2 signal in the anterior cord from C6 to T3
(Figs. 1 and 2), and severe degenerative changes of the cervical and lumbar spine, with narrowing of the right intervertebral foramina and
cord compression at C5–6 (Fig. 3). Figure 1Sagittal T2-weighted sequence MRI with hyperintense lesion of the anterior spinal cord from
C6-T3, consistent with infarction (arrows).Figure 2Axial T2 weighted sequence MRI showing cross-section of lesion at the level of C6–7
(arrows).Figure 3Axial T2-weighted sequence MRI showing narrowing of the right intervertebral foramina (dashed arrow) and cord compression
at the level of C5–6 (arrows) Sagittal T2-weighted sequence MRI with hyperintense lesion of the anterior spinal cord from C6-T3, consistent
with infarction (arrows). Axial T2 weighted sequence MRI showing cross-section of lesion at the level of C6–7 (arrows). Axial T2-weighted
sequence MRI showing narrowing of the right intervertebral foramina (dashed arrow) and cord compression at the level of C5–6 (arrows)
Computed tomography angiogram of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed no dissection of the aorta. Transesophageal echocardiography to
evaluate for cardiac embolic source was not possible due to the limited mobility of the patient’s neck from degenerative disease of the
cervical spine. A transthoracic echocardiogram was performed instead that revealed normal left ventricular function and no evidence of
embolic source. No single cause for the spinal infarction was identified, but the patient’s vascular risk factors and severe degenerative
disease of the spine are proposed as the most likely etiology. Antiplatelet therapy with aspirin and clopidogrel was continued for
prevention of recurrent stroke. The neurological deficits persisted unchanged, and the patient was transferred to the rehabilitation center
at our institution. The pathogenesis of SCI requires an understanding of the vascular supply of the cord. The anterior spinal artery
supplies the anterior two-thirds of the spinal cord, including the anterior horns of gray matter, the corticospinal and lateral
spinothalamic tracts. The posterior spinal arteries supply the posterior columns, subserving proprioception and vibration sense, and the
posterior horns. The posterior spinal arteries descend separately in the posterolateral sulcus, and receive collaterals from the subclavian,
intercostals, and lumbar arteries by way of the dorsal roots.3,10 Posterior spinal artery infarction is rare.11 The anterior spinal artery
originates from branches of the intracranial vertebral arteries in the upper cervical region. In the lower cervical and thoracolumbar
course, it receives tributaries from the radicular branches of the cervical, intercostal, and lumbar arteries. The thoracic region has the
largest spacing between radicular arteries in comparison to other spinal segments.10 A watershed zone of increased ischemic vulnerability is
located at the interface of the anterior and posterior spinal artery territories, described by many authorities to be at the level of
T4.4–6,10 The extent of this patient’s lesion suggests a particularly large area of ischemic vulnerability in the distribution of the
anterior spinal artery. The major anterior radicular artery (Adamkiewicz) arises on the left side, anywhere from T5 to L2.4 Interestingly,
the upper level of origin of this artery approximates that of the infarction in our patient. Infarction affecting the major anterior
radicular artery is considered clinically indistinguishable from the anterior spinal artery syndrome.4 Neurovascular syndromes are defined
by the level of the infarction, the most common being the anterior spinal artery syndrome, presenting with weakness, back pain, areflexia,
spinothalamic sensory loss, and autonomic dysfunction.3 Lesions that involve C3–5 segments can compromise respiration, and those affecting
the splanchnic nerve of T4–9 segments may result in orthostatic hypotension, sexual dysfunction, and impaired thermoregulation. The
Brown–Sequard syndrome, spinal cord hemisection, results from occlusion of the sulcocommissural artery and manifests as ipslateral
paralysis, ipsilateral loss of proprioception, and contralateral loss of pain and temperature sensation. This patient differs from a classic
anterior spinal artery pattern due to partial involvement of the dorsal columns that may be explained by occlusion of the radicular
posterior spinal arteries on the right side. The presentation of symptoms in this case was also unusual because of the substernal pain,
simulating cardiac ischemia. In two previous case reports of a similar presentation, the authors hypothesize that lesions in the lower
cervical region involve pain fibers from the cardiac plexus, resulting in pain.12,13 Our report emphasizes the importance of rapid
identification of neurologic signs associated with chest pain, so that the differential diagnosis is not limited to cardiac ischemia. Spinal
transient ischemic attacks or intermittent spinal claudication syndrome was first described by Dejerine in 1911, and manifests as painless
paraparesis or drop attacks without loss of consciousness.4 Ischemia due to impingement of the vascular supply to the cord due to
degenerative changes in the cervical spine is a possible explanation for the intermittent transient sensory symptoms of upper extremities
that the patient exhibited prior to presentation. The association of these symptoms with manipulation of the neck also suggests either
intermittent compression of the cord or nerve roots, also due to the spondylosis seen on MRI. The patient who presents with acute
paraparesis is a medical emergency that requires prompt evaluation and diagnosis, primarily to exclude the need for immediate surgical
correction of a possible sudden cord compression. Once the differential diagnosis is narrowed to ischemic etiology by emergent imaging,
vascular risk factors such as diabetes mellitus, hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and the various causes of arteritis are addressed. Similar to
cerebral stroke management, acute management of SCI includes close monitoring and avoidance of hypotension. After identification of a risk
factor, measures to reduce the significance of the insult with appropriate medical management are undertaken. Because of the relative rarity
of SCI, no studies at this time specifically address measures for anticoagulation in spinal stroke. However, extrapolation from current
recommendations for prophylaxis of recurrent cerebral stroke and myocardial infarction suggest inhibition of platelet aggregation as
potentially beneficial, care being taken to screen patients for increased risk of bleeding.14 Ongoing care includes referral for inpatient
rehabilitation and long-term management and prevention of medical complications of immobility. SCI may present with multiple etiologic
factors including diabetes mellitus, atherosclerosis, hypertension, episodic hypotension, and degenerative disease of the spine. Sudden
weakness and sensory symptoms typically characterize the onset of SCI, but acute chest pain can be an unusual presenting symptom of spinal
infarction, simulating cardiac ischemia. The prognosis of SCI is generally poor, emphasizing the importance of optimal preventive therapies.
Patients with multiple risk factors may require antihypertensive agents, strict blood glucose control, appropriate antiplatelet therapy,
and, if indicated, treatment for infectious or immune causes of arteritis. Medical and surgical procedures known to increase the risks of
SCI, such as arteriography or lumbar epidural anesthesia, should be replaced by less invasive techniques when possible.4,15 The prompt
recognition of the symptoms of spinal ischemia, and early observance and aggressive reduction of risk factors would help in the prevention
of SCI and permanent sequelae. This case was previously presented in part during the poster session at the Scientific Meeting of the North
Carolina Chapter of the American College of Physicians (ACP) on February 17, 2006 in Durham, North Carolina. Potential Financial Conflicts
of Interest None disclosed.
