Central airway obstruction is a common complication of lung cancer. The microdebrider is a new device available for treatment of central
airway obstruction. We report a case a 59-yr-old male with T3N2M1 non-small cell lung cancer with malignant distal left mainstem obstruction
treated successfully with a novel elongated rotating tip microdebrider via rigid bronchoscopy with sufficient length to reach distal
bronchial lesions. The microdebrider is an excellent addition to the spectrum of interventions available for the management of central
airway obstruction with advantages including accuracy and immediate removal of debris without a need for separate suctioning or limitation
in oxygenation. The microdebrider is a recent addition to the armeratarium available to the interventional bronchoscopist for central airway
occlusion, following the successful application of laryngeal microdebriders for over a decade . However, limitations of the microdebrider
include maneuverability and length (37 cms) which limits use to the trachea and proximal main-stem bronchi. We report a case of malignant
distal left main-stem obstruction treated with a new elongated rotating tip microdebrider (45 cms) via rigid bronchoscopy with sufficient
length to reach distal bronchial lesions. A 53-yr-old male with T3N2M1 non-small cell left upper lobe lung cancer with bilateral brain
metastases diagnosed one-month prior was referred for management of dyspnea and hemoptysis. The patient had noted a dramatic increase in
dyspnea over the prior 3 days. Past medical history was unremarkable and he had a negative smoking history. Physical exam revealed reduced
breath sounds in the left lower zone. Chest x-ray demonstrated a left hilar mass with loss of volume and post obstructive pneumonia in the
left lower lobe (Figure 1a). Axial Computed tomography (CT) angiogram of the chest also revealed multiple segmental and subsegmental
pulmonary emboli and the patient was admitted for anticoagulation with low molecular weight heparin (enoxaparin). The CT study also
confirmed total occlusion of the left mainstem bronchus by a tumor invading from the left hilum (Figure 1b). a Posterior anterior chest
x-ray of 57-yr-old male with T3N2M1 non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates a left hilar mass with loss of volume and/or post obstructive
pneumonia in the left lower lobe. b Axial computed tomography chest angiogram demonstrates total occlusion of the left mainstem bronchus by
a tumor invading from the left hilum. After two days of anticoagulation, rigid bronchoscopy was performed using an Efer-Dumon rigid
bronchoscope. Normal vocal cords, trachea, carina and right bronchial tree were confirmed. A large endobronchial lesion with complete
occlusion of the left mainstem bronchus was identified (Figure 2a). After an unsuccessful attempt to pass the lesion using a pediatric video
bronchoscope, debulking was attempted using a combination of polypectomy snare and electrocautery. There was still 100% obstruction of the
airway from the residual tumor and therefore the ERBE argon plasma electrocoagulator® (APC) was utilized to devitalize the tissue. The
devitalized tissue was then debulked using the Straightshot® microdebrider with rotating tip (Figures 2b, 3) and the bevel of the rigid
bronchoscope. The length of the microdebrider is 45 cm and outer diameter is 4 mm. The rotating tip is controlled by a fly-wheel on the
hand-piece, which allows for better maneuverability and is angled at 12 degrees providing better visualization. The blade was serrated and
an oscillator mode was used at 1000–1200 RPMs. In this manner the left main stem was recanalized and the channel was opened into the left
lower lobe bronchus. Hemostasis was achieved using a combination of suction and APC with less than 20cc blood loss. Visual examination
revealed that there was some degree of extrinsic compression in the left lower lobe bronchus as well; however, the superior segment bronchus
and the basal segmental bronchi were noted to be patent. Post procedure residual obstruction in the left main stem bronchus was estimated at
less than 20%. Since the left upper lobe had been completely replaced by tumor, a guidewire was then placed into the left lower lobe
bronchus and a 4 cm × 14 mm covered nitinol self-expandable metal stent was placed over the guidewire under direct vision into the left
lower lobe bronchus. The stent was deployed under direct vision and adjusted in terms of its position using rat-tooth forceps. At the end of
optimal positioning, the distal aspect of the stent was noted to be just inside the left lower lobe basal segmental bronchus with the
superior segment being ventilated through the uncovered portion of the stent. The proximal aspect of the stent was noted in the left main
stem bronchus well above the proximal extent of the tumor (Figure 2c). Follow-up chest x-ray (Figure 4) revealed aeration of the left lower
lobe with resolution of dyspnea and hemoptysis. a Videobronchoscopy image demonstrates distal left mainstem bronchus occlusion. b
Videobronchoscopy image demonstrates debridement of malignant distal mainstem occlusion with the rotating tip tracheal microdebrider after
argon plasma coagulation. c Videobronchoscopy image demonstrates a nitinol self-expandable metal stent in the previously occluded left
mainstem bronchus. The rotating tip tracheal microdebrider. Posterior anterior chest x-ray demonstrates satisfactory stent placement with
re-expansion of the left lower lobe. Approximately 20–30% of patients with lung cancer will develop airway obstruction and therefore the
management of airway obstruction is a vital component of the services provided by an interventional pulmonology program . Many modalities
are currently available, the majority of which rely on thermal injury to the targeted area. These techniques include electrocautery, argon
plasma coagulation, cryotherapy, laser therapy, brachytherapy and photodynamic therapy, each with their own advantages and disadvantages .
Disadvantages of thermal modalities as a group include uncontrolled thermal injury to normal tissue with complications such as perforation
and fistula, limitation of inspired oxygen concentration because of the risk of endobronchial fire and the need for separate suction
devices, which requires intermittent removal of the thermal device from the bronchoscope with prolongation of the procedure. Microdebriders
accomplish debridement using a powered rotating blade coupled with suction allowing rapid removal of debris. To date, microdebriders have
been used primarily in sinus surgery and advantages include rapid accurate debridement with maintenance of vision because of instantaneous
removal of blood and debris through integrated suction . Subsequently, microdebriders were designed for the management of laryngotracheal
carcinoma with successful debridement and avoidance of tracheotomy . Tracheal blades were subsequently designed up to 37 cm in length and
allowed access to tracheal lumen and proximal mainstem and a retrospective analysis of 23 patients highlighted successful treatment of
tracheal granulation tissue, idiopathic subglottic stenosis and malignant disease . The novel device used in this case report has a number
of advantages over prior microdebrider devices. The added length (8 cm) allows access to distal bronchial lesions. The rotating tip allows
better maneuverability and precision, reducing the possibility of debriding normal tissue. It is unclear presently what modality is superior
for the treatment of central airway obstruction. Approaches depend on the lesion involved and operator preference and experience. We agree
with other authors that microdebridement is useful when precision is essential; especially where high flow oxygen is required . A comparison
of microdebrider bronchoscopy to thermal modalities to identify the best strategy for the management of central airway obstruction will be
difficult, because of the difficulty of designing blinded randomized controlled trials in this critically ill population. In fact, this case
highlights the benefit of using multiple modalities to treat central airway obstruction. The limitations of one modality (bleeding and
damage of tissue for pathological inspection with microdebridement) can often be overcome by combining various therapeutic options. In
conclusion, this case report details the successful management of a distal left mainstem obstructing malignant lesion with a combination of
therapies including a novel elongated microdebrider with rotating tip. Prospective trials are required to identify specific indications for
this therapy along with long-term outcomes in the management of central airway obstruction. CT = computed tomography The author(s) declare
that they have no competing interests. The authors wish to acknowledge that the microdebrider device and image was supplied by Medtronic,
Jacksonville, Florida.
