Inhibitors of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-α) have been approved for treating rheumatoid arthritis. As one of the biological response
modifiers, etanercept has also been used in the treatment of psoriatic arthritis and inflammatory bowel disease. While etanercept is
effective, certain infectious complications, such as tuberculosis, fungus, and cytomegalovirus, have been reported. We report the first
Korean case of adenoviral pneumonia in a 55-year-old female who developed disseminated adenoviral infection following etanercept treatment,
which resolved after anti-TNF-α discontinuation. Etanercept is the first anticytokine drug approved to treat rheumatoid arthritis (RA). It
is a recombinant-DNA-engineered fusion protein consisting of an extracellular ligand protein domain for tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) and
the constant portion of the human IgG molecule1). Etanercept has demonstrable clinical benefits in several inflammatory arthropathies,
including RA and psoriatic arthritis2). Despite trials indicating their safety, the wider use of TNF-α-blocking drugs in patients with RA
has led to reports of serious infectious complications. In one study, 5 of 180 patients with rheumatic disease developed the following
serious infections while taking etanercept3). acute cholecystitis, septic wrist caused by Staphylococcus aureus, arthroplastic hip infection
caused by methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus, psoas abscess caused by Mycobacterium avium-intracellulare, and bacteremia following
colonoscopy. Pneumonia caused by parainfluenza virus type 3 has also been reported4). We report the first case of severe adenovirus
pneumonia with myocarditis that developed in a patient during etanercept therapy. A 55-year-old woman presented with fever for 3 days. She
had worked as a car saleswoman in Pennsylvania and had arrived in Seoul the day before admission. She had suffered from RA for about 20
years and had been treated with a regimen including prednisolone, methotrexate, and etanercept for 2 years. She had received subcutaneous
etanercept at dosages of 25 mg twice a week. She had noticed progressive fatigue, malaise, anorexia, oral bleeding, and a weight loss of 10
kg within the previous 3 months. Upon admission, her body temperature was 37.5℃, blood pressure was 120/80 mmHg, pulse rate was 104 beats
per minute, and respiratory rate was 18 breaths per minute. On physical examination, she appeared chronically ill with a pale conjunctiva,
oral ulcer, and advanced multiple symmetrical joint deformities of both hands. Her chest examination was notable for fine rales on both
lower lung fields, but no murmur was noted. All other findings were unremarkable. Laboratory findings revealed hemoglobin at 7.7 g/dL, a
platelet count of 40,000/mm3, and a white blood cell count of 3,000/mm3 with 65% granulocytes, 26% lymphocytes, and 18.3% monocytes. Liver
function tests revealed aspartate aminotransferase at 447 IU/L, alanine aminotransferase at 113 IU/L, and albumin at 2.4 g/dL. Her
rheumatoid factor was 2,180 IU/mL. Antimycoplasma and anti-HIV antibodies were negative. Chest radiography showed poorly-defined nodular
opacities in both lower lung zones (Figure 1A). A CT scan of the abdomen revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the para-aortic area (Figure 1B).
On hospital day 4, she complained of dyspnea, and her oxygen saturation dropped below 80% while she was breathing 100% oxygen. She was
intubated and transferred to the intensive care unit. Pulmonary hemorrhage was suspected, and chest radiography showed diffuse bilateral
pulmonary consolidation in both lungs (Figure 2A). A CT scan of the chest obtained at the same time showed diffuse consolidation that was
strongly suspicious for pulmonary hemorrhage combined with pneumonia (Figure 2B). Transthoracic echocardiography revealed minimal
pericardial effusion with diffuse hypokinesia and a left ventricular (LV) ejection fraction of 36%. A bone marrow examination showed
hypocellular marrow with no maturation arrest. We performed a bronchoscopy that showed mucosal injection and fold thickening, but could not
find a definite focus of bleeding. The blood and endotracheal cultures for bacteria, fungus and mycobacteria were negative. Intravenous
immunoglobulin (35 g/day) was given for sepsis, and solucortef (50 mg/day) was maintained for RA. Treatment with azithromycin, ceftriaxone
and amikacin was started, but because her condition deteriorated, these were changed to meropenem and ciprofloxacin on hospital day 10. Her
condition improved, with chest radiograph showing complete resolution of previous lesions by hospital day 40 (Figure 3). Follow-up
echocardiography showed normal LV systolic function with an ejection fraction of 70% without hypokinesia. The result of endotracheal
aspiration for viruses was positive for adenovirus, which was confirmed by PCR. After discharge, she maintained oral medication including
prednisolone at 10 mg per day, celecoxib at 200 mg per day, hydroxychloroquine sulfate at 300 mg per day and methotrexate at 7.5 mg per week
through an outpatient clinic without complications. She remained well without aggravating arthralgia. TNF-α is a cytokine that plays a
critical role in the regulation of inflammatory processes due to infection5). Early in the infectious process, TNF-α promotes the influx of
cells to the injured area to counter the inciting agent, while it subsequently helps to limit the extent of damage by inducing apoptosis and
maintaining granuloma formation. These essential functions may be compromised by inhibition of TNF-α via anti-TNF-α blockers, so that
patients who receive anti-TNF-α blocking therapy are vulnerable to new or latent infection6). The spectrum of pathogens causing invasive
disease in patients receiving TNF-α blockade therapy ranges from bacteria to more opportunistic organisms such as Mycobacterium
tuberculosis, cryptococcus and aspergillus6). A recent review of reports from 1998 to 2002 revealed that the incidence of granulomatous
infections was 74 per 100,000 using etanercept7). M. tuberculosis is the most frequently reported infection in patients treated with
etanercept, with a rate of 35 per 100,000. This is much lower than the rate of 144 per 100,000 in infliximab-treated7). The median time to
develop the infection of M. tuberculosis was reportedly 12 weeks in patients treated with infliximab, whereas it was 46 weeks in those
treated with etanercept5). In clinical trials involving etanercept treatment in RA, infections of the upper respiratory tract were the most
commonly reported, whereas serious infections requiring hospitalization were rare and did not increase in frequency during treatment8).
However, in a more recent study, serious and non-serious respiratory tract infections were significantly more common in patients receiving
etanercept than in patients treated with conventional disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (7.04 versus 1.75 per 100 patient-years)9). As
for viral infections, TNF is integral to the immune response to many pathogens, including respiratory viruses. Binding of TNF cytokines to
their receptors initiates several signaling pathways culminating in the activation of transcription factors, cysteine proteases, which
results in apoptosis, and cytosolic phospholipase A2, an enzyme responsible for the production of inflammatory mediators, which are involved
in cytolysis by TNF10). Etanercept may allow benign respiratory viral infections to progress through inhibition of TNF. Adenoviruses are
non-enveloped, icosahedral DNA viruses that cause a variety of clinical syndromes. The majority of these infections are self-limited, with
disseminated disease occurring rarely in immunocompetent patients11). Most severe or disseminated diseases tend to occur exclusively in
immunocompromised patients. Involvement of the lung, liver, pancreas, heart, colon and central nervous system has been reported. Possible
risk factors in these disseminated cases include the underlying medical condition, prolonged hospitalization, invasive procedures, broad-
spectrum antibiotics and immunosuppressive drugs11). Adenovirus is thought to cause approximately 10% of cases of respiratory disease in
children. Four (1.3%) of 317 Korean adult patients with community- acquired pneumonia were diagnosed with adenoviral pneumonia by indirect
immunofluorescence staining or culture12). Adenoviruses can also infect the mucosal endothelium, as well as the epithelium11), which can
lead to life-threatening hemorrhage, as was observed in this case. Furthermore, sudden decreased myocardial function without identifiable
precipitating factors also developed during hospitalization, and function fully recovered without sequelae. This can be attributed to
adenoviral myocarditis. Since TNF-α exerts widespread biological effects on immune cells, it is not surprising that TNF inhibition results
in a decreased ability to control infection in both animal models and humans. In this case, adenoviral pneumonia with myocarditis was
recovered after stopping etanercept treatment. We conclude that all patients should be thoroughly assessed for the presence of any possible
risk factors for infection prior to commencement of etanercept therapy. We recommend close monitoring for any infections during the
etanercept treatment and suggest that discontinuation of therapy may be indicated during the development of infection7). Further study of
the relationship between etanercept therapy and respiratory viral infections may be warranted. (A) An initial chest radiograph shows poorly-
defined nodular opacities and consolidation in both lower lung zones. (B) A contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan reveals enlarged lymph nodes
with central attenuation in the para-aortic area. (A) A chest radiograph obtained on hospital day 4 shows diffuse bilateral pulmonary
consolidation in both lungs that is consistent with diffuse lung injury. (B) A chest CT scan also obtained on hospital day 4 shows diffuse
consolidation and ground-glass attenuation in both lungs, as well as small bilateral pleural effusions. Enlarged lymph nodes with central
attenuation are evident in the right paratracheal area. A chest radiograph obtained on hospital day 40 shows complete resolution of the
previous findings.
