Arthroscopic meniscectomy of the knee is generally a safe and effective procedure with a low rate of vascular complications. We report here
on a unique case of a 55-year-old man with a lateral inferior genicular artery pseudoaneurysm and a concomitant arteriovenous fistula that
developed after arthroscopic meniscectomy; this was successfully treated with selective angiographic embolization. This case illustrates the
effectiveness of an endovascular approach as a minimally invasive treatment for this uncommon complication that occurs after an arthroscopic
procedure. Arthroscopy meniscectomy of the knee has become a routine therapeutic procedure. The worldwide clinical experience has proven
this technique to be safe, effective and well tolerated by patients, with low rates of morbidity and mortality (1, 2). The overall
complication rate for knee arthroscopy ranges from 0.56% to 8.2%. Vascular injuries are quite rare and they represent less than 1% of all
the complications (1-3), and most have involved the popliteal artery or vein, or both. There are only a few reports about injuries to the
genicular artery during arthroscopic procedures. In this report, we describe a unique case of iatrogenic lateral inferior genicular artery
pseudoaneurysm and concomitant arteriovenous fistula that were detected one week after arthroscopic meniscectomy; these lesions were
successfully treated with superselective percutaneous transarterial embolization. A 55-year-old man in good general health had pain and
intermittent locking of the left knee of two months duration. Clinical examination revealed tenderness at the lateral joint line and
moderate effusion. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a displaced bucket-handle tear of the lateral meniscus and so arthroscopic
lateral meniscectomy was performed. Increasing pain and swelling in the left popliteal fossa developed postoperatively over the following
five days. A 65-mL hematoma was aspired and repeat arthroscopy of the knee detected only remnants of blood. The limb showed no signs of
ischemia. The same symptomatology was displayed four days later and so the patient was referred for endovascular management. Selective
arteriography was performed via the right femoral artery, and a 4-Fr catheter was placed into the left proximal popliteal artery. After
contrast injection (30 mL at 8 mL/sec; Iopromida, Shering, Madrid, Spain), a pseudoaneurysm measuring 2.5×1.6×0.9 mm and arising from the
lateral inferior genicular artery was detected; there was early venous drainage via the hypertrophied genicular veins, forming an
arteriovenous (AV) fistula (Fig. 1). A hydrophilic 3-Fr catheter (Terumo, Leuven, Belgium) was selectively advanced over a guide wire into
the injured genicular artery. The pseudoaneurysm was embolized with two small (2 mm in diameter, 20 mm in length) fibered platinum coils
(Cook Europe, Bjaeverskov, Denmark). Follow-up angiography demonstrated complete occlusion of the AV fistula, with no filling of the
pseudoaneurysm (Fig. 2). Clinically, the patient became free of symptoms a few days after the embolization and further clinical follow-up at
six months was uneventful. Vascular injuries arising from artroscopy of the knee are very rare, and several large series have reported an
incidence of less than 1% (1, 2). Most vascular injuries involve the popliteal artery or vein, or both (2). Pseudoaneurysms of the popliteal
and lateral genicular arteries after knee surgery are rare and only a few, isolated case reports have been published (3-6). Pseudoaneurysms
are more likely to form when a vessel is incompletely divided and blood dissects into the surrounding soft tissues. The susceptibility of
the popliteal artery and its branches to injury during arthroscopic meniscectomy is due to several factors, including the employed surgical
technique, and the operator's experience and knowledge of their anatomic location (3, 4). The popliteal artery is close to the posterior
capsule of the joint and it is moved forward during knee flexion. However, visualization of this region during knee arthroscopy is limited
and any injury is often not immediately recognized (4). Nevertheless, the formation of combined pseudoaneurysm and AV fistula after knee
arthorscopy is extremely rare. Only two such cases have been previously reported on, and both of these occurred in the popliteal artery (5,
6). Karkos et al. reported a case of AV fistula of the lateral superior and inferior geniculate arteries, and the etiology of this was
unclear (7). In our case, the mechanism to injury was probably direct trauma by cutting all three layers of both the artery and vein with
scissors, which resulted in an AV fistula. Alternatively, hematoma formation around the artery and vein with degradation of the enclosed
vessels may have also resulted in a combined pseudoaneurysm with AV fistula. When a patient has popliteal swelling, mass, bruit, thrill,
recurrent hemarthosis, pain, calf edema, and/or a neurologic deficit after a knee arthroscopy, the possibility of a vascular injury should
be considered early on in the diagnostic process (2, 4). The diagnosis can be confirmed by conventional arteriography, as in our case, by
Color Doppler sonography, or with using three-dimensional CT or MRI arteriography techniques (4-8). Surgical exploration with vessel
ligation is the "gold standard" of treatment because it preserves distal flow if collateral circulation has formed (3, 5-8). Other treatment
options include correction of the vascular tear by vascular patch or direct suture (8). Sonographically guided compression to occlude the
postcatherterization pseudoaneurysm of the femoral and brachial arteries has been reported on (9). However, with the advances in selective
endovascular techniques, percutaneous embolization has been successfully performed for the management of popliteal pseudoaneurysms and also
for the delayed combined pseudoaneurysm and AV fistula of the anterior tibial artery after an open tibial fracture (10). In our case, we
embolized the lesion with using microcoils to definitely occlude the pseudoaneurysm and AV fistula. This case demonstrates that
superselective percutaneous angiographic embolization with coils offers the advantages of a minimally invasive approach (no surgical
incision, a reduced risk of infection and a shortened hospital stay); therefore, this technique may represent an effective and safe
therapeutic alternative for this uncommon complication of knee arthroscopy. In summary, we report here on a unique case of a lateral
inferior genicular artery pseudoaneurysm with concomitant arteriovenous fistula as a complication of knee arthroscopy. This was successfully
treated with superselective percutaneous transarterial embolization. A. Digital subtraction intraarterial angiography reveals a
pseudoaneurysm originating from the inferior genicular artery (arrow) with shunting of contrast into the venous system (arrowheads). B.
Postembolization digital subtraction intraarterial angiography demonstrating the embolized pseudoaneurysm; note the coils that were used and
complete occlusion of the aneurismatic fistula (arrow).
