To evaluate the diode laser photodynamic therapy efficacy on choroidal neovascularization (CNV) in the treatment of three patients with age-
related macular degeneration (ARMD). The authors selected three patients with ARMD whose vision has decreased due to CNV, and applied diode
laser treatment after injecting an indocyanine green (ICG) solution. The patients were followed for at least three months after treatment,
and examinations included evaluating vision changes and possible leakage on fluorescein angiography (FAG). The final vision of two patients
improved by more than one line on the Early Treatment Diabetic Retinopathy Study (ETDRS) chart after at least three months of follow-up.
However, the final vision of the third patient decreased by one line on ETDRS chart. FAG was done in all patients, and in two of the
patients, there was no evidence of leakage at the laser-applied site. In the other patient, there was evidence of minimal leakage, with the
area of leakage decreasing by more than fifty percent. Side effects of ICG were not found during or after the photodynamic therapy sessions.
The photodynamic usage of ICG treatment of CNV in patients with ARMD, was effective in preventing or improving the visual outcome. Compared
to the widely used verteporfin, ICG is more stable and is more cost effective. The authors therefore came to a conclusion that ICG can be
very useful in the treatment of CNV. However, further studies are necessary. Choroidal neovascularization (CNV) arises underneath the
retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) layer, and is characterized by hemorrhage, retinal edema, subretinal edema, fibrosis, and eventually loss
of vision. Among various causes of CNV, age-related macular degeneration (ARMD) is an important cause of blindness in the elderly population
in the Western hemisphere. The incidence of ARMD is also increasing in Korea, due tothe growing elderly population. Laser photocoagulation
has been recommended as a conventional treatment modality. However, in cases with subfoveal CNV, foveal damage during photocoagulation was
inevitable, causing decrease in vision, central scotoma, and a high incidence of recurrence. Compared to conventional photocoagulation,
photodynamic therapy (PDT) with verteporfin was able to induce regression of neovascularization while minimizing the retinal damage.
However, one of the side-effects of verteporfin is photosensitivity, and when patients were exposed to light after the photodynamic therapy
with verteporfin, they complained of skin rashes or pruritis. The patients were unable to go outside for 48 hours after receiving PDT with
verteporfin. Furthermore, when there is a leakage of the dye during the injection, the patient may develop skin necrosis, and rarely, the
patient may experience back pain. Due to the treatment's high cost, many patients have given up on the treatment altogether. In contrast,
the indocyanine green (ICG) dye is very stable, has no photosensitivity, is inexpensive, and has been used in the fluorescein angiography
for years. Because there have been reports of the effective outcome of treating CNV patients with ICG dye, the authors selected three CNV
patients with ARMD and treated these patients by photodynamic therapy with ICG dye. The authors then analyzed the clinical results of these
patients, examining the photodynamic effectiveness of ICG dye (and its superiority to verteporfin in stability and cost) in the treatment of
CNV in patients with ARMD. Among the patients who were diagnosed with CNV due to ARMD and underwent PDT from April of 2003 to the present,
the authors selected three patients (three eyes total) for retrospective analysis. With each patient, visual acuity with and without
correction was measured, and the anterior segment of the patients' eyes were examined with a slit-lamp. A dilated retinal exam was also done
with contact lenses and an indirect ophthalmoscope, and FAG was done in order to identify CNV. The patients were asked about allergic
reactions to iodine, shellfish, and crustaceans, all of which were negative. PDT was conducted by intravenously injecting ICG dye with
concentration of 50 mg/2.5 cc (Diagnogree, Cheil pharmaceutical co., Japan). In order to allow the dye to reach the eye without dilution, 5
cc of normal saline was injected. Then, the diode laser with a wavelength of 805 nm was mounted on the slit-lamp and applied to the retina
with the spot size of 3000 µm for 90 seconds. The authors calibrated the power of the laser between 575 mW and 1500 mW. The patients were
then followed-up for one month after the PDT, and then three months after that. Afterwards, the authors examined the patients once every
three months and measured the best-corrected visual acuity with the ETDRS chart, conducted a dilated retinal examination, and performed FAG.
With the natural progression of CNV in mind, the authors defined stabilization of visual acuity after PDT as the visual acuity decreasing by
less than two lines on ETDRS chart. The authors defined progress of visual acuity as the patient obtaining more than one line of improvement
on ETDRS chart. When there was no leakage compared to the previous findings identified by FAG, the patient was said to have "no leakage".
The patient was said to have "minimal leakage" when the area of leakage was no more than fifty percent of the original leakage, and
"moderate leakage" when the area was more than fifty percent. Finally, when the leakage exceeded the original area of the lesion, the
progression" label was given to the patient's leakage, and the analysis was completed. A 74-year-old male patient reported a decrease in
visual acuity in his left eye that began six months before his initial visit to the hospital. His vision with or without correction on his
left eye was 20/2000, and his vision with and without correction on his right eye was 20/25 and 20/50, respectively. The patient had no past
history of hypertension or diabetes, and the anterior segment of his eye appeared normal. Dilated retinal examination showed atrophy as well
as hypertrophy of the retinal pigment epithelial (RPE) layer in the left foveal region. The patient also had an exudate. FAG showed classic
CNV the size of an optic disc, located in the subfoveal region. The lesion showed hyperfluorescence at first; the area of hyperfluorescence
increased towards the end of the FAG due to leakage (Fig. 1A-C). ICG dye was injected intravenously with a concentration of 50 mg/2.5 cc.
Two minutes later, an additional 5 cc of normal saline was injected. The diode laser was then applied to the patient's retina with the spot
size of 3000 µm for 90 seconds. The authors calibrated the power of laser at 1000 mW. There were no allergic or adverse effects due to ICG
dye during or after the therapy session. The patient was followed-up for three months, and his best-corrected visual acuity one month after
the treatment increased by one line to 20/800. However, his visual acuity showed no additional improvement three months after the treatment.
The authors looked at his FAG taken three months after the treatment, and found "no leakage" on both occasions (Fig. 1D). During his final
visit, the authors found atrophy of the retinal pigment epithelial layer, and there was no evidence of RPE detachment. However, the patient
continued to complain of metamorphopsia. A 66-year-old female patient complained of metamorphopsia beginning three months before her initial
visit to the hospital. Her visual acuity with or without correction was 20/400 in her right eye and 20/25 in her left eye. The patient had
no past history of hypertension or diabetes, and the anterior segment of her eyes appeared normal. Dilated retinal examination showed
atrophy as well as hypertrophy of right foveal region, and the patient also had a soft drusen and exudate. The patient's FAG showed occult
CNV the size of an optic disc located in the subfoveal region, and an area of hyperfluorescence increased towards the end of the FAG due to
leakage (Fig. 2A-C). ICG dye was injected intravenously, and a diode laser was applied to the patient's retina with the spot size of 3000 µm
for 90 seconds. The authors calibrated the power of the laser at 1500 mW. The patient was followed up for nine months, and her best-
corrected visual acuity improved by more than two lines to 20/250. The degree of metamorphopsia also decreased. According to FAG taken nine
months after the treatment, the patient showed "minimal leakage", involving an area no more than 50% of the original leakage (Fig. 2D).
Dilated retinal examination done in her final visit showed atrophic changes in the retinal epithelial layer, and there was no evidence of
retinal hemorrhage or RPE detachment. The patient did not experience any allergic or adverse reactions to the ICG dye during or after the
treatment session. A 56-year-old male patient reported decreased visual acuity and metamorphopsia beginning six months prior to the initial
visit to the hospital. His visual acuity with or without correction was 20/2000 in his right eye, and 20/25 in his left eye. The patient had
no past history of hypertension or diabetes, and the anterior segment of his eyes appeared normal. Dilated retinal examination showed
atrophy as well as hypertrophy of the retinal epithelial layer in his right macular region. There was no evidence of a soft drusen or small
areas of retinal hemorrhage in the macula. FAG revealed a hyperfluorescent area located in the nasal macular region due to atrophy of the
RPE layer, and a subfoveal occult CNV the size of an optic disc showed increase in the area of hyperfluorescence towards the end of the FAG
due to leakage (Fig. 3A-C). ICG dye with a concentration of 50 mg/5 cc was injected intravenously, and a diode laser was applied to the
patient's retina with the spot size of 3000 µm for 90 seconds. The power of laser was calibrated at 575 mW. The patient was then followed up
for nine months, and his final best-corrected visual acuity of the right eye worsened by one line on the chart at 20/1333. Metamorphopsia
also remained. His final FAG findings showed "no leakage" (Fig. 3D). Dilated retinal examination done in his final visit revealed atrophy of
the RPE layer, and there was no evidence of retinal hemorrhage or RPE detachment. The patient also reported no allergic or adverse reactions
to ICG dye during or after the treatment session. CNV occurs underneath the retina or RPE layer, and leakage or hemorrhage because of
neovascularization, ischemia, or fibrosis can damage the retina, decreasing visual acuity.1,2 Causative factors of CNV include ARMD, ocular
histoplasmosis, high myopia, and other idiopathic causes.3 Among these causes, ARMD is a degenerative disease of the macula which occurs in
patients in their fifties and older. It is characterized by soft drusen, hyper- or hypopigmentation of the RPE layer, detachment of the
sensory retina, retinal hemorrhage, geographic atrophy of the RPE, and CNV or fibrotic changes of the retina. In the Western hemisphere,
ARMD has become a main cause of blindness in the elderly population over 60 years of age. Its prevalence is also increasing in Korea.4 It
can be classified into atrophic or exudative degeneration, and most cases of severe visual loss occur in patients with exudative ARMD with
accompanying CNV. Many different treatment modalities have been tried in order to cure CNV, including pharmaceutical or radiological
therapy, subfoveal surgery, or laser photocoagulation.5 Different pharmaceutical treatments have also been tried (e.g., thalidomide,
interferon α-2a, and anti-VEGF) but they were generally ineffective; research is still ongoing.6 Radiological therapy was known to reduce
proliferation of vascular endothelial cells ex vivo, thereby preventing proliferation of neovascular vessels in vivo. However, there have
been contrasting reports regarding maintenance or amelioration of visual acuity after treatment.7 Subfoveal surgery has been tried in
patients who have severe subfoveal hemorrhage and CNV, in patients with large CNV where laser photocoagulation cannot be done, and in
patients with CNV which has ambiguous margin. However, there have been reports of serious complications such as the development of cataract,
the recurrence of CNV, and retinal detachment. Finally, laser photocoagulation can decrease the incidence of severe visual loss, but in
cases of subfoveal CNV, hyperthermia caused by laser can also damage healthy sensory retina. Cases are limited where laser treatment can be
effective, and recurrence after five years is more than 50%.8 Thus, in patients with subfoveal CNV, there are no satisfactory treatments.
However, while studying agents that can selectively work with CNV, PDT (which employs photosensitive agents) has been developed. PDT has
been clinically proven in the treatment against cancer, and research has been conducted in order to prove its efficacy in the treatment
against CNV. Schmidt-Erfurth and Hasan reported that photosensitive agents can be absorbed into neovascular vessels, and they successfully
demonstrated photothrombosis in an experiment involving animals.9 Among photosensitive agents, the second-generation agent verteporfin has
been proven to selectively induce CNV regression, and because the agent can also prevent laser-induced hyperthermia, it has become a widely
used agent during photodynamic therapy.10,11 Verteporfin can bind with tumors that have multiple low-density lipoprotein (LDL) receptors and
can also selectively unite with neovascular vessels, thereby giving out singlet oxygen and free radical. As a result, new vessels may become
clogged due to photothrombosis.12 PDT, which employs verteporfin, has been proven in the treatment of CNV due to ARMD after a random
prospective study of the treatment of AMD with photodynamic therapy (TAP) was published, and this study included two years of clinical
results.13 In the phase I and II study that examined the safety of verteporfin, short-term visual outcome and effectiveness was exemplified
by FAG: hyperfluorescent leakage decrease-dafter a short period of time (one to four weeks), and normal retinal vessels or visual acuity
remained intact. The study also showed that the leakage coming out of CNV recurred after 12 weeks.14,15 However, after injecting
verteporfin, patients reported photosensitive symptoms such as rash, eczema, facial edema and flushing. The patients were instructed not to
expose their skin, eyes, or other organs directly to sunlight, artificial tanning machines, bright halogen light, or other sources of bright
indoor lighting. Furthermore, when verteporfin is injected along with other photosensitizing agents such as tetracycline, sulfonamides,
phenothiazines, sulfonylurea, hypoglycemic agents, thiazide diuretics, and griseofulvin, a photo-allergic reaction may be amplified.
Additionally, when verteporfin is used with free radical oxygen, anticoagulants, agents which constrict vessels, thromboxane A2, dimethyl
sulfoxide, betacarotene, ethanol, formate, or mannitol, its therapeutic effect decreased markedly. When the patient is taking calcium
channel blockers or polymyxin-B or is receiving ultraviolet therapy, the therapeutic effects of verteporfin will also decrease because these
agents decrease selectivity to neovasculature. In order to overcome these defects of verteporfin, some studies started to employ ICG dye in
PDT because the dye does not cause photosensitivity.16 ICG is an anionic tricarbocyanine lavender-hued dye, and, ever since it was
introduced by an American Fox in 1957, it has been widely used in liver and heart function tests. It has also been used in FAG of the retina
and choroid for more than thirty years.17 After the dye is injected intravenously, it combines with blood proteins and spreads throughout
the body. Because it is absorbed by the liver, it does not pass freely through the gastrointestinal tract or through the kidneys. Twenty
minutes after injection, 97% of the dye is digested by the liver and excreted through the gallbladder. This makes the dye a very stable
agent when measuring liver and circulatory function, because one can freely determine the residual amount in the blood or its loss thereof,
and the amount of blood flow into the liver. With the exception of patients who are allergic to iodine (which is included in the ICG), the
dye is safe to use, and it poses no toxicity to skin. When ICG is diluted into a solution, its maximum wavelength changes from 780 nm to 805
nm after it combines with blood proteins, and such a property can be used in PDT. PDT consists of two parts: the injection of a
photosensitive agent and the application of a non-thermal laser to the sensitized tissue. After the injection of ICG, the dye unites with
blood proteins (e.g. LDL, albumin, etc.) and among these proteins, LDL increases in number within vascular endothelial cells of rapidly
proliferating cells (such as choroidal neovascular vessels). The expression of LDL receptor also increases accordingly. Thus, the combined
unit of ICG and LDL accumulates within CNV, and when the non-thermal laser is applied to the site, this unit changes from a ground singlet
form to an excited triplet form. ICG makes a photochemical reaction with this triplet form, giving rise to free radicals or transforming it
into singlet oxygen. These singlet oxygen and free radicals can damage the endothelial cells, expose the basement membrane of vessels, and
activate the platelets, thereby making the platelets combine and coagulate. These activated platelets can secrete vasoactive mediators,
causing thrombosis and constriction of vessels, thereby clogging the new vessels. Among non-thermal lasers employed in the PDT, the ICG
enhanced diode laser photocoagulation was first used by Puliafito et al. for the treatment of CNV.18 The wavelength of the diode laser
varies between 780 and 840 nm, and the laser has maximum output of 2~3 W, making photocoagulation of retina possible. Also, maximum
absorption wavelength of ICG dye is identical to that of the laser at 805 nm, enabling the laser to penetrate deep into the tissue.19
Furthermore, the wavelength is within that of the infra-red light, making penetration through cornea and lens easy, and since the laser is
not absorbed by other pigments such as xanthophylls, flavoprotein, and glutathion peroxidase, it can be very useful in the treatment of
subfoveal lesions.20 In one study published Obana et al., which examined the effectiveness of ICG dye and diode laser, Obana reported the
therapeutic effect in regression of macular CNV to be up to 92%.21 While Obana conducted his clinical study with humans, the authors of this
study previously took pigmented rats, and, after creating artificial CNV in the retina of rats, injected ICG dye, applied a diode laser, and
observed the regression of CNV. The authors found that the therapeutic effect of such treatment to be up to 85%.22 When the authors analyzed
the clinical results of this study, one month after the treatment, there was visual improvement of 0.3 lines. Three months after the
treatment, there was another 0.3 lines of improvement. The visual acuity did not continue to improve six months and nine months after the
treatment, and the overall average increase in visual acuity was 0.2 lines. As FAG data were analyzed, two eyes had "no leakage" while one
eye had "minimal leakage. In the TAP study that studied the effectiveness of PDT with verteporfin, improvement of visual acuity was defined
as improving more than a line on ETDRS chart after taking into account the natural progression of CNV. One can argue that the authors' study
failed to prove that the therapy with ICG failed to bring about improvements in visual acuity. However, the visual acuity can be defined as
stable when there is deterioration of no more than two lines on the chart, and the authors concluded that the therapy with ICG at least can
stabilize the progression of CNV. Also, when the authors looked at the changes in the amount of leakage on FAG, "moderate leakage" (greater
than 50% of the original leakage) or "progression" did not occur in all patients, further exemplifying the CNV-stabilizing effect of PDT
with ICG. The location of CNV in all three cases was either directly subfoveal or near the area, and because there was no massive
hemorrhage, the final visual outcome of PDT could have been good. This study does have its limitations that, unlike the TAP study that
studied the effectiveness of PDT with verteporfin, the authors did not attempt to treat the patient when there was further leakage on FAG,
and the patient pool was rather small. Also, in one patient's eye, only a short period of follow-up (three months) was possible, making a
direct comparison of ICG to verteporfin difficult. However, compared to the TAP study, the visual acuity stabilizing effect of ICG was
comparable to that of verteporfin, making the dye useful in the treatment of ARMD with CNV. Furthermore, compared to verteporfin, ICG is
safer because it does not give rise to any allergic or adverse reactions to light, and is cost effective. Thus, the authors concluded that
in patients with decreased visual acuity due to ARMD with concomitant CNV, PDT with ICG can be employed with expectation of improving the
visual acuity at a relatively cheaper cost. Further studies are necessary in order to compare both the short- and long-term visual outcomes
of PDT with ICG dye, and also to study whether such treatment can be employed with other causes of CNV such as pathologic myopia, ocular
histoplasmosis, and idiopathic CNV. Color photograph and angiographic findings of CNV due to ARMD. (A) The color photograph shows RPE
atrophy and hypertrophy in the macular area of the left eye. (B) Early phase of FAG before treatment shows classic CNV in the subfoveal
area, which is smaller than one disc diameter. (C) Late phase of FAG before treatment shows hyperfluorescence from leakage on CNV area. (D)
Three months after treatment, no leakage was noted on FAG or hyperfluorescence due to RPE atrophy. Color photograph and angiographic
findings of CNV due to ARMD. (A) The color photograph shows RPE atrophy and hypertrophy, soft drusen, and exdudate in the macular area of
the right eye. (B) Early phase of FAG before treatment shows occult CNV in the subfoveal area, which is smaller than one disc diameter. (C)
Late phase of FAG before treatment shows hyperfluorescence from leakage in the CNV-involved area. (D) Nine months after treatment, minimal
leakage was noted on FAG. Color photograph and angiographic findings of CNV due to ARMD. (A) The color photograph shows RPE atrophy and
hypertrophy, soft drusen, and exdudate in the macular area of the right eye. A small amount of hemorrhage is also observed around the
macular area. (B) Early phase of FAG before treatment shows a hyperfluorescent lesion on the nasal side of the macula due to RPE atrophy.
(C) Late phase of FAG before treatment shows hyperfluorescence from leakage of occult CNV in the subfoveal area, which is smaller than one
disc diameter. (D) Nine months after treatment, no leakage was noted on FAG.
