Currently, portal hypertension is still big problem for the patients with serious liver diseases. Variceal bleeding is one of the most
important complications of portal hypertension. In case of failure of endoscopic and combined medical treatments, surgical decompressive
shunts are required. We emphasized an alternative splenorenal shunt procedure using adrenal vein as a conduit. A 26-year-old male suffered
from recurrent variceal bleeding was considered for surgical therapy. Although we planned to perform a distal splenorenal shunt procedure,
it was observed to be difficult. Therefore left adrenal vein was used as a conduit between left renal vein and splenic vein after splenic
artery was ligated. He did well and was discharged from the hospital on the postoperative day 6. In the follow up period for nine months,
endoscopic and ultrasonographic examinations were normal. We concluded that, in case of failure to perform distal splenorenal shunt due to
technical problems, alternative porto-systemic shunt procedure using the adrenal vein as a vascular conduit can be safely employed. In spite
of new therapeutic modalities such as pharmacologic, endoscopic (sclerotherapy or band ligation), and transjugular intrahepatic
portosystemic shunt (TIPSS), surgical decompressive shunts still have an important place in the treatment of portal hypertension (PHT). One
of the serious complications of PHT is variceal bleeding which can lead to death. Nevertheless, the success rate of the endoscopic and
combined medical treatments is about 50%. A few surgical procedures such as Sugiura procedure for esophageal varices and Hassab-Paquet (A
complete gastroesophageal devascularization with splenectomy) procedure for gastric varices have also been performed for PHT . In case of
failure of those procedures, surgical methods should be considered. Distal spleno-renal shunt (DSRS) and/or portocaval shunt are still
regarded as the most popular surgical procedures in these patients . Type of the surgical shunt should be chosen in the light of prognosis,
anatomic variations and surgical experience. The technique of DSRS was first described by Warren in 1967. DSRS is originally end to side
anastomosis between splenic and left renal veins . End to side anastomosis may be unfavorable due to scar tissues or inappropriate diameter
between the two veins. A few cases had been used adrenal vein for DSRS in the English literature in Pubmed search . In this case report, we
emphasized a successful alternative procedure for portosystemic shunt procedures. The patient was 26-year-old man with medical history of
recurrent upper gastrointestinal (GI) bleeding. There was no alcohol abuse in patient history. Endoscopic band ligation was performed for
the first bleeding episode before this admission. On physical examination, findings related to chronic liver disease were not observed
except splenomegaly. Pulse rate of 120 with a blood pressure of 110/80 mm Hg was found. The patient was also examined by endoscopically and
inactive gastric varices and esophageal variceal re-bleeding were diagnosed. Liver function tests were normal and the other laboratory data
were as follows; hematocrit level: 30%, erythrocyte count: 3400 × 103/mm3, white blood cell count (WBC): 1500/mm3 and platelet count:
31000/mm3. Prothrombin time (PT) and International normalization Ratio (INR) was mildly elevated (18.4 sec. and 1.49, respectively). The
patient had a duplex ultrasound (DUS) examination of the abdomen that revealed the findings of PHT, splenomegaly, normal liver and no
ascites. The diameter of portal vein was 20 mm with hepatopedal flow and left gastric vein (coronary vein) was 10 mm with hepatofugal flow.
The patient also underwent Magnetic Resonance Portography (MRP) for further evaluation of portal venous anatomy. This revealed that; the
diameter of splenic vein (SV) was 30 mm, left renal was 10 mm and there were retroperitoneal spontaneous shunts. Liver biopsy was also
performed and pathological examination revealed nonspecific morphological changes in small portal tracts, portal vein branches were
inconspicuous. Extrahepatic non-cirrhotic PHT was diagnosed and DSRS was planned to prevent esophageal variceal re-bleeding. Laparotomy was
performed through a left subcostal incision. No ascites was observed in the peritoneal cavity and the liver appeared normal. Nevertheless,
the enlarged spleen was identified during the operation. Firstly, division of the gastrocolic ligament was performed and extended distally
to obtain adequate view of the lower border of the pancreas. The splenic vein, left renal vein (LRV) and left adrenal vein were then
visualized. Because it was quite difficult to achieve complete separation of SV from the pancreas due to surrounding dense, fibrotic tissue,
end-to-side splenorenal anastomosis was not observed as an appropriate surgical technique. However, an excessive enlargement (4.5 cm
diameter) and angulation of SV were noted. Since the portal pressure (PP) was measured 34 mm Hg, splenic artery was ligated in order to
prevent likelihood massive bleeding during hard and risky dissection (figure 1). After then, PP was measured 26 mmHg. Adrenal vein stump
measuring 1.2 cm in diameter was thought to be an alternative conduit between the SV and LRV (figure 2). Side-to-end spleno-adrenal vein
anastomosis was performed in a running fashion with 6/0 polypropylene (figure 3, 4). Left gastric vein was also dissected and ligated. After
shunt procedure was performed, PP was measured 16 mm Hg. Enlarged splenic vein and ligation of splenic artery due to difficult dissection.
Splenic vein is isolated and separated from pancreas and surrounding tissue (P: Pancreas, SV: Splenic vein, AV: Adrenal vein, RV: Renal
vein.). Anastomosis between SV and enlarged adrenal vein stumpy. Completed portosystemic shunt using adrenal vein (AV) as a conduit between
splenic vein (SV) and left renal vein (LRV). (AS = anostomosis site) Postoperative course was unremarkable. Ammonia level after the shunt
procedure was normal. The patient was discharged from hospital on the postoperative day 6 and followed up for nine months period by
ambulatory. He had no complaint and had normal daily activities. DUS for shunt patency and upper GI endoscopic examinations for esophageal
varices which may need to be treated were both normal. DSRS as a selective porto-systemic shunt procedure is more effective and has less
complication rate than both endoscopic therapy and TIPSS for the treatment and prevention of esophageal variceal bleeding due to both
cirrhotic and non-cirrhotic PH . It does not alter the liver function in extrahepatic portal hypertension (EHPH) . EHPH is defined as
extrahepatic hypertension of the portal venous system in the absence of liver cirrhosis. Although the endoscopic therapy, liver
transplantation, and TIPSS have resulted in improved results for patients treated surgically for variceal bleeding, portosystemic shunts
remain important and effective options for selected patients with bleeding secondary to portal hypertension. Whether TIPSS is as efficacious
as surgical shunts is rather unproven. Its main drawback is still a high rate of restenosis or occlusion requiring frequent reinterventions
. Recurrent variceal bleeding which is one of the most important complications of PHT isn't uncommon even after medical and endoscopic
management in EHPH . Since repeated investigation of both endoscopic sclerotherapy and band ligation are often required, the patients
recommended endoscopic treatment should be in a close contact with medical center. Nevertheless, the patients living in rural area as our
case have a disharmony for this kind of therapy as cited in the literature . Thus, surgical shunt therapy, particularly DSRS, is a popular
palliative method to decompress PHT. It is an effective shunt procedure and does not usually need repeated intervention. The main principle
in shunt surgery is to create a tension-free and wide anostomosis with sufficient caliber, and thrombus-free veins to prevent obstruction of
the shunt. Inappropriate anatomy (excessive fibrotic tissue, inadequate diameter of splenic vein e.g.) may cause decreased shunt patency
that we suggest alternative shunt procedure avoiding hard maneuvers. Due to these anatomical challenges, prosthetic materials may be used or
coronario-caval shunt or inferior mesenteric-left renal vein shunt can be employed in selected cases . As we performed on this case,
ligation of splenic artery leads to reduce diameter of the enlarged splenic vein. Thus, dissection of the vascular structures and managing
of the end – to- side anostomosis can be performed much easier. Adrenal vein as a conduit is another option to create a selective
splenorenal shunt. DSRS via the adrenal vein has been used as an alternative technique in a few cases . Because of the excessive fibrotic
tissue surrounding SV and inadequate diameter between the SV and left RV to make a safe anastomosis, we preferred adrenal vein as a conduit
to perform porto-systemic shunt. Because, Doppler examination of the shunt patency including flow pattern was optimal even after nine months
later, any other diagnostic method for control was not needed. In case of suspected flow pattern with DUS, angiography may be useful to
figure out the problem. As in this case, in case of failure of DSRS because of technical problems, end-to side porto-systemic shunt
procedure should be considered as an alternative method. For this procedure, prosthetic grafts, cadaveric vascular conduits, and autologous
vascular graft as in this patient can be used. Since prosthetic grafts have a high risk for thrombosis causing occlusion and supplement the
cadaveric vascular graft is difficult, adrenal vein as an autologous vascular graft should be kept in mind. In conclusion, in case of
failure to perform routine surgical shunt procedure to decompress PHT, adrenal vein may be safely used as vascular conduit to create porto-
systemic shunt procedure, particularly end-to-side splenorenal shunt in selected cases. There is no commercial association that might pose a
conflict of interest in connection with this submitted communication which entitled "Porto-systemic shunt using adrenal vein as a conduit;
An alternative procedure for spleno – renal shunt" There are no sources of funding of the work. UA conceived of the study, and participated
in its design and coordination, and managed the operation. PY has made substantial contributions to acquisition of data and involved in
drafting the manuscript. MK participated in its design and gave the final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: Written consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this paper. We are very thankful to Ekrem Kaya for drawing the technical pictures.
