We report herein a rare case of primary omental gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST). A 65 year-old man was referred to our hospital with a
huge abdominal mass occupying the entire left upper abdomen as shown by sonography. On computed tomography (CT), this appeared as a
heterogeneous low-density mass with faint enhancement. Abdominal angiography revealed that the right gastroepiploic artery supplied the
tumor. With such an indication of gastric GIST, liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma or mesothelioma laparotomy was performed and revealed that this
large mass measured 20 × 17 × 6 cm, arising from the greater omentum. It was completely resected. Histopathologically, it was composed of
proliferating spindle and epithelioid cells with an interlacing bundle pattern. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for myeloid
stem cell antigen (CD34), weakly positive for c-KIT (CD117) and slightly positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), but negative for
cytokeratin (CK), alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) and S-100 protein. A mutation was identified in the platelet-derived growth factor alpha
(PDGFRA) juxtamembrane domain (exon 12, codon561) and the tumor was diagnosed as an omental GIST. The postoperative course was uneventful.
The patient is treated by Glevec® and is alive well with no sign of relapse. Our case demonstrated a weak immunohistochemical expression of
c-kit (CD117) and a point mutation in PDGFRA exon 12 resulting in an Asp for Val561 substitution. Imatinib therapy as an adjuvant to
complete resection has been carried out safely. Because of the rarity of primary omental GISTs, it is inevitable to analyze accumulating
data from case reports for a better and more detailed understanding of primary omental GISTs. GISTs are mesenchymal tumors, the majority of
which is KIT (CD117)-positive, typically arising in association with the muscularis propria of the gastrointestinal tract wall. Accordingly,
they occur most frequently in the stomach (60%), jejunum and ileum (30%), and less frequently in the duodenum (5%), < 5% colorectal < 1% in
the esophagus and appendix . A small number may originate not from the omentum, but from outside the gastrointestinal tract; these are
designated extra-GISTs (EGISTs). To the best of our knowledge, thus far only 28 cases of primary omental GISTs, including that described in
the present study, have been reported. Histopathologic and immunohistochemical characteristics of EGISTs are similar to GISTs, the majority
of both having mutually exclusive gain-of-function KIT/PDGFRA mutations. However, because of the rarity of the omental GISTs, it is
difficult to assess their malignant potential, prognostic factors or efficacy of surgery alone or in combination with molecular targeting
chemotherapy with the Kit/PDGFRA tyrosine kinase inhibitor Imatinib, and their overall prognosis. Here, we report a rare case of primary
omental myxoid epithelioid GIST which we have characterized immunohistochemically and genetically. We review the English-language literature
on primary omental GISTs. A 65-year-old man was referred to our hospital in October 2006 with a huge abdominal tumor. A firm mass was
palpated extending from the epigastrium to the left hypogastrium. There were no laboratory abnormalities, except a slight elevation of the
total bilirubin (1.3 mg/dl) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH: 217 IU/L) levels in the serum. The tumor markers carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
and carbohydrate antigen (CA19-9) were within the normal range. Ultrasonography showed that the mass occupied almost the entire upper
abdomen anterior to the bowel loops. On computed tomography (CT), a mass behind the left hepatic lobe showed heterogeneous low density with
faint enhancement (Fig. 1). Abdominal angiography revealed that the tumor was vascularized mainly from the right epigastric artery (Fig. 2).
We suspected liposarcoma, leiomyosarcoma, mesothelioma, or gastric GIST. At laparotomy on October 2006, a well-encapsulated tumor was found
in the greater omentum. There was no adhesion to adjacent organs and structures but a pinpoint adhesion to the stomach. The right
gastroepiploic artery and vein were prominent and stretched by the tumor, and a major supply vessel diverged from it in one stalk (Fig. 3).
There was no evidence of metastasis in the abdominal cavity. Grossly, a well-demarcated reddish-gray solid tumor, 20 × 17 × 6 cm in size,
showed irregular modularity (Fig 3). The cut surfaces were tan-colored and contained focally necrotic areas and a cystic nodule.
Histopathologically, the tumor was composed of proliferating epithelioid cells and myxoid cells with an interlacing bundle pattern (Fig. 4A
&4B). The cellularity was relatively high and the frequency of mitotic figures was 2 of 50 high power fields (HPF). The MIB-1 index was 4.4%
(Fig. 4D). The tumor cells were diffusely immunoreactive for myeloid stem cell antigen (CD34), weakly or focally positive for c-kit proto-
oncogene protein product (CD117) (Fig. 4C) and slightly positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE). However, there was no staining for
cytokeratin (CK), alpha-smooth muscle actin (SMA) or S-100 protein. Direct sequencing demonstrated mutations in the platelet-derived growth
factor alpha (PDGFRA) gene exon 12, codon 561, encoding a thymine to adenine substitution (Fig. 5). These findings were consistent with a
myxoid epithelioid GIST lacking myogenic features and neural attributes. The patient had a complete tumor resection and an uneventful
postoperative course. He was treated by per os administration of Glevec® 300 mg/day as an adjuvant postoperative molecular targeting
chemotherapy and has been living disease-free for 6 months. Computed Tomography. A huge tumor behind the left hepatic lobe showed
heterogeneous low density with faint enhancement. GB, gallbladder; GEA, gastroepiploic artery; T, tumor; PNC, pancreas; SPL, spleen. 3-D
reconstructed angiography of the gastroepiploic artery. A major tumor-supply artery diverges from the right gastroepiploic artery (REA).
Intra-operative photograph. Scissors indicate major tumor-feeding vessels (TFDV). Photomicrographs of the primary omental GIST tumor. A.
Epithelioid components of GIST. Tumor cells show eosinophilic cytoplasm and peripherally placed nuclei, and are mostly cohesive (H&E). B.
Some components show a spindle cell pattern with myxoid stroma (H&E). C. Tumor cells weakly immunoreactive for c-kit (CD117). D.
Immunostaining for MIB-1: sparse of positive tumor cells are shown (MIB-1 index: 4.4%). Genomic sequencing of the PDGFRA gene. Direct
sequencing analysis showing a point mutation at codon 561 (GTC to GAC) in exon12. Val561 is changed to Asp. GISTs are mesenchymal tumors
originating primarily from interstitial cells of Cajal or related stem cell-like precursors of the gastrointestinal tract wall. Typically,
they are characterized by the expression of the receptor tyrosine kinase Kit (CD117), although some GISTs do not or only weakly express this
marker . Primary omental GISTs, Sakurai et al. implicated their possible pathogenesis from ICC-like Kit-positive cells existing in the
normal omentum . It is commonly accepted that mutually exclusive mutations in Kit or PDGFRA receptor tyrosine kinase proteins play a central
role in GIST pathogenesis . This is clearly illustrated by the collected data from primary omental GISTs (Table 2). Mutually exclusive gain-
of-function Kit or PDGFRA mutations represent in-frame deletions, point mutations, duplications or insertions. Mutations in the Kit
juxtamembrane domain (exon 11) are the most common in GISTs of all sites, whereas a rare Kit extracellular domain (exon 9) Ala502-Tyr503
duplication is specific for intestinal GISTs. Mutations in PDGFRA have been identified in the juxtamembrane (exon 12), as observed in our
case, and tyrosine kinase domains (exons 14 and 18), nearly exclusively in gastric GISTs, mostly epithelioid variants. Some Kit and PDGFRA
mutations carry prognostic value. The Kit/PDGFRA tyrosine kinase inhibitor Imatinib has been successfully used in the treatment of
metastatic GISTs for more than 5 years . Microscopic features are site-dependent and the majority (more than 85%) appears as spindle cell
tumors . However, only half of our collected omental GISTs appeared to be spindle cell tumors, the remaining being epithelioid and myxoid
(Table 1). No correlation between prognosis and histologic type has been reported. On the other hand, it is well known that tumor size and
mitotic activity are the best prognostic features . In our case, the tumor size and the mitotic activity expressed per 50 HPFs were 20 cm
and 2, respectively. It is hardly predict accurately the risk for disease progression and malignant potential of our case, because of
scarcity of the primary omental GIST. Based on the criteria advocated by Miettinen and Lasota, these two tumor parameters place the tumor in
group 3b, at the intermediate risk , although according to the risk assessment proposed by Fletcher, et al., our patient displayed high-risk
feature (tumor size above 10 cm, irrespective of low number of mitoses) . Case review of the primary omental GISTs Ep: epithelioid, SP:
spindle, ANED: alive with no evident disease, Mo: month, Yrs: years, DUC: Dead of unknown cause, *: MIB-1-labeling index. **: K-67 labeling
index (%), LFT: lost to follow-up, NA: not available, DOD: dead of disease, Immunohistochemistry and Mutations in the primary omental GISTs
MS: miss sense, IFD: in-frame deletion, NA: not available Because of possible relapse even after complete resection of omental GISTs and the
objective response rate of 67 % of Imatinib to the mutation in PDGFRA exon 12 , our patient received daily oral administration of 300 mg
Glevec®, (we applied 15% reduced dose, referring to a report by Cormier, et al. after took account of a smaller average of Japanese build
than American) . At the present time, there are no signs of toxicity and no evidence of relapse. However, because of the short follow-up
period and rarity of the primary omental GISTs, it is difficult to assess appropriately their malignant potential, efficacy of different
treatment procedures and their overall prognosis. In order to improve overall understanding of the primary omental GISTs, it is useful to
analyze the collected detailed data from reported cases. Our case demonstrated a weak immunohistochemical expression of c-kit (CD117) and a
point mutation in PDGFRA exon 12 resulting in an Asp for Val561 substitution. Because of the rarity of primary omental GISTs, it is
difficult to assess their malignant potential and their overall prognosis. Imatinib therapy as an adjuvant to complete resection has been
carried out safely and may prevent relapse to prolong long-term survival. It is essential to analyze accumulating data from case reports for
a better and more detailed understanding of primary omental GISTs. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. TS, SS and
AS had contributed as molecular tumor pathologist. TS, KF, SY, RM and TM contributed as a gastrointestinal surgeon in operative performance
and postoperative treatment. NH and YT contributed as gastroenterologist and diagnostic radiologist. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
