Portal-mesenteric vein thrombosis, pylephlebitis and liver abscesses are rare complications of inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). The purpose
of this case report is to relate an unusual presentation of CD in order to show how conservative treatment could be an appropriate option as
a bridge to the surgery, in patients with septic thrombophlebitis and multiple liver abscesses with CD. We report a case of a 25-year-old
man with Crohn's disease (CD) who developed a superior mesenteric venous thrombosis, multiple liver abscesses and pylephlebitis, diagnosed
through abdominal ultrasound and an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan. The patient was successfully treated with conservative
treatment consisting of intravenous antibiotics, subcutaneous anticoagulation and percutaneous catheter drainage of liver abscesses. We
reported an unnusual case of pylephlebitis in CD. Until now this association has not been reported in adult patients at onset. We
hypothesise that the infection developed as a result of mucosal disease and predisposed by corticoid therapy. Adequated management was
discussed. A 25-year-old white male smoker patient was admitted to our hospital due to fever and right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Six
years previously he suffered from perianal fistulas and underwent perianal surgery including drainage and fistulectomy. Two years later CD
of the terminal ileum was diagnosed with an upper gastrointestinal barium contrast study and an endoscopic examination (colonoscopy with
multiple biopsies). The patient was treated with mesalazine and was in clinical remission most of the time, except for occasional episodes
of mild watery diarrhea without fever. Two months prior to admission the patient had visited the outpatient clinic with abdominal pain and
diarrhoea. A physical examination revealed a palpable mass in the right lower quadrant and laboratory analysis showed elevation of acute
phase reactants. A gastrointestinal barium contrast was performed and confirmed the presence of a stenosis in the terminal ileum. The
patient was treated with oral prednisone (0.5 mg/kg followed by a standard weaning strategy), to which he responded well. Two months later
the patient was attended to in the emergency department with a seven day history of abdominal pain, fever and malaise. At the time he was
still taking 5 mg of prednisone by month per day. A physical examination showed a heart rate of 120/min, blood pressure of 130/65 mmHg and
temperature of 39°C. His skin, chest and heart were normal. The abdomen was soft, non-distended, slightly tender in the right lower quadrant
and with hypoactive bowel sounds. A rectal examination gave a normal result. Laboratory results on admission are listed in table 1.
Thrombophilia studies were normal and included fasting plasma levels of protein C, protein S, anti-thrombin III, lupus anticoagulant, anti-
cardiolipin and anti-phospholipid antibodies, antinuclear antibodies, and genetic testing for the factor V Leiden. Chest and abdominal
X-rays were normal. An ultrasound abdominal examination revealed multiple hypoechoic nodular lesions in both lobes of the liver suggestive
of abscesses. Laboratory findings on patient admission. Abdominopelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography confirmed the existence of
multiple liver abscesses and mesenteric partial thrombosis (Figure 1, 2). The latter finding was confirmed by abdominal ultrasound with
Doppler. Computed tomography also revealed a dilated small bowel with several thick-walled loops of terminal ileum and ruled out an abscess
of the terminal ileum. Abdominopelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Multiple liver abscesses and mesenteric partial thrombosis.
Abdominopelvic contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Multiple liver abscesses and mesenteric partial thrombosis. The patient was
heparinized (sc enoxaparin 70 mg q12 h) and treated with iv pipericillin/tazobactam 4 g q6 h and metronidazole 500 mg q6 hr for 3 weeks. He
received total enteral nutrition and the corticosteroids were withdrawn within the first days of treatment. The patient underwent an
ultrasound percutaneous-guided needle aspiration and percutaneous drainage of the largest abscess. Culture of the fluid revealed
Peptostreptococcus spp and Propinibacterium acnes, which were both sensitive to the antibiotics administered. All blood cultures tested
negative. Following admission, the patient's clinical evolution was encouraging, although he was febrile until the abscesses were drained.
Follow-up angio magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) on hospitalization day 20th demonstrated a marked decrease in the size and number of liver
abscesses and no signs of thrombosis (Figure 3). After 1 month, the patient was discharged and prescribed po amoxicillin-clavulanate 2 g q12
h and metronidazole 250 mg q8 h for 4 weeks and sc enoxaparin 40 m q12 until he was operated on 5 months later. Prior to surgical
intervention, a CT scan showed complete resolution of the liver abscesses and recanalization of the superior mesenteric vein. The patient
underwent a surgical resection of the terminal ileum and cecum. Pathological report confirmed the presence of structure with no fistula.
After two years follow-up the patient remains in goog health. Magnetic resonance imaging. Decrease in the size and number of liver abscesses
and no signs of thrombosis. Until now the association of pylephebitis and liver abscesses with CD has only been reported in a paediatric
patient . A reported case of a young man with pylephlebitis and liver abscesses associated said with CD confirmed was treated successfully
with conservative therapy followed by surgery. Liver abscesses are a rare complication of IBD, and most cases described to date have been in
patients with CD . Although their etiology is not well known, several factors have been implicated as representing a predisposition to
developing liver abscesses. Abdominal surgery, long-term treatment with steroids or metronidazole, inflammatory and perforating diseases,
fistulae and intra-abdominal abscesses and malnutrition are among those factors, but there is a lack of evidence to support their
association with liver abscesses . In the literature most patients with liver abscesses have a long-standing history of IBD although reports
of CD presenting de novo with hepatic abscess have been presented . The only predisposing factor in the patient whose case study we present
here was the steroid treatment he was undergoing at the time of diagnosis. Clinical manifestations of liver abscesses are variable, but
certain symptoms are more common, such as fever, anorexia, weight loss and abdominal pain. However, their diagnosis is often incorrect, as
their clinical presentation can resemble an exacerbation of CD. Standard treatment of liver abscesses consists of broad spectrum antibiotics
and percutaneous drainage. Although the hepatic abscesses were resolved with conservative treatment, a subsequent surgical resection of the
affected ileum is mandatory. Thromboembolic complications of IBD are well-recognized . These complications can be caused by coagulation
abnormalities induced by inflammation or steroid therapy . Smoking has also been shown to cause morphological injury in endothelial cells .
Other risk factors to have been associated with a thrombotic tendency are active bowel disease, a history of clotting complications, prior
abdominal surgery and sepsis, particularly in the perioperative phase. In the present case we ruled out an underlying hypercoagulable
condition, and so it is likely the mesenteric thrombosis was related to the CD (bowel inflammation and steroid use). The combination of
infection and portal-mesenteric thrombosis can lead to the development of pylephlebitis. Portal pylephlebitis – defined as septic
thrombophebitis of the portal vein or one of its tributaries – is an uncommon complication of suppurative infections, either in the region
drained by the portal system or in strictures contiguous to the portal vein. Diverticulitis and appendicitis are the most common causes of
pylephlebitis, but it is also attributed to IBD . CD was first reported as a cause of pylephlebitis in 1946. Since then, a total of six
further cases of pylephlebitis in patients with CD have been reported, and in all but one of these cases CD was diagnosed prior to the
development of pylephlebitis . The clinical features of these patients have generally been non-specific. A diagnosis of pylephlebitis should
be considered in any patient with evidence of intraabdominal infection and high grade bacteremia. Abdominal ultrasound with colour Doppler
is crucial in establishing the diagnosis of this condition. However, CT scan is more sensitive than ultrasound for detecting a thrombus
within the splenic and mesenteric veins, and therefore should be the preferred imaging technique for detecting both thrombi and pericolonic
abscesses . It should be pointed out that the detection of thrombus in the portal vein or one of its tributaries does not necessarily
indicate septic thrombophebitis. Treatment in these circumstances is based on a strategy of antibiotics and eradication of the septic focus.
A broad spectrum antibiotic coverage is crucial, but the appropriate timing of their administration is less clear. Given the frequency of
hepatic abscesses as a complication of pylephlebitis, and since they may not be visualized in a CT scan (with or without drainage), a
minimum of 6 weeks antibiotic therapy seems prudent . The role of anticoagulation or thrombolytic therapy in the treatment of pylephlebitis
in the setting of IBD has not been standardized, but systemic anticoagulation for a minimum of 6 months has been recommended. Delay in
initiating the appropriate treatment can result in unfavourable outcomes such as liver abscess formation (as occurred in our case),
complications due to portal hypertension or venous infarction of the bowel . The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. MS
and GR have participated in the acquisition of data, have written the manuscript and have given final approval of the version to be
published. Other authors have been involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content and have given final
approval of the version to be published. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper
can be accessed here: Written consent of the case report: "Septic thrombophlebitis of the superior mesenteric vein and multiple liver
abscesses in a patient with Crohn's disease at onset" was obtained from the patient.
