Colostomy site carcinomas are rare with only eight cases reported in the world literature. Various etiological factors like adenoma-cancer
sequence, bile acids, recurrent and persistent physical damage at the colostomy site by faecal matter due to associated stomal stenosis have
been considered responsible. Two such cases are being reported and in both cases there was no evidence of any local recurrence in the pelvis
or liver and distant metastasis. Both patients had received adjuvant chemotherapy following surgery. First case was a 30-year-old male that
had reported with large bowel obstruction due to an obstructing ulcero-proliferative growth (poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma) at the
colostomy site after abdomino-perineal resection, performed for low rectal cancer six years previously. Wide local excision with
microscopically free margins was performed with a satisfactory outcome. Four years later he presented with massive malignant ascites,
cachexia and multiple liver metastasis and succumbed to his disease. Second case was a 47-year-old male that presented with acute large
bowel obstruction due to an annular growth (well differentiated adenocarcinoma) in the upper rectum. He was managed by Hartmann's operation
and the sigmoid colostomy was closed six months later. Five years following closure of colostomy, he presented with two parietal masses at
the previous colostomy site scar, which, on fine needle aspiration cytology were found to be well-differentiated adenocarcinomas of
colorectal type. Surgery in the form of wide local resection with free margins was performed. He presented again after five years with
recurrence along the previous surgery scar and an incisional hernia and was managed by wide local excision along with hernioplasty. Follow-
up of nine years following first surgery is satisfactory. Colostomy site/scar recurrence of rectal carcinoma is rare and could be due to
various etiological factors, although the exact causative mechanism is not known. Surgery with microscopically free margins is recommended
in the absence of metastatic disease. Stenosis of the stoma is considered as one of the most important contributory factors and should be
followed carefully. Metachronous carcinomas rarely occur at the colostomy site and only eight cases have been reported previously. Various
factors like adenoma-cancer sequence, stenosing stoma or bile acids have been implicated. Colon cancer presenting as cutaneous metastasis in
an old operative scar has also been reported . Possible etiological factors include an alteration in the microscopic anatomy around the
scar, perhaps in the lymphatic channels, altered adhesion molecule profile or altered local immunosurveillance mechanisms leading to change
in the local environs of the scar which become more receptive to metastatic tumor cells . The occurrence being so rare, no definite etiology
and management protocol is known. Management in the form of curative surgery along with adjuvant chemotherapy is recommended. A-30-year old
male had been operated in March 1996 for low rectal cancer (T4N0M0) in the form of classical abdomino-perineal resection with
microscopically free (R0) margins and satisfactory outcome. He was on a regular follow-up for three years and was subsequently lost to
follow-up. In April 2002 he presented with acute large bowel obstruction due to complete stenosis and infiltration of the stoma site by an
ulcero-proliferative growth, which was extending in to the surrounding skin and the abdominal muscles (figure 1). He had been having
increasing narrowing of the stoma for the past one year and was managed by his family doctor by regular finger dilatations. Biopsy from the
growth was suggestive of poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma. The ultrasound and computed tomography scan ruled out any local recurrence in
the pelvis or metastases in the liver or ascites. Blood biochemistry including liver function tests was within normal limits except for
anaemia (Hb = 10 gm%) and raised carcino-embryonic antigen (CEA = 10.7 ng/ml, normal being up to 2.5 ng/ml). He was managed by wide local
excision including the stoma with wide margin, the entire descending colon, 2/3rd of the transverse colon en bloc with the involved para and
pre-aortic lymph nodes. The left ureter, which was encased within the lymph node mass, was dissected free and right-sided transverse
colostomy was done (figure 2). The histopathological examination revealed poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum with signet
cell appearance. Out of ten lymph nodes resected along with the specimen, three showed metastasis (rpT4N1M0). Clinical photograph showing
ulceroproliferative growth at the colostomy site. Well-healed midline scar of the previous surgery (abdomino-perineal resection) may be
seen. Eight months after second surgery with transverse colostomy on the right side. The well-healed transverse scar on left side of abdomen
may be seen. Postoperative recovery was good and he was discharged on the tenth day. He received the adjuvant chemotherapy in the form of
Levamisole and 5 fluorouracil three weekly (total 12 cycles). He was again lost to follow-up and presented subsequently in August 2006 with
cachexia, massive malignant ascites, and liver metastasis and succumbed to his disease. A-45-year old male presented to the surgical
emergency in Aug 1997 with features of acute large bowel obstruction of three days duration due to an annular growth in the upper rectum
without any evidence of liver or peritoneal metastasis. Due to poor general condition (anemia, deranged electrolytes) and the unprepared
bowel, he was managed by Hartmann's operation. The histopathological examination of the resected specimen revealed well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma of the rectum (T4N1M0). The colostomy was closed after eight months and the regular follow-up was satisfactory. He received
adjuvant chemotherapy in the form of Levamisol and 5 fluorouracil. He was subsequently lost to follow-up and reported back five years later
in 2002 with two parietal lumps in the left lumbar region and the fine needle aspiration cytology showed them to be well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma of colorectal variety. The Ultrasound and contrast enhanced computed tomographic scan (CECT) showed infiltration in to the
muscles of the anterior abdominal muscles and the peritoneum. A wide local excision including the abdominal muscles was done and the wound
was closed in layers. He reported back in May 2005 with a recurrent 2 × 3 cm parietal nodule along the scar of the previous colostomy and an
incisional hernia. The scar recurrence was excised with an R0 margin and the hernia was repaired using an onlay prolene mesh. The
histopathological examination of the specimen revealed well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of colorectal type (figure 3). The postoperative
recovery was good. He was discharged on the seventh day and a regular follow up of one year (nine years following first surgery) is
satisfactory. The histopathological examination of the resected recurrent colostomy site specimen showing well-differentiated adenocarcinoma
(40×). Colon is not an uncommon site for synchronous and metachronous malignancies. The criteria for multiple carcinomas of the colon are
well laid out . In a study, multiple carcinomas accounted for 4.3% of all colorectal carcinomas, and for 12.9% of colorectal carcinomas and
polypoid cancers of the colon (synchronous 4%; metachronous 2.0%) . However, adenocarcinoma occurring at the colostomy site with no
recurrence in the pelvis is very rare. Only eight similar cases have been reported previously (table 1). There have been case reports of
adenoma carcinoma sequence . The stoma is more easily damaged than the mucosa of the intestine because it may be exposed to unexpected
compression by clothing. Narrowing of the stoma or stenosis due to persistent pressure of tight clothing on the stoma has also been found to
be a significant contributory factor and such patients should be carefully followed. Similar finding was observed in the second reported
case. Cancer family syndrome has also been suggested as a contributory factor by some authors on the basis of positive family history .
Others have however argued that because there were no signs of adenoma of the stoma that could be observed on a daily basis, the carcinomas
might have been similar to de novo metaplasia . Cases reported in the literature earlier with two present cases APR: Abdominoperineal
resection LAR: Low anterior resection with Hatmann's operation Presence of enterobacteria and bile acids in the stools has also been
implicated and reported and the carcinomas occurring at a stoma with which stools were briefly in contact appeared to be rare . Amongst the
eight known cases (table 1), three cases including one of the two reported cases may have been affected by bile acids and changes in
enterobacteria that resulted from prolonged contact with stools. There could be a possible similarity in the mechanisms involved in the
recurrence at colostomy site to that of recurrence of cancer in a scar of previous surgery and various causative mechanisms have been
suggested. There may be a direct extension of the disease, hematogenous spread, lymphatic spread or implantation of exfoliated tumor cells
if the specimen had been retrieved through the incision . This is however unlikely to be the scenario in both the presented cases
particularly in the first case with recurrence occurring at the site of colostomy. In the second case, the recurrence developed along the
scar of previously performed colostomy and this case could possibly resemble in presentation to an incisional scar recurrence in some ways.
Predilection to metastasis at incision site has also been postulated to be due to alteration in the microscopic anatomy around the scar,
perhaps in the lymphatic channels, making it more receptive to metastatic tumor cells, possibly due to altered adhesion molecule profile or
altered local immunosurveillance mechanisms. The exact pathogenesis however remains a matter of speculation awaiting further recognition and
investigation . Carcinomas may occur coincidentally at a stoma, but the stricture of the stoma and the physical stimulation like regular
pressure of tight clothing, could promote their occurrence. The stricture of a stoma should be followed carefully and patient informed about
the possibility of development of carcinoma at the colostomy site. When and if detected, surgery with a curative intent (R0 resection) is
associated with a good outcome if there are no liver, peritoneal or distant metastases. The author(s) declare that they have no competing
interests. CM was the chief surgeon in charge of the case and VS was the first surgical assistant; AB and SS were the pathologists
responsible for the histopathological examination, DB assisted in the preparation of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
manuscript. Informed consent was obtained from the relative of the first case, and the patient in the second; regarding permission to
publish this case in the World Journal Of Surgical Oncology.
