To the Editor: During the past decade, nosocomial infections due to multidrug-resistant Acinetobacter baumannii have been described with
increasing frequency, mostly in intensive care units (ICUs), resulting in therapeutic difficulties (1). The main mechanism for resistance to
extended-spectrum cephalosporins in A. baumannii is attributed to the overexpression of chromosome-encoded cephalosporinases or to plasmid-
encoded Ambler class A, B, and D β-lactamases (2). A. baumannii that produce PER-1 extended-spectrum β-lactamase (ESBL) are rarely isolated
outside Turkey and remain susceptible to carbapenems (3). Here we describe what we believe is the first ESBL-producing A. baumannii isolate
resistant to carbapenems and the first characterization of a PER-1 A. baumannii isolate from Russia, further supporting the emergence and
dissemination of PER-1 A. baumannii strains in eastern Europe and outside Turkey (3,4). On April 17, 2005, a 79-year-old-man was
hospitalized in the cardiology ward of a private hospital in Moscow, Russia, with cardiac arrhythmia and a pulmonary infarction subsequent
to a pulmonary embolism. After 1 week, he was transferred to the ICU for multiple organ failure related to a nosocomial infection caused by
an A. baumannii strain susceptible to several antimicrobial drugs, including imipenem (with positive lung aspiration and blood cultures). He
received imipenem and amikacin at high doses. On May 5, 2005, he was transferred to the internal medicine ward of the American Hospital of
Paris, Neuilly-sur-Seine, France. On the day of admission, bacterial cultures taken from sputum showed a multidrug-resistant A. baumannii
MOS-1 strain, susceptible only to colistin and rifampin. The patient received intravenous and aerosolized colistin 3 times a day plus
rifampin at 1,200 mg/d so that he could return to Russia. Rapid identification of A. baumannii MOS-1, increased awareness as a result of a
French national alert signaling the emergence of ESBL VEB-1–producing A. baumannii (5), and implementation of strict barrier precautions
prevented dissemination of this strain. No other multidrug-resistant A. baumannii isolate with a similar resistance profile has been
isolated in the hospital before, during, or after this period. A. baumannii MOS-1 was susceptible to colistin and rifampin only, and no
synergy image could be observed between clavulanic acid and cefepime or ceftazidime discs on a routine antibiogram performed by the disc
diffusion method. Only the use of cloxacillin-containing Mueller-Hinton agar plates (200 µg/mL) to inhibit the activity of the naturally
occurring cephalosporinase (AmpC) allowed detection of a synergy image, signature of the presence of an ESBL (5). MICs for imipenem,
determined by the agar dilution method (6), were >64 µg/mL. Clavulanic acid addition (2 µg/mL) decreased ticarcillin MIC from >512 to 256
µg/mL and ceftazidime MIC from 512 to 128 µg/mL but did not affect MIC of imipenem. Genes coding for ESBLs and for class B and D
carbapenemases were sought by PCR as previously described (4,5). Primers used for detection of TEM and PER β-lactamases gave 894-bp and
825-bp PCR products, respectively (4). Sequence analysis showed identity with blaTEM-1 and blaPER-1 genes (4). Results of isoelectric
focusing showed 3 isoelectric point values (5.3 for PER-1, 5.4 for TEM-1, and >8.5 for AmpC) in A. baumannii MOS-1 (4). A crude β-lactamase
extract of that isolate had no significant imipenem hydrolysis activity, which suggests that the carbapenem resistance may have emerged
through a nonenzymatic mechanism such as mutations in porins (7). BlaPER-1 gene in A. baumannii MOS-1 was located on a composite transposon,
Tn1213, identical to that characterized by Poirel et al. (8). Attempts to demonstrate plasmids or transfer genes encoding TEM-1 or PER-1
failed (data not shown), which suggests that the genes were chromosomally encoded. A. baumannii MOS-1 was not clonally related to well-
characterized PER-1 A. baumannii strains from Turkey, France, and Belgium (4,9) (Figure), further supporting genetic heterogeneity of PER-1
A. baumannii isolates, even though the immediate genetic environment of blaPER-1 gene was similar (8). Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis of
ApaI restricted analysis of Acinetobacter baumannii isolates. Lane 1, A. baumannii AMA-1 from France (4); lanes 2 and 3, A. baumannii IST-1
and A. baumannii IST-2 from Turkey (4); lane 4, A. baumannii isolate from Belgium (4); and lane 5, A. baumannii MOS-1 from Russia (current
study). Numbers on the right side of the figure represent the sizes in kb. M, lambda ladder. The emergence and spread of ESBL-producing A.
baumannii strains are of concern because they will increase carbapenem use, thus raising the risk for emergence of carbapenem-resistant
isolates. A. baumannii MOS-1 is, we believe, the first description of an ESBL-producing A. baumannii isolate also being resistant to
carbapenems. This resistance was likely acquired in vivo under imipenem treatment, but the susceptible strain was not available for strain
comparison. This is also the first description of a PER-1 A. baumannii isolate from Russia, a country from which little epidemiologic data
on antimicrobial drug resistance are available, except for the emergence of ESBLs of CTX-M type in Enterobactericeae (10). This study
highlights the importance of international patient transfer in the spread of antimicrobial drug resistance, thus emphasizing the need for
hospitals to isolate and screen for multidrug-resistant pathogens in all patients admitted to hospitals from foreign countries. This is
particularly critical when the foreign country is known for a high prevalence of multidrug-resistant bacteria or when no antimicrobial drug
resistance data are available. Suggested citation for this article: Naas T, Kernbaum S, Allali S, Nordmann P. Multidrug-resistant
Acinetobacter baumannii, Russia . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2007 Apr [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/13/4/669.htm This work was funded by a grant from the Ministère de l’Education Nationale et de la Recherche
(UPRES-EA3539), Université Paris XI, and by the European Community (6th PCRD, LSHMCT- 2003-503-335). Dr Naas is associate professor in
microbiology at the University of Paris, South Medical School. His primary research interest is the genetic basis of antimicrobial drug
resistance gene acquisition.
