We report a case of unusual bronchopulmonary foregut malformation composed of a mediastinal bronchogenic cyst with sequestrated lung tissue
and communicating tubular esophageal duplication associated with complete pericardial defect. A 18-yr-old man, who had suffered from dry
cough and mild dyspnea, was admitted because of an incidentally detected chest mass. A computed tomography scan demonstrated a cystic mass
with an air fluid level connected with esophagus in the middle mediastinum. The surgically resected mass was a pleural invested accessory
lobe of the lung (8.0×7.0×4.5 cm) connected with the esophageal wall by a tubular structure (3.0 cm in length and 2.0 cm in diameter). A
complete left pericardial defect was also identified. Histologically, the cystic wall was composed of fibrovascular connective tissue with a
smooth muscle layer, mixed seromucous glands and cartilage, and the inner surface of the cyst was lined by ciliated pseudostratified
columnar epithelium. The inner surface of the tubular structure was lined by non-keratinizing or keratinizing squamous epithelium, and the
wall contained submucosal mucous glands, muscularis mucosa, and duplicated muscularis propria. This case is important in understanding the
embryological pathogenesis of the variable spectrum of the bronchopulmonary foregut malformation. Bronchopulmonary foregut malformations are
characterized by an isolated portion of lung tissue connection with the upper gastrointestinal tract and may result from the imperfect
separation of pulmonary and esophageal anlagen or an accessory lung bud arising in the primitive gastrointestinal tube during early
embryogenesis (1). They encompass a great variability of anomalies including not only extra- and intra-lobar pulmonary sequestrations with
partial or complete gastrointestinal communication but also foregut diverticula, foregut duplications, tracheoesophageal fistulas,
bronchoesophageal fistulas, and congenital cystic adenomatoid malformations of the lung (1). We have recently experienced a very unusual
case of bronchopulmonary foregut malformation presented with an extralobar pulmonary sequestration-like bronchogenic cyst connected with a
tubular esophageal duplication associated with a pericardial defect. A 18-yr-old man, who had suffered from dry cough and mild dyspnea, was
admitted because of an incidentally detected chest mass. A computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a cystic mass with an air fluid level
connected with esophagus in the middle mediastinum (Fig. 1). A left pericardial defect was also suspected (Fig. 2). Surgical excision of the
mass was undertaken. The mass was a pleural invested accessory lobe of the lung connected with the esophageal wall by a tubular structure in
the middle mediastinum. The arterial supply was done from branches of the descending thoracic aorta, and the venous drainage was done into
the azygos system. A complete left pericardial defect was identified. Grossly, the accessory lobe of the lung measured 8.0×7.0×4.5 cm, and
the attached tubular structure measured 3.0 cm in length and 2.0 cm in diameter. The cut surface of the accessory lobe of the lung showed a
bronchus-like dilated cyst, which contained soap bubble-like material communicated with the tubular structure. The investing lung parenchyma
was partly consolidated or partly emphysematous with a subpleural bullous change (Fig. 3). Histologically, the cystic wall was composed of
fibrovascular connective tissue with a smooth muscle layer, mixed seromucous glands, and hyaline cartilage, and the cysts were lined by
pseudostratified ciliated columnar epithelium (Fig. 4A). The investing lung parenchyma was composed of mature alveolar spaces filled with
proteinaceous fluid or red blood cells, and bronchial or bronchiolar structures were randomly distributed among these mature alveoli (Fig.
4B). Focal emphysematous changes with a subpleural bulla were also noted. The inner surface of the tubular structure was lined by ciliated
non-keratinizing or keratinizing non-ciliated squamous epitheliums and the wall contained submucosal mucous glands, muscularis mucosa, and
duplicated muscularis propria (Fig. 4C) No ganglion cells were noted. The mass was diagnosed as a bronchopulmonary foregut malformation
composed of an extra-lobar pulmonary sequestration-like bronchogenic cyst communicated with tubular esophageal duplication. Bronchogenic
cysts presumably represent supernumerary lung buds from the primitive foregut, but in contrast to sequestrations, they only rarely contain
distal lung parenchyma (2). The cystic wall lined with ciliated columnar epithelium generally contains smooth muscle, cartilage, and
bronchial mucous glands. Our patient's lesion revealed a unilocular cyst lined with a ciliated columnar epithelium with smooth muscles,
hyaline cartilages, and bronchial mucous glands and well developed lung parenchyma composed of mature alveoli with randomly distributed
bronchi and bronchioles. It possessed characteristics of both bronchopulmonary sequestration and bronchogenic cyst. Bronchogenic cyst and
extralobar pulmonary sequestration are believed to originate form the embryonal foregut and have a close embryologic relationship. There are
a few reports of bronchogenic cyst arising in pulmonary sequestration or bronchogenic cyst combined with pulmonary sequestration-like
features (3, 4). Bronchopulmonary foregut malformation was first described by Gerle et al. who reported 13 rare cases of pulmonary
sequestration that communicated with the gastrointestinal tract (5). Since then, this terminology has been used for variable congenital
malformations arising from a supernumerary lung bud from the primitive foregut showing a variable histopathologic spectrum, from the
variably developed bronchopulmonary malformation to the foregut cyst without pulmonary structures (1). The type of bronchopulmonary foregut
malformation depends on the stage of embryological development when the accessory tissue arises and the direction in which the aberrant
pulmonary tissue grows. The primitive foregut gives rise to the pharynx and lower respiratory tract as well as upper gastrointestinal tract.
If the accessory lung bud from the primitive foregut arises before development of the pleura, it is invested by adjacent normal lung
parenchyma and becomes an intralobar pulmonary sequestration. If it develops late, after the pleura has already formed, it grows separate
from the adjacent lung, is invested by its own pleura, and becomes and extralobar pulmonary sequestration (1). The most common foregut
cysts, the bronchogenic cyst and the esophageal duplication representing abnormal budding of the vertebral and dorsal primitive foregut,
respectively, indicating their common origin from the primitive foregut and close embryologic relationship (6). Congenital pericardial
defect, a relatively rare condition, can vary from a small communication between the prericardium and pleural spaces to a complete
pericardial absence. The most common variation of this anomaly (found in 65% of patients) is the deficiency of the left pericardium, and it
is widely accepted that pericardial defect represent persistence of the embryonic pleuro-pericardial foramen, perhaps due to inadequate
blood supply following premature atrophy of the left common cardinal vein (7). Congenital pericardial defect may be associated with
cardiothoracic diseases including patent ductus arteriosus, atrial septal defect, and rarely bronchopulmonary foregut malformation (7).
During the fifth week of embryonic development the bronchial buds develop at the caudal end of the laryngeotracheal tube and grow into the
pericardial-peritoneal canals, the future pleural cavities (7). At this stage the primitive heart and lungs share a common coelomic cavity
and are closely related each other (8). As the future pleural cavity enlarges to accommodate the growing lung buds, a fold called the
pericardio-pleural membrane is produced in the lateral coelemic cavity between the future pericardial and plural cavities, and they fuse in
the midline, separating the pleural and pericardial cavities. Considering the close relationship between the branchial pouches, foregut
primordium, pleuropericardial folds, and pharyngeal pouches in embryogenesis, various masses may result from abnormal buddings of the
ventral diverticulum of the foregut or tracheobronchial tree, including bronchogenic cysts, and esophageal duplications could be associated
with pericardial defect. The incidence of congenital pericardial defect associated with bronchopulmonary foregut malformation is extremely
rare (9). To our knowledge, this is the first case in Korea. In summary, our case showed findings of communicating bronchopulmonary foregut
malformation composed of a bronchopumonary cyst having the characteristics of both extralobar pulmonary sequestrations and bronchogenic
cysts and a tubular esophageal duplication associated with a complete congenital pericardial defect of the same side. This case is important
in understanding the embryological pathogenesis of the bronchopulmonary foregut malformations, which range from pulmonary sequestrations to
bronchogenic cysts and foregut duplication cyst. Axial chest CT on lung setting shows a cyst (short arrow) with an air-fluid level (long
arrow) abutting the esophagus by tubular structure (arrow head) in the aortopulmonary window. Axial contrast enhanced CT shows an abnormal
interposition of the lung tissue (arrowhead) between the aorta and the main segment of the pulmonary artery, indicating the absence of the
pericardium. The cut surface of the mass shows a unilouclar cyst containing soap bubble-like material, which is connected with tubular
structure. The investing lung parenchyma shows a subpleural bullous formation. Microscopic features of the specimen (H&E ×40). (A) The wall
of tubular structure lined by squamous epithelium contains duplicated muscular layer and submucosal mucous glands. (B) The wall of
bonchogenic cyst lined by ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium is composed of fibroconnective tissue, hyaline cartilage, and mucous
glands. (C) The investing lung parenchyma shows of mature alveolar spaces with an emphysematous change. Some alveolar spaces are filled with
proteinaceous fluid. (D) A transition from squamous epithelium to columnar epithelium is noted in the junction of the bronchogenic cyst and
tubular esophageal duplication.
