Sporadic sclerotic fibroma (SF) and solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) arising in the oral cavity are very rare. In this report, we describe two
cases of oral pathology, one involving SF and the other involving SFT. Both cases presented with well-circumscribed, firm nodules with
similar gross findings. However, the histologic findings of the SF and SFT showed rather distinct features. The SF was composed of
hyalinized sclerotic collagen bundles arranged in a whorled pattern, whereas the SFT was formed by spindles cells arranged in hypo- and
hypercellular areas. The immunohistochemical findings were similar in both cases; there was positivity for vimentin, CD34, and CD99, but
bcl-2 positivity was only seen in the SFT. Although their histopathologies are similar, SF and SFT should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of soft tissue tumors in the oral cavity. Sclerotic fibroma (SF) is a unique benign fibrous tumor that may develop anywhere on the
skin. SF was originally recognized as a cutaneous manifestation of Cowden disease.1-3 Although SF was first described in a patient with
Cowden's disease, solitary and sporadic cases of SF of the skin in patients without Cowden's disease have been reported.4-6 However, to the
best of our knowledge, only seven cases of sporadic SF of the oral cavity have been described.7-9 Solitary fibrous tumor (SFT) usually
arises in the pleura and it was first described by Klemperer.10 With the increasing number of reported cases in a variety of extrapleural
sites, it was recently suggested that extrapleural SFTs may actually develop more frequently than the pleural tumors.11 SFTs occur rarely
within the oral cavity, and only about 37 cases of SFTs in the oral cavity have been reported.12-26 In this report, we present two cases of
oral pathology, one involving SF and the other involving SFT, and compare the histopathologic findings. In June 2005, a 36-year-old woman
visited the Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery with complaints of a small mass in the right buccal mucosa that she had noted
one year prior. The lesion was asymptomatic and had not increased in size. Intraoral examination revealed a 1-cm-sized polypoid nodule. She
did not have any of the known signs or symptoms associated with Cowden's disease. Grossly, the lesion was a relatively well-demarcated,
firm, flesh-colored nodule. Histopathologic examination showed a relatively well demarcated, non-capsulated, round hypocellular and
eosinophilic nodule, and the overlying mucosa was attenuated (Fig. 1A). The nodule was composed of hyalinized sclerotic collagen bundles
arranged in a whorled pattern. Prominent clefts between the collagen bundles were observed. The scanty tumor cells were spindle shaped and
entrapped among the thick collagen bundles (Fig. 1C). The antibodies listed in Table I were used for the immunohistochemical staining with
the streptavidin-biotin method. The tumor cells stained intensely for CD34 and vimentin, and several CD99-positive cells were seen (Fig.
1E). The immunoreactivity for bcl-2, α-SMA, S-100, CD68, EMA, CD31, factor VIII and bcl-6 was negative (Fig. 1E). In May 2005, a 28-year-old
woman visited the Department of Otolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery. She had noticed a painless mass in her oral cavity about three months
prior to our examination. Intraoral examination revealed a 1.5-cm-sized elevated nodule in the hard palate. Grossly, the lesion was sharply
circumscribed and firm in consistency. Histopathologic examination showed a well demarcated submucosal mass with ulceration of the overlying
mucosa (Fig. 1B). The tumor showed a predominantly haphazard or short fascicular arrangement of the spindle cells that had fusiform or oval
vesicular nuclei, inconspicious nucleoli, and scant cytoplasm. The cellularity of the tumor varied from area to area, and the cellularity
was inversely related to the amount of collagen (Fig. 1D). In the areas with less cellularity, the tumor cells were embedded in a
collagenous matrix. The tumor was richly vascularized and occasionally contained areas with dilated vessels. Focal calcification was seen,
but neither mitosis nor necrosis was found. On immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, CD34, bcl-2 and
CD99, and were negative for α-SMA, S-100, CD68, EMA, CD31, factor VIII and bcl-6 (Fig. 1F). Although SF and SFT are very rarely found in the
oral cavity, there are several fibrous lesions that may be included in the histologic differential diagnosis of tumors in the oral cavity.
These lesions are traumatic fibroma (TF), giant cell fibroma (GF), and benign fibrous histiocytoma (BFH). TFs are the most commonly
occurring oral soft tissue lesion. The microscopic features of TF include dense collagen, numerous mature fibroblasts, and chronic
inflammatory cells. Unlike in SF and SFT, the fibrous tissue of TF blends into the surrounding connective tissue. The collagen bundles of GF
are rarely thickened, and clefts are not seen. The sharp circumscriptions of SF and SFT are the most important histologic features that
distinguish these lesions from other oral fibrous lesions. Moreover, the fibroblasts and myofibroblasts of TF, GF and BFH do not react with
anti-CD34 antibodies.7 Rapini and Golitz4 coined the term "sclerotic fibroma (SF)" when they described a series of 11 solitary skin lesions
with histology similar to that of the cutaneous neoplasms in Cowden's disease. Microscopically, these tumors are well circumscribed,
paucicellular, dermal nodules that are composed of thick collagen bundles separated from one another by prominent clefts, and the collagen
bundles are arranged in a whorled or storiform pattern.2-4 Spindle- and stellate-shaped, occasionally multinucleated CD34-positive dendritic
cells are haphazardly scattered throughout the lesions.3-6 Intraorally, the patients with Cowden's disease typically present with numerous
pink or mucosa-colored papular lesions that often involve the tongue, gingiva and lips.27,28 In most cases, the oral papules reveal non-
specific histologic features that are consistent with epithelial and fibrous hyperplasia.27,28 Alawi et al.7 described the first documented
series of solitary SF of the oral soft tissues. The authors reported five cases of isolated SF, of which four arose in the buccal mucosa and
one arose in the lower lip. Ide et al.8 and Gonzalez-Vela et al.9 reported one case of SF in the lip and one case of SF in the buccal
mucosa. Ours is the seventh case of SF in the absence of Cowden's disease. Suster et al.12 were the first to describe an SFT in the oral
cavity. To date, we have found only 37 reported cases in our literature search.12-26 Microscopically, SFTs are similar at any site in the
body and are characterized by the presence of hypocellular and hypercellular areas, a sclerotic collagen matrix and the presence of vessels,
mast cells, and nuclei arranged in a palisading fashion. Although the cells are generally distributed haphazardly, they may form fascicles
and then present a storiform pattern. SF and SFT present as sharply circumscribed masses with very similar gross findings. Although SF and
SFT exhibit distinct microscopic features, confusion may arise when examining the fragmented biopsy tissue, because the hypocellular,
collagen-rich areas of SFT may closely resemble the appearance of a SF. The results of immunohistochemistry on SF and SFT are very similar.
Like SF, the neoplastic cells of SFT are positive for CD34 and CD99. However, unlike SF, the neoplastic cells of SFT are uniformly bcl-2
positive. The bcl-2 positivity, as well as the microscopic features, are very important for differentiating SFT from SF. Bcl-2, a 26-kD
protein associated with programmed cell survival via the inhibition of apoptosis, has been reported to be positive in most SFTs, regardless
of benign or malignant histologic features.29 In summary, we presented the clinical, microscopic, and immunohistochemical aspects of one
case each of SF and SFT in the oral cavity involving the buccal mucosa and hard palate, and we discussed their differential diagnosis and
immunohistochemical markers (Table 2). Although these are rare tumors, SF and SFT must be considered in the differential diagnosis of oral
soft tissue tumors. (A) Low magnification of the microscopic findings for sclerotic fibroma, which is a relatively well demarcated
submucosal mass (× 20, H & E stain). (B) Low magnification of the microscopic finding for solitary fibrous tumor, which is a sharply
circumscribed submucosal mass (× 20, H & E stain). (C) The thick eosinophilic collagen bundles are separated by prominent clefts (× 200, H &
E stain). (D) The hypocellular and hypercellular areas are mixed (× 200, H & E stain). (E) The tumor cells of sclerotic fibroma are negative
for bcl-2 (× 400), but positive for CD34 (Inset, × 400). (F) The tumor cells of solitary fibrous tumor are positive for bcl-2 (× 400) and
CD34 (Inset, × 400). Antibodies Used for the Immunohistochemical Study α-SMA, smooth muscle actin; EMA, epithelial membrane antigen.
Comparison of Sclerotic Fibroma and Solitary Fibrous Tumor in the Oral Cavity
