Sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis (SEP) is a poorly understood and rarely documented cause of small bowel obstruction. Although recurrent
peritonitis has been reported as the main contributory factor leading to secondary SEP, the pathogenesis of primary (idiopathic) SEP is
still uncertain. A 40-year-old woman with a history of total abdominal hysterectomy due to gestational trophoblastic disease presented with
progressive lower abdominal pain and abdominal distension. Ultrasonography and contrast-enhanced abdomen-pelvis computed tomography of the
abdomen revealed encapsulation of the entire small bowel with a sclerotic capsule. At laparotomy, a fibrous thick capsule encasing small
bowel loops was revealed. Extensive adhesiolysis and removal of the capsule from the bowel loops were performed. The patient recovered
uneventfully; she was discharged without complications. SEP is a rare cause of small bowel obstruction. We treated a case of abdominal
cocoon with intestinal partial obstruction in a woman with a history of abdominal hysterectomy due to gestational trophoblastic disease.
Surgical treatment was effective and the patient recovered without complication. Sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis (SEP), characterized
by a thick and fibrotic membrane, is a rare cause of small bowel obstruction; its pathogenesis is poorly understood1, 2, 4). Idiopathic SEP,
also known as abdominal cocoon, was first described in young girls by Foo et al.; it was thought to be caused by a low-grade peritonitis
from retrograde menstruation3). However, subsequently there were sporadic reports in older patients of both genders4). Secondary SEP occurs
most frequently in patients on chronic ambulatory peritoneal dialysis5, 6). Here, we report a case of sclerosing encapsulating peritonitis
with partial small bowel obstruction that developed 3 years after abdominal hysterectomy for gestational trophoblastic disease. A 40-year-
old woman presented with a history of progressive lower abdominal pain, abdominal distension and frequent gas of 2 years duration. The
patient had a history of abdominal hysterectomy for gestational trophoblastic disease 3 years prior to presentation. . The patient reported
intermittent episodes of abdominal colicky pain and bloating after a meal two years post surgery. The symptoms were becoming more frequent
and serious. There was no other significant medical history such as diabetes mellitus, liver disease or medication. On physical examination,
the patient was afebrile and hemodynamically stable. The abdomen was distended but non-tender with increased bowel sounds in pitch and
frequency. No palpable mass or organomegaly and no external hernias were present. Laboratory blood analyses including erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR) and C-reactive protein (CRP) were within normal limits. Plain abdominal X-ray showed marked small bowel dilatation
and air collection with air-fluid levels centrally located (Figure 1). Ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed that the small bowel was
surrounded by a membranous structure with a thickness from 3.5 mm to 6.1 mm (Figure 2). The patient was admitted to the general ward of our
hospital with the impression of intestinal obstruction. Contrast-enhanced abdomen-pelvis computed tomography performed initially showed
encapsulation of the entire small bowel with a sclerotic capsule, without a luminal obstructive lesion or ischemic change of the small bowel
(Figure 3). There was also a small amount of ascites in the pelvic cavity and several slightly enlarged lymph nodes at the ileocolic area by
CT scan. Endoscopy of the upper gastrointestinal tract did not demonstrate any abnormalities except a short segment of Barrett's esophagus.
A barium follow-through study of the small bowel, performed in order to evaluate the continuity or stenotic change in the small bowel,
revealed dilated and aggregated small bowel with normal peristalsis, suggesting abdominal cocoon (Figure 4). The ileus was resolved with
conservative care over 3 days; the patient was advanced to a liquid diet; however, she complained of abdominal pain again. An abdominal
computed tomography with gastrograffin was carried out; the small bowel was encapsulated from the distal jejunum to the mid ileum with
adhesion of bowel loops and preservation of passage through the entire bowel (Figure 3). Laparotomy exploration was finally performed for
encapsulating peritonitis with intestinal partial obstruction. Exploration revealed encapsulation of the entire bowel with a whitish
leather-like fibrous membrane and straw-colored ascitic fluid of a moderate amount (Figure 5). In addition, there was adhesion between the
liver and gall bladder with a whitish fibrous band, but no nodular change on the surface of the liver. An adhesiolysis of the capsule
encasing bowel revealed the serosa of the bowel loops attached to one another by a thin flimsy layer, which could be separated easily. The
pathologic finding of the removed capsule was a dense collagenous fibrous tissue with mild chronic inflammation (Figure 6). After surgery,
the patient was tolerated a gradually increased diet without any complication and was discharged, on hospital day 22. Sclerosing
encapsulating peritonitis is an uncommon but potentially lethal condition. It can lead to severe complications such as bowel obstruction,
enterocutaneous fistulas and necrosis. Most cases are diagnosed incidentally at laparotomy. Preoperative diagnosis is confirmed readily by a
combination of barium follow-through where a concertina pattern or cauliflower sign and delayed transit of contrast medium are
characteristic and computed tomography of the abdomen where images show small bowel loops aggregated together at the center of the abdomen
encased by a soft-tissue density mantle7, 8). The management for SEP includes medical treatment and surgical intervention. Therapy with
corticosteroids is effective in patients with secondary SEP. Tamoxifen, a nonsteroidal anti-estrogen drug, has been successfully used in the
treatment of fibrosclerotic disorders9, 10). Surgery, such as membrane dissection and extensive adhesiolysis, is the treatment of choice for
cases with intestinal obstruction. However, due to morbidity and mortality, resection of bowel is indicated only if the bowel is non-viable
or is not completely separated from the capsule due to severe adhesion. The pathogenesis of SEP remains uncertain. However, recurrent
peritonitis has been reported as the main cause of secondary SEP5, 6). Other factors that may lead to SEP include the following. Sterilizing
chemicals, buffers, hypertonic dextrose, chronic use of β-blocking agent, acidic dialysate, peritoneal catheter itself, drugs added to
dialysis fluid, and endotoxin contamination of in line microbiologic filters11, 12). Rarely, SEP is also associated with abdominal
tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, familial Mediterranean fever, gastrointestinal malignancy, protein-S deficiency, liver transplantation,
fibrogenic foreign material, and luteinized ovarian thecomas13). This report describes a case of abdominal cocoon in a Korean woman with
intermittent partial obstruction of small bowel. Accurate pre-operative diagnosis makes it possible for the surgeon to perform extensive
adhesiolysis and removal of the capsule encasing small bowel without resection of the bowel. The patient had no history of chronic
continuous peritoneal dialysis but had a history of chronic abdominal pain after hysterectomy. There has been no report on the association
of SEP with hysterectomy or gestational trophoblastic disease to date. There are a few reports of abdominal cocoon in patients with liver
transplantation or treatment for liver cirrhosis who did not have a history of peritoneal-venous shunting (PVS) or β-blocker medication.
These findings suggest that sclerosing peritonitis may be due to persistent low-grade intra-abdominal sepsis14, 15). Nakamura et al.
reported that SEP pathogenesis in long-term CAPD patients might be related to advanced glycation end-product accumulation in the peritoneal
membrane and alteration in peritoneal cell function, accompanied by increased expression of various growth factors and peritoneal sclerosis,
and finally followed by SEP. Therefore, long-term peritoneal stimulation with certain products associated with peritonitis, of various
causes, could cause SEP16). In our case, SEP may have been associated with chronic and recurrent peritonitis after abdominal open surgery.
The causes of SEP may be much more diverse than previously thought. Study of additional SEP cases is needed to facilitate precise and rapid
diagnosis and treatment as well as considerations for prevention. Plain abdominal X-ray shows marked small bowel dilatation and air
collection in the lumen with multiple air fluid levels in the upright position. The distended bowel loop was located centrally and
extensively folded (A: supine position, B: upright position). Ultrasound of the abdomen shows small bowel surrounded by a continuous
membranous structure. The thickness of the capsule was from 3.5 mm up to 6.1 mm. (A) Contrast-enhanced abdomen-pelvis computed tomogram
shows encapsulation of the entire small bowel with a sclerotic capsule. (B) Abdomen computed tomogram after intake of gastrograffin shows
encapsulation of the small bowel from the distal jejunum to the mid ileum. Barium follow-through shows the entire dilated small bowel loop
aggregated and deviated to left side of abdomen. There was no ulcerative change or obstructive material in the lumen of the bowel and normal
peristalsis. A trace of barium in the ascending colon suggested little continuity from the small bowel to the colon. Laparotomy exploration
revealed encapsulation of the entire small bowel with a whitish leather like fibrous membrane. Adhesiolysis of the capsule encasing the
bowel was performed. The microscopic findings of the capsule shows dense collagenous fibrous tissue with mild chronic inflammation (A: ×100,
B: ×200, H & E stain).
