A 20-year-old man presented to our outpatient clinic with hemoptysis, cough, and pleuritic chest pain. His chest radiograph and pulmonary
function tests (PFT) were normal. A bronchoscopy showed a small yellowish patch with a regular surface. A direct bronchoscopic biopsy was
performed. The pathologic findings showed a benign granular cell tumor. The respiratory symptoms resolved after biopsying the tumor. On
follow.up, there were no signs of recurrence of the granular cell tumor after a period of 24 months. Granular cell tumors (GCTs) originate
from Schwann cells. The majority of granular cell tumors occur in the head and neck region, with a predilection for occurrence in the
tongue. Tracheal lesions are by far the least common. A confirmative diagnosis for GCTs should be made histopathologically and should be
supported by immunohistochemical staining. The treatment of a granular cell tumor consists of wide local excision. A review of the English
language literature revealed 31 reported cases of tracheal granular cell tumors, with only four reported in children8). A review of the
Korean ENT literature revealed several cases of laryngeal GCTs and one case of malignant GCT in the retrotracheal space1-3). There are no
reports of tracheal GCT in the Korean literature Here, we report a case of a 20.year.old man with tracheal GCT and discuss the diagnosis and
management of this rare tumor. A 20-year-old man presented to our clinic with blood.tinged sputum, cough, and left pleuritic pain of 2-weeks
duration. The patient had a history of atrial fibrillation and epididymo-orchitis. He developed a small amount of blood-tinged sputum and
left pleuritic pain, and had lost 4 kg of body weight in one month. Subsequently, the amount of blood-tinged sputum increased. No fever or
chills were noted. The physical examination was unremarkable. The workup of the patient included a complete blood count and blood
chemistries, which were normal. A chest X-ray did not demonstrate any evidence of pulmonary disease (Figure 1). The patient underwent a
pulmonary function test (PFT) and a bronchoscopy. The PFT showed a mild restrictive pattern: FVC, 4.1 (76%); FEV1, 3.2 (72%); and FEV1/FVC,
78%. A rigid bronchoscopy revealed a smooth, sessile, yellow lesion emanating from the right posterior terminal trachea wall (Figure 2). The
lesion was biopsied, and the specimen was stained with hematoxylin and eosin. The sections showed a benign granular cell tumor with marked
granular, eosinophilic cytoplasm and small, eccentric, round nuclei. An immunohistochemical analysis showed that the tumor cells were
positive for neuron-specific enolase (NSE), s-100, and CD 68 (focally) (Figure 3). A few days after admission to the clinic, the
blood.tinged sputum resolved. The patient underwent a follow-up bronchoscopy one month later. The tracheal lesion had not changed (Figure
4). The biopsy specimen showed unremarkable columnar cells. A chest high-resolution computed tomography (HRCT) was normal (Figure 5). The
patient was discharged from the clinic as his hemoptysis and pleuritic pain had resolved. Two years after his initial presentation, the
patient remains well. Granular cell tumors, first reported by Abrikossoff in 1926, were initially called myoblastomas, suggesting a myogenic
origin5). The histogenesis of this neoplasm remains controversial4). Currently, most pathologists believe that the cell of origin is the
Schwann cell and refer to this lesion as a granular cell tumor4). Ninety-eight percent of granular cell tumors are benign, and only 1 to 2%
of all GCTs are malignant5). Although only 30 malignant lesions have been reported worldwide in the medical literature, none of these
malignant lesions has been reported for the pediatric age group or in the trachea5). More than 50% of granular cell lesions occur in the
head and neck region, most commonly in the tongue. The reported rate of laryngeal GCTs is 10%. The larynx and bronchi are involved more
often than the trachea. Other head and neck sites for GCTs include the central nervous system and cranial nerves, skin and subcutaneous
tissues, middle and external ear, parotid glands, pharynx, palate, floor of the mouth, esophagus, and tonsils. About 10% of patients may
have multiple GCTs at different anatomic sites. A patient may remain completely asymptomatic with even 50 to 75% obstruction of the tracheal
lumen. The average time from the onset of symptoms to patient presentation is 7 months. There is a history of progressive dyspnea
unresponsive to bronchodilator and steroid therapy. Symptoms of wheezing, especially with exertion, are typically attributed to asthma and
chronic bronchitis. There may be cough, hemoptysis, and a globus sensation, while pain is unusual6). There are several ways to approach the
initial management of tracheal tumors. Laryngoscopy and bronchoscopy can be performed to establish a safe airway, and to assess the extent
of the lesion and perform a biopsy. Bronchoscopy allows examination of the tracheobronchial tree for other lesions. A diagnosis can usually
be made with hematoxylin-eosin staining, but immunohistochemistry with an S-100 protein stain and neuron.specific enolase are also
helpful9). Histologically, the cells are monomorphic, often polygonal, with a granular cytoplasm. Pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia of the
overlying epithelium can be confused with squamous cell carcinoma7). An understanding of the differential diagnosis of subglottic and
tracheal masses is important. Benign tracheal neoplasms may include a benign fibrous histiocytoma, papilloma, neurofibroma, pleomorphic
adenoma, hemangioendothelioma, neurilemmoma, and benign chondrogenic tumors4). The differential diagnosis of malignant tracheal neoplasms
includes a malignant fibrous histiocytoma, malignant chondrogenic neoplasia, carcinoid, rhabdomyosarcoma, fibrosarcoma, adenoid cystic
carcinoma, and squamous cell carcinoma4). Neoplasms arising from the mediastinum, including esophageal tumors that erode the tracheal wall,
should also be considered. The treatment of a GCT is complete surgical excision. Neither radiation therapy nor chemotherapy has any role in
the management of tracheal granular cell tumors. Bronchoscopic excision may be adequate for tumors less than 1 cm in diameter, whereas wide
excision with tracheal resection is reserved for tumors with diameters greater than 1 cm. In one study, recurrence after excision occurred
in approximately 8% of the cases, with all recurrence associated with the presence of a positive margin5). Follow-up is based on appearance
of symptoms rather than serial endoscopic examinations and imaging studies. Follow.up includes serial CT scans and endoscopic examinations.
GCTs are uncommon tumors with a predilection for the upper aerodigestive tract. Although respiratory symptoms caused by asthma or foreign
bodies are common in children, the possibility of a tracheal tumor masquerading as recalcitrant asthma or recurrent pneumonia should not be
overlooked. An unusual case of a mid.tracheal GCT presenting with obstructive sleep apnea and exercise.induced asthma illustrates this
point. The diagnosis of a GCT and other tracheal masses depends on a high index of suspicion and an efficient workup. Treatment is complete
surgical excision. This case outlines how a patient with tracheal GCT might present. The chest PA appears normal. Bronchoscopy showing a
yellowish patch. H&E staining reveal large cells with cytoplasmic granules. Immunohistochemical staining show tumor cells positive for NSE,
S-100, and CD68. Follow-up bronchoscopy showing no change in the yellowish patch. The chest CT is seen as normal.
