Blood oozing after cholecystectomy is a rare but potentially life-threatening complication. Recently, 2 patients died from this cause. The
deaths resulted in criminal proceedings and medical experts were called in. The objective of this report is to describe their findings and
to elucidate preoperatively unknown risk factors of bleeding. Medical records, autopsy, and histological examination of the liver, heart,
pancreas, spleen, and kidney pertaining to 2 recent cases of laparoscopic cholecystectomy were examined. Current literature on this topic
was reviewed. Preoperative risks included renal insufficiency, diabetes mellitus, and cardiopathy. The histological examination, in
particular of the gallbladder bed of the liver, disclosed siderosis, inflammation, and fatty degeneration. These factors supported and
perpetuated blood oozing. Postoperative ultrasonography and a hemogram might have detected and prevented death. Inflammatory alterations,
siderosis, and fatty degeneration of the liver are risk factors of postoperative hemorrhage. Autopsy and histological examination can detect
those factors. Adequate postsurgical observation is mandatory, especially for patients at risk. The first report on laparoscopic
cholecystectomy was published in 1985.1 Nowadays, it is the procedure of choice for removing the gallbladder.2–4 The most frequent
complications are bile-duct trauma and bleeding.3,5 Including procedures for acute cholecystitis, the postoperative complication rate was
reported to be as high as 9% to 16%.6,7 The rate of postoperative hemorrhage is below 1%.4 In particular, patients with liver cirrhosis are
at risk.3,8 Most frequently, the cystic artery, epigastric vessels, and the gallbladder bed were vulnerated.9 Death after laparoscopic
cholecystectomy is very rare. The rate of mortality is below 0.1% and equals the rate of conventional cholecystectomy.9 However, few data
exist on the incidence of and reasons for bleeding from the gallbladder bed of the liver. No published reports exist on life-threatening or
even lethal blood oozing.3 Therefore, we give an account of 2 patients who experienced a laparoscopic cholecystectomy and died from a
seeping hemorrhage. We also disclose risk factors for continuous postoperative bleeding discerned by autopsy and histological examinations.
At age 46, the patient suffered from renal insufficiency requiring dialysis, diabetes type I, hypertension, and cholecystolithiasis.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed in an external hospital. It was a usual procedure that took 42 minutes. Mobilization of the
gallbladder from the gallbladder bed of the liver was unproblematic, and an argon laser was used for coagulation. Postoperatively, the
patient became hypotonic. Six hours after the operation, the patient's blood pressure reached 80/50 mm Hg, the patient produced cold sweat,
and the wound dressing was blood-soaked. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit, and postoperative circulatory insufficiency
was the tentative diagnosis. Nine hours postoperative, the circulation stopped. Resuscitation was ineffective, and cardiogenic shock was the
most favored diagnosis. Hemoglobin concentration and hematocrit were not checked postoperatively. A man age 65 had undergone aortic valve
replacement and suffered from diabetes mellitus type II and hypertension. Admission was due to cholecysto- and choledocholithiasis. The
concrements were confirmed by endoscopic retrograde cholangiography. A papillotomy was performed and the bile duct concrements extracted. On
the next day, laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed externally. The gallbladder was inflamed, and adhesions hampered the identification
of the cystic duct and cystic artery. Mobilization of the gallbladder was difficult, time consuming, and bloody. Hemostasis by
electrocoagulation in the gallbladder bed of the liver was also difficult, and styptic stripes were put on the liver surface. The operation
took 105 minutes. In the 16-hour period after the operation, the patient's blood pressure remained in the normal range, but the pulse rate
increased to 120 beats/minute. Thereafter, the documentation of cardiac monitoring was incomplete. Nineteen hours after the operation, the
patient had to be resuscitated, and he died an hour later amid the clinical picture of myocardial infarction and heart failure. Paraffin-
embedded specimens of liver, spleen, pancreas, kidney, and heart were cut into 4-μm to 5-μm sections and stained with hematoxylin-eosin
(HE), Masson Goldner, Elastica van Gieson, phosphotungstic acid hematoxylin (PTAH), and Fat Red 7B. The free abdominal cavity contained 2.6
liters of blood. The gallbladder was removed and coagulated blood was adherent to the gallbladder bed. The closure of the cystic artery as
well as the cystic bile duct was correct. The liver tissue adjacent to the gallbladder bed had turned inhomogeneously pale. The preparation
revealed no obvious bleeding source. Further findings were sparse postmortem lividity, subendocardial bleeding of the left ventricle,
cardiac hypertrophy (530 grams), anemic inner organs, atrophic kidney and pancreas, and medium grade arteriosclerosis. The gallbladder was
removed. The abdominal cavity contained 1.1 liters of predominantly coagulated blood, especially below the liver. The cystic duct and the
cystic artery were regularly closed by clips. Blood was adherent to the liver surface. Several clips were found in the gallbladder bed.
Further findings were minor bleeding into the liver tissue adjacent to the gallbladder bed, local necrosis, and fatty liver degeneration
(Figure 1). In addition, anemia of the inner organs, chronic pulmonary emphysema, cardiac hypertrophy (650 grams), unsuspicious artificial
aortic valves, medium-grade coronary sclerosis, and zones of scarred myocardium including fresh necrosis in the left ventricle were present.
Liver (case 2): View of the gallbladder bed of the liver. Hemorrhage at the surgical site and hepatic porta. Evident fatty liver
degeneration. These demonstrated marked vacuolization, decomposition, and intense shrinkage of the liver parenchyma with development of
nonnucleated cell necrosis, zones of palisade-like alignment of cell nuclei, siderotic necrosis, blood congestion, and focal tiny bleeding
in the adjacent liver tissue (Figure 2). The adherent blood was partly responsible for a clear granulocytic reaction. Liver (case 1):
Vacuolic decomposition of the peripheral liver parenchyma (center of the figure) with transition to nonnucleated cell necrosis, which is a
sign of thermal injury. Blood in the gallbladder bed of the liver (on the bottom right). (HE, original magnification 25x). The liver had
intense siderosis of stellate cells, little siderosis of the parenchyma, and focal necrosis of the parenchyma. Intense siderosis of the red
pulp was found in the spleen. The pancreas had interstitial fibrosis and lipomatosis and no siderosis. Vasogenic atrophy and diffuse and
nodular diabetic glomerulosclerosis were found in the kidney. The heart had little perivascular and interstitial fibrosis. The gallbladder
bed was callous, and the local fatty tissue was infiltrated by granulocytes. Some fresh blood, parenchymal necrosis, and some granulocytic
reaction were below the liver capsule. Focal vacuolization and decomposition was seen in the connective tissue of the liver and the liver
parenchyma, in part with palisade-like alignment of the cell nuclei. Further findings were focal blood in the vascular walls and blood
coated to the liver surface of the gallbladder bed with moderate fibrin-rich zones (Figure 3). Liver cells were bloated with fat to a higher
grade, predominantly centroacinously. The periportal triangles were markedly infiltrated with lymphocytes. The heart muscle fibers were
hypertrophic. Zones of old infarction aside fresh (some hours) necrosis of muscle fibres were obvious. Liver (case 2): Callous, thickened
gallbladder bed. Signs of thermal injury with vacuolic decomposition of the connective tissue of the gallbladder bed of the liver (right)
and blood imbibed vascular walls (center) with increased perfusion. Blood with fibrin coats the liver surface (bottom right). Inhomogenous
fatty degeneration of the liver. (Masson-Goldner, original magnification 10x). In both cases, the prosecution ordered preliminary
proceedings to investigate the reasons for blood oozing. The medical experts disclosed the findings presented here. The cases were evaluated
on the basis of the external hospital's charts and the autopsy conducted by the Institute of Legal Medicine, University of Hamburg.
According to these data, the death of the first patient was caused by bleeding into the abdominal cavity and hemorrhagic shock. The blood in
the abdominal cavity of the second patient was not enough to cause circulatory shock. However, the blood loss caused an extracardiac
workload and increased the consumption of energy and oxygen. This put a great strain on the prediseased heart and caused a myocardial
infarction. Therefore, bleeding was a factor that caused death. The clinical courses and the autopsies in both cases revealed blood oozing
from the gallbladder bed. Anastomotic branches of the cystic artery to the left or right hepatic artery were reported in 12%.10 However,
none of those vascular anastomoses were found in either case. Cystic arteries that lead from the right hepatic artery, run through the most
cranial part of Calot's triangle, ascend between the gallbladder and the liver, and encircle the gallbladder with 5 to 7 branches have been
identified in 2% of patients.10 If the trunk of such arteries has not been ligated or identified, the surgeon has to deal with several small
branches that have to be closed individually. This involves the risk of missing one or several small branches, which can result in
persistent blood oozing. However, the autopsies of the 2 cases presented reveal correct closures of the cystic arteries. Injured blood
vessels are another possibility for hemorrhage. However, this was also ruled out by autopsy. Liver cirrhosis, consumptive coagulopathy,
sepsis, and infection can cause diffuse seeping hemorrhage associated with operative procedures, but those findings were not true for these
patients. However, the first patient was on hemodialysis due to renal insufficiency. Hemodialysis might be associated with the genesis of
siderosis, and this was confirmed in the parenchyma of the liver and spleen of the first patient. In turn, siderosis can cause liver cell
necrosis, which was histologically evident. A series of postmortem experiments quantified the heat damage of the liver caused by cautery and
laser coagulation.11 Two effects were recognized. One was the direct thermal effect and caused cell necrosis. The other was transmission of
heat resulting in swelling of parenchyma, damaged cell nuclei, and peliosis-like changes in the liver sinus with loss of the endothelium. In
both cases, such histological changes resembling peliosis hepatis were obvious. The inflammatory reaction of acute and subacute
cholecystitis can involve the connective tissue next to the gall-bladder bed and cause marked vascularization.12 Those inflammatory
alterations as well as fibrosis following chronic or recurrent cholecystitis increase perioperative morbidity.13,14 Hence, they might be a
relative contraindication for laparoscopic procedures and might increase the rate of conversion to conventional cholecystectomy. In the
second case, such a constellation was obvious. To stop hemorrhage from the liver by thermal means could be difficult. In select cases,
fibrin glue was recommended to stop diffuse blood oozing from the gallbladder bed.12 In both cases reported herein, the histological
examination of the gallbladder bed of the liver revealed alterations increasing the vulnerability of the liver. In the first case, this was
true for the siderosis, which was most probably also the reason for the necrosis of the liver parenchyma. In the second case, it was true
for the fatty degeneration of the liver. In summary, the exact cause of the blood oozing was undeterminable. Each of the mentioned factors
(fatty liver degeneration, siderosis, alteration caused by chronic and recurrent cholecystitis, thermal injury to the liver parenchyma) was
involved in initiating and perpetuating blood oozing. In the first case, hemorrhage was the sole cause of death. In the second case on the
other hand, bleeding and existing heart disease led to death. Any quantification of the factors remains speculative. According to the
circumstances of death and autopsy findings, the fatal bleeding derived from the gallbladder bed. The bleeding must have derived from small
vessels not detectable by gross or microscopic inspection. This assumption is supported by the results of the histological examination. The
medical experts came to the conclusion that both surgical procedures were lege artis, but the postoperative monitoring was criticized as
fragmentary. The experts did not come to the conclusion that the death could have been prevented with forensic certainty even if the
required postoperative standards had been adhered to. The charges in both cases were dropped. In our point of view, it is not possible to
make any recommendations concerning the frequency and the risk factors. These were the only cases in the last 10 years, and we therefore
cannot offer any reliable recommendations. An exact preoperative clinical and laboratory examination is essential to decide the correct
surgical procedure (laparoscopic versus conventional surgery). Prevention of bleeding comprises the preoperative detection of risk factors
that enable adequate preparation. Thorough surgical dissection in anatomical layers, the use of thermocoagulation, sutures, and clips can
control bleeding. Local procoagulant drugs (eg, fibrin glue) are not routinely used but might be an option. Patients with an increased risk
for complications after laparoscopic cholecystectomy should be monitored closely. Postoperative ultrasound examinations can detect fluid
collections in the abdominal cavity, and a test for hemoglobin can detect its decline. Therefore, both measures can indicate hemorrhage and
can be used as a rationale for an adequate action. In case of lethal postoperative hemorrhage, the postmortem angiography can disclose an
occult bleeding source.15 A selective histological examination of the gallbladder bed should be mandatory for medical evidence. Fatty liver
degeneration, siderosis, chronic as well as recurrent cholecystitis, and thermal injury are able to initiate and perpetuate lethal blood
oozing. Death can be caused either directly by exsanguination or indirectly by deteriorating preexisting morbidity. Histological
examinations can disclose unknown risk factors of seeping hemorrhage. The authors thank Ms. Hayworth for her support in preparing the
manuscript.
