Mutations in the forkhead transcription factor (FOXC1) gene have been shown to cause juvenile glaucoma associated with a variety of
anterior-segment anomalies. The purpose of this study was to determine the ocular and genetic characteristics of two Japanese families with
Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome (ARS). Genomic DNA was extracted from the leukocytes of six members of two families with ARS. The DNA from one exon
of the FOXC1 gene were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) and directly sequenced. The patients received standard systemic and
ophthalmological examinations. Sequence analysis of the FOXC1 gene revealed a novel Ala85Pro missense mutation in Helix1 in family 1 and a
deletion of 17 nucleotides (437-453) in Wing1 and Beta2 within the forkhead domain of the FOXC1 gene in family 2. This deletion predicted a
loss of the forkhead domain by a premature termination of translation. These mutations segregated with the ARS phenotype in an autosomal
dominant pattern. The affected individuals in family 1 had posterior embryotoxon, iris hypoplasia, corectopia with early-onset severe
glaucoma, atrial septal defect, aortic stenosis, and pulmonary stenosis. The affected members in family 2 had posterior embryotoxon and iris
hypoplasia with early-onset glaucoma, and systemically they had hearing loss, hypertelorism, and telecanthus. A novel mutation in Helix1 and
a novel deletion in Wing1 and Beta2 of the forkhead domain of the FOXC1 gene have been identified in two families with ARS. FOXC1 mutations
cause a variety of developmental abnormalities in the anterior segment of the eye, and they also induce an elevation in intraocular
pressures and early-onset glaucoma. Dysgenesis of the anterior segment of the eye is a genetically heterogeneous developmental anomaly
resulting in a high risk of glaucoma. One such anomaly is Axenfeld-Rieger anomaly (ARA), which is occasionally associated with extraocular
alterations such as maxillary hypoplasia, hearing loss, dental abnormalities, congenital heart defects, redundant periumbilical skin, and
skeletal limb anomalies. ARA patients with these alterations are said to have "Axenfeld-Rieger syndrome" (ARS). Nishimura et al. identified
a patient with primary congenital glaucoma who had chromosomal anomalies with a balanced translocation between 6p25 and 13q22. Cloning of
the 6p25 breakpoint led to the identification of mutations in the FOXC1 gene (formerly called FKHL7), and they demonstrated that mutations
in the FOXC1 gene were also detected in patients with Rieger's anomaly, Axenfeld's anomaly, and iris hypoplasia. These findings demonstrated
that mutations in the FOXC1 gene cause a wide variety of allelic disorders of the anterior segment such as iridogoniodysgenesis anomaly
(IGDA) associated with glaucoma . In a family with nine affected individuals in three generations, Mirzayans et al. found that ARS was
associated with a Gln23Stop amino acid substitution in the FOXC1 gene. The affected individuals presented with different degrees of iris
hypoplasia, displaced pupils (corectopia), and a prominent, anteriorly-displaced Schwalbe line (posterior embryotoxon). Peripheral iris
strands were seen to bridge the iridocorneal angle. Mutations in the FOXC1 gene can cause a wide variety of phenotypes that share features
with Axenfeld anomaly, Rieger anomaly, ARS, iridogoniodysgenesis anomaly, iridogoniodysgenesis syndrome, iris hypoplasia,
iridogoniodysgenesis type 1, anterior segment mesenchymal dysgenesis, and congenital glaucoma . Only a small number of studies have been
reported on mutations in the FOXC1 gene in the Japanese population . The purpose of this study was to determine the ocular and genetic
findings in two Japanese families with ARS. Genomic DNA was extracted from leukocytes of peripheral blood and purified by the Qiagen QIAamp
Blood Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The purpose of the study and the procedures to be used were explained to all patients and an informed
consent was obtained. The procedures used conformed to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki. This study was approved by the Tohoku
University Institutional Review Board. The proband in family 1 was a three-year-old girl who presented at three months of age with early
onset severe glaucoma and who has systemic complications including atrial septal defect, aortic stenosis, and pulmonary stenosis. Her father
also manifested early-onset glaucoma. The proband of the second family was a 38-year-old woman who was diagnosed with congenital glaucoma in
both eyes at birth. Family 2 had five affected members and at least three affected members had similar features. Standard ophthalmic
examinations were performed on all examined patients. Control subjects (52 men and 48 women; mean age 68.0±7.7 years) had IOP>21 mm Hg,
normal optic discs, and no family history of glaucoma. The forkhead domain (FHD), spanning amino acids 69-178, was amplified by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR) using 0.5 μM concentration of a pair of primers in an amplification mixture (25 μl) containing 0.2 mM dNTPs and 0.5 U
of ExTaq polymerase (Takara, Japan) with 30 ng template DNA. Oligonucleotide primers used for amplification of FHD of the FOXC1 gene were
forward (sense) primer 5'-AAC TCC CTG GGA GTG GTG CCC TA-3' and reverse (antisense) primer 5'-CGG CTC CTT GAG GTG CAG CCT-3'. The PCR
products were purified using a PCR Purification Kit (PCR Kleen Spin Columns, Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA) after loading onto a 1.2% agarose gel.
Purified fragments were directly sequenced by the BigDyeTM Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Perkin-Elmer, Foster City, CA) on
an automated DNA sequencer (ABI PRISMTM 3100 Genetic Analyzer, Perkin-Elmer). The proband in family 1 was a three-year-old girl who
presented at three months of age with hazy megalocornea, posterior embryotoxon, iris hypoplasia, corectopia with early onset severe
glaucoma, atrial septal defect, aortic stenosis, and pulmonary stenosis. The horizontal by vertical corneal diameters were 13.0 by 12.5 mm
in the right eye (Figure 1) and 12.5 by 11.0 mm in the left eye. The patient underwent trabeculotomy three times in the right eye and two
times in the left eye. Her father, who had posterior embryotoxon and iris hypoplasia with early-onset glaucoma, has been followed by a local
ophthalmologist. Right eye of proband 1. Right eye of proband 1 affected with ARS, displaying megalocornea, posterior embryotoxon, iris
hypoplasia, and corectopia. We screened the FOXC1 sequence for mutations in this proband. After direct sequencing, a heterozygous novel
point mutation (G>C) was found at the first nucleotide in codon 85 which changed alanine to proline (Ala85Pro; Figure 2). This novel
missense mutation was identified in two members of this family, which is consistent with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The
Ala85Pro mutation was not found in 100 ethnically-matched control subjects. Comparison of mutated Ala85Pro with the normal gene sequence and
family 1 pedigree. At top left, a fragment of the FOXC1 sequence in an affected subject is shown. Ala85Pro is shown as a heterozygous novel
mutation (G>C) at the first nucleotide in codon 85 which changed Alanine to Proline, seen at top right. At bottom left, a fragment of the
FOXC1 sequence in a normal subject is illustrated. The pedigree of family 1 is displayed at bottom right. The solid square indicates the
father and the solid circle indicates the proband. The proband of the second family was a 38-year-old woman who was diagnosed with
congenital glaucoma in both eyes at birth. She underwent trabeculectomy once in the right eye and trabeculotomy/goniotomy three times in the
left eye. The horizontal by vertical corneal diameters were 12.5 by 12.0 mm in the right eye and 14.5 by 12.0 mm in the left eye. She had
posterior embryotoxon and iris hypoplasia with early-onset glaucoma (Figure 3). Family 2 had five affected members (Figure 4) consisting of
patients 1, 2, and 3 as the proband, the father of the proband, and an aunt. All affected members (patients 1, 2, and 3) had similar
features such as hearing loss, hypertelorism, and telecanthus. A heterozygous novel deletion, 437-453del17, was identified in the coding
region of the FOXC1 gene in two patients in this family (Figure 5). The mutation segregated with the disease phenotype and the distribution
of the affected members was consistent with an autosomal dominant inheritance pattern. The 437-453del17 mutation was not found in 100
control subjects. Clinical features of proband in Family 2. Top: The photo shows the eyes of proband affected with ARS. These eyes display
megalocornea, posterior embryotoxon, iris hypoplasia, and right iridectomy (post-trabeculectomy). Bottom: Gonioscopic appearance of patients
with proband illustrates iridocorneal angle anomaly. This appearance reveals tissue strands extending from peripheral iris to prominent
Schwalbe's line and a high insertion of iris into trabecular meshwork. Pedigree of Family 2. Solid square indicates the father and solid
circles indicate the proband and women. An arrow points to the proband. This family had five affected individuals. Deleted, normal, and
subcloned gene sequence 437-453del17 in family 2. Top: A fragment of the FOXC1 sequence in an affected subject is revealed to contain a wild
sequence and deletions of 17 nucleotides from 437-453 bases (437-453del17). Middle: This graph shows a normal fragment of the FOXC1
sequence. Bottom: A subcloned sequence shows the 437-453del17. The FOXC1 gene is a member of the forkhead/winged-helix family of
transcription factors. These transcription factors contain a monomeric, 110 amino acid DNA binding domain, and forkhead domain (FHD). This
motif was originally identified as a region of homology with the Drosophila melanogaster forkhead protein and rat hepatocyte nuclear factor
3 protein (also known as Foxa3) . The FHD is evolutionarily conserved and exists in a wide range of species from yeasts to humans . This
DNA-binding motif is a variant of the helix-turn-helix motif and consists of three helices and two large loops that form wing structures,
Wing1 and Wing2 . Different mutations in the FOXC1 gene have been implicated in the pathogenesis of a wide spectrum of ocular disorders .
Mutant alleles segregate with the disease phenotype. Mutated residues are highly conserved across species implying that the mutations are
probably pathogenic. The mutations in our patients were found in the α-helix1 in the FHD, which is located at the amino acid position 85 in
family 1 (Figure 6). Previous studies had noted that the NH2- and COOH-terminal boundaries of the FHD were critical for proper nuclear
localization of FOXA2 and FOXF2 . Two lesions are named the nuclear localization signal 1 (NLS1) and nuclear localization signal 2 (NLS2).
The first region, NLS1, spans residues 77-93 where Ala85Pro is located. Saleem et al. showed that Leu86Pro disrupts FOXC1 function severely
revealing the importance of helix 1 in FOXC1 structure and function. Thus, there is a possibility that Ala85Pro reduces the DNA binding and
significantly reduces transactivation. Summary of the mutations detected in this study. The hatched boxes indicate the location of the
forkhead domain (FHD) within the FOXC1 coding sequence. The two white boxes represent the locations of two polymorphic poly-glycine tract.
The distribution of missense mutation Ala85Pro, and frame shift mutation (437-453del17) are illustrated. Ala85Pro and 437-453del17 existed
in the FHD. The predicted protein translations are shown below the gene diagram for the frame shift mutations. The slashed boxes represent
those areas of the protein that are translated differently than the normal FOXC1 protein; truncated 298 amino acids. In family 2, a deletion
of 17 nucleotides (437-453) spans residues 146-151 and is located in Wing1 and Beta2 within the FHD of the FOXC1 gene. This deletion
generates a truncated 298 amino acids FOXC1 protein instead of a 553 full length amino acid (Figure 6). Therefore, this deletion would
disrupt the nuclear localization signal 2 (NLS2), which contains a basic stretch of amino acids at position 169RRRRRFKK176 at the COOH-
terminal end of the FHD. Both NLSs are necessary for FOXC1 nuclear localization. The first region, NLS1, may serve as a nuclear localization
signal (NLS) accessory domain and NLS2 could be the true nuclear localization signal . Wing2 was suggested to play an important role in DNA
binding and the transactivation capability of FOXC1 . So, a deletion of 17 nucleotides (437-453) could possibly affect the DNA-protein
interaction. A haploinsufficiency of forkhead transcription factors has been shown to cause aberrant ocular development . Considering these
facts, we propose that these mutations may affect the migration and/or differentiation of the mesenchymal cells that contribute to the
anterior segment of the eye and the developmental processes including embryogenesis and tissue specific cell differentiation . Only a small
numbers of studies have reported mutations in FOXC1 in the Asian population thus, it is difficult to discuss extensive genotype-phenotype
correlations. Kawase et al. identified four mutations: 26-47ins22, Ile91Ser, 286ins1, and Arg127His. The younger generations had iris
hypoplasia with early-onset and severe glaucoma. The patient with frame-shift mutation, 26-47ins22, exhibited a more severe phenotype than
patients with the other mutations . Almost all of these mutations are located in the 110-amino-acid DNA binding domain and FHD, and are
evolutionarily conserved and exist in a wide range of species from yeasts to humans . All of the FOXC1 mutations could have the net of
reducing FOXC1 transactivation . In our case, frame-shift mutation, 437-453del 17, also showed high penetrance and slightly more aggressive
glaucoma phenotype. Both frame-shift mutations, 26-47ins22 and 437-453del 17, make truncated proteins and haploinsufficiency may be
correlated with the anterior-chamber defects of the eye. Current medical therapies are not successful in decreasing the lower intraocular
pressure or in preventing progression of glaucoma in patients with ARS. Only 18% of patients with glaucoma and either FOXC1 or PITX2 genetic
defects responded to medical or surgical treatment . The genotype-phenotype correlations of the FOXC1 gene may help in establishing the
prognosis of the disease processes and in understanding the mechanism associated with the various anterior segment dysgenesis caused by the
FOXC1 gene. This study was supported in part by a Grant-In-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Science, and Culture
of the Japanese Government (NF; C-18591905), Tokyo, Japan. This material was presented in part at the Association for Research in Vision and
Ophthalmology annual meetings in 2005 in Fort Lauderdale, Florida. The authors thank Dr. Makoto Tamai for encouraging us to undertake the
investigation. We thank Dr. D.I. Hamasaki for editing the manuscript.
