We present the case of a female patient 29 years of age with antecedents of laparoscopic laser ablation for endometriosis, laparoscopic
appendectomy, and umbilical hernioplasty. The patient was admitted to the hospital's emergency room for abdominal pain in the epigastrium,
transfixing, irradiating to both upper quadrants and to the lumbar region, accompanied by nausea and gastrobiliary vomiting. Lipase
determination was 170 mg/dL. Other laboratory findings were normal. Plain abdominal films on the patient's admission were normal, and
computed tomography (CT) showed data compatible with acute pancreatitis. Without improvement during the patient's hospital stay, pain and
vomiting increased in intensity and frequency. New abdominal x-rays revealed dilatation of small bowel loops. Management was begun for
intestinal obstruction, with intravenous hydration and placement of a nasogastric tube without a good response. At 48 hours, a diagnostic
laparoscopy was performed, revealing a 3-cm internal hernia in the left broad ligament in which a 20-cm segment of terminal ileum was
encased. We performed liberation of the ileal segment and closed the hernial orifice by using the laparoscopic approach. The patient's
evolution was excellent. Internal hernia-related intestinal obstruction occurs very rarely, with a reported incidence of between 0.2% and
0.9%.1,2 An internal hernia implies herniation of a hollow viscus, usually the small intestine, by means of a natural or an unnatural
opening within the peritoneal cavity,3 but there are also abnormalities of intestinal rotation and peritoneal attachment that cause an
internal hernia.4 This herniation can be acquired or congenital and persistent or intermittent. It is normally considered a severe condition
due to the risk of strangulation and perforation of the hernial content, even in small hernias. More than 50% of internal hernias reported
in the literature are paraduodenal.1,2,5 In addition, diverse internal hernia types are described, among which transmesenteric; supra- or
perivesical, or both; intersigmoidal; Winslow hiatal; and transomental are the most common.1–13 Internal hernias are difficult to diagnose
clinically as well as radiologically. In the world literature, reviews are available of 400 patients in whom diagnosis was performed the
majority of times in autopsy studies or during a surgical procedure, frequently after a prolonged period of symptomatology and
complications, such as intestinal ischemia.1,3,4 This case concerns a 29-year-old female patient admitted to the American British Cowdray
Medical Center emergency room for abdominal pain of 8 hours duration, localized in the epigastrium and irradiating to the lumbar region, and
both abdominal upper quadrants, transfixing, very intense, incapacitating, and accompanied by nausea and vomiting on one occasion with
gastrobiliary contents. On physical examination, slight mucosal dehydration was found, in addition to a soft, depressible abdomen,
tenderness in the upper quadrants on medium and deep palpation, without evidence of peritoneal irritation and increased peristalsis. Among
the patient's important antecedents were endometriosis managed surgically by laparoscopic laser ablation, laparoscopic appendectomy, and
umbilical hernioplasty. In the emergency room, plain abdominal films were taken of the patient, without significant data. Laboratory studies
were normal with the exception of lipase of 170 mg/dL, and an abdominal CT scan revealed an increase in size of the pancreatic head and body
compatible with acute pancreatitis. The patient was admitted to the hospital for management of acute pancreatitis with parenteral fluids,
digestive tract rest, and antacids. During the first 24 hours, an increase occurred in vomiting and abdominal pain, along with abdominal
distension, for which new plain abdominal x-rays were obtained, showing dilatation of small bowel loops and a fixed loop in the left upper
left quadrant (Figure 1). Management of intestinal obstruction was initiated, placing a nasogastric tube without the patient having
improvement in symptomatology. Thus, 48 hours after hospital admission, we decided to perform a diagnostic laparoscopy, finding dilatation
of small bowel loops and an internal hernia at the level of the left broad ligament (Figure 2) that had a 3-cm defect (Figure 3) with a
20-cm segment of terminal ileum incarcerated in the hernia, which was completely liberated without evidence of ischemia. Closure of the
defect was carried out by laparoscopy with simple 2- 0 ethibond stitches (Figures 4 and 5). Patient evolution was excellent, with cessation
of vomiting and nausea, as well as abdominal distension, tolerating oral feeding, and with adequate intestinal transit. The patient was
released from the hospital 48 hours after the surgical procedure. Abdominal plain radiograph showing dilated small bowel loops in the left
upper quadrant. The herniated small bowel loop can be observed through the broad ligament orifice. The hernial orifice and the lower portion
of the uterus are seen. Simple stitches were placed to close the defect. Closed hernia defect. Internal hernias originating in broad
ligament defects are very rare, comprising 4% to 7% of all internal hernias. The first reported case was in 1861 by Quain, the finding
appearing during an autopsy.12 According to Hunt,9 internal hernias of the broad ligament may be classified as 2 types: the fenestra type
that implies complete fenestration by means of a broad ligament defect, and the pouch type, in which herniation occurs toward the broad
ligament from an anterior or posterior opening. Among the probable causes of broad ligament defects, we find surgery, inflammatory pelvic
disease, obstetric trauma, and congenital defects.10 Nineteen percent of cases present as bilateral defects or defects in a nulliparous
woman with no antecedent history of abdominal surgery, trauma, or pelvic infection, and in these cases a congenital origin must be
considered.4 Gray and Skandalakis14 described the presence of cystic structures of the broad ligament, which they believed were remnants of
the mesonephric of the müllerian ducts, and it was the rupture of these that led to defects within the broad ligament. As described before,
an internal hernia is difficult to diagnose radiologically. Plain radiographs may show the typical changes of bowel obstruction. Although
computed tomography can suggest the presence of an internal hernia, it may be impossible to diagnose the hernia through a defect of the
broad ligament7,8; nevertheless, barium-enhanced studies like a small bowel follow through and computed tomography may offer the greater
potential for the diagnosis of internal hernias. Treatment is always by means of surgery. The mortality of nonoperative therapy for
incarcerated or strangulated internal hernia approaches 100%, and delay in surgical therapy can lead to undue morbidity. The surgical
approach is usually straightforward and often requires no more than simple manual reduction. The use of laparoscopic techniques is actually
a very feasible resource in the management of bowel obstruction due to internal hernias.15 There are several reports of laparoscopic
management mainly of paraduodenal hernias, like those from Antedomenico et al15 and Fukunaga et al,16 with good results and practically no
complications. We found no reports of an internal hernia from the broad ligament managed laparoscopically, but we believe that in the
setting of a patient with bowel obstruction and the suspicion of an internal hernia, without evidence of necrosis or perforation of the
hernial contents, the first choice should be a diagnostic laparoscopy, because of the ease of reduction of the hernial sac and closure of
the defect, and the aesthetic results provided to the patient with minimal invasiveness. The main concern for the surgeon performing this
procedure should be the detection of possible perforations of the contents of the hernia and to be careful with the mesenteric vessels
located near the hernia sac orifice to prevent their injury and further complications. The laparoscopic approach is a relatively simple one
and has shown good results so far. It should be considered the first choice in the surgical management of these patients.
