Phytobezoars are a rare cause of small-bowel obstruction and an accurate preoperative diagnosis is very difficult. After diagnosis, the
majority of patients in this study underwent surgery. The conventional management of small-bowel obstruction is done by laparotomy. Many
studies have demonstrated that laparoscopy can be an alternative to laparotomy for the treatment of small-bowel obstruction in select
patients, and it also brings the benefits of minimally invasive surgery. This report demonstrates the case of a patient with intestinal
obstruction caused by phytobezoar (mango seed) who was treated laparoscopically. During the laparoscopy, a hard mass 5 cm proximal to the
ileocaecal junction was palpable with graspers. An ileotomy was then performed. The bezoar was extracted and inserted into a bag. In this
case, the intestinal obstruction management by laparoscopy was safe and feasible. Intestinal obstruction is a common surgical emergency
frequently due to adhesions, tumors, inflammatory disorders, volvus, and external or internal hernias.1 Phytobezoars are a rare cause of
mechanical alimentary tract obstruction.2,3 They can occur mainly in patients who have undergone gastric surgery and in multiple sites of
the gastrointestinal tract.2,3 There are many treatments for intestinal obstruction due to phytobezoar (medical, endoscopic, and surgical)
though some patients have not undergone surgery.3,4 Conventional surgical management of acute intestinal obstruction involves laparotomy.5,6
Minimally invasive techniques can be used to diagnose and treat intestinal obstructions.1 The use of laparoscopy in acute intestinal
obstruction has been avoided by some surgeons because of technical difficulties and increased risk of bowel injury.5–7 However, various
studies2,3,5,7,8 have reported laparoscopic management of intestinal obstructions with the improvement of laparoscopic skills. This report
describes a case of small-bowel obstruction due to bezoar (mango seed) treated with laparoscopy. A 74-year-old male was admitted after 24
hours of abdominal pain and vomiting. The patient had accidentally ingested a mango seed 4 days before developing abdominal pain. He did not
have any previous medical conditions or abdominal surgery. A physical examination showed normal vital parameters, a distended abdomen, and
no evidence of peritonitis or abdominal external hernias. An abdominal x-ray revealed dilation of the small bowel and a circular image in
the inferior right quadrant of the abdomen. A colonoscopy identified a hard mass in the terminal ileum, which could not be removed
endoscopically. A laparoscopy by the open technique was performed with a 10-mm port placed in the umbilicus. Pneumoperitoneum was
established to a maximum pressure of 13mm Hg. After an initial diagnostic laparoscopy, 2 additional 5-mm working ports were placed under
direct vision, 6 cm above the umbilicus and 6cm below it in the middle line of the abdomen. The abdominal cavity was inspected carefully
with atraumatic bowel graspers to minimize the risk of bowel injury. A mechanical obstruction due to a hard intraluminal mass was located
approximately 5cm from the ileocecal junction (Figure 1). The small bowel was examined from the ligament of Treitz to the cecum to ensure
that the obstruction did not involve other areas. Also dilation of the small bowel and ascitic fluid were noted. An ileotomy was performed
with a Harmonic scalpel (Ultracision – Ethicon Endo Surgery) along the longitudinal axis (Figure 2), which allowed the removal of a
5.0×5.0×4.0-cm phytobezoar that could not be milked towards the colon (Figure 3). The phytobezoar was extracted in a latex bag (Figure 4). A
larger incision on the umbilicus was made to facilitate the removal of the bezoar. The ileotomy was closed along the longitudinal axis with
interrupted suture using 3-0 Vicryl (Figure 5). The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient stayed in the hospital for 4 days.
The final diagnosis was intraluminal small-bowel obstruction due to phytobezoar (mango seed). Hard intraluminal mass localized 5 cm proximal
to the ileocaecal junction. Ileotomy was performed with a Harmonic scalpel (Ultracision, Ethicon Endo-Surgery) along the longitudinal axis.
Removal of 5.0 × 5.0 × 4.0 cm phytobezoar (mango seed) from ileum. The phytobezoar was extracted in a latex bag. The ileotomy was closed
along the longitudinal axis with interrupted suture using 3-0 Vicryl. Phytobezoars are an uncommon cause of intestinal obstruction, and an
accurate preoperative diagnosis is difficult to obtain.2,3,5 The main causes reported in the medical literature are oranges, coconuts,
cherry tomatoes, and others.2,3 They can occur mainly in patients who have undergone gastric surgery and in multiple sites of the
gastrointestinal tract.2,3,6 Bezoar formation has also been described in patients with coexisting illnesses affecting gastrointestinal
motility, such as Guillain-Barré syndrome, myotonic dystrophy, and hypothyroidism.1,9 Patients with psychiatric illnesses are at an
increased risk for bezoar formation due to the possible ingestion of hair and medications.1,10 A number of surgical, endoscopic, and
pharmacologic treatments have been proposed with differing results.11–13 Many articles report gastric phytobezoar removal by the endoscopic
technique or by using cellulase, but these are reports with few cases, the stomach is easier to access than the ileus, and a well-trained
physician is needed.11,12 There are a few reports about the successful treatment of phytobezoar in the ileus by endoscopy or cellulase.13
Laparotomy has been the gold standard treatment for intestinal obstruction when surgical intervention is necessary, although laparotomy
itself is an independent risk factor for bowel obstruction.1,3,5,8 In this case, we tried to remove the obstruction endoscopically, but this
was not possible because the seed was adhered to the bowel and could have caused a perforation or injury. Mango seeds are very hard and the
fibers very resistant; consequently, cellulose was not a good option. With the improvement in laparoscopic techniques, many authors have
considered the laparoscopic approach as an alternative to conventional laparotomy in select cases of intestinal obstruction.2,3,5–8,14 There
are no defined guidelines for selecting patients with small-bowel obstruction for the laparoscopic approach.1 Authors have described some
criteria that may be useful to identify patients with small-bowel obstruction who can undergo laparoscopy, which include mild abdominal
distension, a proximal obstruction, partial obstruction, shorter duration of symptoms, and others.1,14,15 Multiple previous operations,
documented intraabdominal adhesions, and sepsis are relative contraindications for laparoscopy.1,15 The literature has demonstrated
postoperative complication values varying from 0% to 5.7% in patients who undergo laparoscopic treatment for intestinal obstruction compared
with 0% to 18.6% for laparotomic treatment.3,7,14 The average postoperative ileus rate was also shorter in the laparoscopic group (range,
1.5 to 2.2 days) than in the laparotomic group (range, 3 to 4.7 days).3,6,7,14 Some reports3,7,14 mention hospital stay varying from 2.5
days to 6.6 days in the laparoscopic group and 5.8 days to 16.8 days in the laparotomic group. Some authors1,3,5,14 suggest that
laparoscopic surgical techniques lead to fewer intraabdominal adhesions by reducing tissue trauma. Gentle manipulation of the intestines
should be done to avoid damage to the distended and friable bowel. The open technique to place the first port is recommended for all
patients with intestinal obstruction.1 The procedures performed with open access are safer because the surgeon involved has a direct view of
the abdominal contents; the contrary occurs when the procedure is performed in a “blind” way as is done with the Veress needle. This is very
important when the patient may have a dilated bowel as in cases of bowel obstruction, because there is an increased chance of intestinal
injury caused by the trocar since the bowel is closer to the abdominal wall. Vertical incisions in the middle of the abdomen were used,
because incisions could easily be increased if conversion to laparotomy was necessary. Pneumoperitoneum was established to a maximum
pressure of 13 mm Hg, because high pressures could interfere with cardiopulmonary function. Once safe access is obtained, adequate
visualization is necessary to insert the remaining ports. Atraumatic graspers should be used to manipulate the friable and dilated small
bowel. In this case, the authors opened the small bowel intraabdominally because the pneumoperitoneum pressure of 13 mm Hg helped to
maintain the bowel contents inside the intestine, and the mango seed was placed into a bag avoiding cavity contamination. The enterotomy was
closed longitudinally, contrary to most surgical principles, because in this case, the intestine was very fragile and the transversal
closure led to more tension in the suture, and we observed the bowel lumen was sufficiently ample after the longitudinal closure. The
intestinal resection was not necessary because the bowel segment was viable without signs of necrosis. Several studies suggest that
laparoscopy reduces postoperative complications, postoperative ileus, hospital stay, and adhesion formation.6,7,14 The laparoscopic approach
is a feasible method in the management of bezoar-induced intestinal obstruction when performed by a well-trained and experienced
laparoscopic surgeon in select patients.
