Colonoscopy is a familiar and well-tolerated procedure and is widely used as a diagnostic and therapeutic modality by both
gastroenterologists and surgeons. Although perforation and hemorrhage are the most common complications, splenic injury or rupture is a rare
but potentially lethal complication. We report a case of splenic rupture diagnosed 18 hours after colonoscopy, which required emergent
splenectomy. We also reviewed over 39 other cases of splenic rupture or injury after colonoscopy reported in the English literature. Despite
being an infrequent complication, splenic rupture warrants a high degree of clinical suspicion critical to prompt diagnosis. Most patients
present with symptoms within 24 hours after colonoscopy, although delayed presentation days later has been described. CT scan of the abdomen
is the radiological study of choice to evaluate colonoscopic complications. Splenic injury can be managed conservatively or with arterial
embolization depending on the extent of trauma, but splenectomy remains definitive management. Clinical criteria are the primary
determinants in choosing operative therapy over observation. Herein, possible risk factors for splenic trauma during colonoscopy are
identified, and clinical outcomes are evaluated. Colonoscopy is an excellent diagnostic and therapeutic tool, but not without serious
complications. Hemorrhage and perforation are the most common complications after colonoscopy occurring in less than 1% of patients and
often associated with biopsy or polypectomy. Many other rare complications have been described.1 Splenic injury or rupture is also an
infrequent complication that is often forgotten and may require urgent surgical intervention. The first case of splenic trauma after
colonoscopy was described by Wherry and Zehner in 1974, but the true incidence of this dreadful complication is probably underestimated.2,3
There are 39 case reports in the English literature and at least 9 more in foreign publications1–42 (Table 1). We report a similar case of
splenic rupture diagnosed 18 hours after colonoscopy, which required emergent splenectomy. Presentation, diagnosis, treatment, and potential
risk factors are evaluated herein, as is a thorough review of the literature. Summary of 42 Cases of Splenic Injury After Colonoscopy
Details were not provided in some cases. CT = computed tomography; US = ultrasound; ACLS = advanced cardiac life support. Reference 44
refers to current case. An 82-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital for mild congestive heart failure and pneumonia. Her past history
was significant for myocardial infarction and a left nephrectomy for transitional cell carcinoma via a left flank incision. After a week of
intravenous antibiotics for left lower lobe pneumonia and bacteremia, she began having diarrhea. Tests for Clostridium difficile were
negative, and the patient was diagnosed with antibiotic-associated diarrhea. During this period, her diarrhea became blood tinged, and her
hemoglobin dropped by 3 g/dL. A colonoscopy was recommended and performed without difficulty to the caput cecum. No acute origin of bleeding
was identified, and findings included severe diverticulosis in the left colon and internal hemorrhoids. No biopsies or polypectomies were
performed. The postprocedure period was complicated by the onset of left upper quadrant abdominal pain accompanied by hypotension. The
patient did not complain of left shoulder pain. Her abdominal examination was significant for left-sided tenderness without peritoneal
signs. Laboratory tests revealed an acute drop in hemoglobin from 9.6 g/dL to 6.8 g/dL. White blood cell count was significantly increased
as well. The patient was transfused appropriately, and a computed tomographic scan (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis was ordered. The CT
confirmed a large left upper quadrant hematoma, consistent with a splenic rupture and associated hemoperitoneum. A surgery consult was
obtained. The patient had persistent hypotension and acute anemia and therefore was taken to surgery for exploration. A midline laparotomy
was performed, and a large amount of intraabdominal blood was encountered from the left upper quadrant. A moderate number of adhesions were
present at the splenic flexure associated with a large splenic capsular tear. The spleen was easily mobilized and splenectomy was performed.
Subsequent pathology detailed an unremarkable ruptured spleen. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient made a full
recovery. Splenic injury after colonoscopy is a serious complication, yet its true incidence is unknown. Numerous large series over the last
3 decades have demonstrated splenic trauma as a rare entity. Smith mentioned 1 case in 20,139 colonoscopies.26 Ong reported 1 case in 6387
patients.16 Jentschura had no splenic complications in 29,695 cases.43 The true incidence of splenic injury may actually be higher.
Reluctance to publish morbidity information, the absence of complication codes for splenic injury after colonoscopy, and the fact that the
procedure is infrequently followed by routine surgical exploration all contribute to its unknown incidence. Despite this uncommon
complication, knowledge of this serious consequence is the best aide to early diagnosis because outcomes can be fatal.7,15,26 The cause of
splenic complications after colonoscopy have not definitively been established, yet many risk factors have been proposed (Table 2). The most
common theory involves tension of the splenocolic ligament from either excessive manipulative traction or decreased mobility of the spleen
or colon from adhesions. Specific maneuvers like the slide by advancement, alpha maneuver, hooking the flexure, and straightening the
sigmoid loop have all been implicated in excessive traction and splenic capsule avulsion.12 Any prior surgery, inflammation, or
intraabdominal infection may lead to adhesions and decreased mobility leaving the left upper quadrant susceptible to splenic insult during
colonoscopy. It has been suggested that positioning the patient and minimizing external pressure may prevent splenic complications in higher
risk cases. The left lateral position may allow the spleen and flexure to fall left and lax, preventing the tension of the spleen that
occurs when it falls back in the supine position.30 Despite precautions, it seems injury can occur whether the procedure is technically
difficult or not.15 Age does not appear to be a risk factor, because the age range for reported cases was 33 years to 90 years with a median
age of 63 years. However, a higher risk of splenic complications does appear to exist in women. In reported cases that included gender, 72%
(29/40) of cases occurred in women. It is unclear why there is a predominance of this complication in the female population (Table 3).
Proposed Risk Factors for Splenic Injury During Colonoscopy1–42 Case Characteristics of Splenic Injury After Colonoscopy US = ultrasound; CT
= computed tomography; ACLS = advanced cardiac life support. The presentation of splenic injury from colonoscopy can be difficult to
diagnose. Often early symptoms are attributed to postpolypectomy serositis, colonic distension, analgesia, sedation, old age, or impaired
mental status.1,11,33 The differential diagnosis for significant pain within 24 hours after colonoscopy includes retained gas, perforation,
and splenic injury. Rare complications causing abdominal pain include mesenteric tears, volvulus and gas explosions.3 Pain less than 12
hours postprocedure will warrant observation in most cases. In 39 patients with recorded symptoms, 31 (79%) presented with the onset of
symptoms in less than 24 hours. Most patients present with abdominal pain, often in the left upper quadrant, that may radiate to the left
shoulder. Historically, Kehr's sign is pain at the tip of the left shoulder after bimanual palpation of the left upper quadrant with the
patient in the Trendelenburg position.24 It is not a reliable sign, and a positive Kehr's sign or left shoulder pain was only recorded in
55% (16/29) of patients. Hypotension, anemia, or an elevated white blood cell count can also suggest a splenic injury. Any patients with
peritoneal signs or hemo-dynamic instability should be treated with a high index of suspicion for surgical perforation or splenic injury.
Although early onset of symptoms is common, delayed diagnosis even up to 10 days has been described as has a patient with serious splenic
injury who was entirely asymptomatic.9,12 The diagnosis of a surgical abdomen should be made on clinical grounds, yet the advancement of
imaging technology can elucidate the equivocal or suspicious case. A CT scan provides a definitive diagnosis and delineates the degree of
injury that can often determine operative versus nonoperative management. CT was included in the diagnostic algorithm in 62% (25/42) of
cases, and 11 of these scanned patients avoided a laparotomy and improved with nonoperative management. One of these patients even underwent
splenic embolization successfully after a CT scan.24 The use of ultrasound has been described in 5 cases, but 2 of these cases also included
CT scans.16,22,23,33,34 CT remains the best diagnostic tool to aid in management, because all patients (11/11) treated nonoperatively were
scanned in their evaluation. The goal of management in splenic injury after colonoscopy is nonoperative; however, splenectomy may be
difficult to avoid. Thirty cases (70%) required splenectomy, including half diagnosed by CT, but these numbers benefit from publication bias
and the pre-CT era. Conservative management usually includes hospital monitoring, serial hemoglobin checks, and serial examinations. Janes25
suggested that predictors of failed conservative treatment include hemodynamic instability, underlying splenic disease, a grade III
traumatized spleen by CT, old age, and hemoperotineum. One case of splenic artery embolization has been reported,24 but the definitive
interventional treatment remains splenectomy. The prognosis of splenic injury after colonoscopy is excellent if recognized early. Three
deaths have been reported secondary to splenic rupture after colonoscopy. Two cases were diagnosed during emergent laparotomy, and one case
was found during autopsy after the patient underwent severe shock.7,15,26 All other patients had successful outcomes including those
patients undergoing splenectomy and expectant management. Splenic injury and rupture are rare complications of colonoscopy that must not be
forgotten in the differential for postprocedural pain. Numerous endoscopist and patient factors may increase a patient's risk for splenic
trauma. The onset of symptoms usually occurs in the first 24 hours after a procedure. Early recognition will lead to successful outcomes. CT
criteria are helpful in determining operative versus nonoperative management. Treatment may include close observation, embolization, or
splenectomy. Not using excessive maneuvers in high risk patients and having a high index of suspicion postprocedure will optimize outcomes.
