The relationship between radiation exposure for treatment of cancer and occurrence of a second primary cancer at the irradiated site is well
known. This phenomenon is however rare in prostate. A 75-year-old farmer was treated for rectal cancer with preoperative 45 Gy of
radiotherapy and abdominoperineal resection. Four years later he developed symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction and acute urinary
retention. He underwent a transurethral resection of the prostate. Histological examination of the removed prostate tissue and
immunohistochemistry revealed it to be a poorly differentiated sarcoma. We believe this to be the first reported case of radiation-induced
sarcoma following radiotherapy treatment for rectal cancer. Since radiotherapy plays a pivotal role in the contemporary treatment of rectal
adenocarcinoma, it is relevant to be aware of the potential long-term carcinogenic complications of radiotherapy of the pelvis. Many cancer
patients will receive radiation in the course of their cancer treatment . With this increased use of adjuvant radiation, radiation induced
cancer has become a well-recognized phenomenon. The relationship between radiation exposure and excess cancer incidence has been well
documented for a wide variety of carcinomas and sarcomas in various sites. Soft tissue sarcoma is a well-recognized complication following
radiation exposure. The risk is thought to be 1% of patients . Current modalities target tumour precisely but actually increase the overall
amount of normal tissue exposed to low to moderate-dose ionising radiation . As increasing numbers of patients with early-stage cancer are
treated with radiation and survive longer, it seems likely that incidence of radiotherapy (RT)-induced soft tissue sarcoma will increase .
There is a latency period between radiation and the occurrence of soft tissue sarcoma. The cut-off is thought to be at least four years
following radiation treatment. This latency period is necessary to differentiate a RT-induced sarcoma from a second primary that may predate
the radiation treatment because no accurate molecular or pathologic markers exist. Thus any spontaneous sarcoma that appears in a radiation
field is considered to be a radiation-induced malignancy . Current estimates suggest that RT-induced sarcomas account for between 2.5 to
5.5% of all sarcomas . Pelvic radiation for cancers other than rectal cancer has been implicated in the development of variety of soft
tissue tumours such as angiosarcoma of the small bowel , osteogenic sarcoma and soft tissue sarcomas such as prostatic carcinosarcoma ,
leiomyosarcoma of the rectum , and uterine sarcoma . In this case report we present what we believe to be the first case of prostate sarcoma
following preoperative neoadjuvant radiation for cancer of the rectum. A previously healthy 75-year-old farmer presented with a two-month
history of rectal bleeding. He also gave a history of mild tenesmus and a feeling of faecal urgency; he had been otherwise well. Rigid
sigmoidoscopy revealed a rectal tumour at 10 cm from the anal verge situated on the anterior wall of the rectum. Biopsy of the lesion showed
a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma. Colonoscopy showed no further lesions in the colon. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the
rectum showed that the tumour was extensive and abutted the fascia propria on the back of the prostate. It also appeared to involve the
levator ani muscles. A staging CT scan showed no evidence of liver or lung metastases. He underwent preoperative radiotherapy in the form of
fractionated doses of 45 Gy given five days a week for five weeks. Six weeks after radiotherapy he underwent an ultra low Hartmann's
resection (Abdomino-perineal resection) with a permanent colostomy. Pathological examination of the removed rectum showed a T3 tumour with
no lymph node involvement. He recovered well from surgery and managed his colostomy with no difficulty. Regular clinic follow-up was
conducted and he continued to be well. Four years later he developed symptoms of bladder outlet obstruction and acute urinary retention. He
underwent a transurethral resection of the prostate. Histological examination of the removed prostate tissue showed prostate tissue and an
anaplastic malignant tumour extensively infiltrating over 50% of the prostate tissue. Prominent within the tumour were large multinucleated
cells with frequent, atypical, mitotic figures with extensive coagulative necrosis. There was no evidence of gland formation within the
tumour and specific features of colorectal carcinoma were not identified. Immunostaining showed the tumour was negative for epithelial
markers cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, cytokeratin 34B12, CEA and PSA. The tumour was also negative for the melanoma marker S100, the
lymphocyte marker LCA, the muscle marker MSA, and the syncytiotrophoblast marker Beta HCG. The histological and immunohistochemical features
were therefore those of a poorly differentiated sarcoma. After the confirmation of sarcoma on tissue examination CT scan of the abdomen was
performed. The scan (Figure 1) showed an enlarged and heterogenous prostate, with central fluid density. There was no local or distant
adenopathy. CT Scan of the Pelvis showing prostatic mass. Rectal cancer is commonly treated with combination of surgical resection and
radiotherapy, which is administered either before or after surgery . The occurrence of prostatic sarcoma has not been reported before. The
diagnosis of post radiation sarcoma (PRS) is generally based on the following criteria: • The histological features of the original lesion
and PRS are completely different. • PRS is located within the field of irradiation. • Patients with cancer syndromes such as Li-Fraumeni and
Rothmund-Thomson are excluded. • The latent period (period between initiation of radiotherapy and histological diagnosis of second neoplasm)
is more than 4 years. Although arbitrary given the wide age range reported in the literature (4–55 y), a period of 4 years generally has
been accepted as being the lower limit for the latent period. Medline was searched between 1966–2007 for rectal cancer, radiation therapy,
and sarcoma, all as Medical Subject Headings. The relevant articles were reviewed for risk of carcinogenesis, treatment and prognosis of
radiation-induced sarcoma following were retrieved. Marmion et al., have reported the development of a uterine carcinosarcoma more than 9
years after preoperative radiotherapy for rectal carcinoma . Saggia et al., reported a case of giant cell malignant fibrous histiocytoma in
the pelvis 9 years following radiotherapy for rectal cancer. On the other hand a case of rectal adenocarcinoma has been described in a
9-year-old child following radiation treatment of pelvic rhabdomyosarcoma . Radiation-induced sarcomas are thought to be aggressive, high-
grade tumours, often with a poor prognosis. In a large series from the Memorial Sloan-Kettering cancer centre 90% of patients were able to
undergo resection for curative intent; however, 46% of patients had either a gross or microscopically positive resection margin despite the
fact that the majority of these tumours were less than 5 cm in diameter . From the same group 80% of patients who had tumour resection had
high-grade tumours, resulting in a 5-year survival of 34% for this subgroup of patients. Radiation induced sarcomas tend to be diffuse and
infiltrate along tissue planes that have been made indistinct by the effect of previous radiation. Positive margins result in a 50%
reduction in survival. This suggests aggressive and wide excision to achieve complete curative resection is required to improve the chances
of long survival. Survival in radiation-induced sarcoma is generally worse than other sarcomas . Radiation-induced sarcoma remains uncommon
and arises in 0.035 to 0.2% of all irradiated patients . The most common histological subtypes of radiation-induced sarcomas are osteogenic,
malignant fibrous histiocytoma, angio- and lymphangiosarcoma and spindle cell sarcoma . Despite the low incidence of radiation-induced
sarcoma, it is expected to be seen more frequently, due to an increased life expectancy with progressively improved survival in cancer
patients as a result of increased effectiveness of cancer therapy and better treatment regimes; however the dose-effect relationship between
radiation and sarcoma is controversial . Neither a minimum of cumulative radiation dose nor a correlation between modality of radiation and
the incidence of radiation-induced sarcomas is reported in the medical literature, but it is generally agreed that high radiation dose is
needed for development of sarcoma . A radiation dose-response relationship has been demonstrated for all sarcomas and, for the first time in
humans, for soft tissue sarcomas. Several mechanisms by which radiation may induce genetic changes leading to malignant transformation have
been proposed, but the exact development of radiation-induced cancer is still unclear. The loss of heterozygosity in directly radiated cell
nuclei activate mutational occurrences in tumour suppressor genes resulting in malignant degeneration. Furthermore, genetic mutations may
also be induced by cytoplasmic irradiation and the release of cytokines. Therefore, important genetic effects can also be observed in cells
that did not directly receive nuclear radiation . Thus long-term follow-up is important for patients who have been treated with
radiotherapy. Any suspicious lesion should be thoroughly assessed with imaging and tissue sampling to identify the nature of the lesion. If
the lesion proves to be sarcoma the treatment of choice for radiation-induced sarcomas is surgical resection with clear gross and
microscopic margins. Chemotherapy for radiation-induced sarcoma is not proven to result in prolonged survival . While we have not
established a conclusive relationship between the sarcoma of the prostate and the previous radiotherapy the association between the two
seems to be more than coincidental and we wait with interest further reports from other institutions. The author(s) declare that they have
no competing interests. SMA: Did the literature search, prepared the draft manuscript AGH: Conceived the idea and edited the manuscript All
authors approved the final version of the manuscript The written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report.
