We report a case of sudden loss of vision due to the development of acute myopia after the intake of chlorthalidone used for treating
systemic hypertension. Clinically this was associated with ciliary spasm, shallow peripheral choroidal effusion and retinal striae at the
macula with increase in macular thickness seen on optical coherence tomography. All these findings were reversed completely once the drug
was discontinued. Development of acute myopia should be kept in mind as an adverse effect of a commonly used antihypertensive drug, namely
chlorthalidone. Acute myopia is a rare idiosyncratic response to systemic use of medications. Different drugs have been reported to be the
cause of this rare phenomenon.1,2,3,4,5,6 The frequent culprits reported belong to the Sulphonamide group of drugs3,4 and diuretics.5,6 Here
we present a case of sudden onset of blurring of vision in a young male following ingestion of chlorthalidone for systemic hypertension. The
transient myopia disappeared on discontinuation of the drug. A 30-year-old male presented in the emergency department with a history of
bilateral blurring of vision of one-day duration. He had never worn glasses and past medical history was notable for hypertension. He was
taking atenelol 50 mg (Hipres, CIPLA Pharmaceuticals). Since his systemic hypertension was not well controlled with this drug his physician
had switched over to a combination of atenelol 50 mg with chlorthalidone 12.5 mg (Tenoric 50, IPCA Pharmaceuticals). He started this
medication four days prior to the episode of blurring of vision. Visual acuity at presentation was 20/120 in both eyes. Slit-lamp
examination of the anterior segment was unremarkable. Direct and consensual pupillary reactions were normal. Color vision testing using
Ishihara′s pseudo isochromatic chart was within normal limits. Refraction was done and his visual acuity was improving to 20/20 in both eyes
with a spherical correction of -5 diopter sphere (DS). Gonioscopy revealed normal open angle in both the eyes. A cycloplegic refraction
revealed a value of -3 DS/-0.5 diopter cylinder (DC) x 80° in the right eye and -3.75 DS/-1.0 DC x 130° in the left eye. Indirect
ophthalmoscopic examination revealed shallow peripheral choroidal elevation. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy revealed retinal striae radiating from
the fovea [Figs. 1A and B]. There were no vitreous cells. B-scan ultrasonography showed shallow peripheral serous choroidal detachment [Fig.
2]. A-scan biometry was done to measure the axial length. An optical coherence tomogram (OCT - Stratus version 4.0, Zeiss ophthalmics) was
also done since retinal striae were present, which showed a mild thickening of the macula. The patient′s blood pressure was 140/100 mmHg in
the forearm in supine position. Hematological evaluation including renal parameters and computerized tomogram of the head were within normal
limits. The patient was advised to stop atenelol chlorthalidone combination drug. He was reviewed after five days and his visual acuity had
improved to 20/20 without any refractive error. Fundus examination revealed disappearance of retinal striae at the macula and peripheral
choroidal effusion had also resolved [Figs. 3A and B]. The OCT was repeated which showed reduction in the thickening at the macula. A change
analysis was done using the software in Stratus OCT version 4.0 which revealed definite reduction in the thickness of the macula. A
presumptive diagnosis of drug-induced acute myopia due to chlorthalidone was made. We report a case of acute myopia induced by oral
consumption of chlorthalidone for systemic hypertension. Chlorthalidone is a monosulfonyl diuretic used widely for the treatment of systemic
hypertension. Acute transient myopia may be induced by several drugs and different mechanisms have been described. The exact mechanism
producing acute myopia is not very clear even though it has been postulated to be due to ciliary body effusion,1 peripheral uveal effusion2
and ciliary spasm3 and lens swelling. Oral sulphonamides cause transient myopia as a result of forward displacement of the lens due to
allergic ciliary body edema and rotation.3,4 Intravenous administration of equine anti lymphocytic globulins causes transient myopia due to
ciliary spasm.7 Some of the other drugs that have been described to cause transient myopia include indapamide,5 hydrochlorothiazide,2
triamterene2 and topiramate.8,9 In this case a combination of ciliary spasm and peripheral choroidal effusion explain the induced myopia.
Since the cycloplegic refraction showed a decrease in myopic shift by about 2 diopter it is evident that there was an element of ciliary
spasm. Peripheral choroidal effusion was documented by B scan ultrasonography. Retinal striae have been reported to occur with acute myopia
after drug intake.10 Ciliary body rotation and edema resulting in forward movement of iris lens diaphragm has been reported as a possible
cause for induced myopia by some authors.1,2,3,11 In this case there was no definite shallowing of the anterior chamber. We feel that this
mechanism may not explain the pathogenesis of myopia in this case. To our knowledge this is the first report of this adverse reaction of
chlorthalidone from India. Since this is a common diuretic used in the treatment of systemic hypertension, we feel that it is important to
be aware of this possible idiosyncratic adverse effect. A: Color fundus photograph showing retinal striae radiating from the fovea in the
right eye at presentation B: Left eye showing retinal striae at presentation B scan Ultrasonography of retinal periphery using transverse
section showing shallow choroidal effusion A: Disappearance of retinal striae in the right eye after stopping the drug B: Left eye with
normal macula at the end of one week
