We report a 66-yr-old male patient who developed tricuspid regurgitation secondary to internal cardiac massage. After uneventful off-pump
coronary artery bypass surgery, the subject experienced cardiac arrest in the intensive care unit. External cardiac massage was initiated
and internal cardiac massage was performed eventually. A transesophageal echocardiography revealed avulsion of the anterior papillary muscle
and chordae to the anterior leaflet after successful cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Emergency repair of the papillary muscle was performed
under cardiopulmonary bypass. Traumatic tricuspid regurgitation has been thought to be a rare complication of blunt chest trauma, although
its reported frequency has increased over the past four decades (1). Various kinds of trauma can cause traumatic valvular injury such as
motor vehicle accidents (1-4), horse kicks (5), cardiopulmonary resuscitation (6), and falls (7). To our knowledge, however, this is the
first report of traumatic tricuspid regurgitation after internal cardiac massage. In this case, external and internal cardiac massage were
performed due to cardiac arrest in a patient who underwent offpump coronary artery bypass surgery (OPCAB). After successful cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, the patient was transferred to the operating room to evaluate the hemodynamic instability and close the chest. During
surgical preparation, a transesophageal echocardiography revealed severe tricuspid regurgitation due to ruptured papillary muscle. The
papillary muscle was repaired under emergency cardiopulmonary bypass, and there was no remaining tricuspid regurgitation. A 66-yr-old man
with a 30-yr history of hypertension presented with episodes of chest pain over 10 days. His blood pressure had been controlled with
atenolol. A treadmill test showed ST segment depression at stage 2 for 4 min. The coronary angiography at admission revealed 40%, 80%, and
50% luminal narrowing of the left main, the left anterior descending, and the left circumflex artery, respectively. OPCAB was undertaken via
median sternotomy. Transesophageal echocardiography performed after the induction of anesthesia revealed left ventricular hypertrophy,
normal contractility (left ventricular ejection fraction, 60%), and no abnormal findings in valves. The right internal mammary artery was
anastomosed to the left anterior descending artery, the left internal mammary artery was anastomosed to the diagonal branch, and a saphenous
vein graft was interposed between the aorta and the obtuse marginal branch. During the anastomoses, there were no abrupt changes in
hemodynamic parameters, and there was no difference in cardiac contractility or valvular function between preoperative and immediate
postoperative echocardiographic findings. Five hours after admission to the intensive care unit (ICU), the patient was alert, and the
recovery of respiratory muscle power was thought to be enough for spontaneous breathing. At this time, his blood pressure was 102/59 mmHg
and central venous pressure was 8-9 mmHg. Therefore, the patient's position was changed from supine to sitting, and the ventilator rate was
reduced from 10/min to 8/min in an attempt to wean the patient from the ventilator. After that, the pa tient began to perspire heavily, and
his systolic blood pressure decreased from 120 mmHg to 60 mmHg. After returning to supine, the patient became unconscious, and radial artery
pressure showed flat wave with 18 mmHg of central venous pressure. External cardiac massage was performed for 15 min. Atropine 0.5 mg and
epinephrine 1.0 mg were injected twice intravenously. Electrocardiogram showed ventricular fibrillation, which was resistant to serial
monophasic defibrillation of 200, 300, and 360 J. Therefore, the median sternotomy wound was opened to initiate internal cardiac massage.
When the sternum was opened, the heart was collapsed and seemed to be grossly normal. Internal cardiac massage was continued until a normal
sinus rhythm was restored after the direct cardioversions at 20 and 30 J. Severe hypovolemia was suspected, due to the low diastolic
pulmonary pressure and central venous pressure as well as the empty and small heart. Immediately after the sinus rhythm was restored, the
laceration and contusion on the right ventricle was observed. Since the laceration was shallow and there was no active bleeding, it was
directly sutured in ICU using 5-0 monofilament polypropylene (Surgipro II, Tyco healthcare Group, Mansfield, MA, U.S.A.). There was no
progress in the lesion on the right ventricle. However, after resuscitation, high doses of vasopressors (norepinephrine 0.1 µg/kg/min,
vasopressin 8 unit/hr, and epinephrine 0.5 µg/kg/min) were required to maintain the blood pressure, and the diastolic pulmonary arterial
pressure and central venous pressure were consistently increased, although the cardiac rhythm was stable. The surgical team decided to fully
evaluate the heart and close the sternum in the operating room, and thus, the patient was transferred into the operating room. At the
operating room, the patient's heart rhythm was sinus of 57/min, systemic blood pressure was 100/60 mmHg, central venous pressure was 16
mmHg, pulmonary artery pressure was 45/23 mmHg, and the cardiac index was 2.1 L/min/m2. Right heart dysfunction was suspected after
inspection of the dilated right ventricle, and a transesophageal echocardiographic examination was performed to evaluate the reason for
hemodynamic instability. Avulsion of the anterior papillary muscle and cordae (Fig. 1) and severe tricuspid regurgitation were found (Fig.
2). The right ventricle was markedly distended, and the contractility of the right ventricular free wall and the global left ventricular
contractility were reduced without mitral regurgitation. The severity of tricuspid regurgitation was grade III-IV/IV. The ruptured papillary
muscle was fixed to the right ventricular wall under cardiopulmonary bypass. Measurements of coronary blood flow through all bypass grafts
were within normal ranges and additional coronary bypass grafts did not seem to be needed. Right and left ventricular contractility were
depressed postoperatively, although the tricuspid regurgitation disappeared. An intraaortic balloon pump (IABP) was inserted immediately
after the surgery because of low blood pressure and cardiac output. After that, it was possible to decrease the dose of inotropics and
vasopressors. The IABP was removed two days after the surgery. The patient was discharged 14 days after surgery. Traumatic tricuspid
insufficiency is rare but well described, with various symptoms (8-10). Traumatic cardiac injuries are often overlooked because of the
inexperience of the physician or due to serious compounding injuries that may obscure the cardiac injury (3). However, traumatic cardiac
lesions have been reported with an increasing frequency because of the increased awareness of the relationship between chest trauma and
cardiac lesions and the wide application of echocardiography during the past two decades (2). Although many kinds of chest injuries are
known to be related to valve injuries (1-7), this is the first report of valve injury after internal cardiac massage to the best of our
knowledge. The mechanism of the valvular injury during blunt chest trauma is thought to involve an abrupt elevation of ventricular pressure
from a sudden compression of the heart when the atrioventricular valve is closed (2, 10). The same mechanism may be applied to this case, or
a papillary muscle rupture due to a preexisting myocardial ischemia could be a possible mechanism. However, since the heart was grossly
normal when the sternum was opened during OPCAB and right coronary artery blood flow was intact, the possibilities of these explanations are
fairly low. By contrast, following two facts might strongly support that the tricuspid regurgitation was associated with internal cardiac
massage in this case. Firstly, a newly developed laceration and contusion on the right ventricle was observed after internal cardiac
massage. Secondly, the surgeon confirmed that the lesion corresponded to the position of the anterior papillary muscle of tricuspid valve in
the surgical field. Kinking of the chordae or friction with intracardiac structures from direct manipulation of the heart during the surgery
or internal cardiac massage can cause tension to break papillary muscle and result in direct valvular trauma. Another possible mechanism is
an interaction between the tricuspid valve and pulmonary artery catheter. Direct contact of pulmonary artery and valve tissue can cause
valvular injury during internal cardiac massage. Jahnke et al. (10) classified traumatic tricuspid injury into three types: rupture of the
papillary muscle, chordal rupture, and tear in the leaflet. The reported frequency of each type of injury is highest for chordal rupture,
followed by rupture of the papillary muscle and leaflet tear (2, 11, 12). Chordal rupture is associated with a more insidious history
extending from 10 to 25 yr, whereas papillary muscle rupture becomes symptomatic earlier. van Son et al. (2) suggested that early diagnosis
and surgical treatment could prevent progressive right heart failure and maintain a normal sinus rhythm. In this case, biventricular
dysfunction was suspected due to systemic hypotension, low cardiac index, and elevated central venous pressure and pulmonary artery pressure
after open chest cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Coronary blood flow interruption was suspected as a reason for hemodynamic instability, and
cardiac contusion due to the internal cardiac massage was thought to be the cause of right ventricular dysfunction because there was no
right coronary lesion preoperatively. However, transesophageal echocardiography for cardiac function assessment incidentally revealed
tricuspid regurgitation. Even after the tricupid valve was successfully repaired, postoperative transesophageal echocardiography
demonstrated left ventricular dysfunction as well as right ventricular dysfunction. Presumably, hypoperfusion of the bilateral internal
mammary artery due to sustained low cardiac output and systemic blood pressure before the second operation as well as acute right
ventricular dysfunction might cause left ventricular dysfunction. We could see the restoration of left ventricular function as cardiac
output and systemic blood pressure increased after the IABP insertion. Mild to moderate traumatic tricuspid regurgitation is usually
asymptomatic at its onset, and early diagnosis is not easy. Since echocardiography can detect tricuspid regurgitation itself earlier as well
as anatomical details, it may be very helpful in patient care. If we had performed echocardiography earlier, for example in the ICU, the
alleviation of ventricular dysfunction and improvement of postoperative outcome could have been possible. Recently, it is reported that
internal cardiac massage is superior to external cardiac massage in the survival and neurologic outcomes (13). As the use of invasive
cardiac massage increases, complications such as in this case are thought to increase as well. We recommend that right heart failure,
cardiac tamponade, and valve injury should be ruled out by transesophageal or transthoracic echocardiography if penetrating or blunt chest
trauma is accompanied by an increase in central venous pressure associated with systemic hypotension and low cardiac output. Transesophageal
echocardiography showing avulsed papillary muscle (arrow) above the tricuspid valve. RA, right atrium; TV, tricuspid valve; AO, aortic
valve. Color-flow Doppler showing severe tricuspid regurgitation. Color-flow Doppler showing minimal tricuspid regurgitation after valve
repair.
