Syringocystadenocarcinoma papilliferum (SCACP) is a rare form of adenocarcinoma of the skin. This is the malignant counterpart of
syringocystadenoma papilliferum (SCAP) and usually develops on the scalp in a long-standing lesion identified clinically as SCAP. We
describe a 65-yr-old Korean man with a nodule on the right supra-pubic area with a 2-yr duration. Histologically this tumor had a similar
overall configuration as in SCAP, but the tumor was asymmetric and poorly circumscribed, extending into the deep dermis and showed cytologic
atypia. The tumor cells showed positive reaction to GCDFP-15, but negative reaction to CEA and HMFG-1. We established the diagnosis of SCACP
in the patient, and a wide excision was performed to remove the tumor. The patient has been well without relapse or metastasis for 2 yr.
Syringocystadenocarcinoma papilliferum (SCACP) is listed in the WHO classification of skin tumor as the malignant form of syringocystadenoma
papilliferum (SCAP) (1). Most lesions seem to have arisen from long-standing SCAP (2). Histopathologically, SCACP has many structural
similarities with SCAP, but it can be differentiated from SCAP in that it has an asymmetric and poorly circumscribed structure of tumor,
often extending deep into the subcutaneous fat, and atypical cells, many of which are in mitosis (2). To our knowledge, no case of SCACP
have been reported in the Korean medical literature. Herein we report a case of SCACP occurring on the right supra-pubic area of a 65-yr-old
Korean male patient. A 65-yr-old Korean man presented with a single nodule on the right supra-pubic area. He had had the lesion for 2 yr.
The patient stated that the lesion began as a bean-sized papule and had increased gradually in size with time. It also become painful and
hemorrhagic. He had suffered from limitation of motion of both legs because of osteomyelitis. His personal medical history included
hypertension with regular medication. Physical examination revealed a single, 3.4×3.5 cm, erythematous, dome-shaped, and firm tumor
surrounded by bloody crust on the right supra-pubic area (Fig. 1). Regional lymph nodes were not palpable, and the physical examination did
not reveal any remarkable findings except for the mass. Histopathologic examination revealed a tumor with a solid and cystic pattern in the
upper dermis (Fig. 2) and a tumor of numerous irregular shaped structures in the deep dermis (Fig. 3). Cystic invagination that connected to
the skin surface through infundibular structures was extending to the dermis (Fig. 4A). The lower portion of cystic invagination was
composed of multiple layered epithelium with decapitation on the luminal surface of the cells. There was a dense infiltration of numerous
plasma cells and lymphocytes in the stroma of tumor (Fig. 4B). Variable degrees of nuclear atypia with large and hyperchromatic nuclei and
mitotic figures were observed in these tumor cells (Fig. 5). Based on these histopathological findings, the diagnosis of SCACP was made.
Immunohistochemically the tumor cells showed positive reaction to gross cystic disease fluid protein (GCDFP)-15, but negative reaction to
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) or human milk fat globules (HMFG)-1. Laboratory tests including complete blood count and urinalysis were
within normal limits or negative. Liver function tests and hepatitis B serologic tests revealed chronic hepatitis B. Tumor markers (CEA,
α-fetoprotein, prostate specific antigen, and CA19-9), chest radiography, hepatobiliary sonography and gastrocolonoscopy did not show any
internal malignancy or metastasis. A computed tomography (CT) of abdomen and pelvis could not be checked because of the patient's lower leg
deformity. Wide excisional surgery was performed to remove the tumor. There has not been any signs of recurrence or metastasis for 2 yr
after the opertaion. SCACP is one of the sweat gland carcinomas and is regarded as the malignant counterpart of SCAP (1). Although SCAP is
frequently encountered clinically, SCACP is rarely observed and its clinical and histologic characteristics are not well known. Only eight
cases of SCACP have been reported in the literature (3-8) (Table 1). The male (n=4)-to-female (n=4) ratio was 1:1. The patients' age ranged
from 47 to 74 yr, having SCACP in their scalp. Clinically, the lesion shows skin-colored or yellowish papules or nodules that remain
unchanged for many years but then begin to enlarge suddenly with bleeding or ulceration (2). Usually the lesion is covered with crusts as a
consequence of secretion of apocrine epithelial cells (2). Its size varies from 2.5 to 13 cm. The duration of disease progression from the
lesion to SCACP has been more than scores of years, but in cases of Arai et al. (7) and our case rapid development for two years was
observed. Only surgical excision was performed in all reported cases. Histopathologically, as in SCAP, tumor shows deep epidermal cystic
invaginations containing numerous papillae. Neoplastic cells lining the cystic cavities are connected to the skin surface through funnel-
shaped structures lined by infundibular epithelium. The upper part of invaginations is made up of keratinizing squamous epithelium, whereas
the lower part and papillae are composed of two- or multi-layered epithelium. Cells of the inner layer have columnar with oval nuclei and
abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and decapitation on the luminal surface, while the cells of the outer layer are small, cuboidal of flattened
and have scanty cytoplasm and oval nuclei. Stroma of the tumor contains a dense inflammatory infiltrate, composed of numerous plasma cells
and lymphoid cells (8). Occasionally, numerous normal apocrine glands can be found. However, SCACP can be different from SCAP in that it has
an asymmetric structure of tumor and the boundary is not clear; often tumor cells infiltrate the deep dermis or subcutaneous fat in tubular,
cystic or solid types; neoplastic cells exhibit crowed nuclei, variable degrees of nuclear atypia, and numerous mitotic figures (2, 8). From
the above figdings, SCACP can be considered malignant. Our case could be diagnosed as SCACP since it was shown that tumor cells were
infiltrating into the deep dermis and atypical cells were observed along with the characteristics of SCAP. Uncommonly, SCAP had a tubular
dermal component or tubular apocrine adenoma. However, in contrast with the dermal component of SCACP, dermal tumor cells in our case were
arranged with varying sizes and shapes such as strand, cord, or angular shapes. Also, dermal component was horizontally oriented as was the
case for most malignant neoplasms. In three previous cases (3, 6, 7), since the basement membrane of these papillations was intact and there
was no involvement of the dermis, the specimens were diagnosed as SCACP in situ. Cuataneous metastases from breast or gastrointestinal
cancers should be differentiated from SCACP (4). They lack papillary structures containing deep invaginations as seen in SCACP. Metastatic
thyroid carcinoma and hidradenoma papilliferum should also be included in the differential diagnosis due to their papillary structures (8).
Immunohistochemical and histochemical features of SCACP have been reported in 3 cases (5-7). Positive reactions to diastase-resistance
periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) and cytokeratin were observed in all 3 cases and immunoreactivities to CEA showed positive reactions in 2 cases
(5, 7). Ishida et al. (6) reported negativity to GCDFP-15 and CEA, and loss of immunoreactivities to CEA and GCDFP-15 in SCACP might be
associated with its malignant de-differentiation in comparision with SCAP; however, Arai et al. (7) observed immunoreactivities to CEA and
GCDFP-15 and stated that the loss of immunoreactivities to CEA and GCDFP-15 were not associated with the malignant de-differentiation.
GCDFP-15 may be positive in both apocrine and eccrine units (9). HMFG-1 is positive in normal apocrine gland and tumors with apocrine
differentiation (10). Therefore, HMFG-1 is thought to be a marker for apocrine differentiation in skin neoplasms (10). Positivity for
GCDFP-15 and negativity for CEA and HMFG-1 were observed in our case. The histogenesis of SCAP and SCACP is controversial. However, the
differentiaton of apocrine glands is recently supported by following findings: decapitation is shown on the luminal surface of inner layer
cells; the tumor is connected to folliculosebaceous structures; and there is apocrine glands in the underlying tissues (2, 7). In our case,
decapitation and cystic invagination from the infundibular structure support the hypothesis that SCACP originates from apocrine glands. A
single 3.4×3.5 cm-sized erythematous dome-shaped nodule covered with bloody crust on the right suprapubic area. A low-power view of the
lesion shows a tumor with a solid and cystic pattern in the upper dermis and diffusely infiltrating the lower dermis (H&E, ×1). Tumor cells
of strand or cord structures in the deep reticular dermis with desmoplastic stroma (H&E, ×40). (A) Cystic invagination connected to the
infundibular portion extends downward (H&E, ×40). (B) Inferior portion of cystic invagination lined by multiple layered epithelium with
decapitation on the luminal surface of the cells, numerous plasma cells and lymphocytes in the stroma (H&E, ×100). (A) Tumor cells having
large and hyperchromatic nuclei (H&E, ×200). (B) Hyperchromatic nuclei and mitotic figures were observed in these tumor cells (H&E, ×200).
Cases of syringocystdenocarcinoma papilliferum in the literature
