To report a case of retinal detachment with a macular hole following photodynamic therapy (PDT) using verteporfin and intravtreal
bevacizumab injection in the treatment of myopic choroidal neovasclarization (CNV). A 58-year-old woman was diagnosed with myopic CNV and
treated with a combination of PDT with verteporfin and intravitreal bevacizumab injection that same day. She received the second injection
of intravitreal bevacizumab four weeks after the initial treatment. The patient developed a sudden decline in vision one week after the
second injection; and was subsequently diagnosed with retinal detachment associated with a macular hole. She underwent standard three-port
pars plana vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling, fluid-air exchange and silicone oil injection. The retina was still firmly
attached at the patient's final follow-up visit. PDT and intravitreal bevacizumab injection used for the treatment of myopic CNV can be
associated with retinal detachment with a macular hole. Patients need to be informed about this potential complication, and a higher index
of suspicion may be warranted in patients who report sudden vision loss after the treatment. Recently, intravitreal bevacizumab (Avastin)
injection has gained popularity as a potential treatment for choroidal neovascularization (CNV) associated with age related macular
degeneration and pathologic myopia. The injection is utilized, either as a sole treatment or combined with photodynamic therapy (PDT) using
verteporfin.1,2 Although there is no definitive information on longterm safety for either intravitreal bevacizumab or combined treatment,
these therapies are considered safe and have no known serious ocular or systemic adverse events.1-3 Herein, we present a patient with myopic
CNV, who developed retinal detachment with a macular hole following combined PDT and intravitreal bevacizumab injection. A 58-year-old woman
was diagnosed with CNV secondary to pathologic myopia in her right eye (right eye = -17 D, left eye = -15 D) (Fig. 1). The best corrected
visual acuity in the affected eye as measured with a Snellen chart was 20/200. After an informed discussion of available therapies, the
patient received combined PDT and 1.25 mg intravitreal bevacizumab injection. Four weeks after the initial treatment, the patient received a
second intravitreal bevacizumab injection. Both treatments were uneventful. A week after receiving the second injection, the patient
presented with worsening vision in her right eye. Her visual acuity was counting fingers at 1 m. Examination revealed retinal detachment
involving the posterior pole with a macular hole. Ocular coherence tomography (OCT) confirmed the presence of a macular hole (Fig. 2). The
patient underwent standard three-port pars plana vitrectomy with internal limiting membrane peeling, fluid-air exchange and silicone oil
injection. During the operation, peripheral fundus examination was performed with scleral indentation, and no additional peripheral hole was
observed. On follow-up one week later, the macula had flattened and visual acuity was 20/400. The development of retinal detachment with a
macular hole may occur as a spontaneous process in highly myopic eyes.4 However, the retinal detachment with a macular hole in our patient
occurred shortly after PDT and repeated injections of intravitreal bevacizumab. Therefore, the time course suggests the treatment had a
potentially causal role. Several possible mechanisms may have induced the development of retinal detachment with a macular hole. The
intravitreal injection may have induced vitreous incarceration at the needle insertion site, causing vitreoretinal traction leading to
development of a macular hole and subsequent retinal detachment.5-7 We performed a combined treatment, and there has been a report of
macular hole development several weeks after PDT treatment using verteporfin. Thus, PDT may have induced the development of the macular
hole.8 Lastly, bevacizumab itself may have caused the macular hole by modulating the permeability and activity of the CNV and inducing
contraction of the vascular membrane, leading to exacerbation of tangential traction on the overlying retina.9-11 The short duration in the
onset of retinal detachment with a macular hole after the second injection of intravitreal bevacizumab also suggests a possible causal role
of the drug. In conclusion, PDT and intravitreal bevacizumab injection in the treatment of myopic CNV can be associated with retinal
detachment with a macular hole. Patients need to be informed about this potential complication, and a higher index of suspicion may be
warranted in patients who report sudden vision loss after the treatment. (A) Fundus photography of the right eye before treatment
demonstrates a juxtafoveal grayish subretinal membrane with subretinal fluid and hemorrhage. (B) Late phase of the fluorescein angiography
shows diffuse leakage from a juxtafoveal choroidal neovascularization. (A) Fundus photography 5 weeks after initial combined treatment of
PDT and intravitreal bevacizumab, and 1 week after the second intravitreal bevacizumab injection; demonstrating serous retinal detachment of
the posterior pole with a macular hole. (B) OCT confirms the presence of a macular hole.
