Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) is a useful imaging modality that is now being used more widely to assist in the percutaneous closure of
atrial septal defects (ASD) and patent foramen ovales (PFO). A 42 year old lady with a history of transient ischaemic attacks and migraine
underwent percutaneous closure of an ASD. Intraprocedural ICE demonstrated a mammoth billowing multiperforated interatrial septal aneurysm
in association with a secondum ASD. ICE provides excellent adjuvant imaging during percutaneous closure of intracardiac shunts, in this case
demonstrating a 'mammoth' interatrial septal aneurysm. Intracardiac echocardiography (ICE) is a useful imaging modality that is now being
used more widely to assist in the percutaneous closure of atrial septal defects (ASD) and patent foramen ovales (PFO). A 42 year old lady
with a history of previous transient ischemic attacks and migraines was found to have a secundum ASD and an aneurysmal interatrial septum on
contrast transthoracic echocardiography. She then went on to undergo percutaneous closure of the ASD, during which ICE demonstrated a
dramatic giant multiperforated aneurysmal interatrial septum with a secundum ASD on Doppler flow imaging (Figures 1, 2, 3). Image obtained
using intracardiac echocardiography (ICE): Demonstrating a large interatrial aneurysm (arrow) billowing into the right atrium (RA) with an
excursion of over 22 mm. Image obtained using intracardiac echocardiography (ICE): With colour flow mapping (arrow) of the interatrial
septum demonstrating a large ASD with shunting. Image obtained using intracardiac echocardiography (ICE): With colour flow mapping of the
interatrial septum demonstrating 2 jets (arrows) across the septum. An aneurysmal interatrial septum is thought to be the harbinger of
potential embolic thrombus and its presence increases the risk of a stroke significantly particularly in association with a PFO and is thus
of clinical importance . Adjuvant ICE imaging has permitted such cases to be performed as a same day discharge procedure without the need
for general anaesthesia and provides detailed imaging to enable rapid, accurate closure of intracardiac lesions. This case demonstrates a
"mammoth" billowing multiperforated interatrial septal aneurysm in association with a secondum ASD and illustrated elegantly by ICE. The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. All authors contributed to the preparation of this manuscript.
