Most malignant tumors originating from the biliary tract are adenocarcinomas, and adenosqamous carcinoma of Klatskin's tumor is a very rare
finding. An 83-yr-old man was admitted to our hospital because of jaundice. The abdominal computed tomography and magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography revealed wall thickening and luminal stenosis of both the intrahepatic duct confluent portion and the common
hepatic duct. These findings were compatible with Klatskin's tumor, Bismuth type III. Considering the patient's old age, palliative combined
modality therapy was performed. After percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage, biopsy was performed via percutaneous transhepatic
cholangioscopy. The histopathologic findings showed adenosquamous carcinoma. External radiotherapy and intraluminal brachytherapy through
the endobiliary Y-type stent were then done. Nine months after the radiotherapy, the laboratory findings and the abdominal computed
tomography revealed biliary obstruction and progressive hepatic metastasis. The combined modality therapy of external radiotherapy,
intraluminal brachytherapy and stenting assisted him to live a normal life until he finally experienced biliary obstruction. Primary
carcinoma of the extrahepatic bile duct is a rare tumor that represents less than 1.0% of all malignant neoplasms and less than 3.0% of all
the tumors of the gastrointestinal system1). Most malignant tumors generated in the biliary tract are adenocarcinomas, and adenosquamous
carcinoma is rare (3.0~4.7%). Adenosquamous carcinoma consists of two malignant components: one is glandular and the other squamous2, 3). In
one previous report on patients with extrahepatic adenosquamous carcinoma of the biliary tract, patients were treated with surgical
resection. the overall 1-year, 3-year and 5-year survival rates were 57%, 26% and 16%, respectively, and the median survival was 13
months2). When used for the management of advanced cholangiocarcinoma, adjuvant external beam radiotherapy (EBRT) followed by surgical
resection with or without intraluminal radiotherapy (ILRT) is feasible, but the effect of radio-therapy alone has not been established4). In
Korea, adenosquamous carcinoma of the papilla of Vater and the liver has been reported, but there have been no previous reports on
adenosquamous carcinoma of Klatskin's tumor5, 6). We report here on a case of a patient with adenosquamous carcinoma of Klatskin's tumor,
and this was confirmed by endoscopic biopsy. The patient was palliatively treated by EBRT and ILRT via his stent. An 83-yr-old man was
admitted to Eulji University Hospital because of jaundice he had experienced for the past 4 days, and this was preceded by chills and
myalgia for the previous week. Ten years earlier, he had undergone percutaneous coronary intervention due to angina. Six months previously,
he was operated on for laparascopic cholecystectomy due to acute acalculous cholecystitis with empyema. On admission, his blood pressure was
100/60 mmHg, the heart rate was 66/min, the respiration rate was 20/min and the body temperature was 36.5℃. He looked acutely ill and showed
an alert mentality. His sclera was icteric and he complained of abdominal pain. On physical examination, there was no abdominal tenderness,
rebound tenderness or guarding of the abdomen. There was no palpable mass or hepatomegaly on the abdominal exam. On the biochemical
analysis, the complete blood count was as follows: the white blood cell count was 9,740/µL, the hemoglobin level was 13.8 g/dL and the
platelet count was 225,000/µL. The laboratory data included the following: total serum bilirubin: 11.5 mg/dL, serum glutamic oxaloacetic
transaminase: 276 IU/L, serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase: 299 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase: 487 IU/L, serum gamma guanosine triphosphate:
640 IU/L, amylase: 64 U/L, lipase: 61 IU/L, alpha-fetoprotein: 5.1 ng/mL, carcinoembrionic antigen: 1.59 ng/mL and carbohydrate antigen
19-9: 120.62 U/mL. The abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed enhanced wall thickening of the intrahepatic duct (IHD), the confluent
portion and the common hepatic duct (CHD), and this was all compatible with Klatskin's tumor. The CT also revealed enlarged lymphadenopathy
of the portahepatis (Figure 1). The magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) revealed luminal stenosis of both the IHD confluent
portion and the CHD, and dilatation of both IHDs. This was again compatible with Klatskin's tumor, Bismuth type IIIa (Figure 2, 3).
Considering his old age, palliative external radiotherapy and intraluminal brachytherapy were planned. After percutaneous transhepatic
biliary drainage (PTBD) for achieving bile drainage, biopsy was performed via percutaneous transhepatic cholangioscopy (PTCS). An
endobiliary Y-type stent was inserted via the PTBD of the left IHD (Figure 4, 5). The histopathologic findings showed adenosquamous
carcinoma that was a mix of adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 6, 7). External radiotherapy (22 cycles, total dose: 3,960
cGy) and intraluminal brachytherapy (2 cycles, total dose: 2,000 cGy) were performed through an endobiliary Y-type stent. PTCS was performed
one month after the radiotherapy. This revealed a dilated internal lumen by the endobiliary Y-type stent and superficial necrotized
yellowish tissue on the tumor (Figure 8). During the monthly follow-up nine months after the radiotherapy, the abdominal CT revealed biliary
obstruction and progressive hepatic metastasis. PTBD was performed and conservative management was being planned. Most malignant tumors
originating from the biliary tract are adenocarcinomas, but adenosqamous carcinoma is a rare finding, representing less than 5% of all
biliary tumors. Its clinical characteristics, pathogenesis and the effect of radiotherapy without surgical resection are unknown1). Several
theories have explained that adenosquamous carcinoma is a mix of adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma, and this is a malignant
epithelial tumor that's derived from initially benign metaplasia as a result of some chronic inflammatory process. Further, squamous cell
carcinoma in these unusual sites is more likely to be due to squamous metaplasia of a tumor itself rather than being due to malignant
transformation of previously benign metaplastic epithelium1). Histologic alteration from adenocarcinoma to squamous cell carcinoma shows
that adeno-squamous carcinoma might be a transitional form from adenocarcinoma to squamous cell carcinoma. In addition, some of the primary
hepatic squamous cell carcinomas might originate from adenocarcinomas, and this supports the theory of an origin from adenocarcinoma7, 8).
Although adenosquamous carcinoma of the common bile duct has a different etiology and biologic features compared with adenocarcinoma, the
patients with adenosquamous carcinoma are treated in the same manner as that for patients with adenocarcinoma. Adenosquamous carcinomas are
uncommon tumors with a poor prognosis, even after surgical resection. The median survival is only thirteen months and no optimal
postoperative adjuvant therapy has been established. The outcomes related to various therapeutic interventions are not well defined2). In
one previous study on treating patients with inoperable carcinoma of the extrahepatic bile ducts, group 1 underwent EBRT alone and group 2
was treated with EBRT in combination with high-dose-rate ILBT; the results were then compared. No statistically significant difference was
found in the recurrence rates between those who did and did not receive ILBT (53% for group 1 vs. 36% for group 2; p>0.05). However, a
prolongation of the median time to tumor recurrence was observed for the group 2 patients (5 months for group 1 vs. 9 months for group 2;
p=0.06)9). On the other hand, reports exist that performing brachytherapy boost was not superior to treatment with external beam irradiation
alone10). In another study, there did not seem to be any difference in survival or complications between the low- and high-dose rate
brachytherapy11). Moreover, high radiation doses could be dangerous and detrimental to the prognosis10). Takamura et al. reported that
combined-modality therapy, including external beam radiotherapy, intraluminal irradiation and biliary stenting for extrahepatic bile duct
carcinoma provided reasonable local control and improved the quality of life for the patients with extrahepatic bile duct carcinoma. The
median survival was twelve months, with 1-, 3- and 5-year actuarial survival rates of 50%, 10% and 4%, respectively12). Therefore, the
outcomes and survival rate related to radiotherapy have not been established for cases of inoperable extrahepatic bile duct carcinoma with
obstructive jaundice. Yet it has been recently reported that ILBT with metallic stenting improves the quality of life of extrahepatic bile
duct carcinoma patients with obstructive jaundice. The reported mean time of stent patency was 421 days in the group of patient with
proximal malignant biliary stricture and mean time of stent patency was 168 days for the group of patients with distal stricture that was
impossible to operate on or the patients refused an operation13). So, we expected the period of stent patency to be more than six months for
our case of adenosquamous carcinoma. We performed combined modality therapy of EBRT, ILRT and stenting. He lived a normal life until he
experienced biliary obstruction. Nine months after the therapy, the abdominal CT and laboratory findings showed recurred biliary
obstruction. All the reported cases of adenosquamous carcinomas have been diagnosed by surgical resection. Any inoperable cases that were
diagnosed by endoscopic biopsy have not yet been reported on because endoscopic biopsy is not generally performed before a treatment
decision. Thus, the response to radiotherapy, including brachytherapy, and the patency rate of stents in inoperable adenosquamous carcinoma
have not been reported. In the future, a reasonable management plan for adenosquamous carcinoma will be established if a sufficiently large
number of cases of inoperable adeno-squamous carcinomas are diagnosed by endoscopic biopsy. The abdominal computed tomography shows both
intrahepatic duct dilatation and an enhanced wall thickening (arrow) of the intrahepatic duct confluent portion. The magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography shows luminal stenosis of both the intrahepatic duct confluent portion and the common hepatic duct, and dilatation
of both intrahepatic ducts. The endobiliary Y-type stent is inserted via percutaneous transhepatic biliary drainage of the left intrahepatic
duct. The percutaneous transhepatic cholangioscopy shows an ingrowing mass in the perihilar area. The light microscope findings show
papillary structure (arrowhead) and proliferation of nests of adenocarcinoma cells (arrow) (HE stain, original magnification ×40). The light
microscope findings show squamous cell carcinoma, including keratin (arrow) and intercelluar bridges (arrowhead) that are seen in the tumor
tissue (HE stain, original magnification ×40). The percutaneous transhepatic cholangioscopy shows a dilated internal lumen via the
endobiliary Y-type stent, and superficial necrotized yellowish tissue.
