The development of a perirenal hematoma is rare and primarily the result of trauma, malignancy, or a connective tissue disease.
Infrequently, a continuous or even mild trauma can cause a perirenal hematoma. Here, we report a case involving the development of a
perirenal hematoma after excessive hula-hooping in the absence of a major trauma history. The development of a perirenal hematoma is rare
and primarily the result of trauma, malignancy, or a connective tissue disease. Major traumas (such as a traffic accident or a fall) are the
most common causes of a perirenal hematoma. Here, we describe a case involving a 26-year-old woman who developed a perirenal hematoma after
violent hula-hooping. A 26-year old woman was admitted to our hospital for further evaluation of a perirenal mass. Five days earlier, she
had visited an outside emergency department with complaints of a high fever and left flank pain, which radiated to the iliac fossa and
posterior back. An abdominal ultrasound (US) revealed a left perinephric mass (Fig. 1). The abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan revealed
a perirenal hematoma confined to the left kidney. However, other perinephric structures, including the pancreas, adrenal grand, and
additional vasculature, remained unaffected (Fig. 2). The patient had a long history of insulin dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM), and had
been treated with insulin since the age of 16. She had no other medical illness (i.e. vasculitis, immunodeficiency, hypertension, or
tuberculosis) and had no relevant medication history (i.e. aspirin or non-steroid anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs)). However, in an attempt
to lose weight, the patient had been exercising 30 minutes daily for about six months, using a hula-hoop. She recalled experiencing
intermittent left flank pain whilst exercising with the hula-hoop. A physical examination revealed an ill-appearing woman with a body
temperature of 38℃, blood pressure of 130/80mmHg, and a heart rate of 98 beats/min. Her body weight was 54kg, and her height was 162cm (BMI,
20.1kg/m2). Her abdomen was soft, not distended, and remarkable for left costovertebral angle tenderness. Laboratory examination revealed a
WBC of 11,700/mm2 (64.5% segmental neutrophils and 10.9% lymphocytes), hemoglobin of 11.1g/dL, hematocrit of 34.8%, platelet 340 × 103,
fasting blood glucose of 99mg/dL, postprandial glucose of 207mg/dL, hemoglobin A1C of 16.2%, serum sodium of 143mmol/L, potassium of
4.6mmol/L, blood urea nitrogen of 19mg/dL, creatinine 0.9 of mg/dL, lipase 78 of IU/L and a lactate dehydrogenase of (LDH) 396IU/L. Urine
analysis was negative for blood and protein, and showed 0-1 WBC and 0-1 RBC. The 24-hour total protein was 473mg/day, and creatinine
clearance was 77 mL/min/1.73m2. Coagulation parameters and the liver functions were normal. An abdominal US was rechecked at our hospital.
The US showed a 1.2cm diameter mass encircling the left kidney (Fig. 3). The size of the left perirenal hematoma was smaller than the
previous image, which was conducted at a previous hospital about five days prior. Signs of persistent bleeding were absent, and the left
kidney was well preserved and encapsulated. No vascular malformation was identified. She was treated with hydration and intravenous
antibiotics (cephazedone, 2g/day), and her blood glucose level was well-controlled with insulin. Four days later, her fever subsided and her
general condition improved. She was discharged, and a third abdominal US was repeated 20 days later in an outpatient setting. The US
revealed an overall reduction in the size of the perirenal hematoma (Fig. 4). The cause and diagnosis of a perirenal hematoma must be
established quickly so as to determine treatment direction. The causes of a spontaneous perirenal hematoma (SPH) include immunologic
disorders, neoplasms (renal cell carcinomas and adenomas), and collagen vascular diseases, but the main cause of a secondary perirenal
hematoma is traumatic injury.1 Novicki et al. reviewed the literature concerning SPH over a 45-year period.2 Of 194 patients, 16% had benign
or malignant renal tumors, 15% had nephritis or ruptures of uncertain origin, and 4% had inflammatory vascular disorders. Fujita et al.
described an elderly man with a perirenal hematoma caused by judo training,3 and suggested that a trauma, even a mild trauma, can trigger
the onset of this hemorrhage, because the perirenal blood vessels are supported by loose connective tissue. The renal artery and vein
perforate dense connective tissue to supply the loose connective tissue around the renal pelvis, and thus vessels supplying these loose
connective tissues can be damaged by shearing forces.4,5 In our case, the patient had neither a major trauma history nor any injury
compatible with the development of a hematoma. Even if she were in a poorly controlled glycemic state, she had no laboratory abnormality to
develop spontaneous bleeding; coagulation parameters were normal. She recalled slight, intermittent left flank pain during hula-hooping. The
hoop was made of hard plastic and was filled with iron beads. She was not obese, but she did hula-hoop excessively everyday in an attempt to
lose weight. We believe that the cause of her perirenal hematoma was a result of a repeated minor injury caused by hula-hooping. However, we
could not explain why the hematoma was unilateral. We treated her with intravenous antibiotics in light of her fever, flank pain, and
leukocytosis. First ultrasonogram showing a 1.2 cm diameter mass encircling left kidney. CT scan showing the hematoma encircling the left
kidney without structural distortion before (A) and after (B) contrast enhancement. Second ultrasonogram 5 days later showing reducing
perirenal hematoma compared to first ultrasonogram. Third ultrasonogram 20 days later showing more reducing perirenal hematoma compared to
second ultrasonogram.
