Bacillus organisms are common laboratory contaminants. The majority of Bacillus bacteraemias are transient and not clinically significant.
Clinically significant infection due to Bacillus species is rare and mostly due to Bacillus cereus infections in immuno-compromised hosts.
We report a case of central venous catheter infection with Bacillus pumilus in an immunocompetent child with tufting enteropathy on long-
term parenteral nutrition (PN). There were three episodes of central venous catheter infection with Bacillus pumilus in three months.
Despite adequate and appropriate use of intravenous antibiotics, the infection failed to clear resulting in the need for removal of the
catheter for complete cure. Bacillus species can cause clinically significant central venous catheter infection, even in an immunocompetent
host. Despite adequate antibiotic treatment, the central venous catheter may need removal for complete cure. Central venous catheter
infections are a major cause of morbidity . In most cases, the offending organisms are coagulase-negative staphylococci, Staphylococcus
aureus, gram-negative bacilli, and Candida species. Bacillus species are common contaminants of blood cultures but clinically significant
infection is rare . Significant central venous catheter infections caused by Bacillus species are mainly due to B cereus and have mostly
been reported in immunocompromised hosts . We report a case of central venous catheter infection with Bacillus pumilus, in an
immunocompetent child with tufting enteropathy on long-term parenteral nutrition. An 8 year old girl with tufting enteropathy on long-term
parenteral nutrition presented on 3 occasions with central venous catheter infection due to Bacillus species. On each occasion, she had
fever after flushing of the central venous catheter. She had initially presented in the first few months of life with chronic watery
diarrhoea and impaired growth, and was found to have tufting enteropathy (intestinal epithelial dysplasia) . This is a rare congenital
enteropathy, which requires indefinite dependence on parenteral nutrition from early infancy. The child is on regular parenteral nutrition
and has had no previous history of significant infections, except for central venous catheter infections with coagulase negative
staphylococci. Immunoglobulins, neutrophil and lymphocyte counts were within the normal range. There was no history of significant trauma,
injuries or skin infections prior to this episode, except a small cut on her finger which healed very well and was generally well in
herself. She lives with her parents and is well cared for. There is no history of contact with plant growth products or animal probiotics at
any time. The child presented with fever and rigors to her local hospital. Bacillus species was isolated from blood taken from the central
venous catheter, which was reported sensitive to flucloxacillin. She was treated with 4 weeks of intravenous flucloxacillin because
bacteraemia had persisted despite 14 days of treatment. The child was transferred to our hospital with recurrence of fever and rigors, 10
days after stopping the antibiotics. Empirical treatment was started with intravenous cefotaxime and flucloxacillin. Bacillus species was
isolated from central venous catheter cultures both before and whilst on cefotaxime and flucloxacillin. This was later identified as
Bacillus pumilus at the National Reference Laboratory (Health Protection Agency, Centre For Infection, London). The methods used to identify
the organism were gram stain to determine whether spores are produced, short biochemical profile based on ammonia salt sugars, Lecithinase
and mannitol (B. pumilus is lecithinase negative and mannitol positive) and DNA sequencing. B pumilus was reported to be sensitive to
vancomycin and erythromycin. There were concerns that the patient had previously reacted to systemic vancomycin, so antibiotics were changed
to intravenous clindamycin with vancomycin line locks given for 2 weeks. Blood cultures, taken both during and after this treatment, were
negative. Echocardiography showed no evidence of vegetations at the tip of the catheter or in the heart. Ten days after stopping the
intravenous antibiotics the child presented for the third time with fever and rigors. A Bacillus species was again grown from blood taken
from the central venous catheter. The central venous catheter was removed after 5 days treatment with intravenous vancomycin and a new
central venous catheter was inserted. Subsequent blood cultures were negative and there has been no recurrence of further fever or
infections over a 9-month period, suggesting the infection has been eradicated. Central Venous Catheter infection is an important cause of
morbidity in children dependent upon central venous catheters. In about two-thirds of cases, the offending organisms are coagulase-negative
staphylococci, Staphylococcus aureus and gram negative bacilli. Candida species are responsible for one-third of these infections and carry
a worse prognosis . Currently there are no published data on the frequency with which Bacillus species are recovered from central venous
catheters, but clinically significant infection due to Bacillus species are rare. Most reports of infections caused by Bacillus species have
occurred in intravenous drug users, those with prosthetic valvular devices and in immuno-compromised hosts . Bacillus species grown from
blood are frequently assumed to be contaminants. Bacillus species are isolated from 0.1–0.9% of blood cultures, but only 5–10% of these are
clinically significant infections . Since Bacillus isolates are frequently dismissed as contaminants most laboratories do not identify these
isolates further. Infection due to Bacillus pumilus has thus been rarely reported. The genus Bacillus consists of a heterogenic group of
gram-positive, endospore-forming, rod-shaped, facultative anaerobic bacteria . Bacillus species other than Bacillus anthracis produce spores
that are widespread in the environment, and isolation from a specimen may represent contamination. Of the non-anthrax Bacillus species, B.
cereus, B. licheniformis, and B. pumilus may be more pathogenic in immunosuppressed hosts than other common Bacillus species, (B. subtilis
or B. megaterium). However, Bacillus pumilus has rarely been reported as a human pathogen. Risk factors for Bacillus bacteraemia include
intravenous drug use hemodialysis and leukemia . Intravascular catheters, pacemaker wires, skin or wound infections have all been reported
as potential portals of entry of infection for bacteraemia with Bacillus . Significant bacteraemia with Bacillus species has been described
in immunosuppressed or cancer patients and . To our knowledge, there is one case report of Bacillus cereus infection of a central line in an
immunocompetent patient (a child with haemophilia) . It is unclear why our patient should have infection with Bacillus pumilus, although
there may be some subtle immune dysfunction in tufting enteropathy in addition to malabsorption . Bacillus pumilus has toxic properties; it
has cytopathic effects in Vero cells, haemolytic activity, lecithinase production, and proteolytic action on casein . The organism produces
a toxin that has been detected in guinea pigs with experimentally induced enterocolitis associated with clindamycin . Bacillus pumilus is
also known to be used in some plant growth products and some of the commercially used animal probiotics . Antibiotics, which appear useful
in the treatment of non cereus Bacillus, are clindamycin, imipenem, ciprofloxacin and vancomycin, to which the vast majority of strains are
susceptible . Some suggest that initial antibiotic treatment should be vancomycin until susceptibilities are known. We did not use this
initially in our case because of concerns about a possible previous reaction to vancomycin. However despite an adequate course of
appropriate antibiotics the infection recurred as in previous reports of Bacillus central venous catheter infection . Guidelines are not
available for antibiotic testing of Bacillus species by routine disc susceptibility testing . Tests to determine minimum inhibitory
concentrations are therefore needed. Central venous catheter infection with some organisms (e.g. coagulase negative staphylococci), can be
successfully eradicated by antibiotics alone without resorting to catheter removal . However, central venous catheter infection with
Bacillus species usually requires catheter removal for complete cure, as in our case . Our experience suggests that Bacillus species can
cause clinically significant central venous catheter infections, even in an immunocompetent child. Bacillus species isolated from blood
taken from central venous catheters should not be dismissed as contaminants; instead more blood cultures should be taken. Treatment should
be instituted if these repeat cultures are positive or if the patient's deteriorates clinically. However, despite antibiotic treatment the
central venous catheter may need removal for complete cure. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. HNB provided
clinical care, literature search, initial drafting and editing of manuscript. AMD provided clinical care, critical appraisal and editing of
manuscript. FAI R oversaw antimicrobial susceptibility testing and the antimicrobial regimen for this patient, helped conceive this paper,
critical appraisal and editing of manuscript All authors approved of final manuscript submission. Written consent was obtained from the
child's parents for publication of this report.
