Colorectal cancer and B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL) have a significant incidence, which are increasing with the aging
population. Evidence has been presented in the literature to suggest that the synchronous presentation of colorectal cancer and B cell CLL
may be more than simply coincidental for these two common malignancies. We report an unusual case of a presumed B cell CLL diagnosed on the
basis of histological analysis of lymph nodes recovered from a resection specimen for rectal adenocarcinoma. We considered aetiological
factors which may have linked the synchronous diagnosis of the two malignancies and the potential implications for the natural history of
the two malignancies on one another. A 70-year-old male underwent low anterior resection with total mesorectal excision for a rectal
adenocarcinoma. His co-morbid conditions were chronic obstructive airways disease and ischaemic heart disease. General examination revealed
no lymphadenopathy. Full blood count, urea and electrolytes and liver function tests were all within normal limits. As well as confirming a
pT3 N1 adenocarcinoma, histological analysis showed lymph nodes with an infiltrate of small lymphoid cells. Immunohistochemical studies
showed these cells to be in keeping with B cell CLL. Whilst unable to identify any common aetiological factors in the two malignancies in
our patient, immunosuppression and genetic abnormalities have been identified as possible bases for an observed epidemiological association
between colorectal cancer and haematological malignancies. Examples such as our case of synchronous diagnosis of two malignancies in a
patient are likely to increase with the aging population. The potential affects of one malignancy on the natural history of the other
warrants further study. In our case, we considered that slow progression of the B cell CLL may increase the risk of recurrent rectal
adenocarcinoma. Colorectal cancer is the third commonest malignancy in Europe and North America. B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia (CLL)
accounts for 0.8% of all cancers at any point in time . One of the complications of B cell CLL is an associated increased risk of subsequent
second malignancies, most commonly melanoma, soft-tissue sarcoma and colorectal and lung carcinoma . Immunosuppression associated with the
long term nature of B cell CLL has been proposed as the basis of this increased risk . Whilst patients with advanced B cell CLL may
experience weight loss, recurrent infections, bleeding secondary to thrombocytopenia, and/or anaemia, 25% of patients are asymptomatic and
diagnosed on the basis of peripheral blood markers. Asymptomatic B cell CLL, diagnosed on peripheral blood markers or symptomatic
presentation of B cell CLL has been described synchronously with rectal cancer . We report an unusual case of a presumed B cell CLL
diagnosed on the basis of histological analysis of lymph nodes recovered from a resection specimen for rectal adenocarcinoma. We considered
the diagnostic quandaries of coincidental findings at examination of colorectal resection specimens; the possibility that a synchronous
diagnosis may reflect an aetiological link between the malignancies in our patient; the possibility that the natural history of either one
malignancy could be altered by the presence or treatment of the other. A 70-year-old male presented with an eight month history of looser
stools. His medical history included a right lung lobectomy for tuberculosis aged 20, chronic obstructive airways disease and ischaemic
heart disease. He was a long-term smoker. General examination showed him to be well with no lymphadenopathy. No mass was palpable on digital
rectal examination. Full blood count, urea and electrolytes and liver function tests were all within normal limits. Flexible sigmoidoscopy
and biopsy identified a rectal adenocarcinoma at 8 cm from the anal margin. MRI showed a normal liver and no para-aortic lymphadenopathy. A
moderately bulky tumour was identifiable in the mid/low rectum, 5 cm in length. Local staging with MRI was T2 although the tumour was noted
to be very close to the levator plate especially on the left. Perirectal and presacral lymph nodes were seen, the largest of which was 1 cm
in short axis. CT scan of the chest did not identify any metastatic disease. At laparotomy no peritoneal disease, liver metastases or
abnormal lymph nodes were seen. A low anterior resection with total mesorectal excision was performed. Recovery was complicated by chest
sepsis and prolonged ileus and the patient was fit for discharge on day 14 post surgery. Microscopic examination showed complete resection
margins of a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma extending through the muscularis propria. Metastatic adenocarcinoma was also
identified in one of the twenty one lymph nodes. By UICC staging this was therefore pT3 N1 MX. There was no evidence of extramural vascular
invasion. Several lymph nodes showed partial effacement of the normal lymphoid architecture by an infiltrate of small lymphoid cells in
which many pseudoproliferation centres were evident. Immunohistochemical studies confirmed the presence of CD20 positive B lymphoid
infiltrate that co-expressed CD5, CD23 and BCL2 and was negative for cyclin D1, CD10 and BCL6 (DakoCytomation, Ely, UK). This overall
picture was considered consistent with a low grade B cell chronic lymphocytic leukaemia. The meticulous examination of lymph nodes in
colorectal resection specimens is crucial to evaluating prognosis and planning adjuvant therapies. On rare occasions such examinations will
inevitably discover coincidental pathologies, presenting pathologists and clinicians with diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic quandaries.
This case was an unusual synchronous diagnosis of a presumed early B cell CLL and adenocarcinoma of the rectum. It presented the quandaries
of the diagnosis of B cell CLL, the possibility of a link between the two malignancies and potential implications for the natural history of
either malignancy. In this case the histological and immunohistochemical findings were considered sufficient for a provisional diagnosis of
B cell CLL. A formal diagnosis of B cell CLL could not be made since the patient did not have a lymphocytosis and a bone marrow biopsy was
not considered appropriate at this stage of presentation. In modern medical practice these diagnostic quandaries need to be carefully
discussed with the patient. However it is all too easy for confusion to develop amongst the various medical staff involved in a patient's
care, the patient and their relatives. The most likely explanation for this synchronous diagnosis of a presumed B cell CLL and
adenocarcinoma of the rectum is purely coincidental. However in the synchronous presentation of colorectal cancer and B cell CLL an
epidemiological association has been noted which goes further than simple coincidence . This synchronous relationship has been explained in
terms of immunosuppression over a prolonged period due asymptomatic B cell CLL and a subsequent development of colorectal cancer, in fact,
in a metachronous manner. This is consistent with the observed increase in the long term risk of solid organ malignancies in a patient
diagnosed with B cell CLL , where immunosuppression over a prolonged period has also been postulated as the basis for the increased risk .
Given the very early stage of the presumed B cell CLL in our patient it would seem unlikely that immunosuppression has played a significant
role in the development of the primary rectal carcinoma. An alternative explanation for the link between colorectal cancer and B cell
lymphocytic leukaemia may come from our increasing understanding of tumour genetics. A common alteration in a locus of chromosome 7 has been
suggested as a genetic basis for an association between haematological malignancy and hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer . Leukaemia and
colorectal cancer are both associated with Li-Fraumeni syndrome and mutations of the p53 gene/gene expression. Abnormalities in the p53 gene
expression have been demonstrated in 10–15% of B cell CLL patients and 75% of colorectal carcinoma patients. In B cell CLL p53 gene
expression has been shown to be a marker of aggressive disease with a poorer prognosis . With the exception of Li-Fraumeni syndrome, single
gene mutations would not account for the development of both malignancies in a single patient. However altered p53 expression may illustrate
common pathways, many of which remain unknown, which may increase an individual's risk of more than one form of malignancy. As a matter of
interest we performed immunohistochemistry for p53 protein expression in our patient's histopathological specimens and identified p53
expression in the cells of the adenocarcinoma, but not the B cells of the CLL. In the synchronous diagnosis of B cell CLL and rectal
carcinoma, as well as implying the possibility of common aetiological factors, we also considered whether either disease or its treatment
might affect the natural history of the other. This patient had pT3 N1 stage rectal adenocarcinoma and a predicted 5 year survival in of 68%
– 62% . On the basis of the N1 stage disease the patient was offered adjuvant chemotherapy. As first line chemotherapy the patient received
a course of 5-fluorouracil. There is no evidence to suggest that administration of 5-fluorouracil alters the natural history of B cell CLL.
Variability in the rate of B cell CLL disease progression and incidence of disease related complications can make the decision to treat a
more complex one. Treatment of early stage B cell CLL with chemotherapy does not confer any survival advantage over conservative management.
Treatment of B cell CLL also does not reduce the incidence of second neoplasia . Given the very early stage of a presumed B cell CLL in our
patient we decided to monitor him until evidence of disease progression. However with slow progression of the B cell CLL the patient may
become relatively immunosuppressed for a prolonged period before treatment is indicated. Given the established increased risk of primary
colorectal cancer potentially associated with this situation it is of concern that our patient may be at increased risk of recurrent rectal
carcinoma in the future. The risk of recurrent solid organ tumours with a diagnosis of B cell CLL has not been studied. In our case any
increased risk of recurrent rectal carcinoma would potentially alter the duration of surveillance. Surveillance in our hospital for rectal
carcinoma is 5 years with annual CT chest and abdomen. With a predicted median survival of >7 years with the B cell CLL surveillance beyond
5 years may be prudent. The meticulous examination of lymph nodes in colorectal carcinoma can reveal other unsuspected malignancies. We have
described an unusual case of synchronous rectal adenocarcinoma and a presumed early B cell CLL diagnosed on the basis of histological
examination of the rectal resection specimen. Whilst unable to identify any common aetiological factors in the two malignancies in our
patient, immunosuppression and common tumour genetics may form the bases for an observed epidemiological association between colorectal
cancer and haematological malignancies. Examples such as our case of synchronous diagnosis of two malignancies in a patient are likely to
increase with the aging population. The potential affects of one malignancy on the natural history of the other warrants further study. In
our case, we considered that slow progression of the presumed B cell CLL may increase the risk of recurrent rectal adenocarcinoma and
prolonged surveillance may be prudent. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. JA was the operating surgeon and
consultant overseeing the patient's care. RD and JA were responsible for drafting the manuscript and revising it critically. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case report.
