Placenta increta is an uncommon and life-threatening complication of pregnancy characterized by complete or partial absence of the decidua
basalis. Placenta increta usually presents with vaginal bleeding during difficult placental removal in the third-trimester. Although
placenta increta may complicate first and early second-trimester pregnancy loss, the diagnosis can be very difficult during early pregnancy
and thus the lesion is difficult to identify. We encountered with a woman who was diagnosed with placenta increta after receiving emergency
hysterectomy due to intraperitoneal bleeding 2 months after an uncomplicated dilatation and curettage in the first trimester. Therefore, we
report this case with a brief review of the literature. Placenta increta is a life-threatening complication of pregnancy characterized by
complete or partial absence of the decidua basalis and imperfect development of the fibrinoid layer (Nitabuch layer). Although the incidence
of placenta accreta/increta/percreta is reported 1:2500-7000, this abnormally adherent placental condition assumes considerable significance
clinically because of morbidity and, at times, mortality from severe hemorrhage, uterine perforation, and infection (1-3). Placenta increta
usually presents with vaginal bleeding during difficult placental removal in the third trimester. Placenta increta may also complicate first
and early second-trimester pregnancy loss, causing profuse post-curettage hemorrhage (4-6). Although an association has been noted with
placenta previa, previous uterine curettage, previous cesarean section, multiparity (6 or more), and advanced maternal age (7-9), the
definite etiology of placenta increta remains unknown. We encountered with a woman who was diagnosed with placenta increta after receiving
emergency hysterectomy due to intraperitoneal bleeding 2 months after an uncomplicated dilatation and curettage in the first trimester.
Therefore, we report this case with a brief review of the literature. A 35-yr-old woman, gravida 5, para 2, was admitted because of acute
abdominal pain and syncope 8 weeks after an uncomplicated dilatation and curettage. Her obstetric history included two times of vaginal
delivery and three times of dilatation and curettage. She underwent dilatation and curettage 10 months prior to admission for a missed
abortion, 2 and 4 months prior to admission for elective abortion. She stated that she experienced a small amount of vaginal spotting three
days before admission. When she came to the hospital, her body temperature was 36℃, blood pressure 90/60 mmHg, and pulse rate 84 beats/min.
Physical examination showed diffuse tenderness on entire abdomen with significant rebounding pain and muscle guarding. The complete blood
count showed hemoglobin of 7.6 g/dL and hematocrit of 21.1%. Urine pregnancy test was negative. The diagnosis of internal bleeding
associated with hypovolemic shock was strongly suspected clinically. She received 3,000 mL of fluid infusion including colloid and
crystalloid and 2 units of packed red blood cells (RBC) at the emergency room. Abdomen-pelvic computed tomography (CT) showed a 6×5 cm-sized
exophytically bulging vascular mass on the left uterine cornual portion (Fig. 1). Based on imaging findings, acquired arterio-venous
malformation rupture was suspected. Even after vigorous fluid and blood resuscitation, her hemoglobin further decreased to 4.4 g/dL and
blood pressure remained unstable. She was taken immediately into the operation room. Operative findings revealed extensive hemoperitoneum
(about 5,000 mL including old clot and fresh blood) and a 4×3 cm-sized cystic lesion on the left fundal area of the myometrium suspicious of
vascular malformation. The uterus was slightly enlarged. Bilateral ovaries and tubes appeared edematous and congested, and continuous oozing
from both ovaries and retroperitoneal space was noted. Total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingooophorectomy was performed. In
total, 13 units of packed RBC and 5 units of fresh frozen plasma were transfused perioperatively. Her serum β-human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG) level was less than 2 mIU/mL. Histological examination revealed that in the superficial and deep myometrium extending close to the
serosal surface, there were multifocal aggregates of intermediate trophoblasts and chorionic villi, which showed degenerative features and
were surrounded by a large amount of fibrin (Fig. 2). There was no definite evidence of decidua basalis in the junction of placenta and
myometrium. The appearance was that of a placenta increta. It was presumed that the involvement of a deep myometrial vessel was responsible
for the torrential hemorrhage. She was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) post-operatively and received 5 more units of packed RBC
and 8 units of platelet concentrates. She was extubated on post-operative day 1 and transferred to the general ward. Her condition remained
stable, and she made a favorable progress. She was discharged one week later. Placenta increta usually presents with vaginal bleeding during
difficult placental removal in the third trimester. Placenta increta may also complicate first and early second-trimester pregnancy loss,
causing profuse post-curettage hemorrhage. Early recognition of the condition may improve the outcome, since it provides the obstetrician
the opportunity to deal promptly with such obstetrical emergency. However, most cases of placenta increta have no preceding symptoms, thus a
higher degree of suspicion for early diagnosis should rely on known risk factors mentioned above. The antenatal diagnosis of placenta
increta may be based on real-time ultrasound, power Doppler, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (10, 11). The diagnostic value of
ultrasonographic examination in the antenatal diagnosis of asymptomatic placenta accreta is not clear. Finberg et al. (12) reported a
positive predictive value of 78% and negative predictive value of 94%. However, Lam et al. (13) found that ultrasound was only 33-percent
sensitive for detecting placenta accreta. Chou et al. (14) described successful use of three-dimensional color power Doppler imaging for
diagnosis of placenta percreta. MRI has also been proposed as a diagnostic tool in detecting placenta accreta, but no additive advantage was
found over ultrasonography (13). The clinical manifestations of placenta accreta such as bleeding, uterine rupture, invasion of the bladder,
and uterine inversion depend on the site of implantation, depth of myometrial penetration, and the extent of abnormally adherent placenta
(15). In the majority of women with antepartum hemorrhage, coexisting placenta previa may be the cause. Myometrial invasion by placental
villi at the site of a previous cesarean scar may lead to uterine rupture before the onset of labor (2). With extensive involvement of
placenta increta, hemorrhage becomes profuse as delivery of the placenta is attempted. Successful treatment depends on immediate blood
replacement therapy and prompt hysterectomy. In the past, the most common form of conservative management was manual removal of the placenta
as much as possible and then packing of the uterus. According to the study done by Fox, 25 percent of women died after receiving
conservative management (9). Therefore conservative management is probably appropriate only for partial placenta accreta where bleeding is
minimal. Alternative measures include uterine or internal iliac artery ligation or angiographic embolization. Liu et al. (4) reported four
cases in uterine artery embolization was done to control bleeding. The uterus was preserved and heavy uterine bleeding was controlled
satisfactorily. There could be a few other reasons for hemoperitoneum, including the rupture of acquired uterine arteriovenous malformation,
which was found on CT as in this case. Previous uterine surgeries, such as curettage and cesarean section are important factors that cause
acquired uterine arteriovenous malformation. Previous pregnancy, infection, gestational trophoblastic disease, endometrial or cervical
cancers can be a factor as well (16). Arteriovenous malformation could be diagnosed by angiography, ultrasonography, or CT. The existence of
arteriovenous fistula could not be assured in this case, because additional examination was not taken. However, the possibility of
coexistent arteriovenous malformation was considerably low according to pathologic findings. Also, ectopic pregnancy, which is a common
cause of large hemoperitoneum, was not taken into account due to the negative pregnancy test result. Placental site trophoblastic tumor
characterized by the presence of proliferating trophoblastic tissue deeply invading the myometrium could be another cause. However, her
serum β-hCG level was less than 2 mIU/mL and the pathologic findings were not suitable for placental site trophoblastic tumor. Four cases of
placenta increta at first trimester similar to this case have been reported in Korea. However, Choi et al. (17) reported uterine rupture in
normal intrauterine pregnancy at 13 gestational weeks due to placenta increta. The Lee et al. (18) study was different from the current
study in that missed abortion and H-mole were suspected 50 days after dilatation and curettage due to persistent vaginal bleeding with an
elevated β-hCG level of 161 mIU/mL. Kim et al. (19) reported an elevated β-hCG level of 2,470 mIU/mL in a case with suspected gestational
trophoblastic disease associated with arteriovenous malformation, which was detected from imaging studies that were carried out due to 2
weeks of vaginal bleeding. Also, the case reported by Roh et al. (20) was different in that there was massive acute bleeding immediately
after dilatation and curettage. This is the first case report of placenta increta found in a woman with a normal β-hCG level who developed
hemoperitoneum 60 days after dilatation and curettage. Our case suggests that in women at risk for invasive placentation who have had recent
spontaneous or therapeutic abortion and present with abnormal uterine bleeding or intraperitoneal bleeding, placenta increta should be
considered. Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis. The CT demonstrates a vascular mass on the left uterine cornual portion.
Histologic section of the uterine mass (A). In the superficial and deep myometrium, there were multifocal aggregates of intermediate
trophoblasts and chorionic villi surrounded by a large amount of fibrin (H&E, ×40). (B) There was no definite evidence of decidua basalis in
the junction of placenta and myometrium (H&E, ×200).
