Pancreatic panniculitis is a rare disease in which necrosis of fat in the panniculus and other distant foci occurs in the setting of
pancreatic diseases; these diseases include acute and chronic pancreatitis, pancreatic carcinoma, pseudocyst, and other pancreatic diseases.
This malady is manifested as tender erythematous nodules on the legs, buttock, or trunk. Histopathologically, it shows the pathognomonic
findings of focal subcutaneous fat necrosis and ghost-like anucleated cells with a thick shadowy wall. We herein report a case of fatal
pancreatic panniculitis that was associated with acute pancreatitis in a 50-yr-old man. He presented with a 3-week history of multiple
tender skin nodules, abdominal pain and distension. Laboratory and radiologic findings revealed acute pancreatitis, and skin biopsy showed
pancreatic panniculitis. Despite intensive medical care, he died of multi-organ failure 3 weeks after presentation. The association of
pancreatic disease with fat necrosis at distant foci was first described by Chiari in 1883 (1). The most common pancreatic disorders
associated with pancreatic panniculitis are acute or chronic pancreatitis, especially the alcohol-related types, and pancreatic carcinoma.
Other pancreatic disorders have been infrequently reported to be associated with pancreatic panniculitis, and these include post-traumatic
pancreatitis, pancreatic pseudocyst, pancreas divisum, and hemophagocytic syndrome (2). To the best of our knowledge, only three cases of
pancreatic panniculitis have been reported in the Korean literature. One case was associated with pancreatic adenocarcinoma, and the other
two were associated with acute and chronic pancreatitis, respectively (1, 3, 4). We report here on a case of pancreatic panniculitis
associated with acute pancreatitis that had a fatal outcome. Physicians should be aware of this disease entity because this rare cutaneous
manifestation may be associated with major morbidity and significant mortality. A 50-yr-old man with a history of alcohol abuse presented
with increasing fatigue, generalized weakness, decreased appetite, and abdominal distension and discomfort for the past 2 weeks. He was
admitted to the Department of Internal Medicine under the impression of acute pancreatitis, and he was referred to the Department of
Dermatology for the multiple painful subcutaneous nodules on his legs, which had suddenly developed 3 weeks before (Fig. 1). On admission,
his hemoglobin value was 11.4 g/dL (reference range: 13-18 g/dL), the total count of white blood cells was 31,300/µL (reference range:
4,000-10,000/µL) with 90.7% segment neutrophils, but the coagulation profiles and platelet counts were normal. The serum amylase was 1,909
U/L (reference range: 20-120 U/L), and the lipase was 2,306 U/L (reference range: 5-51 U/L). Liver function testing revealed an aspartate
aminotrans terase level of 104 U/L (reference range: 13-40 U/L), an alanine aminotransferase level of 24 U/L (reference range: 7-40 U/L),
and a lactate dehydrogenase level of 665 U/L (reference range: 200-400 U/L). The fasting glucose level was 133.9 mg/dL (reference range of
70-110 mg/dL) and the electrolytes were unbalanced. The calcium level was 7 mg/dL (reference range: 8.6-10 mg/dL), and the sodium level was
125 mEq/L (reference range: 136-145 mEq/L). The blood urea nitrogen and creatinine were 40.1 mg/dL and 2.1 mg/dL, respectively. After 48 hr,
the blood urea nitrogen was increased to 62.7 mg/dL after intravenous fluid administration. As his leukocytosis, elevated serum LDH at
admission, and hypocalcemia, hypoalbuminemia, increase in blood urea nitrogen during initial 48 hr were poor prognostic factors in Ranson
criteria, increased risk of complications was predicted. The chest radiograpy showed mild pleural effusion. On the abdominal computed
tomography scan and magnetic resonance (MR) imaging taken on the second day of admission, a swollen pancreas with an dilated pancreatic
duct, a loculated fluid collection in the left anterior perirenal space, multiple hepatic cysts, and massive ascites were noted (Fig. 2). On
abdominal paracentesis, the amylase level was 14,696 U/L, the serum-ascites albumin gradient was calculated to be 1.07, and there was no
evidence of malignancy. A skin biopsy performed on the 4th day of admission from the nodule on the left lower leg showed a diffuse
subcutaneous fat necrosis and ghost-like cells with thick shadowy walls and no nuclei. There was a fine granular basophilic material
deposited within and around the necrotic fat cells (Fig. 3). These findings were consistent with pancreatic panniculitis. After 10 days of
intensive medical care for the pancreatic disease, the patient's condition began to worsen; he and his family began to refuse any further
treatment. Despite a strong warning by physicians, he insisted on the discharge and died at home 1 week later. The pathogenesis of
pancreatic panniculitis is still unknown, but the released pancreatic enzymes such as trypsin may increase the permeability of the
microcirculation. Lipase or amylase is then involved in the process of fat degradation, which results in the liberation of free fatty acids
that combine with calcium to form soap (2). Although elevation of the pancreatic enzymes is common in pancreatitis patients, pancreatic
panniculitis is a very rare malady. Mullin et al. (5) identified only one case in a retrospective review of 893 patients who had suffered
with pancreatic disease from various causes. Furthermore, well documented cases of fat necrosis with normal serum lipase levels have also
been described (6). These reports, suggest that there would be some other factors that allow the pancreatic enzymes to escape from the
circulation and act on the subcutaneous fat. Zellman (7) suggested that some damage to the blood vessels via inflammation, edema, or altered
immunity may act as the initiating factor. As for the two cases in the Korean literature, one case was associated with chronic pancreatisis,
in which the cutaneous lesions had occurred 3 months later than the other systemic symptoms, and they involuted as the underlying
pancreatitis was ameliorated (4). The other case was associated with acute pancreatitis with pancreas divisum, in which his skin lesions had
appeared 2-3 days after his admission due to acute pancreatitis; the skin lesions also resolved as the underlying pancratitis subsided with
conservative treatment (1). On the contrary, in our patient, the skin lesions preceded the other systemic symptoms. Although the underlying
pancreatic pathologic conditions can vary, the clinical features of pancreatic panniculitis are similar. The legs were the most commonly
affected area, but the lesions can also occur on the arms, thighs, and trunk. The lesions usually began as erythematous or red-brown
subcutaneous nodules with a tendency to show central softening. In the mild form, they may involute within weeks and leave an atrophic
hyperpigmented scar. If the fat necrosis is severe, individual nodules may break down and extrude necrotic material (8). Although patients
with other panniculitides such as erythema nodosum, erythema induratum, lupus panniculitis, Weber-Christian pannicultitis, or alpha-1
antitrypsin deficiency-associated panniculitis can have similar clinical lesions, the diagnosis of pancreatic panniculitis is suggested by
the presence of pancreatic disease and this is confirmed relatively clearly by the characteristic histopathologic findings. The
pathognomonic findings are collections of 'ghost cells' and anucleated adipocytes containing intracytoplasmic fine basophilic granular
material from the saponification of fat. The resistance of the fat cell membrane to lipase produces the shadowy walls and the fatty acids
combine with calcium to form calcium soap (10). Medical and surgical treatments of the underlying pancreatic disease are the primary
therapeutic approaches. Sometimes conservative care can ameliorate the pancreatitis, and this then results in the resolution of the skin
lesions. In isolated cases, surgical correction of anatomic ductal anomaly or pancreatic pseudocyst, or the removal of gallstones has
resulted in complete resolution (8). However, disseminated fat necrosis is associated with major morbidity and mortality. In a review of 27
patients with pancreatic panniculitis, all 8 patients with pancreatic carcinoma and 42% of the 19 patients with pancreatitis died of their
disease, as was seen in our case (9). Pancreatic panniculitis is a pathognomic finding of pancreatic disease, and as in our case, the
cutaneous lesions may precede the usual manifestations of underlying pancreatic disease by several weeks to months (11). Therefore,
clinicians should be aware that panniculitis may herald serious pancreatic disease. Multiple erythematous to brownish nodules are shown on
both lower legs. (A) Contrast-enhanced computed tomography showing an edematous pancreas with dilated pancreatic duct. (B) Loculated fluid
at left anterior perirenal space with massive ascites was noted (arrow). (A) Diffuse fat necrosis and fine granular basophilic material
deposited in the subcutis. (B) Ghost-like fat cells with thick shadowy walls and no nuclei are noted in the necrotic area (Hematoxylin-eosin
stain, A: ×40, B: ×200).
