Benign tumors are a rare cause of gastrointestinal hemorrhage of which angioleiomyomas constitute a very small minority. They have been
reported in literature to present with volvulus, bleeding or intussusceptions. An interesting case of a patient presenting with
gastrointestinal bleeding from an underlying angioleiomyoma is discussed along with its management options. Angioleiomyoma though rare can
be managed successfully by surgical and/or minimally invasive endovascular procedures. Angioleiomyoma of the small bowel is an extremely
rare benign tumor. This is the first reported case in English literature, where a patient presenting with gastrointestinal bleeding had an
underlying angioleiomyoma. A 58-year-old woman presented with a one-day history of malena and light-headedness. She did not have any known
co morbidities. Apart from being anaemic she was haemodynamically stable and her general physical and abdominal examination unremarkable.
Hematological examination revealed low hemoglobin levels of 7.3 g/dl with normal clotting profile. After initial resuscitation, an
esophagogastroduodenoscopy (OGD) was performed which excluded any cause of upper gastrointestinal bleed. This was followed by colonoscopy,
which although did confirm the presence of blood within the gastrointestinal tract but did not localize the site of bleeding. However, the
patient's hemoglobin level continued to fall over the next two days, which was treated with a transfusion of six units of packed red cell.
Subsequently, she underwent selective superior mesenteric angiography, which demonstrated a large hyper vascular mass with an extensive
contrast blush, near the terminal ileum in the right iliac fossa (Figure 1). It was supplied by a large feeding artery and drained via a
solitary large vein into the portal venous system (Figure 2, 3). No extravasation of contrast was seen suggesting that the lesion was not
actively bleeding at the time of the study. Inferior mesenteric and coeliac axis angiography revealed no synchronous lesion or evidence of
any vascular deposit in the liver. Selective superior mesenteric artery angiogram showing large feeding artery to a mass in the right iliac
fossa with extensive vascular blush. Venous phase of selective superior mesenteric artery angiogram showing large draining vein from the
mass. Communication of the draining vein into the portal venous system. She thereafter underwent laparotomy through midline incision, which
identified vascular solid tumor along the anti-mesenteric border of the ileum about 30 cm from the ileo-caecal junction, measuring 7 × 7 cm
(Figure 4). A segmental small bowel resection was performed, and intestinal continuity established with an end-to-end small bowel
anastomosis. The patient had an unremarkable postoperative recovery; her hematocrit remained stable and she was discharged from the hospital
on the 7th postoperative day. Excised tumor, measuring approximately 70 × 65 × 50 mm. The histopathology of the resected tumor showed a
submucosal tumor compressing the mucosal lining causing ulceration. Sectional analysis of the tumour showed thick bands of muscle with
vascular spongy stroma. Microscopic examination (Figure 5) showed thick bands of smooth muscle staining positive for smooth muscle antigens
using immunochemistry. Immunochemistry was negative for gastrointestinal stromal tumors (C-Kit antigens) and sarcomas. Interspersed between
these muscle fibers were a variety of vascular channels ranging in size from dilated capillaries to a small and medium sized arteries and
veins (Figure 4). The smooth muscle appeared to arise from the muscularis propria of the small bowel. There was no significant mitotic
activity in the tumor and no evidence of tumor necrosis. The tumor was well circumscribed with clear excision margins. All these findings
were consistent with the diagnosis of angioleiomyoma. Histology of the angioleiomyoma with H&E staining. Benign tumors are a rare cause of
gastrointestinal hemorrhage, being responsible for fewer than 1% of all cases and can present with conditions like volvulus, bleeding,
obstruction and/or intussusceptions. Leiomyomas constitute a fraction of these benign lesions. They tend to occur mostly in the jejunum
(44%) followed by ileum (37%) and duodenum (19%). Ezinger distinguished, clinically and pathologically, three main groups of leiomyomas,
namely: superficial leiomyomas, vascular leiomyomas or angioleiomyomas and deep leiomyomas. Vascular leiomyomas are well-defined benign
smooth muscle tumors with prominent abnormal thick walled venous channels . The presence of vascular leiomyomas in the gastrointestinal
tract is extremely rare but a few cases have been reported where they presented as volvulus , peritonitis and perforation of the intestinal
tract . To the best of our knowledge this is the first English language case report where angioleiomyoma has presented primarily with
intestinal bleeding. As the investigation for GI bleeding normally involves OGD and/or colonoscopy, these lesions are difficult to localize
and this was our experience. Cross sectional imaging with CT or MRI can be used to detect mass lesions and delineate the anatomical extent.
Mesenteric angiography is thus the investigation of choice in cases where OGD and colonoscopy do not reveal the source of bleeding. However
definitive diagnosis is histological. Four histological subtypes of angioleiomyomas have been described namely: • Capillary or solid
angioleiomyomas having a rich smooth muscle cell stratification surrounding and holding a few thin vascular channels, • Venous
angioleiomyomas characterized by more numerous and thicker vascular channels than found in capillary angioleiomyomas, • Cavernous
angioleiomyomas having widened vascular channels surrounded by a thin layer of smooth muscle cells, • Combined capillary and venous
angioleiomyomas Our patient had a mixed vascular angioleiomyomas with positive immunohistochemical staining with Desmin for smooth muscle
cells. However, staining with Desmin is not necessary for such tumors as suggested by Hasegawa , Lundgren and Matsuyama . This
characteristic is attributable to the presence of aberrant smooth muscle cells. According to Matsuyama and colleagues, expression of desmin
in vascular smooth muscle cells also varies according to the anatomical site, the layer in the vascular wall, the kind or the size of the
blood vessel, and the cellular condition such as in contractile or synthetic states . One peculiar feature of the tumor found in our patient
was its large size measuring 7 × 7 cm. Vascular leiomyomas are usually < 2 cm although in exceptional cases they can reach large sizes
because they are painless and therefore only diagnosed at a late stage. The operative management is usually surgical involving resection of
the affected bowel segment with end-to-end anastomosis as was done in our patient. Embolization of the feeding vessel can be performed as
suggested by Cho and colleagues to control exsanguination. Angioleiomyoma though rare can be managed successfully by surgical and/or
minimally invasive endovascular procedures. The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. US has been involved in the
conception and design of the case report ST, JV, AJ, have been involved in the acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of data,
drafting the manuscript, revising it critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved final manuscript. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient. I am thankful to Mr. Tim Baynes, Specialist radiology nurse practitioner, for the final
proof reading of this manuscript.
