This paper reports a case of Munchausen syndrome in a pediatric patient. An 11-year-old girl presented with the complaint of clear fluid
otorrhea. She underwent numerous investigations with deception of the physicians. The literature with respect to Munchausen syndrome in the
pediatric patient is reviewed. Diagnosis of Munchausen syndrome is difficult especially during the initial assessment, although suspicion
might be aroused by inconsistencies in the patient’s history and discrepancies between signs and symptoms. Feigned illness with the goal of
receiving medical treatment for its own sake is known as Munchausen’s syndrome. The syndrome is named after Baron Hieronymous Karl Friedrich
von Munchausen (1720–1791) by Asher in 1951 . Munchausen’s syndrome is characterized by a self-inflicted lesion or as a legitimate disease.
These patients have dramatic, but non-existent symptoms and demand radical treatment. The case represents an example of Munchausen syndrome
in a pediatric patient. An 11 year-old girl presented to a peripheral otolaryngology clinic with a 3 month history of clear discharge from
her right ear. The discharge was odorless, occasionally containing bubbles, unrelated to her activities and meals. She had no history of
trauma, ear surgery, ear infection, meningitis, parotid gland infection or pain. The discharge occured everyday, in an amount of 5–6 cc. She
was hospitalized in another clinic for 15 days. In this period no evidence of discharge was observed. Clinical examination was normal.
Computerized tomogram of the temporal bones, technetium scan of parotid glands, sialographic imagings were normal. With these findings she
was referred to our center for further opinion. Her physical examination and audiologic tests were completely normal. We repeated the
computed tomography with milimetric slides to rule out cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and salivary fistula. It did not reveal any apparent
fracture line or any abnormal communication; however, opacification of the right parotid gland and Stensen duct due to lipiodol sialography
was demonstrated. She was living with her distant relatives and her parents were in her home city. Her father was schizophrenic and her
mother was paraplegic. The patient’s relatives brought 3–4 tubes filled with 3–4 cc of a clear fluid discharge. Analysis of this fluid was
negative for β-2 transferrin, a biochemical marker of perilymphatic or CSF leakage. Amylase level was 12 (30–250). We decided to hospitalize
her to observe closely. A plastic bag was applied to her right ear. The following day, she attempted to escape and confessed that she was
filling water with spit in it to her right ear canal. At this point the patient’s past medical and family history was carefully reviewed. It
revealed that the patient had taken a depression therapy. It seemed to be impossible that an 11-year-old child would have the medical
sophistication to simulate CSF or salivary fistula. We wondered if the patient’s relatives had either been assisting the patient or were
aware of her behavior which was refused by them. The suspicion of their involvement was never proven. The patient was referred to
psychiatric consultation. Munchausen’s syndrome is a disorder characterized by a triad of features: simulated illness, pathological lying
and wandering hospital to hospital. The patient might simulate symptoms, aggravate a pre-existing illness or even self-induce disease.
Munchausen’s syndrome must be differentiated from the other factitious disorders. In contrast to those with the conversion disorder,
patients with Munchausen’s syndrome voluntarily induce factitious symptoms as well as physical findings. Unlike malingerers, patients with
Munchausen’s syndrome have no apparent secondary gain beyond the medical procedure itself. These patients calmly submit to even painful
medical procedures. Motives for adopting the sick role are often unclear, with the patients themselves at a loss to explain their actions. A
review of their family and personal background might reveal a history of childhood split up, emotional neglect or abuse. Recent life
experiences could also be important, with factitious behavior allowing an escape from the reality of their current situation. In the present
case, the attitude of the patient was attributed to a subconcious desire to escape from her problems by psychiatrists. Only two cases of
Munchausen syndrome have been reported in pediatric group. One of them was a 10-year-old boy with factitious passage of renal stones and the
other was a 13-year-old boy presented with the complaint of otalgia and simulation of CSF leak . Another clinical entity that must be
separated is Munchausen’s syndrome by proxy (MSBP). It was first described by Meadow in 1977 . It is a disorder in which the fictitious
illness is invented by another person. In MSBP, the child’s carer, usually the mother fabricates illness in the child, either by inducing
physical signs of illness or by deliberately misleading the physician into believing the child is ill. The victims are usually aged less
than 6 years. In the literature, numerous cases of parents fabricating or producing illnesses in children, often resulting in death were
reported [5, 6]. The first goal of treatment is reduction of potentially harmful investigations and procedures, but a therapeutic approach
should be adopted. Involvement of a psychiatrist with the offer of continuing support might be helpful. After diagnosis and confrontation
the patient will show some improvement with a reduction in factitious behavior, even though they continue to deny their role in creation of
the symptoms, and refuse psychiatric care.
