Doppler echocardiography is useful in the initial evaluation and long-term follow-up of patients with pulmonary artery hypertension.
Aerosolised iloprost has been shown to reduce pulmonary pressure immediately after inhalation. We report the echocardiographic findings in a
patient with severe pulmonary hypertension, before and after the inhalation of aerosolized iloprost. These findings illustrate the acute
influence of iloprost in right and left ventricular hemodynamics and morphology. These findings were reproduced in subsequent
echocardiographic evaluations. Doppler echocardiography is useful in the initial evaluation and long-term follow-up of patients with
pulmonary arterial hypertension . A 21-year-old woman diagnosed with idiopathic pulmonary hypertension since she was eleven, responsive to
calcium channel blockers, was referred for Cardiology consultation at 23 weeks pregnancy. She was on nifedipine and fraxiparine and Doppler
echocardiography revealed a dilated and hypertrophied right ventricle and a peak tricuspid regurgitant jet velocity of 5.3 ms-1 with
estimated right ventricular systolic pressure (RVSP) of 122 mmHg. She was then started on 5.0 μg of nebulized iloprost six times per day. At
the 29th week of pregnancy Doppler echocardiography was repeated before and immediately after a single dose of 5 μg of iloprost.
Postinhalation acute assessment revealed not only a remarkable reduction in RVSP but also an impressive change in cardiac morphology as is
evident from figures 1, 2 and 3 and from two-dimensional and three-dimensional echocardiography video clips (see Additional files 1, 2, 3
and 4). These findings were reproduced in subsequent echocardiographic evaluations and illustrate the acute hemodynamic effects of iloprost
nebulization in a patient with severe pulmonary hypertension. Transthoracic echocardiogram showing left ventricle long and short axis views
before iloprost nebulization. This echocardiography reveals the severe right ventricular dilatation and hypertrophy. As the right ventricle
undergoes dilation and hypertrophy, its crescentic shape is lost and the septum shifts leftward compressing the left ventricle. This septum
shift leads to a proportional reduction in left ventricular dimension and impaired left ventricular systolic performance. Transthoracic
echocardiogram showing left ventricle long and short axis views after iloprost nebulization. In the echocardiographic evaluation after
iloprost administration we can detect a reduction in right ventricular dimension, with a proportional increase in left ventricular dimension
and performance. The correction of the septal shift secondary to right ventricular overload also contributes to a smaller right ventricle
and expanded left ventricle. M-mode tracing at the left ventricular level before (left) and after (right) iloprost nebulization. On the left
hand side this short axis M-mode tracing shows the diastolic intraventricular septal shifting toward the left ventricle, leading to its
marked underfilling. On the right hand side of the figure we can observe the correction of the septal shift after iloprost nebulization. The
findings that we describe showed the potential utility of echocardiography in the evaluation of the acute effects of drugs used in the
treatment of pulmonary arterial hypertension. Two-dimensional parasternal view before iloprost inhalation. Two-dimensional parasternal long
and short axis views before iloprost inhalation showing a small left ventricle with increased eccentricity index. Click here for file Two-
dimensional parasternal view after iloprost inhalation. Two-dimensional parasternal long and short axis views after iloprost inhalation
showing near normal morphology of both ventricles. Click here for file Three-dimensional parasternal view before iloprost inhalation. Three-
dimensional parasternal long axis view before iloprost inhalation showing a small left ventricle with increased eccentricity index. Click
here for file Three-dimensional parasternal view after iloprost inhalation. Three-dimensional parasternal long axis view after iloprost
inhalation showing near normal morphology of both ventricles. Click here for file Written informed consent was obtained for publication from
the patient.
