Aorta Coarctation (AC) is uncommon condition that in most adult patients is asymptomatic. Diagnosis of AC is made during routine physical
examination by detection of Blood Pressure (BP) difference between arm and leg. To describe a novel renal artery Doppler flow pattern
pathognomonic of aortic coarctation. We enrolled 4 consecutive patients referred to renal artery Doppler Ultrasonography (DU) for diagnostic
work-up of secondary arterial hypertension. All met the following inclusion criteria: 1) arterial hypertension at age <30 years; 2) referred
for renal DU to rule out renovascular hypertension. We found in all 4 patients (age range 10 to 27 years) a bilateral "parvus-tardus" renal
Doppler flow pattern. In all, echocardiographic and angiographic work-ups showed aortic coarctation. Careful physical examination should be
performed in all hypertensive patients. Furthermore, the suspicion of AC can be raised by a bilateral renal arteries "parvus-tardus" Doppler
flow pattern in young hypertensive patients screened for secondary hypertension. Aortic Coarctation (AC) is a congenital malformation of the
aorta accounting for 6–8% of congenital cardiovascular disease . This disease should be diagnosed and treated early in life, because
untreated AC develops systemic hypertension and subsequent morbidity and mortality due to cardiovascular diseases . Although suspicion of AC
raises during routine physical examination by detecting Blood Pressure (BP) difference between arm and leg , AC can be presented during
adulthood with isolated or resistant hypertension and without significant difference in BP between the upper and lower extremities . Some of
such patients are referring to nephrologists to evaluate their secondary hypertension . We recently encountered four patients who were
referred to excluding the renovascular hypertension. Parvus-tardus waveform was demonstrated in Doppler Ultrasonography (DU) study without
evidence of Renal Artery Stenosis (RAS). So in such cases, the presence of a parvus-tardus pattern in both renal arteries on DU should
suggest the diagnosis of AC or aortic valve stenosis, that AC diagnosis was made at last by further evaluation for our cases. During April
2006 – September 2007, four consecutive patients were recruited for diagnostic work-up of secondary arterial hypertension by renal artery
DU. Study participants met the following inclusion criteria: 1) arterial hypertension at age <30 years; 2) referred for renal Doppler to
rule out secondary hypertension. DU was performed by Hitachi model EUB 525 (Hitachi Medical Corp, Tokyo, Japan) using convex probe 3.5-5
MHz. In one patient, a 10-year-old female, Computed Tomography (CT) angiography was performed on suspition to abdominal AC by multislice
spiral CT (Siemens, 64 slice, Germany), that was applied automatically in base of children protocol in agreemnet with ALARA. A 21-year-old
male with six-month history of tacking beta blocker. He was referred by a general practitioner for investigation of his secondary
hypertension. This suspicion arises from negative family history and risk factor, and development of resistant hypertension. During physical
examination, BP was 160/100 mmHg in his left brachial. According to these findings and the assumption of RAS, DU evaluation of renal
arteries was recommended. During Doppler examination, parvus-tardus pattern was demonstrated in both renal arteries (Fig. 1A, B) and
extention to aorta (Fig 2), but no evidance compatible with renal artries stenosis was detected. Trans-Esophageal Echocardiography (TEE)
revealed a stenotic region about 2 cm length in the thoracic aorta distal to the origination of left subclavicular artery (Fig. 3A, B).
After diagnosis, there was a 60 mmHg differences between upper (brachial) and lower (popliteal) extremities systolic BP. Finally, his BP
normalized after successful surgery procedure. (A) Parvus-tardus pattern in left renal artery. (B) Similar parvus-tardus pattern is
demonstrated in right renal artery. Extention of parvus-tardus waveform to abdominal aorta. (A) Evaluation by TEE revealed aortic
caorctation. (B) Recorded waveforms by cardiologist at post aorta coarctation locations. A 27-year-old man was referred by nephrologists for
evaluation of secondary hypertension. He did not report a previous history of abdominal surgery but the recent ultrasonographic study showed
only one kidney in right hand side, so congenital agenesis of left kidney was suggested for him. Despite the parvus-tardus waveform pattern
in intra-renal arteries through DU study, renal artery DU findings did not disclose any evidence of stenosis. This pattern continued along
the renal artery to aorta which suggested an aortic obstruction. Consequently an aortic stenosis, distal to the origination of left
subclavian artery, was reported using echocardiography and angiography. Physical examination also revealed 70 mmHg systolic BP difference
between upper and lower limbs. A 10-year-old female was referred by an urologist to work up her hypertension. Her small size right kidney
was removed four months prior to perform DU on the assumption of hypertension. On the admission day, her brachial BP was 190/90 mmHg. In DU
study, a parvus-tardus pattern was revealed in left kidney without any evidence of stenosis and which extended to aorta. During examination
of abdominal aorta, stenotic region was detected just after emergence of celiac artery from aorta. According to this Doppler findings, for
determination of involved region and confirmation of diagnosis, CT angiography was performed that demonstrated a 20.3 mm aortic stenosis
zone that was started just after the emergence of celiac artery. Both left renal artery and inferior mesenteric artery originated from the
stenotic region. However, the origin of the left renal artery had a 3.7 mm diameter without any stenosis through its length. After makeing
diagnosis, a significant difference (80 mmHg) was found between brachial and popliteal systolic BP. Following surgical treatment, the
stenotic region in aorta was removed and left renal artery was reinserted to aorto by dacron graft. A 17-year-old female who was referred by
a neurologist because of sever headache and hypertension (brachial BP: 180/110 mmHg) to follow for secondary hypertension. Bilateral parvus-
tardus waveform was demonstrated by sonologist in renal arteries DU study. The same pattern was also revealed in DU study of abdominal
aorta. Additional evaluation by TEE showed an estimated 2 cm length and 0.2 cm diameter AC located distal to the origin of left
subclavicular artery. After definitive diagnosis, her popliteal BP was 100/70 mmHg. Following surgical intervention, BP returned to normal
range. For all cases, suspicion of aortic stenosis was made by DU rather than physical examination. Thereafter, we found that the hallmarks
of significant AC were easily overlooked in all four cases by physicians. A comprehensive physical examination at the first visit, brachial
systolic BP 10 mmHg greater than popliteal artery BP and radio-femoral pulse delay would have provided sufficient finding to raise the
suspicion of AC, so that medical guidelines recommended a comprehensive medical history and physical examination. The results of this study
are consistent with Cuspidi et al. study that decision making following BP measurement limited to only one arm could lead to wrong
diagnosis. The second important aspect is concerning the diagnostic value of renal DU in detecting AC. The majority of sonologists
introduced the dampened waveform pattern known as parvus-tardus . This pattern mostly detected through on indirect assessment of arterial
region located after stenosis (Fig. 4A) . Tardus means slow and late and parvus means small and little. Tardus refers to the facts that
systolic acceleration of the waveform is slowed, with consequent increase in time to reach the systolic peak. Parvus refers to the fact that
the systolic peak is of low height, indicating slowed velocity. Poststenotic systolic peak are rounded with lengthened systolic rise time
(or slow systolic acceleration time – the time in seconds from the onset of the systolic to peak systole), slower than 0.07 s. the
acceleration index (the slope of systolic upstroke) is decreased to lesser than 3 m/s2 . Normal and parvus-tardus waveforms were
demonstrated in figure 4B. As shown, type A and B are normal patterns, whereas type C shows three schematic forms of parvus-tardus pattern.
(A) Schematic view of different waveforms was showed according to stenosis location (From third edition of Dignostic Ultrasound by Rumak C.
M, et al.). (B) Various types of Doppler waveforms. Type A and B are normal types, but type C patterns called parvus-tardus (From second
edition of Dignostic Ultrasound by Rumak C. M, et al.). Type C waves show a significant stenosis from aorta to renal segmental arteries.
Only one side involvement reveals that side renal artery stenosis. In case of parvus-tardus pattern in both side, abdominal aorta waveforms
need to assessed. Absence of this pattern at abdominal aorta in presence of renal arteries parvus-tardus waveform demonstrates bilateral
renal arteries stenosis, however, extension of this pattern to aorta can also be seen in cases of aorta stenosis, left-sided heart failure
and left ventricular outflow obstruction such as aortic valve stenosis . Therefore, although it would be really convenient to simply
evaluate the flow changes in the kidneys and thereby making diagnosis of renal artery stenosis without the arduous task of finding and
directly assessment of the renal arteries, but parvus-tardus presence in renal artery may be suggests the other deferential diagnosis, as
described above. Thus, we need to determine this pattern in both sides and confirm by direct assessment . For cases reported here, spectral
waveform analysis of the renal arteries and abdominal aorta revealed decreased flow, consistent with a parvus-tardus pattern. The abdominal
aortic waveform helped us to rule out bilateral renal artery stenosis and suggested a proximal stenosis in the aorta. These DU findings do
not define the location of stenosis other than proximal to the evaluated artery but it could be due to a stenosis more proximal to the renal
arteries, as shown in our four cases. This should be considered when there is a bilateral intrarenal parvus-tardus arterial wave pattern,
particularly when this pattern extends through the renal arteries and aorta . These latter two components could help diagnosis, particularly
in people with single kidney. The presence of a bilateral parvus-tardus waveform pattern or unilateral in a single kidney patient always
should led us to think more proximal, so that, valvular stenosis can role out and AC diagnosed definitely by echocardiography or CT
angiography. In our patients, diagnosis of aortic forestation was made using ultrasonography rather than physical examination. Described
diagnostic process is reflecting a common negligence of different physicians involving in management of hypertension, but diagnosis of AC by
DU is vigilance of sonologist. So in patients who referred for Doppler evalaution on suspision of renovascular hypretension, in case of
presence of bilateral parvus-tardus pattern without direct signs of stenosis, AC should be considered as differential diagnosis. AC – Aortic
coarctation ALARA – As low as reasonably achievable BP – Blood pressure CT – Computed tomography DU – Doppler ultrasonography RAS – Renal
artery stenosis TEE – Trans-esophageal echocardiography The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. MKT conceived the
paper, and carried out the Doppler ultrasound. NN followed up the patients, drafted and revised the manuscript. MRA is nephrologist who one
of patients was under care of him. JE is nephrologist who two patients were under care of him. HN is nephrologist who one of patients was
under care of him. FGS performed Doppler ultrasonographic evaluation. MT performed trans-oesophageal echocardiography. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We are most grateful to the patients participating in these case reports. Written informed consent was also
obtained for publication from the patients and/or their relatives.
