To the Editor: The genus Acetobacter belongs to the group of acetic acid bacteria that oxidize alcohols or sugars incompletely, leading to
the accumulation of acetic acid. Acetic acid bacteria are of great industrial interest because of their use to produce vinegar from spirits,
wine, beer, and cider in temperate regions of Europe, the Americas, and Japan. Several species seem to be associated with tropical climates.
In Southeast Asia, Acetobacter spp. have been found in fermented foods such as tea fungus beverage, palm vinegar, palm wine, nata de coco,
and pickles (1). A. cibinongensis is mainly found in tropical fruits and flowers (2). We describe a case of human infection with a member of
the genus Acetobacter. The patient was an HIV-seronegative, 40-year-old man who for 1 year had been receiving chronic hemodialysis for end-
stage renal failure. He had a history of intravenous drug use, and continued use was suspected. In February 2005, when admitted for a
routine dialysis session, he had fever (38°C) and bronchitis and was receiving empiric treatment with amoxicillin (2 g/day). His respiratory
status improved slightly, but fever persisted after 48 hours. On his right forearm, he had a large inflammatory skin lesion that followed
the course of an arteriovenous fistula, suggestive of staphylococcal infection. Treatment was switched to pristinamycin (2 g/day for 4
days). The patient’s leukocyte count was within normal limits, but his C-reactive protein level was elevated (50 mg/L). Two blood samples
were drawn, 1 through a subclavian catheter implanted in 2004 and the other through the arteriovenous fistula. After 4 days, a gram-variable
polymorphic rod, named nîmes373, grew from both aerobic culture vials and yielded very small polymorphic colonies on Columbia sheep blood
and blood-chocolate agar plates (Bio-Rad, Marnes-la-Coquette, France). Enhanced growth was observed on Legionella agar (AES Chemunex, Bruz,
France) and on R2A agar plates (BD-BBL, Le Pont de Claix, France). Biotyping of this catalase-positive, oxidase-negative rod with API 20NE
and API 20E strips (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etiole, France) and with the ID-GNB card system on a VITEK 2 apparatus (bioMérieux) did not identify
the bacterium. Positive reactions were obtained for acetoin production and citrate assimilation. Antimicrobial drug–susceptibility pattern
could not be validated owing to the lack of interassay reproducibility. Pristinamycin was replaced by broad-spectrum antimicrobial therapy
consisting of cefazolin (1 g every 48 hours) and tobramycin (225 mg after each hemodialysis session). After 3 courses of this regimen,
treatment was changed to amoxicillin (2 g/day, plus 1 g after each dialysis session) for 4 weeks. The local inflammation and fever subsided,
the C-reactive protein level returned to normal, and the patient’s clinical status improved with no recurrence of infection. A 1389-bp 16S
rDNA sequence was obtained for strain nîmes373, as described (3). The sequence matched those of A. cibinongensis deposited in the GenBank
database (>99.6% identity). The 16S rDNA-based phylogeny confirmed the affiliation of strain nîmes373 to the species A. cibinongensis in the
family Acetobacteraceae (Figure). The growth of nîmes373 on 0.7% calcium carbonate agar plates with 7% ethanol (pH 3.5) cleared calcium
carbonate. This indicated tolerance of the isolate to acidic conditions and ability to produce organic acids from alcohol, thereby proving
its affiliation to the acetic acid bacteria group. 16S rDNA maximum-likelihood phylogenetic tree showing the relationships of the isolate
nîmes373 with 15 species of the genus Acetobacter and 6 strains representative of the 6 other genera of acetic acid bacteria in the Alpha
Proteobacteria. Sequences of Alpha, Beta, and Gamma Proteobacteria of clinical relevance were also included in the tree. Staphylococcus
aureus (Firmicutes) 16S rDNA was used as an outgroup. The 16S rDNA sequences used to reconstruct this tree were obtained from the GenBank
database, and their accession numbers are indicated in brackets. The tree was reconstructed using DNAML from the PHYLIP package v. 3.6.6, on
the basis of the F84 (+ gamma distribution + invariant sites) substitution model. The scale bar indicates 0.02 substitutions per nucleotide
position. Numbers given at the nodes represent bootstrap percentages calculated on 100 replicates. Currently, 6 genera of acetic acid
bacteria are recognized in the Alpha Proteobacteria lineage (Figure). Only the main genera (Acetobacter, Gluconacetobacter, Gluconobacter)
are discriminated by analytic methods, such as high-performance liquid chromatography, which are not used in routine microbiology (4). The
tree showed that 16S rDNA sequencing was effective for genus and species identification of acetic acid bacteria (Figure). This method is
also rapid and convenient for use in a medical microbiology laboratory. Bacteria have been used in food processing and have thus been
ingested, live or dead, throughout human history. The safety of lactic and acetic acid bacteria has been confirmed over the years (5).
However, in recent years, lactic acid bacteria belonging to the genera Lactobacillus, Leuconostoc, Pediococcus, or Bifidobacterium have been
isolated from a variety of clinical samples, generally from patients with diabetes, cancer, or immunosuppression (6). As lactic acid
bacteria are part of the normal human flora, their clinical relevance is often difficult to establish. In contrast, acetic acid bacteria
have never been isolated from human flora; recently, the pathogenicity of an unknown bacterium that probably belonged to acetic acid
bacteria, Granulobacter bethesdensis, was found in a patient with lymphadenitis (7). Our patient denied travel outside France and had no
exotic dietary habits. He was probably infected by direct inoculation, possible during intravenous drug injection or after unnoticed injury
when he worked in vineyards. For hemodialysis patients, vascular access infections are a major cause of illness and death (8). Also for
these patients, unusual bacteria with low inherent pathogenicity are increasingly reported as potential causes of bacteremia (9). The
decreased phagocytic activity of neutrophils and monocytes associated with chronic renal failure may increase susceptibility to bacteria
that would otherwise have low pathogenicity (10). This second known report of human infection with acetic acid bacteria should alert
clinicians to the risk for opportunistic infections with these bacteria, which are broadly used in food processing. Suggested citation for
this article: Gouby A, Teyssier C, Vecina F, Marchandin H, Granolleras C, Zorgniotti I, et al. Acetobacter cibinongensis bacteremia in human
. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2007 May [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/13/5/784.htm
