Nutrition is an important determinant of health in persons over the age of 65. Malnutrition in the elderly is often underdiagnosed. Careful
nutritional assessment is necessary for both the successful diagnosis and development of comprehensive treatment plans for malnutrition in
this population. The purpose of this article is to provide clinicians with an educational overview of this essential but often
underecognized aspect of geriatric assessment. This article will review some common issues in nutrition for the elderly in both hospital and
community settings. The complexity and impact of multiple comorbidities on the successful nutritional assessment of elderly patients is
highlighted by using case scenarios to discuss nutritional issues common to elderly patients and nutritional assessment tools. Three case
studies provide some context for an overview of these issues, which include the physiology of aging, weight loss, protein undernutrition,
impaired cognition, malnutrition during hospitalization, screening procedures, and general dietary recommendations for patients 65 years of
age and older. Nutrition is an important determinant of health in elderly patients. Over the past decade, the importance of nutritional
status has been increasingly recognized in a variety of morbid conditions including cancer, heart disease, and dementia in persons over the
age of 65 (Basran and Hogan 2002; Tessier 2002; Keller et al 2003; Takashashi et al 2003; Coombs et al 2004; Van Wymelbeke et al 2004).
Although there is no uniformly accepted definition of malnutrition in the elderly, some common indicators include involuntary weight loss,
abnormal body mass index (BMI)1, specific vitamin deficiencies, and decreased dietary intake (Reuben et al 2004). Malnutrition in older
patients is regularly underdiagnosed (Gariballa 2000), and many physicians have expressed their need for more education regarding
nutritional status in older patients (Mihalynuk et al 2004). For example, health practitioners may not readily recognize weight loss in the
elderly as a morbid symptom of malnutrition because some weight loss may be associated with age-related reductions in muscle mass (Kane et
al 1994). Similarly, elderly patients with concurrent obesity often have protein undernutrition that may be overlooked. Many elderly
patients have an increased risk for malnutrition compared with other adult populations. It is estimated that between 2%–16% of community-
dwelling elderly are nutritionally deficient in protein and calories (Whitehead and Finucane 1997). If mineral and vitamin deficiencies are
included in this estimate, malnutrition in persons over the age of 65 may be as high as 35% (Chandra 2002). The situation for hospitalized
seniors is also disturbing. Studies of hospitalized older patients suggest that between 20%–65% of these patients suffer from nutritional
deficiencies (Elmstahl et al 1997; Sullivan and Lipschultz 1997; Hall et al 2000), and the prevalence of malnutrition in long-term care
facilities is estimated to be between 30%–60% (Rudman and Feller 1989). The elderly also often have multiple comorbidities that contribute
to overall nutritional compromise. Given these complex contributing factors, a careful nutritional assessment is necessary for both the
successful diagnosis of malnutrition in the elderly and the development of appropriate and comprehensive treatment plans. This article
reviews some issues in nutrition common to hospitalized and community-dwelling seniors. Three introductory case studies provide context for
a discussion of the complexity of nutritional assessment of elderly patients, including the physiology of aging, weight loss, protein
undernutrition, cognitive impairment and vascular risk factors, malnutrition during hospitalization, and general dietary recommendations for
patients 65 years of age and older. Each of these sections conclude with key points emphasizing the significance of these issues to a
comprehensive nutritional assessment in the elderly patient. Following this discussion, we will return to the case studies to suggest how
specific clinical strategies can improve the functional status of these patients. The following three case studies highlight common
complications in malnourished elderly patients. Consider these cases as we discuss major principles of nutritional assessment of elderly
patients. Each scenario is comprehensively addressed at the end of the article. Mrs E is a 79-year-old female with Alzheimer-type dementia
living alone in her own home with assistance only for heavy housework. She has maintained her weight for one year while taking a
cholinesterase inhibitor. She sees her family doctor every 6 months. Her most recent check-up revealed a weight reduction of 3 kg from her
previous visit. Patient height 160 cm; weight 48 kg [BMI=19 kg/m2]. Mrs A is an 82-year-old female living alone, independent in her
activities of daily living, and instrumental activities of daily living2. She has a history of non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus
requiring insulin, hypothyroidism, osteoarthritis, hypertension (HTN), ischemic heart disease (IHD), obesity, and gastroesophageal reflux
disorder (GERD). Mrs E recently suffered a hip fracture following a fall for which she underwent a hip-replacement surgery. Her
postoperative course is complicated by a urinary tract infection (UTI) and two episodes of clostridium difficile (C. difficile) colitis. She
was transferred to a geriatric rehabilitation unit. Patient height 160 cm; weight 94 kg [BMI = 37 kg/m2]. Mr T is an 83-year-old male who
has been living in a nursing home for the past 12 months since suffering a right middle cerebral artery stroke. During this time he has had
trouble feeding himself and has lost 10 kg. He has a coccyx ulcer. Patient height 180 cm; weight 55 kg [BMI= 17 kg/m2]. Age-related changes
in body composition result in a slight decline in lean body mass. This decline is usually more dramatic after the age of 60. Consequently,
basal metabolism or energy requirements for the elderly diminish by about 100 kcal/day per decade. For some seniors it may be difficult to
meet daily micronutrient requirements with this reduced caloric intake (Hazzard et al 1994; Morley 1997; Compher et al 1998). To combat
this, a multivitamin supplement for seniors is recommended (Malouf and Grimley 2003; Malouf et al 2003; Clarke et al 2004), especially for
those whose caloric intake is less than 1500 kcal/day (Compher et al 1998). Cardiovascular, pulmonary, and neurological diseases, as well as
osteoarthritis and osteoporosis, may alter energy requirements in the elderly either by increasing energy expenditure or reducing
requirements through muscle loss related to inactivity. Actual energy needs may vary widely from calculated energy needs because of these
factors (Compher et al 1998; Houwing et al 2003). This makes the elderly a heterogeneous group and more difficult to assess nutritionally.
An increase in metabolic requirements has not been associated with pressure ulcers (an unfortunately common condition in hospitalized
elderly patients), although frequently concomitant conditions such as infection might encourage weight loss in older patients as a result of
increased energy expenditure, decreased albumin, and protein undernutrition (Houwing et al 2003; Dambach et al 2005). Alterations in taste
and smell are associated with aging. It is unclear if these normal physiological changes contribute to decreased food intake (Refai and
Seidner 1999; Westenhoefer 2005). Other gastrointestinal changes occur with age and may affect oral intake. For example, greater satiation
after a meal and a delay in gastric emptying has been shown in older people (Morley 1997). Appetite after an overnight fast is often lower
in the elderly. Oral and dental issues, esophageal motility, and atrophic gastritis may also affect nutritional status. The latter may be
implicated in impaired vitamin B12 and iron adsorption (Refai and Seidner 1999). Dental problems (including poorly-fitting dentures) are
often associated with nutrition problems (Morais et al 2003). In addition to gastrointestinal physiological changes, renal function declines
with age. This decreases responsiveness to antidiuretic hormone, which often results in an increased risk for dehydration in older patients.
This impaired thirst drive makes it difficult to replete fluid losses by oral intake alone. Renal impairment may also affect vitamin D
metabolism and result in a reduction of vitamin D levels, which contributes to osteoporosis in the elderly (Compher et al 1998). Nutrition
has an impact on the immune system of patients over the age of 65. The elderly are more likely to die of infections than young adults (High
2001), and malnutrition is related to an increased risk of sepsis in the elderly (Potter et al 1995). Impaired T-cell response, changes in
phagocyte and macrophage function, and reduced delayed-hypersensitivity response contribute to an overall decline in age-related immune
function (High 2001; Chandra 2002). Infections of all kinds increase metabolic rate, making it more difficult for older persons to eat
enough to keep up with elevated energy demands (Sullivan and Lipschultz 1997). Studies have shown that in community-dwelling seniors
randomized to vitamin and mineral supplements or placebo, supplemented seniors exhibited less nutritional deficiencies (High 2001), improved
immune cell function (High 2001; Chandra 2002), fewer sick days, and less antibiotic use than those patients randomized to placebo.
Additionally, improved post-vaccination immune responses have been demonstrated in subjects given nutritional supplements rather than
placebo (Chandra 2002). Potentially, nutritional supplements may have other value in the senior population (Yen 2003), as cost-benefit
analyses have shown that multivitamin supplementation may reduce healthcare expenditures associated with medical care consumption (including
length of stay in hospital, nurse visits, and medication intake) in community-dwelling elderly persons (Arnaud-Battandier et al 2004).
Keypoint. Age-related changes in physiology and immunity may result in a greater need for vitamin and mineral supplementation in the
elderly. There is no consensus on the definition of protein energy malnutrition (PEM) in elderly people (Kane et al 1994). One view
categorizes PEM as an inadequate intake of calories and protein (marasmus-type malnutrition). Another suggests PEM arises from a response to
a biological stress (low-albumin malnutrition). Classically, in marasmus-type malnutrition the patient loses weight by decreasing body fat
and muscle mass while maintaining a normal serum albumin. This type of weight loss is more typical of a senior living either in the
community or in the long-term care setting. Low-albumin malnutrition is more typical of a hospitalized patient such as Mrs A, and results
from an acute infection or inflammatory state. For the purposes of this article, we shall use the term “protein undernutrition” to refer to
deficient protein intake in elderly patients. The metabolic stress of insufficient protein intake, as well as the effects of hepatic, renal,
or bowel disease, will further impair an older patient's overall nutritional state. Protein undernutrition has been associated with an
increased risk of injury in elderly patients (Muhlberg et al 2004; Perier et al 2004), while protein supplementation has been shown to help
reduce unfavorable outcomes following injury in patients over the age of 65 (Avenell and Handoll 2003; Collins et al 2005). Keypoint.
Protein undernutrition is common in elderly patients, regardless of body weight or domiciliary status. Weight loss in the elderly is a
worrisome clinical sign. Weight loss in the elderly due to voluntary or involuntary causes has been associated with mortality (Himes 1999;
Newman et al 2001; Baldwin et al 2002). Although lean body mass may decline because of normal physiological changes associated with age
(Lissner et al 1991), a loss of more than 4% per year is an independent predictor of mortality (Wallace et al 1995). Rapid weight loss of 5%
or more in one month is considered significant and needs to be immediately evaluated by a physician (Jensen et al 2001; Dryden et al 2002).
It has been shown that even moderate declines of 5% or more over three years is predictive of mortality in older adults (Newman et al 2001).
However, early identification, assessment, and treatment of weight loss and nutritional deficiencies may prevent the morbid sequelae of
malnutrition. Functional, psychological, social, and economic issues associated with concomitant medical problems may all contribute to poor
nutrition and weight loss in the frail elderly patient (Bartali et al 2003). A multidisciplinary geriatric assessment can be helpful to
fully address all the complex interacting issues of the frail senior, such as Mrs E, who experiences rapid weight loss as a result of
malnutrition. This type of comprehensive assessment may include the services of physicians, nurses, dieticians, occupational and physical
therapists, speech and language pathologists, and social workers, each of which can lend their respective expertise to the effective
diagnosis of the functional, psychological, and socioeconomic contributors to malnutrition in older patients. Table 1 lists some of the
contributing factors to weight loss and malnutrition in the elderly. One complicating factor is that diseases tend to present atypically
with non-specific complaints in the elderly patient, making detection and diagnosis of physiological reasons behind malnutrition a greater
challenge. For example, hyperthyroidism or new-onset diabetes are classic examples of medical conditions causing weight loss. Progressive
renal or hepatic insufficiency may also cause anorexia, a malnutritive condition with highly morbid implications in the elderly. Weight loss
related to poor oral intake is also associated with peptic ulcer disease, GERD, and congestive heart failure, as well as dental or chewing
problems (Morais et al 2003; Palmer 2003; Paillaud et al 2004). Decreased oral intake may occur slowly in the setting of slowly progressive
chronic diseases such as Parkinson's disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, or Alzheimer disease. Oral supplementation, a
consideration for Mrs E, has been shown to significantly improve body weight in patients with Alzheimer disease at risk for malnutrition
(Lauque et al 2004). Selected causes of weight loss associated with malnutrition in the elderly A comprehensive geriatric assessment also
addresses psychosocial, environmental factors, and affective symptoms of weight loss in the elderly. The loss of a caregiver, the inability
to drive a motor vehicle, or moving into a new apartment or residence may precipitate a decline in oral intake and cause weight loss.
Depressive symptoms such as these are important considerations when evaluating the nutritional health of a senior patient (Hazzard et al
1994; Kane et al 1994; Williams 1995; Refai and Seidner 2001). It is especially important to ask older patients about alcohol intake, which
may replace or suppress the consumption of foods with superior nutritional value. Alcohol misuse in the elderly is associated with impaired
functional status, poor self-rated health, and depressive symptoms (St John et al 2002). Keypoints. Even slight weight loss in the elderly
is an independent predictor of morbidity and mortality. The medical causes of weight loss may be compounded by psychosocial and
environmental factors. Malnutrition has been associated with compromised cognitive capacity in the elderly. The decreased ability to prepare
a meal, which may adversely affect an elderly patient's ability to ensure sufficient nourishment, has been cited as one of the earliest
signs of mild cognitive impairment (MCI), a pre-Alzheimer disease condition (Borrie et al 2003). For persons with moderate to severe
Alzheimer disease, forgetting to eat, inability to access food, and apraxia with utensils may further impair oral intake. Living alone, as
Mrs E does, further compounds the risk of malnutrition. Vitamin deficiencies, particularly vitamin B12, B6, and folate, are associated with
cognitive impairment (Nilsson et al 2001; Gill and Alibhai 2003; Lehmann et al 2003). Deficiencies in these vitamins are also associated
with hyperhomocysteinemia, which is an independent vascular risk factor. The association of hyperhomocysteinemia with vascular disease is a
direct dose-response association (Stamphler et al 1992; Selhub et al 1995). Treatment with folate, vitamin B6, and vitamin B12 has been
shown to reduce homocysteine levels (Omran and Morley 2000; Nillson et al 2001; Lehmann et al 2003; Scott et al 2004), improve vascular
function in hyperhomocysteinemic patients with coronary artery disease (Willems et al 2002), and result in cholesterol plaque regression
(Marcucci et al 2003). Although a recent secondary prevention randomized controlled trial failed to demonstrate a decrease in morbid
vascular outcomes in stroke patients following supplementation with vitamins B6, B12, and folate over two years, it was suggested that
confounding factors (such as the initiation of folate fortification in grain supply concurrent with the study) might explain the null
findings (Toole et al 2004). More research is needed to clarify the complex interactions between these vitamins and the modification of
vascular risk factors. The intriguing concept of the polypill (Wald and Law 2003; Robinson and Maheshwari 2005) in the treatment of
cardiovascular disease has potential for the primary and secondary prevention of cognitive impairment in elderly patients. A vitamin
polypill (containing a statin class of cholesterol-lowering agents, three blood pressure lowering drugs (eg, a thiazide, a beta-blocker, an
angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, aspirin, and folic acid) might be a beneficial tool in the prevention and treatment of morbid,
nutrition-related vascular conditions. This approach to prevention and treatment requires a great deal of further investigation. This novel
concept incorporates the influence of nutritional factors on health, especially interventions for patients like Mr T. Nutritional
interventions have an impact on vascular disease prevention. It is well established that a diet low in fat and cholesterol is beneficial to
modifying vascular risk factors. Emerging research suggests that supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids (such as those found in salmon and
other cold-water fish), and consuming cruciferous vegetables (such as broccoli, cabbage, and cauliflower) are all associated with stroke
prevention (Joshipura et al 1999; Mozaffarian et al 2005; Robinson and Maheshwari 2005) and may be beneficial if integrated into the diet of
all elderly patients with vascular disease or vascular risk factors. Nutritional antioxidant supplements are generally believed to be
beneficial in reducing free radical cellular and DNA damage. A large epidemiological study found the concomitant use of vitamins C and E is
associated with reduced incidences of Alzheimer disease (Zandi et al 2004). More generally, according to a randomized controlled trial, low
blood vitamin C concentrations are strongly predictive of mortality in patients aged 75–84 years (Fletcher et al 2003). The efficacy of
vitamin E in the prevention and treatment of MCI and Alzheimer disease remains controversial. Used alone in a three-year placebo-controlled
study, a daily dosage of vitamin E (2000 IU) was not shown to slow the rate of progression to Alzheimer disease in patients with MCI
(Petersen et al 2005). A high-dose vitamin E supplementation (>400 IU/day) has been associated with increased mortality (Miller et al 2005).
Other important antioxidants with possibly beneficial outcomes include foods with high levels of phytochemicals and flavonoids. Tomatoes,
citrus fruit, blueberries, and certain spices (Fusheng et al 2005) have all been linked to reducing oxidative stress and cognitive
impairment. Flavonoids and antioxidants in red wine have also been shown to be beneficial in protecting against dementia (Zuccalà et al
2001; Truelson et al 2002). The increasing amount of research in this field holds promise for preventive nutritional strategies based on the
benefits of naturally-occurring antioxidants. Keypoint. Dietary modifications, such as including foods high in antioxidants and lowering
intake of fat and cholesterol, may improve cognition and modify vascular risk factors in elderly patients. Although the incidence of
malnutrition in the community-dwelling elderly is estimated between 2%–16%, up to 55% of elderly people admitted to hospital have pre-
existing evidence of malnutrition (Williams 1995; Milne et al 2005). In the geriatric rehabilitation setting, the incidence of protein
undernutrition, not including patients with micronutrient deficiencies, is estimated at 57% (Keller 1997). In addition to pre-existing
malnutrition, hospitalized patients often develop further nutritional problems during their hospital stay. Nausea, vomiting, “nothing by
mouth” orders, medication side-effects, difficulty with vision and opening containers, the placement of food out of patients' reach, limited
access to snacks, and ethnic or religious food preferences may all contribute to low nutritional intake in hospital (Milne et al 2005).
Malnutrition during hospitalization is also associated with an increased length of stay (Pichard et al 2004; Avenell and Handoll 2005),
readmission, mortality, skin breakdown, and infection. Compromised nutritional status has also been linked to impaired immunity, respiratory
and muscle function, and delays in wound healing (Aptaker et al 1994; Sullivan and Walls 1994). However, there is no consensus on the
effects of supplementation on promoting wound healing. Vitamin C and zinc have shown some promise in improved outcomes relating to pressure
sores (Frias Soriano et al 2004), but there exists some controversy in the literature pertaining to the efficacy of vitamin and trace
mineral supplementation in their treatment and prevention. For example, studies of long-term care patients (such as Mr T) have shown that
although nutritionally supplemented patients have less risk of developing pressure ulcers (High 2001; Houwing et al 2003; Dambach et al
2005), vitamin supplementation has not been found to significantly accelerate the healing of pre-existing pressure ulcers (Mathus-Vliegen
2004). Several randomized control trials have demonstrated the benefits of oral nutritional supplementation in the hospitalized elderly. In
a meta-analysis of 22 trials (n=1755), patients receiving oral nutritional supplements had a reduction in relative risk of mortality over
those who did not receive supplementation (Avenell and Handoll 2005). Although there is insufficient evidence to conclude whether there
exists a benefit in functional status as a result of supplementation, seven of the trials designated length of stay as an outcome measure
and demonstrated that nutritionally supplemented elderly patients have a shorter overall length of stay in hospital. Oral nutritional
supplements in elderly patients with hip fracture, like Mrs A, have been associated with lowered complication rates and length of stay, as
well as improved clinical outcomes and nutritional indices (Potter et al 1998; Arnaurd-Battandier et al 2004). Other evidence also suggests
that oral multivitamin supplementation may reduce unfavorable outcomes following injury in the elderly (Avenell and Handoll 2005). Although
more research is needed, aggressive nutritional support for the hospitalized elderly, in both the acute care and rehabilitation settings,
has been shown to improve nutritional status, reduce mortality and length of stay, and may lead to better functional outcomes (Gariballa
2000; Potter et al 2001). Therefore, recognition of malnutrition in hospitalized elderly patients and referral to a dietician is an
excellent strategy for many hospitalized frail seniors. Summary. Hospitalized elderly patients are at particular risk for malnutrition and
need to be carefully assessed and aggressively treated. Numerous review papers suggest that nutrition screening for at-risk populations is
essential (Elmstahl et al 1997; Sharkey and Haines 2002). Although the 1994 Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care acknowledges that
the elderly (particularly those living alone or in institutions) have a high prevalence of nutritional deficiency, they cite insufficient
evidence to recommend for or against routine screening for malnutrition. Informal screening measures such as self-administered
questionnaires and food diaries can be unreliable, especially in the cognitively impaired (Patterson 1994). This emphasizes the need for
physicians and allied health professionals to regularly screen for malnutrition in the elderly. In addition to the recognition of
nutritional problems, current medical literature recognizes the importance of promptly implementing a treatment plan. The physical exam does
not usually aid in the detection of early malnutrition in the elderly, as some of the loss of muscle bulk may be similar to age-related
processes. However, in specific nutrient deficiencies, changes in nail, hair, tongue, and angle of the mouth can be seen. These findings are
usually coupled with biochemical investigations such as laboratory tests that investigate complete blood count with differential, albumin,
ferritin, electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, fasting glucose, and creatinine (Patterson 1994; Reuben et al 2004). Laboratory results can
provide an objective measure of nutritional status not always possible to achieve with office screening measurements. For example, serum
albumin screening has been shown to be effective in identifying patients requiring nutritional intervention for protein undernutrition
(Robinson et al 2003), and has improved reliability over self-reporting. The most widely used and extensively validated screening tool used
by dieticians is the Mini-Nutritional Assessment (MNA). It is also a very useful tool for physicians involved in comprehensive geriatric
assessments, and could be appropriately used in all three case studies. One advantage of the MNA is that it is applicable to a wide range of
elderly patients (ie, from those who are well to hospitalized elderly). The questions are simple and brief. It has a 96% sensitivity and 98%
specificity, and a predictive value of 97% which distinguishes patients by their adequate nutritional status (score ≥ 24), risk of
malnutrition (score 12–23), and malnourishment (score < 17) (Guigoz et al 1996; Vellas et al 1999). A short-form version of the MNA has been
developed (MNA-SF), see Appendix 1. It contains six questions and is strongly correlated with total MNA score (r = 0.945), and is applicable
for both community dwelling and hospitalized elderly (Rubenstein et al 2001; Ranhoff et al 2005). Other screening tools have been designed
to identify malnutrition in the elderly (Corish et al 2004). The simplest office measure reflecting nutrition is the body mass index (BMI =
weight in kilograms (kg)/height in meters (m)2). In the elderly, a convenient approximation of height is arm span (Patterson 1994). Regular
weight assessment at office appointments is a simple but important way to monitor weight changes in elderly patients. Another easy to
remember mnemonic screening tool is the SCALES assessment (Nutritional Screening Initiative 2005). This asks physicians to evaluate older
patients regarding: Sadness (depression); Cholesterol levels; Albumin (serum levels <40 g/L); Loss of weight; Eating problems (cognitive
and/or physical determinants); and Shopping problems or inability to prepare a meal. A problem with three or more of these areas reflects a
high risk for malnutrition (Morley 1994). Another tool is the “Determine Your Nutritional Health Checklist” which can be a very useful tool
in the community setting (Nutritional Screening Initiative 2005). However, it may be of limited use for seniors with cognitive impairment or
poor vision because it relies on self-reporting. In the nursing home setting, a validated tool is the amount of food left on a resident's
plate. Residents who have more than 25% of their food remaining on their plate are most likely to suffer from protein undernutrition (Beck
et al 2001). One estimate suggests that 84% of nursing home patients had intake less than their calculated daily caloric expenditure, and
only 5% were receiving nutritional supplements. Those with lower caloric intake had a higher mortality rate than those whose intake more
closely matched their caloric expenditure (Elmstahl et al 1997). Keypoints. There are several effective and easy-to-use screening tools
which assess for malnutrition in elderly patients. The most extensively validated tool is the Mini Nutritional Assessment (MNA), which
provides an accurate assessment of elderly patients from a variety of domiciliary settings. Following careful nutritional assessment,
guidelines have been developed to improve and maintain nutritional status in community-dwelling and hospitalized elderly patients. For
example, the Canada Food Guide recommends the following daily nutritional intake for adults: 5–12 servings of grains5–10 servings of fruits
and vegetables2–4 servings of milk products2–3 servings of meat or meat alternatives 5–12 servings of grains 5–10 servings of fruits and
vegetables 2–4 servings of milk products 2–3 servings of meat or meat alternatives Foods high in fibre and complex carbohydrates such as
whole grains, vegetables, and fruits are preferred. Fat intake should be less than 30% of total caloric intake (Patterson 1994), and
nutritionally compromised patients should be encouraged to consume nutrient-dense foods (Jaceldo-Siegl et al 2004). For malnourished elderly
patients, counseling is effective in improving dietary habits (Willaing et al 2004; Pedersen 2005). Referral to a clinical dietician or
nurse educator is recommended following general dietary advice from a physician (Patterson 1994). Formerly known as Recommended Nutritional
Intake (RNI), Dietary Reference Intakes (DRI) guidelines have been revised recently and adjusted for the needs of older adults aged 51–70
years and those over 70. There are increased allowances for the elderly for calcium, magnesium, vitamin D, fluoride, niacin, folate, vitamin
B12, and vitamin E, clinical studies of which have suggested improved outcomes in nutritional status in the elderly (Jensen et al 2001;
Nilsson et al 2001; Gazotti 2003; Lehmann et al 2003). A complete list summary of the current DRI for Canada and the United States is listed
at . In lieu of consensus from specialized nutrition studies in the elderly, preventive dietary strategies for the elderly may be inferred
from well documented recommendations for the adult populations regarding high cholesterol and fat intake, and their association with
ischemic heart disease and diabetes (Cheng et al 2004; Ciardullo et al 2004). Increasing dietary fiber may be useful in the treatment of
constipation, glucose intolerance, lipid disorders, and obesity, as well as preventing diverticular disease and colon cancers. Reduction in
sodium has been shown to reduce blood pressure and also reduce the risk of developing hypertension (Patterson 1994). The recommended adult
calcium intake is 1200 mg/day for those over 50 years of age; 400IU of vitamin D is recommended for ages 50–70, and 600 IU for those over 70
years of age. Seasonal vitamin D deficiency is recognized as highly prevalent in North American adult populations (Dawson-Hughes et al 1997;
Rucker et al 2002; Levis et al 2005), and 35%–90% of the institutionalized elderly are estimated to be vitamin D deficient (Compher et al
1998). Treatment with vitamin D prevents seasonal variations in vitamin D levels and can reduce hip fractures, nonvertebral fractures, and
the risk of developing osteoporosis (Hazzard et al 1994; Dawson-Hughes et al 1997; Ilich et al 2003; Holick 2003). Keypoint. Dietary
assessment and counseling comprise an important and effective aspect of preventing and treating a variety of morbid conditions in elderly
patients. The following case studies will provide an introduction to applying the principles of nutritional management to the care of at-
risk elderly patients. Mrs E has lost 6% of her body weight in six months. This is a cause for concern. Her physician needs to consider
causes for weight loss such as new hyperthyroidism, diabetes, malignancy, depression, or oral problems. These can be ruled out by history,
physical examination, and laboratory tests. Collateral history from family or caregivers is very important in assessing a person with
dementia. Patients with dementia often have an atypical presentation of many illnesses in the elderly, especially in cases of depression. A
medication review is also an important part of the physician's assessment of this patient. For example, cholinesterase inhibitors as a class
can cause nausea, vomiting, anorexia, or diarrhea and can be associated with weight loss. In Mrs E's case, she was able to maintain her
weight for a year on this medication. For this reason, other causes of weight loss associated with dementia should also be considered. For
example, the loss of caregiver support, social isolation, limited access to food, an inability to cook and prepare food because of cognitive
problems, or inability to recognize hunger may contribute to her current malnutritive state. Collateral history from a caregiver and a home
visit can provide invaluable insight into these issues. Home care nurses or occupational therapists can assist in this assessment. A
nutritional treatment plan for Mrs E may include the treatment of any newly diagnosed medical issues and the prescription of nutritional
supplements. In this case, considering a referral to social and community programs (such as adult day care, home care services, or a
delivered meal program) would be appropriate at Mrs E's discharge. Mrs A's situation is complex and highlights some of the issues of
nutritional assessments in the hospital setting. A physician is needed to immediately address Mrs A's other underlying medical problems such
as obesity, IHD, GERD, and HTN, prior to her general nutritional assessment by a dietician. Diabetes can be a major issue during her
hospital stay. Another possible nutritional issue associated with diabetes is substantial proteinuria brought on by diabetic renal disease.
Sequelae of diabetes include autonomic dysfunction, which can result in delayed gastric emptying and poor oral intake. This condition can be
exacerbated by the use of narcotics to control postoperative pain, and is further compounded by GERD. Infection and obesity often increase
insulin resistance, so blood sugar control should be optimized not only for the long-term morbidity prevention, but also for wound healing.
Prior medical complications and the medications prescribed following her hip surgery are another cause for concern. Mrs A may have had poor
oral intake because of her diarrheal illness, or from the side effects of antibiotics used to treat C. difficile arising from her UTI. Many
elderly hip fracture patients have muscle deconditioning as a result of being hospitalized and consequently require increased protein
supplementation. Serum prealbumin or albumin is usually used to assess nutritional status and monitor improvement through a hospital stay.
Although Mrs A is obese with a BMI of 37 kg/m2, she likely has a low albumin level and significant protein undernutrition based on her
recent medical history. One complication in the treatment of obese patients is the provision of adequate calories and protein for wound
prevention and treatment, muscle reconditioning, and therapy-related exercise while concurrently promoting a loss of total body fat.
Generally speaking, achieving an optimal balance of food intake, nutritional status, and healthy body weight is a particular challenge for
health practitioners (Sullivan et al 2004), particularly when treating patients with extremely high or low BMI measurements. Finally, Mrs
A's HTN and obesity suggest additional risk factors for ischemic heart disease. Her cholesterol profile prior to her hospitalization would
provide additional information in planning long-term nutritional goals at discharge. Sodium, fat, and cholesterol restrictions may be
appropriate. Other nutritional goals during Mrs A's hospital stay should include ensuring that she has adequate education to both understand
and follow her dietary advice. Referral to a community dietician or diabetic educator is recommended in Mrs A's discharge planning. Mr T has
severe malnutrition with a BMI of 17 kg/m2 and a corresponding high risk of morbidity and mortality. Given his acute nutritive needs
following his medical history of stroke (Dennis et al 2005), Mr T's nutritional assessment and treatment plan should include a physician,
dietician, speech and language pathologist, and an occupational therapist. The benefits of stroke rehabilitation are well documented
(Gresham et al 1997). One of the first treatments often recommended immediately following a stroke is a swallowing assessment and, if
necessary, training to facilitate improved swallowing. For patients who require tube feeding, it has been determined that patients with
significant dysphagia who undergo gastronomy tube feeding have less risk of aspiration, earlier discharge from hospital, and higher albumen
levels with gastrostomy tube feeding than those who undergo nasogastric tube feeding (Milne et al 2005). Early tube feeding following stroke
has been associated with decreased mortality in older patients (Dennis et al 2005). It is likely that Mr T had the appropriate assessment in
hospital following his stroke. Nevertheless, a bedside swallowing assessment performed by a speech and language pathologist is very helpful
in determining the type of food consistency that is appropriate in a person with dysphagia. Sometimes it is necessary to refer the patient
for a modified barium swallow to further assess their risk for aspiration. Furthermore, positioning and seating are important requirements
for successful meals. Occupational therapists can assist with this as well as the provision of special utensils, plates, or placemats in
order to better facilitate self-feeding. A number of other possibilities may contribute to Mr T's current condition. For example, Mr T may
have extended his stroke resulting in worse dysphagia and subsequently decreased oral intake. Untreated dysphagia may result in protein
undernutrition, which can result in compromised immunity and an increased risk of infection (Hudson et al 2000). He may have developed post-
stroke depression, which often manifests a decrease in appetite. It is possible that not all of the dietary recommendations of the stroke
team were followed after discharge. Sometimes this is because of patient choice; for example, a common recommendation involves restricting
patients' diet to pureed foods. Some patients assess the relative risks (which include aspiration) and prefer a diet with varied textures as
a quality of life consideration. Nutritional deficiencies have been suggested, but not clinically confirmed, to adversely affect vascular
outcomes in stroke (Toole et al 2004). Mr T needs a comprehensive physical and cognitive examination, and laboratory tests to exclude new
medical problems as contributing causes for his weight loss. Since protein undernutrition and low vitamin C levels are associated with poor
wound healing and pressure sores, a dietician should participate in Mr T's treatment plan and consider supplementation in vitamin C, zinc,
and other trace minerals, in addition to increased caloric and protein intake. His albumin level should be regularly measured to provide
objective monitoring of the treatment plan. More than other adults, patients over the age of 65 are at nutritional risk because of the
greater burden of comorbid illnesses coupled with common physiological changes due to aging. Physicians need to maintain strong suspicions
of malnutrition in the senior population, and should be aggressive in instituting preventive measures and treatment strategies for those at
risk or those detected with malnutrition. Because of the impact of coexisting disease on overall nutritive status, a comprehensive,
multidisciplinary approach is often helpful in addressing all contributing factors in the diagnosis and treatment of compromised nutritional
health in the elderly. By providing clinicians with an educational overview and providing tools to aid in the nutritional assessment in the
elderly, we hope to emphasize that attention to the complexity of multiple comorbidities is essential to the successful nutritional
assessment of elderly patients. The following checklist may serve as a preliminary guide to ensuring adequate nutrition among elderly
patients: Multivitamin supplements are highly recommended for older patients, especially in seniors whose daily caloric intake is less than
1500 kcal/day.Advise patients about nutrient-dense food choices when appropriate.Investigate body weight losses of 4% or more.Nutritional
supplements are recommended for at-risk elderly hip fracture patients. Also consider supplements for frail seniors with other
fractures.Calcium and vitamin D supplementation have been shown to reduce hip fracture rates and are recommended for patients over 65 years
of age.Advise patients on the merits of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables.In hospitalized patients, maintain a high index of suspicion
for pre-existing nutritional deficiencies. Utilize the services of a registered dietician.Consider referrals to other health professionals
for nutritional advice such as dieticians, speech and language pathologists, homecare or visiting nurse services, or other specialized
geriatric services available in the community. Multivitamin supplements are highly recommended for older patients, especially in seniors
whose daily caloric intake is less than 1500 kcal/day. Advise patients about nutrient-dense food choices when appropriate. Investigate body
weight losses of 4% or more. Nutritional supplements are recommended for at-risk elderly hip fracture patients. Also consider supplements
for frail seniors with other fractures. Calcium and vitamin D supplementation have been shown to reduce hip fracture rates and are
recommended for patients over 65 years of age. Advise patients on the merits of whole grains, fruits, and vegetables. In hospitalized
patients, maintain a high index of suspicion for pre-existing nutritional deficiencies. Utilize the services of a registered dietician.
Consider referrals to other health professionals for nutritional advice such as dieticians, speech and language pathologists, homecare or
visiting nurse services, or other specialized geriatric services available in the community. Registered dieticians Mary Stanford's and
Claire Downey's helpful comments and feedback in the preparation of this manuscript are sincerely appreciated. Body Mass Index (BMI) is
estimated according to the formula BMI = weight (kg)/height (m)2. BMI results of less than 18.5 are classified as underweight, 18.5–24.9 as
“normal,” 25.0–29.9 as overweight, and over 30.0 as obese (Health Canada 2003). Activities of daily living refer to tasks that require basic
skills such as mobility, self-care, communication, management of environmental hardware and devices, and sexual expression. Instrumental
activities of daily living are comprised of tasks that require more advanced problem-solving skills, social skills, and more complex
environmental interactions. These include home management and community living skills, health management, and safety preparedness (Pedretti
and Zoltan 2001). A. Has food intake declined over the past three months due to loss of appetite, digestive problems, chewing or swallowing
difficulties? 0 _ severe loss of appetite 1 _ moderate loss of appetite 2 _ no loss of appetite B.Weight loss during last three months 0 _
weight loss greater than 3 kg (6.6 lbs) 1 _ does not know 2 _ weight loss between 1 and 3 kg (2.2 and 6.6 lbs) 3 _ no weight loss C.
Mobility 0 _ bed or chair bound 1 _ able to get out of bed/chair but does not go out 2 _ goes out D. Has suffered psychological stress or
acute disease in the past three months 0 _yes 2 _no E. Neuropsychological problems 0 _ severe dementia or depression 1 _ mild dementia 2 _
no psychological problems F. Body Mass Index (BMI) (weight in kg)/(height in m)2 0 _BMI less than 19 1 _BMI 19 to less than 21 2 _ BMI 21 to
less than 23 3 _ BMI 23 or greater Screening score (subtotal max. 14 points) 12 points or greater: Normal – no need for further assessment
11 points or below: Possible malnutrition – continue assessment Note: If greater specificity is desired consider 10 points or below as
possible malnutrition. Alternative height calculations using knee to heel measurements:with knee at 90° angle (foot flexed or flat on floor
or bed board), measure from bottom of heel to top of knee. Men _ (2.02 _ knee height, cm) (0.04 _ age) 64.19 Women _ (1.83 _ knee height,
cm) (0.24 _ age) 84.88 Body weight calculations in amputees: For amputations, increase weight by the percentage below for contribution of
individual body parts to obtain the weight to use to determine BMI. Single below knee 6.0% Single at knee 9.0% Single above knee 15.0%
Single arm 6.5% Single arm below elbow 3.6% Source: Rubenstein et al (2001); Ranhoff et al (2005).
