Rhabdoid tumour predisposition syndrome (RTPS) is a rare syndrome caused by inheritance of a mutated INI1 gene for which only two
multigeneration families have been reported. To further characterise the genotype and phenotype of RTPS, we present a third family in which
at least three cousins developed an atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT) at a young age. Two of these patients showed unusual long
survival, and one of these developed an intracranial meningioma and a myoepithelioma of the lip in adulthood. Mutation analysis of INI1
revealed a germline G>A mutation in the donor splice site of exon 4 (c.500+1G>A) in the patients and in their unaffected fathers. This
mutation prevents normal splicing and concomitantly generates a stop codon, resulting in nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Biallelic
inactivation of INI1 in the tumours, except for the meningioma, was confirmed by absence of nuclear INI1-protein staining. The
myoepithelioma of one of the patients carried an identical somatic rearrangement in the NF2 gene as the AT/RT, indicating that both tumours
originated from a common precursor cell. In conclusion, this study demonstrates for the first time transmission of a germline INI1-mutation
in a RTPS family via nonpenetrant males, long-term survival of two members of this family with an AT/RT, and involvement of INI1 in the
pathogenesis of myoepithelioma. High-grade malignant brain tumours (MBTs) of childhood include medulloblastoma, primitive neuro-ectodermal
tumour, anaplastic astrocytoma, glioblastoma, anaplastic ependymoma, atypical teratoid/rhabdoid tumour (AT/RT), and choroid plexus carcinoma
(CPC) (Kalifa and Grill, 2005). Although most of these tumours are sporadic, familial cases have been described in which inherited germline
mutations in tumour suppressor genes predispose to their development. Germline mutations in PTCH and TP53 are known to be involved in the
familial occurrence of medulloblastoma in childhood in Gorlin syndrome (Johnson et al, 1996) and of various types of brain tumours in Li-
Fraumeni syndrome (Frebourg et al, 1995). The familial occurrence of ependymomas has been well documented, but the predisposing gene remains
to be identified (Dimopoulos et al, 2006). Familial cases of AT/RT or CPC are very rare. Until now, two families have been described in
which the development of these malignant childhood brain tumours correlated with the inheritance in two or more generations of a mutation in
the INI1/hSNF5/BAF47/SMARCB1 gene on chromosome 22 (Taylor et al, 2000; Janson et al, 2006). This tumour suppressor gene encodes INI1, which
is a core subunit of the chromatin remodelling SWI/SNF complex (Wang et al, 1996; Phelan et al, 1999). In one family, an 18-month-old girl
presented with a cerebellar rhabdoid tumour with an INI1 exon 7 donor-splice site mutation, which she inherited from her unaffected carrier
mother. A brother of the latter died at the age of 2 years of a tumour diagnosed as CPC with the same mutation (Taylor et al, 2000). In the
other family, two half-brothers each developed an AT/RT at a young age and inherited an INI1 insertion mutation in exon 4 from their
unaffected carrier mother. Their maternal half-uncle, who was diagnosed with a medulloblastoma and a renal rhabdoid tumour, died at 2 years
of age, suggesting that he inherited the same mutation, although this could not be studied (Janson et al, 2006). Here, we present an
extended molecular analysis of a previously reported family in which four cousins were affected with an MBT at young age (Hulsebos et al,
1999). These tumours were originally classified as anaplastic ependymomas (Nijssen et al, 1994). However, because of the previously
documented involvement of chromosome 22 in the inheritance of the predisposition to these tumours (Hulsebos et al, 1999) and the possibility
of misclassification, we investigated whether these anaplastic ependymomas were in fact AT/RTs. This proved to be the case, as we concluded
from re-evaluation of their histopathology and from mutation and expression analysis of the INI1 gene in three of these tumours. In
addition, one of the patients developed a meningioma and a myoepithelioma in adulthood. Written informed consent was obtained from patient
III-1 (for pedigree see Figure 1). Each of the four cousins developed an MBT at a young age (<5 years). After removal of the tumour, patient
III-1 received adjuvant chemotherapy (methotrexate, vincristine, and prednisolone) followed by craniospinal radiotherapy (3300 cGy in 22
doses) with a boost of 2100 cGy on the location of the tumour. He developed an intracranial meningioma and a myoepithelioma of the lip at,
respectively, 25 and 26 years of age. Patient III-4 developed a recurrent brain tumour almost 2 years after removal of the primary brain
tumour and treatment with chemotherapy (vincristine, procarbazine, and methotrexate). The sister of the paternal grandfather (I-1) of the
four cousins died of an uncharacterised brain tumour at the age of 2 years. The clinical findings for the patients are summarised in Table
1. Freshly frozen tumour tissue was only available from the meningioma of patient III-1 Formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tumour tissue
was available from the other tumours. Tumour DNA was extracted using commercially available kits (QIAGEN, Venlo, The Netherlands).
Extraction of constitutional DNA from blood leukocytes was performed as described previously (Hulsebos et al, 1999). Microsatellite markers
used for haplotype analysis of family members and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) analysis in tumours were, ordered from 22cen to 22qter,
D22S420, D22S427, D22S941, D22S311, D22S446, D22S539, D22S686, D22S303, D22S257, D22S345, D22S156, RH13801, D22S925, D22S926, D22S419,
D22S421, D22S1164, D22S429, D22S1148, D22S310, D22S1167, D22S1163, D22S1150, nf2C3.1, D22S929, nf2CAV, D22S1176, D22S280, D22S284, D22S419,
D22S1165, D22S1171, D22S274, D22S1169, D22S1145. Because of substantial degradation of template DNA, reliable determination of the allele
status of markers generating polymerase chain reaction (PCR) products longer than 150 bp could not be performed for the MBTs of III-1 and
III-3 and for the recurrent tumour of III-4. Primer sequences and amplification conditions were taken from the Genome Database at
http://www.gdb.org/ or from Legoix et al (1999). Polymerase chain reaction reactions were performed essentially as described before (Bijlsma
et al, 1995). 32P-dCTP-labelled PCR products were separated on 6% acrylamide denaturing gels and visualised with autoradiography. The INI1
and NF2 genes were sequenced by using genomic DNA as substrate for amplification by PCR. Primer sequences for mutation analysis of the 9
INI1 exons and the 17 NF2 exons have been given previously (Hulsebos et al, 2007). In degraded DNA samples, the exon 4–intron 4 junction
region of INI1 was sequenced using forward primer 5′-catgctccacaaccatcaac-3′ and reverse primer 5′-aactgaaacgtgctggagaac-3′, generating a
PCR-product of 131 bp. The exon 4–intron 4 junction region of INI1 was amplified with forward primer 5′-ggatcaggtcctatactgac-3′ and reverse
primer 5′-aactgaaacgtgctggagaac-3′, generating a product of 248 bp. Polymerase chain reaction products were analysed on an Agilent 1100
system (Agilent, Amstelveen, The Netherlands) equipped with a Helix DNA column (Varian, Middelburg, The Netherlands). Denaturing high-
performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) running conditions are available upon request. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification
(MLPA) analysis of the NF2 gene was performed using the SALSA P044 NF2 MLPA Kit according to the instructions of the manufacturer (MRC-
Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). Immunohistochemical analysis of the INI1 protein was performed using a BAF47/INI1 antibody (BD
Transduction Laboratories, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA) on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumour tissue as described previously (Hulsebos et
al, 2007). Sequencing of the 9 INI1-exons and their flanking sequences in the constitutional blood DNA of patient III-1 revealed a mutation
in the donor splice site of exon 4 (Figure 2). This heterozygous G>A mutation alters the conserved GT sequence at the beginning of intron 4
(c.500+1G>A of the mRNA (GenBank accession number )), enabling read-through of the transcript at this position. Concomitantly, the G>A
mutation results in the generation of an in-frame stopcodon (UGG → UGA, p.W167X) in the read-through transcript. This mutation was also
present in the constitutional DNA of patient III-4 and of the unaffected fathers II-2 and II-3. As exemplified in Figure 2 for tumour MBT-1,
the malignant brain tumours of patients III-1(MBT-1), III-3 (MBT-3), and III-4 (MBT-4, MBT-4R) and the myoepithelioma of patient III-1
(My-1), but not his meningioma (M-1), showed loss of the wild-type G-allele and retention of the mutant A-allele. Mothers II-1 and II-4 and
also grandmother I-2 had only the wild-type sequence in their constitutional DNA (data not shown). The sequencing data for INI1 are
summarised in Figure 1. To exclude that the G>A donor splice site mutation represents a polymorphism, we screened the constitutional DNA of
132 normal individuals (264 chromosomes 22) by DHPLC analysis of PCR products containing the exon 4–intron 4 junction region in INI1 but
found no mutation-specific profile. In about 3% of cases, the normal GT donor splice site signal at the exon 4–intron 4 junction is ignored
during transcription of INI1 and splicing occurs at a cryptic splice site (GC), which is 54 bp distal to the normal splice site (GenBank
accession number ) (Favre et al, 2003). Mutation of the GT donor splice site may increase the rate of this alternative splicing. However,
the concomitant generation of a stop-codon confers the alternatively spliced transcript in an excellent target for nonsense-mediated decay
(Nagy and Maquat, 1998), resulting in absence of INI1 protein encoded by the mutated allele. Alternatively, the mutation may result in
skipping of exon 4, generating a transcript that is 138 bases shorter than the wild-type transcript and an INI protein with an in-frame
deletion of 46 amino-acid residues. To determine the presence of INI1 protein in the tumours, we performed immunohistochemistry with an
INI1-antibody on available histological sections of tumours. The antibody is directed against the C-terminal part of the protein (amino-acid
residues 257–359), which remains intact after the eventual in-frame deletion of 46 amino-acid residues (nrs122–167) resulting from exon-4
skipping. As shown in Figure 3, nuclear staining was absent in tumour cells of the recurrence of the brain tumour of patient III-4 (MBT-4R)
and in the myoepithelioma of patient III-1 (My-1), but abundantly present in all cells of the meningioma (M-1) of patient III-1. As our
sequencing data demonstrated that the normal INI1 gene was lost in the recurrent brain tumour and in the myoepithelioma, but remained in the
meningioma, this staining pattern is consistent with the notion that the mutant allele does not encode INI1 protein or shortened INI1
protein as the consequence of exon-4-skipping. Our sequencing data indicated that the normal INI1 gene was lost in all analysed tumours,
except for the meningioma. To determine the mechanism by which these losses occurred, we extended previously reported haplotype and LOH
analyses (Hulsebos et al, 1999). The key genetic events are summarised in Figure 1. The LOH analyses indicate that loss of the normal INI1
gene is caused by the deletion of a complete copy of chromosome 22 in the MBTs, but by interstitial deletion in the myoepithelioma.
Furthermore, we noted the aberrant retention of allele 1 of marker D22S929 in the brain tumour as well as in the myoepithelioma of patient
III-1 (see Figure 1, Figure 4). Flanking markers nf2C3.1 and nf2CAV, however, showed normal retention of the paternal alleles in the
myoepithelioma of this patient. As the three markers are located within the NF2 gene (Legoix et al, 1999), we investigated whether this gene
was affected by the rearrangement. Sequencing of the 17 exons of NF2 in constitutional, meningioma, and myoepithelioma DNA of patient III-1
revealed no mutations. Multiple ligation-dependent probe amplification analysis of the NF2 gene demonstrated no additional copy number
aberrations in blood or tumours of this patient (data not shown). We have shown by sequence analysis that the unaffected fathers of the
patients were carriers of the germline mutation. As the paternal grandfather's sister died of a brain tumour at 2 years of age and his sons
transmitted the mutation, it is most likely that the grandfather is also an unaffected carrier and that his sister developed the brain
tumour because of inheritance of the INI1-mutation. This is also supported by the deduced haplotypes of the grandfather's copies of
chromosome 22. This study thus documents the inheritance of a germline INI1-mutation that predisposes to the development of MBTs at young
age in three subsequent generations of a family. Inheritance of an INI1-mutation via asymptomatic carriers has been reported before in two
other families with childhood brain tumours (Taylor et al, 2000; Janson et al, 2006). Although the analyses of the latter families suggested
that the asymptomatic transmission of the INI1-mutation exclusively occurred via female carriers, it is clear from our family that the
transmission can as well take place via healthy male carriers. Originally, based on their (immuno)histological, ultrastructural, and
clinical characteristics, the MBTs of the patients in our family were classified as anaplastic ependymomas (Nijssen et al, 1994). Here, we
demonstrate the biallelic inactivation by mutation and deletion of INI1 in the MBTs of patients III-1, III-3, and III-4 and the absence of
INI1-protein expression in the recurrence of patient III-4 (Figure 2, Figure 3, respectively). INI1 mutations have not been described in
ependymomas (Sevenet et al, 1999a; Kraus et al, 2001; Weber et al, 2001), whereas biallelic inactivation of INI1 and loss of INI1 protein
expression are characteristic features of AT/RTs (Versteege et al, 1998; Judkins et al, 2004; Biegel, 2006). Moreover, re-evaluation
revealed rhabdoid cells in histological sections of the brain tumours (Table 1). Our data thus show that the brain tumours in at least three
of the four cousins are in fact AT/RTs. Especially, as correct histopathological classification of paediatric brain tumours can be
challenging (Judkins et al, 2005; Haberler et al, 2006), our present findings suggest that testing for the mutational status of INI1 is
warranted to exclude rhabdoid tumour predisposition syndrome (RTPS) in previous (Dimopoulos et al, 2006) and future reports on familial
ependymoma. Patient III-1 developed an intracranial meningioma and a myoepithelioma of the upper lip, respectively, 21 and 22 years after
operation and chemo- and radiotherapy for the AT/RT. The meningioma had no mutation in the NF2 gene and displayed a complex karyotype, as
evidenced by single-nucleotide polymorphism analysis, including extensive losses on chromosome arm 1p, but no loss of chromosome 22 (data
not shown). These molecular and also the clinical characteristics of the meningioma strongly suggest that the development of this tumour is
radiation-induced and not part of the RTPS. The biallelic inactivation of INI1 and loss of INI1 protein-expression in the myoepithelioma is
remarkable. This benign tumour type is generally characterised by a paucity of genetic alterations and involvement of chromosome 22 or INI1
in the development of this tumour has never been reported before (Hungermann et al, 2002). Another remarkable finding is the aberrant
retention of the maternal allele 1 of marker D22S929 in NF2 on the paternal copy of chromosome 22 that remained in the AT/RT as well as in
the myoepithelioma of patient III-1 (Figure 1, Figure 4). This might be explained by assuming a somatic double recombination (or gene
conversion) event in a common precursor cell for both tumours, substituting allele 2 for allele 1 on the paternally derived chromosome 22.
Although we were unable to demonstrate that the recombination event directly affected the coding regions of NF2, we nevertheless conclude
that both tumours must have a common origin. Several patients with a constitutional INI1 mutation and with two tumours at different sites
have been reported (Sevenet et al, 1999b; Savla et al, 2000; Kusafuka et al, 2004; Biegel, 2006; Giunti et al, 2006; Meyers et al, 2006). It
will be of interest to determine whether the tumours of these patients, like those of patient III-1, are primary tumours, share somatic
changes in the genome, and originate from a common precursor cell as well. In conclusion, we have documented the variable expression and
incomplete penetrance of an INI1 germline mutation in a third multigeneration family with the RTPS (Wesseling et al, 2007). Inheritance of
the mutation resulted in the development early in life of an AT/RT in at least three cousins. Two of these patients survived this tumour for
over 15 years and one of these developed a (probably radiation induced) meningioma and a myoepithelioma in adulthood. We recently showed
(Hulsebos et al, 2007) that INI1 is a predisposing gene in familial schwannomatosis, a disorder in which patients develop multiple
schwannomas later in life and that is also characterised by variable expression and incomplete penetrance (MacCollin et al, 2003). It has
been hypothesised that in patients with a germline INI1 mutation, a developmental window exists at young age in which most rhabdoid tumours
occur (Janson et al, 2006). Carriers of the INI1 mutation that do not develop such a tumour at young age might be at increased risk of
developing other INI1-related, but not necessarily malignant tumours later in life. Given the small number of splice site mutations in
malignant rhabdoid tumours reported to date (Biegel, 2006), it is interesting to note that our family and one other multigeneration family
with RTPS (Taylor et al, 2000) demonstrate an INI1 mutation at a splice site, raising the possibility that carriers of such a mutation may
be less likely to be affected. In case of our family, there is the additional possibility that in the brain of the unaffected carriers
alternative splicing of the INI1-mutant allele transcript, leading to absence of INI1 protein in the brain tumours of the patients, does not
occur. Instead, skipping of exon 4, resulting in the in-frame deletion of 46 amino-acid residues in the INI1 protein, may occur. This
truncated protein may still be (partly) functional, at least not contributing to the development of brain tumours in these carriers.
Finally, whereas long-term survival in children with AT/RT is extremely rare (Tekautz et al, 2005; Squire et al, 2007), two of the four
cousins we described survive for more than 15 years now. More multigeneration families with the RTPS need to be investigated to further
elucidate genotype–phenotype correlations in this syndrome. We express our gratitude to Dr PJ Slootweg (Radboud University Nijmegen Medical
Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands) and to Dr R Forsyth (Ghent University Hospital, Ghent, Belgium) for histological advice with regard to
the myoepithelioma. We thank A Gemmink (Department of Pathology, Radboud University Nijmegen Medical Centre, Nijmegen, The Netherlands) for
performing the immunohistochemical stainings. This study was supported by the Dutch Cancer Society, grant nos UVA 2001-2561 (TJMH) and KUN
2003-2975 (PW). Haplotyping of family members and LOH analysis of tumours using microsatellite markers from chromosome 22. Patients with the
germline INI-mutation are represented by black symbols and proven nonexpressing carriers of this mutation by dotted symbols. Haplotypes were
constructed assuming minimal numbers of recombinations. Haplotypes for the grandfather (between brackets) were inferred. N: noninferred
marker allele. MBT-1, MBT-3, and MBT-4(R) are the marker alleles retained in the MBT of patients III-1, III-3, and III-4 (R, recurrent
tumour), respectively. M-1 and My-1 represent marker alleles retained in meningioma and myoepithelioma of patient III-1, respectively.
Sequence analysis of the exon 4–intron 4 boundary of INI1. Constitutional heterozygosity for the G>A mutation in blood DNA of patient III-1
(B) but not in normal DNA (A) and retention of the mutant A-allele in MBT DNA of patient III-1 (MBT-1) (C). Immunohistochemical
INI1-staining of the recurrent MBT of patient III-4 (MBT-4R) (A) and the meningioma (M-1) (B) and myoepithelioma (My-1) (C) of patient
III-1. Note absence of nuclear staining of tumour cells in MBT-4R and myoepithelioma. In contrast, the nuclei of endothelial cells of the
blood vessels in both tumours and the nuclei of all cells in the meningioma show unequivocal staining. Original magnification × 200.
Microsatellite analysis with intragenic NF2 markers nf2C3.1 (A) D22S929 (B) and nf2CAV (C) of constitutional DNAs of patient III-1, mother
II-1, and father II-2, and of tumour DNAs of patient III-1. Positions of alleles are indicated on the left. MBT-1, M-1, and My-1 represent
retained alleles in the MBT, meningioma, and myoepithelioma of patient III-1, respectively. Clinical and histopathological features of
patients with malignant brain tumour of infancy Presence (+) or absence (−) of cells with eosinophilic intracytoplasmic globules; these
cells were generally vimentin and GFAP positive; additionally, the cells showed variable EMA staining, but were desmin negative.
+=retention; −=loss; ND=not determined (no tissue available anymore).
