Dear Editor, We read the article by Shukla et al.1 on ″Vitrectomy for circumscribed choroidal hemangioma (CCH) with exudative retinal
detachment refractory to transpupillary thermotherapy (TTT)″ with interest. We would like to share our experience about a similar case. We
have reported a case of a 13-year-old girl with a large, subfoveal CCH and a total, secondary retinal detachment [Fig. 1].2 The tumor
measured 6.0 mm in height with a base of 14.2 mm x 13.8 mm. At presentation, visual acuity was reduced to bare perception of light. The
patient underwent three applications of TTT at zero, five and 10 weeks. At six months after the first session of TTT, the retina was totally
re-attached; vision improved to 7/200. The retina remained attached at the last follow-up, three years from presentation with visual acuity
improving to 20/40, N6. It is noteworthy that the subfoveal area of the tumor was not directly treated, hence allowing good visual recovery
even while successfully arresting the tumor activity [Fig. 2]. Garcia-Arumi et al.3 also showed that most of the tumors (62.5%) required two
or three applications of TTT to obtain occlusion of the tumor vessels. The end point of TTT in treatment of CCH is the resolution of
exudative retinal detachment at the fovea and not total tumor destruction. If the subretinal fluid fails to resolve after one treatment,
second and third treatment sessions can be applied. Further treatment is not necessary if the exudation from the tumor stops. In the case
reported by Shukla et al.1 TTT was applied only once and then presumed to be refractory to further treatment. Also, it would have been
worthwhile to mention the tumor dimensions. At presentation, right eye fundus reveals a large orangered, well-delineated, subretinal mass
lesion at the fovea suggestive of circumscribed choroidal hemangioma. Exudative retinal detachment involves the fovea At 18 months follow-
up, the tumor has regressed with complete resorption of subretinal fluid and visual improvement
