Human ocular infestation by live filarial worm is a rare occurrence and has been reported mostly form South-East Asia. It involves the
eyelids, conjunctiva, cornea, anterior chamber and uvea. No case of intravitreal Brugian microfilaria / adult worm has been found by Medline
search. Here we report a case of live intravitreal adult Brugian filaria, where the parasite was successfully removed by pars plana
vitrectomy. Identification of the worm was done by light microscopy and confirmed by immuno chromatographic test. Intraocular infestation by
the filarial worm is a rare occurrence in humans. Most of the published reports are from South-East Asia.1 We report a very rare case of
intravitreal Brugian filarial worm, where the worm was removed live and intact by pars plana vitrectomy. A 35-year-old male presented to us
with complaints of ″something moving in front of his left eye for two days″. His visual acuity was 20/20 in both eyes. Anterior segment
findings were within normal limits. Indirect ophthalmoscopy of the left eye showed clear ocular media, but there was a motile whitish
thread-like worm entangled with vitreous strands found near the optic disc [Fig. 1]. Posterior segment of the right eye showed no
abnormality. The patient had history of recurrent fever. Peripheral blood smear examination showed eosinophil count of 523/µl of blood but
no detectable microfilaria. Systemic examination revealed no abnormality. Chest X-ray was normal. No cutaneous lesions were seen. Routine
and microscopic examination of urine showed no abnormality. Pars plana vitrectomy was planned to remove the worm live and intact. Limited
vitrectomy was carried out leaving vitreous strands around the worm intact, which helped in removing the parasite by grasping the vitreous
strands around it [Fig. 2]. The worm measuring 30 mm in length and 0.1 mm in diameter was alive and actively motile upon removal from the
eye. It was sent to the parasitologist and on light microscopy identified to be adult filarial worm because of twisted body curves with
smooth cuticle, fine transverse striations, ventrally coiled tail [Fig. 3] and the slightly swollen head end2 [Fig. 4]. Immuno
chromatographic test (ICT) for filarial antigen was negative. The sensitivity and specificity of ICT for filarial antigen (W. bancrofti) is
96 to 100% and 95 to100% respectively.3 This helped us to diagnose the worm as adult Brugian filarial worm and most probably Brugia malayi
as this is the only other filarial worm found in the Indian subcontinent according to the literature.3 Brugia malayi is a helminth belonging
to class Nematodes. Man is the definitive host for Brugia malayi, the intermediate host being species of mansonian mosquitoes. Adult worms
live in the lymphatic system discharging live embryos (microfilaria) into the bloodstream, which are capable of living in the peripheral
blood for a considerable period of time without undergoing any developmental metamorphosis. Microfilarae are taken up by the intermediate
host where they undergo further development becoming infective for man.3,4 Usually pathogenicity of B. malayi is due to lymphangitis and
elephantiasis. But rarely, microfilarae move out of lymphatics or blood circulation and can come to extravascular sites like the eye
(vitreous cavity). The exact mode of entry of such helminths into the vitreous cavity is not known. The possible modes may be from
choriocapillaries through the retinal layers as in a few reported cases of intravitreal Gnathostomiasis or through the optic nerve head.5
The most common clinical presentation of ocular filarial infestation is chemosis, lid edema orbital cellulitis, anterior uveitis or worm in
the anterior chamber. But no case of intravitreal adult Brugian filarial worm has been found by Medline search. Once a parasite is
identified in the vitreous cavity it should be removed immediately, live and intact as (i) it is capable of migrating to various parts of
the eye and could cause structural damage and severe intraocular reaction (ii) severed parasite may cause serious intraocular inflammation
(iii) intact parasite is necessary for proper identification of species and any systemic treatment if needed for it.5,6 This very rare case
of intravitreal Brugian filariasis illustrates that larval stage of lymphatic filariasis can reach vitreous cavity and grow into its adult
form and may cause visual problem. Removal of the living intact parasite is necessary not only for symptomatic relief or visual
rehabilitation but also for prevention of intraocular inflammation due to damage or death of the parasite. Live intravitreal Brugian worm
with active motility seen between the optic disk and macula The worm is extracted live and intact after limited vitrectomy holding the
vitreous strands around the worm Light microscopic picture of the worm showing twisted body curves, smooth cuticles, transverse striations
and ventrally curved tail (100x) Light microscopic picture of head end of the parasite showing slight bulging (400x)
