Congenital anomalies of the lens include a wide range from lens coloboma to primary aphakia and doubling of lens. There have been few case
reports of double lens; the etiology suggested is metaplastic changes in the surface ectoderm that leads to formation of two lens vesicles
and hence resulting in double lens. We report a case with bilobed lens, which raises the possibility of explaining the etiology of double
lens. Congenital coloboma of the lens is the most common congenital anomaly of lens. In the region of the coloboma, there is usually some
defect in the zonules and hence the resultant coloboma. Cases with duplicated lens that is a single eye carrying two lenses, have been
described. 1-3 The exact mechanism for this anomaly is not known yet. Our case serves to explain the connection between lens coloboma and
duplicated lens. A young boy, 16 years old, presented with complaints of poor vision in the left eye since childhood. There was no history
of any treatment or surgical intervention. In addition, no history pertaining to any trauma was given. Birth history was not significant. On
examination, he had a vision of 20/200 in the right eye (RE) and 20/20 in the left eye (LE). The LE was clinically normal with a normal
fundus. The RE revealed a horizontally placed bilobed lens sharing a common capsular bag. Zonules were lacking around the fissure between
the two lobes [Fig. 1]. Also, there was an inferior iris coloboma. Fundus was normal in both eyes. An ultrasonogram of the right eye [Fig.
2] revealed a bilobed lens in the anterior segment of the eye with normal posterior segment. Congenital anomalies of the lens are varied.
Partial congenital aphakia is a rare condition in which the lens appears to be partially divided by a deep furrow.1 In the case of
congenital duplication of lens reported by Thakkar et al.2 two lenses were placed obliquely in a straight line with a clear area in between.
Absence of zonules and capsule between the two lenses was also noted. Richardson3 reported a case in which the two lenses were asymmetrical,
one being larger than the other. The patient also had corneal metaplasia, complete coloboma of iris and fundus. The mechanism for this
anomaly is not known yet. Whether it is part of a phylentogenic spectra or represents development from two embryonically separate lens
remains a question. Duke Elder has tried to explain the occurrence of the two entities based on separate embryonic developmental sequences.1
He suggested that the metaplastic changes in the surface ectoderm leads the lens plate to invaginate at two place and forms two lens
vesicles which results in double lens.1 This suggests that the lens is divided before the lens starts developing. Our case has a deep furrow
in the center Fig. 1 with localized absence of zonules. We, therefore, suggest that once the deep furrow is formed due to absence of
zonules, it may go further (deep) enough to divide the lens into two distinct parts. Therefore, the absence of zonules is significant and
these furrows may be deep enough and progress to duplication. It is a possibility that the lens duplication might be occurring when the lens
vesicle is single and it is the laxity and abnormal stretching which causes the deep furrow and possibly duplication. Duplication may be the
extreme form of such a bilobed, furrowed lens. It is interesting to note that both the cases previously reported2-3 had lens place in a
straight axis at opposite ends. This gives further credence to our theory of the fissure dividing the lens into two and the remaining
zonules pulling them away from each other. Since lens coloboma occurs frequently such deep furrows (bilobed lens) are uncommon. We believe
that it represents the missing link between the colobomatous lens and duplicated lens. We understand that a single case report may not be
suggestive of any mechanism but nevertheless it does indicate a possible mechanism of lens duplication. Slit-lamp photograph of the right
eye showing horizontally placed bilobed lens. Note the lens is partially separated with a separate nucleus in each lobe Ultrasonogram of
right eye showing bilobed lens
