Patients with primary small cell carcinoma of the liver have rarely been described in medical literature. Knowledge of clinical,
pathological and immunohistochemical properties remains limited. We described an 82-year-old female patient with primary small cell
carcinoma of the liver. Histologically, the tumor showed typical morphology of a pulmonary small cell carcinoma. Immunohistochemically, the
tumor revealed neuroendocrine differentiation; positive reaction for chromogranin, synaptophysin, CD56, and neuron specific enolase. The
tumor was also positive for TTF-1 and c-kit but completely negative for hepatocyte, carcinoembryonic antigen, cytokeratin 7; 19; and 20.
Herein, we discussed the clinical, pathological and immunohistochemical findings of extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma of the liver and
reviewed the relevant literature. The most common site of small cell carcinoma is the lung. It has rarely been found at extrapulmonary sites
such as the trachea, larynx, thymus, esophagus, stomach, small intestine, colon, prostate, gallbladder, skin, breast, and uterine cervix.1
Small cell carcinoma, involving primarily the liver, is extremely rare; and only nine cases have been reported in the literature.2-7 The
clinical and pathological features as well as immunohistochemical findings have rarely been reported, furthermore the reported findings are
not always consistent. Here, we report a case of extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma of the liver and review of the medical literature. An
82-year-old female with hypertension complained of abdominal discomfort in the right upper quadrant. She had undergone cholecystectomy and
T-tube choledochostomy 2 years earlier because of gallbladder and common bile duct stones. Abdominal ultrasonography and computed tomography
revealed a 5.6 cm-sized liver mass with peripheral rim enhancement (Fig. 1). Lymph node enlargement was present at the aorto-caval area. The
patient did not smoke and was not an alcoholic. Colonoscopy showed a tubular adenoma at the sigmoid colon. All laboratory tests, including
liver function testing, peripheral blood counts, and tumor markers such as carcinoembryonic antigen(CEA), CA19 - 9 and alpha fetoprotein,
were in the normal range. HBsAg was negative and HBsAb was positive. Anti-HCV and anti-HIV were negative. Surgical resection of segment 6 of
the liver and right hemicolectomy due to hepatic adhesion was performed. The tumor and non-tumor liver tissue were formalin-fixed and
paraffin embedded. After surgery, bronchial washing, chest computed tomography (CT) and PET-CT were performed to exclude primary pulmonary
small cell carcinoma; and there was no evidence of lung cancer. Post operative chemotherapy was not performed because the patient refused
further treatment due to her advanced age. Seven months after surgery, 1.1 cm to 2.8 cm-sized multiple hepatic nodules developed with
enlargement of the lymph nodes at the porta hepatic, aortocaval, and portocaval areas. No pulmonary abnormalities were detected. Oral
etoposide treatment was started because the patient's general condition was poor and she had been receiving anticoagulant therapy due to
atrial fibrillation. Two months after chemotherapy, the size of the hepatic nodules and lymph nodes decreased. The patient is currently
alive 1.5 years post-surgery without significant problems. Paraffin blocks were used for hematoxylin-eosin staining and
immunohistochemistry. The primary antibodies are listed in Table 1. Grossly, the tumor was 6.7 × 5.5 × 5.5 cm with a nodular expanding tumor
border (Fig. 2) that involved Glisson's capsule and invaded the pericolic fat. The cut surface of the tumor was yellow, tan, and friable
with necrotic areas. Portal vein invasion was absent. The background liver was not cirrhotic. Histologically, the tumor was composed of
small round cells with multifocal necrosis, morphologically similar to pulmonary small cell carcinoma (Fig. 3A). An insular and trabecular
pattern was not observed. The tumor cells showed hyperchromatic nuclei with a "salt and pepper" pattern of finely dispersed chromatin,
indistinct nucleoli, and frequent mitoses (Fig. 3B). Nuclear moldings and crush artifacts were present. The tumor cells were diffusely
positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56, neuron specific enolase (NSE), thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and c-kit (Fig. 4A,
B). On the other hand, cytokeratin 7; 19; and 20; CEA; alpha fetoprotein; hepatocyte; vimentin; desmin; and S-100 protein were all negative.
There was no hepatocellular carcinoma or adenocarcinoma component. Multiple enlarged lymph nodes were identified two of which showed
metastatic small cell carcinoma. Extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma has been reported to occur in 0.1 - 0.4% of all malignancies.8
Extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma shows neuroendocrine differentiation, but it is not synonymous with neuroendocrine carcinoma. Primary
neuroendocrine carcinomas of the liver may show solid, trabecular and insular arrangements reminiscent of a carcinoid;9-12 however,
extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma of the liver is histologically indistinguishable from metastatic pulmonary small cell carcinoma to the
liver. Therefore, exclusion of pulmonary small cell carcinoma is a prerequisite for the diagnosis of extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma. In
our case, the tumor showed homogeneous small cell features without a carcinoid-like pattern. There was no pulmonary lesion detected on a
chest X-ray, chest CT, PET-CT, or bronchoscopy. Approximately half of the small cell carcinomas that develop in the gastrointestinal tract
contain non-small cell carcinoma elements;13 but our case had pure small-cell morphology without features of hepatocellular carcinoma or
biliary adenocarcinoma. The results of immunohistochemical staining of small cell carcinoma occurring in the liver vary. Recently reported
cases, including this case, were positive for more than 2 neuroendocrine markers such as CD56, synaptophysin, or chromogranin.2,3,8 Although
TTF-1 is usually positive in pulmonary small cell carcinomas (about 96%),14 its expression is not constant in extrapulmonary small cell
carcinoma. Two cases of small cell carcinoma of the liver previously reported were negative for TTF-1,2,3 but our case was positive. TTF-1
expression has been reported in some extrapulmonary small cell carcinomas occurring in the gastrointestinal tract, urinary bladder, uterine
cervix, prostate, thyroid gland, and breast and it is not a specific marker for pulmonary small cell carcinoma.14-17 Cytokeratin expressions
have been studied in small cell carcinomas of the liver.3,5 Kim et al.3 reported that a tumor was negative for CK7, 19 and 20, in agreement
with our case. However, Zanconati et al.5 reported that AE1/AE3, cytokeratin 8, 18, and 19 were positive for tumors in all of the 3 cases
that they reported. These cytokeratins are expressed more commonly in cholangiocarcinoma than in hepatocellular carcinoma and have negative
reactions with neuroendocrine markers except for NSE, which is less specific than chromogranin. The immunophenotype of the 3 cases reported
by Zanconati et al.5 were more compatible with a carcinoma showing biliary differentiation rather than neuroendocrine differentiation. The
study of more cases is needed to characterize in detail the immunophenotype of primary hepatic small cell carcinoma. Regarding the origin of
neuroendocrine cells, differentiation and proliferation from biliary epithelium have been favored because bile ducts contain neuroendocrine
argentaffin cells. However, neuroendocrine differentiation from stem cell theory should also be considered because the tumor cells were
found to express c-kit, a stem cell marker of the liver, in 4 recently reported cases including ours. The clinical and pathological findings
of primary small cell carcinoma of the liver are summarized in Table 2. The clinical features such as low alpha fetoprotein and absence of
viremia or cirrhosis are different from conventional hepatocellular carcinoma. Extrapulmonary small cell carcinomas generally show rapid
progression with distant metastases and poor prognosis. Small cell carcinoma of the liver is rare and the information on the clinical course
is limited. Sengoz et al.4 reported 2 cases of extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma of the liver, 1 of which survived for 13 months after
chemotherapy and the other for 67 months after right hemihepatectomy. Zanconati et al.5 reported 2 cases that were acutely fatal. In our
case, the patient did not receive the standard chemotherapy of small cell carcinoma because of her advanced age, poor general condition, and
atrial fibrillation. Fortunately, she showed response to oral etoposide that was given after recurrence. She is still alive after 1.5 years
later without significant clinical complications. In general, the treatment of extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma is organ resection and
adjuvant chemotherapy using the same regimen as with pulmonary small cell carcinomas. This work was supported by Inha University Research
Grant. Abdominal CT scan shows a 5.6 cm-size liver mass with peripheral rim enhancement. Grossly, the well demarcated tumor shows central
necrosis and cystic change. Microscopic findings of the tumor reveal solid small round cells and necrosis (A). The tumor cells show oval to
fusiform hyperchromatic nuclei and indistinct nucleoli with frequent mitoses (B). Immunohistochemical staining for CD56 (A) and
synaptophysin (B) reveals a strong positive reaction. Primary Antibodies and Pretreatment Protocols Clinicopathological and
Immunohistochemical Features of Extrapulmonary Small Cell Carcinoma of the Liver RUQ, right upper quadrant; DM, diabetes mellitus; SYN,
synaptophysin; CHR, chromogranin; CT, chemotherapy; MI, myocardial infarction; AWD, alive with disease; DOD, dead of disease.
