A 76-year-old man with opercular syndrome characterized by complete bilateral loss of voluntary control of facial, lingual, pharyngeal and
masticatory muscles is presented with focus on the severe dysphagia. Three years earlier the patient had experienced two strokes resulting
in opercular syndrome with severe dysphagia. Despite initial logopedic dysphagia treatment, swallowing did not improve. A new treatment for
dysphagia, consisting of neuromuscular electrical stimulation was applied on the patient. He returned to oral feeding. Clinical and
treatment observations are reported. Although Magnus was the first to describe the opercular syndrome in 1837 , the syndrome is also known
as Foix-Chavany-Marie syndrome named after the French authors who described the syndrome in 1926 . The classical opercular syndrome presents
with loss of voluntary facial, pharyngeal, lingual, and mastication movements. Reflexive and automatic movements with the exception of the
gag reflex, are being preserved . Usually the gag reflex is decreased or absent [1, 13, 22]. Automato-voluntary dissociation of movements
with the muscles of the larynx, pharynx, tongue, lips, and cheeks has been described in oral apraxia as well [1, 8]. The prevalence of the
opercular syndrome is not known. Bilateral abnormality of the opercular cortex forms the neuroanatomical basis of the opercular syndrome in
the classical cases . Multiple strokes form the major etiology of this syndrome [13, 23]. The voluntary phase of the swallowing act is
severely affected in the majority of these patients while reflex swallowing is preserved [1, 13, 22]. Very often, patients with opercular
syndrome receive percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) tube feeding. In this case study, a new treatment for dysphagia consisting of
neuromuscular electrical stimulation applied on a patient diagnosed with opercular syndrome, is reported [10, 17]. Three years ago, a
76-year-old male was referred to the Department of Neurology because of the sudden onset of difficulty to speak and weakness of the right
arm. A left hemispheric infarction was diagnosed. Six months later he experienced a second stroke with inability to speak or swallow and a
paralysis of the left arm. During neurologic examination no voluntary movements of the jaw, lips or tongue were present. A bilateral
dysfunction of the 5th, 7th, 9th, 10th, and 12th cranial nerves was found with the exception of the automatic movements of the same muscles.
These automatic movements were preserved. The gag reflex was decreased. Although the presence of the swallowing reflex was clinically
observed, the patient totally depended on nasogastric tube feeding because of massive aspiration, including his own saliva. Besides the
earlier left-sided cortical infarction, the MRI-scan showed diffuse atrophy of the brain. An infarction was diagnosed in the right pre- and
post-central convolutions. Also, right-sided subcortical lacunar foci were seen (Fig. 1). The opercular syndrome was diagnosed. Fig. 1MRI
scan performed after the second stroke. The scan shows diffuse atrophy of the brain, an old left-sided cortical infarction, a new infarction
in the right pre- and post-central convolutions, and right-sided subcortical lacunar foci MRI scan performed after the second stroke. The
scan shows diffuse atrophy of the brain, an old left-sided cortical infarction, a new infarction in the right pre- and post-central
convolutions, and right-sided subcortical lacunar foci Despite initial logopedic dysphagia treatment during the first year after the second
stroke, the dysphagia did not improve and the patient fully depended on PEG tube feeding. He was referred to the dysphagia clinic and
offered neuromuscular electrical stimulation of the muscles involved in the swallowing act simultaneous with logopedic dysphagia treatment.
During 5 months, the patient received treatment sessions of 1 h each, on five consecutive days per week. The major treatment goals are to
improve the hyolaryngeal elevation and to stimulate the sensory input that may facilitate volitional triggering of swallowing in dysphagia
[16, 17]. Two dual channel modified hand-held battery-powered electrical stimulators (VitalStim® Therapy; frequency 80 Hz, pulse width
700 µs, Chattanooga Group, Chattanooga, TN, USA) were used by an experienced speech therapist. The initial intensity of the electrical
current was 6.5 mA in position “A” (Fig. 2a) using two sets of snap skin electrodes, located on each side of the midline, above and beneath
the lesser horns of the hyoid bone, on the mylohyoid muscles, and on the thyrohyoid muscles. Position “B” (Fig. 2b) using one set of
electrodes, located on each side of the mouth, on the orbicularis oris muscle and the masseter muscles. The highest electrical current level
the patient could tolerate, resulting in maximum muscle contraction without spasm, was applied as maximum motor level in position “A” and
“B” . During the following sessions, the position B and the combination of position A with B were alternatively applied with increasing
intensity of the electrical current up to 17.5 mA for position B and 10.0 mA for position A. Logopedic dysphagia treatment was given
simultaneously with electrical stimulation. Initial small amounts (2 till 5 ml) of thickened liquids were offered to the patient
progressively followed by the intake of various food consistencies, using swallowing manoeuvres [6, 15]. Fig. 2The position of the skin
electrodes. a On each side of the midline, above and beneath the lesser horns of the hyoid bone, on the mylohyoid muscles, and on the
thyrohyoid muscles. b On each side of the mouth, on the orbicularis oris muscle and the masseter muscles The position of the skin
electrodes. a On each side of the midline, above and beneath the lesser horns of the hyoid bone, on the mylohyoid muscles, and on the
thyrohyoid muscles. b On each side of the mouth, on the orbicularis oris muscle and the masseter muscles Before and after treatment, a
clinical assessment (Table 1) was performed by the speech therapist using an oral motor function test (5-point scale) and a functional oral
intake scale for dysphagia according to Crary . No considerable difference of voluntary control of swallowing was present at the end of
therapy as was confirmed by the patient’s inability to perform six out of seven voluntary exercises of the oral motor function test. Only
minor movements of the lips were observed while the speech therapist was presenting oral movements as imitative tasks. During therapy the
functional oral intake scale showed changes from PEG tube feeding to oral diet with multiple consistencies requiring special preparation or
compensations . Clinically, the presence of the swallowing reflex could be observed. However, the patient’s extreme weak condition and
inability to swallow without great risk of massive aspiration, did not allow a pretreatment videofluoroscopic examination (VFS), neither a
fiberoptic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES). After therapy, both assessment techniques were performed successfully. The FEES was
performed by the laryngologist using a standardized FEES protocol . The FEES and videofluoroscopy were judged independently by the speech
therapist and laryngologist using the “penetration-aspiration scale” according to Rosenbek (Table 1). Table 1Pre- and post-treatment
measurements [5, 14, 21]MeasurementPretreatmentPosttreatmentOral motor function test (seven exercises scored on a five-point scale;
0 = normal; 4 = total disability)28 pointsunable to perform voluntary oral motor exercises26 pointsunable to perform six out of seven
voluntary oral motor exercisesFunctional oral intake scale for dysphagia Level 1: Nothing by mouthLevel 5: Total oral diet with multiple
consistencies, requiring special preparation or compensationsFEES (3 × 5 ml thin and 3 × 5 ml thickened liquid boluses) 1. Penetration-
aspiration scale (1 = normal, 6 = material enters the airway, passes below the vocal folds and is ejected into the larynx or out of the
airway)2. Pharyngeal delay time3. Location of residueNot feasible because of massive aspiration1. Score of one during six swallowing
attempts. 2. Less then 0.40 s (thin- and thick-ened liquids) 3. Mild symmetrical pooling in the pyriform cavities after swallowing thin- and
thick-ened liquidsVideofluoroscopy (3 × 10 ml high-density barium boluses) Penetration-aspiration scaleNot feasible because of massive
aspirationScore of six during first swallowing attempt.Score of one during second and third swallowing attemptFunctional oral intake scale
for dysphagia (Crary et al.) Level 1: nothing by mouth; Level 2: tube dependent with minimal attempts of food or liquid; Level 3: tube
dependent with consistent oral intake of food or liquid; Level 4: total oral diet of a single consistency; Level 5: total oral diet with
multiple consistencies, but requiring special preparation or compensations; Level 6: total oral diet with multiple consistencies without
special preparation, but with specific food limitation; Level 7: total oral diet with no restrictions.Oral motor function test1. Open and
close the mouth.2. Blow up the cheeks while the mouth is closed. Then press a finger against the left cheek and the right cheek a couple of
times, while keeping the mouth closed. (No air may leak out of the mouth.)3. Stretch out the tongue as far as possible.4. Open the mouth and
move the tongue as far as possible to the right5. Open the mouth and move the tongue as far as possible to the left.6. While the tip of the
tongue pushes into the left cheek, press a finger against the tongue. (If there is normal tongue strength it should be possible to resist
mild finger pressure.)7. While the tip of the tongue pushes into the right cheek, press a finger against the tongue. (If there is normal
tongue strength it should be possible to resist mild finger pressure.)The test should be evaluated according to the scale below.Scale0
Normal1 Mild dysfunction2 Moderate dysfunction3 Severe dysfunction4 Impossible to perform Pre- and post-treatment measurements [5, 14, 21]
Functional oral intake scale for dysphagia (Crary et al.) Level 1: nothing by mouth; Level 2: tube dependent with minimal attempts of food
or liquid; Level 3: tube dependent with consistent oral intake of food or liquid; Level 4: total oral diet of a single consistency; Level 5:
total oral diet with multiple consistencies, but requiring special preparation or compensations; Level 6: total oral diet with multiple
consistencies without special preparation, but with specific food limitation; Level 7: total oral diet with no restrictions. Oral motor
function test 1. Open and close the mouth. 2. Blow up the cheeks while the mouth is closed. Then press a finger against the left cheek and
the right cheek a couple of times, while keeping the mouth closed. (No air may leak out of the mouth.) 3. Stretch out the tongue as far as
possible. 4. Open the mouth and move the tongue as far as possible to the right 5. Open the mouth and move the tongue as far as possible to
the left. 6. While the tip of the tongue pushes into the left cheek, press a finger against the tongue. (If there is normal tongue strength
it should be possible to resist mild finger pressure.) 7. While the tip of the tongue pushes into the right cheek, press a finger against
the tongue. (If there is normal tongue strength it should be possible to resist mild finger pressure.) The test should be evaluated
according to the scale below. Scale 0 Normal 1 Mild dysfunction 2 Moderate dysfunction 3 Severe dysfunction 4 Impossible to perform During
the posttreatment FEES, the patient identified sensory testing correctly. The oral transit was severely insufficient so that the bolus had
to be positioned at the base of the tongue by means of a tablespoon to initiate the swallowing reflex. The reflexive phase of swallowing
could be observed. The pharyngeal delay time was measured from the moment the bolus was positioned at the base of the tongue until the
swallowing reflex was triggered while the endoscopic image was in the “home” position . The pharyngeal delay time was less then 0.40 s for
both thin and thickened liquid boluses of 5 ml. After swallowing, mild symmetrical pooling in the pyriform cavities was observed without
laryngeal penetration nor aspiration, resulting in a score of one on the “penetration-aspiration scale” . During the first attempt of the
posttreatment VFS (3 × 10 ml high-density barium boluses), minor aspiration during swallowing was observed. A strong coughing reflex
immediately evacuated this partially aspirated bolus. The response of the patient to aspiration was six on the “penetration-aspiration
scale” (Table 1). During the two other swallowing attempts, neither penetration nor aspiration was observed. In conclusion, posttreatment,
dysphagia with minor diet restrictions, consisting of multiple consistencies requiring special preparation, was observed . One year after
therapy, the patient’s clinical condition has not changed; he is still on oral diet without pneumonia. The primary neural pathway for
voluntary swallowing is blocked in the opercular syndrome [1, 13, 22]. The voluntary control of the oral musculature is absent, resulting in
disuse of the swallowing musculature, with preservation of the reflexes like the swallowing reflex . In general, disuse of striated muscles
leads to atrophy and loss of muscle force [12, 20]. Electrical stimulation is a well-documented clinical method of augmenting muscle
performance in both normal and paralyzed muscles [7, 11, 20]. Some studies report an increase in contractile qualities and muscle force
after electrical stimulation . According to Hainaut et al. NMES as a training modality is not a substitute for, but a complement of
voluntary exercise of disused and healthy muscles . In this patient, electrical stimulation was applied simultaneous with logopedic
dysphagia treatment. Electrical stimulation has allowed restoration of the motor function of paralyzed muscles . It can also initiate muscle
re-education [10, 16] and may create a relearning process of the brain in controlling the muscles responsible for the swallowing act .
Leelamanit et al. found that surface electrical stimulation of the thyrohyoid muscles helps to improve the swallow function by optimized
hyolaryngeal elevation . These studies suggest a positive effect with improvement of the swallowing function. Burnett et al. observed that
paired intramuscular stimulation of the mylohyoid and/or thyrohyoid muscles produced about 50% of the laryngeal elevation with about 80% of
the velocity that normally occurs during a swallow . Hyolaryngeal elevation plays an important role in the cricopharyngeal opening [4, 16].
According to Ludlow et al. sensory levels of surface electrical stimulation may facilitate triggering of swallowing in dysphagia . In this
patient, the muscles involved in swallowing were presumed to be atrophied because of disuse due to complete loss of voluntary control and
PEG tube feeding. It is hypothesized, that in this patient after surface electrical stimulation combined with logopedic dysphagia treatment,
an improvement of the reflexive and automatic movements during the swallowing act appeared, based on an increase of contractile qualities
and muscle force. Despite the fact that a pretreatment FEES and a videofluoroscopic examination could not be performed in this patient,
posttreatment improved muscle force resulting in improvement of amplitude of the hyolaryngeal elevation, and improvement of the
cricopharyngeal opening during the reflexive phase of the swallowing act, are presumed. Despite some movements of the lips, the voluntary
control of the initiation of the swallowing act did not improve. A second hypothesis is based on NMES serving as a cue to break through the
apraxia . In literature, some patients with opercular syndrome have been described as suffering from buccofacial and/or verbal apraxia,
especially those with lesions extending to Broca`s area. Non-verbal oral movements, being less complex than articulatory movements, may
recover in some cases of oral apraxia . During the treatment consisting of logopedic dysphagia training combined with NMES, the NMES may
have served as a proprioceptive cue. This phenomenon could explain some voluntary oral movements in this patient during the application of
NMES without imitative tasks at the end of therapy. No universal accepted protocol for surface electrical stimulation for dysphagia,
including intensity of the current, frequency and length of the treatment, does exist at the moment. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation as
a treatment for dysphagia has been documented in the literature rarely. Furthermore, dysphagia treatment in the opercular syndrome has never
been reported yet. This case report describes the possibility of neuromuscular electrical stimulation to treat dysphagia in the opercular
syndrome. Neuromuscular electrical stimulation as a treatment for dysphagia is a promising paramedical technology that has to be studied
further to specify the treatment protocol as well as the medical indications. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author(s) and source are credited.
