An extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma is a rare condition. It has similar histological features to pulmonary small cell carcinoma and is
equally aggressive. We present the case of a 60-year-old woman who presented with right upper quadrant pain. Computerised tomography
revealed an appendiceal lesion and multiple liver metastases. Exploratory laparotomy and right hemicolectomy was performed with
histopathological analysis confirming a primary small cell carcinoma of her appendix. This is the first reported case of a pure
extrapulmonary carcinoma arising from the appendix. Extrapulmonary small cell carcinomas (ESC) are rare. Many different sites of origin have
been described including kidney, bladder, prostate, endometrium, salivary glands, nasal sinuses and intestinal tract . Primary colonic ESC
remains the rarest and most aggressive. There is an equal sex distribution with a preponderance for middle aged patients. We present a case
of a 60-year old female with a primary small cell carcinoma of the appendix with liver metastasis. A 60-year-old female was admitted with a
4-day history of right upper quadrant pain. She was treated with oral antibiotics for suspected acute cholecystitis. She had a past medical
history of Type-2 diabetes and hypertension. She was a non-smoker. The patient had no fever, sweating or rigors but described similar
intermittent pain with associated nausea and vomiting over the preceding 6-weeks. On examination, the patient was comfortable and well
nourished. Her clinical parameters (pulse and blood pressure) were normal and she was apyrexic. Abdominal examination revealed right upper
quadrant tenderness with a palpable liver edge. There were no other masses or organomegaly. Haematological analyses showed a haemoglobin
level of 13.9 g/dl, white cell count 10.8 × 109/l and C-reactive protein 19 mg/L. All other indices were normal as were the plain chest and
abdominal X-rays. An abdominal ultrasound showed a markedly abnormal liver appearance with multiple hypoechoic lesions suggestive of
multiple metastases. The remainder of the biliary tree was normal. A contrast-enhanced computerised tomography (CT) scan of the chest,
abdomen and pelvis confirmed multiple liver metastases within both lobes of the liver but also a 6 × 7 cm tumour mass in the right iliac
fossa (Figures 1 &2). There was associated lymphadenopathy extending through the ileo-colic branch of the superior mesenteric artery and
further large lymph nodes measuring up to 1.9 cms in diameter in the aorto-caval and para-aortic regions. Although the lesion was separate
from the ileo-caecal valve, radiological imaging suggested an appendiceal or caecal origin. Further extrinsic pressure to the distal third
of the right ureter was present with mild hydronephrosis. No lung parenchymal abnormality was identified. Contrast-enhanced computerised
tomography scan of the abdomen demonstrating a 6 cm × 7 cm tumour mass in the right iliac fossa (white arrow). Although the tumour mass was
inseparable from the lower pole of the caecum, it appeared separate from the ileo-caecal valve. Contrast-enhanced computerised tomography
scan of the abdomen demonstrating multiple liver metastases. Gastrointestinal investigation with colonoscopy was planned but cancelled due
to deteriorating symptomatology with conservative treatment. Laparotomy revealed a large tumour mass which appeared to originate from the
ascending colon. This was adherent to but not invading the right ureter and lateral abdominal wall. Liver metastases and multiple enlarged
lymph nodes along the ileo-colic branch of the superior mesenteric artery were also identified. Due to the involvement of surrounding
structures and a suspected caecal origin a right hemicolectomy was performed with a primary ileo-colic anastomosis. The right ureter was
preserved as the tumour was dissected free of both the ureter and lateral abdominal wall. No synchronous colorectal tumour was identified
during surgery. Macroscopic examination showed that the tumour had replaced the appendix without caecal involvement (Figure 3). Histological
examination showed a small cell carcinoma tumour composed of small cells with round to ovoid nuclei, dispersed chromatin, scanty cytoplasm
and abundant mitoses (Figure 4). The tumour had extended through the peritoneum and involved the surrounding adipose tissue replacing the
entire appendiceal mucosa. There was extensive lymphovascular invasion and metastatic involvement of regional lymph nodes.
Immunohistochemistry demonstrated positivity for the epithelial markers CAM 5.2 and AE1/AE3 and the neuroendocrine markers PGP 9.5,
synaptophysin and TTF1. Ki-67 staining index was approximately 90%. Tumours cells were negative for cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, CD 45
(LCA), desmin, WT-1, CD 56, chromogranin and CD 99. The morphology and immunohistochemical features were in keeping with a neuroendocrine
carcinoma of small cell type. In the absence of an identified pulmonary tumour, a diagnosis of primary appendiceal small cell carcinoma was
made. Macroscopic image demonstrating the extrapulmonary small cell carcinoma which had surrounded and replaced the appendix without caecal
involvement. High-power microscopic view of the small cell carcinoma showing hyperchromatic nuclei, nuclear moulding and clumping of the
nuclear chromatin. She made an uneventful surgical recovery and was transferred to the oncology department 12-days after surgery for
palliative chemotherapy. The patient developed a right flank abscess after receiving one cycle of carboplatin. The abscess was drained
percutaneously. Subsequently the patient was referred to the palliative care team and passed away 2-months after surgery. A post mortem was
not performed. Undifferentiated small cell carcinoma (SCC) is an aggressive lung tumour accounting for 15% of all lung cancers .
Extrapulmonary small cell carcinomas (ESC) in comparison are rare with an incidence between 0.1–0.4% of all cancers . Approximately 2.5% of
all SCC's arise in extrapulmonary sites such as the salivary glands, pharynx, larynx, nasal sinuses, pancreas, oesophagus, colon, rectum,
skin and cervix . Colorectal ESCs are rare with an incidence of 0.3% of all colorectal cancers and like SCC of the lung, are aggressive
malignancies with early metastasis and have an overall 5-year survival of 13% . Kim et al (2004) reported a 12.5% incidence of colorectal
ESC with 3 patients affected from a retrospective review of 24 patients with ESC . Age and sex distribution for ESC are similar to that seen
in adenocarcinoma of the colon . Although smoking is clearly implicated in the formation of pulmonary SCC, its association with ESC is not
clearly documented. This patient was a non-smoker but there was a family history of lung cancer with an elderly brother who died in his
fifties. The type of lung cancer affecting the patient's brother was not determined and therefore it is unclear whether her family history
of lung cancer had a causative role either. SCC is thought to originate from neuroendocrine cells, which are found in the epithelium of many
mucosal surfaces including the gastrointestinal tract . Despite evidence of neuroendocrine involvement, the origin of ESC is still unclear
as development from undifferentiated airway epithelium has also been suggested along with the amine precursor uptake and decarboxylation
(APUD) system hypothesis which proposes a common ancestral cell derived from the neural crest, which then migrates to various epithelial
tissues and sites within the body . Histopathological diagnosis can be confirmed by the classic appearance of small round to oval shaped
cells with a finely granular and hyperchromatic nucleus, inconspicuous nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm on light microscopy . SCC's show a
strong and diffuse immunoreactivity for CD 56 and 80% positivity for TTF-1 tumour markers . TTF-1 is positive in most cases of pulmonary
small cell carcinoma, but also shows positive staining with many high-grade neuroendocrine carcinomas of non-pulmonary origin. The
importance of TTF-1 is to exclude metastatic Merkel cell carcinoma, which is TTF-1 negative . Due to the extent of disease in our case it
was not possible to assess dysplastic changes of the surrounding mucosa. In the absence of a lung primary combined with the
immunohistochemical profile of the appendiceal tumour suggests that this patient had a pure extrapulmonary SCC of her appendix. Although
carcinoid tumours account for 32–35% of all appendiceal neoplasms, SCC's of the appendix are rarer with only one previously reported case by
Rossi et al and this was mixed with adenocarcinoma . To the authors' knowledge this is the first reported case of a pure small cell
carcinoma of the appendix. Further investigative modalities with CT imaging and bronchoscopy are mandatory to exclude a pulmonary origin .
Although this patient had a positive family of pulmonary neoplasia, she was a non-smoker with no respiratory symptomatology and had a normal
chest CT scan. Following consultation with the respiratory department following surgery, no further investigation was requested as
oncological treatment was the priority. Unfortunately clinical presentation of ESC carcinoma is usually at an advanced stage due to the
aggressive nature of the disease. Therapeutic modalities are determined by the location and extent of disease. Chemotherapy remains the
treatment of choice. The role of radiotherapy and surgical intervention remain limited, with surgery often only being used for the treatment
of localised disease . Combination chemotherapy regimens using cisplatin-etoposide are the most commonly used with response rates of up to
70% . There are no definite chemotherapeutic regimens for ESC of the colon due to the small patient numbers and clinically advanced disease
at presentation. The prognosis for ESC is similar to pulmonary SCC's and remains poor with a rapidly deteriorating clinical course. Five-
year survival is less than 13% . The mean survival for gastrointestinal ESC is less than 5-months with a 3- and 8-month mean survival for
extensive and localised disease respectively . The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. AOK: Involved in the literature
review, manuscript preparation and manuscript editing. MEOD: Involved in the conception of the report, literature review, manuscript
preparation, manuscript editing and manuscript submission. RS: Involved in the critical analysis of the histopathology in the case report
and manuscript review. PDC: Involved in the manuscript editing and manuscript review. JL: Involved in manuscript editing and manuscript
review. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The authors would like to acknowledge Dr Damian McManus for his assistance
in the production of the histopathological images. Written informed patient consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of
this study. This was presented at the Ulster Society of Gastroenterology, Belfast, Northern Ireland – 18th October 2007.
