S.N.K. has provided expert testimony for various entities; in this particluar case, he served as a paid examiner for the Massachusetts
Division of Industrial Accidents. The remaining authors declare they have no competing financial interest. Occupational and environmental
exposures to asbestos remain a public health problem even in developed countries. Because of the long latency in asbestos-related pathology,
past asbestos exposure continues to contribute to incident disease. Asbestos most commonly produces pulmonary pathology, with asbestos-
related pleural disease as the most common manifestation. Although the pleurae and pericardium share certain histologic characteristics,
asbestos-related pericarditis is rarely reported. We present a 59-year-old man who worked around boilers for almost 30 years and was
eventually determined to have calcific, constrictive pericarditis. He initially presented with an infectious exacerbation of chronic
bronchitis. Chest radiographs demonstrated pleural and pericardial calcifications. Further evaluation with cardiac catheterization showed a
hemodynamic picture consistent with constrictive pericarditis. A high-resolution computerized tomography scan of the chest demonstrated
dense calcification in the pericardium, right pleural thickening and nodularity, right pleural plaque without calcification, and density in
the right middle lobe. Pulmonary function testing showed mild obstruction and borderline low diffusing capacity. Based on the patient’s
occupational history, the presence of pleural pathology consistent with asbestos, previous evidence that asbestos can affect the
pericardium, and absence of other likely explanations, we concluded that his pericarditis was asbestos-related. Similar to pleural
thickening and plaque formation, asbestos may cause progressive fibrosis of the pericardium. A 59-year-old boiler worker saw his primary
care physician for nasal congestion, dyspnea, and wheeze in mid-March 2005. Although he quit smoking 23 years earlier, he had a 20 pack-year
history of smoking. Past medical history was significant for pneumonia (in 1991) and chronic bronchitis. The initial chest radiograph did
not show pneumonia; however, it revealed noncircumferential calcification of the pericardium. The patient was treated for an infectious
exacerbation of his chronic bronchitis with antibiotics and oral prednisone. After treatment for this episode, he attempted to return to
work, but was unable to continue due to complaints of fatigue, shortness of breath, and exertional dyspnea. In April 2005, he consulted a
pulmonologist who prescribed a combination inhaler (fluticasone and salmeterol). Despite his pulmonary treatment, the patient continued to
have fatigue, dyspnea, and occasional presyncopal events. As a result, he was referred to a cardiologist in May 2005. Physical examination
was remarkable for obesity and distant heart sounds. Increased jugular venous pressure, Kussmaul’s sign, cyanosis, and peripheral edema were
not present. His electrocardiogram showed sinus rhythm with occasional premature atrial beats. Review of chest radiographs revealed
calcifications in the pleura and noncircumferential calcification of the pericardium. Echocardiogram showed mildly depressed left
ventricular function and intermittent interventricular septal displacement in diastole, but no other findings diagnostic of pericardial
constriction were noted. Based on a presumptive diagnosis of pericardial constriction, the patient underwent cardiac catheterization.
Hemodynamic findings included intermittent equalization of right and left ventricular end diastolic filling pressures consistent with
constrictive pericarditis (Figure 1). Partial calcification of the pericardium was seen under fluoroscopy. No obstructive coronary artery
disease was present. The patient was treated with diuretics. He has remained stable, although with a limited capacity for any exertion. The
findings of pleural and pericardial calcification and the patient’s occupation raised questions with regard to asbestos as a possible
etiology. The patient had worked around boilers for a power company from 1976 until leaving this job in March 2005. Starting as a utility
man, he performed a variety of tasks with progressively increasing responsibilities in the boiler area, eventually becoming a boiler
operator in 1992. During his tenure, he checked the pressures and temperature of water pipes, many of which were covered with asbestos
insulation that was sometimes quite friable. Additionally, in the past he changed damaged packing valves, which were made of asbestos-
containing material. Along with the asbestos, he was also exposed to fuel ash, sulfur dioxide, and other emissions. He stated that in the
early years of his work respiratory protection was not provided. Records of workplace medical surveillance from the 1970s and 1980s were not
available; however, in the 1990s the patient was restricted from wearing respirators and from fume (emissions) exposures because of his
history of chronic bronchitis up until his final years with the company. Therefore, it is likely that during the majority of his career, he
did not use respiratory protection. Although workplace spirometry had been performed on several occasions, the available records did not
indicate any chest radiographs for pneumoconiosis surveillance. His previous occupational history included several other jobs but no known
asbestos exposure. Environmental history failed to reveal additional asbestos exposures. Further pulmonary evaluation included a high-
resolution computerized tomography scan of the chest demonstrating dense calcification of the anterior pericardium (Figure 2); right pleural
thickening and nodularity; right pleural plaque without calcification; right middle-lobe linear density consistent with scarring or
atelectasis; and bilateral nodules, all > 5 mm in diameter. Pulmonary function testing in December 2006 demonstrated several abnormalities
(Table 1). Total lung capacity (TLC) was normal, in spite of a markedly elevated residual volume (RV). The forced expiratory volume in 1 sec
(FEV1) and FEV1/FVC (forced expiratory vital capacity) supported mild obstruction, and the increased RV and the RV/TLC ratio documented
significant air trapping. The patient’s diffusing capacity was borderline and considered mildly decreased for that laboratory. There were
moderate increases in the FVC, FEV1, and forced expiratory flow 25–75% after the administration of a bronchodilator, which suggested some
reversibility, although these increases were not considered significant by standard criteria [American Thoracic Society (ATS) 1995; Celli
and MacNee 2004]. A comparison with previous workplace spirometry between 1990 and 2004 did not show accelerated lung function loss but did
demonstrate similar patterns with a previous FEV1 as low as 66% predicted. In December 2006, as part of his workers compensation claim, the
patient was referred to an occupational and environmental medicine physician by the Massachusetts Department of Industrial Accidents for an
impartial examination. The purpose was to provide the responsible judge with independent opinions regarding diagnosis and causal relation to
work. Based on the evidence presented above, the following diagnoses were reached: asbestos-related constrictive pericarditis, asbestos-
related pleural disease, and mild chronic obstructive lung disease. Based on a reasonable degree of medical certainty, the impartial
examiner concluded that these diagnoses were related to the patient’s asbestos exposures as a boiler worker. The differential diagnosis of
pericardial fibrosis is similar to that of pleural fibrosis and includes asbestos exposure, past tuberculosis, other infections,
sarcoidosis, connective tissue disease, and trauma. None of these were apparent in our patient except asbestos exposure. Asbestos most
commonly produces pulmonary pathology; however, asbestos bodies have been recovered from numerous extra-pulmonary tissues, including the
heart (Auerbach et al. 1980; Churg et al. 1978). Asbestos pericarditis, albeit rarely reported, is a recognized extrapulmonary complication
of past asbestos exposure (Davies et al. 1991; Fischbein et al. 1988; Jessurun et al. 1996; Trosini-Desert et al. 2003; Weg 1998; Weir and
Gerstenhaber 2001). Other extra-pulmonary diseases associated with asbestos exposure include malignant mesothelioma of the peritoneum and
pericardium, cancers of the colon, and retroperitoneal fibrosis (Beck et al. 1982; Browne and Smither 1983; Frumkin and Berlin 1988; Masse
et al. 1980; Sebbag et al. 2000; Selikoff et al. 1964, 1979; Uibu et al. 2004). Proposed mechanisms of asbestos fiber migration into
extrapulmonary tissues include direct spread and hematogenous and lymphatic transport (Auerbach et al. 1980). Given that the pleurae and
pericardium share certain histologic characteristics and that asbestos-related pleural disease is the most common manifestation of past
asbestos exposure, it is not surprising that progressive fibrosis of the pericardium, with or without calcification, may also result. The
hemodynamic picture in this patient is a consequence of diastolic restraint of right and left ventricular expansion imposed by an inelastic
pericardium. The result is limited diastolic filling of both ventricles, as well as approximation of right and left filling patterns and end
diastolic pressures, respectively. Echocardiogram also showed intermittent displacement of the interventricular septum in diastole. The
classic “dip and plateau” diastolic filling pattern typically seen in pericardial constriction was not found in this case because the
patient’s pericardial calcification was noncircumferential. The clinical correlation to past asbestos exposure was based on the occupational
history, sufficient latency period, and other pathologic findings consistent with asbestos exposure. Our patient was exposed to asbestos for
almost 30 years while working in a power plant around boilers. Asbestos has long been used for thermal insulation in steam pipes and
turbines. Fontaine and Trayer (1975) reported an area sample concentration of 4.7 fibers/cc at a Tennessee Valley Association power plant 30
years after an asbestos control effort started in 1945. Cammarano et al. (1984) found excess mortality among thermoelectric power plant
workers where asbestos was used for insulation on the turbine boilers and pipes. Similarly, Breslow et al. (1954) observed 10 lung cancer
cases in steam fitters, boilermakers, and asbestos workers, compared with 1 case in controls. Owen (1965) reported mesothelioma cases in
laggers, pipe fitters, and boilermakers. In the Australian mesothelioma registry, between 1980 and 1985, boilermakers made up about 11% of
the identified mesothelioma cases (Yeung and Rogers 2001). Other findings in our patient that are compatible with asbestos exposure included
pleural thickening and plaque; linear density in the lung parenchyma; and impaired lung function. Pleural plaques are a reliable bio-marker
for establishing significant asbestos exposure (ATS 2004). Our patient also had chronic obstructive lung disease, which undoubtedly was
significantly related to his history of past smoking and chronic bronchitis. Nonetheless, peribronchiolar fibrosis, which is associated with
airflow obstruction, has been shown to be one of the earliest pathologic lesions in asbestos exposure (Begin et al. 1982; Bellis et al.
1989; Churg et al. 1985; Dumortier et al. 1990; Filipenko et al. 1985). Epidemiologic studies have also shown a higher prevalence of
obstructive physiology (both decreased flows and air trapping) in asbestos-exposed workers than would be expected after adjustment for
smoking (Becklake 1992; Griffith et al. 1993; Harless et al. 1978; Kilburn and Warshaw 1994; Rodriguez-Roisin et al. 1980). In addition, the
finding of lung nodules, although small, warrant follow-up because the patient’s asbestos exposure puts him at increased risk of lung cancer
(ATS 2004; Meurman et al. 1994; Oksa et al. 1997; Terra Filho et al. 2006; Ulvestad et al. 2002). The pathogenesis of pericardial fibrosis
is assumed to be similar to pleural or lung parenchyma fibrosis. Asbestos is persistent in the tissues. Settlement of the asbestos fibers is
followed by influx of neutrophils and macrophages that generate hydrolytic enzymes, chemotaxins, cytokines, growth factors, and free
radicals. Fibroblasts are activated as well. This cascade of events produces fibrosis, which increases as the fiber burden increases (ATS
2004; Schoenberger et al. 1982). Although asbestos-related pericarditis due to occupational exposure is uncommon, a number of cases have
been reported over the last 20 years (Table 2). Among the 12 cases listed in Table 2 (including our patient), all were > 40 years of age and
most were > 60 years of age. Constrictive physiology was observed in 58% of the cases, with the remaining cases having pericardial
effusions. All cases had associated pleural findings—mostly benign disease—but one patient had a mesothelioma. Most of the cases (83%) did
not report definitive evidence of parenchymal asbestosis. In addition, we are aware of at least two other reports of calcific pericarditis
that were not related to occupational exposure but that do support asbestos as an etiology for pericardial fibrosis (Fraker et al. 1984; Weg
1998). These patients underwent a Beck procedure (a cardiac procedure used in the 1950s to develop collateral blood flow to the heart),
which involved the introduction of asbestos into the pericardium to induce adhesion. In both cases, there was subsequent development of
constrictive pericaridits with calcification (Fraker et al. 1984; Weg 1998). Treatment for asbestos pericarditis is not different from that
for other forms of constrictive pericarditis. This includes diuretics, salt restriction, and activity modification depending on the status
of the patient. The definitive treatment is surgical decortication of the pericardium. We can only speculate whether workplace surveillance
with chest radiography may have detected pleural changes and/or pericardial changes and, thus, led to removal from further exposure at an
earlier stage. Because asbestos is persistent in the tissues, disease progression occurs even after the cessation of exposure. Therefore, we
cannot say whether earlier removal from exposure would have produced a better outcome. Additionally, our patient’s condition, although
stable at present, could worsen with additional fibrotic change of the pericardium and/or lung. The use and sale of asbestos have been
restricted, and strict control measures are currently established in most industrialized countries; however, because of long latency and the
chronic nature of asbestos-related diseases, we will continue to see patients with complications from past exposure. Therefore, careful
workplace surveillance and attention to the occupational and environmental history in clinical practice are important for the early
recognition of asbestos-related conditions. Although classically associated with pulmonary disease, asbestos fibers do reach other tissues
and can produce extrapulmonary disease. Constrictive pericarditis is an uncommon complication of asbestos exposure. When found, it has been
accompanied by asbestos-related pleural disease and occasionally other pathologic changes compatible with asbestos exposure. Hemodynamic
tracing from cardiac catheterization. Simultaneous pressure measurements in the right (R) and left (L) ventricles demonstrate approximate
equalization of diastolic filling pressures. End diastole is indicated by the arrow. High-resolution computerized tomography scan image with
patient in prone position demonstrating calcification of anterior pericardium. Lung function results, December 2006. Absolute value for
FEV1/FVC%. Findings among published cases of pericarditis associated with occupational asbestos exposure.a Adapted in part from Trosini-
Desert et al. (2003). Approximate time from first exposure to time of presentation.
