Chronic periaortitis includes a variety of conditions that have similar clinical and histopathological findings, and thus probably
represents different manifestations of the same disease: idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis, perianeurysmal retroperitoneal fibrosis, and
inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysms. We describe the clinical and imaging characteristics of the nonaneurysmal form of chronic
periaortitis, recognized as isolated periaortitis, in an adult male patient presented with low back pain. A 53-year-old hypertensive man
presented with low back pain of eight months duration. The pain was of moderate intensity, unaffected by motion, and not relieved by bed-
rest. He had no fever, but noted 4 kg weight loss during the preceding months. Laboratory examination revealed normocytic anemia, elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), and C-reactive protein (CRP) of 86 mg/Dl (normal < 5 mg/Dl). Renal function, liver, and bone profile
were within normal limits. Additional investigations, including ANA, ANCA, and serological testing for syphilis were negative. Chest and
lumbar spine radiographs were normal. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the lumbar spine was undertaken to exclude any inflammatory
process such as discitis or osteomyelitis. This showed retroperitoneal soft tissue thickening. Thus, CT angiography (CTA) of the aorta was
performed and showed diffuse atheromatous changes in the thoracic and abdominal aorta including ulcerated plaques and an extensive aortic
thickening confined to the entire abdominal aorta without any abnormal dilatation. In addition, there was a retroperitoneal concentric
periaortic soft tissue mass (rind of periaortic tissue) causing luminal narrowing of the abdominal aorta and significant ostial stenosis of
the celiac trunk, superior mesenteric artery (SMA), and both renal arteries (Figure 1). The left renal vein was also involved and the left
kidney showed a hypodense cortical area at the lower pole consistent with renal infarct. There was no ureteric obstruction or
hydronephrosis. This presentation was consistent with the diagnosis of isolated periaortitis confined to abdominal aorta. He was treated
with prednisone 60 mg/day, resulting in gradual improvement of signs and symptoms over several weeks. Metothrexate was added to help steroid
weaning. Repeated CT scans showed progressive resolution of the periaortic rind with no evidence of abdominal aorta aneurysm. CT angiography
of the aorta performed with 64-row MDCT. (A) Axial image at the level of the renal arteries showing narrowing of the aortic lumen, aortic
wall thickening and periaortic rind (arrows). (B) Multiplanar reformat image showing periaortic thickening confined to the abdominal aorta
(A) (dashed line). The thoracic aorta is spared. Numerous calcified plaques are seen mainly in the infrarenal segment of the abdominal
aorta. Chronic periaortitis is a rare disease, occurs usually in middle-aged adult men. It includes a variety of conditions that have
similar clinical and histopathological findings, and thus probably represents different manifestations of the same disease: idiopathic
retroperitoneal fibrosis, perianeurysmal retroperitoneal fibrosis, and inflammatory abdominal aortic aneurysms (Parums 1990; Vaglio et al
2003; Mitnick et al 2004). The three entities are characterized by advanced atherosclerosis of the abdominal aorta, adventitial and
periadventitial inflammation, medial thinning, and chronic retroperitoneal inflammatory process associated with a varying degree of fibrotic
reaction surrounding the abdominal aorta (Parums 1990). Periaortitis may be the expression of a local immune response to antigens such as
oxidized-low density lipoproteins and ceroid in the atherosclerotic plaques of the abdominal aorta (Vaglio and Buzio 2005a; Vaglio et al
2006). However, because most patients with periaortitis also suffer from constitutional symptoms and show elevated acute-phase reactant
levels, positive autoantibodies and, in some cases, autoimmune diseases affecting other organs, periaortitis may also be considered a
manifestation of a systemic autoimmune disease such as ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid arthritis and systemic lupus erythematosus
(Blockmans 2000; Monev 2002; Carels et al 2005). In the absence of any systemic autoimmune disease and the negative ANA, ANCA, and
serological testing for syphilis, the pathogenesis of the disease in our case may be the result of a local reaction to advanced
atherosclerosis. Biopsy is necessary to exclude other disease such as malignancy or infections. In our patient, biopsy was not performed
because of the periaortic location of the mass. Isolated periaortitis typified by the present case represents the nonaneurysmal form of
chronic periaortitis. Mitnick et al (2004) reported four patients with isolated periaortitis who did not develop an aortic aneurysm or
retroperitoneal fibrosis during the follow-up period. In this form of chronic periaortitis, the abdominal aorta (particularly the infra-
renal portion) has normal or decreased diameter and is surrounded by a mantle of soft-tissue density (Figure 1). Furthermore, the disease
tends primarily to involve the vascular structures causing stenosis of the major branches of the abdominal aorta (eg, celiac trunk, SMA,
renal arteries) as reported in the present case, rather than entrapment of the ureters, and consequently obstructive hydro-uretronephrosis
as in the idiopathic retroperitoneal fibrosis manifestation. The classical presentation of isolated periaortitis is with pain, fever,
fatigue, weight loss, and anemia. Abdominal pain, diarrhea, and gastrointestinal hemorrhage may result from mesenteric artery ischemia, but
this is uncommon. Renovascular hypertension may result from renal artery stenosis. Depending on what other vessels are involved,
claudication, and other manifestations of vascular impairment may accompany this disorder. Contrast-enhanced CT, magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), and positron emission tomography (PET) scan are the noninvasive diagnostic modalities of choice for isolated periaortitis. PET scan
with 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose is a reliable tool in assessing the metabolic activity of the mass, detecting other sites of inflammation and
disclosing infectious or neoplastic lesions to which periaortitis can be secondary or with which it can be associated (Salvarani et al 2005;
Vaglio et al 2005b). Furthermore, this technique is valuable for patients follow-up since abnormal fluorodeoxyglucose uptake can also be
seen at disease relapse. Nonenhanced CT scan reveals a low density soft tissue mass surrounding the abdominal aorta. The periaortic mass
usually shows varying degree of enhancement after administration of contrast agent. In addition, the abdominal aorta and its major branches
appear to be narrowed. At MR imaging, periaortitis is hypointense on T1-weighted images and usually hyperintense on T2-weighted images. The
periaortic soft tissue mass typically shows intense enhancement after administration of gadolinium (Vaglio et al 2003; Mitnick et al 2004).
While CT and MR images are quite similar, advantages of MRI include repeat studies without radiation exposure and contrast administration
with reduced risk of nephrotoxicity. Nephrogenic systemic fibrosis or nephrogenic fibrosing dermopathy has been reported as a rare
complication after administration of gadolinium based contrast agent in patients with kidney disease, particularly in the presence of a
proinflammatory process such as major surgery, infection, or a vascular thromboembolic event (Sadowski et al 2007). Regarding management,
steroids are usually effective and induce remission of the clinical symptoms, normalization of the acute-phase reaction, reduction in size
of the retroperitoneal mass and also resolution of the obstructive complications (Demko et al 1997; Kardar et al 2002; Jois et al 2004).
Nevertheless, the duration of treatment, the effectiveness and the persistence of the results are still uncertain because few cases have
been reported in the literature. A number of immunosuppressive drugs, such as azathioprine, cyclophosphamide, and methotrexate, have been
used as steroid-sparing agents or in patients not responding to steroids alone or when steroids cannot be tapered (Harreby et al 1994;
Scavalli et al 1995; Grotz et al 1998; Marcolongo et al 2004). Recently, based on its utility in drug-eluting stents to prevent restenosis,
rapamycin (sirolimus) has been suggested as treatment to prevent connective tissue proliferation about the injured aorta (Kanko et al 2006).
In our case the patient responded to therapy with steroids without developing retroperitoneal fibrosis and abdominal aorta aneurysm during
the follow-up period of 24 months. Isolated periaortitis corresponds to the nonaneurysmal form of chronic periaortitis. Treatment of
periaortitis with steroids and immunosuppressants leads to resolution of clinical symptoms and periaortic soft tissue mass. Awareness and
recognition of imaging findings associated with isolated periaortitis are crucial for early diagnosis and institution of adequate therapy in
order to avoid further complications such as luminal narrowing of the aorta and its major branches. All authors state that no financial
relationship to disclose. All the authors state that there is no conflict of interest regarding this work.
