We report 3 rickettsioses on Darnley Island, Australia, in the Torres Strait. In addition to previously described cases of Flinders Island
spotted fever (Rickettsia honei strain “marmionii”), we describe 1 case of Queensland tick typhus (R. australis) and 2 cases of scrub typhus
caused by a unique strain (Orientia tsutsugamushi). The Torres Strait islands are scattered between Cape York in northeastern Australia and
Papua New Guinea. Darnley (Erub) Island is the largest island (5.7 km2) in the eastern Torres Strait and has a mostly indigenous population
of 360. Rickettsioses in northeastern Australia include Queensland tick typhus (Rickettsia australis) (1,2), murine typhus (R. typhi), scrub
typhus (Orientia tsutsugamushi) (3), and Flinders Island spotted fever (R. honei strain “marmionii”) (4). The latter 2 diseases are endemic
to the Torres Strait islands (4,5). Because all 4 diseases have similar clinical manifestations, which may include maculopapular rash,
fever, headache, rigor, myalgia, and arthralgia (1–4), laboratory investigation is needed to identify the rickettsial etiologic agent. We
describe the northernmost case of Queensland tick typhus and 2 cases of scrub typhus, along with their molecular identifications, from
patients examined at the Darnley Island Health Clinic. In March 2003, a 23-year-old man (patient 1) sought treatment for fever (39.3°C),
headache, and an eschar on his right thigh. He had no rash. No diagnosis was made, but he was given penicillin V. Seven days later he
returned with worsening symptoms of fever (39.9°C), headache, cough, arthralgia, and lethargy. A provisional diagnosis of scrub typhus was
made, and he was given doxycycline. By the next day he was afebrile, and his condition was much improved. The diagnosis was confirmed by a
positive serologic result for scrub typhus rickettsiae (antibody titer 512) and the presence of O. tsutsugamushi in blood detected on day 7
by PCR and culture (Table). *SFG, spotted fever group; antigens were R. honei, R. australis, R. akari, R. conorii, R. siberica, and R.
rickettsii. †STG, scrub typus group; antigens were the O. tsutsugamushi strains Gilliam and Kato. In May 2004, an 11-year-old boy (patient
2) was examined because of a 3-day history of fever (39.0°C), headache, nausea, abdominal pain, and a boil surrounded by cellulitis behind
his left ear. He had no rash. He was given flucloxacillin for the boil. On day 10 he was still ill and febrile. His blood was tested for
malaria, dengue, and scrub typhus, but he was given no antimicrobial therapy. He was not seen again until day 18, when he was prescribed
doxycycline after PCR detected O. tsutsugamushi (and it was later isolated) in his day-10 blood sample. Follow-up serologic testing of
samples collected on days 10 and 33 displayed seroconversion to antibodies against scrub typhus (titers <128 to >1,024; Table). In April
2003, a 29-year-old man (patient 3) sought treatment for fever (38.4°C), cough, nausea, lethargy, and cellulitis of both feet. His left
thigh had 2 boils, and his inguinal nodes were palpable. Three days later, he was evacuated by air and admitted to the Thursday Island
hospital, at which time he was still febrile (39.2°C) but had no cellulitis. He also had a macular rash, which he reported as originally
having been pustular; the thigh lesions were recognized as eschars. A tentative diagnosis of scrub typhus was made, and the patient was
given doxycycline. Within 48 hours he was afebrile and discharged. Serologic testing for rickettsiae was positive for the spotted fever
group (titer 256) on day 3, but the titers remained unchanged 4 months later. A spotted fever group rickettsial organism was grown from the
day-3 blood sample; however, PCR was negative for rickettsiae (Table). Rickettsial serologic testing was performed on patients’ paired serum
specimens by using an indirect immunofluorescence assay (6). Titers >128 were deemed positive. Patient 1 had an increase in titer to O.
tsutsugamushi; patient 2 exhibited seroconversion to O. tsutsugamushi antibodies; and patient 3 had stationary positive titers to spotted
fever group rickettsiae (Table). Rickettsial isolation was performed according to previously described methods (7). A spotted fever group
rickettsial organism was isolated from patient 3, and an Orientia organism was isolated from patients 1 and 2 (Table). Only 1 Orientia
organism could be adapted to continuous culture (patient 2). We extracted DNA from enriched buffy coat and rickettsial cultures by using the
QIAamp Blood Mini Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany) and following the manufacturer’s protocols. Scrub typhus was diagnosed by 56-kDa gene PCR,
which used the primers A (5′-TACATTAGCTGCAGGTATGACA-3′) and B (5′-CCAGCATAATTCTTTAACCAAG-3′) (Invitrogen, Mount Waverley, Victoria,
Australia) as previously described, without the nested procedure and with a 51°C annealing temperature (8). Buffy coats and cultures from
patients 1 and 2 were PCR positive for O. tsutsugamushi (Table). The 320-bp product (patient 2) was sequenced (Newcastle DNA, University of
Newcastle, Australia; GenBank accession no. AY860955) and shared 89.8% homology with the Taiwanese strains TW381 and TW521 (GenBank
accession nos. AY222635 and AY222630, respectively). A phylogenetic tree of the 56-kDa antigen gene was constructed by using the SEQBOOT and
CONSENSE programs of the PHYLIP software package (Figure). Phylogenetic tree obtained by a neighbor-joining analysis of the 56-kDa gene of
Orientia tsutsugamushi. Bootstrap values from 100 analyses are shown at the node of each branch. Spotted fever group rickettsemia was
identified by 17-kDa antigen gene PCR that used the primers MTO-1 (5′-GCTCTTGCAACTCTATGTT-3′) and MTO-2 (5′-CATTGTTCGTCAGGTTGGCG-3′)
(Invitrogen) as previously described, with an annealing temperature of 51°C and 45 cycles (9). The 17-kDa buffy coat PCR result was negative
for patient 3, but the culture gave a 413-bp sequence that was 100% homologous with R. australis (GenBank accession no. M74042; Table). The
patient’s buffy coat DNA extract was not tested for PCR inhibitors, and no attempt was made to use the R. australis isolate in a
heterologous serologic reaction because the strain could not be established in continuous culture. Isolation of R. australis from a patient
on Darnley Island redefines the northern limit of distribution of Queensland tick typhus in Australia. Previously, Queensland tick typhus
had been thought to extend from Wilson’s Promontory (the tip of southeastern Australia) (10) to the Atherton Tableland (north Queensland)
(2). This more northern finding of Queensland tick typhus was not unexpected because distribution of the vector of Queensland tick typhus in
northeastern Australia, Ixodes holocyclus, is likely to include the Torres Strait islands and Papua New Guinea (11). Rickettsial diseases
that differ clinically from scrub typhus have been reported in Papua New Guinea (12). A recent serologic survey found 7 (3.7%) of 191 Papua
New Guineans were seropositive to scrub typhus or spotted fever group rickettsiae (13). Another survey found that at least 19 (17%) of 113
Papua New Guineans had an antibody titer >256 against spotted fever group rickettsiae (A.G. Faa, unpub. data). A spotted fever group
rickettsial disease such as Queensland tick typhus, Flinders Island spotted fever, or another undescribed rickettsiosis could explain these
findings. Low antibody titers (128) to the spotted fever group in the scrub typhus patients (Table) are consistent with previous exposure to
spotted fever group or typhus group rickettsiae. Because 20% of each enriched buffy coat specimen was examined by rickettsial PCR and 80% by
culture, results were skewed in favor of isolation rather than DNA detection. Since 1935, numerous cases of scrub typhus have been reported
in Australia and Papua New Guinea (5,12). Scrub typhus is known to be endemic to Darnley Island; however, strains have not been typed (5).
Strains from northeastern Australia were serologically determined to be Karp or Karp-related (14). However, this new strain is 10.2%
divergent from any other described strain, including Karp (Figure). Hence, we designated it as the Darnley strain, after the island from
which it was isolated. The phylogenetic relationship of the Darnley strain to other Australian strains, including Litchfield, needs to be
elucidated. The presence of 3 rickettsial diseases on this small island demonstrates the complexity of rickettsial epidemiology in
Australia. Suggested citation for this article: Unsworth NB, Stenos J, Faa AG, Graves SR. Three rickettsioses, Darnley Island, Australia.
Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2007 Jul [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/eid/content/13/7/1105.htm We thank
Chelsea Nguyen for rickettsial serologic testing, and Nathan Kesteven, Brian Milburn, and Simone Cough for alerting us to these patients and
coordinating the sending of specimens to our laboratory. Dr Unsworth is a postdoctoral research associate at Texas A&M University, College
Station, Texas, USA. His interests include the epidemiology of Australian rickettsiae and Q fever pathogenesis.
