Aneurysms of the left main coronary artery are rare with an incidence of 0.1% in large angiographic series. The majority are atherosclerotic
in origin. Other causes include connective tissue disorders, trauma, vasculitis, congenital, mycotic and idiopathic. The primary
complication is myocardial ischemia or infarction, with rupture being rare. Treatment options include anticoagulation, custom made covered
stents, reconstruction, resection, and exclusion with bypass. A 66 year-old man was referred for evaluation of a 2 × 2 centimeter saccular
aneurysm originating from the distal left main coronary artery. There was associated calcification and mild stenosis of the LM. The workup
was prompted by a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction suffered following a laparotomy for a ruptured appendix. The past medical history
was pertinent for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and a left carotid endarterectomy. Cardiopulmonary bypass with hyperkalemic cardioplegic
arrest was utilized. The aneurysm was exposed in the atrioventricular groove. The aneurysm was resected and oversewn. Calcification
precluded patch angioplasty. The patient then underwent coronary bypass grafting with the left internal thoracic artery placed to the left
anterior descending artery and a reversed greater saphenous vein graft to an obtuse marginal branch of the circumflex artery. The
postoperative course was uneventful and discharge to home occurred on the fourth postoperative day. Surgical pathology confirmed an
atheromatous coronary artery aneurysm. Left main coronary artery aneurysms in adult patients are predominantly atherosclerotic in origin.
The clinical presentation is that of myocardial ischemia, likely from associated embolism. Rupture is rare. Operative treatment is exclusion
and revascularization. Aneurysms of the left main (LM) coronary artery are rare with an incidence of 0.1% in large angiographic series . The
majority are atherosclerotic in origin. Other causes include connective tissue disorders, trauma, vasculitis, congenital, mycotic and
idiopathic. Giant coronary aneurysm may be associated with fistulas to a cardiac chamber, most commonly the left ventricle. Most aneurysms
are clinically silent, but those with an associated fistula may have an audible murmur and sign and symptoms of congestive heart failure.
The primary complication is myocardial ischemia or infarction, likely secondary to embolism. Rupture of these aneurysms is rare. Treatment
options include anticoagulation, custom made covered stents, reconstruction, resection, and exclusion with bypass . The purpose of the case
report is to highlight the clinical presentation, work-up and treatment options for a patient with a LM coronary artery aneurysm. A 66 year-
old man was referred to our institution for evaluation of a 2 × 2 centimeter saccular aneurysm (Fig 1) originating form the distal left main
coronary artery. The workup was prompted by a non-ST elevation myocardial infarction suffered following a laparotomy for a ruptured
appendix. The patient's past medical history was pertinent for hypertension, hyperlipidemia, and a previous left carotid endarterectomy.
Medications included a statin, beta blocker and aspirin. On physical exam the patient was mildly obese and free of chest pain. Review of the
coronary angiogram revealed calcification and mild stenosis of the LM, in addition to the aneurysm. The left ventricular function was
normal. The patient was anticoagulated with heparin. Cardiac enzymes normalized over several days. Coronary angiogram demonstrating the
distal left main aneurysm. The patient was prepared for surgery. Cardiopulmonary bypass with hyperkalemic cardioplegic arrest was utilized.
The aneurysm was exposed in the atrioventricular groove by retracting the main pulmonary artery trunk rightward. The aneurysm was resected
and oversewn. Calcification precluded patch angioplasty or resection with interposition graft placement. The patient then underwent coronary
bypass grafting with the left internal thoracic artery anastamosed to the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and a reversed greater
saphenous vein graft to an obtuse marginal branch of the circumflex (Cx) artery. The postoperative course was uneventful and discharge to
home occurred on the fourth postoperative day. Surgical pathology confirmed an atheromatous coronary artery aneurysm. Coronary aneurysms are
predominately atherosclerotic in origin in adult patients. They typically present with signs and symptoms of myocardial ischemia as noted in
this case. This is attributed to embolism of atheromatous debris from with the aneurysm. Rupture of coronary aneurysms is rare and is not
the indication for surgical intervention. Treatment to date has been based primarily upon anecdotal reports as no controlled trials of
therapy exist. Anticoagulation has been the mainstay of nonoperative treatment. Percutaneously delivered custom made covered stents have
been reported as another form of management. Surgical treatment is aimed at exclusion from the circulation either through resection or
ligation with revascularization through bypass. Proximal aneurysms of the left main coronary artery may require aortotomy and patch closure
of the orifice to gain proximal control . Surgical repair can be performed with minimal morbidity and mortality. The author(s) declare that
they have no competing interests. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.
