Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Creative Commons Deed, Attribution 2.5, which does not permit commercial
exploitation. Superficial acral fibromyxoma is a rare, distinctive soft tissue benign neoplasm that has a predilection to develop on the
hands and feet of adults. Except for the only rare location on the palm, superficial acral fibromyxoma usually involves the fingers and
toes, and the big toe tends to be the most frequently affected site.1–6 Most cases of superficial acral fibromyxoma tend to occur in either
the subungal or periungal regions, although only two rare cases occurring on the ventral surface of the digit have been previously
described.1,5 We herein report a case of superficial acral fibromyxoma, which developed at the most common site (i.e. the big toe), but it
occurred in a rare region of this toe (i.e. on the tip of the toe). A 53-year-old healthy man presented with an asymptomatic, slowly growing
nodule with a 3-year history on the tip of his right big toe. Examinations revealed a hemisphere-shaped, slightly reddish nodule, measuring
1.0 cm × 0.8 cm × 0.7 cm in size, on the tip of his right big toe (fig. 1a). Neither the involvement of the ungal region by the lesion nor
any deformity of the nail plate was seen. Computed tomography scanning as well as plane radiographs revealed no involvement of the bone and
no bone alterations. The nodule was completely excised, and a V-Y local advancement flap was also applied to the defect. Neither recurrence
nor metastasis has been observed in the subsequent 1-year follow-up. (a) A hemisphere-shaped, slightly reddish nodule on the tip of the
patient's right big toe. (b) A scanning magnification, which was photographed directly to a slide using a special camera, showing a well-
circumscribed, globularly projecting lesion to be located in the whole dermis while pushing against the subcutis (haematoxylin and eosin,
×1.5). Histopathologically, the excised nodule was a well-circumscribed, globularly projecting lesion, which was located in the whole dermis
while pushing against the subcutis (fig. 1b). The lesion was composed of proliferated spindle and stellate cells with random, loose
storiform, and fascicular patterns, which were embedded in myxoid or myxocollagenous stroma (fig. 2a,b). The proliferating cells showed no
nuclear atypia, and strands of cells with wavy nuclei were sometimes seen. The accentuated vasculature and some inflammatory cells, composed
of mast cells and lymphocytes, were also involved within the lesion. Alcian blue staining revealed abundant mucinous material within the
stroma. Immunohistochemical study revealed that most of the neoplastic cells (> 80%) were positive for CD34, CD99, CD10, and Vimentin (fig.
2c), and they were negative for S-100 protein, epithelial membrane antigen. Factor XIIIa labelled only scattered dendritic cells within the
lesion. Nestin was positive for about 30% of the neoplastic cells, mainly in myxoid area (fig. 2d). The histopathological and
immunohistochemical features in the presented case closely corresponded to those of superficial acral fibromyxoma. (a) The proliferated
spindle and stellate cells with random and fascicular patterns in the myxoid stroma. (b) Those proliferated cells in the myxocollagenous
stroma. (c) CD10 show positive staining in most of the neoplastic cells. (d) Nestin is positive for about 30% of the neoplastic cells mainly
in the myxoid area. Note the labelling of nestin also in the endothelial cells of the capillaries and small vessels within the lesion.
(haematoxylin and eosin: a, b ×50; Immunostain: c, d ×60). From a clinical point of view, the important points in superficial acral
fibromyxoma are as follows: (i) a frequent deformity of the nail plate,1–6 (ii) a usual need for the removal of the nail plate during
surgical procedures,3,6 and (iii) a rare deformity of the bone,1,6 because most cases of this condition affect either the subungal or
periungal regions. Owing to its rare location (i.e. the tip of the toe), the case presented herein showed no deformity of either the nail
plate or bone, and this lesion could therefore be completely excised without the need to remove the nail plate. The histogenesis of
superficial acral fibromyxoma is still unclear. Within the skin, the expression of CD10 has been reported in normal mesenchymal cells in the
nail unit.7 Recent investigations have revealed that multipotent precursors isolated from the dermis, which can differentiate into both
neural and mesodermal progeny, also express nestin.8–10 Therefore, the presented case may suggest that the neoplastic cells in this
condition are related to the mesenchymal cells in the nail unit (onychoblasts) and show dedifferentiation into or include multipotent dermal
stem cells.
