Traumatic diaphragmatic hernias are a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge due to variable presentations. Early repair is important because
of risks of incarceration and strangulation of abdominal contents along with respiratory and cardiovascular compromise. Minimally invasive
techniques have been useful for diagnosis and treatment of diaphragmatic hernias in both blunt and penetrating trauma. We present the case
of a 54-year-old victim of a motor vehicle crash who presented with a delayed diagnosis of a right-sided traumatic diaphragmatic hernia. By
using a 4-port technique and intracorporeal suturing, the hernia was repaired. This case highlights the difficulties associated with
diagnosing diaphragmatic hernias and the role of minimally invasive techniques to repair them. Minimally invasive surgical techniques are
being increasingly used to both diagnose and repair traumatic diaphragmatic injuries with excellent results. Trauma is the leading cause of
acquired diaphragmatic hernias (DH). Correct diagnosis of diaphragmatic hernias is often missed in the acute setting.1–3 Patients are often
asymptomatic or comatose, and imaging performed may not clearly depict the DH. Therefore, further studies may not be done, leading to
incorrect diagnoses and treatments.4 Late-onset DH can present as a variety of clinical symptoms, such as cardiorespiratory or
gastrointestinal complaints.1,3–6 Right-sided herniation may even be more difficult to detect than left-sided herniation. Thoracoscopy and
laparoscopy are 2 of the approaches to minimally invasive repair of these defects. A 54-year-old woman was brought to the emergency
department by EMS as a Level II trauma status after a motor vehicle crash. She was the driver of a vehicle that was T-boned by a deer on the
passenger side of the car, and she subsequently lost control of the vehicle. The patient was wearing her seatbelt and the airbag deployed.
She was unresponsive at the scene, and an attempt to intubate her in the field failed. She was ventilated with a bag-valve mask and later
intubated in the emergency department. On arrival to the ER, she was hemodynamically stable with 100% saturation. Her Glasgow Coma Scale was
6T. A plain chest film performed on arrival revealed elevation of the right hemidiaphragm with linear atelectasis at the right base (Figure
1). A computed tomographic (CT) scan of the chest and abdomen revealed right lower and middle lobe collapse and elevation of the right
hemidiaphragm. There was left lung base atelectasis, and a Grade 3 liver laceration, but the great vessels were intact. The patient also had
a closed head injury with subarachnoid hemorrhage, diffuse axonal injury, and a frontal scalp hematoma. Her other injuries included
fractures of her right clavicle, multiple bilateral ribs, right wrist, stable pelvic fracture, sacrum, and unstable fracture of C2. The
patient was admitted to the ICU, and her course was complicated by respiratory failure and pulmonary sepsis, which resolved with a
tracheostomy and a prolonged course of antibiotics. The patient was transferred to the surgical floor 20 days later, and after another 5
weeks of hospitalization she was discharged to a long-term rehabilitation facility. Initial chest x-ray reveals elevation of the right
hemidiaphragm with linear atelectasis at the right base. Two days later, she was readmitted with shortness of breath, wheezing, and fever. A
chest x-ray showed a moderate-to-large right pleural effusion and opacity at the right lung base (Figure 2). A CT scan of the chest showed
right diaphragmatic hernia with herniation of bowel alongside the liver, right lower lobe atelectasis, and mediastinal shift to the left
(Figure 3). Bronchoscopy was performed and showed extrinsic compression and complete closure of the right lower lobe orifice and bronchi.
The patient was given a course of antibiotics, and after resolution of her pneumonia, surgery was performed. Chest x-ray on readmission
shows a moderate right pleural effusion with opacity at the right lung base. Computed tomographic scan of the chest and abdomen showing
right diaphragmatic hernia with stable right pleural effusion, right lower lobe atelectasis, mediastinal shift to the left, and herniation
of bowel alongside the liver into the thorax. In the operating room, the patient was positioned with her right side elevated. Four trocars
were used, 2 of which were 12mm. Laparoscopy revealed a large diaphragmatic defect with herniation of the right lobe of the liver into the
thoracic cavity (Figure 4). The liver was pulled back into the abdomen revealing a collapsed right lower lobe, some pleural fluid, and the
edges of a large diaphragmatic defect (Figure 5). Adhesions of the lower edge of the diaphragm were taken down, and the defect closed using
interrupted figure-of-eight Surgidac sutures with PTFE pledgets (Figure 6). Herniation of the right lobe of the liver though the defect in
the right diaphragm. Retraction of the liver reveals a collapsed right lung, pleural fluid, and a large defect. Intraoperative photographs
showing the closed defect. A survey of the rest of the abdominal cavity was negative. A chest tube was inserted for drainage of the thorax,
and the port sites were closed. The postoperative chest X-ray compared with the preoperative chest X-ray showed marked improvement in the
borders of the right hemidiaphragm (Figure 7). The patient's postoperative course was complicated by a flare-up of respiratory infection,
but she responded to antibiotics and was discharged to a long-term rehabilitation facility 2 weeks after the surgery. Preoperative (A) and
postoperative (B) chest x-rays. Diaphragmatic hernias (DH) can be categorized as occurring in the left or right diaphragm, being congenital
or acquired, or having an early or late onset. Congenital diaphragmatic hernias (CDH) are well described and occur in 1/2000 to 1/5000 live
births, with 30% to 50% diagnosed in utero.7 Left-sided CDHs are more common than are right-sided and bilateral ones (85% vs. 8% to 21% vs
2%), with a 1:1.25 male to female ratio.7,8 Left-sided CDH may cause severe respiratory distress, gastrointestinal symptoms, or both, in the
newborn, whereas right-sided CDH may cause fewer symptoms. Trauma is the leading cause of acquired DH. Traumatic DHs are mostly left-sided
(70% to 80%) vs. right-sided (15% to 24%) vs. bilateral (8%)1,10,11 Penetrating injury results in a 5% incidence of diaphragmatic injury,
which is usually diagnosed and treated by laparotomy. Laparoscopy is a useful diagnostic tool in low-velocity penetrating injuries to assess
violation of peritoneum and to survey the diaphragms. If not diagnosed promptly, even a small diaphragmatic injury may result in significant
morbidity and require repair due to migration of organs aided by the combined “push-pull” mechanism of positive intraabdominal pressure and
negative intrathoracic pressure. In blunt injury, which includes road accidents and falls, 15% of hospitalized patients have DH. The
presentation of DH in blunt trauma can be divided into 2 distinct types. The first one is immediate herniation of abdominal contents through
a large rent in the diaphragm produced by transient but very significant elevation of intraabdominal pressure. This is a dramatic
presentation characterized by respiratory compromise and often by hemodynamic instability. The second, more insidious pattern is a
diaphragmatic defect without immediate herniation of intraabdominal contents. This pattern is often initially overlooked in the acute
setting1–3 and is only correctly diagnosed in 30% to 40% of cases.1,12 The current practice of nonoperative treatment of solid organ
injuries decreases the number of laparotomies in the acute trauma setting, and imaging is notoriously inaccurate in the diagnosis of
diaphragmatic injuries. The time period before onset of symptoms can be variable,5,6 sometimes measuring in years.10 Delayed DH of-ten
presents as cardiorespiratory or gastrointestinal complaints, such as dyspnea, coughing, chest pain, abdominal pain, or vomiting. Eventual
diagnosis of DH is made on further investigation of these complaints. Late presentation of symptoms makes diagnosis even more difficult, and
the misdiagnosis rate increases.4 When a diaphragmatic hernia presents symptomatically, a 20% to 66% morbidity rate exists due to
gastrointestinal obstruction, perforation, incarceration, or respiratory compromise.2 Other less common causes of DH can be violent
coughing, obesity, heavy lifting, multiparity, and iatrogenic causes like esophagogastric surgery.9 Our patient presented with fever,
tachycardia, and respiratory symptoms during her second admission to the hospital, due to the diaphragmatic hernia with simultaneous
pneumonia. The inability to communicate with our patient added to the delay in diagnosis and treatment of her DH. Misinterpretation of
radiological imaging can miss the diagnosis of DH. In cases of late-presenting CDH, Baglaj et al4 report that pneumothorax and pleural
effusion were the most common initial findings. Eren et al1 reviewed imaging of the diaphragm after trauma and suggest that plain
radiography as a first-line modality, followed by CT scans, which are feasible in the trauma setting. MRI would be very helpful in
visualizing the defect and should be used in patients with a high suspicion of DH. Plain chest film and CT scan of our patient on initial
presentation after the motor vehicle crash, only revealed elevation of the right hemidiaphragm and right lower lung collapse (Figures 1, 2).
This reading perhaps may have been the correct diagnosis at that time, with gradual herniation later on. Interestingly, MRIs focusing on her
spinal injuries were ordered later during hospitalization. In the literature regarding right-sided DH, mostly CDH is discussed. There is
controversy about whether right-sided CDH has increased mortality or any influence in the morbidity of the neonate.8 The diagnosis of right-
sided CDH is often delayed due to milder symptoms compared with symptoms accompanying left-sided CDH. Right-sided CDH can also be associated
with a number of congenital defects and complications,8 and can present with other anomalies.7,13–15Therefore, it is important to recognize
that such anomalies exist and perhaps can be present in longstanding right DH. Our patient did not have any anomalies between the lung and
liver. However, takedown of adhesions within the diaphragm itself was necessary to free the crura. If this DH had been left unrepaired, it
is possible that adhesions between lung, liver, bowel, and diaphragm may have formed. Close proximity of the abdominal contents to the
infected lung put our patient at risk for spread of infection. The use of minimally invasive surgery for repair of DH is controversial.
Thoracoscopic and laparoscopic approaches have been described.9,12,16–22 A recent review of the literature discussing CDH reports that mixed
use of thoracoscopy and laparoscopy occurs.17 In fact, both techniques may be complimentary.23 Both thoracoscopic and laparoscopic
approaches to repair DH have advantages over open surgery in that they result in minimal trauma, promote early recovery, and decrease
hospital stay. Thoracoscopy has been successful for repair of DH and may be easier due to good exposure in the thoracic cavity and has
decreased the difficulty in reduction of herniated contents.17,22,24 Thoracoscopic repair of CDH in children and in select newborns could be
the treatment of choice due to its safety and efficacy.17,22 Laparoscopy is a superior early diagnostic tool compared with thoracoscopy,
because survey of the entire abdomen can be performed and subsequent repairs made, especially in the acute trauma setting.25,26 Laparoscopy
provides better orientation and surgical exposure of both the abdominal and thoracic cavity (through the defect), permitting survey for
other injuries,2,3,12 whereas in thoracoscopy, only one hemidiaphragm can be inspected at a time.20 Moreover, laparoscopy allows for the
repositioning of herniated contents more easily in the abdominal cavity.12,16 Another advantage of laparoscopy is that the patient is not
required to undergo single-lung ventilation as needed in thoracoscopy.27 A laparoscopic approach is best indicated in anteriorly or
centrally located acute or chronic traumatic diaphragmatic hernia without concomitant severe abdominal or thoracic injury.12,16 Safety of
laparoscopic repair of DH has been proven in many case reports but can be technically challenging.21 Therefore, surgical experience and
meticulous technique are key to the success of laparoscopic repair. Use of a thoracoscopic or laparoscopic approach must be individualized
for the patient's clinical condition, presence or absence of other injuries, type and duration of hernia, and the surgeon's experience with
minimally invasive surgery.12,16 Given our patient's history of blunt trauma, a laparoscopic approach to diaphragmatic repair was preferred
over thoracoscopy. Using laparoscopy, it was feasible to survey the rest of the abdomen, place the liver and bowel back into the abdominal
cavity, and repair the diaphragmatic defect. Diagnosis of traumatic diaphragmatic hernias can be difficult in the acute setting and can
present later with variable symptoms and radiological findings. Diaphragmatic hernias should be considered early in the differential
diagnosis of a trauma patient. Though right-sided diaphragmatic hernias are less common than left-sided ones, they occur more frequently
than was once thought. Plain films, CT imaging, and MRI can help establish the diagnosis. Both thoracoscopy and laparoscopy are options to
minimally invasive surgical approaches to repair, and the approach must be individualized by the clinical condition, presence of other
injuries, type of hernia, and the skill level of the surgeon. Laparoscopy is a safe and successful approach to DH repair in the trauma
patient, because further assessment and treatment of abdominal and thoracic injury can be facilitated.
