We noticed overrepresentation of atovaquone-proguanil therapeutic failures among Plasmodium falciparum–infected travelers weighing >100 kg.
We report here 1 of these cases, which was not due to resistant parasites or impaired drug bioavailability. The follow-up of such patients
should be strengthened. Fewer than 25 cases of falciparum malaria that failed to respond to atovaquone-proguanil (A-P) have been noted in
published articles since the 1996 registration of Malarone (GlaxoSmithKline, Marly-le-Roi, France) (1,2). Well-documented cases that were
not attributed to suboptimal dosage or impaired bioavailability essentially due to vomiting, diarrhea, or both, showed atovaquone-resistant
parasites in the recrudescent isolate, with Y268S or Y268N cytochrome b mutations (2–10). We report the case of treatment failure that was
not due to resistant parasites or impaired drug bioavailability. During February 2007, a 39-year-old man who was born in Africa but lived in
France since 1996 traveled to Kinshasa, Democratic Republic of Congo, for a 1-month vacation in which he visited friends and relatives. He
was 6 feet tall with strong musculature and weighed 115 kg (body mass index = 34.3). He did not use chemoprophylaxis and did not take
antimalarial self-treatment before seeking medical advice. Two days after returning to France, a fever and other signs of uncomplicated
malaria attack developed (chills, arthralgia, asthenia) without vomiting. Three days after onset of symptoms, the patient sought care at the
Avicenne Hospital, Bobigny, France. Blood smears performed at admission showed 1.6% Plasmodium falciparum parasitemia. The patient was
hospitalized and immediately treated with the standard dosage of A-P (Malarone, 4 tablets each day for 3 days given with the main meal; each
tablet contains 250 mg of atovaquone and 100 mg of proguanil hydrochloride). The patient experienced no vomiting or diarrhea. His fever
abated by day 3 of treatment, and malaria smears at that time showed 0.07% of morphologically altered parasites (these figures are not
uncommon because A-P is known to act relatively slowly). The patient was discharged on day 3. The patient did not return until his scheduled
appointments for control of parasitemia on days 7 and 28. The patient was apyretic, and parasitemia was negative by day 7 on thin and thick
blood smears. On day 28, the patient was apyretic, but thin and thick smears showed P. falciparum trophozoites (0.001% parasitemia on thin
smear and 16 trophozoites per 1,000 leukocytes on thick smear). The patient was then successfully retreated with 650 mg quinine base orally
3× daily for 7 days. Day 0 in vitro phenotype showed parasite susceptibility to atovaquone, with a 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) value
of 10 nmol/L (in vitro resistance threshold >40 nmol/L ). Day 28 in vitro susceptibility was not assayed because of insufficient parasite
density. DNA sequencing showed that both day 0 and day 28 isolates had wild-type sequence of cytochrome b. Genotyping of the pfdhfr gene
showed that the 3 major pfdhfr mutations (at position 51, 59, and 108) associated with cycloguanil resistance were found in isolates from
day 0 and day 28. The number and the proportions of genotypes within isolates were determined by a fragment analysis method based on the
polymorphism of the gene encoding merozoite surface protein-2 (12). Day 0 and day 28 isolates contained the same majority genotype, with the
727-bp msp-2 allele representing >80% of isolates. This parasite population analysis did not show the selection of a minority-resistant
genotype by A-P treatment. These results did not show either the emergence of mutant codon 268 cytochrome b within the 727-bp msp-2 dominant
genotype. High-performance liquid chromatography on day 3 of treatment (performed 20 h after the last drug intake) showed an atovaquone
plasma concentration of 3.1 μg/mL. High interpatient variability has been reported, but this value showed initial adequate drug
concentration and excluded impaired bioavailability (13). Thus, this patient, who had correctly taken A-P tablets with food and did not
vomit, showed correct plasma drug concentration on day 3 but did not show clearance of A-P–susceptible parasites on day 28, although he was
asymptomatic. Reinfection was excluded because the patient was treated after returning to France (which is a non–malaria-endemic area). All
these data suggest that the standard drug regimen led to suboptimal dosage in this patient. Apparently correct initial atovaquone
concentration on day 3 did not predict the outcome of treatment because A-P acts slowly, and most reported A-P therapeutic failures were
late failures. Drug interactions that could have lowered A-P plasmatic concentration were excluded because, other than A-P, the patient
received only acetaminophen. The most plausible cause of this late therapeutic failure is the relatively insufficient dosage due to
increased oral clearance and volume of distribution of atovaquone in this patient who weighed >100 kg. According to the relationships
between oral clearance of atovaquone and weight, and between volume of distribution and weight, these parameters increase by 40% in
comparison to those in a patient of 70 kg (13). The effect may be less marked for proguanil because, unlike atovaquone, it becomes
concentrated in the erythrocytes. However, proguanil likely does not act by itself in A-P association but only facilitates the atovaquone
activity (14). Likewise, the observed pfdhfr triple mutant likely had no effect on the intrinsic activity of proguanil but only reflected
the high frequency of this haplotype in West Africa. Another hypothesis is that the treatment failure was due to resistant parasites not
related to the cytochrome b mutations. Some rare therapeutic failures remain unexplained by phenotypic or genotypic data. Such a parasite
should have emerged during treatment, because the IC50 of the day 0 isolate was susceptible. We know of only 1 other reported case of A-P
treatment failure not associated with cytochrome b mutations and not related to incorrect dosage or impaired bioavailability (15). In the
case reported by Wichmann et al. (15), clonal analysis of pre- and posttreatment isolates was not performed, which limited the
interpretation of DNA sequencing; the weight of the patient was not mentioned. Most previously reported A-P therapeutic failures were late
failures: patients sought care or parasitemia was detected >3 weeks after first day of treatment in 13 of 21 cases (2–5,7–9,15). These data
underline the usefulness of the day 28 appointment in detecting late A-P therapeutic failures. In addition, this appointment may provide the
opportunity to detect asymptomatic parasitemia (2), as occurred in the present case. We noticed an overrepresentation of A-P therapeutic
failures among patients who weighed >100 kg. In a series of 347 P. falciparum–infected travelers, 3 of 12 patients who weighed 100–115 kg
exhibited therapeutic failure while receiving the standard A-P regimen (only 2 therapeutic failures were reported among the other 335
patients who weighed <100 kg). Two of these patients >100 kg showed mutant parasites on the date treatment failure was recognized (2); the
third treatment failure (the present one) was due to susceptible parasites. Thus, relative suboptimal dosage of the standard A-P regimen in
patients >100 kg led to either failure to control susceptible parasites or emergence of resistant ones. DNA point mutations conferring
atovaquone resistance may emerge more easily in patient who have received suboptimal dosage. However, not all patients weighing >100 kg seen
in our center had A-P therapeutic failures. Eleven of these 12 patients were from Africa and could have possessed residual immunity, which
could have helped them clear parasites. A-P is safe and therapeutic failure remains rare. Nevertheless, the overrepresentation of failures
in patients >100 kg argues for strengthening the follow-up monitoring of those patients. Moreover, the weight of a patient could be taken
into account in the dosage of A-P prescribed for similar cases in the future. Suggested citation for this article: Durand R, Prendki V,
Cailhol J, Hubert V, Ralaimazava P, Massias L, et al. Plasmodium falciparum malaria and atovaquone-proguanil treatment failure. Emerg Infect
Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2008 Feb [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/2/320.htm This work was supported by
the French Ministry of Health (Institut de Veille Sanitaire). Dr Durand is a senior parasitologist at the French Malaria Reference Center
and at the Léonard de Vinci University, Bobigny, France. His main research interests are malaria and leishmaniasis.
