Streptococcus suis infection is an emerging zoonosis in Southeast Asia. We report a fatal case of S. suis serotype 16 infection in a
Vietnamese man in 2001. Streptococcus suis is a gram-positive, facultatively anaerobic coccus that may cause pneumonia, meningitis,
septicemia, and arthritis in pigs. The pig can also be a healthy carrier of S. suis in the upper respiratory tract (particularly the tonsils
and nasal cavities), the genital tract, and the alimentary tract (1,2). The first case of S. suis infection in humans was reported in
Denmark in 1968. Since then, increasing numbers of cases have been reported in many countries, including the Netherlands; the United
Kingdom; France; Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, People’s Republic of China; Thailand; Taiwan; and the United States (3–7). A
recent outbreak of S. suis infections in Sichuan Province, People’s Republic of China, emphasized the importance of S. suis as an emerging
zoonosis (8). S. suis is also the most important cause of bacterial meningitis in adults at the Hospital for Tropical Diseases (HTD) in Ho
Chi Minh City, Vietnam (N.T.H Mai et al., unpub. data). The number of cases is likely underreported and will likely increase further with
increased awareness and enhanced capacity to culture and identify S. suis. A 57-year-old unemployed man from Long An Province, southern
Vietnam, who had a history of alcohol abuse, had a 10-day history of abdominal pain, jaundice, anorexia, and weight loss. At the time of
admission to HTD in 2001, the patient was lethargic, his vital signs were stable, and his neck was not stiff. Physical examination showed
cutaneous spider naevi, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, and ascites. Leukocyte count was 15.3 ×103 cells/μL (70% neutrophils), blood urea
nitrogen 12.1 mmol/L (reference range 3.57–7.14 mmol/L), creatinine 150 μmol/L (<115 mmol/L), sodium 127 mmol/L (135–145 mmol/L), potassium
6.67 mmol/L (3.5–5.1 mmol/L), serum aspartate aminotransferase 87 IU/L (12–30 IU/L), serum alamine aminotransferase 41 IU/L (13–40 IU/L),
and albumin 20 g/L (35–52 g/L). An abdominal ultrasound examination showed hepatosplenomegaly and ascites. Ascitic fluid was cloudy and
contained 5 g/L protein. Results of Gram stain and culture of ascitic fluid were negative. A diagnosis of spontaneous bacterial peritonitis
associated with alcoholic liver cirrhosis was made, and the patient was treated with 2 g/day of ceftriaxone. Twenty-four hours after
admission, acute respiratory distress developed. The patient’s family decided to take him home because they were unable to pay for further
treatment; the patient died on the same day. The blood culture (BACTEC 9050 system; Becton Dickinson Microbiology Systems, Sparks, MD, USA),
which was taken at the time of admission, grew S. suis 24 hours after collection. Further inquiries into potential pig exposure, after the
blood culture results were reported, indicated that the patient kept pigs near his house and was known to regularly consume portions of the
pig that had a high risk of being contaminated, such as the intestine. S. suis was identified on the basis of colony morphology, negative
katalase reaction, optochin resistance, and APIStrep (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France). Serotyping was performed by slide agglutination
using specific antisera (Statens Serum Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark) and was positive for serotype 16. Confirmation of the serotype was
performed at the International Reference Laboratory for S. suis Serotyping, Quebec City, Quebec, Canada (M. Gottschalk). This strain was
susceptible to penicillin (MIC 0.032 mg/L), ceftriaxone (0.064 mg/L), rifampin (0.032 mg/L), chloramphenicol (2 mg/L), erythromycin (0.064
mg/L), levofloxacin (0.38 mg/L), and vancomycin (0.5 mg/L) but resistant to tetracycline (64 mg/L) by Etest (AB-Biodisk, Solna, Sweden) when
Clinical Laboratory Standard Institute breakpoints were used. On pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) that used restriction enzyme SmaI,
this strain showed little similarity with a representative set of serotype 2 isolates from Vietnam (Figure). Multilocus sequence typing
(MLST) (www.mlst.net) showed that the sequence of 5 of 7 alleles of the included housekeeping genes had not been previously described. Thus,
this strain was assigned the new sequence type 106. On eBURST analysis (www.mlst.net), this sequence type does not belong to any of the
clonal complexes but is a singleton. PCR for detection of the genes encoding the putative virulence factors extracellular protein factor
(EF) and suilysin were negative. Results of Western blot for detection of muramidase-released protein (MRP) and EF, using rabbit polyclonal
antibody against MRP and EF (provided by H. Smith, the Netherlands), were also negative. S. suis serotype 2 strains 31533 and 89-1591
(provided by M. Gottschalk, Canada) were used as positive and negative controls, respectively. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis after SmaI
digestion of Streptococcus suis serotype 16 strain SS07 and a representative set of S. suis serotype 2 strains isolated from patients with
meningitis in southern Vietnam. A dendrogram was generated by Dice analysis (optimization 0.5%, band tolerance 1%) and cluster analysis with
unweighted pair group method with arithmetic average, using Bionumerics software (Applied Maths, Sint-Martens-Latem, Belgium). Numbers in
dendrogram indicate percentage of similarity. Arrow numbers indicate molecular size (kb). The total number of human S. suis infections
reported until August 2006 was ≈400, and nearly 90% of these cases occurred in China, Thailand, Hong Kong, Taiwan, and the Netherlands (4).
These data did not include at least 200 cases of S. suis infection in Vietnam (C. Schultsz, unpub. data). At present, 33 capsular serotypes
of S. suis have been recognized (1,4). S. suis serotype 2 is considered to be the most pathogenic to pigs and humans. All human cases of S.
suis infection for which serotyping was available were caused by S. suis serotype 2, except for 1 case of serotype 1 (9), 1 case of serotype
4 (3), and 1 case of serotype 14 (6). Among 116 cases of S. suis meningitis seen at HTD from 1997 through 2005, 115 were caused by serotype
2 and 1 by serotype 14. S. suis serotype 2 can cause meningitis, septicemia and septic shock, arthritis, endocarditis, pneumonia,
endophthalmitis, and cellulitis in humans (3,5,8). The mortality rate for S. suis serotype 2 meningitis is <10% (10), but it can reach 70%
among patients with septicemia and septic shock (11). The exact route of infection for humans is not known. Cases have been linked to
accidental inoculation through skin injuries, for example, during occupational exposure to pigs and pork, but inhalation of aerosols and
ingestion of contaminated food have also been suggested (3,9,11,12). Preexisting medical conditions, such as alcoholism and liver cirrhosis,
as was present in our patient, or a prior splenectomy may predispose to severe infection. Serotype 16 has never been isolated from humans
and, to our knowledge, has also rarely been reported as a cause of invasive disease in pigs. One isolate of S. suis serotype 16 was reported
from a diseased pig in Germany and 4 isolates from slaughter pigs in South Korea (13,14). The S. suis serotype 16 strain was sensitive to
all antimicrobial agents tested except tetracycline, as has been reported for serotype 2 isolates (5). PFGE results showed that this human
serotype 16 isolate was unrelated to human serotype 2 isolates. On MLST, this isolate had a new sequence type that did not belong to any of
the clonal complexes. In contrast, most serotype 2 isolates reported so far belong to clonal complex 1 (www.mlst.net). Taken together, these
results suggest that capsule switch, such as has been observed for S. pneumoniae, does not explain the emergence of invasive isolates of a
different serotype. In addition, the PCR and Western blot analyses indicate that the serotype 2 capsule, EF, MRP, or suilysin is not
required for virulence of S. suis in humans, as has also been shown in pigs. S. suis infection is an emerging zoonosis in Asia. Strains with
serotype 16 are among those capable of infecting humans. Suggested citation for this article: Nghia HDT, Hoa NT, Linh LD, Campbell J, Diep
TS, Chau NVV, et al. Human case of Streptococcus suis serotype 16 infection. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2008 Jan [date
cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/1/155.htm This study was supported by The Wellcome Trust. Dr Nghia is an infectious
disease specialist. His research interests include the epidemiology, diagnosis, clinical manifestations, and treatment of Streptococcus suis
infection in Vietnam.
