We present the case of 48-year-old woman suffering from migraine with aura (MA) since menarche. During her life the patient frequently
presented catamenial MA attacks with an increasing frequency during pregnancy in particular in the second and third trimesters, and then
during breast-feeding. Treatment with oral contraceptive (OC) for endometriosis and later with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, fluorouracil
(CMF) for breast cancer produced a higher number of attacks. Instead, she referred an improvement with gonadotropin releasing hormone
agonist (GnRH-a) for the treatment of endometriosis and then with tamoxifen as hormonal therapy after mastectomy and chemotherapy for breast
cancer. We highlight the importance of physiological hormonal modification and hormonal therapies on the course of MA. The influence of
ovarian hormone activity on migraine with (MA) and without aura (MO) throughout the female lifecycle is well known [1, 2]. Estrogenic
production induces dichotomy in the incidence of migraine between the two genders at the time of puberty, which becomes wider during the
childbearing age and diminishes after menopause . In women, the attacks often begin at menarche and then occur maximally in correlation with
menses as pure menstrual migraine or menstrual-related migraine in a large amount of patients [3, 4]. Indeed, a change in migraine pattern
is frequently observed during pregnancy [5, 6], puerperium and after menopause [8, 9], and is related to hormonal therapies . We present the
case of a woman with a 36-year history of migraine with aura and describe the effect on the attacks of the hormonal physiological
modifications and of the various hormonal therapeutic treatments that rarely could be found in a single individual. A 48-year old woman
presented at our Headache Centre for a long-standing history of migraine with aura (ICHD-II) . She experienced her first episode by the age
of 12 years, a few months after menarche. The attacks were characterized by gradual onset of flickering lights localized over the temporal
aspect of both visual fields with an average duration of 30–40 min, followed within a half-hour by bilateral, throbbing and moderate to
severe headache, accompanied by nausea, photophobia and phonophobia with a duration of about 6 h. At the beginning, the attacks usually
occurred during the menstrual period with a frequency of one episode every other month. Other trigger factors were reported, including
emotional stresses and difficulties with study and, later on, with her work as a clerk. The frequency of attacks remained quite unchanged
until the age of 26 when she became pregnant. During the second and third trimester, the patient experienced an increased frequency with at
least two episodes a month, or more, in the last month prior to delivery. The attacks remained unchanged during puerperium and the 4 months
of breast-feeding, after which the episodes persisted with a frequency of once a month. At the age of 31, the patient was diagnosed with
ovarian endometriosis for which she was started on oral contraceptives (OC). During the 6-month period of OC therapy, the attacks markedly
worsened, presenting with an almost weekly frequency. For this reason, a prophylactic therapy with lisuride at the dosage of 0.025 mg tid
was added, without relevant improvement. Afterwards, the OC therapy was stopped and the patient underwent a partial ovariectomy. In the
subsequent 6 months, she was treated with the gonadotropin-releasing hormone agonist (GnRH-a) triptoreline at the dosage of 3.75 mg im once
monthly, during which period the patient did not present with any attack. Nevertheless, at the end of treatment at the age of 33, the MA
attacks recurred with high frequency. At that time, the patient experienced important emotional distress due to a severe disease suffered by
her mother. At the age of 40, she was diagnosed with a breast cancer. A radical mastectomy was performed and pathology showed a ductal
adenocarcinoma with metastatic invasion of the axillary lymphonodes; estrogen and progesterone receptors were positive. The surgery was
followed by six cycles of chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5-fluorouracil. During chemotherapy, the patient reported
about three crises monthly, of which one was regularly, at the end of every cycle. After the end of chemotherapy, tamoxifen 20 mg daily was
started and the therapy lasted for 5 years. In the 5 years of tamoxifen therapy, the patient experienced only three attacks, but soon after
the stop of therapy MA built up again with two or three episodes a month of severe headache preceded by visual disturbance and paresthesia,
the latter being very unusual until then. A brain MR with gadolinium and MR-angiography were unremarkable. Migraine prophylactic treatment
was prescribed with flunarizine 5 mg daily for 6 months and then amitriptyline 50 mg at bedtime for 8 months with poor efficacy. This case
considers the milestones of the physiological hormonal life of a woman and their effects on the course of MA. Moreover, the pathologies
presented by the patient (endometriosis and breast cancer) allow to evidence the importance of the treatments performed, in particular those
with influence on hormonal activity, on MA attacks. The data, regarding the frequency of the crises are precise because, for many years
before presenting to our Headache Centre, the patient entered in her detailed personal diary the events of her life, including the
occurrence of the attacks and of menses. Clearly, the trigger factors for MA are not only hormonal, but also emotional, causes (the disease
of her mother, the neoplasia, problems in the job). However, the relationships with the physiological hormonal modifications are very
evident: first of all, we notice the beginning of the attacks a few months after menarche and the occurrence of the attacks often in
relation to menses. Then, she developed a worsening of the attacks at the beginning of the third month of pregnancy, an unusual but not
extraordinary circumstance in MA, that respect to migraine without aura (MO) may show a less favourable course or that sometimes develops
during pregnancy . Finally, we noted a persistence of the attacks during puerperium and breast-feeding. Regarding pharmacological
treatments, we evidenced drugs that caused worsening or improvement of the attacks. In the first instance, there was a remarkable worsening
of the crisis with the use of OC, in spite of the concomitant prophylactic treatment. Moreover, although it is difficult to establish the
exact mechanism of action by which antiblastic drugs might provoke the attacks at the end of every treatment, a cause–effect relationship
appears clear. In the second instance, the treatment with GnRH-a for therapy of endometriosis and then with tamoxifen for adjuvant treatment
of the neoplasia proved to be very effective in the prevention of the attacks, particularly tamoxifen that was prescribed for 5 years. The
patient reported not more than three attacks during the entire period of anti-oestrogenic treatment. About tamoxifen, there are two studies
in the literature [13, 14]. In an open-label non-randomized study on eight women suffering from not further specified catamenial migraine,
five patients reported marked improvement or disappearance of headache, two mild–moderate improvement and one was unchanged. Tamoxifen was
given at a dosage of 10–20 mg/days for 7–14 days before menstruation and continued at 5–10 mg days for 3 days after the start of
menstruation for four cycles . The second report was on a series of six women with “migraine-type headaches” and benign mammary dysplasia
treated with tamoxifen 20 mg/day. Improvement was seen in all patients who no longer required migraine drug therapy, but the attacks
returned a few weeks after tamoxifen discontinuation of the drug . In contrast with these data, one case report of catamenial migraine
showed a worsening of the attacks with tamoxifen . We found two studies on the use of GnRH-a with partially divergent conclusions [16, 17].
The first was a non-randomized prospective study, in which five patients with menstrual migraine were treated with 3.75 mg IM GnRH-a monthly
for 10 months. For the last 6 months of treatment, patients also received transdermal estrogen and medroxyprogesterone 2.5 mg. All the
patients reported a marked reduction of the attacks with leuprolide and with leuprolide and hormonal add-back therapy . Conversely, Martin
et al. in a randomized, placebo-controlled study on 21 patients, treated with GnRH-a and with GnRH-a associated with estrogens, demonstrated
a modest preventive benefit only in the group treated with GnRH-a (goserelin 3.6 mg implant) associated with a transdermal patch containing
100 μg of oestradiol-17β. The above reported studies, the only ones present in literature on this topic to the best of our knowledge,
consider the use of tamoxifen and GnRHa only in the treatment of MO. We highlight the possible use of these treatments also in MA, but this
needs further studies. A possible caveat is that often the course of MA is irregular with long periods of spontaneous remission and this
pattern could make testing the efficacy of a therapy difficult. But this statement is not applicable to our patient who presented a rather
regular course of the crisis. The uncommon behavior of MA in this patient should be stressed. MA is commonly thought to worsen in periods of
high plasma estrogen concentration, such as the last two trimesters of pregnancy, but not with estrogen withdrawal. In this case, MA
worsened with both low and high estrogen levels (i.e., menstrual period, post-partum, pregnancy). It seems that both hormonal fluctuations
and stable high estrogen levels could trigger MA attacks, whereas stable low estrogen levels, obtained pharmacologically by anti-estrogen
and GnRH-a drugs, could be beneficial. In our case, these therapies were given, incidentally, to treat other diseases (endometriosis and
breast cancer) as in the Powles’ report for benign mammary dysplasia . We believe, considering these results, that in particular and
selected situations, when the crises are particularly related to hormonal changes and difficult to treat, or when associated with
concomitant gynecologic diseases, these drugs could be considered for use, although not as a first-line treatment, but with caution and in
cooperation with a gynecologist.
