Editor, Around 1500 new cases of thyroid cancer are diagnosed each year in the United Kingdom, being responsible for around 320 deaths
annually1. Detecting recurrent thyroid carcinoma is important for the speedy imposition of treatment regimens, but occasionally detecting
subsequent disease can be problematic. Bone is the commonest site for distant thyroid carcinoma metastases2, but other sites such as the
parapharyngeal space3 are not unknown. We describe the case of a patient presenting with recurrent follicular thyroid carcinoma following
total thyroidectomy in which bilateral internal jugular vein thrombosis, in association with a right jugulodigastric mass were the main
features. We believe that this is the first such report of a recurrent follicular carcinoma of the thyroid presenting in this manner. A 39
year old Caucasian lady presented with a large anterior midline mass and hoarseness due to left vocal cord palsy. Due to airway difficulties
a surgical tracheostomy was performed, at which time biopsy was taken. Histology reported a poorly differentiated follicular cell carcinoma
of the thyroid, CT scan demonstrating masses in both lobes of the thyroid, but no metastatic spread. Total thyroidectomy was performed
followed by thyroid ablation therapy with radioactive iodine. Fourteen months following thyroidectomy the patient was readmitted to hospital
with a diffuse red tender right sided neck swelling centred over the jugulodigastric area. Fibreoptic nasendoscopy was unremarkable. Both
her inflammatory markers and white cell count were found to be raised, and intravenous antibiotics were commenced. A CT of the neck was
performed, which demonstrated extensive bilateral thrombosis of the internal jugular veins, the left displaying intracranial extension
involving the sigmoid sinus. An ultrasound scan revealed changes suggestive of right sided parotiditis, but an MRI added nothing new. With
no recurrence of tumour found investigations for other causes of thrombosis were undertaken, but were all negative. Fine needle aspiration
cytology of the mass was unhelpful. Subsequently the patient developed dysphagia, dysarthria, and bilateral impairment of cranial nerves IX,
X and XII. Ultrasound scan of the liver, and bone marrow biopsy were undertaken and found to be unremarkable. A PET scan was performed, but
highlighted nothing other than the right sided neck lump. An incision biopsy of the right sided neck lump was undertaken, the histology
revealing a poorly differentiated necrotic carcinoma similar in appearance to the follicular thyroid carcinoma previously excised. Her
condition deteriorated and she died shortly after. Diagnosing recurrent thyroid carcinoma following attempted curative surgery is of
paramount importance in order to institute the correct treatment as soon as possible. Recurrence of thyroid carcinomas can be difficult to
detect, and while thrombosis of jugular veins has been described as a feature of papillary thyroid carcinomas4, we believe this is the first
description of this occurring with a follicular thyroid carcinoma. Some authors have postulated that thyroid carcinomas may result in a
hypercoagulable state5 and we hope that this report highlights the importance of ruling out recurrence of follicular thyroid carcinoma as a
cause of unexplained thrombosis in a patient which has previously undergone curative surgery. No conflict of interest declared
