Herein, we describe the presenting symptoms, history, ophthalmic examination, visual fields and brain magnetic resonance imaging of a
patient who developed left homonymous hemianopia due to right occipital lobe hemorrhage after ingestion of sildenafil citrate (Novagra
Forte). To the best of our knowledge, association of homonymous hemianopia with sildenafil usage has not been reported before. Sildenafil
citrate (Viagra, Novagra Forte) has been developed as a drug to help male impotence. Sildenafil is a selective phosphodiesterase-5 and a
partial phosphodiesterase-6 inhibitor and is prescribed for erectile dysfunction.1,2 By enhancing the effect of nitric oxide and cyclic
guanosine monophosphate pathways, sildenafil leads to smooth muscle relaxation in the corpus cavernosum,3 allowing inflow of blood during
sexual stimulation.2 Visual symptoms are among the well-recognized side-effects of sildenafil,1,2 on the other hand spontaneous intracranial
hemorrhages (ICH) which did not affect the visual function have been reported after sildenafil.4-6 McGee et al., have reported left
homonymous hemianopia secondary to right parietal lobe hemorrhage after ingestion of 20 mg of vardenafil (another inhibitor of
phosphodiesterase-5) in a 66-year-old healthy man.7 Our patient developed left homonymous hemianopia due to right occipital lobe hemorrhage
after ingestion of 50 mg sildenafil citrate (Novagra Forte). To the best of our knowledge, association of homonymous hemianopia with
sildenafil usage has not been reported before. A 63-year-old man was admitted to Poostchi clinic affiliated with the Shiraz University of
medical sciences, Shiraz, Iran, complaining of bilateral blurred vision and headache since early in the morning after having one half of a
100 mg sildenafil (Novagra Forte) tablet 6 h prior to consultation. He had no history of diabetes or hypertension. His blood pressure was
normal. His best-corrected visual acuity was 20/25 in each eye. He had mild nuclear sclerosis cataract in both eyes, a normal intraocular
pressure and no relative afferent pupillary defect. The ophthalmoscopy was normal bilaterally. Color vision screening as done by Ishihara
plates was normal. A visual field test was performed by automated perimetry (Humphrey) and revealed a left homonymous hemianopia [Fig. 1].
Neurological and internist consultation revealed no positive findings except for the visual field defect. Brain T1 mode magnetic resonance
imaging showed a hypersignal area in the parasagittal region of the right occipital lobe without mass effect or midline shift. This finding
was in favor of subacute intracerebral hematoma [Fig. 2]. This case presented with symptoms initially described as bilateral visual
blurriness. A computerized perimetry revealed a congruous left homonymous hemianopia respecting the midline, which is typical for post
chiasmal lesions. This was proved to be a hemorrhagic stroke in the occipital lobe. Our patient did not have any history of previous
systemic illness, nor did he have any positive clinical or para clinical findings of an underlying vascular problem. Visual symptoms are
well-recognized side-effects of sildenafil. They are infrequent at the lowest clinical doses of the drug (25 and 50 mg), with a reported
incidence of roughly 3%. The incidence of visual complaints rises to 11% after a 100 mg dose and is near 50% when patients use 200 mg.1
Sildenafil can cause a reversible visual disturbance through its action on phosphodiesterase-6 in photoreceptor outer segments in the
retina. The most prominent symptoms are complaints of a bluish tinge or a sense of increased light sensitivity. These changes in color
discrimination, mostly in the blue-green spectrum have little if any effect on visual function and are generally only apparent with
sophisticated visual function testing.2 Non-arteritic anterior ischemic optic neuropathy has been reported after ingestion of sildenafil.8,9
Sildenafil may alter the perfusion of the optic nerve head. Spontaneous ICH which did not affect the visual function has been reported after
sildenafil.4,6 Nitric oxide influences both cellular constituents of the blood and vascular smooth muscle. A principal intracellular target
for nitric oxide is guanylate cyclase, which, when activated, increases the intracellular concentration of cyclic guanosine monophosphate,10
which in turn activates protein kinase G. Nitric oxide induces relaxation of vascular smooth muscle and inhibits platelet activation and
aggregation.11 Platelet inactivation combined with increased cerebral blood flow may be associated with an increased risk of ICH.4
Vardenafil has been associated with a visual field defect in an identical case to the one presented here,7 this suggests that the visual
field defect and brain hemorrhage may not be necessarily specific to sildenafil but to the class of drug. Confronting a patient with
disturbances in visual function after taking sildenafil, one should keep in mind the possibility of brain hemorrhage, even in the absence of
other symptoms. Therefore, the clinical examination is important. Findings suggestive of anterior pathway disease may suggest that anterior
ischemic optic neuropathy is the culprit, but a homonymous heminopia should suggest a possible ICH in patients who have just ingested
sildenafil. Visual field revealing left homonymous hemianopia Brain MRI revealing right occipital lobe hemorrhage
