Anal lesions affect up to 34% of patients with Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS),1 and are more frequent in males who have sex with
males (MSM).2 The most common anal infection in human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive patients is caused by human papillomavirus
(HPV).2,3 It is suggested that the appearance of this illness is related to the conversion of HIV into AIDS.2,4,5 Even with the introduction
of highly-active antiretroviral therapy (HAART), the prevalence of HPV infection in HIV-positive patients has not decreased, nor has anal
cancer incidence.6 It is well-known that HPV infection in HIV-positive patients is a risk factor for the development of squamous cell cancer
of the anus. Routine screening is strongly recommended in this population in order to identify pre-malignant lesions. 6 HPV infection
frequently manifests as verrucous lesions (warts) that cause pruritus, discomfort, and, more rarely, pain or bleeding.2,3 However, some
other infectious agents such as varicella-zoster virus (VZV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), molluscum contagiosum (MC), and particularly herpes
simplex virus (HSV), can also cause verrucous skin lesions in HIV-positive patients.7 Herpes simplex virus is found in 29% of MSM with
symptomatic anorectal disease,3 although the majority of confirmed herpes simplex cases are reported in asymptomatic individuals.3,8 The
most frequently encountered findings are ulcerated aphthous lesions, vesicles and inguinal lymphadenopathy.3,9 Additional signs and symptoms
include pain, pruritus, lymphadenopathy, superficial ulcers, vesicular erosion,3,9,10 urinary retention11,12 and constipation.12,13 A very
small number of cases of verrucous herpes of the perineum have been reported in the English medical literature and treatment options varied,
including the use of acyclovir,4,14 valacyclovir15 and surgical resection.16 We report a case of a perianal verrucous lesions that was
initially suspected to be anal neoplasia, but was revealed to be a herpes infection. The patient required surgical resection after antiviral
therapy failure. This article reviews the literature in order to describe the main characteristics of patients with verrucous perineal
herpes infection and the outcomes of different treatment modalities. A 39-year-old male was referred to our service who complained of having
had verrucous and painful perianal nodules for 3 months. He had a 10-year history of HIV infection and had been using HAART for the last two
years. His CD4 T cell count was 400/¼l and his HIV viral load was 60.000 copies per ml. The proctologic exam revealed painful 2–3 cm
verrucous perianal nodules (Figure 1). Endoscopy of the rectum and sigmoid was normal. Bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy was detected
during the physical exam. An anal pap smear revealed high-grade anal dysplasia, while a conventional pathologic exam of perianal lesions
revealed no dysplasia but demonstrated cytoarchitectural alterations compatible with HSV infection. Immunohistochemical tests b114® for HSV
type 1 and b116® for HSV type 2 from Dako Denmark A/S (Glostrup - Denmark) revealed the presence of HSV type 2. Fungal and acid-alcohol
resistant bacilli screening were negative. The patient was administered oral acyclovir for four weeks (2.4 g/d). Because there was minimal
or no regression of the lesions and persistence of the pain, we chose to resect all lesions. After surgery, the patient was administered
prophylactic acyclovir. Disease recurrence was not detected after a 9-month follow-up (Figure 2). Our review of the English language medical
literature published within the last 15 years identified eight cases of verrucous perineal herpes infection. The patient characteristics are
summarized and compared to the findings from our case in Table 1. Data from the literature demonstrate that this atypical presentation of
herpes infection has a predilection for middle-aged males infected with HIV.4,15,16,17 The features of the present case were found to be
similar to those reviewed in the literature. The patient characteristics reported in the literature suggest risk factors for this uncommon
presentation. An immunocompromised status, which is related to HIV infection, was reported in all cases of perianal verrucous herpetic
lesions, which suggests that it may be a significant factor. Additionally, all patients had CD4 T cell counts lower than 500 cells/μL,
despite the use of HAART. A history of receptive anal intercourse may also play an important role in this affliction. Although this issue
was not always addressed in previous reports, two of the patients were MSM.4,15 HSV, as well as VZV, CMV, MC and HPV infections, can
manifest as hyperkeratosis5 and verrucous4 lesions in HIV-positive patients. The cause for this manifestation of herpes simplex infection is
unknown,4,14 although many hypotheses have been postulated. According to Smith et al.,5 there is an increased number of dendritic cells that
are positive for XIIIa factor, which might be related to the pathogenesis of HIV18,19 as these cells can work as an enervator of the virus
in the skin.20,21 These dendritic cells, can produce TNF-alpha in certain conditions, which might increase the growth index of
keratinocytes22,23 and generate acanthosys and hyperkeratosis. In uninfected people, various stimuli of keratinocytes are inhibited by IFN-
gamma, which is produced by cytotoxic T cells and T helper cells. This mechanism is diminished in HIV-infected patients.23 Interestingly,
the majority (7/9) of the lesions in the reported cases were caused by HSV2 (cases 1, 2, and 5–9). However, due to the small number of
cases, an association between HSV type and verrucous lesions cannot be assumed. Regarding the treatment modalities and outcomes, it is
difficult to compare the results from previous reports to our case. As seen in Table 1, there was significant treatment diversity among
these nine cases and relatively short follow-up. However, it must be emphasized that although two cases were successfully treated with
antiviral therapy alone (cases 1 and 3), the majority of cases (7/9) received local excision as part of their treatment. Local excision
alone was performed in three cases (cases 1, 4 and 5) and in combination with upfront antiviral therapy in four cases (cases 6–9). Among
these seven surgically treated patients, three of them presented with disease recurrence (cases 4, 6 and 7) despite the administration of
oral and topical acyclovir to two of them (cases 6 and 7). The use of prophylactic acyclovir after surgical treatment effectively prevented
disease recurrence in our patient during the nine-month follow-up period. According to the literature, patients with HSV infections
resistant to acyclovir, which usually occurs after irregular use of the drug,7 could be treated with foscarnet24 and beta-interferon.10
Because valacyclovir is more bioavailable than acyclovir, it was more effective in the resolution of cutaneous HSV infections.25,26 Despite
the relatively short follow-up period in these reports, they suggest that prophylactic use of oral acyclovir or valacyclovir may prevent
recurrence. In addition, there is evidence which indicates that the survival of patients with AIDS and previous exposure to herpes virus
infections may increase with chronic use of suppressive therapy with acyclovir.27 Moreover, the evidence seems to support pro-phylactic use
of these drugs. Atypical presentation of herpes simplex infection should be considered as a differential diagnosis of perianal neoplasia in
HIV-positive patients, because the nature of this presentation may be related to an immunocompromised status. Surgical resection followed by
acyclovir prophylactic treatment appears to be an effective therapy. Initial proctologic exam. Proctologic exam after surgery. Patients with
anal hypertrophic herpes. HSV = herpes simplex virus; NA = not applicable; NR = not reported; LE = local excision; IV = intravenous; M =
male; F = female
