Antecedent trauma has been implicated in the causation of soft tissue tumors. Several criteria have been established to define a cause-and-
effect relationship. We postulate possible mechanisms in the genesis of soft tissue tumors following antecedent traumatic injury. We present
a 27-year-old woman with a paraspinal desmoid tumor, diagnosed 3-years following a motor vehicle accident. Literature is reviewed. Soft
tissue tumors arising at the site of previous trauma may be desmoids, pseudolipomas or rarely, other soft tissue growths. The cause-and-
effect issue of desmoid or other soft tissue tumors goes beyond their diagnosis and treatment. Surgeons should be acquainted with this
diagnostic entity as it may also involve questions of longer follow-up and compensation and disability privileges. The etiology of most soft
tissue tumors is unknown. Our search of the English literature revealed a few case reports of soft tissue tumors developing at the site of a
previous traumatic injury . Desmoid tumors, lipoma and lymphoma were among the tumors reportedly associated with such injuries. We describe
a young woman with a left paraspinal desmoid tumor at the site of a recent trauma, possibly associated with a cause-and-effect mechanism. We
hope this study will shed more light on this phenomenon. A 27-year-old woman presented with a large subcutaneous mass in the upper back
(Figure 1) of 8 months' duration. Large subcutaneous mass in the left paraspinal region. Family history and past medical history were
unremarkable. The patient reported that she had been involved in a motor vehicle accident 3 years previously, in which she sustained a brain
concussion, fracture of the right lamina of the C-6 vertebra, and comminuted fractures of the left radius, ulna and femur. Physical
examination revealed a firm mass measuring 15 × 10 cm, adherent to its surroundings, with no apparent pathological vasculature or satellite
lesions. Cytological examination was inconclusive. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a solid space-occupying lesion measuring 12
× 4.8 × 7.6 cm, located in the left paraspinal region beneath the trapezium muscle (asterisk), compressing the paraspinal muscles medially
(Figure 2). The tumor has a heterogeneous appearance on T2 weighted images and enhanced with the injection of contrast material,
demonstrating its vascularity. Findings on core needle biopsy were compatible with desmoid tumor. Colonoscopy revealed no abnormalities. MRI
of the tumor: T1W pre-(A) and post-(B) gadolinium injection, T2W (C) and T1W post gadolinium, sagittal view (D). The tumor (arrows) has a
heterogenous appearance on T2W images and enhances with the injection of contrast material, demonstrating its vascularity. It is located
beneath the trapezius muscle (asterisk) which is atrophic. The paraspinal muscle is compressed medially. Owing to the large size of the
tumor and its close proximity to the spine, the initial treatment consisted of tamoxifen 20 mg twice daily and indomethacin 250 mg q8h. The
treatment was well tolerated. However, after 4 months, neither subjective nor objective changes in tumor consistency or size were noted. The
tamoxifen dosage was therefore doubled. Computerized tomography (CT) scan, 4 months later demonstrated tumor growth. There was no evidence
of infiltration of adjacent bony structures or pulmonary metastases. The patient was offered surgery. The tumor was surgically excised. It
measured 9 × 12 × 22 cm and weighed 1970 grams. It was relatively well circumscribed, with a fibrous consistency, and no areas of hemorrhage
or necrosis. Microscopic study revealed relatively low (up to 2–3/10HPF) mitotic activity (Figure 3, 4). The surgical margins were clear. At
present, 24 months postoperatively, the patient is tumor-free. Histopathologic specimen demonstrating spindle cell proliferation without
significant atypia or pleomorphism (HE × 40). Photomicrograph at high power magnification (HE × 100). Desmoid tumor is a benign, locally
aggressive neoplasm that arises from fascial or musculoaponeurotic tissue. It has a tendency to infiltrate surrounding tissue. The term
'desmoid', derived from the Greek "desmos" which means tendon-like was first employed by Müller in 1838. Desmoid tumors account for 0.03% of
all neoplasms , and 3.0% of all soft tissue tumors . Patients with familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) have a 1000-fold increased risk of
developing desmoid tumors compared to the general population. The abdomen is the most common site of the tumors in this patient group, many
times following a surgical insult. The reported female: male ratio for sporadic desmoid tumors is 5:2 ; most women are affected during or
after pregnancy. Reitamo et al., found that 80% of desmoid tumors occur in females, 50% of them in the third to fifth decade of life. The
female predominance is less prominent in patients with FAP . Recently, It was found that virtually all desmoid tumors have somatic -catenin
or adenomatous polyposis coli (APC) gene mutation leading to intranuclear accumulation of -catenin . The expression of nuclear -catenin may
play a role in the differential diagnosis of desmoid tumors from a host of fibroblastic and myofibroblastic lesions as well as from smooth
muscle neoplasms . The treatment of desmoid tumors is usually surgical. Local recurrences may occur even after clear margin resection.
Distant metastases are extremely rare. The pathogenesis of desmoid tumor may involve genetic abnormalities, sex hormones, and trauma ,
including surgical trauma, especially in patients with FAP . One study found that 10–30% of all sporadic abdominal wall desmoid tumors
occurred following surgical intervention. Half these tumors developed within 4 years of surgery . Gebhart et al., reported a case of desmoid
tumor arising at the site of a total hip replacement. Desmoid tumors developing around silicone implants have also been described . Skhiri
et al., reported a case of cervical desmoid following placement of an internal jugular catheter, and Wiel Marin et al., described a thoracic
desmoid tumor at the site of a previous rib fracture. Traumatic injury has been implicated as a causative factor in the genesis of other
soft tissues as well. Radhi et al., reported 3 cases of diffuse centroblastic lymphoma at a site of previous surgery with metallic implants.
Two of them were preceded by atypical lymphoid infiltrate. In 1969, Brooke and MacGregor suggested that lipoma may be secondary to trauma
because of the prolapse of normal deep adipose tissue through a tear in the overlying Scarpa's fascia, namely, "pseudolipoma". Pseudolipoma
consists of normal adipose tissue in an abnormal location, and is not considered a true lipoma because it is not encapsulated. Meggit and
Wilson reported 12 cases of post-traumatic so-called lipoma. They speculated that the tumors were the consequence of a rupture in the septa
that normally surround adipose tissue. A later report by Herbert and DeGeus described a young girl with an abdominal wall lipoma due to
pressure from tightly fitting briefs. They demonstrated an anatomical defect in the Scarpa's fascia at the level of a perforating vessel
with fat herniating through it. The largest series of 24 pseudolipomas was reported by Rozner and Isaacs in 1977, wherein scar contracture
following a shearing fascial injury was the etiological mechanism. Penoff described 3 cases of traumatic lipoma of the hip, although he
found no anatomic confirmation of an injury to Scarpa's fascia. In 1988, Dodenhoff described a "saddle-bag deformity" of the right hip
secondary to trauma. Post-traumatic lipoma was also reported by Elsahy (5 cases) and David et al., (10 cases). Signorini and Campiglio
described 9 cases of subcutaneous lipoma that appeared within a few months of a blunt trauma. They proposed that the differentiation of
mesenchymal precursors (preadipocytes) to mature adipocytes – a process triggered by the trauma – could lead to the formation of
subcutaneous lipoma. Warren listed several criteria defining a post-traumatic neoplasm: (a) prior integrity of the tumor site; (b) injury
severe enough to initiate reparative proliferation of cells; (c) reasonable latent period; and (d) tumor compatible with the scar tissue and
anatomic location of the injury. Ewing suggested slightly different criteria to establish a cause/effect relationship: (a) authenticity and
severity of the injury; (b) previous integrity of the wounded part; (c) tumor originating within the boundary of the injury; (d) histologic
variety of tumor compatible with underlying scar tissue; and (e) proper latent period. In our case, the wounded part (upper back) was
previously tumor-free, the authenticity of the trauma was confirmed by MRI, the tumor originated within the boundary of the injury, and the
latency period was reasonable. Furthermore, the desmoid histology was compatible with a scar or other reparative process. Thus, the tumor
met the criteria of both Warren and Ewing for post-traumatic neoplasm. The cause-and-effect issue of desmoid or other soft tissue tumors
goes beyond their diagnosis and treatment. It may also involve questions of longer follow-up and compensation and disability privileges.
Pseudolipomas are not real neoplasia, but they seem to account for the reports of the so-called post-traumatic lipomas. The post-injury
local reparatory mechanisms better explain the creation of desmoid tumors, which, in these rare cases, seem to have lost control of cell
growth, giving rise to a soft tissue tumor. The rarity of desmoid tumor, its specific biology, the well-documented association between
abdominal wall desmoids and pregnancy, and even the tendency of surgery to induce new desmoid tumors in patients with FAP support the notion
that trauma/tissue injury is a likely cause of at least, some of these tumors, including the one described here. CT-computerized tomography;
FAP-familial adenomatous polyposis; MRI-magnetic resonance imaging The author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. CS
participated in drafting the manuscript, interpretation of data and conceptual design, AD conceived the study and participated in drafting
the manuscript, BO carried out the imaging analysis and interpretation of data, GH carried out the surgical procedure, conceptual design,
participated in drafting the manuscript and revised it critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report.
