Descemet′s membrane detachment is a condition with a wide range of etiologies. The most common cause is a localized detachment occurring
after cataract surgery. We report a case of vancomycin injection-induced Descemet′s membrane detachment as a complication following a
routine cataract surgery and its management. Descemet′s membrane detachment (DMD) can occur during anterior segment ocular surgery with
instrumentation1 or following inadvertent injection of fluid just posterior to the corneal stroma (or in the very posterior stroma).2,3 In
the former, the detached Descemet′s membrane (DM) may hang in a scroll-like manner in the anterior chamber (AC) from its root of attachment
to the corneal stroma. On the contrary, in the latter situation the injected fluid in the corneal stroma causes hydrodissection and
separation of the DM along with the corneal endothelium and it remains attached to the stroma all around beyond the site of detachment. This
report documents a case of DMD following intrastromal injection of vancomycin and its treatment and recovery. An 85-year-old gentleman
reported for cataract surgery in his left eye. Routine preoperative slit-lamp examination (SLE) of the left eye revealed ectopic pupil with
peripheral anterior synechiae from 9 to 11 o′clock position with atrophic iris changes in that sector (the patient did not have any history
of ailment, injury or surgery in the left eye) and nuclear sclerotic (Grade III) cataract. Corneal status, AC depth, intraocular pressure
and ocular fundus were within normal limits in the left eye. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) of the left eye revealed complete obliteration
of the angle recess from 9 to 11 o′clock position along with atrophy of the adjoining iris and ciliary body. The patient underwent routine,
uneventful phacoemulsification with foldable intraocular lens implantation (Acrysof, Alcon) under topical anesthesia through a 2.75 mm clear
corneal tunnel (superior) and two corneal sideports. At the end of the surgery, during intracameral injection of vancomycin hydrochloride
(Vancocin) with a 27-gauge cannula through the three o′clock sideport, the drug was injected inadvertently into the corneal stroma resulting
in DMD involving about half of the cornea. Immediately a cellophane-like reflex from the surface of the detached DM was seen under the
operating microscope. The detachment was managed with intracameral injection of sterile air. A 27-gauge cannula was introduced through the
10 o′clock sideport and advanced into the AC parallel to the iris plane till the tip of the cannula was clearly in the AC. Air was injected
with the cannula facing posteriorly and forming a single, large, full-chamber air bubble in the AC, flattening the detached membrane on to
the stroma and acting as a tamponade. The patient was discharged with topical steroid- antibiotics and hyperosmotic saline eye drops and
advised to maintain supine (face up) position. First postoperative day vision was 20/200 (pinhole). The SLE showed corneal stromal edema,
apposition of DM except in its inferotemporal quadrant and a freely moving half chamber air bubble in the AC with an otherwise quiet eye.
Corneal edema started subsiding clinically from the fifth postoperative day, but a curvilinear border demarcating the attached and detached
DM was still identifiable [Fig. 1] along with minimal DMD [Fig. 2]. Progressively the cornea cleared from center to periphery and the DMD
was completely re-attached by the eighth postoperative week. On the last follow-up (12th week), the best corrected visual acuity was 20/30
with a SLE showing quiet anterior segment without any clinically detectable corneal edema [Fig. 3]. Descemet′s membrane detachment is
neither rare, nor always a benign problem with a wide range of etiologies. The most common cause is a localized detachment occurring during
instrumentation in cataract surgery1,4, higher incidence being observed in clear corneal procedures.4 It is also seen following
uncomplicated clear corneal phacoemulsification.5 It may occur following inadvertent intracorneal injection of fluids like
viscoelastics2,3,6,7 and is also possible with other fluids like balanced salt solution, adrenaline and antibiotics. Small and localized
DMDs are insignificant and resolve spontaneously with medical management. Large DMDs are rare and may cause vision loss because of
subsequent corneal decompensation. These require surgical treatment like internal tamponade using air or non-expansile mixture of
perfluoropropane (C3F8) or sulphur hexafluoride (SF6) gas in the AC.8,9 In our case vancomycin hydrochloride solution (1 mg/ 0.1 ml) was
inadvertently injected into the corneal stroma at the clear corneal sideport incision resulting in a planar DMD affecting nearly half the
cornea and was attached all around the fluid pocket except at the injection site. The air injected into the AC could not express out the
intracorneal pocket of fluid and appose the DMD immediately as accidental injection site had closed by corneal tissue edema. Buoyancy of the
injected tamponading air bubble in the AC along with the corneal endothelial pump action, supportive hygroscopic action of the hyperosmotic
saline solution helped in re-attachment of the DMD [Fig. 4]. It was observed that the inadvertent injection of 0.1 ml of the antibiotic
vancomycin hydrochloride at the strength of 1 mg/0.1 ml into the corneal stroma did not result in any clinically detectable signs of corneal
scarring or endothelial damage till the last follow-up (12th postoperative week). Knowledge of the possible effects of antibiotic agents and
their diluents on the corneal stroma in their intracameral dose is limited. Sandboe et al., have reported that vancomycin in the
concentration of 1.0 mg/ml is nontoxic to the rabbit endothelium.10 A PubMed search revealed case reports of DMD following accidental
injection of fluids like viscoelastics.2,3,6,7 This report, we believe, is the first documentation of DMD induced by injection of
vancomycin. At the last follow-up, there was excellent anatomical and functional recovery and we could not detect any significant corneal
endothelial or stromal damage following intrastromal injection of vancomycin. However, it is difficult to predict the long-term clinical
course and a longer follow-up is necessary for drawing any conclusion regarding corneal toxicity of the antibiotic. The current case adds to
the spectrum of causes of DMD that can occur during routine cataract surgery and its subsequent management. A routine approach of DMD
management is recommended even for vancomycin hydrochloride-induced DMD. Support from Sri Kanchi Sankara Health and Educational Foundation
(SKSHEF),Mr. Bhaskar Jyoti Saikia in preparing the schematic diagram. Support from Sri Kanchi Sankara Health and Educational Foundation
(SKSHEF), Mr. Bhaskar Jyoti Saikia in preparing the schematic diagram. Slit-lamp photograph (fifth postoperative day) showing curvilinear
border (arrows) demarcating the attached and detached Descemet's membrane Slit-lamp photograph showing reducing Descemet's membrane
detachment (inset showing magnified view) Comparative postoperative photographs showing reducing corneal edema with complete reattachment of
Descemet's membrane. A. First postoperative week (third postoperative day) and B. Twelfth postoperative week Schematic diagram showing DM
detachment with the accumulated vancomycin in the intrastromal pocket
