A rare case of sudoriferous cyst of the orbit occurring in an adult, who had facial trauma, is reported. Several factors suggest its adult
onset. The only other case reported in an adult is of presumed childhood origin. Very few congenital cases have been reported. A 65-year-old
lady presented with recent onset of left-sided ptosis and a painless mass below the left supraorbital margin. The patient had traumatic
ptosis after a road traffic accident 13 years ago. The ptosis was surgically repaired, which resulted in symmetrical palpebral apertures.
Computed tomographic scan revealed a well-defined cystic mass in the anterior orbit. The mass was removed in toto by anterior orbitotomy.
Histopathological examination revealed a single cyst lined by double-layered cuboidal epithelium in some areas and transitional epithelium
at others. A periodic acid Schiff (PAS) positive, diastase-resistant glycocalyx lined the inner epithelium. Apical snouting suggested an
apocrine nature. This confirmed a diagnosis of sudoriferous cyst. Sudoriferous cysts are cysts of sweat gland origin. Sweat glands are found
distributed throughout the body in the skin with special concentration in the axillae, nipples, perianal and perigenital areas. They also
occur as modified glands in the following areas: eyelids as Moll′s glands, breast as mammary glands and auditory canal as ceruminous glands
secreting wax.1 Whereas sudoriferous cysts are common in the lids, their occurrence in the orbit is extremely rare.2-6 A 65-year-old lady
presented to our hospital in July with a 10-day history of left-sided ptosis and a mass below her left superior orbital rim. There was no
history of recent trauma. She had suffered a road traffic accident 13 years ago and the injuries she sustained left her with facial
asymmetry, slight enophthalmos, ptosis and diminished vision, all on the left side. She underwent lid repair for traumatic ptosis 7 years
ago after which her palpebral apertures were symmetrical. Thereafter, she remained asymptomatic and did not have any ocular complaints,
which could necessitate a visit to an ophthalmologist. The patient had a full ocular examination at our hospital 2 months previously for
painless progressive loss of vision on the right. At that time, no ptosis or mass was present. She had bilateral immature senile cataracts.
The left eye had a traumatic mydriasis with a 5-mm, non-reactive pupil and a relative afferent pupillary defect. Intraocular pressures were
normal. A juxtamacular scar (found inactive on fluorescein angiography) was present in the right fundus and the left had mild disc pallor.
On her current (July) visit, her best-corrected visual acuities were 20/40 and 7/200, right eye and left eye respectively. She had facial
asymmetry, with hollowing of the left temporal area, flattening of left upper cheek, and mild left enophthalmos. There was severe ptosis of
the left upper lid. A well-defined swelling, approximately 1.5 cm in diameter was present medially below the left supraorbital margin [Fig.
1A]. It was non-tender, smooth, fluctuant, and fairly mobile without any fixation to the overlying skin but fixed at its base. The upper
edge of the swelling could not be palpated under the bony margin. On lid eversion, the swelling was above the upper tarsal border. The
extra-ocular movements in the left eye were restricted in elevation. The levator muscle action was 14 mm on the right side and 5 mm on the
left. Other ocular findings were as before. Computed tomographic scan of the orbits showed a well-defined, anteriorly situated cystic
swelling of 1.8 cm × 1.6 cm × 1 cm size [Fig. 1B] on the left. Ultrasound examination corroborated the cystic nature of the swelling. The
patient underwent anterior orbitotomy under local anesthesia and sedation. After opening the orbital septum, a large cyst was removed in
toto after dissecting its adhesions to the levator aponeurosis and its fibers [Fig. 1C. The thinned levator aponeurosis was then attached
below the superior tarsal border. Postoperatively, her palpebral apertures were symmetrical [Fig. 1D]. Gross examination showed that the
cyst measured 1.6 cm × 1.5 cm × 1 cm [Fig. 1E]. Cut surface revealed a unilocular cyst filled with a clear fluid. The translucent cyst wall
was 0.1-0.2 cm thick. Histopathological examination showed a cavity lined by a two-layered cuboidal epithelium in many areas and
transitional epithelium in others [Fig. 1F. The surrounding fibrofatty tissue showed congested vessels and sparse mononuclear infiltrate.
Periodic acid Schiff (PAS) diastase stain showed a positive apical glycocalyx and diastase- resistant granules. Apical snouting was seen in
the inner lining cells suggestive of an apocrine cyst [Fig. 1G]. A diagnosis of sudoriferous cyst was made. There was no recurrence of cyst
formation or ptosis at 1-year postoperative follow-up. Orbital cysts/structural lesions account for 5-30% of the lesions in various reported
series of orbital tumors.7 A lucid classification of the differential diagnosis has been proposed.8 Dermoid cysts are the most frequent and
others include cysts of surface epithelium, teratogenous cysts, neural cysts, inflammatory cysts, and secondary cysts from adjacent
structures. Acquired cysts include mucocoeles, implantation cysts, and lacrimal ductal cysts.8,9 Apocrine gland cysts come under the
category of simple epithelial cysts. Different cysts have their own characteristic histological features.10 Sudoriferous cysts (or
hidrocystomas) are cysts of sweat gland origin. Sudoriferous glands are of two varieties based on the method of secretion; in the apocrine
variety, the lining cells release the apical part of their cytoplasm, the remainder of the cell being viable. The eccrine-type sustain no
loss of cell structure. Sudoriferous cysts arising from the sweat glands of Moll are usually found in the lids and are apocrine in type.
Orbital sudoriferous cysts are extremely rare and only a few have been reported in children.2-5 In the only reported adult case,6 the cyst
was presumed to have developed in childhood and grown gradually. Bone remodeling and orbital enlargement suggested the long-standing nature
of the lesion. In our case, there was no bone remodeling; the swelling was of recent onset and a lid operation performed earlier elsewhere
failed to reveal any cystic lesion. All this indicates that the sudoriferous cyst was probably of adult origin. It is known that
implantation of epithelial cells into deeper tissues at the time of any injury leads to formation of epithelial inclusion cysts. For
congenital sudoriferous cysts, it is hypothesized that sequestration at the embryonic stage of epithelial cells destined to form glands of
Moll could lead to cyst formation in the orbit.8 In our patient, there are two possibilities as to probable origin of this cyst: (i) some
implantation of epithelial cells occurred during the time of lid surgery, which led to cyst formation much like an inclusion cyst and (ii)
some superficial glandular tissue cells were implanted into deeper tissue layers at the time of injury and remained dormant/resulted in a
tiny undetected cyst, which gradually enlarged to noticeable levels over a period of time. Had this been a conjunctival inclusion cyst, it
would have had a lining of stratified columnar epithelium; ductal cysts of lacrimal glandular tissue also have a double layered lining and
may have PAS positive material but the characteristic apical snouting would be absent. More sophisticated tests specific for apocrine cells
such as human milk fat globulin-1 (1.10.F3) monoclonal antibody, cytoplasmic granules containing epidermal growth factor (EGF) and others
are not universally available. All previous reports have relied on typical apocrine features seen on hematoxylin and eosin staining. Orbital
sudoriferous cysts, though earlier reported to be only of childhood origin, may also be of adult origin. This diagnosis must also be
considered when dealing with orbital cysts in adults. This paper was presented as a short case in OPAICON 06 at Lucknow - 28/29 October 2006
(A) Preoperative photograph showing left facial asymmetry, left ptosis and swelling below left supraorbital margin (B) Computed tomographic
scan showing a well- defined cyst in the left anterior orbit (C) Intraoperative photograph showing cyst removal (D) Postoperative appearance
at 5-month follow-up (E) Gross appearance of cyst after removal (F) Low power view of the cyst showing areas of double layered cuboidal cell
lining and some areas of transitional epithelium. H and E stain ×40 magnification (G) High powerview showing periodic acid schiff (PAS)
positive apical glycocalyx. Apical snouting is seen. PAS diastase stain ×400 magnification
