Dear Editor, Dihydroergotamine mesylate (DHE), an ergot alkaloid, is an effective therapy for migraine headache and is considered safe to be
used for a broader range of headache types . It is a significantly less potent arterioconstrictor than ergotamine tartrate (ET), which makes
it a potentially safer drug . However, it still has the potential to cause cerebrovascular events including cerebral hemorrhage,
subarachnoid hemorrhage and ischemic strokes. These potential complications may be especially expected in certain clinical scenarios. We
report the case of a 23-year-old woman with a 4-week history of fluctuating and intractable headache that was initially diagnosed as
migraine and treated with intramuscular DHE (1 mg/ml) twice over a period of 12 h. She also received two doses of sumatriptan succinate
(70 mg) during the same period. She developed visual disturbance and left lower extremity weakness 2 h after the second DHE treatment. MRI
of the brain showed bilateral ischemic infarcts (see Fig. 1). CT angiogram demonstrated diffuse vasospasm of the cerebral vasculature
predominantly in the posterior cerebral and anterior cerebral arteries. One day after the CT angiogram, she underwent a four-vessel
conventional cerebral angiogram; this showed a beaded appearance of the cerebral vasculature consistent with vasculitis (see Fig. 2). These
angiographic findings were still present in a repeat cerebral conventional angiogram 1 week after the initial one; however, a right frontal
lobe brain biopsy was negative for any evidence of vasculitis. Fig. 1Diffusion weighted images showing bilateral hemispheric
infarctsFig. 2Cerebral angiogram showing beading pattern of cerebral vessels consistent with vasculitis Diffusion weighted images showing
bilateral hemispheric infarcts Cerebral angiogram showing beading pattern of cerebral vessels consistent with vasculitis The patient was
also taking oral contraceptives at the time of presentation. The etiology of her infarctions may be multifactorial, but the combined
administration of DHE and sumatriptan in the setting of vasculitis may have significantly contributed to the outcome. DHE and sumatriptan,
though effective and safe treatment options for different headache syndromes, can result in serious complications (like cerebral infarction)
if given over a short period of time. Moreover, the consideration of this treatment should be discouraged when the diagnosis of vasculitis
is a possibility. None.
