Dear Dr. Kavic: I found the article Fatal Intestinal Ischemia After Laparoscopic Correction of Incisional Hernia by Dr. E. B. Wassenaar et
al (2007:11(3):389–393) very interesting and illuminating concerning mesenteric arterial atherosclerosis and its most severe end point.
Their 47-year-old patient exhibited postlaparoscopy intestinal ischemia requiring visceral angiography and inferior mesenteric artery
angioplasty (no stent despite some recoil/residual stenosis of this apparent single and vessel supply of the GI tract). Their patient, and
10 of another 14 patients in their review, did not survive. Their specific patient presented with known aorto-iliac atherosclerotic disease
requiring previous iliac angioplasty. At that time, I suspect that arteriographic definition of celiac/superior mesenteric/inferior
mesenteric stenosis/occlusions could have determined that their patient was at high risk for mesenteric ischemia. Perhaps this ultimately
fatal outcome could have been precluded had angioplasty/stenting been performed preoperatively rather than after ischemia had occurred?
Mesenteric vascular disease is a highly lethal/morbid process that many times is overlooked unless “classic” symptoms are present.
Unfortunately, many times our patients present with much more soft/subtle signs and symptoms (intermittent dyspepsia, nonspecific weight
loss, general malaise, and other things) and many times with no suspicious symptoms at all. Significant mesenteric arterial stenosis (at
least 2 of 3 vessels) is now seen/found incidentally by MRA or CT angiography performed for other indications. The therapeutic conundrum is
what should be done for the elective, minimally symptomatic patient? I suspect that many of us have known at least several patients who
developed serious mesenteric ischemic complications whilst in the conservative follow-up phase of their mesenteric arterial disease as
demonstrated by radiologic studies. There is somewhat of a divergence of opinion between some published material and what is discussed at
vascular meetings regarding this problem. I do suspect that “forewarned is forearmed.” I would respectfully urge vigilance in the detection
of significant (2 of 3 mesenteric vessel stenoses) and plea for early treatment of such PRIOR to the development of devastating visceral
ischemia and its consequences. Very sincerely yours, Paul R. Johnson, MD, FACS FACS Board Certified – General Surgery Board Certified –
Thoracic Surgery
