The potential impact of nanotechnology in the field of urology is broad with diagnostic and therapeutic benefits that have only recently
begun to be explored. Application of nanotechnology principles to tissue and vessel sealing during laparoscopic procedures may reduce
associated thermal injury and inflammatory response. We report our initial experience using the EnSeal Tissue Sealing and Hemostasis System
during laparoscopic nephrectomy and discuss its potential advantages and disadvantages compared with those of contemporary technologies. The
term nanotechnology describes the application of functional materials, devices, and systems through the control of matter at the nanometer
scale.1 The potential uses of nanotechnology are broad, and over the past 5 years urological applications have included body or organ
imaging and labeling as adjuncts for diagnosis,2 advanced delivery of therapeutic agents in prostate cancer,3 and bioassays for the
detection of prostate-specific antigen.4 Recently, the utility of nanotechnology has expanded to include vessel-sealing systems for
application during laparoscopic procedures. We describe our experience using the EnSeal Tissue Sealing and Hemostasis System (SurgRx Inc.,
Redwood City, CA) during laparoscopic nephrectomy and discuss the potential advantages and disadvantages for tissue dissection and vessel
sealing that this novel technology affords. An 81-year-old male was referred to our institution for a renal mass incidentally discovered
during an abdominal pain workup. Past medical history was significant for hypertension, and he had no previous abdominal surgeries.
Computerized tomography scan of the abdomen and pelvis with intravenous contrast (Figure 1) revealed a solid, enhancing, 3-cm lesion in the
posterior medial upper pole of the left kidney consistent with renal cell carcinoma. No evidence was present of renal vein invasion or
retroperitoneal lymphadenopathy. After extensive discussion regarding surgical approach including cryotherapy and partial nephrectomy, the
decision was made to proceed with a laparoscopic left radical nephrectomy. Computerized tomography scan of the abdomen with intravenous
contrast revealing a solid, enhancing, 3-cm lesion in the posterior upper pole of the left kidney consistent with renal cell carcinoma. The
patient was placed in the right lateral decubitus position, and 12-mm periumbilical, 12-mm left upper quadrant, and 5-mm superior midline
ports were placed using a Veress needle and under direct vision without difficulty. Using the EnSeal, the white line of Toldt was incised,
and the descending colon was reflected off of the kidney medially down to the level of the internal inguinal ring. Using the left gonadal
vein as a landmark, the left ureter was identified and dissection was continued superiorly to the level of the renal hilum exclusively using
the EnSeal for both sealing and dividing tissue. The renal vessels were transected after locking polymer Hem-o-lok clips (Teleflex Medical,
Research Triangle Park, NC) were applied. Once hilar transaction was complete, the superior and lateral renal attachments were dissected by
using the EnSeal. After a clip was placed at the inferior aspect of the left ureter, the ureter was transected, and all remaining medial and
inferior attachments were dissected using the EnSeal. The kidney was placed in a 15-mm Endo Catch bag (Tyco Healthcare, Norwalk, CT) and
removed through an extended periumbilical incision. The renal fossa was re-examined to ensure adequate hemostasis, and the ports were
removed under direct division. Estimated blood loss was negligible (<20 mL). The patient was discharged with a creatinine of 1.7 mg/dL and a
hematocrit of 39.1 × 109 cells/L on postoperative day 3 after an uncomplicated hospital course. Pathology revealed pT1b clear cell
conventional renal cell carcinoma with a papillary growth pattern. At his first follow-up visit, the patient's creatinine was 1.6 mg/dL, and
he reported no complaints. With the rapid expansion of laparoscopy in urology, safe and reliable methods of obtaining minimally invasive
operative hemostasis are needed. Because traditional methods of controlling bleeding, such as manual pressure, tying, and suture ligation,
are not as easily applied in a minimally invasive setting, a heavy reliance on tissue and vessel coagulation is necessary. However, the
monopolar, bipolar, and ultrasonic devices currently available for tissue and vessel sealing deliver energy at high temperatures to denature
tissue proteins and form a coagulated seal, which can result in unwanted collateral thermal damage, sticking and charring, excessive smoke,
and insufficient vessel sealing.5,6 The EnSeal Tissue Sealing and Hemostasis System uses millions of nanometer-sized particles embedded in a
bipolar temperature coefficient matrix (Smart Electrode Technology, Figure 2). The cutting mechanism is in the shape of an “I”-beam,
utilizing high and equal tissue compression to enhance the seal as the blade is advanced along the length of the jaw (Figure 3). Current
flow is only active when the device jaws are closed and is modulated at the tissue-electrode interface by nanoparticles that locally
interrupt current flow to tissue when temperatures exceed 100°C. This allows sealing and transection to occur in a single step and
simultaneous current regulation minimizing collateral thermal spread and tissue damage. A recent comparison of maximum temperature and
thermal spread during vessel sealing between the EnSeal, Gyrus Bipolar Cutting Forceps (ACMI-Gyrus, Maple Grove, MN), Ligasure 5, and
SonoSurg Ultrasonic Scissors (Olympus Surgical & Industrial America Inc., Orangeburg, NY) in a porcine model reported that the EnSeal
produces mean lower peak temperatures (86.9°C versus 96.9°C to 180°C) and reduced mean thermal spread to surrounding tissues (1.10 mm versus
2.78 mm to 3.23 mm).7 Because tissue temperature is prevented from reaching potentially damaging levels, thermal spread and charring are
minimized. Denes et al8 evaluated the vessel sealing performance of the EnSeal in a porcine model and reported that the sealed vessel walls
are capable of withstanding mean burst pressures greater than 900 mm Hg for vessels less than 7 mm in diameter. Smart Electrode Technology.
Bipolar temperature coefficient matrix. As tissue begins to desiccate, Smart Electrodes on a nanometer scale maintain the conductive path
and current flow at a predetermined temperature to provide temperature control and minimize thermal effects. “I” Beam cutting mechanism. The
I-beam provides high compression to the treated tissue to enhance tissue seal as the blade is advanced along the length of the jaw.
Compression at the apex of the jaw is equal to compression at the distal end. In its closest reported application, the EnSeal has been used
to achieve hemostasis of the dorsal venous complex during the robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy equal to 30 reviewed cases of
stapler ligation.9 In our patient, this technology was used to achieve hemostasis in dissecting and dividing all renal and colonic
attachments, including those around the renal hilum. The renal vessels were traditionally divided after application of clips. Estimated
blood loss was minimal, and the renal fossa was dry upon final examination. We found that the 5-mm straight jaw EnSeal device proved
effective in performing both blunt dissection and sealing and transection of perirenal tissues (fibroadipose, peritoneal, and lymphatic).
With the exception of the hilar vessels, this device proved adequate for sealing and transecting small peripheral vessels less than 3 mm,
and subjectively, plume production was minimal compared with previous experiences with the Harmonic ACE (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Inc.,
Somerville, NJ) and monopolar cautery devices. We did find that after repeated use, dissection became more arduous due to tissue adherence
to the jaws of the device, but recent modifications including a shorter (3 mm) curved jaw may provide some improvement. The potential impact
of nanotechnology in the field of urology is wide-ranging with both diagnostic and therapeutic benefits. The recent application to tissue
and vessel sealing during laparoscopic procedures may reduce thermal injury and inflammatory response previously associated with monopolar
and bipolar electrocautery. Our initial experience shows that the EnSeal tissue sealing and hemostasis system can be safely utilized during
laparoscopic nephrectomy to achieve hemostasis during dissection. Further formal evaluation of vessel-sealing capacity and comparison with
known vessel-sealing systems is warranted.
