Grade III through V splenic injuries as defined by the American Association for the Surgery of Trauma (AAST) grading scale are associated
with hemorrhage and nonoperative failure. Embolization has been reported to reduce splenic bleeding in 50% to 75% of patients with a high-
grade injury. However, splenectomy following embolization may be necessary in patients who continue to bleed or develop splenic infarction
with abscess formation. We present the case of a 15-year-old female who demonstrated a Grade V splenic laceration with moderate
hemoperitoneum following an all terrain vehicle crash. Central splenic artery embolization was performed. Because of signs of continued
bleeding, laparoscopic splenectomy was performed. The patient had a satisfactory postoperative result and returned to normal activity in 2
weeks. Our experience suggests that in cases of high-grade splenic injury or angiographic extravasation associated with moderate to large
hemoperitoneum, embolization may serve as a bridge to operative therapy and make laparoscopy a safe, less-invasive option for splenectomy.
Although laparoscopy has had only limited established applications in trauma surgery, improved equipment and advanced surgical skills have
created greater opportunities for surgeons to apply minimally invasive techniques to the management of the injured patient.1 An acutely
injured spleen that causes hemodynamic instability does not lend itself to minimally invasive techniques and requires an open laparotomy to
control hemorrhage. However, in the hemodynamically stable patient, nonoperative management has become standard treatment.2 Angio-graphic
embolization has increased the success rate of nonoperative management in patients at risk for continued or delayed splenic bleeding.3 But,
certain patients are at risk for continued bleeding or delayed hemorrhage even following splenic embolization and may require splenectomy.4
This case report suggests that an spleen injured from blunt trauma can safely be removed laparoscopically following embolization, and
laparoscopy represents an alternative to open laparotomy for patients at risk for continued or delayed hemorrhage. A CT scan obtained on a
hemodynamically stable 15-year-old female following an all-terrain vehicle crash demonstrated a Grade V splenic laceration with a moderate
hemoperitoneum. Angiography was performed the following day because of a decrease in hemoglobin from 10.5 g/dL to 8.5 g/dL. Only the lower
pole of the spleen enhanced with angiography. Vessels supplying the majority of the spleen were truncated and were thought to represent
thrombosis or possibly arterial spasm. There was no free extravasation of contrast material. A decision was made to embolize the central
splenic artery with a coil because of the potential risk of continued bleeding. Over the succeeding 24 hours, the patient complained of
increasing abdominal pain. Her hemoglobin decreased from 8.5 g/dL to 7.5 g/dL. The patient's vital signs were stable except for a
significant tachycardia of 120 bpm to 140 bpm. The decision was made to perform splenectomy using minimally invasive techniques because of
these signs of continued bleeding. The patient was given 2 units of packed RBCs before surgery to increase her hemoglobin to a level of 10.5
g/dL. After laparoscopic splenectomy, the patient's abdominal pain was much improved and her hemoglobin remained stable. She was discharged
on the third postoperative day. At 2-week follow-up, the patient had returned to normal activity. The patient was secured on a beanbag with
the left side up 60 degrees. This positioning facilitates gravity in retracting intraabdominal organs and increases the working space in the
left upper quadrant. The table was tilted to the left to begin the procedure with the patient in a supine position. After insufflation with
a transumbilical Veress needle, 5 ports were used to perform the operation. The first port was sited in the umbilicus to accommodate a
10-mm, 30-degree laparoscope. Five-mm ports were placed in the subxyphoid and left subcostal anterior axillary line positions for retraction
and irrigation purposes. Finally, two 10-mm ports were inserted on each side of the umbilical port for the right and left hands of the
operating surgeon. After all ports were inserted, the table was tilted to the right to place the patient into a three-quarter right lateral
decubitus position. The patient was then brought into a reverse Trendelenburg position to “suspend” the spleen for optimal laparoscopic
visualization. Free blood and clot within the abdominal cavity were removed with irrigation and suction. Blood clot and coagulum on and
within the spleen were left in place. To avoid additional bleeding, a subcapsular hematoma was not disturbed. Splenectomy was performed by a
standard laparoscopic technique described by Katkhouda.5 The splenocolic ligament was first taken down from the lower pole of the spleen.
The gastrosplenic ligament with short gastric vessels was then divided with a Harmonic scalpel, and the splenic hilum (splenorenal ligament
with hilar vessels) was secured and divided with several applications of a 35-mm linear stapling device with vascular cartridge. Following
division of the hilar structures, the remaining ligamentous attachments, which suspend the spleen (splenophrenic ligament), were divided.
The spleen was placed in a nonpermeable plastic bag and morcellated to facilitate its removal from the abdominal cavity. The approach to
management of splenic injury due to blunt trauma has undergone major changes over the past 25 years.6 Hemodynamically unstable patients
bleeding from splenic injury must be taken immediately to the operating room for urgent laparotomy and splenectomy or splenorrhaphy.
Patients whose vital signs are stable should be evaluated for nonoperative management by undergoing a CT scan with IV contrast. Table 1
lists a commonly used spleen injury scale. Spleen Injury Scale11 Preservation of splenic tissue has become a major objective in the
management of splenic trauma to avoid over whelming postsplenectomy infection (OPSI).7 Partial splenectomy or splenorrhaphy can be
successfully accomplished in certain types of injuries, but the exact amount of splenic tissue necessary to maintain immune competence is
not known.8 It is possible in many cases to closely monitor and observe patients with splenic injury whose vital signs remain stable.2
Bleeding will subside in a significant number of patients without need for surgical intervention. Nonoperative management not only preserves
splenic tissue and function but also avoids the morbidity attendant with major operative intervention. Improved CT imaging capability has
made it possible to identify certain findings that are associated with a greater risk for continued or delayed splenic hemorrhage. The
presence of these markers increases the likelihood that a patient will fail observation and require surgery.2,3,9,10 CT findings that are
associated with risk for splenic hemorrhage include Grade III through V injuries as defined by the American Association for the Surgery of
Trauma (AAST) grading scale for splenic injuries.11 Other findings on CT scan associated with an increased risk of continued bleeding
include contrast blush, vascular truncation, aneurysm, or arteriovenous fistula formation. The presence of moderate to large hemoperitoneum
(defined as blood around the liver as well as spleen, peri-colic gutters, and pelvis) is also associated with nonoperative failure.
Angiography has been demonstrated to be a useful diagnostic adjunct to further define vascular aberrations associated with splenic bleeding
and failed nonoperative management.12,13 In addition, interventional angiography provides an opportunity for therapeutic splenic
embolization. Embolization has been reported to be effective in controlling splenic bleeding in 50% to 75% of high-risk patients.
Consequently, embolization increases the likelihood for success of nonoperative management to greater than 80% for all grades of splenic
injury.3 Even though embolization significantly decreases the need for splenectomy, 5% to 20% of patients have been reported to continue
bleeding following embolization.4 Smith4 reported that nonoperative failure following embolization was associated with a high Grade of
injury (III at 40%, IV at 38%, and V at 40%), moderate to large associated hemoperitoneum (36%), and extravasation at the time of
angiography (59%). When extravasation was associated with a moderate to large hemoperitoneum, the failure rate was 71%. In our experience, 4
of 22 embolized spleens (18%) continued to bleed, requiring a splenorrhaphy in 1 patient and splenectomy in 3. All were Grade IV or V
splenic injuries with associated moderate to large hemoperitoneum. Surgery following embolization has traditionally been performed through
open laparotomy as was done in 3 of 4 of our cases. The current case presentation represents our first laparoscopic removal of a bleeding
spleen injured from blunt trauma. Not many case reports exist in the literature of laparoscopic splenectomy following blunt trauma. A few
isolated case reports have been published of athletes with stable Grade III injuries undergoing “prophylactic splenectomy” to return to
physical activity more quickly.14,15 The largest experience of laparoscopic treatment of blunt splenic injuries was reported by Huscher et
al.16 They reported 11 cases, including 6 splenectomies and 1 partial splenectomy. Of the 11 laparoscopic explorations for splenic injury,
only 7 patients had all or part of the spleen removed. The remaining 4 patients had cautery or topical coagulants applied to the injured
spleen; no splenic tissue was actually removed. None of the patients in Huscher's series had preoperative embolization. We identified 2 case
reports in which embolization was performed before splenectomy for blunt trauma. The earliest case was reported by Poulin et al.17 A partial
splenectomy was performed for an infracted upper pole following embolization for bleeding from a Grade IV injury. The other embolized
patient was 1 of 4 laparoscopic splenectomies reported by Nasr et al.18 This was a Grade IV injury that underwent initial embolization for
vigorous bleeding. Similar to our case report, the patient continued to bleed following embolization and underwent successful laparoscopic
splenectomy. Importantly, concerns for nonoperative management of spleens that demonstrate signs of continued bleeding or for those at risk
of re-bleeding are appearing in the trauma literature.4,6,19 These concerns may be particularly relevant in the physically active patient
who is susceptible to reinjury of a damaged spleen. The risk of serious morbidity or death from hemorrhage from injured spleens may become
greater than that for OPSI. Embolization is a less-invasive alternative to laparotomy and is effective in stopping or retarding splenic
bleeding in most cases. Hagiwara et al20 recently reported successful control of hemorrhage from injured spleens with embolization in
patients who demonstrated episodes of hypotension during the initial resuscitation, but responded to fluids. Indeed in cases of high-grade
injury or angiographic extravasation associated with moderate to large hemoperitoneum, embolization may serve as a bridge to stabilize
patients and allow preparation for surgical intervention. Our experience suggests that in those patients who continue to bleed following
embolization or are at risk for delayed bleed or re-injury, laparoscopic splenectomy may represent a viable alternative to open laparotomy
for removal of the injured spleen. The practice of preoperative embolization as an aid to reduce intraoperative bleeding during elective
laparoscopic removal of large spleens has been reported to be successful for hematologic/oncologic disease.21,22 This case, along with
limited reports in the literature, suggests that minimally invasive surgical techniques to remove a spleen for blunt traumatic injury can be
performed safely in the hemodynamically stable patient who continues to bleed following embolization. In addition, patients who are at risk
for spontaneous rebleed or bleed from reinjury may benefit from preoperative embolization as a bridge to operative therapy, and laparoscopy
may be a safe, less invasive option for splenectomy.
