Gastric leaks represent serious complications of bariatric surgery. With the increasing popularity and performance of bariatric procedures,
the incidence of leaks and associated complications are expected to increase. Minimally invasive natural orifice surgery represents a novel
and promising approach to gastric leak management, especially for morbidly obese patients who are at much higher risk from open or
laparoscopic surgical procedures. The present article reports two cases of the safe and successful use of the EndoGastric Solutions
StomaphyX™ device to alter the flow of gastric contents and repair gastric leaks resulting from bariatric revision surgery. Both patients
were at a high risk and could not undergo another open or laparoscopic surgery to correct the leaks that were not healing. The StomaphyX
procedures lasted approximately 30 min, were performed without any complications, and resulted in the resolution of the gastric leaks in
both patients. The Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) is the most commonly performed bariatric procedure in the USA to treat morbid obesity .
Numerous studies have documented the effectiveness of RYGB in promoting excess body weight loss typically in the 65–80% range after 1.5 to
2 years . Despite the favorable short-term outcomes of this bariatric surgical procedure, approximately 10–40% of patients do not achieve
successful long-term weight loss . The weight regain occurs typically within 2 to 7 years after RYGB surgery and is associated with dilation
of the pouch or stoma [3, 4]. Several open and laparoscopic bariatric revision procedures have been used in an attempt to correct these
dilations, but they all have been associated with serious complications, such as perforations, obstruction, staple-line disruption, blind
loop syndrome, stomal ulcer, and incisional hernias [2, 5, 6]. The most feared complication of gastric surgery for morbid obesity, however,
is a postoperative gastric leak with the development of peritonitis [2, 5]. After RYGB, leaks have been reported at the gastrojejunostomy,
the distal stomach, or the jejunojenuostomy in up to 5% of all revision procedures with a significant morbidity and mortality rate that may
exceed 50% [7, 8]. StomaphyX™ (EndoGastric Solutions, Inc., Redmond, WA, USA) is an incisionless transoral fastening device that creates
plications using polypropylene SerosaFuse™ fasteners (Fig. 1). StomaphyX has been cleared by the US Food and Drug Administration for tissue
approximation and ligation in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract. The device has been successfully used for pouch and anastomosis volume
reduction [9, 10]. The present study reports the results of two patients who were treated with StomaphyX for management of gastric leaks
that developed after revisions of RYGB. Fig. 1A general view (a) and the shaft part (b) of the StomaphyX device A general view (a) and the
shaft part (b) of the StomaphyX device A 58-year-old woman underwent a RYGB procedure at another institution in 2003. The procedure was
successful and resulted in the creation of a 40-cc gastric pouch. The patient completed counseling for eating disorders before and after her
original surgery. Unexpected events in her life, however, brought on depression, and she subsequently returned to overeating, which resulted
in dilation of the gastric pouch to 600 cc and commensurate weight regain. Once the patient regained control of her personal life and her
eating habits, she complained of a lack of satiety. An open pouch reduction surgery was undertaken after extensive discussions with the
patient, counselors, and her family members. The patient initially did well after the surgery, but by day 12, she complained of increasing
abdominal pain and experienced fever of 38.9°C. Computer tomography revealed a leak from the gastric pouch. The patient was taken to the
operating room and underwent debridement of the staple line from the area of the initial surgery, dehiscence on the gastric pouch
(approximately 2 cm in length), primary closure with drainage, and placement of a feeding jejunostomy in the biliopancreatic limb. Despite
an initially successful procedure, a leak had redeveloped on day 5 and required another sump drain to be placed. The jejunostomy feeding
tube was utilized, but there was ongoing minute reflux of tube feeds, bile, and gastric contents from the pouch recovered by the drains. The
output of the drains was more than 50 cc per hour when the patient was on tube feeds and 20 cc per hour when total parenteral nutrition
(TPN) was used; therefore, TPN was used to maintain the patient’s nutritional status. A positive nitrogen balance was attained by an
adequate caloric intake and confirmed by a pre-albumin level greater than 14. The drains were slowly backed out but resulted in no
improvement in the patient’s gastric leak. The patient remained medically stable and afebrile. An upper endoscopy was performed, and the
leak was found to be in a dependent position relative to the gastrojejunostomy (Fig. 2), assuring that gastric contents flowed
preferentially through and placed pressure on the leak. Removal of residual sutures was performed endoscopically, and the leak was estimated
to be approximately 24F bougie in size (7.6 mm). The patient received conservative therapy with maximal nutritional support, but there was
no progression in the healing of the leak for 4 months. Because of the patient’s condition, another open revision surgery was considered to
be of high risk. Fig. 2Upper GI radiography showing leak inferior to the jejunum in patient 1 Upper GI radiography showing leak inferior to
the jejunum in patient 1 As an alternative to an open or laparoscopic procedure, the patient elected to undergo natural orifice surgery
(NOS) using the StomaphyX device. The patient was taken to the operating room and placed under general anesthesia. An upper endoscopy was
performed to identify the anatomical landmarks of the pouch and to locate the leak. The endoscope was then inserted through the shaft of the
StomaphyX device (Fig. 1), and the device was introduced through the patient’s mouth into the pouch under continuous visualization. Once
inside the pouch, vacuum was employed to draw a large fold of tissue proximal to the leak into the shaft of the device. The stylet of the
device, which is maintained entirely within the shaft at all times, was advanced, and the first polypropylene fastener was deployed across
the base of the tissue fold creating a stable full-thickness plication. Without removing the device from the patient, another five
plications were created circumferentially at 1 cm from the leak. The plications on opposing sides of the leak were then pulled together and
fastened to each other using the StomaphyX device in the same manner that was used to create the first plications. Additional three
fasteners were deployed to create a bridge of tissue to shield the leak. The device was removed, and a second upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy was performed to evaluate the results (Fig. 3). The duration of the procedure from insertion of the devices to its withdrawal was
30 min. There were no perioperative or postoperative complications. The endoscopy revealed that the leak was reduced by at least 70%. The
side of the pouch was also shortened to eliminate the dependency of the leak relative to the gastrojejunostomy. By pleating the pouch and
including the leak, the revised anatomy of the pouch formed a ridge of tissue that changed the flow of gastric contents. This was documented
by a change in irrigation flow before and after the StomaphyX procedure. At this time, the outflow from the drains essentially stopped. The
leak rapidly closed within a few days, and all drains were removed. The patient was released 4 days after the procedure and was instructed
to remain on a liquid diet, avoid strenuous physical activities for the first 1 to 2 weeks, and advance progressively to a regular diet and
normal lifestyle activities over the following 5 to 6 weeks. An endoscopy examination at 6 months revealed the absence of a leak or fistula.
Fig. 3Upper GI radiography after the StomaphyX procedure showing flow into the jejunum in patient 1 Upper GI radiography after the StomaphyX
procedure showing flow into the jejunum in patient 1 A 42-year-old man desired a revision for weight regain after an RYGB performed in 1997.
Five years after the original RYGB, a perforated stomach ulcer was diagnosed and treated at another institution by closing the ulcer and
reconfiguring the small bowel. Ten years after the original RYGB, the patient underwent additional revisional surgery. A vertical sleeve and
duodenal switch was performed. A leak of about 1 cm in diameter developed immediately along the staple line of the vertical sleeve within
5 cm from the gastroesophageal junction (Fig. 4) and was accompanied by symptomatology typical for a leak. The leak did not close despite
NPO and conservative therapy with maximal nutritional support by tube feeds. The nutritional support provided an adequate caloric intake and
a positive nitrogen balance, which was confirmed by a pre-albumin level greater than 14. The patient remained stable, but there was no
improvement in the leak after 6 weeks despite the drains being slowly backed out. Fig. 4Upper GI radiography showing a horizontal leak from
duodenal switch near gastro-esophageal junction on the greater curvature side of the stomach in patient 2 Upper GI radiography showing a
horizontal leak from duodenal switch near gastro-esophageal junction on the greater curvature side of the stomach in patient 2 The patient
underwent the NOS StomaphyX procedure under general anesthesia following the protocol used for patient 1. The procedure lasted 30 min and
resulted in the creation of six plications and a tissue shield over the leak. A computer tomography scan performed the next day confirmed
that the leak had been completely eliminated (Fig. 5). No perioperative complications or postoperative symptoms were reported. The patient
was released 4 days after the procedure and followed the same dietary and physical activity regimens as described for patient 1. Normal
nutrition and lifestyle were resumed within 60 days. An endoscopy examination at 3 months revealed the absence of a leak or fistula.
Fig. 5Computer tomography scan on the day after the StomaphyX procedure showing no evidence of leak in patient 2 Computer tomography scan on
the day after the StomaphyX procedure showing no evidence of leak in patient 2 The two cases presented in this article demonstrated a
successful repair of gastric pouch leaks using the StomaphyX device. In the first case, the StomaphyX procedure resulted in reducing the
leak by 70% and promoted its healing by diverting the gastric content flow in such a way that the leak was no longer dependent to the
gastrojejunostomy. In the second case, the leak was not dependent upon the gastrojejunostomy, and the StomaphyX device was used to close the
leak and create a shield of tissue that allowed the leak to heal. The StomaphyX procedures were fast and safe, as they lasted only 30 min
and did not result in any complications. Both patients were released in 4 days after the procedure and were able to return to their normal
diet and lifestyle within 60 days. The StomaphyX device made possible the repair of gastric leaks in two patients who were not candidates
for the standard higher risk open or laparoscopic procedures. The transoral StomaphyX device proved invaluable to these patients. Transoral
incisionless surgery using StomaphyX eliminates the risk of incisional infection and incisional herniation and reduces the risk of
nosocomial infections. It is expected that, with future modifications, StomaphyX will allow handling of post-gastric bypass leaks, fistulas,
perforated ulcers, and, possibly, other post-bariatric complications, which are expected to increase with the increasing popularity and
performance of bariatric procedures. Dr. Overcash has no commercial associations with EndoGastric Solutions that might represent a conflict
of interest in relation to the submitted manuscript and did not receive any financial support from the company for conducting or publishing
the two StomaphyX cases. The author would like to thank Anna Gawlicka from EndoGastric Solutions for providing professional assistance with
preparation of the final version of the manuscript and its submission. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
