The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or
display the open access version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that the original authorship is properly and fully
attributed; the Journal, Learned Society and Oxford University Press are attributed as the original place of publication with correct
citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but only in part or as a derivative
work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions©oxfordjournals.org. Ablation of a mitral
annulus (MA)-ventricular tachycardia (VT), a rare form of idiopathic left VT, has not yet been described in patients <2 years of age. We
describe a case of a toddler with an incessant, poorly tolerated idiopathic VT (190 bpm) refractory to medical therapy, which was
successfully ablated in the left ventricle at the infero-posterior part of the MA. Different diagnostic and ablation steps are described.
Mitral annulus-ventricular tachycardia, a rare form of idiopathic left VT, can safely and successfully be ablated in very young children.
Idiopathic ventricular tachycardia (VT) is rare in the paediatric population. Recently, in adults idiopathic VT originating from the mitral
annulus (MA) has been described.1,2 We describe a case of a toddler with an incessant, poorly tolerated idiopathic VT that was ablated
successfully in the left ventricle (LV) at the infero-posterior part of the MA. A previously healthy 21-month-old boy was referred to our
institution for catheter ablation of a drug-resistant sustained VT resulting in a gradual decrease in echocardiographic left ventricular
ejection fraction (LVEF) from 77 to 44%. The electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed ventricular-atrial dissociation during a V1 positive
tachycardia (cycle length 316 ms) with relative narrow QRS complexes (QRS duration 110 ms) and left superior axis (Figure 1).
Electrocardiogram during sinus rhythm revealed no abnormalities; no discrete inferior Q-waves suggesting an inferior aneurysm were present.
Except for the impaired LVEF, echocardiography on referral was normal, excluding major structural heart disease. Twelve-lead
electrocardiogram during ventricular tachycardia (190 bpm) with the presence of ventriculo-atrial dissociation (arrows demonstrate the
P-waves). The ablation procedure was guided by CARTO mapping and performed under general anaesthesia using the retrograde trans-aortic
approach (non-irrigated Biosense Navistar Celcius 4 mm, B-curve mapping catheter). Limited voltage mapping of the LV during sinus rhythm
showed an area of low voltage (<0.5 mV) at the infero-posterior wall of the LV adjacent to the MA (Figure 2A). During VT (CL 329 ms)—induced
by programmed electrical stimulation after isoprenaline infusion (0.15 µg/kg/min)—earliest activation with centrifugal activation pattern
was observed in the same area (Figure 2B). Pacing in that area resulted in a perfect pacemap. As delivery of radiofrequency (RF) energy in
this region (20–35 W, 55°, 60 s) resulted in the termination of tachycardia with immediate re-occurrence, an irrigated-tip catheter
(Biosense Navistar Thermocool 4 mm, B-curve) was used. Now RF delivery (30 W, 40°, 60 s) during VT at the site of earliest ventricular
activation resulted in immediate and persisting termination of the tachycardia (Figure 3). Electrocardiogram monitoring during and after
ablation demonstrated no ST segment changes. Heparin was given during 24 h (activated clotting time 150–180 s), and the patient was
dismissed from the hospital 3 days later. After a follow-up period of 1 year, the patient remained free of arrhythmias and LV systolic
function restored completely. (A) Voltage map of the left ventricle during sinus rhythm (posterior view). Purple dots, mitral annulus;
yellow dots, His and left bundle branch signals. Low voltage area <0.5 mV is marked in red. Arrow: low voltage bipolar signal of 0.39 mV.
(B) Activation map of the left ventricle during ventricular tachycardia (posterior view). R-peak in V4 is used as a reference for the
activation map. Isochrones of 5 ms demonstrate a centrifugal activation pattern with earliest activation at the infero-posterior part of the
mitral annulus (red zone). Arrow: earliest ventricular activation −71 ms before the R-peak of V4. Red dots: sites of radiofrequency
application. Bipolar electrogram at the site of successful ablation (ABL d). First component of the bipolar electrogram precedes the onset
of the QRS complex by −33 ms. Radiofrequency application results in the termination of tachycardia. This patient presented with a VT
originating from the posterior MA. Detailed analysis of the ECG during VT (negative QRS polarity and notching of the R-wave in the inferior
leads, S-wave in V6, Rs-pattern in I, and positive QRS complex in V1) suggested a VT origin near the posterior part of the MA.1 Mitral
annulus-ventricular tachycardia is a rare form of idiopathic LV tachycardia, accounting for 5% of all patients with idiopathic VT.1
Idiopathic VT, especially in adults, most commonly arises from the right ventricular outflow tract and less often from the left ventricular
outflow tract. Of all MA-VTs, only 11% have an origin at the posterior portion of the MA, whereas 58% originate from the antero-lateral
portion and 31% from the postero-septal portion of the MA. Also in children, only 30% of all idiopathic VTs arise from the LV. To the best
of our knowledge, no case of an LV MA-VT has been described in an infant <2 years of age. In general, idiopathic VT in children has a good
prognosis and can be treated pharmacologically. However, children with an idiopathic VT originating from the LV are more likely to undergo
RF ablation, as they are more symptomatic (heart failure or syncope), have a lower chance for spontaneous resolution of VT, and are less
likely to respond to medical treatment.3 The ablation technique itself is similar as in adults.4,5 However, because long-term effects of
expansion of RF-scar lesions in the ventricles of a growing child are not well known, VT ablation in small children should only be
considered in specific circumstances such as incessant, drug refractory VT. The mechanism of VT in this patient and of idiopathic MA-VT, in
general, is not clear. Several mechanisms such as triggered activity, re-entry, and abnormal automaticity have been suggested. In our
patient, the area of low voltage at the posterior MA demonstrates subtle structural changes in an overall structurally normal heart and
suggests a substrate for re-entry. Also centrifugal activation, as demonstrated by electro-anatomical mapping, is consistent with a possible
small re-entrant circuit. In contrast, tachycardia in our patient occurred spontaneously or during isoproterenol infusion and not during
programmed electrical stimulation alone, suggesting a possible non-re-entrant mechanism for tachycardia. Conflict of interest: none
declared. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by the University of Ghent, Belgium.
