Eosinophilic gasteroenteritis is an uncommon disease with variable clinical features characterized by eosinophilic infiltration. Clinical
manifestations range from non-specific gastrointestinal complaints such as nausea, vomiting, crampy abdominal pain, and diarrhea to specific
findings such as malabsorption, protein loosing enteropathy, luminal obstruction, eosinophilic ascites and effusion. We report here on a
case of eosinophilic gastroenteritis causing enterobiliary fistula which is an extremely unusual complication. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis
is a relatively uncommon disease that's characterized by eosinophilic infiltration of the gastrointestinal tract, peripheral eosinophilia
and abnormal gastrointestinal function. Since it was first recognized by Kaijer in 1937, more than 400 cases of eosinophilic gastroenteritis
have been reported in the literature (1). Most of the clinical signs and symptoms are related to the gastrointestinal tract, e.g., vomiting,
abdominal pain, diarrhea, malabsorption, obstruction and ascites. Although various signs and symptoms have been previously reported, to the
best of our knowledge, enterobiliary fistula as a complication of eosinophilic gastroenteritis has not yet been reported on. We report here
on a case of enterobiliary fistula that was complicated with eosinophilic gastroenteritis, and this was demonstrated by an upper
gastrointestinal series (UGI) and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP). A 68-year-old man presented with a 3-week history of
abdominal discomfort, nausea and skin eruption on his entire body. There was no past medial history of hepatolithiasis, recurrent peptic
ulcer, abdominal operation, allergic disease, generalized skin eruption or food sensitivity. The laboratory investigations revealed a white
blood cell count of 12.86 × 103/µl. There was peripheral eosinophilia ranging from 7% to 52% (normal: 0-7.2%). The total IgE was 593 IU/ml
(normal: 0-170 IU/ml). Stool examination and an enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test to detect parasite infestation showed
negative results. The blood urea nitrogen (BUN) was 40 mg/dl (normal: 10-26 mg/dl) and the serum creatine was 2.1 mg/dl (normal: 0.6-1.3
mg/dl). An ultrasound scan for evaluation of acute renal failure yielded negative results except for pneumobilia. Because of the absence of
prior sphincterotomy, a surgical bypass procedure or recent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP), we inferred the existence
of enterobiliary fistula. The acute renal failure was slightly improved and we then performed multidetector computed tomography (MDCT) for
further evaluation. MDCT revealed diffuse submucosal thickening from the antrum of the stomach to the duodenal bulb and a bezoar at the
first portion of duodenum. But enterobiliary fistula was not clearly detected (Figs. 1A, B). Gastrointestinal endoscopy showed large ulcers
with a geographic pattern from the antrum of the stomach to the duodenal bulb (Fig. 1C). The duodenum revealed severe stricture involving
the second portion and a soft bezoar at the first portion of the duodenum. MRCP demonstrated that there was pneumobilia in the gall bladder
and common bile duct (CBD). In addition, cholecystoduodenal fistula and a suspected choledocoduodenal fistula were observed (Fig. 1D). The
results of the UGI were similar to those of the MRCP, and the other findings were mucosal fold thickening and nodularity involving the
antrum and severe stricture involving the second portion of the duodenum (Figs. 1E, F). Biopsy samples were obtained at the ulcer bed, and
they showed marked eosinophilic infiltration (Fig. 1G). We adopted the criteria shown in Table 1 for evaluating the tissue eosinophilia;
severe eosinophilia (over 70 eosinophils/× 400 field) was demonstrated in the lamina propria of the gastric mucosa. The diagnosis was
enterobiliary fistula complicating eosinophilic gastroenteritis. After steroid therapy, there was interval improvement of both the ulcer and
duodenal luminal narrowing on the follow up endoscopy. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis is a rare heterogeneous disorder of an undetermined
etiology. An allergic mechanism to food or other allergens has been suggested (2). Increased total IgE and food specific IgE levels have
been detected in the majority of patients. Eosinophilic gastroenteritis presents various clinical features depending on what layers of the
bowel wall are infiltrated by the eosinophils (3). The mucosal form, which is the most common type, is characterized by infiltration of
eosinophils predominantly in the mucosal layer, and this leads to diarrhea, blood loss in the stool, abdominal pain, vomiting, protein-
losing enteropathy, malabsorption and iron-deficiency anemia. The muscularis form demonstrates thickening of the bowel wall, which might
result in luminal narrowing or obstruction. This finding may simulate carcinoma, lymphoma or Crohn's disease. Because the gastric biopsy
specimens in our case were obtained from the mucosal layer, eosinophilic infiltration of the muscle layer could not be confirmed. But
considering these findings, that is, diffuse submucosal thickening from the antrum of the stomach to the duodenal bulb on CT and duodenal
luminal narrowing on the UGI, our case was thought to be the muscularis form. The serosal form rarely demonstrates exudative ascites,
pleural effusions with higher peripheral eosinophil counts and the best response to steroids, as compared with the other forms (4).
Enterobiliary fistulas represent a complication of cholelithiasis or choledocholithiasis in 90% of cases (5). The infrequent causes include
peptic ulcer disease, malignancy and prior surgery. In our case, because there were no other reasons, we deduced that the ulcerations
induced by the eosinophilic gastroenteritis caused the enterobiliary fistula. Biliary tract disease, as a rare manifestation of eosinophilic
gastroenteritis, has been reported on (1). Similarly, enterobiliary fistula is considered to be a very rare complication. The diagnosis of
eosinophilic gastroenteritis requires the presence of three criteria: symptoms related to the gastrointestinal tract, biopsies showing
eosinophilic infiltration of one or more areas from the esophagus to the rectum, and exclusion of other disorders that have similar
features, such as malignancies, parasitic, allergic, autoimmune disorder, inflammatory bowel disease (Crohn's disease or ulcerative colitis)
and hypereosinophilc syndrome (6). Other previous reports have noted that peripheral eosinophilia is not uniformly associated with
eosinophilic gasteroenteritis (4). For that reason, the definite diagnosis of eosinophilic gastroenteritis requires the histologic findings
of eosinophilic infiltration. The severe eosinophilia, as was shown in our case, should be demonstrated for a definitive diagnosis of
eosinophilic gastroenteritis (7). The UGI may demonstrate enlargement of the rugal folds, and narrowing and rigidity of the antrum (8). CT
scans may show focal or diffuse thickening of the folds, especially at the antrum, and angulation and separation of the intestinal loops
(9). Eosinophilic infiltration of the muscle layer results in thickening and rigidity of the bowel wall. Once the correct diagnosis has been
made, corticosteroid therapy usually results in rapid improvement (10). Yet the duration of treatment remains controversial and long-term
follow up is required since recurrent symptoms commonly develop after an asymptomatic interval of several years (2). Surgery may be
unavoidable when obstruction or perforation occurs or when a definitive diagnosis cannot be made (11). Eosinophilic gastroenteritis shows
diverse clinical manifestations. Although enterobiliary fistula complicating eosinophilic gastroenteritis is a very rare complication,
radiologists should suspect this entity when pneumobilia with unexplained gastrointestinal symptoms and peripheral eosinophilia are
demonstrated in a patient. Enterobiliary fistula in 68-year-old man. A. Axial enhanced multidetector CT scan shows thickening of gastric
wall (white arrows) and air in gall bladder (white arrowheads). B. Coronal multiplanar reformatted multidetector CT image demonstrates
pneumobilia (white arrows) and bezoar at duodenal bulb (white arrowheads). C. Gastrointestinal endoscopy demonstrates bezoar (white arrows)
and geographic ulceration at duodenal bulb (black arrowheads). D. MR cholangiopancreatography coronal image of single-shot turbo spin-echo
sequence shows linear high signal intensity from duodenal bulb to gall bladder, which is thought to be cholecystoduodenal fistula (black
arrowheads). There is another area of faint linear high signal intensity, suggesting choledocoduodenal fistula (black arrows). E. Upper GI
reveals mucosal fold thickening and nodularity in antrum of stomach (white arrowheads) and severe narrowing involving second portion of
duodenum (black arrows). F. There are two linear structures (black arrows and black arrowheads) that originate from duodenal bulb. We can
not trace definite connection to biliary system, but they are thought to be enterobiliary fistulas. G. Microscopic finding shows marked
eosinophilic infiltration (over 70 eosinophils/HPF) in lamina propria of gastric mucosa (black arrowheads) (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, ×
400). Criteria for Grading Histologic Severity Cited from Whitington et al. (7)
