A 35-year-old male with a history of chikungunya fever, presented with diminution of vision in the right eye of one-week duration. His best
corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers 2 meters and 20/20 (Snellens) in the right and left eyes respectively. A diagnosis of
neuroretinitis was made in the right eye while left eye showed features of retinitis. ELISA (serum) and polymerase chain reaction (aqueous)
were positive for herpes simplex virus. The lesions did not show any response to antiviral or steroid treatment and appeared to be self-
limiting. At five months follow-up, lesions had resolved well with BCVA of 20/120 and 20/20 in the right and left eyes respectively.
Chikungunya fever is caused by an alphavirus transmitted to humans by the bite of infected mosquitoes belonging to the genus Aedes.1 Large
scale outbreaks of the fever due to the chikungunya fever in south India have been reported recently. We report an interesting case of
bilateral retinitis following serologically proven chikungunya fever. A 35-year-old male presented with diminution of vision in the right
eye of one-week duration. He was symptomatically treated for serologically proven chikungunya fever three weeks back. On examination, his
best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers 2 meters and 20/20 (Snellens) in the right and left eyes respectively. Relative
afferent pupillary defect was noted in the right eye. Slit-lamp examination showed a quiet anterior segment and 1 + vitreous cells (Grading:
Kimura and colleagues)2 in both eyes. Intraocular pressures were normal. Fundus examination of the right eye showed areas of retinitis and
hemorrhages in the posterior pole and hyperemia and blurring of the disc margins (neuroretinitis). In the left eye, a patch of retinitis was
seen nasal to the optic disc [Fig. 1A and B]. Fundus fluorescein angiography showed areas of capillary nonperfusion corresponding to the
retinitis lesions [Fig. 2A and B] and optical coherence tomography (Stratus version 4, Zeiss, Germany) showed areas of retinal destruction
[Fig. 3]. Laboratory investigations included an ESR of 38mm/h, normal hematological and rheological parameters, coagulation profile, blood
sugar, liver and renal function, urine analysis and chest X-ray. VDRL test for syphilis and Mantoux test were negative. ELISA showed IgM and
IgG positivity for herpes simplex and only IgG positivity for cytomegalovirus and Varicella Zoster viruses. ELISA for HIV and toxoplasma
were negative. Aqueous tap was positive for herpes simplex virus. He was started on intravenous acyclovir 1500 mg/m2/day. As the lesions
continued to progress [Fig. 4A and B] in both eyes, oral steroids in a dosage of 1 mg/kg body weight were added after four days along with
oral acyclovir and intravitreal ganciclovir 2000 micrograms in 0.05 ml in both eyes. Oral acyclovir was stopped after 10 days while the
steroids were tapered over four weeks. At the end of four weeks, there was no further deterioration in vision or appearance of any new
lesions. At the last follow-up (five months), the retinal lesions had healed well [Fig. 5] and his BCVA was 20/120 and 20/20 in the right
and left eyes respectively. Ocular manifestations in chikungunya fever are rare and include retroorbital pain, conjunctivitis and
choroiditis, (Medline search).3 We report an interesting case of bilateral retinitis in a patient with serologically proven chikungunya
fever. As no reports of retinitis after chikungunya fever were available in the literature at the time of examination, tests were done to
rule out an infective etiology. ELISA and the PCR results of the serum and the aqueous sample respectively were positive for herpes simplex
virus.4-6 As a result, he was started on intravenous acyclovir. As symptoms continued to progress in spite of intravenous acyclovir, an
ongoing immune-mediated reaction following the fever was a possibility. Role of corticosteroids and immunosuppression in viral fever is
controversial. As a result, he received oral steroids (1 mg/kg body wt) under cover of antivirals. There was no immediate improvement of the
retinitis with the above treatment. However, there was no further worsening of the retinitis either. The lesions were self-limiting and took
over six to eight weeks to resolve completely. Retrospectively, the interval between the onset of visual symptoms and the systemic
manifestations of chikungunya fever in our patient was three weeks. This delay favors the hypothesis that the ocular lesions could be an
immune- mediated process rather than a direct viral infection. There may also be an aberrant immune response triggered by the virus
resulting in development of autoantibodies against the retina.7 However, in our case, it is difficult to explain the PCR and ELISA
positivity to herpes simplex virus and non- responsiveness to antiviral treatment. As this is an isolated case report, it is difficult to
postulate the mechanism involved in the development of retinitis. This report highlights the findings and course of bilateral retinitis in a
patient with chikungunya fever. Fundus photograph of the right eye showing active retinitis Fundus photograph of left eye showing active
retinitis Fluorescein angiogram showing areas of capillary nonperfusion in the right eye Fluorescein angiogram showing areas of capillary
nonperfusion in the left eye Optical coherence tomogram of the right eye showing areas of retinal destruction Fundus photograph of the right
eye showing progression of retinitis Fundus photograph of left eye showing progression of retinitis Fundus photograph of the right eye
showing resolved retinitis
