Dear Editor, Transorbital orbitocranial penetrating injuries (TOPI) are relatively rare and can be caused by a variety of unusual objects.1
A 40-year-old gentleman had fallen down from a moving lorry on a roadside fencing. The fencing bar along with his spectacle bar penetrated
his right orbit. He presented approximately two hours after the accident in a drowsy condition. General and systemic examination was
unremarkable. On local examination the cut end of the fencing and spectacle sidebar was entering into the skull and globe through the upper
part of the right eyelid and there was profuse and active bleeding from the wound. X-ray skull showed both the metallic objects penetrating
through the orbit into the cranial cavity [Fig. 1]. Computed tomography (CT) scan facility and facility to perform direct puncture carotid
angiogram at that time was not available. However, in view of profuse and active bleeding it was decided to remove both the objects urgently
[Fig. 2]. The patient underwent left frontal craniotomy by a neurosurgical team and the dural defect was repaired with pericranial graft.
Following surgery the patient continued to deteriorate and expired. According to studies intracranial extension of the foreign bodies is
associated with a 25% mortality rate.2,3 The intracranial lesions in these patients include ventricular damage, carotico-cavernous fistula,
pneumocephalus and subdural, subarachnoid, intraventricular, and intracerebral hemorrhage.4 Although radio-opaque foreign bodies causing
such injuries may be easily located by routine X-rays,5 it may not provide adequate details to assess the extent of intracranial damage. In
patients with orbital injuries for the assessment of serious underlying intracranial injuries the recommended investigations include CT and
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI).4,6 To rule out vascular injuries angiography and/ or CT angiography may be needed.6 However, in the
presence of metallic objects MRI may not be possible and these objects can produce severe artifacts. At times the sophisticated facilities
may not be available and if the patient′s condition is such that he cannot be referred to a higher center it becomes really difficult to
assess the underlying damage. In such circumstances the patients can be managed based on the available evidence but the results may not be
rewarding. X-ray skull antero-posterior (left) and lateral (right) view showing the trajectory of foreign body Photograph showing the
removed fencing (lower) and spectacle (upper) sidebar
