Paragangliomas rarely originate from the pancreas and they are characterized on imaging studies as well-marginated, hypervascular masses
with cystic areas. We herein report on a case report of pancreatic paraganglioma in a 57-year-old woman, which was confirmed on pathology.
Color Doppler ultrasonography and dynamic CT demonstrated a well-demarcated, extremely hypervascular mass with prominent intratumoral
vessels and early contrast filling of the draining veins from the mass. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography showed that the main
pancreatic duct was displaced and mildly dilated. Tumors arising from the chromaffin cells of the adrenal medulla are called
pheochromocytomas, whereas those that occur in the paraganglia at other sites are referred to as paragangliomas (1). Although paragangliomas
can be found in every site where healthy paraganglia are known to occur, the majority are commonly seen in the carotid artery, jugular
foramen, middle ear, aortopulmonary region, posterior mediastinum and abdominal paraaortic region, including Zuckerkandl's body (2).
Paragangliomas arising from the pancreas are very rare. They have been previously characterized on radiologic images as being well-
marginated, hypervascular masses with cystic areas (3-5). However, the reported CT features were those of only single equilibrium phase CT,
and this modality can't show the hypervascularity of paragangliomas. Also, the early enhancement of the prominent draining veins during the
arterial phase, which supports the hypervascularity of paragangliomas, has not been reported. We herein report on the abdominal
ultrasonography (US), dynamic CT and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) findings that show the extreme hypervascularity
of an unusual variant of paraganglioma that arose in the pancreatic head. A 57-year-old woman visited our hospital with right flank
discomfort of two-month duration. The patient's past medical history was unremarkable and her blood pressure was normotensive. Her physical
examination did not show any abnormality. On admission, the serum CA 19-9 level was slightly elevated at 45.2 U/mL (normal range: 0-37
U/mL). Urine analysis demonstrated three to four white blood cells per high-power field, but the patient denied dysuria or other urinary
symptoms. The other laboratory results were within the normal limits. Transabdominal US showed a 6×7-cm, well-marginated, retroperitoneal
mass with isoechogenicity relative to the liver parenchyma, and this was adjacent to the pancre atic head. while color Doppler US
demonstrated the hypervascularity of the tumor (Fig. 1A). Dynamic pancreas CT revealed a 7-cm, well-demarcated, low attenuating mass in the
pancreatic head. On the arterial phase CT, this mass showed strong enhancement and also non-enhancing tubular-shaped portions; several
intratumoral vessels that were connected to the peritumoral vessels were also noted. There was early contrast filling of the main portal
vein and several prominent draining veins surrounding the mass. On the portal venous phase CT, the mass was still well-enhancing and the
extent of the non-enhancing portions within the mass was reduced compared with that seen on the arterial phase. There was diffuse dilatation
of the pancreatic duct that was most likely secondary to mass compression or invasion. Given the mass compression of the distal main portal
vein, the possibility of main portal vein invasion could not be ruled out (Figs. 1B-D). ERCP demonstrated superior displacement of the head
portion of the main pancreatic duct and diffuse mild dilatation of the main pancreatic duct (Fig. 1E). Endoscopic US showed a well-
marginated, echogenic mass with several anechoic portions, and this represented cystic degeneration or hemorrhagic necrosis in the pancreas
head. It also demonstrated several large vessels within and around the mass and mild dilatation of the main pancreatic duct. Based on these
imaging findings, we radiologically diagnosed the tumor as being a non-functioning islet cell tumor of the pancreatic head. We performed
pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy. The gross specimen revealed a 6.5×6×6-cm, well-circumscribed ovoid soft-tissue mass with
multifocal hemorrhagic portions and no cystic degeneration (Fig. 1F). The tumor had displaced the common bile duct and the main pancreatic
duct without any evidence of invasion. Microscopic examination showed a Zell-ballen pattern composed of mild pleomorphic chief cells and
sustentacular cells within the tumor (Fig. 1G). Prominent peritumoral and intratumoral arteries and veins were also observed.
Immunohistochemistrical staining was positive for synaptophysin, chromogranin and S-100 protein, but negative for cytokeratin (Figs. 1H, I).
The histopathologic findings were consistent with a paraganglioma of the pancreas. Paragangliomas or extraadrenal pheochromocytomas are
rare, affecting about one in 2,000,000 people (6). Although most paragangliomas are solitary and they arise sporadically, they can be
multicentric or hereditary. Paragangliomas of the abdomen predominantly arise from paraganglia that are symmetrically distributed along the
abdominal aorta in the retroperitoneum. The most prominent collection is near the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery (the organ of
Zuckerkandl), which is where the majority of abdominal paragangliomas originate. Other less common locations of abdominal paragangliomas
include the gallbladder, urinary bladder, prostate, spermatic cord, uterus and duodenum (2). Although paragangliomas occur in a variety of
anatomic locations, they have nearly identical imaging features, namely a homogeneously or heterogeneously hyperenhancing, soft-tissue mass
with cystic areas on CT scanning and multiple areas of signal void interspersed with hyperintense foci (a salt-and-pepper appearance) within
the tumor on the MR imaging (2). Paragangliomas of the pancreas are very rare. To the best of our knowledge, only eight cases of pancreas
paraganglioma have been reported (3-5). The mean age of these eight patients was 67 years (range: 42 to 85 years) with a male to female
ratio of 1/7. Six of these eight tumors were located in the pancreatic head, whereas the remaining two originated from the body of the
pancreas. Although the available radiologic images were limited in the previously reported cases of pancreas paraganglioma (3-5), the
imaging findings were generally characterized as a well-defined mass with frequent areas of hypoechogenicity on US, a well-marginated,
hypervascular tumor with cystic areas of low-attenuation on contrast-enhanced CT, and tumor displacement of the main pancreatic duct on
ERCP. Although the present case is characterized by similar findings, it is unique because the dynamic CT demonstrated robust enhancement of
the mass that was comparable to that of the greater abdominal vessels, prominent intratumoral vessels and early contrast filling of the main
portal vein and draining veins from the mass during the arterial phase. The differential diagnosis of a hypervascular pancreatic mass should
include islet cell tumor (ICT), which can be functioning or nonfunctioning according to their clinical and laboratory manifestations (7).
Functioning ICTs are usually less than 3 cm in size and they are homogeneously hyperenhancing during the arterial phase of contrast-enhanced
CT (7). On the other hand, nonfunctioning ICTs tend to be larger than functioning ICTs, they have a greater predilection for cystic change
or necrosis, and they are heterogeneously enhancing (7). The radiologic differentiation of pancreas paragangliomas from nonfunctioning ICTs
can be difficult. Yet to the best of our knowledge, there is no report regarding early contrast filling of the prominent draining veins of
nonfunctioning ICTs. Therefore, early contrast filling of the prominent draining veins of this tumor and the portal vein too may be a clue
for differentiating pancreas paragangliomas from nonfunctioning ICTs of the pancreas. In conclusion, we report here on a patient with a rare
diagnosis of primary paraganglioma of the pancreas, and this tumor was characterized by hypervascularity with prominent intratumoral vessels
and early contrast filling of the draining veins from the mass. Despite its rarity, paragangliomas should be a part of the differential
diagnosis of a hypervascular pancreatic mass, and especially in the setting of early contrast filling of the prominent draining veins from
the mass. 57-year-old female with right flank discomfort of two months duration. A. Transabdominal color Doppler ultrasonogram demonstrates
6 x 7-cm, well-marginated, hypervascular mass (arrows) with intratumoral vessels (arrowheads) adjacent to pancreatic head. B, C. Axial
contrast-enhanced CT scans during arterial phase (B) and portal venous phase (C) shows strong, persistently well-enhancing mass (arrows) and
several intratumoral vessels (arrowheads in B). Extent of non-enhancing, tubular-shaped portions within mass is reduced during portal venous
phase relative to arterial phase. There is early contrast filling of several prominent draining veins around mass (curved arrows). D. Axial
contrast-enhanced CT scan during arterial phase at level cranial to that of B shows early contrast filling of several prominent draining
veins (curved arrows) and main portal vein (P). E. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography shows superior displacement of head
portion of main pancreatic duct and diffuse mild dilatation of main pancreatic duct. There is multifocal parenchymal staining in pancreas
head and neck. F. Photograph of gross specimen shows well-marginated mass with areas of intratumoral hemorrhage displacing common bile duct
(arrow) and main pancreatic duct (arrowhead). Note location of normal amupulla of Vater (curved arrow). G. Photomicrograph of histologic
specimen shows typical "Zell-ballen" pattern, which is composed of mild pleomorphic chief cells (arrows) and sustentacular cells
(arrowheads) within tumor (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, x 400). H. Photomicrograph of immunohistochemistrical staining shows strong
positivity of chief cells (arrows) for synaptophysin (×400). I. Sustentacular cells (arrows) are well observed by immunohistochemistrical
staining for S-100 protein (×400).
