Sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation of the spleen is a recently described benign pathologic entity that is characterized by round
shaped vascular spaces that are lined by endothelial cells, and the spaces are circumscribed by granulomatoid structures. Microscopically,
all the reported cases had multiple angiomatoid nodules in a fibrosclerotic stroma. Each angiomatoid nodule was made up of slit-like, round
or irregular shaped vascular spaces that were lined by endothelial cells and interspersed ovoid cells. We present here the CT and dynamic
gadolinium-enhanced MR findings of a patient with sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation. The spoke-wheel pattern that was observed
on MRI in this case may be an important imaging clue for making the correct diagnosis of this benign lesion. The secondary involvement of
the spleen in different diseases is more widespread when compared to the spleen's primary lesions (1). Sclerosing angiomatoid nodular
transformation (SANT) of the spleen is one of the primary benign diseases of the spleen that has recently been described (2). Although it is
defined by its morphological details, any data regarding its radiological appearance is extremely scarce. Microscopically, all the
previously reported cases had multiple angiomatoid nodules in a fibrosclerotic stroma. Each angiomatoid nodule was made up of slit-like,
round or irregular shaped vascular spaces that were lined by endothelial cells and interspersed ovoid cells. To date, only the CT findings
were briefly reported from one case (3). In this article, we present the CT and dynamic MR findings of a case with SANT of the spleen. A
spoke-wheel pattern was observed on MRI, which may be important to diagnose this benign condition. A 44-year-old male patient was admitted
to our hospital with vague pelvic pain and questionable prostate symptoms. His vital signs and physical examination, as well as the basic
biochemical and complete blood count examinations, were within normal limits. His past medical and family history were also unremarkable.
The patient was referred to our department by the attending physician for a CT examination to check for abdominal pathology. CT examination
revealed a centrally hypodense lesion that measured 8cm in diameter with well-defined borders and an enhancing peripheral portion that
radiated centrally to almost completely fill the splenic parenchyma (Fig. 1A). MRI study confirmed the CT findings, revealing a lesion with
heterogeneous intensity with a centrally scattered hyperintense signal on the precontrast fat saturated T1-weighted images; this was
suggestive of hemorrhagic components, which were confirmed by pathologic analysis (Fig. 1B). On the T2-weighted images (Fig. 1C), the lesion
appeared peripherally hyperintense and centrally hypointense with radiating enhanced areas towards the center of the lesion, which appeared
hyperintense. The early arterial phase T1-weighted gradient echo images (Figs. 1D, E) showed peripheral enhancement with progressive central
progression in a radiating fashion on the late phase images, and this resembled a spoke-wheel pattern. The central portion was not
completely filled on the late phase images, and this was consistent with fibrosis, which was confirmed by the pathology report. There was no
lympadenaopathy or any other focal solid organ lesion that was suggestive of metastasis. The patient underwent splenectomy. The gross
examination revealed an enlarged spleen weighing 650 gr. A whitish firm nodule with hemorrhagic spiculations extending towards the normal
splenic parenchyma was seen on the gross cut section. Microscopic examination depicted that the lesion was primarily composed of multiple
angiomatoid nodules that were separated by sclerotic fibrous stroma. Round-shaped vascular spaces lined by endothelial cells were noted to
be centrally circumscribed by granulomatoid structures; these were the most prominent morphological features of these nodules. The cells
within the nodules had vesicular nuclei and they rarely contain eosinophilic nucleoli with rare mitosis. Hyalinization and fibrosis were
noted in the central area of the lesion. Immunohistochemical studies of the nodules revealed CD34-positive, CD31-positive and CD8-negative
cells in the peripheral sector, while the central portion was mainly comprised of CD31-positive, CD34- and CD8- negative cells. The final
diagnosis was SANT. The patient did well during the post-surgical period and he was discharged four days after the surgery without any
complications. The spleen may be affected during several disease processes, and particularly lymphomas. Non-lymphomatoid tumors of the
spleen are unusual and these are primarily of a vascular origin (4). Most of these lesions are comprised of cavernous hemangiomas, while
other disorders of this class, namely, hemangioendothelioma, Littoral cell angiomas and hamartomas are rare. SANT of the spleen is a newly
defined distinct pathological vascular disorder of the spleen by Martel et al. (2) in 2004; the pathological analysis of this new entity was
described in detail in their series of 25 patients. They also concluded in their study that SANT of the spleen is a benign disorder with no
tendency for recurrence, and splenectomy offered complete cure to patients. In another manuscript by Li et al. (3), the CT findings were
described together with an in-depth pathological analysis of a patient. The reported lesion was hypodense, as in our patient, with an
internal calcific focus that became indistinguishable from the surrounding splenic parenchyma on the late portal phase images. In our
patient, the lesion demonstrated diffuse peripheral enhancement on the early arterial phase with progressive centripedal filling in a
radiating pattern, while its center remained hypodense and hypointense on the late phase images of CT and MRI, respectively. To the best of
our knowledge, the MRI findings of this rare entity have not been published before. Although rare, SANT should be considered in the
differential diagnosis for hypervascular lesions of the spleen. SANT was reported to cause no symptoms in the affected patients and it is
generally incidentally detected. Its clinical prognosis was reported to be excellent with complete cure after splenectomy (2). Making the
differential diagnosis among the other benign and malignant vascular lesions of the spleen may be difficult. Angiosarcoma, the most
prevalent primary malignant vascular entity, may sometimes be difficult to differentiate from other benign lesions. However, considering
their highly aggressive biological nature, it would be highly unusual to see an angiosarcoma of this size to be restricted to only the
spleen without any distant metastasis. Littorall cell angioma may be differentiated due to its typical multiple hypodense nodules and
considering the solitary appearance of SANT of the spleen (2). Although lymphoma must also be kept in mind for splenic lesions, the absence
of splenomegaly, the solitary character of the lesion and the absence of any associated intraabdominal lympadenopathy may be helpful clues
for making the differential diagnosis (2). Also, the general well-being of the patient and the absence of any other clinical symptoms
regarding lymphoma may be other supportive findings against the diagnosis of lymphoma. It may be difficult or impossible to confidently
differentiate SANT of the spleen from other benign disorders of the spleen like hamartoma and inflammatory pseudotumor of the spleen with
using only the images. The scarcity of data on the imaging characteristics of the SANT of the spleen make this even more problematic. So, we
think that pathological examination and invasive treatment may be almost always indicated for making the correct diagnosis with the
currently available data. In conclusion, SANT is a rare vascular lesion of the spleen and its incidence may increase, after its recent
description as a separate clinico-pathologic entity. MRI may be helpful for the diagnosis of splenic nodular angiomatoid transformation by
demonstrating a spoke-wheel pattern on MRI with centripedal filling in a radiating pattern, and the splenic mass may contain fibrotic and
hemorrhagic components. The description of the radiological and clinical features of this entity in a large series may also increase the
recognition of SANT by practicing radiologists. Sclerosing angiomatoid nodular transformation in 44-year-old man. A. Axial CT image shows
predominantly hypodense mass with lobulated contours. Also note rim-style contrast enhancement of external borders of lesion (arrow). B.
Fat-saturated precontrast T1-weighted image shows central hyperintensity that is consistent with hemorrhage. C. T2-weighted MR image shows
spoke-wheel pattern of lesion that is predominantly hyperintense with central hypointense areas. Note hyperintense radiations towards center
of lesion. D, E Postcontrast arterial (D) and delayed venous phase (E) T1 weighted MR images clearly show progressive enhancement from
periphery to center of lesion, which is similar to spoke wheel pattern (arrows).
