Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Creative Commons Deed, Attribution 2.5, which does not permit commercial
exploitation. Central pontine myelinolysis (CPM) usually presents in chronic alcoholics and in patients in whom hyponatraemia has been
corrected rapidly. However, CPM may occur in other clinical circumstances, including patients with severe hypoglycaemia. We describe the
occurrence of CPM and quadriplegia in a patient who experienced fluoroquinolone-associated severe hypoglycaemia. A 63-year-old man with Type
2 diabetes mellitus was admitted to hospital for resection of a large liposarcoma. Renal-dose levofloxacin was utilized as part of an
antimicrobial regimen to treat post-operative peritonitis. On days 6–8 of levofloxacin therapy, the patient experienced recurrent
hypoglycaemia despite total parenteral nutrition, 10% dextrose containing fluids and cessation of insulin therapy 3 days prior to the first
hypoglycaemic episode. Hypoglycaemia resolved within 24 h of stopping levofloxacin. After a final and severe hypoglycaemic event, the
patient developed quadriplegia and tonic left deviation of gaze. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a high-intensity lesion in the central
pons consistent with CPM. Fluoroquinolones should be considered as a potential cause of hypoglycaemia. Severe hypoglycaemia has the
potential to cause white matter lesions in the pons. Putative mechanisms include failure of membrane ion channels, oligodendrocyte apoptosis
and oxidative stress of glucose reperfusion. Fluoroquinolone-associated hypoglycaemia and hypoglycaemia-induced quadriplegia are both rare
and we believe this is the first case report linking the two events. Diabet. Med. 25, 856–859 (2008) Central pontine myelinolysis (CPM) is a
serious neurological disorder of brain white matter initially described in alcoholics and malnourished patients . It may also occur if
hyponatraemia is corrected too rapidly . Liver transplantation and haemodialysis patients have accounted for an increasing proportion of
cases in recent years . Although rare, hypoglycaemia has been reported to cause CPM . The exact pathogenesis of the disorder remains
unclear. Fluoroquinolones are a class of antibiotics that inhibit bacterial DNA synthesis and are used to treat a wide variety of
infections. Disorders of glucose homeostasis have been reported in association with fluoroquinolone therapy, in particular gatifloxacin and
levofloxacin. A report of two population-based, nested case–control studies of elderly adults treated in hospital for hypoglycaemia or
hyperglycaemia after ambulatory treatment with a fluoroquinolone, cephalosporin, or macrolide found significantly increased risks of both
hypoglycaemia and hyperglycaemia for gatifloxacin-treated patients and an increased risk of hypoglycaemia for patients treated with
levofloxacin . Gatifloxacin was withdrawn from the US and Canadian markets in June 2006 because of treatment-related glucose disturbances.
We present the case of a patient who experienced recurrent hypoglycaemia while receiving levofloxacin. After a severe hypoglycaemic event,
the patient developed quadriplegia as a result of CPM. A 63-year-old man presented to hospital with increasing abdominal distension. He had
Type 2 diabetes mellitus, managed with glibenclamide. A large, low-grade liposarcoma was removed along with the involved left kidney. Tumour
resection was complicated by bowel perforation and three additional surgical procedures were performed for partial bowel resection and
peritoneal debridement. Fluconazole, metronidazole and renal-dosed levofloxacin were administered for treatment of peritonitis. Adrenal
insufficiency was diagnosed and managed with stress-dose parenteral hydrocortisone (50 mg every 8 h). Renal function worsened after left
nephrectomy (peak creatinine 361 µmol/l), but electrolytes remained unremarkable and no signs of uraemia or fluid overload were observed.
During a prolonged stay in the Intensive Care Unit (ICU), total parenteral nutrition (TPN, 0.83 mol/l glucose, 104 ml/h) was started and an
ICU insulin infusion protocol was utilized to manage hyperglycaemia. The patient gradually recovered, permitting transfer to an Intermediate
Care Unit (IMCU) on hospital day 22. TPN was continued, but the insulin infusion was stopped after transfer to the IMCU, with the patient
receiving only insulin aspart (Novolog) according to a supplemental subcutaneous insulin protocol. On the 27th day of hospital stay, TPN was
stopped because of a malfunctioning venous catheter. Two hours later the patient experienced neuroglycopenic symptoms and capillary blood
glucose was 2.8 mmol/l. Symptoms abated after intravenous administration of 25 ml 50% dextrose. Low capillary blood glucose values were
corroborated by a laboratory plasma glucose measurement. There was no insulin in the patient's TPN and the last dose of insulin aspart (4
units) had been administered subcutaneously 5 days before hypoglycaemia occurred. Ten per cent dextrose (D10) infusion at 104 ml/h was
started after the initial episode of hypoglycaemia. Despite administration of D10 fluids, the patient required four additional doses of 50%
dextrose to treat recurrent hypoglycaemia on hospital days 27 and 28 (days 6 and 7 of levofloxacin, see Fig. 1). Time course of
hypoglycaemia during levofloxacin therapy (a) and MRI imaging of the brain (b). (a) Recurrent episodes of hypoglycaemia occurred during days
6–8 of levofloxacin despite delivery of glucose in TPN or fluids. The last episode induced a brief cardiopulmonary arrest. (b) T2 weighted
MRI image of the brain 2 days after the onset of quadriplegia. The lesion in the central pons (arrow) is consistent with central pontine
myelinolysis. Note the deviation of the patient's eyes suggesting bulbar involvement. D10, 10% dextrose; IVF, intravenous fluids; MRI,
magnetic resonance image; TPN, total parenteral nutrition. TPN was restarted during the evening of hospital day 28 and D10 fluids were
stopped. On hospital day 29 (levofloxacin day 8), the patient suddenly developed cardiac asystole and required rapid intubation and
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Capillary blood glucose was 1.1 mmol/l at the time of cardiac arrest and multiple doses of 50% dextrose were
administered to achieve euglycaemia. Sinus rhythm, normal blood pressure and spontaneous respiration were restored within 5 min of the
event. However, 24 h later, the patient developed quadriplegia and tonic ocular deviation to the left. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
revealed a focal high intensity lesion on T-2 weighted images of the central pons (Fig. 1). The lesion also exhibited prominent intensity on
diffusion-weighted images and reduced intensity on apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) mapping. No cortical lesions were observed. Because
of concern about drug-induced hypoglycaemia, levofloxacin was discontinued. The patient required insulin therapy for hyperglycaemia within
24 h of stopping levofloxacin. No other aetiology of hypoglycaemia was identified. The patient's last dose of sulphonylurea was prior to
admission, 27 days before the onset of hypoglycaemia in hospital and no insulin was administered in the 5 days before hypoglycaemia. The
patient gradually recovered partial motor function by the time of hospital discharge with the help of physiotherapy. Tracheotomy and
gastrostomy were performed before transfer to a nursing home. Unfortunately, the patient returned to the hospital 1 month later in
respiratory failure as a result of aspiration pneumonia and subsequently died. To our knowledge, this is the first case of fluoroquinolone-
associated hypoglycaemia complicated by pontine demyelination and quadriplegia. No alternative explanations are apparent and hypoglycaemia
remitted quickly after levofloxacin was discontinued. In particular, the patient was not receiving exogenous insulin when hypoglycaemia
occurred, dextrose was provided in either TPN or intravenous fluids during the episodes and hydrocortisone at stress doses was prescribed
for adrenal insufficiency. Although high doses of fluconazole can increase circulating sulphonylurea levels and precipitate hypoglycaemia ,
our patient had not received any oral glucose-lowering medication for nearly 1 month before hypoglycaemia occurred. We are unaware of any
reports documenting metronidazole-induced hypoglycaemia. The persistent and severe hypoglycaemia and lack of response to a D10 infusion
point to a mechanism other than the discontinuation of TPN. There were no significant shifts in sodium or potassium to provide an
alternative explanation for CPM. Hypoglycaemia is a potential cause of cardiac asystole and asystole resolved after euglycaemia was
restored. Patients most at risk of fluoroquinolone-induced hypoglycaemia are those with Type 2 diabetes mellitus treated with sulphonylureas
. Hypoglycaemia typically occurs 4–6 days after initiation of a fluoroquinolone antibiotic. Quinolones have been shown to directly stimulate
insulin secretion from pancreatic B-cells, with at least part of this action occurring by direct action at pore forming KIR 6.2 subunits of
K ATP channels . In our patient's case, hypoglycaemia occurred on day 7 of levofloxacin therapy and resolved promptly after levofloxacin was
stopped. Severe hypoglycaemia may cause neurological disturbances ranging from focal deficits to coma and death. However, reports of
hypoglycaemia-induced quadriplegia are rare in the English language literature ; one case of quadriplegia occurred as part of the ‘locked-
in’ syndrome and neurological symptoms in the other two cases resolved quickly after hypoglycaemia was treated . None of these previous
reports has documented pontine lesions on central nervous system (CNS) imaging. Shirayama et al. have reported a case of intentional
insulin-induced hypoglycaemia complicated by left hemiplegia and a pontine lesion with increased signal intensity on diffusion-weighted MRI
. Hypoglycaemia-induced CPM has also been reported in patients presenting in coma and with ataxia . Our patient's only acute lesion on CNS
imaging was an area of high signal intensity in the pons characteristic of CPM. The patient's neurological findings can be explained by
disruptions of the corticospinal tract, corticobulbar tract and paramedian pontine reticular formation. There are three putative mechanisms
by which severe hypoglycaemia could cause pontine myelinolysis. Deprivation of glucose, the major source of fuel for the brain, may lead to
cytotoxic oedema secondary to failure of ion pumps in the cell membrane . In animal models and at least one patient , enhancement on
diffusion-weighted MRI and decreased signal on ADC mapping as observed for our patient identified significant changes in brain water
diffusion. Glucose resuscitation resulting in hyperglycaemia activates the NADPH pathway in neurons, causing cytotoxic oxidative stress .
The same phenomenon could also adversely affect oligodendrocytes. Finally, hypoglycaemia induces apoptosis pathways in oligodendrocytes and
prevents the maturation of oligodendrocyte precursor cells . We believe our case represents hypoglycaemia associated with fluoroquinolone
therapy in a critically ill patient with renal failure. This case also illustrates two rare complications of hypoglycaemia, namely CPM and
quadriplegia. CPM appears to be the aetiology of the patient's quadriplegia. More studies are required to elucidate the pathogenesis of
white matter brain injury in hypoglycaemia. None to declare. apparent diffusion coefficient central nervous system central pontine
myelinolysis intensive care unit intermediate care unit magnetic resonance imaging total parenteral nutrition
