Arterial and cardiac involvement of Behcet's disease is a rare but life threatening complication. The rupture of an arterial aneurysm might
result in sudden death. We report a 54-year-old man with an established diagnosis of Behcet's disease who presented with multiple
cardiovascular complications that eventually lead to his death. He presented with extensive venous occlusions, and sequentially developed
right ventricular thrombosis with multiple pulmonary thromboembolisms, and a pulmonary artery aneurysm. We report this unusual sequence of
cardiovascular complications in a patient with Behcet's disease. Behcet's disease (BD) is often complicated by vascular complications with a
clear preponderance for venous involvement1). Arterial and cardiac complications including aneurysms, arteritis, and thrombosis are rare but
life threatening complications2, 3). We report an unusual case of successive vascular complications including extensive venous thrombosis,
huge right ventricular (RV) thrombus, multiple pulmonary thromboembolisms, and a pulmonary artery aneurysm (PAA) rupture in a patient with
an established diagnosis of BD. In March, 2003, a 54-year-old man presented with cough, dyspnea and intermittent fever that began two months
earlier. Two years previously, he was diagnosed with BD based on the clinical manifestations of recurrent oral and genital ulcers, skin
manifestations including erythema nodosum and papulopustular lesions, and a positive pathology test. He had a previous history of recurrent
venous occlusions at multiple sites, including the common femoral vein, great saphenous vein and inferior vena cava. He had been on
maintenance coumadin therapy until eight months earlier when he stopped treatment and was lost to follow up. On examination, his body
temperature, heart rate and blood pressure were 38.1℃, 110/min and 120/80 mmHg, respectively. Multiple discrete round ulcers were observed
on his lower lip mucosa, tongue and scrotum. The skin examination showed multiple 0.2 cm sized papules and pustules on both palms. The chest
examinations showed no abnormal findings. The auscultation of the heart revealed a rapid beat without a murmur. The initial complete blood
count revealed a hemoglobin count of 12.6 g/dL, a platelet count of 368×109/L, and a white cell count of 10.6×109/L. The ESR was elevated to
73 mm/hr and the C-reactive protein was positive at 4.7 mg/dL. The anticardiolipin antibodies were negative but the lupus anticoagulant was
positive (92.7 sec). The plasma homocysteine concentration was 19.9 mol/L (normal, 4.5-12.4 mol/L). The HLA B51 test was negative. The
antithrombin III, protein C and S levels were within the normal range. The chest X-ray revealed haziness in the right middle and left upper
lobes. The chest CT scan revealed a large mass in the RV. Transthoracic echocardiography showed a mobile ill-defined 2.0×1.3 cm sized mass
that was attached to the tip of the papillary muscle of RV but valvular vegetation was not observed (Figure 1A). The ventricular functions
were normal. The lung scan revealed multiple perfusion defects on the right upper, right lower, and left lower lung fields (Figure 1B).
Doppler ultrasonography of the lower extremities did not show venous thrombosis. Coumadin and methylprednisolone 24 mg/d were started under
a diagnosis of BD complicated by intracardiac thrombosis and multiple pulmonary thromboembolisms,. His symptoms improved rapidly. After the
coumadin treatment for one year, the right ventricular thrombus was completely resolved. In October 2004, he suddenly developed a hemoptysis
of 700 mL associated with chest pain and dyspnea. The body temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate and blood pressure were 38℃, 140/min,
44/min and 110/70 mmHg, respectively. Coarse crackles were heard over both lung fields. The complete blood count showed a hemoglobin level,
a white blood cell count and a platelet count of 11.0 g/dL, 16.4×109/L and 405×109/L, respectively. The coagulation profile, ESR, CRP, and
blood chemistry were within the normal limits. The chest CT scan and pulmonary angiography revealed a pulmonary hemorrhage from a rupture of
the right pulmonary artery and a thrombus within the aneurysm (Figure 2). The patient was diagnosed with a rupture of PAA and was started on
high dose glucocorticoid and cyclophosphamide pulse therapy. After the completion of 6 cycles of cyclophosphamide therapy, he was maintained
on azathioprine 100 mg/d and methylprednisolone 8 mg/d. His progress was uneventful for 10 months, and the PAA decreased in size. In August
2005, he developed recurrent hemoptysis, which resolved with high dose glucocorticoid therapy. However, he died during a third episode of
massive hemoptysis in October 2005, twelve months after the initial presentation. Since the main pathological feature of BD is vasculitis,
the condition is often complicated by vascular complications with an incidence of vascular involvement ranging from 7 to 29%2). The venous
lesions are mainly venous occlusions, while arterial lesions are either arterial aneurysms or arterial occlusions. Arterial complications,
particularly when multiple vessels are involved, have grave consequences often leading to mortality. The pathogenesis of thrombosis in BD is
unclear. Endothelial cell injury by the deposition of immune complexes has been implicated as an important cause of hypercoagulability and
thrombosis. Vascular inflammation can lead to the enhancement of platelet aggregation and an impairment of fibrinolysis resulting in a
thrombosis4, 5). Recently, the von Willebrand factor antigen6), hyperhomocysteinemia, and antiphospholipid antibodies were reported to play
a role in thrombus formation in BD7, 8). Thrombosis can occur in any type of vein or artery. However, thrombosis within the cardiac chamber
is extremely rare9) and can only occur in settings where the immune system is extensively activated. This is because the endocardium is less
prone to damage from circulating immune complexes and various inflammatory mediators due to high velocity dynamic blood flow within the
cardiac chambers. In our patient, the increased lupus anticoagulant and plasma homocysteine concentration was documented during the severe
disease flare up resulting in a thrombosis of the pulmonary artery and RV. Our case demonstrates that multiple thrombophilic factors act
cumulatively to trigger a fulminant thrombotic phenomenon. Aneurysms occupy approximately 60% of reported arterial lesions associated with
BD10). The aorta is the most commonly affected artery followed by the pulmonary artery11). PAA is known to occur as a result of immune-
mediated vasculitis1). The consequent neovascularization and degeneration of arterial wall result in the formation of an aneurysm12).
Hemoptysis is the main presenting symptom but thrombi within PAA can cause secondary ischemia in the lung parenchyma. Medical treatment with
immunosuppressive agents is preferred over surgery because a recurrent aneurysm or fistula at the anastomotic site is a common complication
after a surgical resection13). There are reports of the regression of PAA associated with BD after a treatment with high dose glucocorticoid
and cyclophosphamide combination14, 15). However, the successful control of the symptoms with these therapeutic regimens is not always
enough to prevent a recurrence or rupture. Once an aneurysm develops, it carries the risk of rupture at any time. Approximately 30% of BD
patients with PAA die within 2 years15). When a BD patient with thrombophilic tendency experiences a major flare in the disease activity, a
search for other vascular complications is recommended because multiple catastrophic vascular events can be triggered by the inflammation.
Echocardiographic findings show mobile intracardiac mass (1.3×2.0 cm) in the right ventricle (A). Lung perfusion scan shows multiple
perfusion defects on both lung fields (B). Chest CT finding shows a rupture of the right pulmonary artery aneurysm with a thrombus within
the aneurysm.
