Psychotherapy conducted over the telephone has received increasing amounts of empirical attention given practical advantages that side-step
treatment barriers encountered in traditional office-based care. The utility and efficacy of telephone therapy appears generalizable across
diverse clinical populations seeking care in community-based hospital settings. Treatment barriers common to older adults suggest that
telephone therapy may be an efficient and effective mental health resource for this population. This paper describes empirical studies of
telehealth interventions and case examples with psychotherapy conducted via telephone on the Spinal Cord Injury Unit of the Palo Alto
Veterans’ Administration. Telephone therapy as appears to be a viable intervention with the aging population. Telehealth may be described as
the provision of health care services via a variety of modes including videoconference, internet and telephone. It has existed in some form
since the 1960s, but became more commonly utilized in the 1990s with the rise of the internet and videophone technology. Data indicate that
by 1999, approximately 100 telehealth networks were in operation (Winerman 2006). Services provided at a distance include teleassessment,
teleeducation, telemonitoring, telesupport, and teletherapy by clinicians of various disciplines and backgrounds. Though telehealth may in
part be driven by economic and political reasoning (Perednia and Allen 1995), medical care from a distance has been referred to as “one of
the most promising applications of advanced communication technology,” (Balas et al 1997, p. 2). Telehealth and intervention from a
distance, specifically by telephone, allows flexibility and improved access to care and more specifically, access to specialty care
(Perednia and Allen 1995) where there may otherwise be barriers to services such as psychology and mental health. Telephone intervention has
already been implemented with a variety of applications and diagnoses. Following a successful 6-month pilot project, telehealth has been
utilized with over 9000 patients receiving interdisciplinary rehabilitative care at the Integris Jim Thorpe Rehabilitation Hospital in
Oklahoma City (Winerman 2006). In this large population, no difference in depression scores on the Mental Component Summary Scale were found
compared with patients receiving traditional face-to-face therapy. Despite the wide range and varied modes of intervention intrinsic in
rehabilitative care, evidence from teleintervention studies appears to support its utility with older adults. A study of self-report data
collection found the telephone to be an accurate and viable modality for information collection (Rintala and Willems 1991). Patients with
spinal cord injury in a rehabilitation hospital (N = 27) reported their activities in their own words twice weekly. One report was given
over the phone, the other face-to-face. The authors found that measures from the two modes did not differ, supporting use of the telephone
as an efficient mode of data collection (Rintala and Willems 1991) which may build confidence for practitioners’ clinical work with patients
via phone. Tutty and colleagues (2005) analyzed telephone psychotherapy for the treatment of depression in adults who did not respond to
pharmacotherapy. Findings reflect patient satisfaction with the modality. Six hundred individuals were randomized to 3 different treatment
conditions (N = 198 in the telephone condition, N = 207 assigned to case management, and N = 195 to usual care). Sixty-four percent of the
telephone intervention patients endorsed being “very satisfied” with telephone therapy at 12 months, compared with 48% in the case
management condition, and 36% in the care-as-usual condition. Continuing, Mohr and colleagues (2005) studied individuals with multiple
sclerosis and comorbid depression (N = 120). These patients were randomized to one of three conditions: Sixteen weeks of manualized Tele-
Cognitive-Behavioral Therapy (T-CBT), a control condition Tele-Supportive Emotion Focused Therapy (T-SEFT) or a control condition that
provided no treatment. While both therapeutic conditions yielded change greater than the no-treatment condition, T-CBT correlated with a
greater increase of positive affect than did T-SEFT (Mohr et al 2005). This finding suggested that those receiving the intervention
benefited more than those that did not. Last, Phillips and colleagues (2001) recruited patients with acute spinal cord injury (N = 111) from
a rehabilitation center in Atlanta for intervention designed to reduce the incidence of secondary conditions among people with mobility
impairment from newly acquired spinal cord injury. Individuals were randomized to one of three groups: video-based intervention for nine
weeks; telephone-based intervention for nine weeks; or standard follow-up care, and followed for one year. The authors found that both
telecare intervention conditions correlated with decreased length of hospital stay compared with the standard care condition. The authors
concluded that telephone-based interventions do improve health-related outcomes. Older adults constitute a growing population who face
increased vulnerability to psychopathology and disability (Gatz and Smyer 1992; Blazer 1994; deBeurs et al 2005). Though there are only a
limited number of published epidemiological studies with varied findings of incidence and prevalence of psychological disorder specifically
with older adults (Gatz and Smyer 1992; Rummans et al 1997; Jeste et al 2005), there is evidence suggesting “nxiety and depression are the
most prevalent psychological problems in late life” (deBeurs et al 2005, p. 3). For example, epidemiological catchement area (ECA) studies
have shown a prevalence of affective disorders in older adults ranging from 1.5 % to as high as 7% (Gatz and Smyer 1992). Depression rates
in older adults have been shown to range from 0.5%–3%, though an estimated 10%–15% of older adults experience symptoms to a degree that
diminishes their quality of life (deBeurs et al 2005). Older adults are even greater risk of experiencing psychiatric disorders such as
depression if they have a general medical condition (Jeste et al 2005). While exact prevalence rates may be arguable to date, risk factors
for psychopathology in older adults appear cumulative with age. Individuals that have experienced previous episodes of psychopathology may
be more vulnerable to development of successive episodes. Furthermore, those that have experienced prior episodes of psychopathology may
have had more exposure to factors that could lead to future episodes. Moreover, older adults experience psychological symptoms differently
than younger adults. Their symptoms may masquerade as neurologically based cognitive impairment (Blazer 1994; Rummans et al 1997; Jeste et
al 2005) and as a result go untreated. At the same time, cognitive impairment secondary to anxiety or mood disorder may significantly impair
an individual’s independent function and/or ability to complete “functional” activities of daily living. The diagnostic variability in older
adults underscores the importance of specialist care in a population that often lacks access to psychological specialists. In concert with
increased risk factors for and barriers to treatment, underutilization of services amongst older adults as a group has been clearly shown
(Karlin and Duffy 2004). Differences in symptom constellations between older and younger adults may be one factor exacerbating
underutilization amongst older adults. Aside from less typical clinical presentation, a number of other variables contribute to the trend in
older adults’ underutilization of appropriate services. Unfortunately, and also reflected by low utilization rates with older adults, it is
not uncommon for older adults to have variable access to mental health providers. Fewer or compromised resources, cumulative effects of
developmental and psychopathological risk factors associated with aging, and underutilization of psychological health resources may increase
frequency of presentation for medical health problems, detract from independence, further compromise quality of life, and result in
inappropriate healthcare resource utilization. Underutilization of mental health services can also result in over- or
inappropriate/ineffective utilization of emergency departments and other medical services (Karlin and Duffy 2004). Additionally, it has been
suggested that older adults have relied on general hospitals for mental health care due to systemic incentive for inpatient treatment, and
not to see a mental health professional (Gatz and Smyer 1992). Other factors compounding underutilization amongst older adults include
stigma, cohort effects, and financial limitations, including unequal Medicare and insurance coverage for psychiatric diagnoses as compared
with medical diagnoses. Another significant barrier to care for elderly patients is geographical limitation. The use of the telephone as the
primary modality for ongoing psychotherapy has increased over the years as an effective method to address the problem of geographical
location. Shields (2001) discovered that over half (53.12%) of 800 randomly selected licensed psychologists had used the telephone as a
primary method to conduct psychotherapy sessions. While several respondents indicated that they consider face-to-face therapy the preferred
mode of treatment, results reflected that older and more experienced therapists initiated and conducted telephone therapy more frequently
and with more patients, and rated telephone therapy more highly as a way to meet patients’ needs. Situations necessitating telecare most
frequently included patient geographic relocation, medical or physical problems, and transportation problems (Shields 2001; Tran 2004).
Teleintervention allows for increased accessibility of specialized care. In addition to serving as a viable method to overcome barriers to
treatment, psychotherapy by telephone can be a valuable vehicle to support increase of perceived control and/or sense of mastery, facilitate
resolution or remission of psychiatric disorders, prevent symptom relapse, and supplement medical care in general. Telephone therapy as
provided at the Spinal Cord Injury (SCI) Service of the Veterans Affairs Palo Alto Health Care System (VA) has been a method useful to
overcoming barriers that would have otherwise left patients without psychological treatment. The population of our outpatient spinal cord
injury clinic (N = 470) ranges in age from 18 to 90 years old with a mean age of 59.3. Barriers to treatment we have been able to address
via telephone intervention reflect barriers identified in the literature. To begin with, distance of the individual from the service site
has frequently had the potential to limit patients from therapy. Individuals eligible for services from the VA may not live in convenient or
functional proximity to a facility that provides psychological services. Given that our population includes both acute and chronic injuries,
we see a variable range of functionality that may be impacted by transportation, distance and resources. As a regional specialty care
center, we see patients from as far west as Guam, and as far east as Nevada. We have found that some of our patient’s home communities lack
mental health resources to which we could make referrals. Mobility problems and a general lack of providers with offices accessible to those
with a disability have also been barriers to treatment for SCI patients. Functional impairment can be a barrier to managing appointments,
and it may also lead to a need to rely on others for transportation. Last, as per aforementioned reasons for older adults’ underutilization
of psychological services in general (stigma, cohort effect, financial cost) SCI Service therapists have encountered similar themes.
Veterans in treatment, as well as those contemplating or indicating potential to benefit from treatment, present barriers such as cohort
effects, geography, stigma, and lack of familiarity with resources and/or about what mental health could do for them. Additional advantages
may result as providers begin to use the telephone as a means to address service underutilization. Advantages for the individual and for
healthcare payors for example; insurance providers, or, in our case, government, include that: telecare may be less-expensive, may reach
patients on an outpatient status as opposed to an inpatient status, and may lead to decreased use of primary and emergency care for
psychological problems. Upon treatment with SCI psychology, patients have indicated in varying ways that they too may not have otherwise
engaged in psychological services despite finding benefit. Patients have reported not knowing the function or importance of mental health
care and that tele-intervention introduced them to mental health services by making psychological treatment possible. Next, some patients
have endorsed that they would have otherwise been unable to make weekly appointments. Additionally, engaging in psychotherapy via telephone
appeared to be less threatening, and thereby helped patients get past inaccurate and/or stigmatized views of mental healthcare. Patients
have also experienced indirect effects of telephone psychotherapy such as improved relationships with their natural support systems. Phone
intervention allowed these patients to get help, yet not feel like they were further burdening their supporters by requiring assistance
getting to and from appointments. This alone may contribute to a sense of independence and autonomy. Our experience with telephone
psychotherapy has not been without its limitations. Some patients have appeared to be less invested in psychotherapy, as if they felt their
sessions were of a more friendly nature rather than a health care visit when the telephone was the modality. We found that it was necessary
to verbally establish expectations and an environment that might be established nonverbally were we face-to-face. For example, we found it
helpful to remind individuals of session time and duration, and encourage them to conduct the session from a room in their home that was
private, and free of noise and other distraction. Maintaining session structure and regularity also seemed a helpful support of both
provider and recipient’s investment in the session. The VA attempts to identify and locate all US military veterans with spinal cord
injuries or diseases (SCI/D), regardless of when the injury was acquired. These veterans are referred to regional SCI centers such as ours
for annual comprehensive evaluations to prevent and treat SCI/D and complications. Psychological evaluations are an integral part of this
process, in addition to being a resource available to patients by referral or request. We have found that incorporation of psychology with a
general medical evaluation helps to decrease stigma around psychology and counseling issues, increase familiarity with psychology as a
resource, and incorporate the idea that emotional well-being and physical well-being are linked. Annual psychology evaluations help us to
identify, understand and address social and functional concerns common to our patients. We are also able to identify veterans’ psychological
concerns or diagnoses meeting DSM criteria. To our experience, individuals appropriate for treatment with telephone psychotherapy show good
initial rapport in person, are motivated for treatment, are not a danger to self or others and are not in crisis, nor likely to be in
crisis. After appropriateness of psychotherapy by phone was determined, psychotherapy via phone was conducted by SCI-Psychology clinicians
from a private office or examination room on the outpatient unit. Clem is a veteran in his early sixties with a complex psychiatric history
that includes childhood trauma, PTSD related to his experience as an army medic, and polysubstance abuse. In 1986, Clem acquired incomplete
quadriplegia with considerable use of his arms after a driving accident. In 1997 he acquired a systemic infection and lost all use of his
arms. Though a large disability payment had allowed him to purchase and move to a ranch where he could care for his frail mother, declining
health made it necessary that both Clem and his mother move to nursing homes. In his nursing home, Clem met his wife who was on staff. After
dating for some time, they married in 1998 and moved back to his ranch although his mother had died. In 2003, Clem described his wife as the
best thing that ever happened to him. He said she was a dedicated caregiver, who refused his offer to pay an attendant because she did not
believe anyone else could care for him properly. In 2005, Clem called the social worker he had met in the hospital two years earlier and
told her his wife had spent all of his considerable savings after he insisted that she manage their finances. He said he did not believe she
loved him anymore, but that he did not want staff to report his situation to authorities. Clem also accused other people of stealing money
and real estate from him. His wife was upset by his accusations and phoned a staff member to request that Clem be admitted to evaluate him
for delirium. Clem met his telephone therapist while hospitalized for stable but unhealing pressure sores and a neuropsychological
evaluation. Neuropsychological assessment found Clem clear of cognitive dysfunction. During Clem’s hospitalization, his therapist diagnosed
major depressive disorder with narcissistic traits. Medical necessity required he stay in bed for all but four hours per week. Clem and his
therapist developed close rapport that assured the therapist that they could continue to work together by phone upon discharge. Clem’s
treatment illustrates how telephone therapy can be integrated with other forms of treatment to provide care for someone who might otherwise
need to remain in a hospital. Rather than delirium, Clem appeared to be struggling with emotional overwhelm which resulted in impulsive,
disorganized, ineffective problem-solving, and paranoid ideation. Because he required continued bed rest to heal his skin, telephone therapy
using a client-centered approach was initiated along with antidepressant medication. Marital therapy was attempted at a local facility, but
his wife refused to return after the initial session, stating she found it too embarrassing to discuss their problems with others. After a
few sessions devoted to ways he could begin to repair his relationships with his wife and others, Clem began to talk about his many
childhood traumas. He eventually explored the events of his military experience that caused his PTSD. The telephone therapist worked with
Clem’s psychiatrist, who offered consultation as well as increasing his antidepressant. The combination resulted in a substantial decrease
of his paranoia. Clem’s intrusive thoughts became much less traumatic in nature though they would occasionally return. The therapist taught
Clem cognitive therapy skills that allowed him to control his remaining thought intrusions. With treatment, Clem had more energy. He hired
people to fix things and improve landscaping around his ranch. He began to appreciate the knowledge his wife was gaining from her new job,
and their relationship improved. Unfortunately, as Clem’s depression subsided to mild, his paranoia increased. His wife reacted by
withdrawing her affection and refused further marriage counseling. Clem continued to participate in weekly client-centered therapy by phone.
His symptoms gradually subsided, and after six months, he achieved near-complete remission. Alan is a married man in his late fifties who
had a potentially terminal co-morbid medical condition that had been operated on with a successful outcome. He, however, experienced
residual difficulties after the procedure. Alan was diagnosed with depression during an annual examination with the SCI Service. Alan faced
significant geographic barriers to treatment and was therefore unable to see a therapist for weekly psychotherapy. Mood episodes and
interpersonal issues were addressed via weekly telephone psychotherapy sessions. Advantages of telephone intervention in this case included
psychotherapy process advantages that may have otherwise been absent. Telephone psychotherapy required that Alan engage in dialogue about
his depression, whereas in person he brought his wife with him and appeared to prefer that his she speak on his behalf. The long distance
from Alan’s home that made weekly sessions too difficult to do in person allowed consistency of contact when conducted by phone. Although
Allen’s wife appeared firmly committed to their relationship, Allen maintained fear that she would leave him due to his disability in spite
of over twenty years of marriage. Allen tested the therapist’s willingness to abandon him by repeatedly ending the telephone sessions early
saying he had nothing to talk about. The therapist’s demonstrated loyalty after these truncated sessions eventually allowed Allen to feel
safe enough to examine his cognitive distortions about his wife. Moreover, psychotherapy by phone averted reliance on a significant other
for transportation, and promoted one-to-one interaction that would in turn assist the patient with relationships and his own self-concept.
Therapy via phone is not without its limitations. We have found that working with individuals in environments outside the therapist’s
control can entail treatment interferences. For example, some individuals have appeared to take the appointment time less seriously. Keeping
session lengths and times consistent can be more difficult if telecare is viewed differently than a visit to a clinic. Next, as Haas and
colleagues (1996) described, while the telephone has recently been promoted as a method for service delivery, drawbacks to the method can
include increased difficulty of providing for patient safety in crisis situations, increased risk to privacy, and many remaining questions
about long-term cost efficiency. Balas and colleagues (1997) reported that a study of the medical care of elderly persons did not show
significant and/or beneficial difference compared to the protocol control group. Moreover, it is noted that questions have been raised about
the degree to which effective treatment in the best interest of the individual can be carried out without direct experience of the other
person in the encounter, and without a specifically designated and designed location (Haas et al 1996). In addition to some of the
limitations of providing psychotherapy via telephone, other issues that psychotherapists may need to give special awareness and attention to
include: professional liability for an individual’s safety, provision of psychotherapy to an individual residing in a state other than that
in which the psychotherapist is licensed, and confidentiality. First, it is important to emphasize that providers take a great degree of
care and caution when considering provision of therapy by phone, and which individuals may be appropriately suited with telephone treatment.
Appropriate candidates for telephone intervention are those with whom the clinician has already met in person and with whom a therapeutic
rapport was established, and those who have been assessed thoroughly: including for suicidal or homicidal ideation, thoughts of harming
oneself or others, and grave psychiatric disability. Next, it is feasible that treatment scenarios arise that are unique to phone therapy
provision. For example, an individual might request therapy from a provider in another state. Providers must act in accordance with the
regulations of the state in which they are licensed and practicing. Provision of psychotherapy at distances as large as that between states
may not be an appropriate treatment approach for many reasons, including but not limited to safety concerns. Explicit discussion of terms
and alternatives for local support and emergency planning are recommended at the onset of the therapeutic alliance. Last, confidentiality in
the digital age poses a concern. Confidentiality may be threatened via electronic transmission of information, and possibly via unsecured
telephone connections. The issue of confidentiality is recommended as part of a clinician’s assessment of whether a particular case is
appropriate for telephone intervention. The risks and benefits of psychotherapy by telephone should be considered thoroughly and found to be
in an individual’s best interest prior to treatment alliance. Psychotherapy conducted over the telephone offers advantages to patients
including increased access to and increased comprehensiveness of care. Telephone therapy is a modality that decreases stigma around
psychological treatment, affords treatment to those to which it is geographically otherwise unavailable, and can be combined with other
treatment interventions to decrease length of and/or need for inpatient hospitalization. As technology advances and becomes increasingly
more accessible to a greater portion of the population, videoconferencing may become a practical option in addition to psychotherapy by
telephone. Alternatives to face-to-face psychotherapy include risks and benefits that could be associated with any new modality, and more-so
as newer and therefore less-familiar technologies are utilized. On the other hand, individuals who may otherwise have gone without treatment
can engage in psychotherapy with appropriate, efficient and effective outcomes. Older adults as a group underutilize appropriate
psychological services, and oftentimes rely instead on hospital and emergency care for psychological intervention. As the field of
psychology becomes more attuned to the diagnostic differences and psychological needs of older adults, barriers to treatment can be better
addressed. Though there are limitations to conducting psychotherapy by phone, its advantages may outweigh its disadvantages in many cases.
Shields RL. 2001. Telephone therapy: An exploratory study. Dissertation Abstracts International: Section B: The Sciences and Engineering.
PsycINFO Database Record. APA: 2005 Disclosure The authors wish to thank Steve Tutty, MA for his generous consultation and helpful comments.
There are no conflicts of interest.
