The potential for splenic injury during left sided thoracentesis or percutaneous renal biopsy is well known, its occurrence has been rarely
reported1. In a series of 244 incidental splenectomies, only one was secondary to left thoracentesis2. Each year about 600 new cases of
extrinsic allergic alveolitis are diagnosed in the UK3. Lung biopsy is an important diagnostic tool for diffuse lung disease. Others include
bronchoalveolar lavage and high resolution computed tomography3. We present a case of delayed splenic rupture following percutaneous lung
biopsy, which required urgent laparotomy. A 48-year-old gentleman presented with left upper quadrant pain and shortness of breath for eight
hours prior to admission. There was no history of trauma, haematological or storage diseases. The patient underwent a left lung biopsy two
months earlier which had led to the diagnosis of extrinsic allergic alveolitis. On examination, he was comfortable and haemodynamically
stable. Respiratory and cardiovascular examinations were unremarkable, abdomen was soft and non-tender. Initial haematological
investigations, cardiac enzymes and electrocardiogram were normal. A provisional diagnosis of inferior wall myocardial infarction was made.
He became progressively hypotensive and developed abdominal distension with left upper quadrant tenderness. Two scars were noted, one over
6th and the other over 8th intercostal spaces. Urgent computed tomography of abdomen and pelvis revealed complex fluid collection around the
spleen and free intraperitoneal fluid (fig 1). At emergency laparotomy, 2.5 litres of intraperitoneal blood was removed. A large clot was
identified under left dome of diaphragm. A small-healed wound over the lateral surface of the spleen was identified. No active bleeding was
evident and the findings were consistent with those of a ruptured subcapsular splenic haematoma. Postoperative recovery was uneventful and
the patient was discharged on day seven. This case highlights the delay with which an iatrogenic splenic injury can present. The most
important indicator in this case, which could relate to splenic injury, was a scar near the splenic region following lung biopsy. Clinical
problems after splenic rupture have been classified into three groups characterized by the delay in presentation and type of symptoms4.
Group one: acute ruptured spleen, Group two: delayed ruptured spleen, and Group three: occult ruptured spleen. Our case was group two, with
delayed presentation two months after injury. Computed tomography is the gold standard for investigating splenic injuries. Grading scales
based on computed tomography findings can predict the likelihood of successful non-operative management, which is often possible if the
splenic hilum is intact (even when capsular disruption is present)5. However, due to haemodynamic instability in this case, percutaneous
drainage was not performed. As new cases of diffuse lung disease are being investigated, physicians should be increasingly aware of the
possibility of splenic injury after lung biopsy. Splenic injury should be considered if haemodynamic instability occurs even after two
months of lung biopsy. No conflict of interest declared.
