To report a patient who presented with epithelial ingrowth caused by viral keratoconjunctivitis 3 months after LASIK surgery. A 41-year-old
man presented with decreased visual acuity in the right eye, which had developed about 3 weeks before. He had undergone LASIK surgery 3
months prior without complications. Two months after the surgery, he was treated for viral conjunctivitis. During the treatment period,
filamentary keratitis developed, and a therapeutic bandage contact lens was applied for 2 weeks. Upon presentation, examination revealed a
corrected visual acuity of 20/100 and irregular epithelial sheets under the edematous flap. The flap was lifted, and the in-grown epithelium
was removed. The flap was repositioned with double continuous 10 - 0 nylon sutures. Post-operatively, the patient developed a mild diffuse
lamellar keratitis that resolved rapidly with topical corticosteroid treatment. At 2 months, the corrected visual acuity was 20/20 without
interface opacities. As the patient showed no complications prior to viral conjunctivitis, we suspect that the viral infection caused edema
of the corneal flap, which caused epithelial ingrowth under the flap. Patients who have viral conjunctivitis after LASIK surgery should be
examined carefully and managed with consideration of flap complications. Laser in situ keratomileusis is the most frequently performed
refractive surgical procedure worldwide. It involves the creation of an anterior corneal flap that adheres back into place after laser
ablation. Although the flap heals to the posterior stromal bed, histological studies demonstrate a lack of wound repair at the interface 6
months after surgery, which may explain the possibility of late complications involving the flap and interface.1 Epithelial ingrowth is one
of the most significant complications of LASIK at the edge of the flap. Reports of the incidence of epithelial ingrowth have ranged from 0 -
20%.2-5 It usually presents in the early post-operative period and is known to be associated with loose epithelium, epithelial defects at
the time of surgery, hyperopic LASIK correction, enhancement surgeries, flap instability, and corneal epithelial basement membrane
dystrophy.2,4-6 While not always serious, it can progress to induce irregular astigmatism or melting of the overlying flap and threaten the
central vision. Adenoviral keratoconjunctivitis is a common infection responsible for numerous worldwide ocular epidemics. It presents as
acute catarrheal conjunctivitis with pseudomembrane formation of varying severity. In about 80% of the cases, keratitis causes groups of
swollen epithelium with or without subsequent subepithelial infiltrates.7 We report the case of a patient who presented, 3 months after
LASIK surgery, with epithelial ingrowth associated with viral keratoconjunctivitis. As far as we know, this is the first case of delayed
epithelial ingrowth associated with viral keratoconjunctivitis. A 41-year-old man presented with decreased visual acuity in the right eye,
which had developed about 3 weeks before. He had undergone LASIK surgery 3 months prior at another clinic without apparent complications.
Pre-operatively, manifest refraction was - 1.75 - 0.25 × 180 OD and - 1.00 OS, yielding 20/20 best spectacle-corrected visual acuity (BSCVA)
in both eyes. Two months after the surgery, he was infected with viral conjunctivitis from his 6-year old son and was treated for about 3
weeks at the local clinic. During the treatment period, filamentary keratitis developed. Filaments were mechanically removed, and a
therapeutic bandage contact lens was applied to the right eye for 2 weeks. Our examination revealed a corrected visual acuity of 20/100 in
the right eye and 20/20 in the left eye. There was an epithelial defect, which involved the temporal one-third of the anterior flap surface
OD. The flap was edematous and seemed to be detached from the remaining stromal bed with irregular hazy interface opacities (Fig. 1). Under
the edematous flap, a white demarcation line was observed. In the left eye, multiple subepithelial infiltrates were noted. On his first
visit to our clinic, the patient underwent surgery for the interface opacities. Under an operating microscope, an 8-blade marker was used to
mark the cornea. The flap was easily elevated, and an epithelial sheet was noted on the stromal side of the flap. Scraping was performed on
the surface of the posterior remaining stroma and on the posterior surface of the corneal flap with a no. 15 Bard-Parker knife. The
interface was irrigated with balanced salt solutions and Vigamox®(Alcon, Ft. Worth, TX, USA) eye drops. The flap was repositioned, and the
edge was closed with several interrupted and double continuous 10 - 0 nylon sutures to prevent epithelial ingrowth. Topical fluorometholone
0.1% and Vigamox 4 times a day were prescribed. On post-operative day 1, UCVA was 20/200, and there was a moderate degree of edema on the
flap. At the 1 week follow-up, UCVA was 20/100 OD, and there was a mild haze in the interface without recurrence of epithelial ingrowth
(Fig. 2). Topical fluorometholone was switched to prednisolone 1%. One month after the surgery, sutures were removed and prednisolone eye
drops were tapered by one drop every month. Two months after the surgery, the patient's refraction was + 1.0 - 0.25 × 180 in the right eye
with a corrected visual acuity of 20/20 (Fig. 3). The patient was followed up for six months, maintaining a corrected visual acuity of 20/20
without recurrence of epithelial ingrowth. A case of delayed epithelial ingrowth associated with viral conjunctivitis in a patient who had
LASIK surgery 3 months ago has been described. As the patient showed no complications before he got viral conjunctivitis, we suspect that
the viral infection would be the triggering factor in the epithelial ingrowth beneath the flap. Because viral conjunctivitis is highly
prevalent in young adults, who are also the majority of the candidates for LASIK surgery, more patients could suffer from this significant
complication. Clinically significant epithelial ingrowth is an infrequent complication after LASIK. When it occurs, about 90% of the
epithelial ingrowths are detected within 2 months post-operatively.5 The origin of the epithelium was known to be from the limbus rather
than from the epithelial islet left during the procedure. The epithelium from the limbus invades the interface against the adhesive force
between the flap and the stroma. As a result, a weakened adhesion occurs due to loose epithelium, epithelial defects, hyperopic LASIK
surgeries, or repeated LASIK surgeries.5,6,8 Braunstein et al.9 showed one case of epithelial ingrowth after phacoemulsification, which
brought us the idea that phacoemulsification producing stromal edema would result in weakening of the adhesive force between the flap and
the posterior stroma. During the conjunctivitis episode, the patient had filamentary keratitis, and a therapeutic bandage contact lens was
applied to the right eye for 2 weeks. The filamentary keratitis in viral conjunctivitis associated with punctuate keratitis results in flap
edema and a weakening of the adhesive force. Contact lenses on the diseased cornea may also induce flap edema, resulting in the weakening of
the adhesive force of the flap to the stroma, even though some surgeons have advocated using a bandage contact lens for the prevention of
epithelial ingrowth after primary LASIK, re-treatment, and debridement of epithelial ingrowth in the sound cornea.4,6,10,11 Other possible
mechanisms are the mechanical removal of the filament may cause an iatrogenic abrasion or the contact lens adhering to the diseased
epithelium may cause the initial erosion. The corneal erosion causes the flap to swell and loosens its adherence to the stoma. We believe
epithelial ingrowth, which occurred in this patient, was caused by the edematous flap and the weakened interfacial force, which is mostly
induced by the filamentary and the bandage contact lens use with/without corneal erosion. The causative agent of the conjunctivitis in this
case is not confirmed because no organism was positively cultured. We, however, believe the causative agent to be a virus, probably an
adenovirus, because of the clinical findings of a conjunctival follicular reaction lasting for three weeks and including characteristic
subepithelial infiltrates in the opposite cornea. Moreover, the disease was transmitted from his son. In conclusion, it should be noted that
viral keratoconjunctivitis causing edema of the corneal flap may induce epithelial ingrowth under the flap. Patients who have viral
conjunctivitis after LASIK surgery should be examined carefully and managed with consideration of flap complications. This study was
supported by a grant of the Korea Health 21 R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (A050554). On initial examination
in our clinic, there were irregular opacities underneath the flap. (A) The flap is edematous and seems to be detached from the remaining
stromal bed. (B) On fluorescein staining, an epithelial defect involving the temporal one-third of the anterior flap surface was noted.
After removal of the epithelial ingrowth, moderate flap edema and hazy interface opacities were observed. Double continuous 10 - 0 nylon
sutures were made to prevent the recurrence of epithelial ingrowth. Corneal finding two months after the removal of epithelial ingrowth and
corneal suturing. Recurrence of any epithelial ingrowth was not noted one month after removal of sutures.
