A hitherto unrecognized variant of solid-pseudopapillary tumor (SPT) of the pancreas is reported. The tumor presented in the pancreatic tail
of a 44-year-old female patient. It was a well-defined, solid nodule measuring 25 mm in diameter, with homogenous tan gray cut surface.
Histologically, the neoplasm was mostly composed of sheets of spindle cells. No cellular atypia and mitosis was identified. The periphery of
the tumor showed typical feature of SPT. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were positive for vimentin, CD10, CD56, β-catenin, and
α1-antichymotrypsin, but negative for cytokeratin, chromogranin, synaptophysin and S-100 protein. Ultrastructurally, the tumor showed a few
acinar spaces with microvilli between tumor cells. This case is peculiar in that the tumor did not show gross cystic change and
predominantly consists of spindle shaped tumor cells, so may cause difficult diagnostic problem. Solid-pseudopapillary tumors of the
pancreas usually present as large, hemorrhagic, and cystic masses that are mainly composed of polygonal cells, and they characteristically
exhibit prominent cystic change.1 The present case was small in size and no gross cystic change was identified. The tumor was composed
predominantly of spindle cells, causing a diagnostic problem. Here, we report an unusual spindle cell variant solid-pseudopapillary tumor
with emphasis of differential diagnosis. A 44-year-old female patient was admitted due to an incidentally found abdominal mass. She did not
complain of any specific symptoms. Pancreatic computed tomography showed a lobulated soft tissue mass at the pancreatic tail. Radiologic
impressions included solid-pseudopapillary tumor, non-functioning endocrine tumor, and pancreatic cancer. Distal pancreatectomy was done.
Resected pancreatic tumor (2.5 cm in size) was grossly well-defined, homogenous, and soft (Fig. 1), and mostly composed of sheets of spindle
cells microscopically (Fig. 2). The spindle cells have scanty cytoplasm and contain regular nuclei with a fine chromatin pattern but no
nucleoli. No cellular atypia and mitosis were identified. Focally, the tumor cells are ovoid in shape. The periphery of the tumor showed
focally cystic change and pseudopapillary formations (less than 10% of the tumor), which are typical of solid-pseudopapillary tumors (Figs.
3A and B). Occasionally, the tumor showed small hyaline globules. Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells were diffusely positive for
vimentin, but negative for cytokeratin, chromogranin, synaptophysin, and S-100 protein. The tumor cells were focally positive for
α1-antichymotrypsin. Most of the tumor cells showed nuclear and cytoplasmic positivities for β-catenin (Fig. 4A) and cytoplasmic staining
for CD10 (Fig. 4B) and CD56. These immunohistochemical results were similar between the spindle cell area and area of pseudopapillary
formation. Ultrastructurally, there were a few zymogen-type granules and neurosecretory granules, and the tumor showed a few acinar spaces
with microvilli between tumor cells (Fig. 5). At the time of this report, the patient was still alive with no specific symptoms (18 months
after operation). Solid-pseudopapillary tumors of the pancreas are low-grade malignant epithelial tumors2 and consist of monomorphous cells
variably expressing epithelial, mesenchymal, and endocrine markers.1 Grossly, they present as large, round, solitary masses (range: 3 - 18
cm) that are usually well demarcated from the remaining pancreas. The cut surface of the tumors reveals lobulated, light brown solid areas
admixed with zones of hemorrhage and necrosis as well as cystic spaces filled with necrotic debris.3,4 However, cystic changes can be less
prominent in smaller tumors.5 Histologically, the tumors exhibit a solid monotonous pattern with sclerosis and a pseudopapillary pattern. In
both patterns, uniform polygonal cells are arranged around delicate fibrovascular stalks.6 Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells are
positive for alpha-1-antitrypsin, neuron-specific enolase, and vimentin. However, inconsistent results have been reported for epithelial and
neuroendocrine markers.1 Ultrastructurally, most conspicuous are tumor cells containing large, osmiophilic, zymogen-like granules.
Neurosecretory granules have been described in a few tumors. Usually, intermediate cell junctions are rarely observed and microvilli are
lacking, but small intercellular spaces are frequent.1 The present case was unusual in that no gross cystic change was identified, and the
tumor was predominantly composed of spindle cells. Therefore, the differential diagnosis of the present case included endocrine tumors and
spindle cell soft tissue tumors such as benign fibrous histiocytoma and schwannoma, malignant melanoma, and acinar cell carcinoma. This case
is predominantly composed of solid areas showing monomorphic appearance, that resemble endocrine tumors. This type of tumor has not yet been
reported. However, endocrine tumors usually lack pseudopapillary formation, as seen in the periphery of this case. Immunohistochemical
criteria in favor of solid-pseudopapillary tumors included positivities for alpha-1-antitrypsin and vimentin but negativities for endocrine
markers. Moreover, ultrastructural findings in the present case, including zymogen-type granules and acinar spaces with microvilli between
tumor cells support the diagnosis of solid-pseudopapillary tumor. This tumor was predominantly composed of spindle cells, thus resembling
spindle cell soft tissue tumors. The alternating pattern of Antoni A and B areas, which is a characteristic feature of schwannoma, was not
found in this tumor. Furthermore the tumor was negative for S-100, and no long-spacing collagen was present in electron microscopic
findings, thus ruling out the possibility of schwannoma.7 Immunohistochemical studies have contributed little to the practical diagnosis of
benign fibrous histiocytoma, but ultrastructural findings of this case such as neurosecretory granules and acinar spaces with microvilli
between tumor cells supported the diagnosis of solid-pseudopapillary tumors.8 These characteristics of spindle cells can also be seen in
malignant melanoma. However, no prominent nucleoli were noted in the present case, and immunohistochemical staining for S-100 protein was
negative. Pancreatic acinar cell carcinomas may have a solid pattern, reminiscent of low-grade endocrine tumors. Usually, there are necrotic
areas, and prominent nucleoli are characteristic features. These tumors are usually positive for cytokeratin and diffusely positive for
chymotrypsin, which are different from the present case.9 CD10 is an endopeptidase responsible for reducing the local concentration of
biologic modulators by catabolizing them. It was originally identified in acute leukemia as a "common acute leukoblastic leukemia antigen",
but is well known today for its ubiquitous distribution in various tissues. Recently, CD10 was demonstrated in solid-pseudopapillary tumors
in a diffuse pattern, therefore, it can be helpful in differential diagnosis in addition to CD56.5 β-catenin immunostaining is useful for
differential diagnosis of solid-pseudopapillary tumors. The protein β-catenin was originally identified as a submembranous element of the
cadherin-mediated cell-to-cell adhesion complex. It has been shown that β-catenin acts as a downstream transcriptional activator of Wnt
signaling via accumulation in the nucleus and subsequent complex formation with DNA-binding proteins such as TCF and LEF-1. The association
between-genetic alterations of β-catenin and pancreatic tumors had received little attention, however, recent studies revealed
nuclear/cytoplasmic expression of β-catenin in solid-pseudopapillary tumors in contrast to membranous reactivity in pancreatic acinar cell
carcinoma and neuroendocrine tumor.10 In this case, most of the tumor cells showed nuclear and cytoplasmic positivities for β-catenin and
cytoplasmic staining for CD10 and CD56, supporting the diagnosis of solid-pseudopapillary tumors. Because solid-pseudopapillary tumors of
the pancreas behave as low-grade malignant tumors, an accurate diagnosis is clinically important. This case was unique in that it was small
in size, did not show gross cystic change, and was predominantly composed of spindle cells, causing a difficult diagnostic problem. The
present study was supported by the research fund of Dankook University in 2006. Resected pancreatic tumor (2.5 cm in size) was well-defined,
homogenous and soft. The tumor was mostly composed of sheets of monomorphous spindle cells. The periphery of the tumor showed focally cystic
change and pseudopapillary formations (A and B). Most of the tumor cells showed nuclear and cytoplasmic stainings for β-catenin (A) and
cytoplasmic staining for CD10 (B). Ultrastructurally, the tumor showed a few acinar spaces with microvilli between tumor cells.
