Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominantly inherited syndrome. MEN1 is characterized by the presence of
functioning and nonfunctioning tumors or hyperplasia of the pituitary gland, parathyroid glands, and pancreatic islet cells. In addition,
MEN1 carriers can have adrenal or thyroid tumors and non-endocrine tumors, such as lipomas, angiofibromas, and leiomyomas. Although
leiomyoma is not a major component of MEN1, it is thought to occur more frequently than expected. However, there has been no report of a
case of MEN1 with leiomyoma in Korea so far. This report describes a patient with multiple leiomyomas in MEN1. A 50-year-old woman was
referred for further evaluation of elevated calcium levels and osteoporosis. Biochemical abnormalities included hypercalcemia with elevated
parathyroid hormone. There was hyperprolactinemia with pituitary microadenoma in sella MRI. An abdominal MRI demonstrated adrenal nodules
and leiomyomas in the bladder and uterus. Endoscopic ultrasonography demonstrated esophageal leiomyoma and pancreatic islet cell tumor. A
subtotal parathyroidectomy with thymectomy was performed. Sequencing of the MEN1 gene in this patient revealed a novel missense mutation
(D350V, exon 7). This is the first case of MEN1 accompanied with multiple leiomyomas, parathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, pancreatic
tumor, and adrenal tumor. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) is an autosomal dominant hereditary disorder. The clinical diagnosis of
MEN1 can be made in a patient who has tumors in at least two of the following tissues: pituitary, parathyroid, and pancreatic islet cells.
In addition, MEN1 carriers can have adrenal or thyroid adenomas, bronchial or thymic carcinoid tumors, and non-endocrine tumors, such as
lipomas, angiofibromas, collagenomas, and leiomyomas.1-4 In Korean literature, Oh et al. reported the first case in 1986, diagnosed
radiologically, and a total of 24 cases have been reported since. Nevertheless, MEN1 cases with accompanying multiple leiomyoma have not yet
been reported in Korean literature.5-18 Recently, a case of MEN1 was identified with accompanying leiomyomas in the bladder, the uterus, and
the esophagus, in addition to typical endocrine tumors, such as parathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, pancreatic tumor, and adrenal
cortical tumor. This report describes this MEN1 patient with multiple leiomyomas, who revealed a novel germline missense mutation, D350V, in
the MEN1 gene, with a review of the relevant literature. A 50-year-old female presented with chronic fatigue. The patient was diagnosed with
osteoporosis five years prior and was taking alendronate. Hypercalcemia was diagnosed two years following the osteoporosis diagnosis, and
the patient visited the hospital for a comprehensive check-up. The patient did not have any history of diabetes, hypertension, tuberculosis,
or hepatitis. She was the first daughter of two sons and two daughters. Concurrently, her 81-year-old mother, who was bedridden for unknown
reasons, was also undergoing tests for hypercalcemia, and was subsequently diagnosed with multiple parathyroid adenomas and pancreatic
tumors, based on the test results. Her father had a history of sudden death by an acute cardiac event. In the neck examination, the thyroid
was not enlarged, and palpable tumors were absent. Heart and lung sounds were normal, and no abnormalities were detected in the abdomen, all
extremities, or neurological tests. The axillary hair and the pubic hair were normal, hirsutism was absent, and galactorrhea was not
observed. In blood electrolyte tests, sodium was 144 mmol/L, potassium was 4.0 mmol/L, chloride was 107 mmol/L, blood calcium was 12.6
mg/mL, ionized calcium was 5.4 mg/dL, and inorganic phosphate was 3.3 mg/dL. In general biochemical tests, fasting blood glucose was 93
mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen was 8.9 mg/dL, creatinine was 0.8 mg/dL, and the hepatic function test was normal. Her 24-hour urinary calcium
excretion was 326 mg/day, the amount of phosphate excretion was 460 mg/day, and the creatinine clearance rate was 64 mL/min. Thyroid hormone
tests were within normal range, and intact-PTH was increased to 99.8 pg/mL. Prolactin was also mildly increased to 27.63 ng/mL. Plasma
insulin was 9.2 uIU/mL (4.2 - 48), gastrin was 21 pg/mL (0 - 90), glucagon was 40 pg/mL (40 - 130), pancreatic polypeptide was 79 pmol/L (<
100), and vasoactive intestinal polypeptide was 32 pg/mL (< 100). In dual X-ray absorptiometry (DXA), the T score of the femur was decreased
to - 2.0, confirming the osteopenia finding. In the neck ultrasound, in the posterior area of the left thyroid, a tumor suspected to be a
parathyroid adenoma 10 mm in size was detected, and in the parathyroid scan, uptake was detected in two glands (Fig. 1). In the neck
computed tomography (CT), parathyroid tumors, 10 mm in the left side and 8 mm in the right side, were detected. In the chest CT, abnormal
findings in the lung and the mediastinum were not detected. On the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a tumor 7 mm in size in the
pituitary was detected (Fig. 2). On the abdominal MRI, a 2.3 cm left adrenal tumor and a pancreatic tumor were observed, and a 7 cm uterine
myoma and a bladder wall myoma were detected (Fig. 3). Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) and endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS) revealed an
esophageal leiomyoma 20 mm in size in the area 20 cm away from the incisor, and in the pancreatic head, a tumor 6 mm in size was detected
(Fig. 4). In general positron emission tomography (PET), increased fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in the pituitary was seen. Nonetheless,
the increase of the uptake by other lesions was not detected, and thus indicated the benign nature of the multiple tumors. From the
peripheral blood of the patient and her mother, genomic DNA was extracted, and sequencing of the MEN1 gene was performed. Sequencing
analysis revealed a transition of GAG to GTG at codon 350 of exon 7, causing an amino acid change from aspartic acid to valine, D350V (Fig.
5). Because of the detection of double parathyroid adenoma, pituitary adenoma, pancreatic tumor, and adrenal cortical tumor, as well as
accompanying multiple leiomyomas in the bladder, the uterus, and the esophagus, MEN1 was diagnosed. For parathyroid adenoma, a subtotal
parathyroidectomy was performed, leaving half of the left inferior parathyroid gland, and a prophylactic thymectomy was performed as well.
In postsurgical histological tests, the diagnosis of parathyroid adenoma was confirmed (Fig. 6). After surgery, the intact-PTH level was
decreased to 5.79 pg/mL. The remaining tumors are under follow up observation. MEN1 can be diagnosed by the identification of two or more of
the following: parathyroid tumor, pancreatic islet cell tumor, and pituitary adenoma. In addition, MEN1 may also include a carcinoid tumor,
lipoma, adrenal gland tumor, adrenal hyperplasia, and leiomyoma.1-4 It is inherited autosomal dominantly in most cases, and occurs in
familial or sporadic forms. In Korea, approximately 24 cases have been previously reported, and among them, 11 cases were familial, and
cases with accompanying leiomyoma have not been reported.5-18 The clinicopathological features of MEN1-associated tumors are generally
similar to those of tumors arising sporadically in the same tissue; nevertheless, MEN1-associated tumors show a distinct pattern in three
aspects.4 Firstly, MEN1 develops in several endocrine tissues and is multicentric. Due to its multicentric characteristic, its recurrence
rate after surgery is high. Secondly, some MEN1 tumors (parathyroid and gastrin cell) typically present approximately one or more decades
earlier than sporadic tumors of the same tissue. Thirdly, some MEN1 tumors have the potential for malignancy, and the pertinent malignant
tumors have been known to be a major cause of death in MEN1 patients. The parathyroid is the most prevalent endocrine organ affected, and
parathyroid involvement is seen in 90% of patients.1 In Korea, a tumor in the parathyroid was seen in 83% of cases. In nine of these cases,
pathological findings were reported in the literature, and 56% (5 cases) were parathyroid hyperplasia, and 44% (4 cases) were parathyroid
adenoma (Table 1).5-7,9-10,12-14,16-18 Pancreatic islet cell tumors are detected in approximately 30 - 80% of MEN1 cases, and these could be
either functional or non-functional. In the cases of functional tumors, it has been reported that various hormones could be released. In
Korean MEN1 cases, a pancreatic islet cell tumor was developed in 96% of the cases. Cases secreting insulin (32%, 8 cases) and gastrin (20%,
5 cases) were most prevalent among functional tumors. The cases considered to be non-functional were 16% (4 cases) (Table 1).5-18 Pituitary
tumors, most commonly prolactinomas, are present in 10 - 50% of symptomatic MEN1 patients. In Korean cases, a pituitary tumor was detected
in 75% of the cases, and among them, prolactin-secreting adenoma was the most prevalent, making up 68% (13 cases) (Table
1).5,7-9,11,13-15,17,18 Other so-called non-classical neoplasms occur frequently in MEN1 patients. Adrenal cortical tumors are detected in
approximately 40% of Korean patients. The majority of these tumors were bilateral, hyperplastic and non-functional, and caused minimal
morbidity. In addition to endocrine tumors, non-endocrine mesenchymal tumors, such as lipoma, angiofibroma, collagenoma, and leiomyoma, have
been reported to be associated with MEN1 and mutations in the MEN1 gene.2,19-21 Leiomyoma has been reported to develop in the esophagus,
lung, uterus, skin, and ureter, and the difference from sporadic leiomyoma is its multicentric development in many cases.2,3 In Korean
reports, non-endocrine tumors have only been reported in three cases: carcinoid tumors (two cases) and leiomyomas (the current study).5-8,14
The MEN1 gene is localized to chromosome 11q13, was identified by positional cloning, and is composed of 10 exons.22,23 It encodes a 610
amino acid protein, menin, which is localized primarily to the nucleus.23 Menin has a tumor-suppressor function that involves direct binding
to the JunD protein and the inhibition of JunD-dependent transcription.24 Mutation sites in the MEN1 gene are found throughout the entire
coding region. A genotype-phenotype correlation has not been clearly established for the mutations, although it has been suggested that some
of the mutations might be associated with the formation of specific tumors.25 In Korea, genetic analysis has been reported in only 38% of
MEN1 patients. This analysis is summarized in Table 1, and a frameshift mutation was detected in two cases, a nonsense mutation in two
cases, and a missense mutation in three cases. In our case, a germline missense mutation, D350V, was identified. To our knowledge, this
mutation has not been reported to date.18,26-30 The first DNA analysis of a leiomyoma of the esophagus in a patient with MEN1 failed to
detect allelic deletions at the MEN1 locus.19 This implied that the tumor arose through a completely independent mechanism not associated
with the patient's underlying MEN1 disease. However, in a study conducted subsequently, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) at the MEN1 locus was
shown in two esophageal leiomyomas from a MEN1 patient.20 Meanwhile, another study reported that the MEN1 gene contributes to the
development of multiple esophageal and uterine leiomyomas in MEN1 patients and that the gene does not play a significant role in the
tumorigenesis of sporadic uterine leiomyoma.2 Thus, leiomyomas in MEN1 and sporadic patients most likely develop through different
mechanisms. In conclusion, although leiomyomas in MEN1 have not previously been reported in Korea, they should be considered an integral
part of MEN1 and examined carefully. Additionally, we found a novel mutation, D350V, in exon 7 of the MEN1 gene. Parathyroid scan. Two foci
of delayed washout of the radiotracer in the bilateral parathyroid glnads (arrows). Sella MRI. Pituitary microadenoma (7 mm) at the right
lateral wing (arrow). Abdomino-pelvic MRI. 2.3 cm-nodule in the left adrenal gland, arrow (A), bladder wall mass (B), and uterine myoma (C).
Endoscopic ultrasonography shows 6 mm sized round anechoic mass at head of pancreas, suggesting pancreatic islet cell tumor (A), and 20 mm
sized homogenous hypoechoic mass, suggesting esophageal leiomyoma (B). Sequencing of exon 7 in the MEN1 gene shows a missense mutation
(D350V). The parathyroid adenoma was composed of a single cell proliferation of enlarged chief cells without any fat cells present. The
chief cells had clear to slightly eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei with heavy chromatin distribution. The cells are arranged
in a glandular and solid pattern (Hematoxlyin-eosin, × 200). Summary of 24 Cases of MEN1 in Koreans M, male; F, female.
