A 36-year old female with acute myelogenous leukemia presented with a sudden decrease in vision one month following bone marrow
transplantation (BMT). She had been taking multiple immunosuppressants to treat her recently-developed graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD).
Visual acuity was 20/60 in her right eye and 20/25 in her left. Ophthalmic examination revealed mild inflammatory reaction in both the
anterior chamber and the vitreous of both eyes, as well as densely opaque yellow-white infiltrates with well-demarcated borders in the
posterior retina of both eyes. She was originally diagnosed as CMV retinitis, but treatment with ganciclovir failed to improve her ocular
condition. Subsequent work-up, including serology and brain MRI, led to a diagnosis of combined ocular and cerebral toxoplasmosis. After 6
weeks of antiparasitic therapy, her retinal lesions became inactive and her cerebral lesions improved. Immunosuppressed patients with
necrotizing retinochoroiditis should be suspected of having toxoplasmosis. Accurate differentiation between this condition and CMV, and
early intervention with the appropriate treatment may be critical to preserve the best vision. A 36-year-old woman who had undergone
allogeneic bone marrow transplantation (BMT) for acute myelogenous leukemia (M4) 2 months previously was referred with a complaint of
decreased vision for 2 days. Since BMT, she had been under multiple regimens including intravenous ciprofloxacin, fluconazole and acyclovir
as a prophylaxis for bacterial, fungal and herpes viral infections. For the prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia, monthly inhalation of
pentamidine (a dose of 300mg in a nebulizer) was used and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole was not given. She also had been taking
methylprednisolone (1.9 mg/kg, daily), cyclosporine (1.4 mg/kg, daily) and mycophenolate mofetil (7.1 mg/kg, daily) for the treatment of
BMT-induced graft-versus-host-disease (GVHD). Ophthalmic examination revealed visual acuity of 20/60 in the right eye and 20/25 in the left.
There were mild cellular reactions in the anterior chambers and vitreous humors of both eyes. Densely opaque, yellow-white curvilinear
infiltrates of 2 disc area size were observed with a small satellite lesion at the posterior retina of her right fundus. A similar
infiltrate was also identified temporal to the macula in her left eye (Fig. 1). No retinal hemorrhage was found. Blood test showed positive
CMV antigenemia (12/200,000 WBC). Necrotizing retinitis in the posterior pole with CMV antigenemia in this immunocompromised patient
prompted us to make diagnosis of CMV retinitis. However, despite 2 weeks treatment with intravenous ganciclovir (2.5 mg/kg daily, dose
adjusted to her glomerular filtration rate), her retinal lesion worsened and new satellites appeared (Fig. 2). In addition her vision had
decreased to 20/400 in the right eye, and 20/60 in the left. A subsequent blood test revealed the negative conversion of CMV antigenemia,
but showed positive for serum toxoplasmosis antibody (both IgM and IgG by ELISA). At this time, the patient's mental status changed for the
worse and a brain imaging was performed. The finding of multifocal, ill-defined nodular enhancing lesions in cerebral, cerebellar
hemispheres and basal ganglia was consistent with toxoplasmic involvement of CNS (Fig. 3). The cerebrospinal fluid analysis was normal in
cell counts, protein and glucose and the CSF culture for fungus and bacteria were all negative. With a presumed diagnosis of concomitant
toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis and encephalitis, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole 5 mg/kg PO BID and clindamycin 600 mg PO QID were started. One
week later, the cellular reaction in her anterior chambers and vitreous cavities had disappeared, and the size and thickness of her retinal
infiltrates were decreased markedly. Brain MRI showed improvement as well. The inflammatory retinal lesion became inactive following six
weeks of therapy; however her right vision failed to improve because of macular involvement (Fig. 4). Visual acuity at the last follow-up
was 20/400 in the right eye and 20/80 in the left eye. Brain MRI taken after 6 weeks of therapy showed little evidence of any lesions. At
four months after discontinuation of treatment, there was no evidence of ocular or intracranial recurrence. In this study, we have described
one interesting case of toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis simulating CMV retinitis with concurrent cerebral toxoplasmosis after allogeneic BMT.
In our case, positive serum toxoplasma serology, no use of trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole as a prophylaxis for Pneumocystis pneumonia after
BMT, exacerbation of the condition after intravenous ganciclovir treatment, apparent good response to antiparasitic therapy and concurrent
encephalitis with multiple nodular brain lesions suggested toxoplasmosis. Differential diagnosis of necrotizing retinochoroiditis in
immunocompromised hosts has been challenging.1-4 Compared with CMV retinitis, toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis has clinical features of mild to
moderate inflammatory reactions in the anterior chambers and vitreous, an absence of retinal hemorrhages, and opacified retinas that appear
thicker and more densely white-yellow. In addition, the borders of the lesions are better defined and smoother in contour. While CMV has
become the most frequent cause of necrotizing retinochoroiditis since the advent of AIDS, other causes such as toxoplasmosis or herpes
should be considered as a possible pathogen. Therefore, one should perform serum toxoplasma serology in such patients, especially when
exacerbation of the condition was noted following intravenous ganciclovir treatment like in our case. Our case holds additional several
interesting characteristics: 1) development of retinal hemorrhage during the aggravation phase, 2) concurrent encephalitis which has rarely
been reported in non-AIDS ocular toxoplasmosis cases, and 3) bilateral simultaneous involvement unlike most cases which are either
unilateral or sequentially bilateral.1,3,4 Toxoplasmosis in the immunocompromised including BMT patients was known to be usually through
reactivation of latent infection.5 Because IgM for toxoplasmosis could last for several years and we had not performed the serology test for
toxoplasmosis in both the patient and the donor before BMT, it is difficult to assume the accurate routes of infection. However, primary
infection via donor marrow or transfusion also could be a possible mode of infection considering her positive toxoplasmosis IgM. In
conclusion, toxoplasmic retinochoroiditis in immunosuppresed patients is very different from that in immunocompetent patients, and can be
easily confused with CMV retinitis. Toxoplasmosis should be considered as a pathogen for the necrotizing retinochoroiditis in
immunocompromised patients with anti-CMV therapy failures. High index of suspicion is essential to make an accurate differential diagnosis.
This study was presented at the combined meeting of Club Jules Gonin and the Retina Society, Oct 2006, as a poster. Fundus photographs and
optical coherence tomography (OCT) at presentation in the patient's right (a, b) and left (c, d) eyes. Her visual acuity was 20/60 in the
right eye and 20/25 in the left eye. Fundus photographs of both eyes 2 weeks after the initiation of intravenous ganciclovir (a, b). Her
visual acuity had decreased to 20/400 in the right eye and 20/60 in the left eye. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showing
multifocal, ill-defined nodular enhancing lesions in both cerebral hemispheres and basal ganglia. Fundus photographs and OCT of right eye
(a, b) and left (c, d) after 6 weeks of antiparasitic therapy. Her visual acuity remained poor due to the formation of epiretinal membrane
and atrophy of her neurosensory retinas.
