The presence of lupus anticoagulant is associated with an elevated risk of venous and arterial thrombosis, and recurrent miscarriages as
well. For some cases, this disease can present with bleeding as a consequence of lupus anticoagulant hypoprothrombinemia (LAHPS). LAHPS is a
rare disease and it is reported to be most frequent in young females with/without systemic lupus erythematosus or in healthy children who
are suffering with a viral infection. In such cases, steroid therapy is usually effective in normalizing the biological abnormalities and
controlling the bleeding problems. A 34-year-old previously healthy man was admitted to our department because of his prolonged coagulation
times; these abnormalities were discovered before performing orthopedic surgery. The prothrombin time (PT) was 15.2 sec, and the activated
partial thromboplastin time (APTT) was 37.7 sec. A 1:1 dilution of patient plasma with normal plasma nearly corrected the PT, but this
failed to correct the APTT. Evaluation of the clotting factors revealed decreased levels of factors II, V, VIII, IX and XI. The presence of
LA was demonstrated by the dRVVT test, and the patient was diagnosed with LAHPS. He was successfully treated with corticosteroid before
performing the orthopedic surgery. The most common clinical presentation of patients with lupus anticoagulant antibody is arterial or venous
thromboembolism1). Hemorrhage is much less common and this is usually attributable to the associated thrombocytopenia, a platelet
dysfunction, a prothrombin deficiency or other underlying coagulopathies2, 3). Lupus anticoagulant hypoprothrombinemia (LAHPS) is a rare
syndrome. In many cases, steroid is required to treat patients' hemorrhages, and steroid has been noted to promptly correct the
hypoprothrombinemia and control bleeding events4). Herein, we report on a 34-year-old previously healthy man with LAHPS. He was referred to
our hospital because of his prolonged coagulation time, which was discovered during his lab work-up for an orthopedic operation. The
laboratory studies showed LAHPS with microscopic hematuria; however, any viral infection or other systemic disease was not found. He was
successfully treated with corticosteroid before undergoing orthopedic surgery. A 34-year-old-man was admitted to another hospital for an
orthopedic operation. The coagulation studies showed a prolonged prothrombin time (PT) and an activated partial thromboplastin time (APTT).
He was treated with fresh frozen plasma, but without success. After 2 weeks, the patient was referred to our hospital. He was not taking any
medication, and especially, any anticoagulant and antiplatelet agents. He had no personal or family history of any bleeding disorder. The
physical examination was non-specific except for signs of ligament rupture. The initial laboratory tests showed a leukocyte count of
8,200/mm3, a hemoglobin of 14.7 g/dL and a platelet count of 226,000/mm3. The PT was 15.2 sec (normal values (NV): 10.0-13.0 sec), the APTT
was 37.7sec (NV: 27.5-34.7 sec). Evaluation of the clotting factors revealed decreased levels of factors II, V, VIII, IX and XI (Table 1). A
1:1 dilution of patient plasma with normal plasma nearly corrected the PT, but this failed to correct the APTT. The diluted Russell's viper
venom time (dRVVT, American Diagnostica,) was positive. The anticardiolipin antibodies IgG and IgM were positive. The tests for antinuclear
antibodies and anti double stranded DNA antibodies were negative; the C3 and C4 complement levels were low. The patient denied any symptoms
that would be suggestive of SLE, and there was no family history of bleeding or connective tissue disease. An extensive infectious disease
workup ruled out hepatitis A, B and C, cytomegalovirus and Epstein Barr virus. Finally, we diagnosed the patient as having lupus
anticoagulant-hypoprothrombinemia (LAHPS). However, he displayed only microscopic hematuria and he was without SLE or any underlying
disease. So, we closely followed the patient's laboratory findings and clinical symptoms for 2 months. He did not show any symptoms or signs
of bleeding, yet the abnormal laboratory findings were sustained. We decided to try corticosteroid treatment to prepare the patient for
orthopedic surgery and then 2 weeks later, the coagulation studies were significantly improved. He successfully underwent the operation and
was discharged. At present, he hasn't any symptoms or signs of thrombosis, hemorrhage and SLE. Lupus anticoagulant (LA) is an
antiphospholipid antibody that causes prolonged in vitro coagulation times. This may be associated with a hypercoagulable state together
with thromboembolic events1). A bleeding diathesis is a rare manifestation of lupus anticoagulant, and when it occurs, it was nearly always
due to thrombocytopenia or Factor II deficiency2, 3). Lupus anticoagulant hypoprothrombinemia syndrome (LAHPS) is a rare clinical malady
that can occur in association with SLE, transient viral infections, drug reactions or even in healthy individuals5, 6). It mostly occurs in
young females, and only rarely in those adults who are without systemic lupus erythematosus, an underlying disease or a preceding illness2).
The clinical findings are generally asymptomatic, but there can be severe hemorrhagic symptoms such as brain hemorrhage, gastrointestinal
bleeding and diffuse muscular hemorrhage. These patients may present with severe life threatening bleeding diathesis if the Factor II level
is very low (i.e., usually under 10%)2). In our case, the Factor II level was 29% and only microscopic hematuria was observed. Simel et al.
have reported on a case of LAHPS for which the patient did not respond to replacement therapy, and the patient showed a significant response
to immunosuppressive drugs7). Most of the cases previously reported in the literature have responded well to administering only prednisone
treatment4). A few cases needed an additional immunosuppressive drug such as cyclophosphamide or azathioprine7, 8). Corticosteroid therapy
is the treatment of choice for LAHPS associated with SLE; it normalizes the abnormal coagulation times, including the PT, the APTT and the
clotting factors. For those cases associated with viral infection, the LAHPS spontaneously reverses itself when the infection has been
resolved, and so steroid therapy is not necessary. Our patient had only microscopic hematuria without SLE or any underlying diesese.
Therefore, we followed up the laboratory findings and clinical symptoms for 2 months; during this time, he did not display any symptoms and
signs of bleeding. However, the abnormal laboratory findings were sustained. We decided to institute corticosteroid treatment for getting
him ready for orthopedic surgery; 2 weeks later, the coagulation studies were significantly improved. He successfully received the operation
and was discharged. At present, he has no signs or symptoms of thrombosis, hemorrhage and SLE. Prompt, close follow up of these patients is
crucial because they may develop, at any time, the full clinical syndrome of SLE and thrombosis because of the presence of LA. This study
was supported by research funds from Chosdun University, 2006 Results of the Serial Coagulation Studies and the Treatment The date of
administering prednisone: 8 Dec 04
