The mixed epithelial stromal tumour is morphologically characterised by a mixture of solid and cystic areas consisting of a biphasic
proliferation of glands admixed with solid areas of spindle cells with variable cellularity and growth patterns. In previous reports the
seminal vesicle cystoadenoma was either considered a synonym of or misdiagnosed as mixed epithelial stromal tumour. The recent World Health
Organisation Classification of Tumours considered the two lesions as two distinct neoplasms. This work is aimed to present the low-grade
epithelial stromal tumour case and the review of the literature to the extent of establishing the true frequency of the neoplasm. We
describe a low-grade epithelial stromal tumour of the seminal vesicle in a 50-year-old man. Computed tomography showed a 9 × 4.5 cm pelvic
mass in the side of the seminal vesicle displacing the prostate and the urinary bladder. Magnetic resonance was able to define tissue planes
between the lesion and the adjacent structures and provided useful information for an accurate conservative laparotomic surgical approach.
The histology revealed biphasic proliferation of benign glands admixed with stromal cellularity, with focal atypia. After 26 months after
the excision the patient is still alive with no evidence of disease. Cystoadenoma and mixed epithelial stromal tumour of seminal vesicle are
two distinct pathological entities with different histological features and clinical outcome. Due to the unavailability of accurate
prognostic parameters, the prediction of the potential biological evolution of mixed epithelial stromal tumour is still difficult. In our
case magnetic resonance imaging was able to avoid an exploratory laparotomy and to establish an accurate conservative surgical treatment of
the tumour. The mixed epithelial and stromal tumour (MEST) is morphologically characterised by a mixture of solid and cystic areas with a
biphasic proliferation of glands admixed with solid areas of spindle cells, with variable cellularity and growth patterns. We report a low
grade MEST of the seminal vesicle and we emphasize the diagnostic criteria and the different diagnosis as cystoadenoma. A 50-year-old man
was admitted in November 2005 to our hospital with disuria, fever and gradual decrease in urinary stream for several months. On ultrasound
(US) a hynomogeneous, hypoechoic pelvic mass of the posterior side of the bladder was demonstrated. Abdominal computed tomography (CT)
revealed a 9 × 4.5 cm pelvic mass in the side of the seminal vesicles displacing the prostate and urinary bladder. On precontrast CT, the
mass showed fluid heterogeneous content, well-defined margins, and irregular thin enhanced internal septa after intravenous contrast
material administration. On axial spin-echo T1-weighted and axial and sagittal T2-weighted (Fig. 1a–c) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), a
large well defined multilocular pelvic mass was revealed in the side of the seminal vesicles, contiguous to the posterior wall of the
urinary bladder, above the prostate and anterior to the rectum. On T1 and T2-weighted images, the mass showed internal septa that delimited
heterogeneous iso- hyperintense areas with proteinaceus content. On axial T1-weighted fat-suppression gradient-echo images, before and after
intravenous administration of gadopentetate-dimeglumine (gadolinium-DTPA), no enhancement of the mass occurred. The exploratory laparotomy
revealed a retrovesical mass, which was well defined and not firmly adherent anteriorly to the bladder. It was supposed that the origin of
the mass might be the right seminal vesicle. The tumour was totally dissected from the attachments to the bladder anteriorly ad rectum
posteriorly, which required the removal of the left seminal vesicle and a portion of both vasa deferens. 14 months after surgery, the
patient is currently alive with no evidence of disease. The tumour measured 9 × 6 × 6 cm and consisted of an oval rubbery mass. The cut
surfaces showed multilocular cysts of variable sizes and shapes filled with gelatinous material (Fig. 2). The histological examination
revealed two distinctive but intermixed components, one glandular and the other stromal (Fig. 3). The glandular proliferation was
characterized by cystically dilated glandular spaces, containing pale eosinophilic intraluminal secretions and lined by one to two layers of
cuboidal or low columnar cells. There was either no significant cytologic atypia or appreciable mitotic activity. The epithelial cells were
uniformly reactive against all keratin proteins (AE1/AE3, CAM5.2, and high-molecular-weight keratin). Monoclonal and polyclonal
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), prostate acid phosphatase (PAP) and prostate – specific antigen (PSA) stains gave negative results. The
stromal component was composed by extensive loosely cellular areas with mixoid content. The stromal cells were spindle-shaped and showed
pleomorphism. The stroma was at least focally densely cellular and tended to condense around distorted glands. No mitoses were found (Fig.
4). The spindle-shaped cells showed strong reactivity for vimentin, CD34, and patchy weaker reactivity (30%) for α-smooth muscle actin (Fig.
5a–c) and desmin, but were negative for cytokeratin and PSA. We preferred a diagnosis of low grade MEST because of the presence of cellular
pleomorphism of the stromal component. 26 months after surgery, the patient is still alive, with no evidence of disease. Axial spin-echo
T1-weighted (a) and axial (b) and sagittal T2-weighted (c) MRI showed a large, well-defined, multilocular pelvic mass in the side of the
seminal vesicles, contiguous to the posterior wall of the urinary bladder and the prostate. On T1 and T2-weighted images the mass showed
internal septations that delimited heterogeneous iso- hyperintense areas with proteinaceus content. The cut surface showed multilocular
cists of varying size and shapes. The segments of both the right and the left vas deferens were evident. Inset: the external surface was
yellow, smooth and glistening. Microscopically the tumour showed cistically dilatated glands containing pale eosinophilic intraluminal
secretions and lined by one to two layers of cuboidal or low columnar cells (H&E ×40). The stromal cells were spindle-shaped and showed
pleomorphism. The stroma was at least focally densely cellular and tended to condense around distorted glands (H&E ×200). The stromal cells
show positivity for AML (a)(×400), Vimentin (b)(×600) and CD 34 (c)(×600). In our case the low-grade MEST diagnosis was made in accordance
with the World Health Organization (WHO) classification criteria . The lesion arose from the seminal vesicle and did not: a) present normal
tissue, b) invade the prostate, and it was not immunoreactive for monoclonal and polyclonal CEA, PAP and PSA. The glandular proliferation
was benign. Mitosis and atypia of the epithelium were not found. The stromal cellularity was mostly pronounced in the tissue adjacent to
intratumoural glands. Focal cellular pleomorphism was present, but mitoses were not found. The examined lesion was categorized into low-
grade MEST because of the presence of atypia in the spindle-shaped cells. The former literature reviews reported MEST under different names:
cystomyoma , cystadenoma , mesonephric hamartoma , papillary cystadenoma , cystic epithelial-stromal tumour , mullerian adenosarcoma-like
tumour , cystosarcoma phyllodes , phyllodes tumour , epithelial stromal tumour with phyllodes tumour-like features , benign fibroepithelial
tumour . These tumours have been considered to represent morphological variants of the same neoplasm, which may reveal local recurrence but
not malignant transformation . In the WHO classification , the seminal vesicle cystoadenoma (SVC) was excluded from the category of MESTs
and considered as a distinct neoplasm; it should be histologically distinguished from MEST by its non-neoplastic stroma. Consequently the
previous reports of MESTs have been critically revised (table 1). In the reviews of 10 and 14 MESTs, Baschinsky et al., and Son et al.,
reported respectively 6 and 8 cases of SVC. According to WHO criteria, the cases of SVC reported by Lagalla et al., , Bullock et al ,
Damjanov and Apic , Lundhus et al., , should be excluded from MESTs. This is because the description of stromal component is absent or
because microscopically they showed a non-neoplastic stromal component, that is typical of benign glandular tumours. The SVC described by
Soule and Dockerty , Baschinky et al., , Mazzucchelli et al., , Gil et al., , the mesonephric hamartoma of Kinas et al., , the benign
fibroepithelial of Zanetti et al., , should be considered MEST, because all these tumours showed simultaneous ductal and stromal
proliferations. In the histological grading of stromal component, the WHO classification categorised MESTs in low or high grade, depending
on mitotic activity and necrosis . But the number of mitosis is not specified. In the high-grade MEST the stroma should be at least focally
densely cellular and condensed around distorted glands. In the differential diagnosis between low and high-grade MEST the histological
features reported by WHO classification are not exhaustive to achieve a conclusive diagnosis. The WHO rejected the concept of phylloides
tumour despite the evidence that it is a separate entity from cystadenoma. In the MEST review of Son et al., and Hoshi et al., the
classification of Baschinsky et al., in low, intermediate, high-grade MEST was reported. Surprisingly this distinction is not described in
the original paper of Baschinsky et al., . In the description of cystosarcoma phyllodes, Fain et al., examined the tumours reported by Mazur
et al., and Soule and Dockerty : obviously the spectrum of phyllodes tumour reported by Fain et al., may be not accepted as conclusive
because only three cases were considered. In our case US was only useful to detect the lesion, but both its site and relations with adjacent
organs were not established. CT confirmed the presence, size, location, internal consistency, extension of the primary tumour, and the
absence of distant metastases. MRI was useful in establishing the tumour origin from the seminal vesicles and its relations with the
adjacent organs (Fig. 1). MRI with fat-suppression and administration of paramagnetic contrast agent is recommended to demonstrate the
absence of tumour vascularisation and to indicate the benign non-vascular nature of the mass. Literature review of mixed epithelial and
stromal tumour of seminal vesicle ^ In the cystomyoma of Plaut and Standard it is unclear whether the epithelium is a component of the
neoplasm or an entrapped native structure. For these reasons the neoplasm should not be considered as a true MEST. Treatment: * tumorectomy
Ω left vesciculectomy @ Removal tumour mass, left SV, portion of both right and left vas deferens ° radical cysto-prostatectomy # radical
cystoprostatectomy and low anterior resection of the rectum. = tumorectomy, removal of a portion of the bladder, of both right and left vas
deferens and rectal muscularis propria. Legend: UB = Urinary bladder; NED = No evidence of disease; IVP = Excretory urography; US =
Ultrasonography; SV = Seminal vesicle. SVC and MEST are two distinct pathological entities with different histological features and clinical
outcome. Predicting the potential biological behaviour of MEST remains difficult because accurate prognostic parameters are not available.
In our case MRI was able to avoid an exploratory laparotomy and to establish an accurate conservative surgical treatment of the tumour.
MEST: mixed epithelial and stromal tumour; US: ultrasound; WHO: World Health Organization; CT: Computed tomography; MRI: magnetic resonance
imaging; CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen; PAP: prostate acid phosphatase; PSA: prostate specific antigen. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. IF collected the
tissue specimen, made the histological diagnosis and images, revised the manuscript. IP made the radiological diagnosis, prepared
radiological images. BM conceived the study and revised the manuscript. ML, FF, GP: collected clinical records and wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
