This clinical report described the oral rehabilitation of a cleft lip and palate patient with removable partial denture. Although implant-
supported fixed treatment was presented as part of the optimum treatment plan to achieve the best result, the patient declined this option
due to the significant financial burden. Persons with a congenital or craniofacial defect are unique, and oral problems must be evaluated
individually to the most ideal treatment. The changes in appearance, function, and psychological wellbeing have an enormous impact on
patients' personal lives and are rewarding for the maxillofacial prosthodontist providing this care. Treatment of patients with cleft lip
and palate calls for a complex multidisciplinary approach with long-term involvement. The team concept remains the key to success in the
care of these patients. Prosthodontists are integral members of this team because of the wide range of patient care services that they
provide (1). Plastic surgeons, orthodontists, and prosthodontists are only part of the cleft palate team responsible for the medical care
that, in many patients, starts shortly after birth and continues in various stages until maturity (2). Many patients with clefts that also
affect the alveolar ridge present with either congenital absence of the permanent maxillary incisors, or with teeth that are in a
rudimentary form, e.g., peg-shaped or small crowns and short roots. The maxillary central incisors are often hypoplastic with short roots
and are severely malposed. This malpositioning, in addition to the tooth-lip relationship and the extent of hard and soft tissue deficiency,
influences the esthetic appearance and phonetics (3). Thus, prosthodontists, when rehabilitating these patients, face the difficult decision
of whether to use fixed or removable partial dentures (FPDs, RPDs). In patients with severe deficiency, more extensive, advanced restorative
care is required to resolve functional, esthetic, and phonetic problems. There are various methods of definitive prosthetic treatment in
cleft palate patients. A combination of bone grafting and implant-supported fixed or removable prostheses is an invasive treatment approach.
A conservative alternative treatment could be conventional fixed or removable prostheses for patients who refuse surgical intervention (4).
RPDs are especially indicated in patients with tissue deficiency, several fistulae, soft palate dysfunction, or uncoordinated nasopharyngeal
sphincter action, which can lead to hypernasal speech (3). Furthermore, it is suggested that a prosthesis may improve the psychological
status of patients as well as their quality of life (5). Providing maxillofacial prosthetic treatment for patients with congenital and
craniofacial defects should not only address physical and functional deficiencies but, ideally, should also consider the possible
psychological effects of these deformities. Unfortunately, only 20% of cleft palate teams worldwide perform psychological assessments of
these patients (6). This portion of the treatment evaluation is often overlooked or ignored and should be integrated into the overall
treatment (7). Implant-supported fixed and removable prostheses, overdentures, and traditional fixed and removable prostheses can provide
more normal facial contours, an improved smile line, improved arch relationships, and improved function in patients with facial defects. The
authors have observed that patients with congenital craniofacial defects often feel more positive about themselves after prosthetic
treatment. Patients embarrassed by their teeth and facial appearance are frequently less motivated to maintain good oral hygiene or seek
regular dental care, resulting in increased tooth loss and destruction of oral tissues; this exacerbates an existing problem. Early
intervention can be extremely beneficial for the patient's well-being (7). Prosthodontic care has a long and rich history in the care of
patients with cleft lip and palate. With the increased knowledge of craniofacial growth and development and improved surgical and
orthodontic treatment, today's cleft patients receive better care and in less time (8). This requires less prosthetic intervention. The RPD
could be a good alternative for some cleft patients in whom there are multiple missing teeth and an edentulous space that is too long to be
spanned by a fixed restoration. This clinical report describes the rehabilitation of a cleft lip and palate patient using a RPD like an
obturator. A 45-yr-old woman born with cleft lip and palate with congenitally absent bilateral maxillary incisors was referred to the
Department of Prosthodontics in the School of Dentistry, Dicle University. She underwent cheiloplasty at 7 months of age and palatoplasty at
2 yr. The missing teeth were replaced with multiple metal-ceramic FPDs 10 yr before. Clinical examination of the patient revealed poor oral
hygiene and poorly fitting restorations (Fig. 1). She presented with an inadequately repaired cleft lip and palate, and severe related
psychosocial problems (Fig. 2). The patient requested prostheses to into the left ureter for the purpose of palliation, the patient was
submitted for ATP-CRA with an informed consent cial wellbeing. The previous fixed restorations were removed (Fig. 3). The radiographic
examination showed reduced periodontal support of all teeth. All teeth were extracted after periodontal treatment except the mandibular
right first premolar, maxillary right canine, first premolar, second molar and maxillary left second molar. Following a dental prophylaxis
and oral hygiene instructions, the patient was placed on a 0.12% chlorhexidine gluconate oral rinse (Periogard Oral Rinse; Colgate Oral
Pharmaceuticals, Canton, MA, U.S.A.) with twice daily recommended use. To satisfy the patient's primary concerns, a treatment plan was
developed that included placement of metal-ceramic crowns of mandibular right first premolar, maxillary right canine and first premolar.
Considering the clinical situation, maxillary and mandibular RPDs were determined to be the treatment of choice. Although a plan of implant
treatment was presented to the patient as part of the primary treatment option, the patient declined these treatment modalities due to the
financial burden. Maxillary and mandibular complete-arch impressions were made using irreversible hydrocolloid impression material
(Jeltrate, Alginate, Fast Set; Dentsply Intl, York, PA, U.S.A.). Diagnostic casts were fabricated from Type IV dental stone (Silky- Rock;
Whip Mix Corp, Louisville, KY, U.S.A.) and mounted on a semi-adjustable articulator (Articulator #3140; Whip Mix Corp) using a face-bow
transfer (#8645 Quick Mount Face-Bow; Whip Mix Corp) and a centric relation record (Take 1 Bite; Kerr Corp, Orange, CA, U.S.A.). The
articulator was programmed using protrusive and lateral records (Coprwax Bite Wafers; Heraeus Kulzer, South Bend, IN, U.S.A.). The occlusal
scheme was developed through a diagnostic waxing. Mandibular right first premolar, maxillary right canine and first premolar teeth were
prepared for metal-ceramic restorations. Laboratory-processed provisional restorations (Temdent, Weil-Dental, Rosbach, Germany) were
fabricated and cemented with zinc-oxide eugenol (TempBond; Kerr Corp). Irreversible hydrocolloid impressions (Jeltrate, Alginate, Fast Set;
Dentsply Intl) of the provisional restorations were obtained and poured in Type IV dental stone (Silky-Rock; Whip Mix Corp). A custom
incisal guide table was fabricated from acrylic resin (Pattern Resin LS; GC America). Definitive impressions of the prepared teeth were
obtained using hydrophilic addition silicone impression material (Elite HD+, Zhermack, Rovigo, Italy). Working casts were generated from
Type IV die stone (Jade Stone; Whip Mix Corp) and mounted onto the articulator using interocclusal records (Take 1 Bite; Kerr Corp). The
FPDs (Ivoclar Vivadent) were fabricated in a licensed dental laboratory. Following the normal clinical sequence, the marginal fitting and
esthetic appearance of veneers were verified. A trial evaluation of the metal substructure, prior to glazing of the ceramic material,
enabled final occlusal refinement. The crowns were cemented with zinc polycarboxylate cement (Poly F Plus; Dentsply DeTrey GmbH, Konstanz,
Germany) using the manufacturer's recommended powder/liquid ratio. After crown cementation, preliminary impressions were made with
irreversible hydrocolloid (Kromopan; Lascod SpA, Florence, Italy) for RPDs. Custom trays were fabricated with autopolymerized acrylic resin
(Duracryl; Spofa Dental, Prague, Czech Republic), and definitive impressions (Zetaplus, Thixoflex; Zhermack, Rovigo, Italy) were made.
Maxillomandibular records were made, and the casts were mounted in an articulator. The artificial teeth were arranged in wax for trial
evaluation. The occlusion and position of the prosthetic teeth were evaluated intraorally, and the necessary corrections were made before
processing the dentures. Instructions were given to the patient and she maintained a soft diet for the first few days to facilitate
accommodation; the necessity of regular cleaning and maintenance was also explained. The patient was instructed to remove the dentures at
night and to present the following day and once a week for a period of two months for inspection and possible corrections and adjustment
(Fig. 4). In addition to oral hygiene instructions, the patient was prescribed a topical 1.1% neutral sodium fluoride (PreviDent; Colgate
Oral Pharmaceuticals) with recommended daily use. Recall evaluations at four-month intervals occurred for a period of one year, and the
patient did not experience any complication associated with the oral rehabilitation. The patient's esthetic and functional expectations were
also satisfied. At follow-up sessions after completion of treatment, the patient reported her great satisfaction with the outcome, and her
family described her resultant more extroverted character (Fig. 5). The RPD treatment selected, albeit invasive, is more conservative than
the considered alternatives. Other treatment methods involving implant-supported fixed dentures are considerably more radical and have
greater incidence of clinical complications than conventional removable prosthodontics (9, 10). Furthermore, this patient's limited
financial resources precluded the selection of a costly treatment. Therefore, RPDs were used, the patient's oral hygiene was maintained to
an acceptable level, and both the esthetic and functional results of the restorations were satisfactory. When evaluating a patient with
congenital abnormalities, the initial steps involve inspection of appropriate occlusal vertical dimension (OVD). Insufficient OVD may be
secondary to lack of teeth, abraded and worn teeth, altered anatomy intraorally and extraorally, or inadequate arch development. Maxillary
and mandibular RPDs are used to restore OVD, function, and esthetics. Many variables determine the appropriate OVD to restore functional
occlusion and facial support in each patient. These processes include an evaluation of speaking space, interocclusal distance, facial
contours, lip contours, speech, condition of remaining teeth, and occlusion. A thorough assessment evaluates the need for periodontal care,
endodontic treatment, orthodontic treatment, oral and maxillofacial surgery, or plastic surgery either prior to or during the maxillofacial
prosthetic treatment. Other factors, such as work and/or family commitment, may contribute to the course of the prosthetic and other
treatments selected. Treatment such as orthognathic surgery, bone grafts, and orthodontics, which would require more treatment time, may not
be possible options (7). To illustrate, this 45-yr-old woman presented with an inadequately repaired cleft lip and palate. The patient
desired only prostheses to improve her situation to the extent possible, and maxillary and mandibular RPDs were fabricated. For some
patients, it may be better to consider a more expedient treatment that obtains a high degree of success versus a long-term complicated
treatment involving multiple procedures and increased expense during the critical development phase of adolescence or young adulthood. The
more expedient treatment can give an individual more immediate esthetic, functional, and psychological support. The treatment of patients
with congenital craniofacial defects presents psychosocial as well as technical challenges. In the general population, physical
attractiveness contributes to a positive self-concept and social wellbeing (11). The research of social psychologists describes the self-
fulfilling nature of social stereotypes: appearance forms the basis for responses and impressions by others, which then influence individual
behavior (12). Research has shown that global self-esteem is highly determined by assessment of one's own physical presentation, as well as
by comparisons with the attractiveness, ability, intellectual skills, and social acceptance of other people (13). Unusual facial features
exacerbate the social challenges of meeting new people and getting along with others (14). Lowered self-esteem, speech defects, decreased
academic performance, and social isolation may result from merely "looking different" from one's peers. These factors can contribute to
inappropriate acting out and impaired social interactions (15). A combination of fixed, implant-supported and removable prostheses in
conjunction with other dental and medical treatment is often necessary to obtain the maximum and ideal outcome for the patient.
Maxillofacial prosthetic treatment allows these patients to feel more normal, and to have better selfesteem, greater opportunity to fulfill
their potential socially, and improved employment possibilities (16). Pretreatment intraoral view. Frontal view of patient before
rehabilitation. View during the healing period after extraction. Post-treatment intraoral view. View of content and well-rehabilitated
patient.
