The first three authors contributed equally to this work. This is an open-access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License, which permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly
cited. We sought to identify the genetic defect in a four-generation Chinese family with autosomal dominant congenital lamellar cataracts
and demonstrate the functional analysis with biosoftware of a candidate gene in the family. Family history data were recorded. Clinical and
ophthalmologic examinations were performed on family members. All the members were genotyped with microsatellite markers at loci considered
to be associated with cataracts. Two-point LOD scores were calculated by using the Linkage Software after genotyping. A mutation was
detected by using gene-specific primers in direct sequencing. Wild type and mutant proteins were analyzed with Online Bio-Software. Affected
members of this family had lamellar cataracts. Linkage analysis was obtained at markers D3S2322 (LOD score =7.22, recombination fraction
=0.0) and D3S1541 (Z=5.42, θ=0.0). Haplotype analysis indicated that the cataract gene was closely linked to these two markers. Sequencing
the beaded filament structural protein 2 (BFSP2) gene revealed a G>A transversion in exon 5, which caused a conservative substitution of Arg
to His at codon 339 (P.R339H). This mutation cosegregated with the disease phenotype in all affected individuals and was not observed in the
unaffected family members or in 100 normal, unrelated individuals. Bioinformatic analyses showed that a highly conserved region was located
around Arg339. Data generated with Online Bio-Software revealed that the mutation altered the protein’s hydrophobicity, hydrophobic moment,
and chaperone and regulation activities. This is the first reported case of a congenital lamellar cataract phenotype associated with the
mutation of Arg339His (P.R339H) in BFSP2. It highlights the physiologic importance of the beaded filament protein and demonstrates a
possible mechanism of action for the mutant gene. Hereditary congenital cataract is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous lens disease
responsible for a significant proportion of visual impairment and blindness in childhood . It can occur in an isolated fashion or as one
component of a multi-system disorder. Non-syndromic congenital cataracts have an estimated incidence of 1–6 per 10,000 live births , and at
least one-third of the cases are familial. From the first description of the cosegregation of inherited cataracts with the Duffy blood group
locus , more than 30 loci have been mapped through linkage analysis and 19 genes have been characterized. Among the 19 genes, 10 genes
encode crystallins (CRYAA, CRYAB, CRYBA1/A3, CRYBA, CRYBB1, CRYBB2, CRYBB3, CRYGC, CRYGD, CRYGS), three encode membrane transport proteins
(MIP, GJA3, GJA8), two encode a cytoskeletal protein (BFSP1, BSFP2), three encode transcription factors (HSF4, MAF, PITX3), and one encodes
a lens intrinsic membrane protein (Lim2) . Lens-specific beaded filament structural protein–2 (BFSP2, also called phakinin, CP47, CP49, and
LIFL-L [OMIM 603212]) has been mapped to human chromosome 3q21-q25 with the use of human-rodent somatic cell hybrids . BFSP2 is one of the
cytoskeletal proteins in the lens, which sustains lens cell morphology and participates in lens cell motility, and is very important by
functioning in the maintenance of transparency of the lens. We know from the previous report that BFSP1 and BFSP2 mutations can lead to
congenital cataracts. But, so far, just one paper has reported that a BFSP1 mutation causes autosomal recessive juvenile onset cataract .
There are five reported BFSP2 mutations that were found to induce formation of autosomal dominant congenital cataract. These mutations were
mainly in exon 2; clinical types of cataracts induced by BFSP2 gene mutations are polymorphism cataracts, nuclear cataracts, cortical
opacity Star cataracts, and gill-like cataracts etc. . We first reported mutations in exon 5 of BFSP2, which can cause autosomal dominant
congenital cataract, and BFSP2 mutations can also cause congenital lamellar cataracts . Lamellar cataracts are a common form of congenital
cataract. MIP , CRYAB , CRYBA1 , and HSF4 mutations can cause this. More recently, Jamie et al. described a three-generation pedigree with
X-linked congenital lamellar cataract. In this study, we report a four-generation Chinese family with congenital lamellar cataracts. Linkage
analysis mapped the disease gene to 3q21–25, and a missense mutation (c.1091G→A) in BFSP2 was identified in this family, which resulted in
the substitution of Arg339His (P.R339H) in BFSP2. Analysis of the wild type and mutant proteins suggested that the increased hydrophobicity
with the decreased hydrophobic moment of the mutant protein altered regulation activities of the BFSP2 protein and α-crystallin assemblies.
These alterations may be the cause of congenital lamellar cataracts. A four-generation family with non-syndromic congenital cataracts was
recruited at the Beijing Tongren Eye Center (Capital Medical University, Beijing, China). Informed consent was obtained from each
participant as consistent with the Declaration of Helsinki. The phenotype was documented by slit lamp photography. Genomic DNA was extracted
from peripheral blood leukocytes using standard protocols. Polymerase chain reactions (PCRs) were performed with microsatellite markers
close to candidate loci associated with autosomal congenital cataracts. PCR products from each DNA sample were separated from a 6%
polyacrylamide gel and were analyzed. Pedigree and haplotype data were performed with Cyrillic (version 2.1) software. Exclusion analysis
was performed by allele sharing in affected individuals. A two-point linkage was calculated with the LINKAGE (version 5.1) package. The
cataracts in this family were analyzed as an autosomal dominant trait with full penetrance and a gene frequency of 0.001. The allele
frequencies for each marker were assumed to be equal in both genders. The marker order and distances between the markers were taken from the
NCBI database. Individual exons of the BFSP2 cluster were amplified by PCR using primer pairs shown in Table 1 . The PCR products were
sequenced on an ABI3730 Automated Sequencer (PE Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Denaturing high performance liquid chromatography (DHPLC) was
used to screen the mutation identified in the patients, family members, and 100 normal control subjects in exon 5 of BFSP2 by using a
commercial system (Wave DHPLC; Transgenomic, San Jose, CA). The tertiary structure of the protein is highly conserved. Both mutant and wild
type versions of the protein structure were predicted and analyzed using the Swiss-model software (version 3.5), BioEdit software, Phyre
software (version 0.2), and Radar. The proband was a six-year-old female (IV:25) who had bilateral cataracts since birth. Her visual acuity
was 0.1 in the right eye and 0.08 in the left eye. Binocular vision correction does not improve. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was measured to
be 15.1 mmHg in the right eye and 16.7 mmHg in the left eye. Other eye examinations included mydriasis later, slit lamp biological
microscopy, and performance of the congenital lamellar cataracts (Figure 1). Slit lamp photographs of proband. The photographs of the
proband (IV:25) showed that the opacities were lamellar cataracts. This four-generation family included 17 affected individuals with
congenital lamellar cataracts and 56 unaffected individuals (Figure 2). The diagnosis was confirmed by ophthalmologists. The disease feature
of this family is congenital morbidity eyes. There was no history of other ocular or systemic abnormalities in the family. Pedigree and
haplotype of cataract family. Four-generation pedigree, with autosomal dominant lamellar cataracts. Haplotyping shows segregation of two
microsatellite markers on 3q21-q25. Squares and circles indicate males and females, respectively. Blackened symbols and bars denote affected
status. BFSP2 on chromosome 3 was linked to this family while other candidate genes were excluded by allele sharing and linkage analysis.
Significant linkage was found with markers D3S2322 and D3S1541, and the maximum LOD score was 7.22 (at θ=0). Haplotype analysis showed that
the responsible locus was localized on chromosome 3q21–25 and flanked by markers D3S2322 and D3S1541 (Figure 2 and Table 2). Note: The
highest observed LOD score was 7.22 (θ=0) for marker D3S2322. Direct cycle sequencing of the amplified fragments of BFSP2 in two affected
individuals identified a single base alteration, C.G1091A (Figure 3B), in exon 5 of BFSP2 (GI: 8419), resulting in the substitution of Arg
to His at codon 339 (P.R339H). The remainder of the coding sequence showed no other change. Multiple-sequence alignment and DNA sequence
chromatograms of BFSP2. A: The multiple-sequence alignment of BFSP2 from primates, rodents, cattle, and zebrafish to humans (Homo sapiens)
is shown. The Arg339 residue is located within a highly conserved region. B: DNA sequence chromatograms of the P.R339H mutation in BFSP2 are
shown. The G→A transversion at position 1091 resulted in the P.R339H mutation. BFSP2 family protein sequences were obtained from NCBI and
UCSC websites and multiple-sequence alignments of BFSP2 family proteins from various species were obtained (Figure 3A) using the Vector NTI
software. We found that codon 339, where the mutation (P.R339H) occurred, was located in a highly conserved region of the protein. DHPLC
analysis confirmed this mutation (Figure 4), which cosegregated with all affected individuals in the family. Further, this mutation was not
observed in any of the unaffected family members or 100 normal controls. Denaturing high-performance liquid chromatography results of wild
type and mutated BFSP2. DHPLC results show a variant trace for BFSP2 compared to the wild type (WT) trace. The profile in purple is the
mutant protein. The profile in blue is the wild type protein. We identified a new mutation, P.R339H, in BFSP2 in a four-generation Chinese
family with autosomal dominant congenital lamellar cataracts. The disease gene was linked to 3q21–25 with a maximum LOD score of 7.22 and
spanning BFSP2. Mutation analysis of the candidate gene detected a new mutation, P.R339H, in BFSP2 that cosegregated with the disease
phenotype in all affected individuals but was not present in any of the unaffected family members or in 100 normal control subjects. The
result of multiple-sequence alignments showed that Arg339 was a highly conserved residue. The lens sutures are specific regions where lens
fiber cells from opposite directions merge through complex overlapping and interdigitation of the tips of their membranes . The beaded
filament structural protein encoded by BFSP2 is a highly divergent member of the intermediate filament family and a major component of
beaded filaments, which are abundant in lens fiber cells, the only cells in which they are known to be expressed. These cytoskeletal
structures consist of a 7-9 nm backbone filament with 12-15 nm globular protein particles spaced along it . During lens development, the
anterior ends of the lens fiber cells progressively insinuate between the lens epithelium and the embryonic nucleus whereas the posterior
ends progressively insinuate between the posterior lens capsule and embryonic nucleus. Elongation continues until the fiber cell ends from
opposing directions meet to form the lens sutures . Through direct cycle sequencing, we identified a G→A transversion in exon 5 of BFSP2,
which was present only in affected members of the family. This transversion, C.G1091A, was predicted to cause a conservative substitution of
Arg to His at codon 339 (p.R339H). This novel mutation in exon 5 of BFSP2 appears to result in congenital lamellar cataracts. From the NCBI
database, we know Arg339 is in the active region of the BFSP2 protein. The online Phyre software (version 0.2) was used to compare the three
dimensional (3D) structures of the wild type (Figure 5A) with mutant proteins (Figure 5B), and the 3D structure was little changed. BioEdit
software predicted that the substitution in the BFSP2 protein would alter the hydrophobicity between amino acids 330 and 340 (Figure 6) and
the hydrophobic moment between amino acids 330 and 350 (Figure 7). Comparison of wild type and mutant BFSP2 3D structures. A: Wild type
BFSP2 3D structure using Phyre software is shown, and Arg339 is indicated in yellow and a green arrow. B: Mutant BFSP2 3D structure is shown
also using Phyre software, and His339 is indicated in yellow and a green arrow. The 3D structure was not overly changed due to the mutation.
Comparison of hydrophobicity between wild type and mutant BFSP2. BioEdit software predicted the effect of the substitution on BFSP2 protein
hydrophobicity. Hydrophobicity of the mutant protein increased between 330 amino acids and 340 amino acids. Comparison of hydrophobic moment
between wild type and mutant BFSP2. BioEdit software predicted the effect of the substitution on the BFSP2 protein hydrophobic moment. The
hydrophobic moment of the mutant protein decreased between 330 amino acids and 350 amino acids. Furthermore, we used Radar to predict the
effect that the substitution would have in the wild type protein with an increase of two to three repeats (Figure 8). Many large proteins
have evolved by internal duplication, and many internal sequence repeats correspond to functional and structural units. The predicted effect
of substitution in BFSP2. The online Radar software was used to predict the effect of the substation in BFSP2. The substitution would have
in the wild-type protein with an increase from two to three repeats, the part marked by red arrow turned into two parts. The mechanism of
how a mutation in BFSP2 can give rise to cataracts is unknown. BFSP2 shows most of the secondary structural features that are conserved
among the intermediate filament (IF) family of proteins . Some reports indicate that BFSP2, filensin, and α-crystallins have been shown to
immunolocalize to unique cytoskeletal structures within the lens fiber cells known as beaded filaments. Beaded filaments are considered to
be important in facilitating the chaperone activity of α-crystallin assemblies . Some reports show that BFSP2 can regulate beaded filament
protein stoichiometry . The alteration had little effect on the backbone or 3D structure of the protein. Hydrophobicity of the mutant
protein increased while the hydrophobic moment decreased. The predicted new characteristics of the mutant protein, which include altered
interactions with other proteins, altered regulation activities of BFSP2, and altered α-crystallin assemblies, may be the cause of the
disease. The authors thank the family for their participation in this project and Dr. Siquan Zhu and Dr. Shuzhen Wang (Beijing Tongren
Hospital, Capital University of Medical Sciences, Beijing, China) for phenotype identification. This study was supported by the
National Basic Research Program of China (No. 2007CB511905), the National Infrastructure Program of Chinese Genetic Resources (No.
2006DKA21301), and the National Natural Science Foundation of China (No. 30471864).
