Rapid arterial rethrombosis is associated with high-grade residual stenosis and usually occurs at the site of the initial occlusion,
resulting in reocclusion of the recanalized artery. Platelets may play an active role in such rethrombosis after thrombolytic-induced clot
lysis. Given that glycoprotein IIb/IIIa receptor blockers, like tirofiban, prevent thrombus formation by inhibiting the final common pathway
of platelet aggregation, they may be helpful for treating rethrombosis after thrombolysis. A 64-year-old man presented with an acute
ischemic stroke due to internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusion. The ICA was recanalized by intravenous thrombolysis but reoccluded shortly
after recanalization. The reoccluded ICA was successfully recanalized using intra-arterial tirofiban. A carotid stent was subsequently
inserted to relieve severe stenosis and to prevent recurrent stroke. Here, we report a case of rescue treatment of a successfully
recanalized ICA by intra-arterial tirofiban. We suggest that rescue use of intra-arterial tirofiban may be effective and safe, especially in
hemorrhage prone situations, due to the relatively lower dose of tirofiban compared with intravenous doses. Reocclusion after successful
arterial recanalization occurs commonly in acute ischemic stroke.1,2 Rapid rethrombosis is associated with high-grade residual stenosis and
usually occurs at the site of the initial occlusion, resulting in reocclusion of the recanalized artery.3 Platelets may play an active role
in such rethrombosis following thrombolytic-induced clot lysis. Glycoprotein (GP) IIb/IIIa receptor blockers prevent thrombus formation by
inhibiting the final common pathway of platelet aggregation. There are three GP IIb/IIIa receptor blockers (abciximab, tirofiban,
eptifibatide) available for clinical use. There are significant differences in the biological and plasma half-lives of abciximab and the
small molecule agents (tirofiban and eptifibatide). Tirofiban is a small, non-peptide molecule that has been used intravenously, in
combination with recombinant tissue plasminogen activator (rt-PA), to treat patients with acute coronary artery disease. Some promising
pilot results using intravenous tirofiban combined with thrombolytics for acute ischemic stroke have been demonstrated.4,5 A 64-year-old man
was admitted to the hospital due to left-sided weakness and drowsiness. His initial National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale (NIHSS) score
was 16. Brain CT showed no low-density lesions, but bilateral cervical internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusions were observed on CT
angiography (Fig. 1). Intravenous rt-PA was administered 160 minutes after the initial onset of symptoms. Because there was no improvement
at the end of the intravenous rt-PA infusion, we proceeded to cerebral angiography to perform intra-arterial thrombolysis. Cerebral
angiography showed complete occlusion of the left cervical ICA and severe stenosis of the right cervical ICA (Fig. 2A) with delayed filling
of the right middle cerebral artery and both anterior cerebral arteries. The left ICA territory was supplied by an ophthalmic collateral
from the left external carotid artery and pial collateral flow from the left posterior cerebral artery. Due to the severe stenosis of the
right ICA and delayed intracranial perfusion, plans were made to insert a carotid stent to prevent recurrent ischemic stroke. However, the
right ICA was reoccluded approximately 20 minutes after the initial angiography (Fig. 2B). Tirofiban was administered through the
microcatheter by hand injection. After injection of 200 µg of tirofiban over five minutes, the occluded ICA was recanalized with the
remaining stenosis as severe as that seen on initial angiography (Fig. 2C). We inserted a self-expandable carotid stent (SMART, 7 × 80 mm
Cordis, Warren, NJ, USA), and subsequent angiography showed no remaining stenosis (Fig. 2D). A brain MRI performed 10 days after
thrombolysis showed acute cerebral infarctions involving the right fronto-parietal and medial frontal cortex. Four weeks following
thrombolysis, the patient's NIHSS score had improved to six. Fibrinolysis by rt-PA heightens platelet activity and exposes clot-bound
thrombin, facilitating rethrombosis via the cleavage of fibrinogen to fibrin.6 In addition, high blood flow velocity due to remaining
arterial stenosis may further activate platelet aggregation. Thus, a blockade of platelet-mediated thrombotic mechanisms appeared to be a
rational approach to the management of this patient, as platelets seemed to play a key role in the rethrombosis. Highly effective inhibition
of platelet activity can be achieved by the introduction of potent inhibitors of the GP IIb/IIIa receptor. It has been reported that GP
IIb/IIIa receptor blockers can decrease the incidence of restenosis and ischemic complications after percutaneous transcoronary
angioplasty.7 Recently, GP IIb/IIIa receptor blockers were advocated as potentially promising agents for acute stroke therapy, and there
were some case studies reporting the successful rescue use of GP IIb/IIIa receptor blocker in acute ischemic stroke.6,8-10 Tirofiban is a
non-peptide tyrosine derivative that mimics the RGD integrin recognition sequence. It has a very short platelet-bound half-life and a
relatively long plasma half-life, therefore providing an advantage when the rapid reversal of antiplatelet action is required such as in
cases of high-risk hemorrhage or in combined use with thrombolytics. It has been reported that tirofiban produces a dose-dependent,
dethrombotic effect on thrombosis and inhibits acute de novo stent thrombosis under high-shear flow conditions in an ex vivo canine
arteriovenous shunt model.11 Tirofiban is generally used intravenously in coronary artery disease, with a loading dose of 0.4 µg/kg/min for
30 minutes and a subsequent infusion of 0.1 µg/kg/min. We initially planned to use the standard intravenous loading dose (900 µg) intra-
arterially; however, after use of only 200 µg intra-arterial tirofiban, the ICA was successfully recanalized. We speculate that intra-
arterial drug delivery may reduce the dose of tirofiban required to dissolve the thrombus. This case demonstrates that a GP IIb/IIIa
receptor blocker is effective for the recanalization of reoccluded arteries, especially in the presence of arterial stenosis. The dose of GP
IIb/IIIa receptor blocker can be reduced by intra-arterial use, as compared with intravenous use and may be effective at preventing
hemorrhagic complications, especially when used in combination with thrombolytics. Although this case showed promising results of intra-
arterial tirofiban use, further studies are necessary to verify the effect of intra-arterial use of tirofiban and to determine its proper
dose. Initial brain CT angiography shows bilateral internal carotid artery occlusions. Serial cerebral angiography. (A) The initial
angiography reveals severe stenosis of the right cervical ICA. (B) Reocclusion of the right ICA 20 minutes after initial angiography. (C)
After intra-arterial tirofiban infusion, the occluded right ICA is recanalized and severe stenosis remains. (D) Final angiography after
carotid stent insertion shows no stenosis of the right ICA. ICA, internal carotid artery.
