Iris cyst excision involves complex surgical maneuvers and may have a variable visual outcome depending upon preexisting and postoperative
complications. Hereby, we report a case series of 10 eyes from which posttraumatic iris cysts were excised and proven histopathologically.
Histopathology records were reviewed. Data regarding patient profile, clinical profile, surgical details, treatment outcomes and follow-up
were reviewed. Outcome measures were defined as recurrences, visual acuity and number of other surgeries required. Non-parametric Wilcoxon
test was used to compare changes in the visual acuity and Fisher test was used to find out the significance of several risk factors. Mean
age was 24.7 years (3-58 years). Mean follow- up was 2.36 years. Mean preoperative logMAR visual acuity was 0.56 in comparison to final
logMAR visual acuity of 1.62. Factors related to adverse functional outcome were related to post-surgical complications. Iris cysts are
classified as primary or secondary, with primary cysts being more common.1 Secondary iris cysts develop as a result of trauma,2 intraocular
parasites,2 tumors3 or prolonged use of topical drugs.4,5 Traumatic iris cysts are rare. These can either be ′solid looking′, lined by
stratified or cubical epithelium (pearl cyst), or a serous cyst, containing straw-colored turbid fluid. This is due to deposition of surface
epithelial cells from the conjunctiva or cornea on the iris after surgical [Figure 1] or penetrating trauma [Figure 2]. This study evaluates
the clinical profile and histopathological features of traumatic iris cysts in Indian subjects and elucidates their surgical management and
treatment outcome. A chart review was done on all patients presenting with traumatic iris cyst from 1 January 1995 to 31 December 2006. Data
were collected for clinical profile, history of ocular trauma and/or surgery, ocular findings, type of surgery, histopathological features,
postoperative complications and follow-up. For statistical analysis, the non-parametric Wilcoxon test was used to compare changes in visual
acuity at presentation and at last follow up. Fisher test was used to find out the significance of several risk factors with appropriate
significance (P< 0.05). Ten patients were identified with traumatic iris cysts. Patients ranged in age from three years to 58 years with a
mean of 24.70 + 17.32 years (Mean + SD). Six were males and four were females. Four patients had a history of corneal wound repair following
trauma and three had prior cataract surgery, while one patient had prior vitrectomy and cataract surgery. On examination, iris cyst was
found attached to cornea in three eyes. Anterior chamber involvement was measured in terms of clock hour involvement [Table 1]. Preoperative
logMAR vision ranged from 0 to 1.69 with mean of 0.56 + 0.52 and postoperative logMAR vision ranged from 0 to 4.0 with mean 1.62 + 1.62.
Follow-up ranged from 0.1 year to 7 years with mean 2.36 + 2.60 years. In all cases, cysts were found to be expanding with time and causing
complications such as visual axis obstruction, iritis, glaucoma, and corneal decompensation. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) was done in
eight cases [Table 4] and the extent and involvement of the other structures was identified [Figure 4]. In the remaining two cases, this
could be determined by clinical examination alone. All patients underwent removal of cyst with additional surgical procedures done where
necessary [Table 2]. Histopathology revealed all cysts to be lined by multiple layers of nonkeratinized stratified squamous epithelium. The
contents of the cysts were empty in all cases [Figure 3]. On application of Fisher′s test, iris cyst attachment to cornea (P=0.50),
extension to ciliary body (P=0.50), clock hour involvement of anterior chamber (P=0.60), intact removal of iris cyst (P=0.22) and nature of
injury (P=0.70) with respect to final visual acuity was found to be statistically insignificant (P>0.05). Wilcoxon signed rank test showed
statistically significant poor postoperative vision (P=0.028) at last follow-up in comparison to vision at presentation. No recurrence was
noticed in any case till last follow-up. Two types of iris implantation cysts have been described depending upon their gross examination.
The first is named as pearl or epithelial cyst which is a solid-looking cyst lined by stratified squamous epithelium having concentric
lamellar layers and clear cystic space in the center. The other one is known as serous cyst.6 It has a thin wall and is lined by stretched
out and flattened atrophic epithelium containing chronic inflammatory or cellular exudates. Meanwhile, epithelial ingrowth mainly consists
of avascular membrane progressing on the corneal endothelial and iris surface.7 Treatment of epithelial ingrowth has traditionally involved
aggressive excision of cellular proliferation and associated tissue as well as ablative therapy to excision site to eradicate residual
cells. One of the challenges is to identify the full extent of ocular involvement by the epithelial cellular incursion, so as to treat it
completely. In the present study, histopathological examination of the excised iris cyst revealed that nine cysts were epithelial or pearl
cyst, and one was serous cyst. In cystic ingrowths, the tissue margins are clearly defined and readily seen during surgery. However, the
best treatment is not yet determined and it is unclear whether laser treatment, surgical removal or cyst aspiration with/without laser
photocoagulation/surgical removal offers the best chance of control. There have been reports of iris cysts being treated with aspiration2 to
collapse the cyst but this might lead to recurrence.2 Some have reported success with block excision techniques.8 As an alternative to
surgical removal, laser treatment with Nd-YAG to rupture the cyst were also reported.9,10 In the present study all cysts underwent total
excision with/without iridocyclectomy. Additional surgical procedures like lensectomy, vitrectomy, penetrating keratoplasty and intraocular
(IOL) removal were done, where necessary. Six (60%) cases showed no complication after treatment with good visual outcomes (mean logMAR
0.45), which was clinically significant. Three cases were of pediatric age group, less than 18 years. Two were males and one female. The
median logMAR vision was 0.60. All three underwent excision of cyst. Additionally, one case required penetrating keratoplasty. Median final
logMAR acuity was 0.47. The case that underwent keratoplasty had graft failure, resulting in poor anatomical and visual outcome. Overall,
poor final visual acuity in the present study was attributable to uncontrolled glaucoma and graft failure as postoperative complications
[Table 3]. One patient who underwent excision of cyst and lens removal developed uncontrolled glaucoma and three patients who underwent
penetrating keratoplasty along with cyst removal developed graft failure. These four patients had mean postoperative logMAR vision of 3.37
and the remaining six patients had mean postoperative logMAR vision of 0.45, which was better than the preoperative, mean logMAR vision of
0.56 in 10 patients. It is because of very poor vision in these four patients that mean postoperative logMAR became poorer than preoperative
logMAR, overall. Best visual outcomes were obtained in eyes that did not have any postoperative complications. Traumatic iris cyst is
difficult to manage and has poor visual outcomes if associated with postoperative complications. Appropriate surgical management appears to
be a good treatment option in the management of such eyes. Slit-lamp picture shows an iris cyst that developed one year after cataract
surgery (ECCE+IOL). The cyst extends from nine to 12 o'clock meridian with no corneal attachment. Cyst excision with IOL removal was done
with no complications Slit-lamp picture of an iris cyst that developed two years following trauma with bamboo stick. The cyst extends up to
the iridocorneal angle with corneal attachment. Cyst excision was done with no complications Histopathology image showing a cyst lined by
stratified squamous epithelium and surrounded by iris tissue. Cyst content is empty (Hematoxylin-Eosin stain; 100X) Ultrasound Biomicroscope
(UBM) picture shows iris cyst (Cy) with corneal attachment and clear cystic cavity. Note the acoustically clear lens (L) and the anteriorly
displaced iris (I) Clock hour involvement of the cyst in the anterior chamber Types of surgical procedures performed in all cases Clinical
and histopathological profile of the cysts Etiology and UBM features of Iris cyst
