Pilomatrixoma of the eyelid is extremely rare in middle age and rarely develops into a large tumor. A 45-year-old female developed a
painless, progressive swelling (3.0 cm × 2.0 cm) of the left upper eyelid over a period of two years. Overlying skin was normal in color and
texture. A differential diagnosis of dermoid, epidermoid cyst, chalazion and basal cell carcinoma was made. An excisional biopsy was
performed. A diagnosis of pilomatrixoma was made on histopathological features (dystrophic calcification of matrix with keratin and foreign
body granulomatous reaction, basaloid cells and shadow cells/ ghost cells). It also comprises ossification apart from the usual
calcification. This is a report of an unusually large ossifying pilomatrixoma in left upper eyelid of a middle-aged woman. The patient
should be followed up at regular intervals to rule out any recurrence or malignant transformation. Pilomatrixoma is a benign dermal and /or
subcutaneous tumor most commonly affecting children and adolescents with a slight female preponderance.1 A tumor of the head and neck
region, pilomatrixoma is extremely rare in middle age and rarely attains a large size, especially involving the eyelid.2,3 Clinically, it is
almost always deceptive and often diagnosed on histopathology after excision.4 Complications are extremely rare in pilomatrixoma .
Pilomatrixoma occurs more frequently in patients with myotonic dystrophy. Active mutations of betacatenin gene (CTNBB1) are found to
contribute to the tumorigenesis of pilomatrixoma.3 The distribution of pilomatrixoma depends on the density of pilosebaceous glands in a
given area. Periorbital pilomatrixoma usually involves the upper eyelid and eyebrow.2 We report a case of an unusually large pilomatrixoma
in the left upper eyelid of a middle-aged woman which showed ossification along with calcification. A 45-year-old female presented to us
with history of two years of gradually increasing, painless swelling of the left upper eyelid. On examination, there was a 3.0 cm × 2.0 cm,
single, large, stony hard, non-tender, mobile swelling with well-defined margins involving the left upper eyelid [Figure 1]. The overlying
skin was slightly adherent to the nodule but was normal in color and texture. Severe mechanical ptosis caused by the swelling was noted in
left upper lid but no other ocular abnormality was noted. Systemic examination did not reveal any lymphadenopathy, organomegaly or nodular
lesion elsewhere. Differential diagnoses of dermoid cyst, epidermoid cyst, chalazion or basal cell carcinoma were considered. Surgical
excision of the lesion was done under infiltrative anesthesia. A skin incision was undertaken in the upper eyelid crease. The lesion was
meticulously dissected from the surrounding tissues and its complete removal was accomplished. On gross examination, a single, globular
yellow-orange encapsulated mass with smooth outer surface measuring 2.5 cm × 1.5 cm × 0.5 cm was seen [Figure 2]. Histopathology showed
confluent foci of dystrophic calcification of the matrix with keratin and foreign body granulomatous reaction, basaloid cells and shadow
cells/ghost cells. Amid the pilomatrical matrix, a well-defined area of bone formation with osteocytes was also seen [Figure 3a and b].
Careful serial sections did not show malignant change in any field of the lesion. Based on these features, a histopathological diagnosis of
a pilomatrixoma was made. The patient did not show any sign of recurrence or malignant transformation after nine months of follow-up.
Pilomatrixoma is a rare benign skin appendegeal epithelioma with differentiation towards hair root cells. It usually presents with a
solitary nodule that slowly grows over several months or years. Lesions are usually the color of the normal skin, but reddish-blue lesions
have been observed probably resulting from hemorrhage.3,5 The size of the pilomatrixoma varies from 0.5-3.0 cm but giant periorbital lesions
up to 3.0 cm have been rarely reported. In their review of 11 cases of eyelid and eyebrow pilomatrixoma Yap et al., found tumor diameter of
1.0 cm or less.6 Another study reported 17 patients of eyelid pilomatrixoma but none had attained the size of 3.0 cm or more.7 However, the
most recent one reported a rapidly growing and bleeding upper eyelid pilomatrixoma which measured 3.0 cm × 1.0 cm.5 The present case
reported by us differs from the above mentioned case in size (3.0 cm × 2.0 cm), onset (slow), the nature of overlying skin (normal) and the
presence of ossification. Most of the eyelid/eyebrow pilomatrixomas reported so far have been seen in young adults and rarely in older
patients.6,7 A giant tumor in general and in middle age in particular as in the present case has rarely been reported. Histopathologically,
pilomatrixoma is categorized into various chronological stages.8 Early pilomatrixoma lesions are usually cystic and consist of uniform
basaloid cells lining the cystic cavity and shadow cells/ghost cells admixed with keratin.1 The shadow cells, also termed ghost cells, are
pathognomonic of pilomatrixoma which evolve from basaloid cells, represent dead cells that retain their cellular shape and show a central
unstained area that corresponds to the lost nucleus.9 The older lesions become solid and are characterized by shadow/ghost cells, keratin
debris, secondary multinucleated giant cells, dystrophic calcification and sometimes by bone formation.1,8 Ossification as well as all the
above mentioned features including chronicity were seen in the present case too. Tumor necrosis, calcification and ossification also take
place in rare cases of pilomatrix carcinoma.1 Though no recurrence or malignant change is seen in the present case, there is need for
vigilance and such patients should be followed up at regular intervals. Presentation at a meeting: A part was presented as poster in Annual
Conference of Oculoplastic Association of India. December 14th-16th 2007. Hyderabad A large swelling involving the left upper eyelid Excised
tumor mass Photomicrograph showing (a) Pilomatricial tissue with basaloid cells and shadow cells/ghost cells along with ossification** in
adjacent area (H & E, ×200). Magnified view of pilomatricial tissue with foreign body granulomatous reaction*, basaloid cells and shadow
cells/ghost cells (H & E, ×400)
