A 48 year old man was transferred to our department with cardiogenic shock, pyrexia, a high white cell count and significant serum troponin
T level. Clinical evaluation revealed severe mitral regurgitation secondary to a flail of both mitral valve leaflets. An emergency cardiac
catheterisation did not reveal any significant coronary artery disease. Left ventricular angiogram and echocardiography demonstrated a good
left ventricular function and massive mitral regurgitation. Blood cultures were negative for aerobics, anaerobics and fungi. The patient
underwent emergency mitral valve replacement with a mechanical valve. Intraoperatively, the posteromedial papillary muscle was found to be
ruptured. Histology of the papillary muscle revealed myocardial necrosis with no signs of infection. Cultures obtained from a mitral valve
specimen were negative. The patient's recovery was uneventful and he was discharged on the 6th postoperative day. 0.4%–5% of patients with
acute myocardial infarction die from sudden and severe mitral regurgitation due to a complete rupture of a papillary muscle . Most commonly,
the posteromedial papillary muscle is involved, but in 20% of cases, the anterolateral papillary muscle is involved. The muscle rupture may
represent a rare mechanical complication of a blunt chest trauma, or may be due to sepsis . Spontaneous rupture of the papillary muscle,
secondary to isolated papillary muscle infarction, in the absence of coronary artery disease, is incommon or rare. We describe a case of a
spontaneous acute papillary muscle rupture in the absence of a history of ischemic cardiopathy or blunt chest trauma or sepsis. A 48 year
old man was transferred to the intensive care unit in June 2008 with signs and symptoms of cardiogenic shock after extreme exercise. He was
a farmer and had been lifting a bale of corn. He collapsed immediately after exercise. Past medical history was positive for heavy smoking,
severe arterial hypertension and hypercholesterolemia. There was no previous history of chest pain, heart murmurs or drug abuses. Up until
the even the patient had appeared to be in good health and had not been on medication. There was no history of trauma to the chest. Physical
examination revealed congestive heart failure and a loud pan-systolic apical murmur, radiating posteriorly. The ECG showed sinus
tachycardia. Chest X-ray showed pulmonary venous congestion and was suspicion of an infiltrate in the right lower lobe which could be
consistent with the patient's pyrexia. An urgent echocardiogram showed normal systolic function, severe left ventricular hypertrophy (14 mm
septum wall), an increased end-diastolic diameter of the left ventricle (58 mm) and posterior and anterior mitral valve prolapse with severe
mitral valve regurgitation. Coronary angiography and a left ventricular angiogram showed normal coronary arteries and a good left
ventricular function with massive mitral regurgitation. The patient was pyrexyal with a temperature of 38.6°. Laboratory tests showed an
elevated white cell count (18 × 103/mm3) and elevated troponin T level (1.5 ng/ml). Cultures (blood, sputum, urine) were taken and broad-
spectrum antibiotics were started. The patient underwent emergency surgery. At operation the head of the posteromedial muscle was found to
be ruptured, leading to a complete flail of the posterior and anterior mitral leaflets. Histology of papillary muscle specimens revealed
lesions comparable to that of an acute myocardial infarction. Valve replacement was carried out with a mechanical bileaflet valve. Weaning
from cardiopulmonary bypass was uncomplicated and the patient's recovery was uneventful. Blood cultures for anaerobics, aerobics and fungi
were negative, as were serological tests done for other inflammatory conditions, such as rheumatoid arthritis. Isolated rupture of the
papillary muscle, which is extremely atypical in the absence of coronary abnormalities is usually secondary to a myocardial infarct or
rarely to a blunt chest trauma. In the literature, a case of rupture of the papillary muscle as a consequences of sepsis due to clostridium
in a patient with SLE (systemic lupus erythematosus) and antiphospholipid syndrome has been described. Because of the low incidence of the
disease the exact pathogenesis is unclear. In cases of left ventricular hypertrophy, stress can lead to a relatively more severe ischemia of
the papillary muscle in view of a relatively lower coronary circulation in relation to muscle size and cardiac fibrosis . It is possible
that a temporary occlusion of the coronary artery selectively irrigates the papillary muscle with a subsequent ricanalization of the artery,
but the occlusion can last long enough to condition an infarct of the myocardium, which can be identified by clinical findings and by
elevated enzyme levels. This could form an explanation in the case of our patient. The posteromedial papillary muscle is affected more often
than the anterolateral papillary muscle because the latter receives blood both from the diagonal branches of the descending left anterior
artery and the marginal branches of the curve. The posteromedial muscle owes its blood supply only to the posterior interventricular artery.
The infarct is primarily subendocardial in approximately half of the cases of muscular rupture, and trans-mural in the other half. It is
usually a small infarct. In some cases rupture of the papillary muscle is associated in its development both with a defect of the
interventricular septum and the rupture of the free wall of the left ventricle. Surgical mortality is high and, according to case studies,
fluctuates between 19% and 85%. Mortality is influenced by the type of surgical technique, both in repair and replacement procedures.
Surgical technique influences long-term survival, as highlighted by the studies carried out by Gillinov et al . The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. FB, GF, GP, LM and MR are members of surgical team. CM and FC were the anesthesist involved in theatre and
in intensive care unit. VP was the pathologist. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief
of this journal.
