Conceived and designed the experiments: TF NC LB RHV AZ JB CR SI ASF TH. Performed the experiments: TF NC TF SS KM YI HK SY SH MN OO HK HGdS
LB RHV AZ MEK CR. Analyzed the data: TF TF SS HH YA SY SH LB RHV AZ SU IS. Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: TF TF SS KM ASF.
Wrote the paper: TF NC SU JB CR SI ASF TH. Joint Senior Authors: IS CR SI ASF TH. Zinc (Zn) is an essential trace element and it is abundant
in connective tissues, however biological roles of Zn and its transporters in those tissues and cells remain unknown. Here we report that
mice deficient in Zn transporter Slc39a13/Zip13 show changes in bone, teeth and connective tissue reminiscent of the clinical spectrum of
human Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS). The Slc39a13 knockout (Slc39a13-KO) mice show defects in the maturation of osteoblasts, chondrocytes,
odontoblasts, and fibroblasts. In the corresponding tissues and cells, impairment in bone morphogenic protein (BMP) and TGF-β signaling were
observed. Homozygosity for a SLC39A13 loss of function mutation was detected in sibs affected by a unique variant of EDS that recapitulates
the phenotype observed in Slc39a13-KO mice. Hence, our results reveal a crucial role of SLC39A13/ZIP13 in connective tissue development at
least in part due to its involvement in the BMP/TGF-β signaling pathways. The Slc39a13-KO mouse represents a novel animal model linking zinc
metabolism, BMP/TGF-β signaling and connective tissue dysfunction. Zn is an essential trace element and its homeostasis in the single cell
and in whole organisms is tightly controlled by two major families of Zn transporters, Zn importers (SLC39s/ZIPs) and exporters
(SLC30s/ZnTs) , and Zn-binding proteins metallothioneins (MTs) . Mice strains carrying mutations in genes related to zinc metabolism show
various defects of development , . Children affected by the recessive condition acrodermatitis enteropathica (AE) have low serum
concentrations of Zn because of mutations in the intestinal Zn transporter SLC39A4/ZIP4. These patients suffer from severe skin disease and
frequent infections , . Zn is essential for the function of molecules with domains such as Zn-finger, Ring-finger and LIM domains , . In
addition, Zn has been implicated as signaling molecule or as affecting intracellular signaling pathways . A nematode ZnT1 orthologue, CDF1,
positively affects Ras-ERK signal transduction . Slc39a7/Zip7 was found to affect EGF/IGF signaling and tamoxifen resistancy of breast
cancer cells . Slc39a6/Zip6/Liv1 controls the nuclear localization of the Zn-finger transcription factor Snail . Extracellular signals, such
as toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4)- and FcεR1-mediated stimulation, induce the change of intracellular level of free Zn in dendritic cells and
mast cells, respectively, and this in turn controls the biological activities of extracellular stimuli , . These reports all support the
idea that Zn is an intracellular signaling molecule and lead to the prediction that Zn transporters have roles not only for maintaining Zn
homeostasis, but also for mediating intracellular signaling events . In Zn-deficient conditions, bone growth retardation and increase of
skin fragility are commonly observed , . Indeed, Zn concentrations are high in bone, cartilage, and teeth, and Zn may play a role in bone
metabolism by stimulating bone formation and mineralization . Zn is also condensed in epidermal and dermal cells and in their extracellular
matrix (ECM) , . The MT-null mice show low concentration of Zn in skin, and the epidermis fails to exhibit hyperplasia . These evidence
suggests an important role of Zn in development of both hard and soft connective tissues, which require well-coordinated local paracrine
regulators such as BMP and TGF-β to be developed , , , . Human genetics studies revealed that they play a pivotal role for connective tissue
development , . The Ehlers-Danlos syndrome (EDS) is a group of genetic disorders affecting connective tissues. Several types are
distinguished based on clinical features, inheritance pattern, and molecular basis . Many of them originate from changes in the primary
structure or posttranslational modifications of fibrillar collagens . While our studies were in progress, a mutation in SLC39A13 was found
in two families with a newly recognized variant of EDS , similar to the one we observed in two sibs (see below). In that work, emphasis is
given to the impairment in collagen lysyl hydroxylation, a feature observed also in our patients, but no explanation is given for the short
stature and other phenotypic features observed, which clearly distinguish the novel EDS type from EDS VIA (procollagen lysyl hydroxylase
deficiency). Other EDS types, such as EDS type VIB or EDS type VIID, and related conditions such as the Brittle Cornea Syndrome are still
awaiting molecular elucidation; intriguingly, the causative gene for the Brittle Cornea Syndrome has been found to be a Zn-finger gene .
Here we report that knockout of Slc39a13 in mice results in a generalized skeletal and connective tissue disorder, and that a homozygous
loss of function mutation in SLC39A13 is found in a unique type of the EDS in human subjects. In addition, Slc39a13 controls intracellular
Zn distribution and is involved in BMP and TGF-β signal transduction pathways in connective tissues. Thus, our results allow to establish a
genetic and functional link between the Zn transporter Slc39a13 and connective tissue development, showing the usefulness of the Slc39a13-KO
mouse as a novel animal model for human connective tissue diseases. To examine the physiologic role of Slc39a13 in vivo, we performed gene
depletion (Figures S1A and S1B). Slc39a13-KO mice showed growth retardation (Figures 1A and S2) and developed progressive kyphosis after 3
or 4 weeks of age (Figure 1B). Slc39a13-KO mice showed several abnormalities in bone: 1) Skull and long bones were radiolucent (Figure 1C,
left and middle); 2) Decrease in cortical bone thickness, number of trabeculae, and bone volume (three-dimensional micro-computed tomography
(3D-mCT), Figure 1C, right); 3) Decrease in bone mineral density (BMD) in skull, mandible, and cortex and cancellous of femur (Figure S3A);
4) Reduction of bone volume/total tissue volume (BV/TV) and osteoid thickness (O.Th) in tibial metaphyses (Figure S3B); 5) Double-labeling
analysis using calcein, a marker of newly formed bone, revealed that calcification activities such as mineral apposition ratio (MAR) and
bone formation rate (BFR/BS), an indicator of osteoblast function, were decreased (Figure S3C). However, eroded surface (ES/BS), the numbers
of osteoclasts (N.Oc/B Pm), and osteoclast-covered bone surface (Oc.S/BS) were essentially equivalent to those in wild-type littermates
(Figure S3D). These data indicated that Slc39a13-KO mice had reduced osteoblast activity with little alteration of osteoclast activity. A.
5-week-old female wild-type and Slc39a13-KO mice. A bar indicates 10 cm. B. Kyphosis in Slc39a13-KO mouse. Appearance and radiographs of
5-week-old mice. C. Osteopenia of Slc39a13-KO mice. X-rays of skull (left), femur and tibia (middle) of 4-week-old mice. 3D-mCT of the
tibial diaphysis (right). D. Slc39a13-KO mice show elongated growth plate with uncoordinated columnar formation, and decrease hypertrophic
zone. Tibia from 4-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice and wild-type littermates stained with H&E. Large views of growth plate are shown in middle and
lower panels. PZ, proliferative zone; HZ, hypertrophic zone. E. Gene expression of Col10a1 and Ihh gene are diminished in growth plate of
4-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice. Bar indicates 300 µm. ISH images. In addition to decrease of bone mass, Slc39a13-KO mice had a significant
reduction in long bone length (Figure S4A). The width of growth plate was elongated (Figures 1D and S4C), where hypertrophic chondrocytes
were rarely observed; instead irregularly organized proliferative chondrocytes were present (Figure 1D, bottom right). These abnormalities
were apparently observed after 2 or 3 weeks of age (Figure S4C). In Slc39a13-KO chondrocytes, type 10 collagen RNA (Col10a1), a marker for
hypertrophic chondrocytes, was diminished (Figure 1E, upper). Expression level of Fgfr3, Sox9, Sox5 and Sox6, all of them crucial for
chondrocyte differentiation, were altered in Slc39a13-KO chondrocytes (Figure S4B, left). In addition, expression of Indian hedgehog (Ihh),
a marker for the pre-hypertrophic zone, was downregulated in Slc39a13-KO cartilage (Figure 1E, lower). These results strongly suggested that
differentiation from proliferative to hypertrophic chondrocytes was impaired in Slc39a13-KO mice. The microarray data also revealed that
expression of genes regulating cell adhesion and polarity was diminished in Slc39a13-KO chondrocytes (Figure S4B, right), suggesting a role
of Slc39a13 in cellular organization during chondrocytes differentiation. Slc39a13-KO mice showed abnormal incisor teeth (Figure 2A):
malocclusion, deformity, and breakage (3D-mCT, Figure 2A, lower). They showed reduced root dentine formation of molar teeth and bone volume
of both mandible and alveolar (backscattered electron (BEN) image, Figure 2C upper; 3D m-CT, Figure 2C lower; H&E, Figure 2D), with little
morphological change in teeth crowns of molar (Figure 2C, upper right). These data indicated an indispensable role of Slc39a13 in the proper
development of root dentin, mandible, and alveolar bones. We also noted some changes in the craniofacial morphology of Slc39a13-KO mice. The
eyes were sunken, giving an enophthalmos-like appearance, and the palpebral fissures were downslanting (Figure 2B). Measurements of maxilla
and mandible bones showed that both bones were remarkably smaller in Slc39a13-KO than in wild-type mice (Figure S5). These results indicated
that Slc39a13 has a crucial role for teeth and craniofacial development. A. Slc39a13-KO mice develop abnormal incisor teeth (upper). 5-week-
old Slc39a13-KO mice show evidence of malocclusion (red arrow head), deformity (blue arrow head), and breakage (yellow arrow head) of
incisor teeth. Lower panels show 3D m-CT imaging analysis showing a systemic decrease in bone density and abnormal tooth development of
5-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice compared with wild-type littermates. B. Craniofacial features of Slc39a13-KO mouse. Eye shows enophthalmos-like
appearance and downslanting palpebral fissures in Slc39a13-KO mouse. Representative face images of 5-week-old wild-type and Slc39a13-KO
mouse. C. Root dentin formation of molar teeth (red arrow head) and the bone volume fraction of mandible (yellow arrow head) are remarkably
reduced in Slc39a13-KO mice. BEN (upper) and 3D m-CT images (lower) of mandibular molar regions in 5-week-old wild-type and Slc39a13-KO mice
are shown. D. Root dentin and alveolar bone are reduced in Slc39a13-KO mice. Sagittal sections of mandibular molar regions in 5-week-old
wild-type and Slc39a13-KO mice were stained with H&E. Boxed areas are reproduced at higher magnification. de: dentin, ab: alveolar bone. In
addition to hard tissue abnormalities, the strength of skin under tension was significantly reduced (Figure 3B). In fact, dermal collagen
fibrils layer was obviously thinner in Slc39a13-KO than in wild-type mice (Figure 3A, lower panels of left and middle). Ultrastructual
analysis by transmission-electron micrography (TEM) of dermal collagen fibrils in Slc39a13-KO mice demonstrated significant decrease and
wide variation in size compared with those in wild-type mice (Figures 3D and 3E). At the same time, the epidermis layer did not show
significant differences between Slc39a13-KO and wild-type mice (Figure 3A, right; enlarged view of blue-box area 1), indicating that the
function of collagen-producing cells might be impaired in Slc39a13-KO mice. In fact, morphology of Slc39a13-KO fibroblasts was changed in
dermis (Figure 3C, enlarged view of green-box area 2 in Figure 3A); spindle-shaped and often stellate with cytoplasmic extension in wild-
type mice, they were mostly round–shaped in Slc39a13-KO mice. In addition to dermis, substantia propria (SP) was markedly thinner in
Slc39a13-KO eye, while corneal epithelial cell (CEP) layer was not affected (Figures 3F and 3G). Therefore, Slc39a13 may participate in skin
and eye development by controlling dermal and corneal stromal fibroblast functions. A. Dermal collagen is decreased in Slc39a13-KO mice. H&E
staining shows 5-week-old Slc39a13-KO skin is thinner than wild-type littermates (left), without significant difference in epidermis (right;
enlarged view of blue-boxed area 1). Azan staining shows collagen fibril is decreased in Slc39a13-KO skin (middle). B. Fragility of skin is
increased in Slc39a13-KO mice. The strength of skin under tension is weakened in 5-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice compared with wild-type
littermates (n = 3 for each). Data represent mean±S.D. C. Magnified image of green-boxed area 2 in Figure 3A shows morphology of dermal
fibroblasts (red arrow) are spindle-shaped and often stellate with cytoplasmic extension in wild-type, while they are mostly round to oval
in Slc39a13-KO mice. D. TEM images of transversely sectioned dermal collagen from 5-week-old mice are shown. Bar; 500 nm. E. Dermal collagen
in 5-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice are characterized by thinner in size (left), and lower density of collagen fibrils (right) than that in a
wild-type mice. Thirty-nine and 168 areas in TEM images of wild-type and Slc39a13-KO samples, respectively were assessed. Data represent
mean±S.D. F. Collagen of corneal stroma is decreased in Slc39a13-KO mice. H&E (left) and Azan (middle) staining show 5-week-old Slc39a13-KO
cornea is thinner than wild-type littermates. Magnified images of red-boxed area in middle panel show the width of corneal stroma
(substantia propia; SP) is decreased in Slc39a13-KO cornea, without significant difference in corneal epithelial cells (CEP) (right). G.
Relative ratio between SP versus CEP indicates significant reduction of stromal collagen in Slc39a13-KO cornea compared with those of wild-
type (n = 5 for each). Data represent mean±S.D. We studied a pair of sibs with short stature and skeletal and connective tissue disease that
could not be ascribed to any of the known EDS types or other connective tissue disorders known so far (Figures 4A–4F, and Case reports). We
first observed reduced urinary excretion of hydroxylated collagen metabolites, but mutation analysis of several collagen 1 and 3 genes as
well as procollagen hydroxylase genes failed to show pathogenic mutations (Case reports). Analysis of the SNP microarray data obtained in
the family members revealed a single larger region of complete homozygosity pericentromeric to chromosome 11 (10 Mb encompassing 227 genes).
Further screening of this region by microsatellite mapping (Figure 4G) suggested that two parents shared alleloidentical haplotypic blocks.
The location of SLC39A13 within the region of homozygosity in combination with the strong analogy between the clinical features in our
patients and those observed in the Slc39a13-KO mouse designated SLC39A13 as candidate gene. Mutation analysis showed that both affected
individuals were homozygous, and the parents were heterozygous, for a G to A transition at nucleotide c.221 (c.221G>A) predicting the non-
conservative amino acid substitution G74D (Figure 4H). UniProt (Universal Protein Resource, http://www.uniprot.org) describes the potential
structural topology of SLC39A13/ZIP13 as an eight-transmembrane protein as consistent with other family members (Figure 4J) , , , and
glycine −74 is located in the second transmembrane domain of SLC39A13 and conserved through all vertebrate species down to fish (Figures 4I
and 4J, and data not shown). Screening of 128 chromosomes of Caucasian descent and an additional 48 chromosomes from Portuguese descent did
not reveal any instance of the c.221G>A mutation. Thus, we inferred that c.221G>A/G74D was pathogenic, further establishing the important
role of SLC39A13 in connective tissue development in mouse and human. The elder affected sib is shown at age 22 with short stature and with
mildly shortened trunk (A), antimongoloid eye slant with lack of periorbital tissue (B), missing upper lateral incisor tooth (C), thin and
finely wrinkled skin on the palm of his hands (D), severe varicosity of his lower legs and feet (E), vertebral flattening with sclerosis of
the vertebral endplates (F, radiograph taken at age 18 years). G. Autozygous haplotype blocks detected by SNP genotyping are represented by
the black boxes, while blocks detected by microsatellite analyses are represented as solid boxes in different colors (the common ancestral
haplotype being represented in red). The microsatellites used are shown on the left, and the numbers refer to microsatellites' alleles. Gene
density (GD) for local transcripts is shown in the center. Individual genes are depicted as small circles, shaded (for the olfactory
receptor genes clusters) or open (all other genes). The relative position of SLC39A13 and of the centromere (CEN) are also indicated. H.
Sequence tracings from SLC39A13 amplicons showing homozygosity for a G to A transition changing codon 74 from glycine to aspartic acid in
the two affected subjects (Pat-1 and Pat-2), as well as heterozygosity in the parents. I. Alignment of amino acid sequences of SLC39A13
protein showing high conservation of sequences and in particular of glycine-74 (red box). J. Assignment of transmembrane domains of SLC39A13
(shaded boxes) was taken from Uniprot (http://www.uniprot.org). The substitution of glycine-74 with aspartic acid was predicted to cause a
six-residue shift of the second transmembrane domain towards the carboxy end by HMMTOP program (http://www.enzim.hu/hmmtop/, lower panel).
Taken together, all results obtained from Slc39a13-KO mice and human cases indicated that Slc39a13 was required for connective tissue
development. Indeed, Slc39a13 gene was relatively highly expressed in some tissues such as bone and eye (Figure S1C). This gene was also
expressed in osteoblasts of tibia (Figures 5A1 and 5A2) and of alveolar bone (Figure 5C2), in proliferative zone of growth plate (Figure
5B), and in odontoblasts on the forming of the dentine of crown in molar tooth (Figure 5C1). Fibroblasts in reticular layer of dermis of
skin expressed Slc39a13 protein (Figure 5D). Collectively, Slc39a13 was expressed in cells essential for connective tissue development. A.
Slc39a13 gene is expressed in osteoblasts (1 and 2; red arrow head) in tibia of 4-week-old mice. Regions indicated as 1 and 2 in top are
magnified as 400 times. ISH images. B. Slc39a13 mRNA is expressed in proliferative zone of growth plate (left) at 3-week-old tibia. Region
indicated as 1 and 2 in top are enlarged at lower panels. PZ: proliferative zone. HZ: hypertrophic zone. C. Slc39a13 gene is expressed in
odontoblasts of 10-day-old molar teeth. ISH analysis shows Slc39a13 is expressed in odontoblast (black arrowhead) lining the dentin of crown
(1), and in osteoblast (red arrowhead) on the surface of alveolar bone (2). Regions indicated as 1 and 2 in top are magnified as 400 times.
od: odontoblasts, ab: alveolar bone. D. Slc39a13 protein expression in dermal fibroblasts. IHC analysis shows Slc39a13 protein is expressed
in fibroblasts in dermis of 5-week-old wild-type mice (left upper). Enlarged images of boxed areas are shown in IHC images. Bar indicates 10
µm. Slc39a13 belongs to the SLC39/ZIP family of Zn transporters, and therefore is expected to be located on the cell surface and/or on the
lumen of intracellular compartments , although neither its cellular localization nor its function has been known previously. We found that
Slc39a13 protein was localized in perinuclear region of osteoblasts, chondrocytes, pulpal cells, and of fibroblasts (Figure 6A), and mainly
located in Golgi apparatus (Figure 6B), suggesting that Slc39a13 protein functions as an intracellular Zn transporter in connective tissue
forming cells. Consistent with this hypothesis, while the overall Zn concentration in serum and in dermal fibroblasts as a whole was similar
in wild-type and in Slc39a13-KO mice (data not shown), electron probe X-ray micro analysis (EPMA) capable of detecting Zn level in a
restricted area of a single cell (Figure 6C, upper) revealed that Zn level in Golgi was increased in Slc39a13–KO primary dermal fibroblasts
as compared to that in wild-type cells (Figure 6C, lower right). Considering the fact that members of the SLC39s/ZIPs family function as
transporters of Zn from the extracellular space into the cytosol , all the evidence supports the notion that this transporter Slc39a13
functions as a Zn transporter transporting Zn from the Golgi to the cytosol and thus influences the Zn level at least in areas of the
cytosol, adjacent to the Golgi membrane. We were unable to detect a significant change of the average Zn concentration in the cytosol
because apparently, the Zn concentration detected by EPMA was very variable (data not shown); cytosol space is broad and Zn content seems to
be heterogeneous from area to area in cytosol. We also found that the Zn concentration in the cell nucleus was decreased in the absence of
Slc39a13 (Figure 6C, lower left), implicating that Slc39a13 also affects the nuclear translocation of either Zn-binding proteins, or Zn
itself, or both. In their complexity, the results indicate that Slc39a13 affects the intracellular distribution of Zn in connective tissue
forming cells. A. Slc39a13 protein locates on perinuclear region in primary osteoblasts (1), chondrocytes (2), pulpal cells (3), and dermal
fibroblasts (4). Slc39a13, nuclei, and actin were stained with anti-Slc39a13 specific antibody, DAPI, and phalloidin, respectively. Confocal
microscopic images. B. Slc39a13 is localized in Golgi. Confocal microscopic analysis using dermal fibroblasts. Golgi, Slc39a13, nuclei, and
actin is stained with anti-GM130 antibody, anti-Slc39a13 specific antibody, DAPI, and phalloidin, respectively. C. Upper: Schematic diagram
of EPMA to detect intracellular zinc level. Golgi and nucleus in primary dermal fibroblasts are scanned by electron beam (EB), and
characteristic X-ray (CX) for zinc is detected. Lower: Slc39a13 involves in control of intracellular zinc distribution. The ratio of zinc
level in Golgi or nucleus versus total Zn in those organelles (n = 11 and 10 for wild-type and Slc39a13-KO dermal fibroblasts, respectively)
was obtained by calculating counts per seconds (cps) of CX for zinc generated by EB scanning; Zn level in each organelle (%) = Each
organelle Zn (cps)/{nuclear Zn (cps)+Golgi Zn (cps)}×100. Data represents ±S.D. To investigate further the consequences of genetic ablation
of Slc39a13, we explored molecular events taking place in Slc39a13-KO mice by microarray analysis using primarily isolated osteoblasts and
chondrocytes. The pathway-Express program indicated that only BMP/TGF-β signaling was the cascade that was commonly perturbed in both cell
types by loss of Slc39a13 (P-value of hypergeometric distribution with Bonferroni type multiple testing correction, <0.01) (Figure S6A).
Consistent with this, we observed changes of gene expression in Scl39a13-KO mice, such as depletion of Msx2, a homeobox gene crucially
involved in BMP-mediated bone and teeth development (Figures S7 left and S8A), abnormal accumulation of Runx2, an essential gene for
osteoblast maturation (Figure S7, right), and decrease of dermal type 1 collagen (Figure S8B). In addition, BMP4 stimulation in Slc39a13-KO
primary osteoblasts failed to induce Msx2 (Figure 7A), and Runx2 was instead overexpressed (Figure 7A). Slc39a13-KO primary dermal
fibroblasts showed reduced induction of type 1 Collagen RNA (Col1a2) and Smad7 in response to stimulation with TGF-β (Figure 7B). Ectopic
expression of Slc39a13 in Slc39a13-KO primary osteoblasts and dermal fibroblasts recovered responsiveness against BMP4 and TGF-β (Figures
7C, 7D and S10), establishing an essential role of Slc39a13 for BMP4 and TGF-β signaling. Importantly, mouse Slc39a13 carrying the
homologous G to A substitution (G74D, Figures 7C and 7D) as well as human SLC39A13 having the G to A mutation obtained from EDS patients
(data not shown) was unable to fully rescue the unresponsiveness of osteoblasts and fibroblasts isolated from Slc39a13-KO mice against BMP
and TGF-β, respectively, indicating that this mutation causes a loss of function. A. Slc39a13 is involved in BMP4 -mediated gene expression.
Primary osteoblasts were stimulated with 50 ng/ml of BMP4 for indicated periods, and gene expression including Slc39a13, Msx2, Runx2, and
Gapdh was examined by RT-PCR. B. Slc39a13 is involved in TGF-β –mediated gene expression. Primary dermal fibroblasts were incubated with 2.5
ng/ml of TGF-β1 for indicated periods, and gene expression of Slc39a13, Col1a2, Smad7, and Gapdh was examined by RT-PCR. C and D. Ectopic
expression of mouse wild-type Slc39a13 (WT), but not of G74D mutant (G74D), rescued BMP4 or TGF-β -induced gene expression in Slc39a13-KO
primary osteoblasts (C) or dermal fibroblast (D), respectively, assessed by real-time PCR. Values represent means±S.D. of three separate
experiments. E and F. Slc39a13 is involved in BMP/TGF-β –induced nuclear localization of Smad proteins. Primary osteoblasts (E) or dermal
fibroblasts (F) were stimulated with either 50 ng/ml of BMP4 for 15 minutes (E, right panels) or 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1 for 30 minutes (F, right
panels), respectively, followed by staining for Smad1, Smad2/3, nuclei (DAPI), and actin (Actin). Confocal microscopic images. Smad
transcription factors are major signal transducers of BMP and TGF-β signaling , . They are phosphorylated by the activated receptor complex,
and subsequently translocate to the nucleus to initiate transcription of their target genes. BMP4 and TGF-β stimulation induced equivalent
phosphorylation level of Smad 1/5/8 (Smads) in Slc39a13-KO osteoblasts and Smad2 (Smad2) in Slc39a13-KO dermal fibroblasts, respectively
(Figure S6B). In contrast, nuclear localization of Smad proteins (Figures 7E, 7F and S9C) as well as phosphorylated Smad proteins (Figures
S9A, S9B and S9D) was disrupted in BMP4 or TGF-β-stimulated Slc39a13-KO cells. This was further confirmed by immunoblotting utilizing
subcellular fractions (Figures S9E and S9F). These results suggested that Slc39a13 was involved in nuclear localization of Smad proteins,
but not for their phosphorylation, in connective tissue forming cells. We herein described (1) that SLC39A13 is crucially involved in
connective tissue development, (2) the emerging role of the Zn transporter SLC39A13 in BMP/TGF-β signaling in corresponding tissues and
cells, (3) that SLC39A13 dysfunction causes skeletal and connective tissue disease both in mouse and man, (4) and thus that Slc39a13-KO
mouse is a novel animal model for human connective tissue diseases. Slc39a13-KO mice show osteopenia due to the reduction of osteoblast
activity (Figures 1C and S3). As shown in Figure 7, loss of Slc39a13 caused dysregulation of BMP/TGF-β -mediated gene expression including
expression of Runx2 and Msx2, both of which are critically involved in bone, tooth, and craniofacial skeletogenesis , , , , . In
BMP4-stimulated Slc39a13-KO osteoblasts, we observed simultaneous upregulation and depletion of Runx2 and Msx2, respectively (Figure 7A).
This pattern of expression was also observed in vivo (Figure S7). Runx2 is essential for osteoblast differentiation , meanwhile it represses
functional differentiation of osteoblasts when overexpressed in mice , suggesting that proper control of its spatio-temporal expression thus
seems to be important for osteoblast differentiation in vivo , . Msx2 is reported to promote osteoblast differentiation independently of
Runx2 . Therefore, the Slc39a13 -Msx2 gene expression axis may also be critical to lead appropriate skeletal and craniofacial development.
Slc39a13-KO mice show evidence of impaired differentiation of chondrocytes in cartilage: expression of Fgfr3 and Sox9 is dysregulated
(Figure S4B, left), and that of Ihh is disrupted (Figure 1E, lower). The gain-of-function mutant of Fgfr3 causes achondroplasia , Sox9
controls chondrocyte differentiation via Sox5 and Sox6 expression , and Ihh is a master gene of bone development under BMP control , ,
suggesting that Slc39a13 exerts a profound influence on genes crucial to chondrocyte differentiation. We also found irregular formation of
chondrocyte columns in Slc39a13-KO growth plate (Figure 1D, bottom right), where expression of genes required for tight junction and
cellular polarity , were diminished (Figure S4B, right). The irregularity in cellular morphology was also observed in Slc39a13-KO
odontoblasts in the molar tooth (Figure S8A, bottom left) and dermal fibroblasts (Figure 3C); thus, Slc39a13 have a role in growth plate
architecture and cellular organization, implicating the possible involvement of Slc39a13 in BMP/TGF-β signalings since they are well
recognized to control cell adhesion, polarity, and movement , although we cannot exclude the possibility that other signaling pathways are
also affected by loss of Slc39a13. In teeth, Slc39a13-KO mice show reduced normal formation of root dentin in molar but no significant
morphological changes in the molar crown (Figure 2C, upper right), suggesting that teeth development normally initiates without Slc39a13 and
proceeds until bell stages. From late bell stage, the epithelial and mesenchymal interactions between ameloblasts and odontoblasts are
activated, resulting in mineralization, and the root of a tooth begins its development once the crown formation has been established , . In
Slc39a13-KO mice, odontoblasts cannot sufficiently induce target genes of BMP signaling such as Msx2 (Figure S8A), thus reduction of the
width of root dentin may occur since BMP has a crucial role in this stage . Intriguingly, the root was elongated normally in Slc39a13-KO
molar tooth (Figure 2C, upper right), suggesting that Slc39a13 is required for root dentin accumulation but not for root elongation. The
skin of Slc39a13-KO mice was abnormally fragile, most likely because of the reduction in dermal collagen fibrils (Figures 3D and 3E).
Similarly, corneal stromal collagen was reduced in Slc39a13-KO eyes (Figures 3F and 3G). A functional dysregulation of Slc39a13-KO
fibroblasts (Figures 3C and 7B) is a plausible reason why both skin and corneal development are impaired in Slc39a13-KO mice, since
fibroblasts and TGF-β are required for their development and repair , , . Slc39a13-KO mice also showed lipoatrophy; the subcutaneous layer
of adipose tissue was significantly thinner in Slc39a13-KO than in wild-type mice (Figure 3A, lower left), a finding present also in the EDS
patients (Case reports), suggesting that Slc39a13 may determine the fate of other mesenchymal-originated cells like adipocytes. It is also
noteworthy that the physical strength of the ocular bulbs in Slc39a13-KO mice was reduced (data not shown); loss of Slc39a13 may be
pathogenically linked to connective tissue disorders associated with fragile eyes. These mouse phenotypes of skeletal, dental, dermal,
ocular, and craniofacial changes were strongly reminiscent of human EDS and OI , , , , , . We investigated a pair of sibs who had short
stature in combination with skeletal and connective tissue changes that evoked EDS and OI. The SLC39A13 gene was contained in a single
region of homozygosity on chromosome 11, and mutation analysis revealed a point mutation predicting the substitution of a highly conserved
amino acid (G74D) in the second transmembrane domain (Figures 4I and 4J). A similar substitution of the corresponding glycine (G330) to
aspartic acid (G330D) in the first transmembrane domain of SLC39A4/ZIP4 has been associated with the genetic disease, AE. We showed that the
homologous mutation in SLC39A13 indeed causes loss of function (Figures 7C and 7D). Accordingly, the individuals homozygous for the SLC39A13
loss of function mutation were affected by a disorder analogous to that observed in the Slc39a13-KO mice and corresponding to the novel EDS
variant. Indeed, the recapitulation of the mouse phenotype by the human disorder is extensive, and includes osteopenia, short stature, thin
and fragile skin, enophthalmos, thin sclerae, downslanting palpebral fissures and dental anomalies. In agreement with our data, and while
our manuscript was being prepared, Giunta et al reported two families with a SLC39A13 mutation and a novel type of EDS . This mutation they
found was different from the one we identified but was also predicted to cause loss of function. These authors focused on the reduced
excretion of hydroxylysine metabolites and suggest inhibition of lysyl hydroxylase as the probable pathogenetic cause. Indeed, we had also
observed reduced urinary excretion of hydroxylated collagen metabolites in our subjects. However, the overall clinical picture of our
patients and those described by Giunta et al. is different from that of lysyl hydroxylase deficiency (EDS VIA) with normal stature but
severe muscular hypotonia and marked looseness of skin and joints; thus, it is clear that the pathogenetic mechanism postulated by Giunta et
al., i.e., secondly inhibition of procollagen lysyl hydroxylase activities, may be operational but does not account for the short stature
and the additional features, including hypodontia, observed both in the patients and in the mouse model. The defect in BMP/TGF-β signaling
that we have described is more consistent with the phenotype; impaired TGF-β signaling fits well with short stature in mouse and human, as
increased TGF-β activity has been regarded as the cause of tall stature in Marfan syndrome, another inherited disorder of connective tissue
, . Notably enough, some clinical spectrum of the EDS patients and of Slc39a13-KO mice actually resemble that of human cases and animal
models of Zn-deficiency, that show developmental abnormalities including dwarfism, bone growth retardation, and increase of skin fragility ,
, . Thus, our combined findings in the mouse model and in the human subjects are unequivocable and point to a “Zn - connective tissues -
BMP/TGF-β signaling” connection that deserves thorough exploration. Our data showed Slc39a13 is involved in BMP/TGF-β signaling pathways in
connective tissue forming cells and in nuclear translocation of Smad proteins (Figures 7E, 7F, and S9). Smad proteins are phosphorylated
downstream of BMP or TGF-β receptor complex, followed by nuclear translocation. Among the Smad proteins, all receptor-regulated Smad (R-
Smad) and Smad4 possess a Zn-binding motif in the MH1 domain for their DNA binding . At the moment, we do not know how Slc39a13 regulates
the nuclear localization of Smad proteins, but our results show that the Zn transporter Slc39a13 affects either directly or indirectly BMP
and TGF-β signaling pathways. Considering the fact that there was no change of serum Zn concentration in both cases of human patients (Case
reports) and of Slc3913-KO mice (data not shown) and that Slc39a13 is located in Golgi (Figure 6B), it seems likely that Slc39a13 regulates
the intracellular Zn distribution. In fact, the Zn concentration at the whole-cell level was unchanged, but the Zn level in the Golgi was
increased in Slc39a13-KO cells (Figure 6C, lower right), indicating that Slc39a13 functions as a Zn transporter allowing for efflux of Zn
from the Golgi into the cytoplasm, where Zn is expected to interact with Smad. Our data supported that Slc39a13 functions as a Zn
transporter controlling intracellular Zn distribution, although we cannot exclude the possibility that Slc39a13 may transport other metals,
like Slc39a2/Zip2 for iron and calcium , Slc39a14/Zip14 for iron , and Slc39a8/Zip8 for cadmium . At the moment it remains unknown how Zn is
transferred to its target molecule. It may be simplistic to assume that Zn transporters such as Slc39a13 simply shuttle Zn ions across the
Golgi membrane, and that their effect is the result of changes in the concentration of Zn in one or the other cell compartment. Or, unknown
“metal chaperone(s)” may transfer Zn directly from a given Zn transporter to Zn binding molecule . The mechanisms how Slc39a13 regulates the
nuclear localization of Smad proteins should be an intriguing novel question, and the demonstration of a complex perturbation of
intracellular signaling and of deregulation of gene expression in Slc39a13-ablated tissues and cells indicates avenues for further research.
Taken together, the results obtained in Slc39a13-KO mice and patients with EDS establish that the Zn transporter SLC39A13 controls
intracellular Zn distribution and is involved in connective tissue development. We showed SLC39A13 is required for full activation of BMP
and TGF-β signaling through controlling the intracellular localization of Smad in connective tissue forming cells. This would be at least
one of the possible reasons why linear growth, bone mineralization, root dentin formation, and fibroblastic collagen synthesis are impaired
in Slc39a13-KO mice and the EDS patients. The Slc39a13-KO phenotype, however, seems to differ from typical BMP/TGF-β related-KO mice which
show more severe phenotypes than Slc39a13-KO mice . This could be explained in the following ways: 1) In Slc39a13-KO, BMP/TGF-β signaling is
affected only in those tissues where Slc39a13 is expressed and functions non-redundantly. 2) In BMP or TGF-β related-KO mice, all tissues
are defective of their signaling. 3) In Slc39a13-KO mice, in addition to BMP/TGF-β signaling, other signaling pathways might be affected;
all of these issues should be unfolded in the future. Our study yields new insights into the relevance of Zn transporters in the biological
events, and illustrates their role in health and disease. Thus, further exploration of the role(s) of Zn transporters and of their
dysfunction will reveal the role(s) of Zn as a signaling molecule, shed light on other genetic disorders of connective tissue, and help to
understand the pathophysiology of Zn-deficiency. Generation of knockout mouse line of the Slc39a13 gene was performed using previously
described methods . A bacterial artificial chromosome (BAC) clone containing the mouse Slc39a13 was screened from an embryonic stem (ES)
cell–BAC library . A targeting vector was created to eliminate the genomic region encompassing exons 6–8 by inserting a Neo-cassette into a
region between exons 5 and 9 of Slc39a13 and deleting the intervening exons (Figure S1A). This region contains the conserved HEXPHEXGD motif
common to SLC39/ZIP family members . This vector was introduced into R1 ES cells and cloned homologous recombinants were selected with
antibiotics and the genotypes verified. We developed chimeric mice with the targeted ES cell clones and obtained homozygous mice by
interbreeding the offspring. Heterozygous mice were phenotypically normal, and crosses between heterozygotes produced homozygous mutant mice
according to Mendelian expectations. All procedures including mouse handling were conducted according to guidelines approved by the RIKEN
Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee. Genotyping was done by PCR using LA taq (TAKARA BIO Inc.) (Figure S1B). Primers used for
genotyping are; F; 5′-CTTGTAGCCCACCAATCAGAGACCGATGAT-3′ R1; 5′-TGGTGGTCAGAAGCCCGATCT-3′ R2; 5′-GCTGCTAAAGCGCATGCTCCAGACTGCCTT-3′
Radiographs, BMD, measurement of long bone length, and 3D-mCT scans of bone were taken using a composite X-ray analyzing system (In vivo 3D
Micro X-ray CT System R_mCT, Rigaku). The dissected mandibles were scanned using micro CT (MCT-100 MFZ, HITACHI). BEN was scanned using
Electron Probe X-ray Micro Analyzer (JXA9200 II, JOEL). Bone histomorphometric analysis was performed by using the left tibia from 4-week-
old mice (n = 5) injected with calcein (Wako Pure Chemical Industries, Ltd.) for in vivo fluorescent labeling (16 mg/kg body weight/10 ml)
at 1 and 4 days before sacrifice. The tibia was fixed in 70% ethanol, and the undercalcified bone were embedded in Glycolmetacrylate.
3-micrometer-thick section was cut longitudinally in the proximal region of the tibia, and stained for toluidine-blue-O and tartrate-
resistant acid phosphatase (TRAP). Histomorphometry was performed with the semiautomatic image analyzing system (Osteoplan II; Carl Zeiss)
linked to a light microscope. The histomorphometric measurements were made at 400 times using a minimum of 17∼20 optical fields in the
secondary spongiosa area from the growth plate-metaphyseal junction. Nomenclature, symbols, and units used are those recommended by the
Nomenclature Committee of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research . Paraffin sections (4∼6 µm) processed from tibia of 1, 2, 3
and 4-week-old mice, mandible of 5-week-old mice, and molar tooth of 10 day-old mice were prepared for H&E staining, and for in situ
hybridization (ISH). Digoxigenin-labeled antisense RNA probes for Slc39a13, Msx2, Runx2, Col10a1, and Ihh were used for ISH by the method of
GENOSTAFF Inc. The sections used in ISH analysis were counterstained with Kernechtrot stain solution. Probe sequences and hybridization
conditions are available upon request. Skin and eye isolated from 5-week-old mice were formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded. Paraffin
sections (4 µm) were cut and stained with H&E and Azan for histological analysis, and also used for immuno histochemistry (IHC). We made a
rabbit polyclonal antibody specific to a peptide corresponding to the CLAQPAAEPGLRAVVRNL sequence of mouse Slc39a13, which was used for IHC
(Figure 5D) and for confocal microscopic analysis (Figure 6). We confirmed that this antibody was able to detect and was specific to
Slc39a13 since it did not show positive signals in Slc39a13-KO cells, as shown in Figure 5D. For collagen type I staining, anti-rabbit
polyclonal antibody against collagen I (Abcam) was used. To measure the fragility of skin, dorsal skin of 5-week-old mice were chopped in
2×3 cm2, and the strength of skin under tension was measured by a spring scale. For transmission electron microscopy, skin biopsy samples
were taken from dorsal skin of 5-week-old wild-type and Slc39a13-KO mice, and prepared as previously described . For measurement of collagen
fibril density, the superficial dermis was photographed in the central portion, and diameters were measured along the minor axis of cross-
sections using Image-Pro Plus (Media Cybernetics). Quantitation of fibrils/nm2 was also measured from transmission electron micrographs of
cross-sections from dermis of the dorsal skin region of mice using Image-Pro Plus (Media Cybernetics). Cells cultured on glass coverslips in
35-mm Glass base dishes (Iwaki) were stimulated and then fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde in PBS. Immunostaining was done after cells were
made permeable with BD Perm/Wash Buffer containing antibodies and 1% BSA. Fluorescence was detected with an inverted spectral Confocal
Scanning system TCS SP2 AOBS (Leica) with an oil immersion 63× objective. Images were processed with Adobe Photoshop Version 7.0. GM130
antibody (clone35, BD Transduction Laboratories), DAPI (Molecular Probes), and Alexa Fluor®546 phalloidin (Molecular Probes) were used to
visualize Golgi, nuclei, and actin, respectively. Alexa Fluor® 568 F(ab')2 fragment of goat anti-mouse IgG (Molecular Probes), Alexa Fluor®
488 F(ab’)2 fragment of goat anti-rabbit IgG (Molecular Probes) were used for secondary staining. The following antibodies were used for
confocal microscopy and immunoblotting; anti-Smad1 (Zymed), anti-Smad2/3 (BD Transduction Laboratories), anti-phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (Cell
Signaling), and anti-phosphorylated Smad2 (Cell Signaling). Anti-tubulin (B-5-1-2, Sigma), anti-Flag (Sigma), anti-HDAC1 (Sigma). We made a
rabbit antibody by immunization with a peptide corresponding to the NSKEDPSQAPSKDPTAA sequence of mouse Slc39a13, which was used for
immunoblotting (Figure S6). As shown in Figure S6B, this antibody reacted with a 40 kDa molecule in wild type cells but not in Slc39a13-KO
cells. BMP4 and TGF-β1 were purchased from R&D systems. Cells were stimulated with BMP4 or TGF-β1 for indicated periods, and then were lysed
with hypotonic buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.2% NP-40, 10 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT) supplemented with proteinase inhibitors for 5 min.
After centrifugation at 10,000×g for 1 min, cytoplasmic fraction was isolated as supernatant. Precipitates were then incubated with
extraction buffer (20 mM HEPES pH 7.9, 0.1 mM EDTA, 0.2% NP-40, 420 mM NaCl, 1 mM DTT) supplemented with proteinase inhibitors at 4°C for 30
min. Nuclear fraction was subsequently extracted by centrifugation (10,000×g, 4°C, 10 min). For total cell lysates, cells were suspended
with lysis buffer (1% NP-40, 20 mM Tris-HCl pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl) supplemented with proteinase inhibitors, and lysates were cleared by
centrifugation (10,000×g, 4°C, 10 min). 20 µg of each fraction were subjected to SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting. Electron Probe X-ray
Micro Analyzer (JXA9200 II, JOEL) assessed intracellular zinc distribution in primary dermal fibroblasts. Wild-type and Slc39a13-KO dermal
fibroblasts were cultured in 6 well plates, and cells were fixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M sodium cacodylate buffer and post-fixed
in 1% osmium tetroxide. Subsequently, the cells were dehydrated in an ascending series of alcohol and embedded in epoxy resin. Electron beam
scanned Golgi and nucleus of embedded cells. Characteristic X-ray for zinc generated by electron beam exposure was detected. Gene expression
profiling was conducted using total RNAs obtained from primary osteoblasts and chondrocytes of wild-type and Slc39a13-KO mice. Biotinylated
cRNA was synthesized using a One-Cycle Target Labeling kit (Affymetrix) according to the manufacturer's manual and hybridized with Mouse
Genome 430 2.0 Arrays (Affymetrix). The signal intensities for each probe set were calculated using a gcRMA method in a Genespring GX 7.3
software package (Agilent). Using lists of genes exhibiting 2-fold changes between wild-type and Slc39a13-KO cells, pathway analysis was
conducted on a Pathway Express program (http://vortex.cs.wayne.edu/projects.htm#pathways-Express). The raw data for microarray analysis are
available from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) of the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI; series accession nos. GSE10555
and GSE10556). For RT-PCR analysis, total RNA was extracted from cells and several tissues of C57/B6J mice using Sepasol-RNA I (Nacalai
tesque), and reverse-transcribed with oligo-(dT) primer and a reverse transcriptase (ReverTra Ace, TOYOBO). SYBR Green PCR Master Mix
(Applied Biosystems) was used for real-time PCR analysis. Primer sequences for RT-PCR and real-time PCR are listed in Supplemental Tables S2
and S3, respectively. Differences among multiple groups were compared by 1-way ANOVA followed by a post-hoc comparison using Fisher's PLSD
test. The two-tailed Student's test was used to analyze difference between 2 groups. The committee approved the studies and confirmed that
informed consent was obtained from human subjects as follows: The patients were not recruited in a prospective study, but came to us with a
request for diagnostic help and genetic counseling owing to our reputation as medical experts in skeletal and connective tissue diseases. We
have seen them at the Lausanne University Hospital. Thus, our relationship with them falls under the physician-patient relationship as
defined by Swiss law; every single procedure (clinical examination, venipuncture, radiography and skin biopsy) is directly related to the
diagnostic procedure and is not per se a research procedure. Equally, analysis of the patients' biologic material (urine, blood, DNA, cell
culture) is part of the routine diagnostic procedure to confirm or rule our known genetic entities (in our case, the known forms of Ehlers-
Danlos syndromes). Although written consent is required only for surgical operation with anaesthesia, which was not performed in our case,
we obtained both oral and written informed consent. The IRB has granted approval for the informed consent for research procedures of this
type (i.e., non-surgical) to all activities performed within the Swiss National Foundation research project “Molecular Bases of Human
Chondrodysplasias” (PIs: A. Superti-Furga and L. Bonafé). This is to cover for the performance of additional procedures such as the
sequencing of “novel” genes and the study of cell cultures in such patients. The patients themselves (two well-informed young adults) have
enthusiastically (and thankfully) given oral and written informed consent to study their DNA and cells hoping for results that could help in
therapy and/or genetic counseling. We identified a sib pair, a male and a female, with short stature and a combination of skeletal and
connective tissue findings that could not be classified in existing nosologic categories. Briefly, these individuals were born at term from
uncomplicated pregnancies. The parents were not knowingly related but originated from the same region in Portugal; they were healthy and of
average stature. Both sibs were of normal size and weight at birth but showed progressive short stature beginning in the second half of the
first year of life. Among the clinical signs at that time were muscular hypotonia and soft skin, leading to the diagnostic suspicion of the
Ehlers-Danlos Syndrome (EDS). During childhood, the main clinical signs and features were thin, fragile, but not hyperelastic skin that
bruised easily and was particularly thin on the hands and feet; varicose veins; moderate joint laxity; blueish or greyish sclerae;
downslanting palpebral fissures; and hypodontia of one or a few teeth in permanent dentition. Both had astigmatism in childhood.
Radiographic examination revealed moderate osteopenia, flattened or biconcave vertebral bodies with flaky irregularity of the endplates as
well as mild dysplastic changes at the metaphyses of long bones and of the phalanges. As adults, the affected male and female subjects were,
respectively, 145 and 135 cm tall; their body proportions were normal, indicating that the platyspondyly was accompanied by shortening of
the long bones. Their skin remained thin and fragile, and the subcutaneous fat tissue was sparse. Both individuals had marked venous
varicosities on their feet and legs. The male subject suffered from a cerebral hemorrhage posteriorly to the left putamen at age 21 years,
from which he recovered completely. Intellectual development was above average, and there was no history of susceptibility to infections.
Thus, the patients had features of the EDS, in particular of EDS type IV (thin and fragile skin, varicose veins, cerebral hemorrhage) and
some signs of osteogenesis imperfecta (flattened or biconcave vertebrae and grayish sclerae), but the degree of short stature was unusual,
and the facial appearance with downslanting palpebral fissures as well as the dysplastic vertebral bodies similarly did not fit either
diagnosis well , , . Routine analysis of collagen synthesis in cultured fibroblasts was normal, ruling out a diagnosis of EDS IV and making
OI unlikely. Analysis of the urinary excretion of collagen crosslinks revealed that both individuals excreted a reduced ratio of
hydroxylated vs. unhydroxylated collagen crosslink products in their urine (Supplemental Table S1). The reduction was statistically
significant when compared to that of either parent, but was milder than that observed in lysyl hydroxylase deficiency (EDS type VIA), . A
therapeutic trial of vitamin C administered orally at a dose of 1 g/day for one month to stimulate procollagen lysyl hydroxylation in the
two affected individuals did not change the urinary excretion pattern. After elucidation of the SLC39A13 mutations, Zn levels were
determined twice in both affected individuals in plasma and in urine to test for a possible perturbation of whole-body Zn homeostasis; the
Zn levels were within the normal range for adults. This may be consistent with the finding that mouse Slc39a13 is located in the Golgi and
therefore SLC39A13 likely regulates the intracellular Zn distribution. Based on the slightly but consistently reduced excretion of
hydroxylated collagen crosslink products, we first hypothesized that this condition was either a variant of EDS VIA or another enzymatic
deficiency leading to impaired procollagen lysyl hydroxylation, but extensive linkage analysis under a model of recessive inheritance and
targeted mutation analysis excluded the three procollagen lysyl hydroxylase genes PLOD1, PLOD2, and PLOD3 as responsible for the disease;
further studies excluded the genes, COL1A1, COL1A2, COL3A1, and CRTAP. Information for plasmid construction and transfection, skeletal
staining, primary cell culture condition, measurement of maxilla and mandibles, and analysis of human biological samples was described in
Text S1. (0.68 KB DOC MB ) Click here for additional data file. Generation of Slc39a13-KO mice. A. Schematic diagram of the construct used
to generate Slc39a13-KO mice. A targeting vector was constructed with a Neo-cassette inserted into the region between exons 5 and 9 of
Slc39a13 locus. TK: thymidine kinase B. Infants produced by crosses between heterozygotes were genotyped by PCR using specific primers (F,
R1 and R2, shown in Figure S1A). WT: wild-type, HE: heterozygote, KO: Slc39a13-KO. C. Slc39a13 gene expression in mouse tissues assessed by
RT-PCR. sLN: superficial inguinal lymph node, mLN: mesenteric lymph node, BM: bone marrow cells, ΔBM: without bone marrow cells. (0.73 MB
TIF) Click here for additional data file. Growth retardation of Slc39a13-KO mice. A. Left: Little significant difference in skeletogenesis
and body size at newborn between wild-type and Slc39a13-KO mice. Bar indicates 1 cm; Right: Body weight of newborn mice (n = 5 for each).
Data represent mean±S.D. B. Significant delayed growth is observed after 3 weeks of age (n = 5; male mice). Data represent mean±S.D. C. Both
male and female Slc39a13-KO mice show growth retardation (n = 10 for each). Data represent mean±S.E.M. WT: wild-type mice, HE: heterozygote
mice, KO: Slc39a13-KO mice. (1.41 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Skeletal histomorphometry of Slc39a13-KO mice. A-D: Bone
histomorphometric analysis. Data represent mean±S.D. A. BMD (bone mineral density) in skull, mandible, cortex, and cancellous zone of femur
are decreased in 5-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice compared with wild-type mice (n = 5 for each). B. Bone volume and osteoid thickness of 4-week-
old Slc39a13-KO mice are lower than those of wild-type (n = 5 for each). C. Osteoblast function is significantly decreased in Slc39a13-KO
mice. A double-labeling analysis of calcein (left), mineral apposition ratio (middle), and first and second calcein bone formation rate
(right) of 4-week-old mice (n = 5 for each). D. Osteoclast activity of Slc39a13-KO mice is equivalent to wild-type littermates. Eroded
surface (left), osteoclast number (middle), and osteoclast-covered bone surface (right) of 4-week-old Slc39a13-KO and wild-type mice are
shown (n = 5 for each). (0.94 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Abnormal cartilage development in Slc39a13-KO mice. A. Length of
femur (upper) and tibia (lower) of 4-week-old Slc39a13-KO mice are shorter than those of wild-type (n = 5 for each). Data represent
mean±S.D. B. Genes involved in chondrocyte differentiation (left) and in cell adhesion or polarity (right) are dysregulated in Slc39a13-KO
primary chondrocytes. Gene expression profiling by DNA microarray analysis was carried out using total RNA from Slc39a13-KO or wild-type
primary chondrocytes. Each gene was normalized to the median of the measurement for that gene. C. Abnormal morphology of growth plate in
Slc39a13-KO mice. H&E staining images are shown. PZ: proliferative zone. HZ: hypertrophic zone. Bar indicates 100 µm. (4.46 MB TIF Click
here for additional data file. Impaired craniofacial skeletogenesis in Slc39a13-KO mice. A. The following points are traced on the
cephalometric radiographs: Upper; Ba, Basion, defined as the most posterior-inferior cephalometric maxilla point; Rh, Rhinion, the most
anterior point of the nasal bone; and Na, Nasion, the cephalometric point between the nasal bone and the frontal bone. Lower; Me, Menton,
the lowest point of the chin; Go, Gonion, the most posterior inferior point at the angle of the mandible; and Co, Condylion, the most
posterior superior point on the condyle of the mandible. B-F. Dwarfed craniofacial formation in Slc39a13-KO mice. Analysis of the 5-week-old
maxilla and mandible bone reveals that Slc39a13-KO mice are characterized by shorter craniofacial depth (B. Ba-Rh), shorter nasomaxillary
depth (C. Na-Rh), shorter cranial base depth (D. Na-Ba), shorter mandibular depth (E. Me-Go), and shorter craniofacial depth (F. Me-Co),
compared with wild-type mice (n = 5 for each). Data represent mean±S.D. (0.75 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Perturbation of
BMP/TGF-β signal transduction without affecting phosphorylation of Smad proteins in Slc39a13-KO cells. A. DNA microarray analysis using RNA
of primary osteoblasts (left) and chondrocytes (right). Each gene was normalized to the median of the measurement for that gene. B. Smad
proteins are normally phosphorylated in Slc39a13-KO cells. Primary osteoblasts or dermal fibroblasts were stimulated with either 50 ng/ml of
BMP4 (left), or 10 ng/ml of TGF-β1 (right), respectively for indicated periods. Total cell lysates were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by
immunoblotting with either anti-phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (pSmads), anti-Smad1, anti-phosphorylated Smad2 (pSmad2), anti-Smad2/3, or anti-
Scl39a13 specific antibodies. Anti- α -tubulin antibody was used for control blotting. (0.84 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file.
Dysregulated expression of tibial Msx2 and Rnux2 in Slc39a13-KO mouse. ISH analysis shows Runx2 is accumulated (right), while Msx2 is
diminished (left) in 4-week-old Slc39a13-KO tibia. Regions indicated as 1 and 2 in upper are enlarged as 200 times at middle and lower
panels. (8.41 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Dysregulated expression of molar Msx2 and dermal type 1 collagen expression in
Slc39a13-KO mouse. A. ISH analysis shows Msx2 gene expression is diminished in odontoblasts (od) lining the dentin of crown (★) of 10-day-
old Slc39a13-KO molar teeth. Regions indicated with ★ in upper are enlarged as 200 times at lower panels. Unorganized odontoblasts are
observed in Slc39a13-KO molar. B. Type I collagen level is decreased in Slc39a13-KO skin. Skin section of 5-week-old wild-type and
Slc39a13-KO mice were applied for IHC. Bar indicates 100 µm. (5.71 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Involvement of Slc39a13 in
localization of Smad proteins. A and B. Slc39a13 is involved in BMP/TGF-β -induced nuclear localization of phosphorylated Smad proteins.
Primary osteoblasts (A) or dermal fibroblasts (B) were stimulated with either 50 ng/ml of BMP4 for 15 minutes (A, right panels) or 10 ng/ml
of TGF-β1 for 30 minutes (B, right panels), respectively, followed by staining for phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (pSmads), phosphorylated Smad2
(pSmad2), nuclei (DAPI), and actin (Actin). Confocal microscopic images are shown. C and D. Ratio of subcellular localization of intact (C)
or phosphorylated (D) Smad proteins was obtained by counting cells (n = 50) in confocal microscopy images visualized by anti- Smad1, anti-
Smad2/3, anti-phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (pSmad), or anti- phosphorylated Smad2 (pSmad2) antibodies after BMP4 (left in C and D; for Smad1 and
pSmads in osteoblasts) or TGF-β1 (right in C and D; for Smad2/3 and pSmad2 in dermal fibroblasts) stimulation. nuc: nuclear space, cyto:
cytoplasmic space, both: both of nuclear and cytoplasmic spaces E and F. Cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions from primary osteoblasts (E) and
dermal fibroblasts (F) were separated by SDS-PAGE, followed by immunoblotting with either anti-phosphorylated Smad1/5/8 (pSmads) and anti-
Smad1 (E), or anti-phosphorylated Smad2 (pSmad2) and anti-Smad2/3 (F) antibodies. Anti- α-tubulin and HDAC1 antibodies were used for control
blotting. (2.36 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Ectopic expression of Slc39a13. Either empty vector (mock), Flag-tagged wild-
type (WT), or G74D mutated (G74D) mouse Slc39a13 expression plasmids were transfected into Slc39a13-KO primary osteoblasts (A) and dermal
fibroblasts (B). Their expression level was assessed by RT-PCR (upper), and by immunoblotting using anti-Flag and anti-α-tubulin antibodies
at two days after transfection (lower). (0.72 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Molar ratio of hydroxylysyl/lysyl-pyridinoline
collagen crosslinks in urine of the two sibs with EDS and in their parents. (0.71 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Primer
sequences used for RT-PCR are listed. (0.97 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. Primer sequences used for real time-PCR are listed.
(0.77 MB TIF) Click here for additional data file. We thank Dr. Kohei Miyazono (University of Tokyo) for critical reading and variable
suggestions and Drs. Ken Watanabe (The National Center for Geriatrics and Gerontology, Obu) and Masahiro Narimatsu (Mount Sinai Hospital,
Toronto) for their helpful experimental advice. We are grateful to Dr. Sayaka Tominaga for her help in human genetic analysis, and to Mr.
Masami Kawamura and Tsutomu Yamasaki, and Ms Satoko Ojimi, Yuko Ishikura, and Ayumi Ito for their excellent technical assistance. We also
thank Ms Mizuki Shimura and Ryoko Masuda as well as Andi Bandi for their secretarial assistance. Dr. Brendan Lee (Baylor College of
Medicine, Houston) is acknowledged for CRTAP mutation analysis, and Dr. Peter Byers (University of Washington) for collagen synthesis study
in fibroblast cultures. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Funding: This work was supported
by grants from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology in Japan; by the Swiss National Foundation (grant no.
3100A0-100485); and by German BMBF Rare Diseases network SKELNET (Project GFGN01141901).
