Luca Pastore and colleagues discuss the differential diagnosis and management of a 62-year-old man who presented with a 6-cm fungating mass
on the dorsum of the tongue. In May 2007, a 62-year-old man presented with a 6-cm fungating mass on the dorsum of the tongue (Figure 1),
which had lasted for an unknown period of time. The lesion had a roughened and irregular surface, with areas of white keratosis admixed with
areas of necrosis. It felt indurated on palpation. Two additional smaller exophytic lesions were observed on the dorsum of the tongue: one
adjacent to the main mass and the other on the apex. Both showed surface nodularity and minimal surface keratin production. The surrounding
mucosa demonstrated hyperkeratosis and a pebbled surface. Interlacing white keratotic striae were observed on the right buccal mucosa
(Figure 2), while the mucosa of the left cheek had an erosive area bordered by fine, white radiating striae (not shown in figure). break;On
biopsy, the three exophytic masses turned out to be oral carcinomas, while the surrounding hyperkeratotic area showed histologic features of
oral lichen planus. A skin examination revealed polygonal, flat-topped papules covered with a fine network of white lines on the legs
(Figure 3). Furthermore, the patient had an erosive area on his glans penis (Figure 4). Network of White Lines on the Legs, Consistent with
the Diagnosis of Lichen Planus The clinical appearance of the fungating mass immediately raised a high suspicion of malignancy, and a biopsy
was promptly planned. For the two other exophytic lesions on the dorsum of the tongue, the differential diagnosis included squamous cell
carcinoma, verrucous carcinoma, squamous papilloma, condyloma acuminatum, focal epithelial hyperplasia, and verruciform xanthoma. The
differential diagnosis of the hyperkeratotic surrounding area included plaque-like lichen planus, leukoplakia (thick or verruciform),
proliferative verrucous leukoplakia, and lichenoid mucositis. With regard to the buccal lesions, a clinical diagnosis of oral lichen planus
(OLP) was relatively straightforward, given the presence of the bilateral interlacing white keratotic striae. Similarly, the skin lesions
were highly suggestive of lichen planus, with the typical polygonal papules covered with a fine, lace-like network of white lines (so-called
Wickham striae; in analogy, the interlacing white lines of reticular OLP are also referred to as Wickham striae by some authors). The
erosive area on the glans penis could be erosive lichen planus, pemphigus vulgaris, mucous membrane pemphigoid, plasma cell balanitis (or
Zoon balanitis), or erythroplasia of Queyrat. On biopsy, the fungating mass on the dorsum of the tongue showed features of an invasive
squamous cell carcinoma, while the contiguous exophytic lesion turned out to be a verrucous carcinoma; the mass on the apex of the tongue
was a squamous cell carcinoma in situ. Histologic appearance of the hyperkeratotic surrounding area was consistent with OLP. Biopsies of
either buccal and cutaneous lesions were not performed; nonetheless, both were diagnosed as lichen planus on the basis of the striking
clinical findings alone. A biopsy of the genital lesion was not considered a priority at that time; in accordance with the concomitant oral
and skin involvement, a presumptive diagnosis of erosive lichen planus was made. Once a biopsy-proven diagnosis of oral cancer is made, a
staging workup is necessary in order to determine the extent of the primary tumor, the regional lymph node status, and the presence of
distant metastasis. For this purpose, a comprehensive head and neck examination and imaging studies (computed tomography and/or magnetic
resonance imaging; more recently, also positron emission tomography) are performed, and the cancer is staged according to the TNM (tumor,
node, metastasis) system (Tables 1 and 2). Depending on the clinical stage, location, and histologic findings of the primary cancer, general
health status of the patient, and the patient's wishes, treatment of oral cancer is individually planned for each case. In this patient,
total-body computed tomographic scans revealed multiple enlarged lymph nodes in the left laterocervical and submandibular regions, while
there was no evidence of distant metastasis. On the basis of clinical and imaging data, the invasive tumor was staged as T4 N2 M0. The
patient underwent surgery, with partial glossectomy and ipsilateral neck dissection. On histologic examination, the invasive cancer was
identified as moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma that had widely invaded into muscles. Lymph node metastases were moderately
differentiated squamous cell carcinomas as well, with no extracapsular extension. Based on additional data acquired from pathologic
examination, the pathologic staging (pTNM) was T4a N2b M0 (stage IVa). Resection margins were free of tumor, and postoperative radiotherapy
was given only on the neck. The general health status of the patient rapidly worsened after surgery, and at a two-month follow-up evaluation
a new mass was observed on the base of the tongue. On biopsy, this was diagnosed as a new squamous cell carcinoma, but a second surgical
treatment was not planned, given the very poor health status of the patient. Combined radiotherapy and chemotherapy were prescribed, but the
patient died two months later. The family gave written consent for details of this case to be published. Oral cancer is a global health
problem; worldwide, nearly 275,000 patients are annually estimated to have oral cancer, which represents about 3% of all malignancies in men
and 2% in women . The vast majority of oral cancers (approximately 94%) are squamous cell carcinomas that arise from the epithelium of the
oral mucosa . Survival of patients with oral cancer is directly related to the stage of disease at diagnosis; in fact, the five-year
relative survival rate increased from 26.5% for oral cancers diagnosed at a distant stage to 81.8% for cases diagnosed at a localized stage
. Squamous cell carcinomas of the tongue seem to have lower rates of overall survival compared with cancers located in other oral cavity
sites . Unfortunately, only 33% of oral cancers are diagnosed at a localized stage, when the disease may be more easily and successfully
treated . This fact is responsible for a relatively poor overall five-year survival rate (59.1%), which has not significantly improved in
the past several decades . As a consequence, early detection is critical to reduce oral cancer mortality. In 9% to 25% of patients with oral
cancer, additional synchronous or metachronous primary oral or pharynx carcinomas develop ; for these patients, the survival rates are
worse. Current therapeutic options for oral cancer include surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy (each alone or in various combinations).
In general, a wide surgical excision of the primary tumor remains the first line of treatment, even though stage I and stage II oral cancers
could also be successfully treated with radiotherapy alone . For stage III and stage IV oral cancers, surgery may be combined with
radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy. A postoperative radiotherapy leads to better outcomes than radiotherapy administered preoperatively .
Indications for a postoperative radiation therapy include: positive surgical resection margins, bone or perineural invasion, multiple
positive lymph nodes, or extracapsular lymph node invasion . Chemotherapy can be given before surgery, after surgery and before
radiotherapy, at the same time as radiotherapy, or alternating with radiotherapy. There is some evidence that postoperative concurrent
radiotherapy and chemotherapy are more effective than postoperative radiotherapy alone in patients with advanced oral cancers , although
this combined treatment may increase complications . When there is clinical and/or imaging evidence of cervical lymph node metastasis, a
neck dissection is required. Elective selective neck dissection may be performed in the node-negative neck, given the possibility of occult
neck lymphadenopathy. Size and location of the primary lesion, thickness of the tumor, and invasion of neural, vascular, or lymphatic
structures are factors used to evaluate the risk of occult cervical metastasis . However, primary prevention and early diagnosis remain the
cornerstones of strategies for reducing oral cancer mortality. With regard to primary prevention, public education efforts must be made to
encourage people to avoid high-risk behaviors, with tobacco smoking and alcohol consumption being the major risk factors. As to early
detection, the American Cancer Society recommends a periodic cancer-related check-up, which should include examination for oral cancers ,
and guidelines for visual inspection of the oral cavity were suggested . However, a recent Cochrane review concluded that there is
insufficient evidence to recommend screening of the general population for oral cancer using visual examination or adjunctive tools
(toluidine blue, brush biopsy, fluorescence imaging) as an effective method for decreasing oral cancer mortality . Nonetheless, the authors
recommended regular screening by visual inspection applied by qualified health care providers for high-risk groups . Patients with
potentially malignant disorders of the oral mucosa have an increased risk of development of oral cancer; for these patients, close
monitoring is recommended . Lichen planus is an immune-mediated chronic inflammatory disease that commonly affects the epithelium of the
oral mucosa with a spectrum of clinical conditions, including keratotic, atrophic, erosive, and ulcerative lesions; epithelia of other sites
can be involved, namely the skin, the glans penis, the vaginal and vulvar mucosa, and the scalp . A simultaneous involvement of more than
one mucocutaneous site occurs in a relatively high percentage of patients with lichen planus . A number of studies have indicated that OLP
may be a precancerous lesion, with reported rates of malignant transformation that range from 0.4% to 5.6% . Nevertheless, the precancer
character of OLP remains highly controversial; the criticism is largely based on the vagueness of the criteria used in many studies for the
diagnosis of OLP . It has been argued that a transformation rate of even 1% would imply that nearly all oral cancers would develop from OLP,
which is actually unlikely . Moreover, applying strict diagnostic criteria, a recent study found that only oral lichenoid lesions and not
OLP are associated with an increased risk of malignant transformation , although it is important to note that the concept of oral lichenoid
lesion is somewhat controversial as well ; at any rate, the authors do not advise monitoring of patients with OLP . In addition, at present
there are no data to demonstrate the effectiveness of long-term follow-up of patients with OLP in reducing morbidity and mortality from oral
cancer . Therefore, to date we have no robust evidence to support the hypothesis of a malignant potential of OLP, and evidence to justify a
continuous recall of patients with this oral ailment is lacking as well. In spite of this, our report should alert physicians and dental
practitioners that a potential of malignant transformation of OLP presumably exists, although its actual magnitude is yet to be established.
Two other worrying facts should be taken into account: a study of 2,071 patients with cutaneous lichen planus, with no information about the
oral status, reported no increase in risk of skin cancer, while the risk of oral cancer was 5.9-fold increased ; another study involving
patients with OLP who subsequently had one oral carcinoma found that additional synchronous or metachronous mouth malignancies developed in
56% of participants . Oral cancer is a global health problem with a relatively poor prognosis, mainly due to late diagnosis; as a
consequence, early detection is critical to reduce mortality. There is insufficient evidence to support the effectiveness of current
screening methods in decreasing oral cancer mortality; however, close monitoring of patients with potentially malignant disorders of the
oral mucosa is recommended. There is ongoing controversy as to the potentially malignant nature of oral lichen planus, and there is
insufficient evidence to support the effectiveness of long-term monitoring of patients with oral lichen planus in reducing morbidity and
mortality of oral cancer. This report should alert physicians and dental practitioners that a potential of malignant transformation of oral
lichen planus presumably exists, although its actual magnitude is yet to be established. Well-powered prospective studies are needed to
provide the highest levels of evidence for practice; in the meantime, long-term monitoring of patients with oral lichen planus should be
advisable. There is no doubt that further well-designed and well-powered long-term prospective studies, with validated diagnostic criteria
for OLP, are needed to provide the highest levels of evidence for practice; in the meantime, long-term monitoring of patients with OLP
should be advisable. The presence of generalized, mucocutaneous lesions could be a matter of greater concern. oral lichen planus tumor,
node, metastasis Luca Pastore and Lorenzo Lo Muzio are in the Department of Surgical Sciences, University of Foggia, Foggia, Italy. Maria
Luisa Fiorella and Raffaele Fiorella are in the Department of Otorhinolaryngology, University of Bari, Bari, Italy. Funding: The authors
received no specific funding for this article. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Provenance:
Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed
