Epididymal inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor, also known by various other synonyms is a rare benign disease. Only eight cases have been
reported to date. The most common presentation is a scrotal mass of variable duration. For a scrotal mass it is difficult to distinguish a
benign or malignant etiology, in addition to the origin whether from testis or epididymis. As a result the definitive diagnosis can only be
established by surgical exploration. We report the ninth case of epididymal IMT who based on clinical and radiological findings underwent
radical orchidectomy, with the histology suggestive of inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor. At 4 years follow up the patient is free of
disease recurrence. IMT though rare should be considered in the differential diagnosis of epididymal mass. Clinically it is often difficult
to distinguish the origin of mass and even though the disease has benign nature and course it is crucial to counsel patients for
orchidectomy as definitive diagnosis is established on surgical exploration. Inflammatory Myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) of epididymis is a
distinct but rare entity. IMT is also described by other synonyms, more commonly as inflammatory pseudotumor. Extra genitourinary and
genitourinary sites are well documented with various proposed etiological theories . Epididymal IMT is rare and only eight cases are
reported in the literature . The most common reported presentation of epididymal IMT is lump in the scrotum. Due to its uncertain etiology
many of these patients have been offered antibiotics with no clinical response. We describe a case of a young healthy male with a painless
indurated scrotal mass with possible involvement of the testicle. Based on patient's age and clinical findings the lump was suspected to be
a testicular tumor and therefore was subjected to radical orchidectomy. We present our case and review of literature for epididymal IMT. A
22 year old healthy Caucasian male noticed a swelling and a palpable mass in the right scrotum for a period of one week. Patient denied any
history of fever, trauma, urethral discharge and any previous history of recurrent urinary tract or sexually transmitted infections. There
was no past history of exposure to tuberculosis. Physical examination revealed a nontender indurated solid mass in the lower pole of right
testicle possibly also involving the epididymis. Scrotal ultrasound demonstrated a solid heterogeneous mass involving right testicle with
possible extratesticular extension into the epididymis. Quantitative serum Beta -human chorionic gonadotropin, alpha-fetoprotein and LDH
(lactate dehydrogenase) were within normal limits. With the presumed diagnosis of testicular tumor a right radical orchidectomy was
performed. On gross pathologic examination the mass was abutting the tunica albugenia but further examination revealed being confined to
epididymis with normal testicular parenchyma. Histology of the mass (4 × 2.2 × 1.8 cm) demonstrated a spindle myoepithelial and polygonal
cell proliferation with intense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate. (Fig. 1) The mass also revealed scattered neutrophils with positive
immunostaining for smooth muscle actin, vimentin (Fig. 2), CD3, CD20, CD68 and AE1/AE3 but was negative for ALK-1 (Fig. 3) and CD 138. There
was presence of numerous T cells, B cells and macrophages but absence of atypical epithelial cells. The lesion also lacked presence of
sperm, Michaelis Gutman bodies, GMS (Grocott's silver) and AFB (acid fast bacilli) stain for any fungal or acid fast organism respectively.
The histological and staining pattern was consistent with inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor of the epididymis. The reagents, their source,
pre-treatment, dilution and incubation times are listed in table 1. Immunohistochemical reagents used in our case. Low magnification of IMT
(100×). Spindle cells mixed with inflammatory cells. The spindle cells are epithelioid, mixed with chronic inflammatory cells. The
myoepithelial cells are loosely arranged. There is increased vascularity in the IMT. (Immunostains) – Immunostaining showing spindle
myoepithelial cells positive for smooth muscle actin and vimentin. (Immunostain) – Immunostaining negative for ALK-1. The patient recovered
well with no evidence of any recurrence at the site of resection or other sites after 4 years of follow-up. Based on such an unusual and
rare finding a thorough Medline search revealed eight additional patients with similar presentation of scrotal lump. All patients had
exploration of the scrotal mass due to its solid heterogenous features on ultrasound and clinical examination. All patients underwent either
excision of mass or radical orchidectomy. Inflammatory Myofibroblastic tumor (IMT) is a well described disease and can occur in many organs
such as lung, skin, soft tissues, breast, gastrointestinal tract, pancreas, oral cavity, bone and central nervous system. However various
sites in genitourinary tract have also been reported but less commonly , epididymis is least common with only 8 cases (20 to 73 years) being
reported to date . Only those tumors with spindle myoepithelial cell proliferation and lymphocytic infiltrate qualify for IMT. Various
synonyms like inflammatory pseudo tumor, plasma cell granuloma, plasma cell pseudo tumor, atypical Myofibroblastic tumor and post operative
spindle nodule are used interchangeably . In spite of this the term inflammatory myofibroblastic tumor is preferred as inflammatory pseudo
tumor has been applied to diverse entities like reparative pseudosarcomatous lesion of lower genitourinary tract , infectious etiology like
mycobacterium avium intracellulare and Epstein Barr virus (EBV) . The post operative spindle cell nodule denotes to spindle cell
proliferation with easily identifiable mitotic figures deposited in a less conspicuous myxoid background where as a classic IMT describes a
lesion characterized by spindle cell proliferation in a loose, edematous myxoid stroma associated with granulation tissue type and a mixed
acute and chronic inflammatory cells composed of lymphocytes, plasma cells, eosinophils with occasional neutrophils and mast cells. The
pathophysiology of IMT is not well understood, various etiologies have been proposed including a reparative process related to delayed
chronic response to remote or undetected trauma . Infectious etiologies such as Epstein Barr virus, mycobacterium avium intracellulare and
herpes virus 8 have also been suggested to be associated as an etiological agent with IMT . However no such similar association of EBV as an
etiological agent has been demonstrated with epididymal IMT . Cytogenetic studies show that some IMT (mediastinal and abdominal) lesions
have genetic clonal abnormality at chromosome region 2p22–24 with breakage in band p22–24, with specific involvement of 2p23, suggesting a
neoplastic change . In some of the IMTs an anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK) gene on 2p23 has been implicated in pathogenesis of this lesion.
A fluorescence in situ hybridization with a probe flanking the ALK gene at 2p23 demonstrated translocation of ALK gene. An
immunohistochemical staining for ALK showed positive cytoplasmic staining in the myofibroblastic cells . Two case reports including ours
have studied ALK immunostaining on epididymal tissue with none staining positive for ALK. Patients with IMT can present with fever, night
sweats, weight loss, malaise or abnormal laboratory parameters such as elevated ESR (erythrocyte sedimentation rate), anemia, leukocytosis
and site specific symptoms . However patients with IMT of epididymis rarely present with above symptoms but most commonly with a palpable
mass of variable duration ranging from 3 weeks to 5 years . The mass is clinically often indistinguishable from the testis. One patient
described in the literature, clinically had multiple extra testicular masses, with 3 in the body of the epididymis, 1 at head of the
epididymis and 1 in tunica vaginalis on subsequent exploration . Our patient presented with 1 week history of a palpable mass with no
precedent history of trauma and recurrent urinary or sexually transmitted infections. A summary of all reported eight cases and our case has
been presented in table 2. Based on the clinical examination the differential diagnosis of such a mass is testicular tumor, adenomatoid
carcinoma, paratesticular sarcoma, epididymal adenocarcinoma. Brief summary of cases reported in the literature. The diagnosis of IMT is
based on the histological features of spindle myoepithelial cell proliferation, lymphocytic and inflammatory infiltration. Other
immunomarkers could substantiate the diagnosis of IMT. Immunomarkers such as vimentin, actin and CD 68 are positive in 25% cases . A similar
finding was noted by Brauers and Lam et al in epididymal IMT, with immunostaining being positive for vimentin, actin, CD 68 and α1-anti
chymotrypsin. In our patient histology stained positive for vimentin, smooth muscle actin and CD 68 but negative for ALK-1 and CD138.
Various non surgical treatment options have been proposed at sites other than genitourinary tract including cyclosporine, corticosteroid,
methotrexate, antibiotics and radiation with variable success. Spontaneous regression has also been reported . Surgical excision is
definitive to exclude malignant etiology for scrotal masses. Our patient and most patients described in the literature had orchidectomy as a
final treatment. Though Cooperman et al described local excision of clinically evident extra testicular masses with a normal testicle
confirmed on ultrasound, the frozen section of these masses excluded presence of malignancy. Similarly Brauers et al report epididymectomy
for a clinically palpable 1 cm mass with normal testis on examination. Lam et al however performed orchidectomy for a firm scrotal mass
clinically indistinguishable from testis. In our patient based on clinical examination and ultrasound, it was difficult to justify local
excision due to difficulty in differentiating whether the mass was separate from testis. The abdominal and retroperitoneal variant presents
with more aggressive pattern compared to their extra abdominal counterparts, with recurrence rate of 23–37% . The true potential for
metastasis as reported by Coffin et al in their series of 84 patients is unclear whereas Meis and Enzinger reported cases with metastasis.
The reason for such inconsistent finding is uncertain, whether it represents multifocal disease is unclear at present . However recurrence
of epididymal IMT has not been reported to date. Our patient is free of any recurrent disease at previous site of excision or other distant
sites at end of 4 years of follow-up. IMT though rare should be considered in the differential diagnosis of epididymal mass. Clinically it
is often difficult to distinguish the origin of mass either from testis or epididymis. Radiological studies are unable to differentiate
benign or malignant nature and as a result definitive diagnosis is established on surgical exploration. Depending on the gross
characteristics and frozen section of clinically distinct masses, either a local excision or radical orchidectomy is offered. Thus even
though the disease has benign nature and course it is crucial to counsel patients for orchidectomy as definitive diagnosis is established on
surgical exploration. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. PPD was involved in conception and design, acquisition of data, data analysis, and interpretation, manuscript drafting
and final approval. WPW was involved in acquisition of data, data analysis, provided pathologic imaging, interpretation of data and final
approval. KSP was involved in conception and design, acquisition of data, data analysis, and interpretation, manuscript drafting and final
approval.
