To the Editor: Streptococcus suis, a major swine pathogen worldwide, is emerging as a zoonotic agent capable of causing a variety of serious
infections in swine as well as in persons exposed to pigs or to pork products. These infections include meningitis, septicemia, pneumonia,
endocarditis, arthritis, and septic shock (1,2). Despite recent outbreaks among persons in China, S. suis disease in humans is a rare,
probably underdiagnosed infection that usually occurs as sporadic cases (1,2). Persons in close occupational or accidental contact with pigs
or pork products and those who eat uncooked or undercooked pork may be at higher risk than others. However, most infected persons are likely
healthy carriers, and S. suis is believed to induce overt disease (especially meningitis) in only some circumstances (2). We describe a case
of S. suis meningitis in a 68-year-old man from Sardinia, Italy, who had no reported contact with swine, other animals, or any animal
products; the patient also had cancer, which was discovered incidentally during the workup. In November 2007, the patient was hospitalized
with a 48-hour history of fever, headache, nausea, and general malaise. Physical examination showed impaired consciousness, nuchal rigidity,
and a temperature of 39.5°C. Laboratory findings were 20,700 leukocytes/mm3 with 92% neutrophils, glucose 95 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein
375 mg/L. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis demonstrated 240 leukocytes/μL with 80% polymorphonuclear cells, glucose 24 mg/dL, and protein
277 mg/dL. A computed tomography scan of the head showed no abnormal findings. Gram stain of CSF showed gram-positive cocci, mostly in pairs
(Figure). Gram-positive cocci, mostly in pairs, in cerebrospinal fluid from a 68-year-old man with Streptococcus suis meningitis.
Magnification ×1,000. Empirical therapy consisted of intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g twice a day) and oral chloramphenicol (2 g once a day). On
day 5, α-hemolytic streptococci were isolated from CSF on sheep blood agar and identified as S. suis by using APIStrep (bioMérieux, Marcy
l’Etoile, France). Serotyping, performed by slide agglutination with specific antiserum (Statens Serum Institute, Copenhagen, Denmark),
identified the isolate as serotype 2. Antimicrobial drug­­–susceptibility testing, performed according to guidelines of the Clinical and
Laboratory Standards Institute (www.clsi.org), indicated susceptibility to penicillin, ceftriaxone, chloramphenicol, levofloxacin, and
vancomycin and resistance to erythromycin (MIC >128 mg/L) and tetracycline (MIC 16 mg/L). Erythromycin resistance was constitutive and was
mediated by the erm(B) determinant; tetracycline resistance was mediated by tet(W). Multilocus sequence typing (http://ssuis.mlst.net)
assigned the S. suis isolate to sequence type (ST) 1. The patient, a retired welder, denied any recent occupational or even occasional
contact with swine or other animals and had no history of eating raw or undercooked pork. The patient’s condition improved; chloramphenicol
was discontinued on day 10, but the 14-day course of ceftriaxone was completed. On day 6, the patient became afebrile but had dizziness and
deafness; a formal audiology evaluation on day 9 showed severe bilateral sensorineural high-frequency hearing loss (–80 dB) that improved
after a short course of dexamethasone. However, the patient was not discharged because of the lung mass found on initial chest radiograph.
Computed tomography scan, bronchoscopy, and histopathologic findings led to diagnosis of the mass as an advanced-stage squamous cell
carcinoma. The meningitis had common and uncommon features. The common features were hearing loss, a typical outcome of S. suis meningitis
independent of early antimicrobial drug administration (1,2); serotype 2, the most frequent and virulent serotype in swine and in humans
(1,2); ST1, belonging to the ST1 complex, strongly associated with S. suis meningitis isolates (2,3); and erm(B)-mediated erythromycin
resistance, widespread in this species (4). The uncommon features were tetracycline resistance mediated by tet(W), increasingly detected in
gram-positive and in gram-negative bacteria (5) but never previously reported in S. suis or in other major streptococcal pathogens, where
common determinants are tet(M) and tet(O); and lack of evidence for recent contact with swine, other animals, or swine (pork) products. Two
previous cases of human S. suis meningitis in Italy (6,7) and other recent cases from Europe (8,9) were related to occupational exposure.
However, the patient reported here also had cancer, and malignancy has been indicated as a predisposing factor for the development of severe
S. suis disease in humans (2). These findings appear to be consistent with the recent suggestion of new epidemiologic patterns of infection
caused by this organism (2). S. suis may become an opportunistic pathogen in persons who are under stress or who have immunodeficiency, and
it has been increasingly isolated from mammalian species other than pigs, from birds, and from the environment. As also discussed in a
recent survey (10), the possibility cannot be excluded that a patient with S. suis infection may be unaware or have no memory of previous
exposure to animals. Alternatively, because asymptomatic carriage of S. suis has been documented in humans (2) and is believed to contribute
to its transmission (10), the possibility should also be considered that the infection may be a reactivation, possibly favored by
malignancy, of latently colonizing S. suis. Suggested citation for this article: Manzin A, Palmieri C, Serra C, Saddi B, Princivalli MS, Loi
G, et al. Streptococcus suis meningitis without history of animal contact, Italy . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2008 Dec [date
cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/12/1946.htm We thank Chiara Magistrali for performing the slide agglutination test.
This work was supported in part by a grant to A.M. from Regione Sardegna, Ricerca Sanitaria Finalizzata 2007.
