To the Editor: Long incubation periods are an occasional feature of infection with rabies virus and should be considered in human cases of
acute encephalitis in rabies-free countries where there has been a history of travel to rabies-endemic areas (1). Until 1987 Australia had
recorded only 1 case of travel-acquired rabies. However, in 1990 an extreme case of long-incubation rabies was diagnosed. The patient was a
10-year-old girl of Vietnamese origin in whom rabies developed after she had lived continuously in Australia for almost 5 years (2). A
thorough investigation of the case history by public health officers concluded that the likely source of infection was Vietnam, which the
girl left in July 1984, suggesting an incubation period >6.5 years. Preliminary sequence analysis of a fragment of the rabies virus genome
extracted from postmortem samples taken from the patient confirmed that the likely origin was Southeast Asia (3). Since that time, 2 major
developments occurred that suggested that the case should be reexamined. The first was the discovery of a bat lyssavirus in Australia (4).
In addition to being closely related to rabies virus, Australian bat lyssavirus (ABLV) had been isolated from 2 patients with fatal cases in
Australia, one of whom was deduced to have had a potential incubation period of 27 months (5). The second development was the increase in
phylogenetic investigations of rabies viruses in many countries across Asia including Sri Lanka, the Philippines, India, People’s Republic
of China (6), Indonesia, and, importantly, Vietnam (7). After the patient’s death, a decomposed sample of the patient’s brain was sent to
the Australian Animal Health Laboratory at Geelong. Although live virus was not isolated from this sample, several short sequences of the
viral genome were amplified by PCR. From one of these, a 200-bp sequence of the nucleoprotein gene was derived that confirmed the clinical
diagnosis of rabies. This sequence was compared to a small panel of virus sequences known at the time. Although limited, with no
representative sequences from Vietnam, this early comparison indicated that the virus was of Asian origin (3). To reinvestigate this case,
we reassessed one of the other virus sequences originally generated from this case with a panel of rabies virus sequences from Southeast
Asia, including viruses from Vietnam, China, and examples of ABLV. The original DNA fragment that yielded this sequence was also amplified
from postmortem brain samples and the 306-bp sequence (GenBank accession no. EU854576) corresponded to positions 71–376 of the Pasteur virus
genome (NC_001542) encoding the first 102 aa of the viral nucleoprotein. Further sequences were obtained from published studies submitted to
GenBank. Sequences were aligned and edited with DNAstar Lasergene version 7 suite of programs (DNAstar Inc, Madison, WI, USA). Neighbor-
joining and maximum likelihood analysis were undertaken by using PHYLIP version 3.5 as previously described (8). A sequence derived from a
human case of European bat lyssavirus type 2 (EF157977) was used as the outgroup. One thousand replicates were used to assess bootstrap
support for the phylogenic analysis. The phylogenetic tree produced by this investigation indicates that the 1990 sequence falls within the
rabies virus clade and is clearly distinct from the 4ABLV sequences included (Figure). These findings exclude the possibility that the young
Vietnamese girl was infected with ABLV, now known to be endemic within Australian bats, after she arrived in Australia. The virus from the
patient belonged within the rabies virus clade, forming a separate lineage most closely related to a subgroup of viruses found in China (6).
The sequence is distinct from a small number of sequences derived from rabies viruses in Vietnam, which suggests that China is a stronger
candidate for the source of the virus than her native country. Phylogenetic analysis of lyssavirus nucleoprotein sequences (306 bp) derived
from viruses of Asian origin. European bat lyssavirus type 2 has been used as the outgroup. The human sequence is shown in boldface.
Although the case history could not provide evidence for interaction with a dog while her family was in Hong Kong Special Administrative
Region, rabies was endemic within the colony at the time that the patient’s family was resident. From 1980 through 1984, 5 human cases were
recorded (9). Only 2 case-patients had clear evidence of a dog bite; histories for the remaining 3 cases provided no evidence for an animal
bite. From 1956 to 1979, Hong Kong had been free of rabies, but the disease had reentered the colony shortly after its incidence had
increased in the neighboring Chinese province of Guangdong. If Hong Kong was where the young girl was infected, it would indicate an
incubation period of 4.5–6 years. Such long incubation periods are rare for rabies virus infections. An earlier epidemiologic study of 177
cases in Amritsar, India, demonstrated that rabies developed within 6 months of exposure in 90% of human cases (10). However, the thorough
documentation of a small number of cases (1,2) suggests that clinicians need to be aware of the importance of including travel history over
several years in cases of unexplained encephalitis. Suggested citation for this article: Johnson N, Fooks A, McColl K. Reexamination of
human rabies case with long incubation, Australia . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2008 Dec [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/12/1950.htm This work was supported by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs (Defra, UK)
through grant SE0423.
