We report isolation of Francisella novicida–causing bacteremia in a woman from Thailand who was receiving chemotherapy for ovarian cancer.
The organism was isolated from blood cultures and identified by 16S rDNA and PPIase gene analyses. Diagnosis and treatment were delayed due
to unawareness of the disease in this region. Francisella novicida, a rare human pathogen, has recently been considered to be a subspecies
of F. tularensis on the basis of DNA similarity (1,2). The reservoir and transmission route of F. novicida were not clearly defined. Since
the first isolation of F. novicida, to our knowledge, only 5 patients with suspected infection have been reported (3–5). F. novicida,
however, has neither been isolated nor associated with human disease in Thailand. We report a case of F. novicida infection in a Thai
patient who was undergoing chemotherapy. In October 2007, a 37-year-old woman from Thailand sought treatment at Siriraj Hospital (a
2,400-bed university hospital in Bangkok, Thailand) with a history of fever for 1 week. She was a hairdresser residing in a suburban area of
Prachuap Khiri Khan, a southern province of Thailand. She denied history of blood transfusion, animal contact, and travel abroad. She had
not been aware of being bitten by insects recently. There was no incidence of unusual animal death in the area in which she resided. Five
months before seeking treatment, she received a diagnosis of advanced stage clear cell adenocarcinoma of the ovary with metastasis to
peritoneum, spleen, uterus, and multiple abdominal lymph nodes. Chemotherapy was planned. Initial laboratory screening showed increased
liver enzyme levels and abnormal hepatitis markers confirming chronic active hepatitis B virus infection. Chemotherapy was delayed while she
was treated with lamivudine. A follow-up visit in early September showed that her liver function biochemistry results had returned to within
normal limits. Chemotherapy with carboplastin and paclitaxel was then initiated. At the time of admission, 25 days after the start of
chemotherapy, the patient had fever (39oC), blood pressure 90/60 mm Hg, and pulse rate 75 beats/min. She also had an episode of
gastrointestinal hemorrhage with melena. It was believed that fever and gastrointestinal bleeding were complications from chemotherapy;
thus, microbiologic investigation was not promptly initiated. Abnormal laboratory findings included anemia (hemoglobin 80 g/L) and
leukocytosis with marked neutrophilia (Figure). Urine and stool cultures showed insignificant growth. Course of illness in a Thai patient
with Francisella novicida bacteremia. Solid line, leukocyte count with percentage of neutrophils; dashed line, temperature. Two samples of
blood cultures from peripheral lines were obtained using BacT/Alert FA bottles (bioMérieux, Durham, NC, USA) on day 10 of hospital admission
and incubated in the continuous monitoring BacT/Alert 3D system (bioMérieux). Both blood culture bottles grew small pleomorphic gram-
negative coccobacillus after incubation for 2 days. Samples from positive bottles were subcultured onto 5% (vol/vol) sheep blood agar,
MacConkey agar, and chocolate agar. A slow-growing bacterium was recovered on both blood agar and chocolate agar after 2-day incubation at
35oC with 5% CO2. The organism was negative for catalase and oxidase. Bacterial identification was delayed because the organism was
unidentifiable based on the conventional biochemical keys and the Vitek 2 system (bioMérieux, Marcy L’Etoile, France). Using the API 20NE
(bioMérieux), the organism was identified as Mannheimia haemolytica/Pasteurella trehalosi with good confidence level (94.5% probability).
The identification of this isolate was further determined by the 16S rDNA gene analysis that used screening primers SQE1 and SQE3 (6) and
the 1,445-bp gene sequencing procedure as described elsewhere (7). The DNA sequence was analyzed by using the standard nucleotide-nucleotide
BLAST algorithm (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov). The 16S rDNA sequence of this isolate, called strain RB401, was most closely related (99.9%
homology) to the novicida-like subspecies of F. novicida strain 3523 (GenBank accession no. AY243028) and was deposited to the GenBank
database under the accession no. EU365864. Identification of strain RB401 was further confirmed by analyzing DNA sequences of TUL4 and
PPIase genes as previously described for strain 3523 (5). The fragment containing TUL4 amplicon (363 nt) from strain RB401 shared the
highest similarity (98%) to the matching region from strain 3523. Comparing the 267-nt coding region sequence of the 3′ end of PPIase gene
nt 733259–733525 to the genome sequence of F. novicida strain U112 (GenBank accession no. CP000439) showed the highest similarity to all
subspecies of F. tularensis, e.g., F. tularensis subsp. tularensis strain WY96-3418 (GenBank accession no. CP000608), and to F. novicida
strain U112. The PPIase gene sequence of strain 3523 was not available for the alignment. However, the above findings also supported that
our isolate was F. novicida. The sequences of TUL4 and PPIase genes from strain RB401 were deposited to GenBank under accession nos.
EU786119 and EU786120, respectively. Antimicrobial drug susceptibility testing was performed by disk diffusion method and interpreted based
on the CLSI criteria for Acinetobacter spp. (8). Results showed that strain RB401 was susceptible to piperacillin/tazobactam, third-
generation cephalosporins, cefepime, imipenem, meropenem, aminoglycosides, fluoroquinolones, and tetracycline, but resistant to co-
trimoxazole. Due to the delay in organism identification and lack of awareness of its significance, antimicrobial treatment
(piperacillin/tazobactam 4.5 g intravenously every 8 h) was not initiated until day 19. However, on day 21, the patient requested to be
referred to her hometown hospital and died 2 days after referral. The final microbiology report was released 2 days after her death. The
serologic test for antibodies against Francisella spp. was not available. All laboratory technicians who processed culture and identified
the bacterium received doxycycline (100 mg twice a day for 14 days) for prophylaxis, and none reported fever or abnormal symptoms. F.
novicida, often referred to as F. tularensis subsp. novicida, is rarely attributed to human infection and is not readily recognized in most
clinical laboratories. Because of the unreliable results of phenotypic identification methods, unfamiliarity of the bacterium and close
genetic relatedness among Francisella spp., the organism can be misidentified, thus leading to inappropriate management. A clinical
diagnosis of Francisella infection is highly nonspecific, and it seems that the underlying disease with immunosuppression was an important
factor to contracting the disease in the described case and previous case reports (3–5). Human F. novicida infection has not previously been
described from Asia. There is no clear explanation regarding route of acquisition and the pathogenic role of this organism. Additionally,
there is no evidence for human-to-human transmission. In our case, clinicians and microbiologists did not suspect F. novicida infection.
Given that our patient had severe complicated underlying diseases while the potentially low-virulence organism was recovered, it was thus
difficult to claim that the patient’s death was solely due to F. novicida infection. Notably, the 16S rDNA, TUL4, and PPIase sequences of
our isolate are most closely related to the strain earlier reported from Australia (5). These areas are not known to be endemic for F.
novicida, and therefore, these strains represent the emergence of F. novicida in the Asia-Pacific region. The earlier case-patient was
successfully treated with flucloxacillin and doxycycline, followed by dicloxacillin and doxycycline (5). F. novicida is not considered to
have a fastidious growth requirement. The standard protocol of 5-day incubation for automated blood culture (9) is supposedly sufficient for
detection of F. novicida bacteremia. Identification of F. novicida, however, is often difficult because the bacterium can be easily
misidentified as a non-Francisella species or as a highly pathogenic F. tularensis. It was also indicated that this organism could not be
detected by a direct fluorescent antibody test used for the identification of F. tularensis types A and B (5). As a preliminary result, our
16S rDNA sequence was closely related to subspecies of F. tularensis, and thus doxycycline prophylaxis for the organism-exposed laboratory
personnel could not be avoided. There is high risk for laboratory-acquired tularemia when handling F. tularensis cultures (10). In
retrospect, prophylactic treatment may have been unnecessary because our isolate proved to be F. novicida, which is not known to cause
laboratory-acquired infections. Rapid methods for Francisella species identification are needed for better consideration of antimicrobial
prophylaxis. Most F. tularensis strains were susceptible to aminoglycosides, quinolones, and tetracyclines (11). Our isolate was similarly
susceptible to these agents, which suggests that they may be considered as therapeutic options for Francisella spp. Initial treatment with
piperacillin/tazobactam was based on the preliminary report of gram-negative bacilli, but later antimicrobial susceptibility testing showed
this isolate to be susceptible to this agent. However, previous reports (11–13) suggested that piperacillin/tazobactam and other β-lactams
are generally considered ineffective in vivo against Francisella spp. and likely result in therapeutic failure. Given that the organism is
believed to be of low virulence, particularly that it does not pose a substantial risk for immunocompetent persons, its role as a human
pathogen remains controversial. Further studies to gain better understanding of pathogenic mechanism and transmission route of F. novicida
are necessary to provide appropriate guidelines for the treatment and prophylaxis. Suggested citation for this article: Leelaporn A, Yongyod
S, Limsrivanichakorn S, Yungyuen T, Kiratisin P. Emergence of Francisella novicida bacteremia, Thailand. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2008 Dec [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/14/12/1935.htm We thank the Department of Microbiology and
the Division of Medical Records, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital, for their support in this study. Dr Leelaporn is a clinical
microbiologist and a supervisor of Bacteriology Service at the Department of Microbiology, Faculty of Medicine Siriraj Hospital. Her
research interests include antimicrobial resistance mechanisms and diagnostic bacteriology.
