The role of fulvestrant in the management of intestinal obstruction associated with lobular carcinoma has not been specifically described.
Herein we present two cases where fulvestrant, as the only available parenteral endocrine agent for postmenopausal advanced breast cancer
has the opportunity to provide a means to initiate treatment in those patients who present with varying degrees of intestinal obstruction.
Fulvestrant may obviate the use of chemotherapy while achieving sustained clinical benefit with less toxicity, in appropriately selected
patients. Fulvestrant (Faslodex) is a relatively new oestrogen receptor (ER) antagonist with a novel mode of action; it binds, blocks, and
increases degradation of ER . Fulvestrant is licensed for treatment of postmenopausal women with hormone receptor-positive advanced breast
cancer (HR(+) ABC) progressing or recurring on anti-oestrogen therapy. However, it is also active in the first-line setting in patients with
HR(+) tumours . It is currently the only parenteral endocrine agent licensed for use in postmenopausal breast cancer, given as 250 mg
intramuscularly every 4 weeks. The role of fulvestrant in the management of intestinal obstruction associated with lobular carcinoma has not
been specifically described. Herein we present two cases – both highlighting the use of fulvestrant in this context. An 82 year old lady
presented as an emergency with small bowel obstruction but no history of abdominal surgery. Her chest X-ray revealed a small pleural
effusion at the right base. Concomitantly, she was found to have a highly suspicious, palpable mass on her right breast. CT scan findings
revealed obstruction at the distal ileum (Figure 1), bilateral hydronephroses, widespread sclerotic bony metastases and a pulmonary embolus
(PE). The right-sided breast mass was biopsied and this confirmed an invasive lobular adenocarcinoma (Grade 2), that was both strongly ER
and progesterone receptor (PR) positive, with a H-score of 280 and 220 respectively. CT scan demonstrating mechanical small bowel
obstruction. She was deemed high risk for surgery due to her recent PE and she also did not wish to have surgery. In view of the
circumstances, she was commenced on fulvestrant injections as a primary endocrine therapy. This lady's intestinal obstruction eventually
settled with non-operative management. When she was reviewed in the outpatient clinic two months after commencing fulvestrant, her tumour
marker (CA15.3) had decreased from 57 to 38 kU/L. Follow-up CT scan at 6 months showed no evidence of progression of metastases with
resolution of the small bowel obstruction. At one year of fulvestrant, the overall assessment was that of a partial response with complete
resolution of the palpable breast tumour. With a background history of ER+ lobular breast carcinoma metastasizing to the lungs and bones for
a few years, a 64 year old lady presented recently with symptoms of gastric outlet obstruction and changes in bowel habit. This patient was
first diagnosed with ER+ lobular breast carcinoma and was treated with wide local excision and post-operative radiotherapy. She then
developed recurrences in her lymph node which progressed to her lungs and bones over the years. CT scan revealed thickening in the duodenum
and in both the ascending and descending colon with narrowing of the lumen (Figure 2). Biopsy results from both the duodenum and colon were
consistent with metastases from a breast primary. Her symptoms of gastric outlet obstruction resolved after an uneventful gastrojejunostomy
but her bowel symptoms remained. She was commenced on fulvestrant as systemic therapy following prior treatments with tamoxifen, then an
aromatase inhibitor. CT scan demonstrating thickening of colonic wall with narrowing of lumen. A repeat CT done 2 months later showed stable
disease. She felt very well in herself with resolution of her bowel symptoms. Lobular breast carcinoma accounts for about 8% to 14% of all
breast cancers . Several studies have demonstrated higher prevalence of spread of metastatic disease to the gastrointestinal tract,
peritoneum and retroperitoneum, and ovaries in patients when compared to patients with ductal carcinoma . Loss of expression of the cell-
cell adhesion molecule E-cadherin in infiltrating lobular carcinoma may have contributed to these differences . In hormone-responsive
patients, endocrine therapy represents the mainstay of effective, well-tolerated treatment for advanced breast cancer before cytotoxic
chemotherapy is required. A proviso for the success of any new endocrine therapy must be a lack of cross-resistance with prior treatments .
It is found that women who respond well to endocrine treatment for sustained periods tend to respond well to subsequent endocrine therapy.
In Case 2, there was a decrease in the time lag between each endocrine therapy prior to starting fulvestrant. However, as noted, the patient
responded well to treatment, obviating the need to commence chemotherapy. This case report highlights not only the unusual presentation (ie
intestinal obstruction) known to be associated with lobular carcinomas but also the challenges this specific type poses to initiating
therapy. In the presence of gastric metastasis, it is found that endocrine therapy (tamoxifen as a first line agent) is used as often as
chemotherapy . The chemotherapy schemes most frequently used were cyclophosphamide, methotrexate and 5 fluorouracil or cytoxan, doxorubicin
and 5 fluorouracil. Initiating tamoxifen was not an option in Case 1 and fulvestrant proved to be an efficacious alternative. A recent study
demonstrated that fulvestrant was active in patients with multiple sites of metastases, visceral metastases, human epidermal growth factor
receptor 2-positive disease and after heavy endocrine pre-treatment . Another study comparing fulvestrant with anastrozole appears to show
that patients with visceral metastases may have a longer duration of response with fulvestrant . Two large randomized trials have previously
shown that fulvestrant is at least as effective as anastrozole against breast cancer in postmenopausal women who failed on prior endocrine
therapy . However, fulvestrant showed neither superiority nor noninferiority in comparison to tamoxifen for the treatment of postmenopausal
women who have received no prior hormonal or cytotoxic therapy for advanced breast cancer . Fulvestrant, is the only available parenteral
endocrine agent for postmenopausal advanced breast cancer, and has the opportunity to provide a means to initiate treatment in patients who
present with varying degrees of intestinal obstruction. This may obviate the use of chemotherapy while achieving sustained clinical benefit,
with less toxicity, in appropriately selected patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. JYMT wrote the report, revised and submitted the manuscript for publication. KLC and RS
helped with editing the report. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Keith (Medical Photography Nottingham University
Hospitals) – formatting the images for this case report.
