Aspergillus mastoidits and skull-base osteomyelitis are extremely rare, even in immunocompromised patients. We report a case of an 81-year-
old immunocompetent man, who underwent a mastoidectomy because of unexplained, progressive otalgia in spite of a noninflamed and air-
containing middle-ear space. Histopathology yielded Aspergillus fumigatus. When confronted with otitis with an unexpected clinical course a
high index of suspicion is required to facilitate early diagnosis and appropriate therapy of a potential lethal Aspergillus infection, even
in immunocompetent patients. This seems to be more so in older patients with an open middle-ear cavity and/or when there is facial nerve
involvement. Invasive skull-base mastoiditis, also known as malignant or necrotizing otitis externa, typically affects immunocompromised
patients (diabetes, leukemia, AIDS, prior treatment with cytotoxic medication and or corticosteroids) and is usually caused by Pseudomonas
aeruginosa. Although being an uncommon condition, it is often well recognized and at one moment differentiated from an ‘ordinary’ otitis due
to alarming (progressive) symptoms such as extreme/deep otalgia, vertigo-hearing loss (labyrinthitis), facial nerve dysfunction and
sometimes dysfunction of other nerves of the cerebellopontine angle (Gradenigo syndrome). Although human exposure to Aspergillus is common,
infections are infrequent. Aspergillus mastoiditis and skull-base osteomyelitis are extremely rare, even in immunocompromised patients , the
first patient being described in 1985 . We report a case of invasive Aspergillus fumigatus skull-base mastoiditis in an immunocompetent
patient, only first recognized at surgery. An 81-year-old man presented with a 5-week history of right-sided otalgia and otorrhoea
(Table 1). His hearing in the right ear was subjectively reduced; there was no history of tinnitus or vertigo. Examination revealed whitish
debris filling the right external auditory canal. The left ear was normal. His medical history included a symmetrical presbyacusis, for
which he had been wearing hearing aids bilaterally since 1999. He did not take any medication. Initially, the diagnosis of a right-sided
external otitis was made and the patient was treated with oral antibiotics and acetic acid ear drops.Table 1 One month later the patient
returned with progressive, intermittent severe/undurable, right-sided otalgia. Examination showed some mild otorrhoea as well as a quiet,
central perforation in the tympanic membrane with a noninflamed and air-containing middle ear space. The ear canal was slightly edematous.
No granulation tissue could be seen in the external auditory canal or middle ear by microscopic examination. There was no post-auricular
fluctuation and no erythema, tenderness or edema over the mastoid area. Facial function was normal. The Valsalva maneuver was negative.
Initial laboratory workup showed signs of an infection [ESR 46 mm/h, CRP 21.3 mg/l, normal WBC (8.6 × 109/l; 16% lymphocytes)]. Liver
enzymes were normal. Fasting blood sugar was 6.1 mmol/l. Anti-dsDNA, ENA, anti-proteinase3 and anti-myeloperoxidase were all negative. Tone
and speech audiometry showed a superimposed conductive hearing loss of the right ear. Because of the ununderstood invalidating earache (not
matching with the quite external auditory canal, tympanic membrane and middle ear) a computed tomography (CT) scan was planned. This scan
(1 week later) demonstrated complete opacification of the right mastoid air cells, swelling of the soft tissues surrounding the ear but no
signs of bony erosion (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Axial CT scan of the right temporal bone showing complete opacification of the mastoid air cells, an
air-containing middle ear and swelling of the soft tissues surrounding the ear Axial CT scan of the right temporal bone showing complete
opacification of the mastoid air cells, an air-containing middle ear and swelling of the soft tissues surrounding the ear Considering the
aforementioned and the still progressive, sometimes undurable otalgia, despite the use of broad spectrum antibiotics and strong analgesics,
we decided to perform a cortical mastoidectomy to obtain mastoid-material for histopathologic investigation. At surgery subcutaneous edema
and a black discoloration of the mastoid cortex and the bony ear canal was encountered. This was the first time invasive fungal mastoiditis
or other bone infiltrating pathology was suspected. Therefore, we decided to perform directly a canal wall down (radical mastoidectomy)
procedure to remove as much infected bone as possible and to ensure a good drainage. Purulent fluid and widespread granulation tissue filled
the mastoid air cells. Intraoperative specimens of tissue were sent for culture and histopathological analysis. After surgery an infectious
disease consult was obtained to medically complement surgical eradication of the fungal infection. Postoperatively, the patient was treated
with local miconazol dressing on cotton strips and oral voriconazol (200 mg twice daily) for 4 weeks. Histolopathological analysis revealed
necrosis, inflammation/granulocytes, and numerous septate fungal hyphae. Cultures of mastoid material obtained during surgery yielded
Aspergillus fumigatus. At follow-up visits after surgery, a well-healed incision was seen and the mastoid cavity re-epithelialized normally
in several months with no evidence of residual or persistent disease by microscopic examination (last visit 1 year after surgery). Mycotic
infections of the head and neck region are uncommon. Infections of the external auditory canal and paranasal sinuses are the most
encountered sites. The classification of Aspergillus infections has been described for paranasal sinus aspergillosis, and has been expanded
to include temporal bone infection . Documented cases of Aspergillus mastoiditis are exceedingly rare and all but six [1–4, 6, 7] of the
reported cases to date involved immunocompromised patients. Patients with invasive aspergillosis can have similar clinical presentation and
physical findings as an infection caused by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Failure to identify Aspergillus as the causative pathogen of invasive
temporal bone infection is the principal reason for delay in initiating potentially life-saving therapy. In our patient mainly the mastoid
was involved with the infection and not so the well-aerated middle ear (Fig. 1). This unusual finding might be explained with an obstruction
of the aditus ad antrum through pathologic tissue (granulation tissue) in combination with the tympanic membrane perforation . Almost all
patients with documented invasive external otitis resulting from Aspergillus reported in literature were noted to have facial nerve
involvement. Evidence of facial nerve involvement in patients with mastoiditis—particularly those who are immunocompromised and do not
respond to antibiotics—should cause one to consider Aspergillus in the differential diagnosis [1–6, 8]. Another noteworthy co-incidence in
the seven documented immunocompetent patients with Aspergillus mastoiditis to date (our patient included) is their old age (52–85, average
75 years) and the fact that they all had a port d’entrée to the tympanic cavity or mastoid: six had a tympanic membrane perforation [1–4, 6]
and the seventh (with the age of 52) was already known with a cholesteatoma (for which she refused surgery) 9 years before the mastoiditis .
Treatment of Aspergillus mastoiditis is threefold. Aggressive surgical debridement and resection is required and antifungal therapy should
be instituted once the diagnosis is made. Hyperbaric oxygen therapy should be considered post-operative although clear evidence to
demonstrate effectiveness is still missing . Further, attempt should be made to find and control any underlying immunologic conditions.
Mastoiditis caused by Aspergillus species is very uncommon. Because of the invasive nature of this life threatening disease, prompt
diagnosis and aggressive management including surgical debridement and antifungal therapy are necessary. When confronted with otitis/ear
complaints with an unexpected clinical course a high index of suspicion is required to facilitate early diagnosis and appropriate therapy of
a potential lethal Aspergillus infection, even in immunocompetent patients. This seems the more so in older patients with an open middle ear
cavity (tympanic membrane perforation, cholesteatoma) and/or when there is facial nerve involvement. This is for we know the seventh
immunocompetent patient with invasive Aspergillus mastoiditis described in the world literature. Both authors indicate that they do not have
a financial relationship with the organization that sponsored the research. Also there has not been any organization that sponsored the
research. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits
any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
