A 35 year-old asymptomatic Caucasian female with a family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) was referred for cardiologic
evaluation. The electrocardiogram and transthoracic echocardiogram were normal. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed for
further assessment of myocardial function and presence of myocardial scar. CMR showed normal left ventricular systolic size, measurements
and function. However, there was extensive, diffuse late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) throughout the left ventricle. This finding was
consistent with extensive myocardial scarring and was highly suggestive of advanced, non-ischemic cardiomyopathy. Genotyping showed a
heterozygous mis-sense mutation (275G>A) in the cardiac troponin T (TNNT2) gene, which is causally associated with HCM. There have been no
previous reports of such extensive, atypical pattern of myocardial scarring despite an otherwise structurally and functionally normal left
ventricle in an asymptomatic individual with HCM. This finding has important implications for phenotype screening in HCM. A 35 year-old
asymptomatic Caucasian female with a significant family history of hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), including sudden cardiac death of
unknown cause in one son and HCM in two other children, was referred for cardiologic consultation. The electrocardiogram and transthoracic
echocardiogram had revealed no abnormalities. Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) was performed for further assessment of myocardial
function and detection of myocardial scar. Two-, three- and four-chamber CMR cines were obtained using steady-state free precession and
inversion-recovery imaging was used to assess late gadolinium enhancement (LGE). CMR showed normal left ventricular (LV) systolic function
(end-systolic volume index 24 mL/m2; end-diastolic volume index 72 mL/m2, ejection fraction 63%) and normal wall thickness (anteroseptal
wall thickness 0.8 cm, posterolateral wall thickness 0.8 cm). There was extensive, diffuse, poorly demarcated LGE throughout the LV
ventricle, predominantly involving the basal lateral, basal anteroseptal and mid-inferior walls (figures 1A and 1B). Subsequent genotyping
showed she was heterozygous for the mis-sense mutation 275G>A (R92Q) in exon 9 of the cardiac troponin T gene (TNNT2) previously reported to
be associated with HCM . The same gene defect was also found in both surviving children with HCM. Inversion-recovery images in the vertical
long-axis (2-chamber shown) view demonstrating diffuse, poorly demarcated late-gadolinium enhancement (arrows) without left ventricular
enlargement or hypertrophy (LA – left atrium, LV – left ventricle). Myocardial scar in HCM shows wide variation. Longitudinal stripes of
fibrosis commonly occur at the junctions of the interventricular septum and free wall of the right ventricle (right ventricular insertion
points), but more advanced forms include dense replacement scars throughout the ventricle . Myocardial scar in HCM may serve as an
arrhythmogenic substrate and the extent of area involved has been shown an association with arrhythmias, sudden cardiac death and major
adverse cardiovascular events . Diffuse LGE on CMR without left ventricular hypertrophy or enlargement is uncommon in HCM. LGE represents
myocardial fibrosis in HCM, and therefore, with such diffuse pattern of myocardial scarring, left ventricular function might be expected to
be depressed. The presence of diffuse LGE in a patient with an unequivocal HCM genotype and family history in the setting of an unequivocal
normal cardiac phenotype has not been reported previously. This indicates that cardiac fibrosis may be the only demonstrable abnormality in
HCM, and precede other phenotypic expression in HCM. This finding has important potential implications for family screening in HCM. Further
evaluation of the need to include LGE CMR as routine practice to screen relatives of patients with HCM is required. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. BS wrote drafted the manuscript.
VA interpreted the cardiovascular magnetic resonance images and was responsible for the idea for the manuscript, performed sequence
alignment of the manuscript and, helped write and rewrote the manuscript. RS was the pediatrician for the patient's children and
subsequently conducted genetic testing on them. CG conducted genetic counseling and testing on the patient, and interpreted the significance
of those results. DS and RM prescribed, performed and interpreted the various sequences during cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging of
the patient. AM was the patient's cardiologist and had been responsible for the patient's care, referral for further testing, manuscript
revision and for echocardiographic assessments. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Inversion-recovery images in the
vertical short-axis view demonstrating diffuse, poorly demarcated late-gadolinium enhancement (arrows) without left ventricular enlargement
or hypertrophy (LA – left atrium, LV – left ventricle).
