Enterobacter sakazakii (E. sakazakii) infections are an important cause of life-threatening meningitis, septicemia, and necrotizing
enterocolitis in infants. Dried infant formula milk is an important vehicle for E. sakazakii infection. E. sakazakii was isolated in Korea
from dried infant formula milk. Although E. sakazakii infection of infants may occur in Korea, its prevalence has not yet been documented.
Therefore, we determined the prevalence of E. sakazakii and documented symptoms. Between March and October 2006, 1,146 stool samples were
collected from patients at Uijeongbu St. Mary's Hospital. Each fecal swab was dissolved in 10 mL of buffered peptone solution, and enriched
culture was streaked onto Druggan-Forsythe-Iversen (DFI) agar. Presumptive E. sakazakii colonies that exhibited a blue-green color during
culture on DFI medium were selected. The identity of colonies that developed yellow pigment during culture on TSA was determined using the
Vitek system and PCR. We isolated 4 E. sakazakii strains whose 16S rRNA sequence alignments had a similarity of 99% with those of 3 E.
sakazakii ATCC strains. This is the first report on isolation of E. sakazakii from stool samples and to document the symptoms of Korean
patients. Enterobacter sakazakii (E. sakazakii) is a bacterium that belongs to the family of Enterobacteriaceae. It was initially referred
to as yellow-pigmented Enterobacter cloacae. In 1980, Farmer et al.1 reclassified it as E. sakazakii, based on DNA-DNA hybridization,
biochemical characteristics, antibiotic susceptibility patterns, and presence of yellow-pigmented colonies. E. sakazakii infection is an
important cause of life-threatening meningitis (complicated by ventriculitis, brain abscess, cerebral infarction, and cyst formation),
septicemia, and necrotizing enterocolitis in infants.2,3 Mortality rates of 33-80% were reported for infected patients.2 There are few
reports of E. sakazakii infection of adults, which is not usually life threatening.3-5 E. sakazakii has been isolated from stool and
urine.6-8 Isolation from stools was demonstrated in infants aged ≤ 18 weeks.9 This organism has also been detected in a wide range of foods,
including cheese, meat, vegetables, grains, herbs, and spices.10-12 Most reports are concerned with the presence of the organism in dried
infant formula milk.10-13 Dried infant formula milk is an important vehicle of E. sakazakii infection.14 In Korea, E. sakazakii was isolated
from 3 of 45 dried infant formula milk samples.15 Although E. sakazakii infection of infants may occur in Korea, its prevalence has not yet
been determined. Therefore, we determined the prevalence of E. sakazakii in stool samples of hospital patients in Korea and documented the
symptoms of those whose stool samples were positive for E. sakazakii. To isolate E. sakazakii, 1,146 stool samples were collected from March
to October 2006 at Uijeongbu St. Mary's Hospital. Each fecal swab from each sample was dissolved in 10 mL of buffered peptone solution
(Oxoid, Basingstroke, England) and incubated at 37℃ for 24 hours. One mL of preenriched buffered peptone solution was added to 10 mL of
enterbacter enrichment broth (Oxoid) and incubated at 37℃ for 24 hours. The enriched culture was streaked onto Druggan-Gorsythe-iversen
(DFI) medium (Oxoid) and incubated at 37℃ for 24 hours. Up to five presumptive E. sakazakii colonies that exhibited a blue-green color
during culture on DFI medium were selected for culture on TSA at 25℃ for 72 hours. The identities of colonies that developed yellow pigment
during culture on TSA were determined using a Vitek GNI card (bio Meriux, Marcyl' Etoile, France) and PCR. E. sakazakii ATCC 29004, E.
sakazakii ATCC 29544, and E. sakazakii ATCC 51329 were used as positive controls. Bacteria were grown on TSA at 37℃ for 24 hours. One loop
of biomass was scraped off the agar, suspended in 500 µL of sterile distilled water, and boiled for 10 minutes. After centrifugation at 1200
× g for 10 minutes at 4℃, the supernatants were used as templates for PCR. To detect the sequence of the 16S rRNA gene, E. sakazakii strains
were amplified using PCR assays with Esakf (5' GCT YTG CTG ACG AGT GGC GG 3') and Esakr (5' ATC TCT GCA GGA TTC TCT GG 3'), details of which
have previously been reported.7 The following conditions were used for the thermal cycler (PTC-100; MJ Research, Watertown, MA, USA):
initial denaturation for 2 minutes at 94℃, 29 cycles of denaturation at 94℃ for 30 seconds, annealing at 60℃ for 60 seconds, extension at
72℃ for 90 seconds, and a final cycle at 72℃ for 5 minutes. The products were then sequenced using a modified Sanger method, a Big-dye kit
(Applied Biosystems), and an ABI 3,730 capillary DNA analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The antibiotic susceptibility of
E. sakazakii was determined using the Vitek system and GNS cards. The following antibiotics were tested: amikacin (AN), ampicillin (AM),
ampicillin/sulbactam (SAM), aztreonam (AZ), cefazolin (CZ), cefepime (FEP), cefoxitin (CFX), ciprofloxacin (CIP), gentamicin (GM), imipenem
(IPM), piperacillin/tazobactam (TAZ), and trimethoprime-sulfamethoxazole (SXT). Four E. sakazakii strains were isolated from 1,146 stool
samples of Korean patients. Details of stool samples and isolated strains are shown in Table 1. E. sakazakii was isolated from 2 of 392
infants less than one year of age. Among adults, 2 E. sakazakii strains were isolated from 61 - 70-year-old age group. The 4 clinical
isolates and 3 ATCC strains were tested for antibiotic resistance. Strains isolated from babies less than one year of age were resistant to
ampicillin and cefazolin, whereas isolates from adults were susceptible to all antibiotics tested. The clinical characteristics of the 4
cases were as follows. A 3-month-old baby who exhibited symptoms of poor nutrition and abdominal distention was hospitalized, and a clinical
diagnosis of gastroenteritis and meningitis was made. The white blood cell (WBC) count of cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) was 16 per mm3 and
consisted of lymphocytes (82%), monocytes (12%), and neutrophils (6%). CSF agglutination tests for Streptococcus agalactiae, S. pnemoniae,
Neisseria meningitidis, and H. influenza type B were negative. Blood and CSF cultures were negative. Intravenous therapy with
amoxicillin/clavulanate and tobramycin was initiated and the patient's condition gradually improved after 10 days of hospitalization.
Rotavirus antigen and E. sakazakii were isolated from stool specimens on day 7 of hospitalization. A 20 days-old baby presented with fever.
He was hospitalized with a clinical diagnosis of sepsis and meningitis. The patient's physical condition on admission was normal except for
the presence of jaundice. Intravenous therapy with ampicillin/sulbactam and tobramycin was initiated, and the patient's condition gradually
improved after 5 days of hospitalization. A diagnostic lumbar puncture revealed that CSF had a total protein concentration of 81 mg/dL, a
glucose concentration of 62 mg/dL, and a WBC of 2 per mm3. CSF agglutination tests for Streptococcus agalactiae, S. pnemoniae, Neisseria
meningitidis, and H. influenza type B were negative. Blood and CSF cultures were negative. E. sakazakii was isolated from stool specimens
after 4 days of hospitalization. A 64 years-old male patient presented with right hemiplegia and thymic cyst rupture. E. sakazakii was
isolated from stool specimens on day 30 of hospitalization. No sign or symptom indicative of E. sakazakii infection was observed during
hospitalization. A 72 years-old male patient was diagnosed with intracranial hemorrhage. E. sakazakii was isolated from stool specimens on
day 30 of hospitalization. No sign or symptom indicative of E. sakazakii infection was observed during hospitalization. The biochemical and
antibiotic resistance characteristics of the isolates are presented in Table 2. Three of the 4 isolates produced yellow pigmentation during
culture on TSA. Moreover, all 4 isolates exhibited a blue-green color during culture on DFI agar, which confirmed the constitutive
expression of α-glucosidase (data not shown). Three of the Vitek GNI biochemical profiles of isolates identified as E. sakazakii had
identification values of 96 - 99% and that of one strain was 82% (S2, Table 2). There were several point mutations in the sequences of the
strains (Table 3). We isolated four E. sakazakii strains from 1,146 stool samples. Clinical outbreaks of E. sakazakii infection in neonatal
care units in various parts of the world have been reported.16,17 However, isolation of E. sakazakii from humans in Korea has never been
documented before. All four isolates developed blue-green colonies on DFI agar, confirming the constitutive expression of α-glucosidase.
However, α-glucosidase activity is not restricted to E. sakazakii.18 E. sakazakii is naturally resistant to all macrolides, lincomycin,
clindamycin, streptogramins, rifampicin, fusidic acid, and fosfomycin.18 It is, however, susceptible to some antibiotics, including
tetracyclines, aminoglycosides, numerous α-lactams, chloramphenicol, antifolates, and quinolones.19 Our results showed that strains of E.
sakazakii isolated from adults were sensitive to ampicillin and cefazolin. However, the strains of E. sakazakii isolated from infants were
resistant to ampicillin and cefazolin. These observations are different from those of Mustjens et al., who showed that the resistance to
ampicillin is likely due to exclusion of E. sakazakii.20 We speculate that specific virulence factor could explain the differences in
susceptibility between the strains isolated from infants and those from adults. But, further study is needed to confirm the differences in
antibiotic susceptibilities. Several studies on the molecular characterization of E. sakazakii have been conducted to identify phylogenetic
relationships and suitable PCR primers.19,21-23 The 16S rRNA gene has widely been used for sequence analysis because it is highly conserved
and ubiquitous. Amplification of the 16S rRNA gene from the E. sakazakii isolates using the Esakf and Esakr primer pair produced PCR
products with 929 bp long (Fig. 1). These primers are very specific for E. sakazakii.19 Molecular methods based on 16S rRNA gene sequencing
are well established and are routinely used for characterization and identification of bacteria.24,25 The 16S rRNA gene contains variable
and hypervariable regions. The variable regions have been used to discriminate between species and genera. Variability in the E. sakazakii
16S rRNA gene has also been observed. Lehner et al.19 detected 2 phylogenetically distinct lineages in the 16S rRNA gene, and Hassan et
al.26 observed sequence differences between E. sakazakii and other Enterobacteriaceae within hypervariable regions. We compared the 16S rRNA
sequences of the 4 isolates with those of the three ATCC strains. The sequence alignments of the 16S rRNA PCR products of the 4 isolates and
the 3 E. sakazakii ATCC strains had 99% similarity. However, we detected several point mutations in the sequences (Table 3). The present
result together with previous study19 indicate that the E. sakazakii 16S rRNA gene has at least 4 "hot spots" and may contain several point
mutations. A few cases of E. sakazakii infection in adult have been reported, and younger than 4 years old infants and children are high
risk groups compared with adults.10 In this study, infection signs of E. sakazakii were encountered in only 2 patients, however, not seen in
adults. This result shows that E. sakazakii infection is more risky in infants than in adults. Powdered infant formula is both the vehicle
and the direct/indirect source of 50 - 80% cases of diseases caused by E. sakazakii.14 Therefore, we suggest that dried infant formula milk
in the present study could be considered as the possible sources of E. sakazakii isolated from infants, although we were unable to prove our
hypothesis. Finally, our study shows that E. sakazakii infection does occur in Korea. In conclusion, this study is the first to report the
isolation of E. sakazakii from stool samples of Korean patients and indicates that continuous surveillance is needed to monitor E. sakazakii
infection. Agarose gel analysis of 16S rRNA PCR products of E. sakazakii strains. Number of Stool Enterobacter sakazakii Isolates by Age
Group Characteristics, Antimicrobial Susceptibilities, and Identification by Vitek GNI of E. sakazakii Strains M, male; Amr, ampicillin
resistant; Ams, ampicillin susceptible; CZr, cefazolin resistant; CZs, cefazolin sensitive; CFXr, cefoxitin resistant; CFXs, cefoxitin
sensitive. Sequence Analysis of the 16 S rRNA Genes of E. sakazakii Strains Isolated from Stool Samples and Those of ATCC 29544, ATCC 51329,
and ATCC 29004 Strains of E. sakazakii
