To the Editor: A 30-year-old African man, without any specific medical history, came to the emergency department of Brugmann University
Hospital in Brussels, Belgium, on March 18, 2008, because of malaise, profuse transpiration, and dizziness that day. He also reported a
3-day history of muscle pain and pain while urinating, for which his general practitioner prescribed ciprofloxacin. Originally from Guinea-
Conakry, the patient reported no travel outside Belgium after his arrival >9 years earlier. No recurrent fever episodes were noted during
this period. Two weeks before becoming ill, a friend visiting from Guinea-Conakry stayed at his home for 7 days. Results of a physical
examination were normal, except for a temperature of 37.5°C. Blood analysis showed moderate anemia (hemoglobin 12.9 g/dL) and
thrombocytopenia (platelet count 73,000/μL) with total bilirubin and C-reactive protein levels of 1.5 mg/dL and 7.0 mg/dL, respectively.
Because we suspected subfebrile malaria in this patient, a blood smear was prepared. It showed ring-shaped trophozoites of Plasmodium
falciparum with a parasite density of 0.1%. Serologic tests showed an antibody titer to Plasmodium spp. of 3,200. A blood sample was sent to
the national reference laboratory at the Institute of Tropical Medicine in Antwerp. The diagnosis of P. falciparum malaria was confirmed by
microscopy and real-time PCR. Follow-up was uneventful because the patient responded to a 7-day course of oral quinine and doxycycline.
Malaria, a potential life-threatening disease caused by P. falciparum, usually occurs within 2 months after the bite of an infective
mosquito. A few reports mention a delay of >1 year between exposure and initial clinical symptoms, probably related to the disappearance of
residual protective immunity in immigrants (1,2). Impaired immunity has also been linked to late malaria, implicating a chronic low-grade P.
falciparum infection that becomes clinically evident in an immunocompromised person (3). In addition, several cases of malaria without any
travel history to a malaria-endemic region have been described. A possible explanation for this type of malaria is exposure to an imported
Anopheles spp. mosquito, referred to as airport, luggage, or container malaria (4). Transmission by indigenous anopheline mosquitoes when
weather conditions are favorable has been reported in some European countries (5,6). Cases of P. falciparum malaria without any evidence of
a mosquito bite have been reported and related to transfusion of parasitized erythrocytes, intravenous drug use, or accidental needlestick
injuries (4). We report a clinically atypical case of late P. falciparum malaria that may have been contracted by the bite of an anopheline
mosquito captured in the luggage of the patient’s visiting friend (7). Unreported travel to a malaria-endemic region was possible but
unlikely because our patient stayed illegally in Belgium and leaving the country would risk being repatriated to Guinea-Conakry. Indigenous
malaria was excluded because he became ill during the winter, a time when proliferation of local Anopheles spp. in Belgium is difficult. The
patient did not receive any recent blood transfusions and denied being an intravenous drug user, although this possibility cannot be
excluded. This type of malaria, also known as luggage or suitcase malaria, makes adequate and timely diagnosis difficult because a history
of exposure to a possibly malaria-infected mosquito is apparently absent. Moreover, our patient had few classic symptoms or signs, such as
high-grade fever, chills, or headaches; this pattern complicates diagnosis. This lack of typical malaria symptoms may be related to the fact
that before coming to the hospital, the patient took ciprofloxacin, which has in vitro activity against P. falciparum. Another possible
reason is residual immunity to malaria, which was no longer protective but still capable of attenuating symptoms or signs of malaria. This
finding implicates recrudescence of disease after a long period of asymptomatic infection with P. falciparum. Serologic analysis detected
high levels of antibodies to Plasmodium spp., which suggests a chronic infection rather than a new one. It is generally accepted that
protective immunity wanes after several months of nonexposure. Support for this thesis is the frequency of clinical malaria in African
adults who visit their families after a long stay in a country where the disease is not endemic. However, these cases might be caused by
antigenic variation of P. falciparum in the area visited, which would enable the parasite to evade the host’s immune response (8). Residual
immunologic memory against P. falciparum has been suggested, which would link persistent immunity with late recrudescence or with less
severe or complicated disease in immigrants (2,9). Moreover, P. falciparum has been transmitted through blood transfusions from donors from
malaria-endemic regions several years after exposure, which suggests long subpatent periods (10). This case highlights the problem of
diagnosing P. falciparum malaria in patients without a recent travel history to malaria-endemic areas. In such cases, autochthonous malaria,
whether transmitted by an imported or an indigenous mosquito or by infected blood cells or needles, should be excluded. Residual protective
immunity, even after several years of nonexposure to P. falciparum, may explain persistent asymptomatic infection and late recrudescence of
disease. Suggested citation for this article: Theunissen C, Janssens P, Demulder A, Nouboussié D, Van Esbroeck M, Van Gompel A, et al.
Falciparum malaria in patient 9 years after leaving malaria-endemic area . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Jan [date cited].
Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/1/115.htm
