Rhabdomyolysis is usually caused by physical, infectious or toxic factors and may be complicated by acute renal failure (ARF) associated
with a high mortality rate of more than 20% . We report about a very unusual, but emergent cause of severe rhabdomyolysis due to peripheral
embolism of a left atrial myxoma. A 36-year-old male patient was admitted to hospital due to lumbalgia. Patient’s history revealed neither
traumatic injury nor intake of drugs. Clinical examination only showed right-sided weakness in ankle dorsiflexion, hip flexion and
adduction. Vital parameters, ECG findings, X-ray and MRI of the lumbar spine were normal. Laboratory tests revealed highly elevated serum
creatine phosphokinase (286,580 U/l, n: ≤270 U/l), myoglobin (56,000 μg/l, n: ≤75 μg/l), lactate dehydrogenase (4,926 U/l, n: ≤232 U/l),
aspartate aminotransferase (4,263 U/l, n: ≤35 U/l), alanine aminotransferase (701 U/l, n: ≤45 U/l) levels and inflammation parameters (CRP
145 mg/l, n: ≤8 mg/l). Renal function was impaired (creatinine 173 μmol/l, n: 61–104 μmol/l; urea-N 5 mmol/l, n: 1.3–3.5 mmol/l; uric acid
655 μmol/l, n: 208–440 μmol/l; glomerular filtration rate 31 ml/min, n: 80–170 ml/min/1.73 m2). Kidney ultrasonography revealed no signs of
hydronephrosis or perfusion defects. MRI of pelvis and thighs due to the development of acute myalgias in the right leg demonstrated
compartment syndrome of the M. iliopsoas and femoral muscles. After emergent fasciotomy, transthoracic echocardiography performed due to
hemodynamic instability demonstrated a left atrial inhomogenous mass (Fig. 1a). Furthermore, MRI angiography initiated due to signs of lower
extremity vascular occlusion revealed a circumscribed perfusion defect at the aortic bifurcation (Fig. 1b). Surgical removal of the atrial
mass and its aortic embolus was immediately performed and histopathology revealed a typical cardiac myxoma (Fig. 1c). Patient’s
postoperative course was complicated by ARF, arrhythmias and serious infections. However, multiple organ dysfunction could completely be
restored after 6 weeks of intensive care management.Fig. 1Embolism of a left atrial cardiac myxoma a Echocardiography. Four-chamber image
from ECG-gated line-balanced fast field echo pulse sequence showed an intra-atrial mass (arrow) with attachment to the inter-atrial septum.
LA left atrial cavity, LV left ventricular cavity, RA right atrial cavity, RV right ventricular cavity b MRI angiography of the aortic and
large lower extremity vessels. MRI perfusion image shows a circumscribed perfusion defect at the aortic bifurcation with subocclusive
stenosis of the right-sided A. iliaca communis. This area revealed a bright signal enhancement on T1-weighted inversion recovery images
obtained after intravenous injection of gadobutrol. c Histopathology. At thoracic surgery the left atrial mass was 6 × 4 × 3 cm in diameter.
Histopathological examination of the resected tumor revealed a benign myxoma with characteristic myxoid stromal tissue containing a low
number of tumor cells with uniform small nuclei and focal accumulation of siderophages. Tumor cells did not exhibit any signs of atypia
(H&E, ×100) Embolism of a left atrial cardiac myxoma a Echocardiography. Four-chamber image from ECG-gated line-balanced fast field echo
pulse sequence showed an intra-atrial mass (arrow) with attachment to the inter-atrial septum. LA left atrial cavity, LV left ventricular
cavity, RA right atrial cavity, RV right ventricular cavity b MRI angiography of the aortic and large lower extremity vessels. MRI perfusion
image shows a circumscribed perfusion defect at the aortic bifurcation with subocclusive stenosis of the right-sided A. iliaca communis.
This area revealed a bright signal enhancement on T1-weighted inversion recovery images obtained after intravenous injection of gadobutrol.
c Histopathology. At thoracic surgery the left atrial mass was 6 × 4 × 3 cm in diameter. Histopathological examination of the resected tumor
revealed a benign myxoma with characteristic myxoid stromal tissue containing a low number of tumor cells with uniform small nuclei and
focal accumulation of siderophages. Tumor cells did not exhibit any signs of atypia (H&E, ×100) Atrial myxomas represent 50% of all primary
benign cardiac tumors in adults aged 30–60 years and occur more often in women . Clinical manifestations include one or more of the
classical triad of cardiovascular symptoms, constitutional symptoms and peripheral or visceral signs of embolization which is detected in up
to 30–50% of cases . Peripheral embolism leads to clinical signs of ischemia including purple discoloration of the skin not present on
admission of our case. Furthermore, renal embolism as a potential cause of ARF could be ruled out in this case by Doppler sonography. Thus,
although embolism of cardiac myxomas represents a common feature, ARF due to severe rhabdomyolysis as primary manifestation of myxoma is
rare and has not been published so far. To prevent ARF in rhabdomyolysis fluid resuscitation, urine alkalinization and administration of
loop diuretics are recommended. In severe cases precipitation of myoglobin and uric acid crystals within renal tubules may lead to ARF. Due
to a low specificity of clinical symptoms as demonstrated in this case, diagnosis of cardiac myxomas represents a challenge. Two-dimensional
echocardiography was shown to be the most useful screening method . Despite adequate treatment options by open thoracic heart surgery ,
serial echocardiography at regular intervals is recommended during long-term follow-up due to recurrence in up to 5% of cases. This article
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution,
and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
