Andrew Larner discusses the diagnosis and management of a man referred to the Cognitive Function Clinic with a 12- to 18-month history of
deteriorating memory. A 50-year-old man was referred to the Cognitive Function Clinic with a 12- to 18-month history of deterioration in his
memory. The symptoms reported by the patient and his wife included forgetting what he was supposed to be doing, occasional disorientation in
place, misplacing objects, and word-finding difficulties, all of which had affected his occupational function as a high school teacher. His
past medical history was unremarkable. In the family history, his mother was said to have had Alzheimer disease (AD) in her fifties and died
in her sixties, but no further details were available to confirm or refute this. The patient's neurological examination was normal. On the
Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE; see Box 1 for brief descriptions of cognitive tests), the patient scored 26/30 with evidence of
impaired delayed recall. Initial neuropsychological assessment showed no evidence of generalised intellectual loss, since the full scale IQ
measured with the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–Revised (WAIS-R) was 109, comparable to the predicted premorbid full scale IQ of 100
measured with the National Adult Reading Test (NART). He was within normal limits on tests of memory. In tests of executive function using
verbal fluency and the Stroop test, the patient was within normal limits and showed no perseverative errors or rule breaks. Structural brain
imaging with computed tomography (he could not tolerate magnetic resonance brain imaging) was within normal limits. Despite these apparently
reassuring results, follow-up for longitudinal assessment was recommended, in part because the symptoms affected occupational function and
in part because of the family history. Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE) A brief (5–10 minutes) mental status questionnaire assessing
attention, orientation, memory, language, and visuospatial copying. Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–Revised (WAIS-R) Widely used test
battery of general cognitive abilities, deriving a full scale IQ from six subtests that comprise Verbal IQ and five subtests that comprise
Performance IQ. Administration time 1–2 hours; may require more than one consultation if patients become fatigued. National Adult Reading
Test (NART) A reading test of 50 irregularly spelled words. Since this function is relatively preserved in some forms of dementia, the NART
may be used to estimate premorbid cognitive function, since longitudinal assessments of IQ are almost never available in initial clinical
evaluation. Verbal Fluency Tests Generation of words beginning with a particular letter (Letter or Phonemic fluency), or exemplars of a
particular category (Category or Semantic fluency) in one minute; tests of executive function. Stroop Test (Colour–Word Interference Test)
Reading names of colours printed in inks of different colour; reading the names is much easier than reading the conflicting colours
(inhibition task); test of executive function. Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination A development of the MMSE addressing some of its
shortcomings, with more detailed tests of memory, language, visuospatial, and executive function, and hence longer to administer (15–20
minutes). Graded Naming Test Patient must name 30 black-and-white line drawings, sequenced in order of difficulty; a test screening for
naming deficits. Over the next two years, the patient and his family noted further decline in memory function. New symptoms included
repetitive questioning and difficulty remembering tasks to be done. He had to give up work, and his wife took over running the household
finances. At reassessment, MMSE score was stable, but on the Addenbrooke's Cognitive Examination he scored 81/100 with evidence of impaired
delayed recall. Repeat neuropsychological assessment showed a decline in intellectual performance (37 point fall in WAIS-R Verbal IQ) and
deterioration in all measures of auditory and visual memory for immediate and delayed recall, but with normal working memory. There was also
deterioration in word-finding and naming abilities (Graded Naming Test) and in tests of executive function (verbal fluency, Stroop test).
Computed tomography brain imaging was now reported to show atrophy of the temporal lobes. After two years of follow-up and investigation,
this man fulfilled clinical diagnostic criteria for the diagnosis of dementia as enshrined in the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders , namely “the development of multiple cognitive deficits that include memory impairment… sufficiently severe to cause
impairment in occupational or social functioning”. The differential diagnosis of the cause of dementia is potentially broad (Box 2),
although the majority of cases result from AD, with or without concurrent cerebrovascular disease. In dementia of young onset, arbitrarily
defined as clinical onset before 65 years of age, the differential diagnosis is more varied . Syndromes of frontotemporal lobar degeneration
(FTLD) are more common, and indeed may be equal in frequency to AD in this age group . In FTLD there is focal brain degeneration, which may
show a predilection for the frontal lobes presenting with a behavioural phenotype, the behavioural or frontal variant of frontotemporal
dementia, or for the temporal lobes presenting with a linguistic phenotype, either progressive non-fluent aphasia (PNFA) or semantic
dementia. Overlap between FTLD and motor neurone disease, and movement disorders such as corticobasal degeneration and progressive
supranuclear palsy, is also recognised . Memory complaints are not uncommon in patients with FTLD, and many patients meet current clinical
diagnostic criteria for AD . However, memory deficits may be a relatively minor feature in FTLD, and standard screening tests such as the
MMSE are insensitive to the diagnosis. Clinical suspicion should be raised when the extent of functional impairment appears inconsistent
with the degree of cognitive deficits, requiring evaluation for cognitive deficits other than memory. Psychiatric illness, particularly
depression, also enters the differential diagnosis. Neurodegenerative disorders: ○AD +/− cerebrovascular disease ○Parkinson disease
dementia/dementia with Lewy bodies ○FTLDs: Behavioural variant frontotemporal dementia PNFA Semantic dementia ○Prion diseases Vascular
dementias Alcohol-related dementia/Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome Structural brain disease: ○Severe traumatic brain injury ○Tumours +/−
radiotherapy Inflammatory brain disorders, e.g., multiple sclerosis So-called “reversible causes” (very rare): ○Neurosyphilis
○Hypothyroidism ○Vitamin B12 deficiency Other conditions that need to be considered include vascular dementias, alcohol-related dementia,
and traumatic brain injury. There are many neurological disorders that may also be attended with cognitive impairment, sometimes of
sufficient severity to mandate a diagnosis of dementia. These so-called secondary dementias often present with other neurological signs in
addition to dementia, such as parkinsonism, myoclonus, seizures, chorea, ataxia, and sensory signs. Dementias inherited as monogenic
Mendelian disorders (Box 3) are also more common with young-onset disease, although still rare. Examples include AD associated with
mutations in the presenilin 1, presenilin 2, or amyloid precursor protein genes, FTLD associated with mutations in the tau or progranulin
genes, and Huntington disease . Inherited dementias: ○Huntington disease ○Familial AD ○Familial FTLD ○Inherited prion disease Inherited
vasculopathies: ○Cerebral autosomal dominant arteriopathy with subcortical infarcts and leukoencephalopathy ○Familial British dementia,
familial Danish dementia Inherited movement disorders, ataxias, metabolic disorders that may be complicated by cognitive decline and
dementia: ○Wilson disease ○Dentatorubropallidoluysian atrophy ○Presenile dementia with bone cysts ○Some spinocerebellar ataxias ○Some
hereditary spastic paraplegias ○Neurodegeneration with brain iron accumulation A provisional diagnosis of probable young-onset familial AD
was made, based on the NINCDS-ADRDA (National Institute of Neurological and Communicative Diseases and Stroke–Alzheimer's Disease and
Related Disorders Association) clinical diagnostic criteria of AD , and the family history of one other affected individual. The stringent
definition of autosomal dominant disease transmission requires a family history with at least three affected individuals in at least two
generations , which was not known to be the case in this family. The patient was treated with cholinesterase inhibitors, licensed for the
treatment of mild-to-moderate AD in this jurisdiction, but these produced no subjective or objective benefit despite switching between the
different cholinesterase inhibitors . Two years after diagnosis the patient completed independent screening for a pharmaceutical
company–sponsored trial of a potential new AD medication by meeting all specified inclusion and exclusion criteria. At the age of 56, about
seven years after the first onset of symptoms and four years after the diagnosis of probable AD, the patient developed new neurological
symptoms and signs. He complained of a stiff neck, falls both forward and backward, occasional choking, and difficulty articulating (as
opposed to finding) his words. Increasing apathy was also noted retrospectively, a possible and easily overlooked cause of his initial
occupational difficulties. Neurological examination was now abnormal, showing slowed horizontal saccadic eye movements with reduced
amplitude vertical saccades, dysarthria, a broad-based gait with postural instability, and a positive applause sign. Had it not been for the
presence of dementia of Alzheimer type, these new non-cognitive neurological symptoms and signs were judged to be consistent with a
diagnosis of probable progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP), based on NINDS-SPSP (National Institute of Neurological Disorders and
Stroke–Society for Progressive Supranuclear Palsy) diagnostic criteria . The chance concurrence of two diagnoses, probable AD and PSP, was
thought unlikely and hence, seeking a more parsimonious explanation, neurogenetic testing of the tau gene was undertaken. This testing
showed the patient to be heterozygous for the splice site mutation C915 +16 C > T at the exon 10/intron 10 boundary (denoted 10 +16),
indicating a diagnosis of frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 (FTDP-17) (Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man,
catalogue entry +157140) . Shortly thereafter, the patient developed a chest infection and died. Permission for autopsy was not granted, but
the patient's family has given written informed consent (as outlined in the PLoS consent form) for the publication of the details of his
case. Although PSP and AD may rarely occur together, in this case the clinical features and confirmatory investigations eventually led
instead to a single diagnosis of FTDP-17 with a tau gene mutation. AD and PSP are usually distinct conditions. Although both are
neurodegenerative disorders that may cause dementia, typically the pattern of cognitive deficits differs: in AD there is prominent amnesia,
with impaired encoding of new information, with or without agnosia, aphasia, and apraxia; whereas in PSP there is slowness of thought,
altered personality with apathy, and forgetfulness with impaired retrieval of information . Prior reports of the signs of PSP developing in
AD have not been identified; eye movement abnormalities, nuchal rigidity, and early falls are not features of AD, although parkinsonism may
occur, typically in the later stages. There have been occasional reports of AD pathology in PSP and of AD/PSP overlap cases . PSP has
previously been reported to “evolve” on occasion in patients initially diagnosed with the PNFA phenotype of FTLD , but this patient did not
have a PNFA phenotype. Mutations in the gene encoding microtubule-associated protein tau (MAPT) typically present with a frontotemporal
dementia phenotype with or without a parkinsonian syndrome—hence the clinical nomenclature of FTDP-17 . Phenotypic heterogeneity has been
reported in association with MAPT mutations: for example, an AD-like phenotype has been reported on occasion , including cases with the
splice site 10 + 16 mutation . This particular mutation has also been identified in a patient presenting with apparently sporadic young-
onset PSP . The current case suggests that tau gene analysis should be undertaken in individuals with a phenotype initially suggestive of AD
who develop signs suggestive of PSP, as well as in patients with a diagnosis of “young-onset familial AD” who prove negative for mutations
in genes deterministic for AD (amyloid precursor protein, presenilin 1 and 2) . No specific treatments for frontotemporal dementia and
progressive supranuclear palsy are available, but symptomatic drug and non-pharmacological treatments are sometimes tried. Longitudinal
patient assessment may be required to determine the true significance of subjective memory complaints. The differential diagnosis of young-
onset dementias differs from that of late-onset disease, with both FTLD syndromes and inherited dementias being more common. Emergence of
neurological signs in young-onset dementia raises suspicion of a non-Alzheimer or inherited dementia syndrome. Concurrence of movement
disorder characterised by parkinsonism and young-onset dementia should suggest the possibility of a mutation in the gene encoding MAPT. With
the benefit of hindsight, the initial misdiagnosis in this patient might possibly have been avoided by more detailed initial
neuropsychological assessment, and by use of other neuroimaging modalities, both structural and functional. Although temporal lobe atrophy
can be seen in both AD and FTLD, the distribution of focal atrophy can be diagnostically helpful, and functional imaging may show different
distributions of hypoperfusion (single-photon emission computerized tomography or SPECT scanning) and hypometabolism (positron emission
tomography or PET scanning) . Alzheimer disease frontotemporal dementia with parkinsonism linked to chromosome 17 frontotemporal lobar
degeneration microtubule-associated protein tau Mini-Mental State Examination National Adult Reading Test progressive non-fluent aphasia
progressive supranuclear palsy Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale–Revised Andrew J. Larner is Consultant Neurologist at the Walton Centre for
Neurology and Neurosurgery, Liverpool, United Kingdom. E-mail: a.larner@thewaltoncentre.nhs.uk Funding: The author received no specific
funding for this article. Competing Interests: The author has declared that no competing interests exist. Provenance: Commissioned;
externally peer reviewed
