To the Editor: Recent articles have reported enteric human adenoviruses (HAdVs) types 40 and 41, previously thought to be restricted to the
gastrointestinal tract (1), in multiple organ systems of a deceased immunodeficient child (2) and in respiratory specimens of children with
acute respiratory illnesses (3). Here we present a case in which enteric HAdV-40 was found in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and blood of an
apparently immunocompetent child with Haemophilus influenzae invasive disease. The patient, a 10-month-old previously healthy Thai boy, met
the criteria for a clinical case of encephalitis (4) and, after informed consent was obtained, was enrolled in the study of causes of
encephalitis in Thailand (collaboration between the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Ministry of Health of Thailand).
Clinical and laboratory information was collected from the medical record. Biologic specimens were sent to CDC and to the Thailand National
Institute of Health, Nonthaburi, Thailand, for extensive testing for a broad range of pathogens potentially associated with encephalitis
(4). Data on the clinical course of the patient are presented in the Table. *CSF, cerebrospinal fluid. †2004. HAdV DNA was first detected in
the CSF specimen collected on December 12, 2003, by an in-house pan-AdV PCR screening assay conducted as part of the study protocol.
Amplicon sequences obtained closely matched that of HAdV-40. This unexpected result was confirmed by independent PCR assays on separate
aliquots of the same specimen, a broadly reactive real-time TaqMan PCR, targeting the hexon gene and a HAdV 40/41 type-specific real-time
Förster resonance energy transfer (FRET) PCR assay targeting the fiber gene (5). Sequences of the hexon gene hypervariable regions 1–6 that
provide type specificity (6) showed a single nonsynonymous base substitution (C→T; Thr→Ile) at nucleotide position 107 of the HAdV-40
prototype strain Dugan (GenBank accession no. DQ115441). HAdV-40 DNA with identical sequences was also detected in the acute-phase serum
specimen also collected on December 12, 2003, but not in the convalescent-phase specimen collected on January 7, 2004. An oropharyngeal swab
specimen obtained on December 12 was PCR-negative for HAdV DNA. Although no increase in levels of HAdV antibodies was detected by indirect
enzyme immunoassay against pan-AdV antigen, microneutralization assay demonstrated a rise in levels of type-specific neutralizing antibodies
to HAdV-40 between the acute-phase (<1:10) and convalescent-phase (1:40) serum specimens. The results of other testing conducted on the same
specimens as part of the study protocol were the following. CSF obtained on December 12, 2003, was negative by broad-specificity PCRs for
bacterial 16S RNA and viral agents (alphaviruses, flaviviruses, bunyaviruses, human herpesviruses) as well as by PCR for enteroviruses,
herpes simplex virus, Nipah virus, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, and Neisseria meningitidis. CSF was also negative for Cryptococcus spp. by India
ink technique. Serum was negative for acute infection with flaviviruses (dengue and Japanese encephalitis viruses); alphaviruses
(chikungunya virus); influenza viruses; human parainfluenza viruses 1–3; measles, mumps, and rubella viruses; enteroviruses; Bartonella
henselae; rickettsiae (R. typhi, Orientia tsutsugamushi, and R. conorii); and M. pneumoniae. Results of PCR on saliva specimens and
serologic testing for rabies were negative; an oropharyngeal swab specimen was negative by PCR for M. pneumoniae; and results of a smear for
malaria parasites were negative. The patient was HIV negative. Detection of HAdV-40 in CSF in this case was confirmed by multiple PCRs with
amplicon sequencing. Detection of virus in the acute-phase serum specimen confirms systemic infection and demonstrates that HAdV-40 DNA
found in CSF did not arise from contamination of the CSF at the time of collection. Laboratory contamination is also unlikely because the
nucleotide sequence of the identified strain (GenBank accession no. FJ228470) was not identical to the prototype reference strain used for
positive control in the PCR. Seroconversion to HAdV-40 provides further evidence that this child experienced an acute systemic infection
with this virus. The contribution of HAdV-40 to the clinical illness in this patient remains unclear. He had a confirmed H. influenzae
invasive infection, which likely explains the initial underlying illness. However, the detection of HAdV-40 coincided in time with the
development of neurologic signs (new-onset seizures, ataxia) and widespread rash. By then, the patient had been receiving antimicrobial drug
therapy for several days, his CSF was negative for 16S bacterial RNA by PCR and culture-negative for H. influenzae, and the CSF pleocytosis
had decreased substantially. These circumstances make it less likely that these signs were associated with the underlying H. influenzae
disease and raise the possibility that superimposed HAdV-40 infection played a role. Because the patient had no diarrhea or respiratory
symptoms, no evidence of immunodeficiency, no stool specimen available for testing, and no evidence of HAdV in throat swab specimen, the
pathogenesis of HAdV-40 infection in this case is unknown. The origin of the maculopapular rash concurrent with neurologic symptoms in this
patient is also unclear. Rash is not typical for H. influenzae infection and, although reported for some HAdV infections (7), has not been
previously described for HAdV-40/41. In conclusion, this case demonstrates the possibility of nongastroenteric, systemic infection involving
CNS with enteric HAdV in immunocompetent hosts. Broad-specificity AdV PCR assay followed by amplicon sequencing enabled detection of this
pathogen in an unexpected context and can be useful in defining the nongastroenteric disease effects associated with the enteric HAdVs.
Suggested citation for this article: Khetsuriani N, Tong S, Lu X, Reed S, Erdman D, Campbell A, et al. Systemic infection with enteric
adenovirus in immunocompent child with Haemophilus influenzae disease . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Feb [date cited].
Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/2/355.htm We thank our collaborators from Thailand—Surapee Anantapreecha, Malinee
Chittaganpitch, Sirima Pattamadilok, Ratigorn Guntapong, Watcharee Saisongkorh, and Sununta Henchaichon—for their contribution to the
Thailand Encephalitis Study; Henry “Kip” Baggett for his helpful review of the manuscript; and the numerous collaborators at the National
Institute of Health of Thailand and the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention who performed the testing of specimens for agents other
than AdVs.
