The online version of this article has been published under an open access model. Users are entitled to use, reproduce, disseminate, or
display the open access version of this article for non-commercial purposes provided that the original authorship is properly and fully
attributed; the Journal, Learned Society and Oxford University Press are attributed as the original place of publication with correct
citation details given; if an article is subsequently reproduced or disseminated not in its entirety but only in part or as a derivative
work this must be clearly indicated. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oxfordjournals.org A 42-year-old man
presented with chest angina. He had exertion chest discomfort 1 month ago. He had no cardiovascular risk factors. Chest X-ray revealed no
cardiomegaly. Electrocardiogram revealed ST-segment elevation in lead II, III, and aVF. Echocardiography showed hypokinesia in inferior wall
with an ejection fraction of 45%. We diagnosed ST-elevation myocardial infarction in inferior wall. We performed a coronary angiography
(CAG) for primary percutaneous coronary intervention. The CAG showed a significant stenosis with plaque rupture at bifurcation portion of
postero-lateral branch and postero-descending branch of the right coronary artery (RCA), which is considered as infarct-related artery, and
a significant stenosis at proximal portion of the left anterior descending artery (LAD) and the left circumflex artery (LCX). The RCA lesion
was pre-dilated and implanted (zotarolimus-eluting stent 3.5 × 24 mm). After 3 days, we implanted two different stents at two significant
lesions of LAD and LCX (LAD: sirolimus-eluting stent 3.5 × 23 mm; LCX: paclitaxel-eluting stent 3.5 × 24 mm) because of product delivery
(Panels A, B, and C). We treated with aspirin 100 mg/day and clopidogrel 75 mg/day. Six months later, he was admitted at our hospital due to
atypical chest pain. We performed CAG. Follow-up CAG revealed huge aneurysms around the stents in RCA and LCX and small aneurysm around the
stent in LAD (Panels D, E, and F). The aneurysms were clearly visible on intravascular ultrasound (Panels G, H, and I). We decided to treat
with medication of three anti-platelet agents (aspirin, clopidogrel, and cilostazol) without additional intervention. He has been free of
symptom until now. Funding to pay the Open Access publication charges for this article was provided by grant No. RTI04-01-01 from the
Regional Technology Innovation Program of the Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Energy (MOCIE).
