Ronald Ma and colleagues describe the differential diagnosis, investigation, and management of a 21-year-old pregnant woman presenting with
hypertension and proteinuria at 20 weeks of gestation. A 21-year-old pregnant woman, gravida 2 para 1, presented with hypertension and
proteinuria at 20 weeks of gestation. She had a history of pre-eclampsia in her first pregnancy one year ago. During that pregnancy, at 39
weeks of gestation, she developed high blood pressure, proteinuria, and deranged liver function. She eventually delivered by emergency
caesarean section following failed induction of labour. Blood pressure returned to normal post-partum and she received no further medical
follow-up. Family history was remarkable for her mother's diagnosis of hypertension in her fourth decade. Her father and five siblings,
including a twin sister, were healthy. She did not smoke nor drink any alcohol. She was not taking any regular medications, health products,
or herbs. At 20 weeks of gestation, blood pressure was found to be elevated at 145/100 mmHg during a routine antenatal clinic visit. Aside
from a mild headache, she reported no other symptoms. On physical examination, she was tachycardic with heart rate 100 beats per minute.
Body mass index was 16.9 kg/m2 and she had no cushingoid features. Heart sounds were normal, and there were no signs suggestive of
congestive heart failure. Radial-femoral pulses were congruent, and there were no audible renal bruits. Baseline laboratory investigations
showed normal renal and liver function with normal serum urate concentration. Random glucose was 3.8 mmol/l. Complete blood count revealed
microcytic anaemia with haemoglobin level 8.3 g/dl (normal range 11.5–14.3 g/dl) and a slightly raised platelet count of 446 × 109/l (normal
range 140–380 × 109/l). Iron-deficient state was subsequently confirmed. Quantitation of urine protein indicated mild proteinuria with
protein:creatinine ratio of 40.6 mg/mmol (normal range <30 mg/mmol in pregnancy). An important cause of hypertension that occurs during
pregnancy is pre-eclampsia. It is a condition unique to the gravid state and is characterised by the onset of raised blood pressure and
proteinuria in late pregnancy, at or after 20 weeks of gestation . Pre-eclampsia may be associated with hyperuricaemia, deranged liver
function, and signs of neurologic irritability such as headaches, hyper-reflexia, and seizures. In our patient, hypertension developed at a
relatively early stage of pregnancy than is customarily observed in pre-eclampsia. Although she had proteinuria, it should be remembered
that this could also reflect underlying renal damage due to chronic untreated hypertension. Additionally, her electrocardiogram showed left
ventricular hypertrophy, which was another indicator of chronicity. While pre-eclampsia might still be a potential cause of hypertension in
our case, the possibility of pre-existing hypertension needed to be considered. Box 1 shows the differential diagnoses of chronic
hypertension, including essential hypertension, primary hyperaldosteronism related to Conn's adenoma or bilateral adrenal hyperplasia,
Cushing's syndrome, phaeochromocytoma, renal artery stenosis, glomerulopathy, and coarctation of the aorta. Pre-eclampsia Essential
hypertension Renal artery stenosis Glomerulopathy Renal parenchyma disease Primary hyperaldosteronism (Conn's adenoma or bilateral adrenal
hyperplasia) Cushing's syndrome Phaeochromocytoma Coarctation of aorta Obstructive sleep apnoea Renal causes of hypertension were excluded
based on normal serum creatinine and a bland urinalysis. Serology for anti-nuclear antibodies was negative. Doppler ultrasonography of renal
arteries showed normal flow and no evidence of stenosis. Cushing's syndrome was unlikely as she had no clinical features indicative of
hypercortisolism, such as moon face, buffalo hump, violaceous striae, thin skin, proximal muscle weakness, or hyperglycaemia. Plasma
potassium concentration was normal, although normokalaemia does not rule out primary hyperaldosteronism. Progesterone has anti-
mineralocorticoid effects, and increased placental production of progesterone may mask hypokalaemia. Besides, measurements of renin activity
and aldosterone concentration are difficult to interpret as the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone axis is typically stimulated in pregnancy.
Phaeochromocytoma is a rare cause of hypertension in pregnancy that, if unrecognised, is associated with significant maternal and foetal
morbidity and mortality. The diagnosis can be established by measuring levels of catecholamines (noradrenaline and adrenaline) and/or their
metabolites (normetanephrine and metanephrine) in plasma or urine. Catecholamine levels in 24-hour urine collections were found to be
markedly raised. Urinary noradrenaline excretion was markedly elevated at 5,659 nmol, 8,225 nmol, and 9,601 nmol/day in repeated collections
at 21 weeks of gestation (normal range 63–416 nmol/day). Urinary adrenaline excretion was normal. Pregnancy may induce mild elevation of
catecholamine levels, but the marked elevation of urinary catecholamine observed was diagnostic of phaeochromocytoma. Conditions that are
associated with false positive results, such as acute myocardial infarction, congestive heart failure, acute cerebrovascular event,
withdrawal from alcohol, withdrawal from clonidine, and cocaine abuse, were not present in our patient. The working diagnosis was therefore
phaeochromocytoma complicating pregnancy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of neck to pelvis, without gadolinium enhancement, was performed
at 24 weeks of gestation. It showed a 4.2 cm solid lesion in the mid-abdominal aorto-caval region, while both adrenals were unremarkable.
There were no ectopic lesions seen in the rest of the examined areas. Based on existing investigation findings, it was concluded that she
had extra-adrenal paraganglioma resulting in hypertension. At 22 weeks of gestation, the patient was started on phenoxybenzamine titrated to
a dose of 30 mg in the morning and 10 mg in the evening. Propranolol was added several days after the commencement of phenoxybenzamine.
Apart from mild postural dizziness, the medical therapy was well tolerated during the remainder of the pregnancy. In the third trimester,
systolic and diastolic blood pressures were maintained to below 90 mmHg and 60 mmHg, respectively. During this period, she developed mild
elevation of alkaline phosphatase ranging from 91 to 188 IU/l (reference 35–85 IU/l). However, liver transaminases were normal and the
patient had no seizures. Repeated urinalysis showed resolution of proteinuria. At 38 weeks of gestation, the patient proceeded to elective
caesarean section because of previous caesarean section, and a live female baby weighing 3.14 kg was delivered. The delivery was
uncomplicated and blood pressure remained stable. Following the delivery, computer tomography (CT) scan of neck, abdomen, and pelvis was
performed as part of pre-operative planning to better delineate the relationship of the tumour to neighbouring structures. In addition to
the previously identified extra-adrenal paraganglioma in the abdomen (Figure 1), the CT revealed a 9 mm hypervascular nodule at the left
carotid bifurcation, suggestive of a carotid body tumour (Figure 2). The patient subsequently underwent an iodine (I)131
metaiodobenzylguanidine (MIBG) scan, which demonstrated marked MIBG-avidity of the paraganglioma in the mid-abdomen. The reported left
carotid body tumour, however, did not demonstrate any significant uptake. This could indicate either that the MIBG scan had poor sensitivity
in detecting a small tumour, or that the carotid body tumour was not functional. In June 2008, four months after the delivery, the patient
had a laparotomy with removal of the abdominal paraganglioma. The operation was uncomplicated. There was no wide fluctuation of blood
pressures intra- and postoperatively. Phenoxybenzamine and propranolol were stopped after the operation. Histology of the excised tumour was
consistent with paraganglioma with cells staining positive for chromogranin (Figures 3 and 4) and synaptophysin. Adrenal tissues were
notably absent. The tumour is a well-circumscribed fleshy yellowish mass with maximal dimension of 5.5 cm. The tumour cells are polygonal
with bland nuclei. The cells are arranged in nests and are immunoreactive to chromogranin (shown here) and synaptophysin. The patient was
counselled for genetic testing for hereditary phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma. She was found to be heterozygous for c.449_453dup mutation of
the succinate dehydrogenase subunit D (SDHD) gene (Figure 5). This mutation is a novel frameshift mutation, and leads to SDHD deficiency
(GenBank accession number: 1162563). At the latest clinic visit in August 2008, she was asymptomatic and normotensive. Measurements of
catecholamine in 24-hour urine collections had normalised. Resection of the left carotid body tumour was planned for a later date. She was
to be followed up indefinitely to monitor for recurrences. She was also advised to contact family members for genetic testing. Our patient
gave written consent for this case to be published. Hypertension during pregnancy is a frequently encountered obstetric complication that
occurs in 6%–8% of pregnancies . Phaeochromocytoma presenting for the first time in pregnancy is rare, and only several hundred cases have
been reported in the English literature. In a recent review of 41 cases that presented during 1988 to 1997, maternal mortality was 4% while
the rate of foetal loss was 11% . Antenatal diagnosis was associated with substantial reduction in maternal mortality but had little impact
on foetal mortality. Further, chronic hypertension, regardless of aetiology, increases the risk of pre-eclampsia by 10-fold . Classically,
patients with phaeochromocytoma present with spells of palpitation, headaches, and diaphoresis . Hypertension may be sustained or sporadic,
and is associated with orthostatic blood pressure drop because of hypovolaemia and impaired vasoconstricting response to posture change.
During pregnancy, catecholamine surge may be triggered by pressure from the enlarging uterus and foetal movements. In the majority of cases,
catecholamine-secreting tumours develop in the adrenal medulla and are termed phaeochromocytoma. Ten percent of tumours arise from extra-
adrenal chromaffin tissues located in the abdomen, pelvis, or thorax to form paraganglioma that may or may not be biochemically active. The
malignant potential of phaeochromocytoma or paraganglioma cannot be determined from histology and is inferred by finding tumours in areas of
the body not known to contain chromaffin tissues. The risk of malignancy is higher in extra-adrenal tumours and in tumours that secrete
dopamine. The diagnosis of phaeochromocytoma requires a combination of biochemical and anatomical confirmation. Catecholamines and their
metabolites, metanephrines, can be easily measured in urine or plasma samples. Day collection of urinary fractionated metanephrine is
considered the most sensitive in detecting phaeochromocytoma . In contrast to sporadic release of catecholamine, secretion of metanephrine
is continuous and is less subjective to momentary stress. Localisation of tumour can be accomplished by either CT or MRI of the abdomen .
Sensitivities are comparable, although MRI is preferable in pregnancy because of minimal radiation exposure. Once a tumour is identified,
nuclear medicine imaging should be performed to determine its activity, as well as to search for extra-adrenal diseases. I131 or I123 MIBG
scan is the imaging modality of choice. Metaiodobenzylguanidine structurally resembles noradrenaline and is concentrated in chromaffin cells
of phaeochromocytoma or paraganglioma that express noradrenaline transporters. Radionucleotide imaging is contraindicated in pregnancy and
should be deferred until after the delivery. Upon confirming the diagnosis, medical therapy should be initiated promptly to block the
cardiovascular effects of catecholamine release. Phenoxybenzamine is a long-acting non-selective alpha-blocker commonly used in
phaeochromocytoma to control blood pressure and prevent cardiovascular complications . The main side-effects of phenoxybenzamine are
postural hypotension and reflex tachycardia. The latter can be circumvented by the addition of a beta-blocker. It is important to note that
beta-blockers should not be used in isolation, since blockade of ß2-adrenoceptors, which have a vasodilatory effect, can cause unopposed
vasoconstriction by a1-adrenoceptor stimulation and precipitate severe hypertension. There is little data on the safety of use of
phenoxybenzamine in pregnancy, although its use is deemed necessary and probably life-saving in this precarious situation. The definitive
treatment of phaeochromocytoma or paraganglioma is surgical excision. The timing of surgery is critical, and the decision must take into
consideration risks to the foetus, technical difficulty regarding access to the tumour in the presence of a gravid uterus, and whether the
patient's symptoms can be satisfactorily controlled with medical therapy . It has been suggested that surgical resection is reasonable if
the diagnosis is confirmed and the tumour identified before 24 weeks of gestation. Otherwise, it may be preferable to allow the pregnancy to
progress under adequate alpha- and beta-blockade until foetal maturity is reached. Unprepared delivery is associated with a high risk of
phaeochromocytoma crisis, characterised by labile blood pressure, tachycardia, fever, myocardial ischaemia, congestive heart failure, and
intracerebral bleeding. Patients with phaeochromocytoma or paraganglioma should be followed up for life. The rate of recurrence is estimated
to be 2%–4% at five years . Assessment for recurrent disease can be accomplished by periodic blood pressure monitoring and 24-hour urine
catecholamine and/or metanephrine measurements. Approximately one quarter of patients presenting with phaeochromocytoma may carry germline
mutations, even in the absence of apparent family history . The common syndromes of hereditary phaeochromocytoma/paraganglioma are listed in
Box 2. These include Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, neurofibromatosis type 1, and succinate dehydrogenase
(SDH) gene mutations. Our patient has a novel frameshift mutation in the SDHD gene located at Chromosome 11q. SDH is a mitochondrial enzyme
that is involved in oxidative phosphorylation. Characteristically, SDHD mutation is associated with head or neck non-functional
paraganglioma, and infrequently, sympathetic paraganglioma or phaeochromocytoma . Tumours associated with SDHD mutation are rarely
malignant, in contrast to those arisen from mutation of the SDHB gene. Like all other syndromes of hereditary phaeochromocytoma, SDHD
mutation is transmitted in an autosomal dominant fashion. However, not all carriers of the SDHD mutation develop tumours, and inheritance is
further complicated by maternal imprinting in gene expression. While it may not be practical to screen for genetic alterations in all cases
of phaeochromocytoma, most authorities advocate genetic screening for patients with positive family history, young age of tumour onset, co-
existence with other neoplasms, bilateral phaeochromocytoma, and extra-adrenal paraganglioma. The confirmation of genetic mutation should
prompt evaluation of other family members. Von Hippel-Lindau syndrome Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2A and type 2B Neurofibromatosis
type 1 Mutation of SDHB, SDHC, SDHD Ataxia-telangiectasia Tuberous sclerosis Sturge-Weber syndrome Hypertension complicating pregnancy is a
commonly encountered medical condition. Pre-existing chronic hypertension must be considered in patients with hypertension presenting in
pregnancy, particularly if elevation of blood pressure is detected early during pregnancy or if persists post-partum. Secondary causes of
chronic hypertension include renal artery stenosis, renal parenchyma disease, primary hyperaldosteronism, phaeochromocytoma, Cushing's
syndrome, coarctation of the aorta, and obstructive sleep apnoea. Phaeochromocytoma presenting during pregnancy is rare but carries high
rates of maternal and foetal morbidity and mortality if unrecognised. Successful outcomes depend on early disease identification, prompt
initiation of alpha- and beta-blockers, carefully planned delivery, and timely resection of the tumour. Phaeochromocytoma complicating
pregnancy is uncommon. Nonetheless, in view of the potential for catastrophic consequences if unrecognised, a high index of suspicion and
careful evaluation for secondary causes of hypertension is of utmost importance. Blood pressure should be monitored in the post-partum
period and persistence of hypertension must be thoroughly investigated. computer tomography iodine metaiodobenzylguanidine magnetic
resonance imaging succinate dehydrogenase succinate dehydrogenase subunit D Andrea Luk, Ronald C. W. Ma, Alice P. S. Kong, Wing Yee So, and
Chun Chung Chow are with the Department of Medicine and Therapeutics, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong,
China. Ching Wan Lam was previously with the Department of Chemical Pathology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories,
Hong Kong, China. He is currently with the Department of Pathology, Hong Kong University, Queen Mary Hospital, Hong Kong, China. Wing Hung
Tam is with the Department of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, China.
Anthony W. I. Lo is with the Department of Anatomical and Cellular Pathology, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong
Kong, China. Enders K. W. Ng is with the Department of Surgery, Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shatin, New Territories, Hong Kong, China.
Author contributions. All authors participated in the management of the patient or writing of the article. AL and RCWM wrote the article,
with contributions from all the authors. Funding: The authors received no specific funding for this article. Competing Interests: RCWM is
Section Editor of the Learning Forum. The remaining authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Provenance: Commissioned;
externally peer reviewed
