We report a 55-year-old female patient who presented with no P waves but with a wide QRS complex escape rhythm at 44 beats/min and prolonged
QTc of 0.55 seconds on ECG. The patient had recurrence of ventricular fibrillations and loss of consciousness, and underwent defibrillation
and cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) several times because of cardiac arrest. The transthoracic echocardiography showed dilated
cardiomyopathy and enlargement of both atria. The Doppler echocardiography documented the absence of A wave in the tricuspid and mitral
valve flow. An electrophysiologic study demonstrated electrical inactivity in the right and left atria. Atrial pacing with maximum output
did not capture the atria. These findings together with her electrocardiographic finding indicated atrial standstill. Sudden cardiac death
was her first clinical manifestation of ventricular arrhythmia. The patient remained asymptomatic after receiving a single chamber
implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (ICD) with VVI pacemaker function. Atrial standstill is a rare condition characterized by the absence
of electrical and mechanical activity in the atria. On surface ECG, atrial standstill is distinguished by bradycardia, junctional (usually
narrow complex) or wide complex escape rhythm, and absence of the P wave.1 Atrial standstill can be persistent or transient, and diffuse or
partial. Nearly 50% of patients suffer from Adams-Stokes attacks.2,3 According to most reports, atrial standstill may be secondary to other
clinical disorders such as Ebstein's anomaly, muscular dystrophy, diabetes mellitus, amyloidosis, or myocarditis, and it has also been
reported in rare cases of digitalis or quinidine toxicity, and ischemic heart disease.4-8 Only a few cases of familial clustering of primary
atrial standstill have been reported. Some cases are associated with a cardiac sodium channel gene SCN5A mutation and connexin 40,7 and a
mutation or deletion of the ryanodine receptor 2 gene (RYR2) has been found in patients with catecholaminergic polymorphic ventricular
tachycardia (CPVT).9 Herein, we present a patient with atrial standstill, dilated cardiomyopathy, and sudden cardiac arrest. A 55-year-old
female patient was referred to our hospital for evaluation of her bradycardia and dyspnea on exertion (NYHA class II-III). Physical
examination revealed chronically ill appearance, grade 2/6 systolic murmur at the mid right and left sternal borders, decreased breathing
sounds with both basal rales, 2 finger-breath tender hepatomegaly, and weakness of right extremities. Laboratory findings revealed elevated
BNP level (471 pg/mL), however, other parameters including CBC, electrolytes, cardiac enzymes, liver function test, etc. were within normal
limits. Twelve-lead electrocardiogram (ECG) showed an escape distal rhythm at 44 beats/min with a QRS duration of 0.12 seconds, but no
atrial activity. T wave inversion in V1 to V6 was prominent, and corrected QT interval (QTc) was prolonged to 0.55 seconds (Fig. 1A). Chest
X-ray revealed marked cardiomegaly with right and left chamber enlargement. Echocardiography showed massively dilated right and left atria
along with mild tricuspid and mitral regurgitation. Right and left ventricles were also enlarged, and left ventricular ejection fraction
(LVEF) was 34%, which was compatible with the findings of dilated cardiomyopathy. A Doppler study did not demonstrate any atrial activity (A
wave) in the mitral and tricuspid inflow regions. Three hours after admission, she developed sudden onset ventricular fibrillation (VF) and
loss of consciousness, and needed immediate defibrillation. There were several episodes of recurrent VF and cardiac arrest after
defibrillation, and the patient needed immediate cardiopulmonary resuscitation. After she was stabilized from these events, we decided to
implant ICD with pacemaker function. The patient underwent an electrophysiologic (EP) study which revealed total right and left atrial
standstill (no recordable atrial electrogram plus lack of atrial capture during high output, right atrium and coronary sinus pacing), and HV
interval of 56 ms (Fig. 1B). During programmed ventricular stimulation, ventricular fibrillation was easily induced. Therefore, we implanted
a single chamber ICD with VVI pacemaker function (Fig. 2). After the procedure, her surface ECG showed regular pacemaker rhythm, and her QTc
interval progressively shortened to 0.44 seconds. Her cardiac performance improved progressively, and the BNP level returned to normal (7
pg/mL). She received conventional managements for heart failure and anticoagulation. The biopsy report of chest wall fat pad showed no
evidence of amyloidosis. The gene study for SCN5A and connexin 40 revealed negative result. Atrial standstill is a rare arrhythmogenic
condition, and it's diagnosis relies on ECG demonstration of bradycardia, the absence of P waves, and junctional narrow or wide complex
escape rhythm. Intracavitary recordings also fails to demonstrate atrial depolarization. Typically, the atria are scarred and have little or
no working myocardia. A few autopsy reports have described the pathologic changes in atrial standstill, showing fibroelastosis and fatty
infiltration in atria.10 The high lateral RA is usually involved first in a progression toward the lower RA site. Finally, atrial
electrograms can be recorded only in the vicinity of the tricuspid valve or interatrial septum. This phenomenon was observed in most cases,
despite of different underlying diseases. Nakazato et al. observed the absence of P wave in 6 of 11 patients with atrial standstill,11 and
observed the loss of P waves in the remaining 5 patients as the underlying disease progressed. Atrial standstill may be secondary to several
clinical disorders, however, she had no evidence of muscular disease, ischemic heart disease, drug intoxication, and myocarditis.12-15 In
the primary persistent form, atrial paralysis is paralleled by atrial dilatation, and mitral valve incompetence.3 Clinically, atrial
standstill causes weakness and lethargy, and about 50% of patients suffer from syncope. Atropine does not increase the heart rate.
Symptomatic cases require ventricular pacing and treatment for congestive heart failure if present, however, the prognosis is poor.
Fazelifar et al.1 reported a family with atrial standstill associated with syncope, dilated cardiomyopathy, and sudden cardiac death, and
agreed with the postulation that the atrial standstill is a disease primarily associated with SCN5A mutation and rare connexin 40 genotype.5
Bhuiyan et al.9 presented two families with typical CPVT in conjunction with additional features of progressive AV block, sinus node
dysfunction, atrial fibrillation, atrial standstill, and dilated cardiomyopathy those related with the genetic defect in the N-terminus of
RYR2. Although we did not investigate possible genetic defect such as deletion of ryanodine receptor 2 gene, cardiac evaluation through
available hospital records of the patient's relatives did not reveal any cardiac abnormalities, and the clinical features were different
from those of CPVT. Dilated cardiomyopathy can cause fatal ventricular arrhythmias via any kind of arrythmogenic mechanism. Our case had
atrial standstill which was persistent and advanced, and dilated cardiomyopathy accompanying bradycardia and long QT interval as well as the
electrical and mechanical activity of both atria were not detected by intracardiac electrogram, Doppler recordings, and fluoroscopy. She
developed recurrent ventricular fibrillations and cardiac arrest, therefore, we performed a single chamber ICD implantation with VVI
pacemaker function to prevent sudden cardiac death. With the procedure and anticoagulation, she remained free of ventricular arrhythmias and
syncope. Twelve-lead ECG and intracardiac electrogram. (A) Twelve-lead ECG on the 1st day of admission showed an escape distal rhythm at 44
beats/min with wide QRS complex, of 0.12 sec. No P wave was found in ECG. QTc interval was prolonged to 0.55 sec. (B) Recording obtained
during EPS after implantation of ICD with VVI pacemaker function. There was no electrical activity on atrial and CS electrograms. ECG,
electrocardiogram; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; HRA, high right atrium, CS, coronary sinus. (A) Chest PA of a single chamber
ICD with VVI pacemaker function implanted to the patient. (B) DFT test showed induction of VF, and safe and successful defibrillation at
14.8 J. PA, postero-anterior; ICD, implantable cardioverter-defibrillator; DFT, defibrillation threshold test; VF, ventricular fibrillation.
