Sarcoidosis is a granulomatous disease of unknown aetiology. Over 90% patients of sarcoidosis present with pulmonary findings. Other organs
such as lymph nodes, skin, and joints may be involved. Isolated granulomatous disease confined to the spleen is rare. This report documents
a rare case of isolated granulomatous disease of spleen presenting as hypercalcemia. After all possible causes for hypercalcemia were ruled
out, splenectomy was done which proved diagnostic and therapeutic, as calcium levels returned to normal. We propose that sarcoidosis should
be kept in mind as a cause of unexplained hypercalcemia. Increased awareness of radiological features of splenic involvement in sarcoidosis,
would help in diagnosis. We believe that we are reporting 9th case in the literature while writing this report. Sarcoidosis is an idiopathic
multisystem disorder of unknown aetiology which can virtually affect any organ in the body. Splenic involvement is seen in 10–15% patients
of which 3% present with palpable spleen. Isolated granulomatous disease confined to spleen is rare. This manifests as multiple splenic
nodules which are often difficult to detect on ultrasound scan. Hypercalcemic renal failure is a very rare presentation of isolated splenic
involvement, which was seen in our case. Splenic granulomas are the source of calcitriol and splenectomy proves diagnostic as well as
therapeutic in such circumstances. A 46 year old lady presented with back and leg pain. She had a history of sciatica for 17 years. She also
complained of poor appetite, loss of 3 stones of weight in 6 months. Patient also complained of intermittent nausea, vomiting, constipation.
Past medical history included previous discectomy and laminectomy, Raynaud's syndrome, essential hypertension, and hysterectomy for
endometriosis. Drug allergies included penicillin, erythromycin, septrin, acupan, doxycycline. On examination, pulse and blood pressure were
stable. Chest and abdominal examination were normal. Serum investigations revealed a raised corrected calcium of 3.72 mmol/L, urea of 9.4
mmol/L and creatinine of 135 umol/L. ESR was 52 mm/hr, liver function tests were normal. Coagulation studies, protein electrophoresis were
within normal limits. Patient subsequently underwent investigations for causes of hypercalcemia. Urine analysis was negative for Bence-Jones
proteins. Thyroid function tests were within normal limits. Serum parathormone levels were 1.1 pmol/L. Serum angiotensin convertase enzyme
levels were normal (26 U/L). Ultrasound abdomen revealed slightly enlarged spleen. Skeletal survey did not reveal bony secondary deposits or
other abnormalities. MRI scan of lumbosacral spine showed posterocentral and right posterolateral disc protrusion at L5/S1 with compression
of thecal sac, which explained the back and leg pain. Ultrasound of neck did not reveal thyroid or parathyroid abnormalities. Bone marrow
studies were reported normal. CT scan of chest and abdomen was done to rule out occult malignancy as a cause of hypercalcemia. This revealed
borderline enlarged spleen (cranio-caudal diameter of 12.7 cms) studded with multiple low density coalescent nodular lesions (figure 1).
Patient was started on oral steroids and was given an infusion of alendronate for hypercalcemia. All investigations were discussed in upper
GI multidisciplinary meeting and a decision to perform splenectomy was made. Patient underwent laparotomy and splenectomy. Intra-operative
findings included enlarged spleen studded with white nodules (figure 2). Postoperative recovery was uneventful. Patient was given chemo-
prophylaxis with oral penicillin V and prophylactic pneumococcal and meningococcal vaccines. Histology of spleen showed epitheloid and giant
cell granulomas dispersed throughout splenic parenchyma. Granulomas were non-caseating (figure 3). Some of the giant cells within the
granulomas contained calcific spherules. Sections from hilar lymph nodes showed a similar granulomatous process. Special stains did not
identify fungi or mycobacteria. Final diagnosis of splenic sarcoidosis was made. Postoperatively, calcium levels returned back to normal.
Follow-up after one month revealed no further clinical problems and normal serum calcium levels. At 6 months follow up, patient remained
asymptomatic. Opthalmic opinion was saught in view of diagnosis of sarcoidosis,. This was found to be entirely normal. CT Image – (CT scan
image showing multiple splenic nodules). Gross specimen of spleen with the parenchyma studded with circumscribed firm white nodules, which
appeared to be confluent in places. Photomicrograph showing the nodules to be composed of epithelioid cell granulomas alongwith giant cells
(Inset). Sarcoidosis is a systemic inflammatory disease of unknown aetiology characterized by the formation of noncaseating granulomas. It
occurs most commonly in the third to fifth decades of life . Although sarcoidosis is seen worldwide, the frequency of the disease, organ
system involved, acuity of presentation and prognosis vary widely with geography and ethnicity. Over 90% patients with sarcoidosis present
with pulmonary findings at the time of diagnosis. Extrapulmonary lesions are seen in liver, eyes, central nervous system, joints and lymph
nodes. The reported frequency of splenomegaly in sarcoidosis has ranged from 1% to 40% . However, isolated granulomatous disease involving
spleen is rare. Primary management consists of medical therapy with prednisolone, methotrexete, and/or anti malarial drugs. Indications for
surgery include symptomatic splenomegaly, severe hypersplenism, prophylaxis for splenic rupture, and neoplastic exclusion . Our patient
presented with symptomatic hypercalcemia and required splenectomy for diagnostic purposes and neoplastic exclusion . The relationship
between sarcoidosis and hypercalcemia was first noted in 1932 . Risk factors for development of hypercalcemia in patients with sarcoidosis
include renal insufficiency, increased dietary vitamin D, and increased sunlight exposure. Increased bowel absorption caused by a high
calcitriol level is the main abnormality . Our patient had hypercalcaemia and elevated urea and creatinine levels. The elevated creatinine
is likely due to reversible renal tubular defects (seen in hypercalcemia) causing reduced tubular secretion of creatinine; the interference
with renal tubular concentrating function may lead to volume depletion, but our patient was not volume depleted. Abdominal viscera are
frequently involved in sarcoidosis, although patients are usually asymptomatic. Liver and spleen are most commonly involved organs, with
granulomas noted in 40–60% of patients in two autopsy series. Hypodense splenic nodules are seen in approximately 15% of patients with
sarcoidosis . Lesions are usually diffuse. Most nodules are between 0.1 and 3.0 cm, with a mean of approximately 1.0 cm. Isolated or
predominant involvement of spleen by nodules is more common than isolated or predominant hepatic nodular disease. Punctate calcifications
are relatively uncommon but have been reported as affecting 16% of patients in one study . The occurrence of hepatosplenic nodular sarcoid
is more common during first five years of sarcoidosis, with only six of 32 patients in one series having had the disease longer at the time
that nodular hepatosplenic sarcoid was diagnosed . Abdominal or systemic symptoms are present in 66% of patients with hepatosplenic
sarcoidosis. On contrast-enhanced CT, the splenic nodules are hypodense relative to adjacent normal spleen. Peripheral enhancement is not
seen . In one report, lesions visible on contrast-enhanced CT were not seen on sonography, suggesting that the acoustic impedance of the
granulomas was similar to that of normal splenic tissue . In our case also, lesions were not seen on ultrasound. Primary management of
splenomegaly in sarcoidosis consists of medical treatment which includes corticosteroids. About 3% of these patients suffer from massive
splenomegaly resulting in abdominal discomfort, which may be accompanied by thrombocytopenia and other manifestations of hypersplenism .
Although patients with splenomegaly respond to corticosteroids given for a long period of time (up to 1 year), most patients with massive
splenomegaly will eventually require splenectomy . In our case, patient received initially oral steroids and intravenous infusion of
alendronate for hypercalcemia, but the response was only short-lived. Investigations for common causes of hypercalcemia were inconclusive.
Our patient had splenectomy for diagnostic purposes and to rule out occult malignancy. Hypercalcemia was successfully treated by
splenectomy. Isolated involvement of spleen in sarcoidosis is rare. We believe that at the time of writing this case report, only 8 cases
have been so far reported. Sarcoidosis as a cause of splenomegaly should be kept in mind. Our case was different from cases so far reported,
as our patient presented with hypercalcemia and was successfully treated with splenectomy. Splenectomy not only is helpful for diagnosis but
also for treatment of refractory hypercalcemia. Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. SJ performed the literature search, wrote and submitted the manuscript. RLH assisted
with the literature search and obtained the images from the pathology and radiology Dept. RL assisted in pathology reporting and wrote
pathology section. JHP performed the surgery, was the consultant in charge of the patients' care and made alterations to the final draft of
the paper. All authors have read and approved final manuscript.
