Small bowel intussusceptions are much less common than the ileocolic type, with jejunoileal intussusceptions being amongst the most rare1.
We review the literature on small bowel intussuception, using a case of an 11-year-old girl with a jejunoileal intussusception involving the
whole of the small bowel, from the level of the duodenojejunal flexure to the ileocaecal valve, as an illustrative history. The typical CT
features of an intussusception and value of CT with regard to identification of complications are highlighted. Small bowel intussusceptions
(SBI) are much less common than the ileocolic variety, with jejunoileal and duodenojejunal intussusceptions being the rarest types of all1.
SBI may be difficult to diagnose preoperatively, with a consequent increase in ischaemic complications, secondary to delayed surgery. An
11-year-old girl was admitted with an 8-hour history of acute abdominal pain. On physical examination, she was clinically anaemic, shocked
and had a palpable central abdominal mass. A past history of iron deficiency anaemia had been attributed to a poor dietary intake. A plain
abdominal radiograph (Fig.1) confirmed the presence of the mass, and showed gaseous distension of the stomach and (displaced) duodenum.
Following fluid resuscitation, the duty surgeon requested an emergency CT scan of the abdomen and pelvis, both to determine the cause of the
mass, and to aid in his decision as to the timing of an exploratory laparotomy. The CT images (Fig.2) demonstrated an enormous small bowel
intussusception, which extended from the duodenojejunal flexure (DJF) to the ileocaecal valve. The colon was clearly seen to be separate
from the mass. Fluid was trapped between the layers of bowel, and lying freely in the pelvis. The bowel loops caught up in the mass enhanced
poorly, indicative of ischaemia. Axial source images at the level of the superior mesenteric vessels showed them to be dragged over to the
left side and entangled in the intussuscepted loops, reminiscent of a small bowel volvulus. Abdominal radiograph demonstrating a large,
central abdominal mass (arrows) and an associated high small bowel obstruction (asterisk). (a). Axial CT image at the level of the superior
mesenteric artery origin, where the 3rd part of the duodenum crosses anterior to the spine. The start of the intussusception is seen as a
fluid filled structure, to the left of the midline at the DJF (arrow). More anteriorly lie further components of the intussusception
(asterisk) (shown to be one contiguous mass on consecutive images). (b) Axial CT image at the level of the lower poles of the kidneys. The
layers of the intussusception are clearly visualised, with fluid trapped between them (arrows). The superior mesenteric vessels are
displaced to the left side and appear twisted, reminiscent of a small bowel volvulus (asterisk). The bowel wall is thickened and enhances
poorly, in keeping with ischaemia. The ascending and descending limbs of the colon are seen lying posteriorly adjacent to the kidneys, and
separate from the intussusception (c) Axial CT image at a more caudal level. Layers of fat are seen trapped within the intussusceptum
(arrows). Surgery performed later on that same evening, confirmed the CT findings. The intussusception was successfully reduced, and a
proximal jejunal polyp was found to have acted as a pathological lead point. Mesenteric venous thrombosis and consequent bowel wall
ischaemia necessitated a total of four further laparotomies, for resection of non-viable bowel and an ischaemic stricture. Four months
following her emergency admission, the patient was finally discharged from hospital. She has been left with 200cm of small bowel, and an
intact ileocaecal valve and colon. The surgical team remain optimistic about her future, and she was progressing well when seen at her first
outpatient visit. It remains speculative, but it is possible that the jejunal polyp removed at surgery may have been responsible for her
chronic iron deficiency anaemia. Ileocolic intussusception is one of the most common causes of an acute abdomen in children and has a
characteristic clinical picture of vomiting, red ‘currant jelly’ stools, severe colicky abdominal pain and mass. The incidence of acute
intussusception in Europe is reported to range from 0.66 to 2.24 cases per 1000 children2. 70% of cases occur in the first year of life with
the incidence declining rapidly thereafter to less than 2% of cases in 10–15 year olds. SBI is unusual, representing 1–10% of all
intussusceptions but up to 50% of cases in older children. Ileoileal, jejunojejunal, jejunoileal and duodenojejunal intussusceptions are
described in descending order of frequency. Subacute presentation of SBI is typical and therefore difficult to diagnose preoperatively,
leading to an increased risk of ischaemic complications3,4. A 2–3cm doughnut-like lesion found in the left abdomen or paraumbilical region
with ultrasound is suspicious for SBI. An intussusception length >3.5cm has been reported as a sensitive and specific predictor of those
SBIs that require surgical intervention, as compared to those that will resolve spontaneously5,6. The diagnosis of SBI can confidently be
made with CT, due to their virtual pathognomic appearance: they are seen as a complex soft tissue mass, with a target, layered, sausage-
shape or reniform configuration. An eccentric area of fat density within the mass represents intussuscepted mesenteric fat, and the
mesenteric vessels themselves may be visible within this fat layer7. The superior anatomic detail of CT over ultrasound, mean that ensuing
complications such as mesenteric thrombosis or small bowel volvulus may also be easily recognised. Whilst ultrasound remains the primary
imaging modality used both to diagnose intussusception and for the evaluation of an abdominal mass lesion, the clinical condition of the
patient (as in this case), may dictate that CT be sometimes used as a first-line investigation. It was additionally of value as the size of
the intussusception may have led to an errant diagnosis of a large bowel intussusception, unnecessary therapeutic enema and delay of
appropriate surgery. Intussusception is an unusual but important differential in older children presenting with an acute abdomen. In this
scenario CT may have a significant diagnostic advantage over ultrasound. Intussusception should be considered in the differential diagnosis
of all children who present with an acute abdomen, regardless of age. Small bowel intussusceptions cannot be reduced with air (or fluid)
enema techniques. Ultrasound remains the first line imaging investigation both in children who present with an abdominal mass and in those
in whom intussusception is clinically suspected. CT is of value in those children in whom complex intra-abdominal mass lesions are detected
or when the presenting clinical picture is complicated. The authors have no conflict of interest
