Editor, Insufficient blood perfusion to the small bowel may result from arterial occlusion by embolus or thrombosis, thrombosis of the
venous system, or non-occlusive processes such as vasospasm or low cardiac output. Patterns of segmental, skipped, or patchy small bowel
ischaemia have been reported post abdominal aortic aneurysm repair and is thought to imply that microembolisation has played an important
role1. Microvascular thrombi in various organs can result from disseminated intravascular coagulation2. We present a case of patchy small
bowel ischaemia in a septic patient who had developed evidence of disseminated intravascular coagulation. A 50-year-old man prescribed four
weeks of diclofenac for a muscular strain presented with frank haematemesis secondary to an eroding gastric ulcer measuring 7 cm in
diameter. A partial gastrectomy and Rouxen-Y reconstruction was performed and a massive blood transfusion of 25 units was required peri-
operatively. The patient was referred to a tertiary care centre for intensive care where on day six post operatively, he developed
peritonitis as a result of a biliary leak from his duodenal stump. His blood tests at that time were suggestive of non-overt disseminated
intravascular coagulation secondary to sepsis with an elevated D-dimer of 7.36 μg/ml (0.01–0.5 μg/ml). An emergency exploratory laparotomy
was performed. This revealed a duodenal stump blowout and a 2 inch segment of proximal jejunum containing multiple less than 1 cm blisters
in a triangular arrangement (figure 1). These were found to be necrotic areas and were resected. Histology of the specimen confirmed areas
of transmural haemorrhagic ischaemic necrosis associated with a marked serosal exudate and incipient perforation. Thrombi were
histologically identified within the omentum. Later in the post-operative period he developed bleeding from his duodenal stump for which he
had successful radio-embolisation of the gastroduodenal artery. After a complicated postoperative period, he was discharged home. Although,
patchy bowel ischaemia has been reported in past, this pattern in a mid jejunal small bowel segment containing multiple less than 1 cm areas
of necrosis in a septic patient has not been reported to our knowledge. Proximal jejunum with multiple necrotic areas Patchy small bowel
ischaemia has been noted in patients following abdominal aortic aneurysm repair1. Some of these patients have been found to have widespread
microembolisation or to have pathological evidence of microemboli. As a result it has been postulated that this pattern of ischaemia is a
direct consequence of microembolisation3. Sepsis almost invariably leads to haemostatic abnormalities. These range from the insignificant to
severe disseminated intravascular coagulation. Compelling evidence from clinical and experimental studies suggests that disseminated
intravascular coagulation is involved in the pathogenesis of microvascular dysfunction and that deposition of microvascular thrombi can
occur3,4. Given the above patient had an elevated D-dimer and evidence of thrombi on histology it is our feeling that the likely mechanism
behind this unusual intra-operative finding was microembolisation. With sepsis related disseminated intravascular coagulation being the most
likely cause. We conclude that in septic patients, the bowel should be carefully examined as missing such pathology will have serious
implications for critically ill surgical patients. The authors have no conflict of interest
