A 14-month-old boy with double aneuploidy and a double aortic arch suffered from frequently recurrent severe feeding and respiratory
problems. Chromosomal analysis showed a 48,XXY + 21 karyotype: a double aneuploidy of Down syndrome (DS) and Klinefelter syndrome (KS). Only
four cases of double aneuploidy (DS + KS) associated with congenital heart defects have been published of which none had a double aortic
arch. Our case report should draw attention to the possibility of a double aortic arch in patients with severe feeding and respiratory
problems and a double aneuploidy. The first case of double aneuploidy of Down syndrome (DS) combined with Klinefelter syndrome (KS) was
published in 1959 by Ford et al. . Most of the papers published since then were focused to more extent on the double aneuploidy itself than
on the clinical features of the patients. Pediatric cardiologists are familiar with screening of babies with DS for congenital heart defects
(CHD), expecting in approximately 50% to find a heart defect, typically atrioventricular septal defect [9, 13]. However, in children
diagnosed with KS, a CHD has only rarely been reported [1, 13, 15]. Reports on CHD with double aneuploidy of DS and KS are scarce. We report
on a child with DS and KS associated with a double aortic arch. A 14-month-old boy was admitted to our department after frequent admissions
in other hospitals because of recurrent severe feeding and respiratory problems. His weight was 7.6 kg, height 78 cm, blood pressure
90/75 mmHg, moderate psychomotor retardation was present. His parents were not consanguineous. He was born following an uneventful pregnancy
with a birth weight of 2,560 g. The mother was 36 years old. Chromosomal analysis performed because of facial dysmorphic features (Fig. 1)
suggesting Down syndrome revealed a 48,XXY +21 karyotype: a double aneuploidy of Down syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome. Soon after birth,
he had to be intubated because of severe respiratory problems. Echocardiography, bronchoscopy and CT thorax performed in another centre
demonstrated a small atrial septal defect (secundum type) and narrowing of the trachea from its middle to the carina. The X-ray of the small
bowel was normal; barium swallow was then not performed. The boy had to be fed by a tube and later exclusively via a percutaneous
endoscopical gastrostomy. After extubation, the patient suffered repeatedly from severe respiratory distress in the course of intercurrent
infections. Fig. 1Facial dysmorphic features in a child with double aneuploidy—Down syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome (with the permission
of the parents) Facial dysmorphic features in a child with double aneuploidy—Down syndrome and Klinefelter syndrome (with the permission of
the parents) This clinical picture accompanied by findings of a topical trachea and possibly also an oesophageal obstruction led to a
suspicion of a vascular airway compression. A new echocardiography and a new CT of the thorax with contrast (Siemens Somatom Sensation
64-slice, contrast 25 ml omnipaque 300 intravenous) demonstrated a double aortic arch (Fig. 2), compressing both trachea and oesophagus. The
anterior left arch appeared smaller with a localised narrowing, as compared to the posterior right arch. The descending aorta was running to
the left of the spine. Barium swallow demonstrated a severe indentation in the proximal oesophagus (Fig. 3). Fig. 2CT scan, transverse
projection. Arrows indicate anterior and posterior aortic arch. Trachea (asterisk) compressed by the vascular ring. A anterior, L left, P
posterior, R rightFig. 3Barium swallow. Posterior indentation of the oesophagus (arrow) CT scan, transverse projection. Arrows indicate
anterior and posterior aortic arch. Trachea (asterisk) compressed by the vascular ring. A anterior, L left, P posterior, R right Barium
swallow. Posterior indentation of the oesophagus (arrow) Using a median sternotomy approach, the left anterior aortic arch was divided at
the smallest point between the left carotid and subclavian artery. In addition, the ductal ligament was divided. Complete and thorough
mobilization of the trachea and oesophagus has been performed. It was decided not to proceed with open heart surgery in order to close the
small centrally located atrial septal defect, because if still necessary, it can later be closed percutaneously. The postoperative course
was complicated by a wound infection and pleural empyema for which he needed surgical treatment. The percutaneous endoscopical gastrostomy
could be abolished and normal oral feeding restored. Aneuploidy is defined as an abnormal number of chromosomes. Double aneuploidy, the
existence of two chromosomal abnormalities in the same person, is relatively rare. It can involve both autosomal (chromosome 13, 18 or 21)
and sex chromosomes and each may manifest either as a monosomy or trisomy or even tetra- or pentasomy. The incidence of a double aneuploidy
with DS and KS varies in different publications . Kovaleva and Mutton have reported that 0.098% of the children with DS also have KS. The
incidence and spectrum of cardiovascular anomalies in children born with Down–Klinefelter syndrome is not known. Only four case reports on
CHD in these patients have been published [2, 6, 7, 11], but none had a double aortic arch. Adult patients with isolated KS may occasionally
suffer from mitral valve prolapse. However, an obvious relationship between this syndrome and CHD has not been documented, with exception of
several case reports [1, 15]. In contrast, Down syndrome alone is well known for cardiac anomalies, occurring in 40% to 50% of patients .
Freeman reported a 44% incidence of CHD in a group of 227 infants with DS, of which 45% are atrioventricular, 35% are ventricular and 8% had
an isolated atrial septal defect. The resting 12% of other anomalies did not include any infant with a vascular ring. As a matter of fact,
an aberrant origin of the subclavian artery (arteria lusoria) seems to be found more and more frequently in children with DS, so that it has
even been proposed to consider it as a new cardiac sign for DS . In most of them, however, this should be only an incidental finding , not
responsible for the feeding difficulties. Interestingly, in patients with DS less vascular anomalies than in general population were
reported, probably because of an increase in inhibitors of vascular endothelial growth factor, whose genes are located on chromosome 21 .
Double aortic arch does not belong to the spectrum of defects known to be associated with DS. Our observation should draw attention to a
possible occurrence of a complete vascular ring in a young infant with clinical symptoms of recurrent respiratory and feeding problems and a
(double) aneuploidy. In addition to assessing intracardiac anatomy, a careful assessment of aortic arch anatomy is warranted [3, 4, 16]
before possible breathing or swallowing difficulties may be assigned to muscular hypotony, bronchial pathology and other factors, common for
patients with (double) aneuploidies. Conflict of interests The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Open Access This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
