Primary endometrioid adenocarcinoma developed at urethrovaginal septum has not been reported. A 61-yr-old woman presented with recurrent
urinary tract infection. She had received hormone replacement treatment with estrogen and progesterone for 5 yr. A pinpoint ulceration at
slightly elevated anterior vaginal wall was found and biopsy revealed endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Magnetic resonance imaging showed the 4.3
cm sized mass in urethrovaginal septum. She has undergone anterior pelvic exenteration, pelvic lymph node dissection, and urostomy with
ileal conduit. Microscopic finding of the pathology revealed endometrioid adenocarcinoma. Co-existence of endometriosis was not identified.
Tumor at urethrovaginal septum was difficult to be detected till growing to be bulky, because of vaginal axis, misunderstanding of the tumor
as symphysis pubis, no definitive symptom, and its rarity. This is the first reported case of extraovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma
developed at the urethrovaginal septum. Understanding normal functional anatomy and meticulous physical examination are essential to detect
this rare tumor in the urethrovaginal septum. Most tumors in lower female genital area are originated from vaginal or urethral mucosa (1,
2). Mostly, they are accompanied by apparent symptoms, such as vaginal bleeding or hematuria, which lead to an easy detection of the tumor
(2). However, the mass developed at urethrovaginal septum without definite involvement of mucosa of urethra or vagina is rare and it does
not show any obvious symptoms or signs except urinary retention (3). We report a case of endometrioid adenocarcinoma at urethrovaginal
septum. The difficulty in diagnosis of the tumor at urethrovaginal septum is discussed. A 61-yr-old woman presented with recurrent urinary
tract infection. She had been treated with antibiotics for urinary tract infection several times. She had a history of smoking 1 pack per
day for 20 yr, drinking 10 cups of coffee per day for 30 yr. Exposure to diethylstilbestrol during her fetal period was uncertain. She had
been receiving hormone replacement treatment with estrogen and progesterone for past 5 yr in a local clinic to alleviate menopausal symptoms
including senile vaginitis. The uterus was mobile and non-tender. And the symphysis pubis had been felt as prominent. The mass was enlarged
to the size of walnut 4 month later. A pinpoint sized ulceration at lower 1/3 of anterior vaginal wall elevation was noticed after rotating
vaginal speculum about 90° to show the anterior vaginal wall. Punch biopsy was performed and the microscopy of the mass revealed
endometrioid adenocarcinoma. A magnetic resonance imaging revealed 4.3×4.2 cm sized mass between urethra and vagina (Fig. 1). A positron
emission tomography-computed tomography revealed a focal hypermetabolism at the site of mass. All the results of complete blood count and
blood chemistry were within normal limits with exception of urine analysis showing white blood cell and red blood cell count higher than
100/HPF. All serum tumor markers such as CA 125, CA 72-4, CA 15-3, CA 19-9, TA-4, carcino embryonic antigen, and neuron specific endolase
were within normal limits. A Pap smear result was normal and no high-risk human papilloma virus was detected. Anterior pelvic exenteration,
bilateral salpingooophorectomy, pelvic lymph node dissection, and urostomy with ileal conduit were performed. An operative finding revealed
a walnut sized, soft, well-demarcated mass at urethrovaginal septum. The uterus, both adnexae, and pelvic lymph nodes had normal gross
findings. There was no residual disease in the abdomen and pelvis cavity at the completion of the operation. The postoperative course was
uneventful except for rectocutaneous fistula. She had no evidence of disease for 24 months. Grossly 5×2×1.5 cm sized urethrovaginal mass
protruding into urethra with focal villous appearance was present. The tumor had formed a fistula tract into the vagina (Fig. 2A) which was
replaced by defect of punch biopsy. On serial section, the cut surface of the tumor was largely necrotic. The epicenter of the tumor was
between urethra and vagina. Microscopically mucosal invasion was noticed in both vagina and urethra. Microscopically grade 2 endometrioid
adenocarcinoma was confirmed (Fig. 2B). No histological evidence of endometriosis was identified. The endometrium and the myometrium were
atrophic. The cervix and both adnexae appeared normal. No lymph node metastasis was seen. The immnunohistochemical staining was negative for
estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor (PR), CD10, hMLH 1, and hMSH 2. But bcl-2 was positive in 30% of tumor cell. And p16 and p53
were positive in 85% and 90% of tumor nucleus, respectively. Primary vaginal cancer constitutes about 2% of malignant neoplasm of the female
genital tract (2). Eighty four percent of vaginal cancer was secondary, from the cervix (32%), the endometrium (18%), the colon and rectum
(9%), the ovary (6%), or the vulva (6%). Most patients with vaginal cancer experience painless vaginal bleeding and discharge (2). Primary
carcinoma of the female urethra is rare malignancy, accounting for less than 0.1% of all female genital malignancies (1). Most tumors
involve the anterior or the distal urethra and may be confused with a urethral caruncle or mucosal prolapse. The most common symptoms
include urethral bleeding, hematuria, dysuria, urinary obstruction, urinary frequency, and a mass at the introitus (2). Tumors in lower
female genital area were relatively rare but mostly it can be easily detected because of its early appearing symptom when it involves
vaginal or urethral mucosa. But, Nagai et al. (3) reported that even 7 cm sized leiomyoma in urethrovaginal septum caused no symptoms except
for urinary retention. Recurrent urinary tract infection was the only clue to suggest the mass in urethrovaginal septum for the first time
in this case. It is essential to examine anterior vaginal wall in patients with urinary tract symptoms including recurrent urinary tract
infection, and urinary retention. We would like to name the urethrovaginal septum as the "retropubic shadow" for gynecologists for the
following reasons. Firstly, fingertips of palpating vagina direct to promontory. It is another direction to urethrovaginal septum. Colpogram
of healthy women revealed that the upper third of the vagina lays almost horizontally to the coccyx and vaginal axis formed by levator ani
make fingertips entering vaginal cavity to go to bending toward promontory. This is remarkable at pelvic examination, because of more acute
vaginal axis with patient's straining of levator ani (Fig. 3A) (4). Secondly, the small mass at urethrovaginal septum could be misunderstood
as symphysis pubis (Fig. 3B). Thirdly, the actual primary urethrovaginal carcinoma like in this case is not accompanied by evident symptoms
such as hematuria or vaginal bleeding until the tumor penetrates the mucosa of vagina or urethra (5). Lastly, the rarity of this condition
makes it hard for physicians to consider the possibility of this particular disease (2). Extraovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma and
adenosarcoma could be developed from endometriosis with unopposed estrogen replacement (5-8). However, in this case, the woman had been
received estrogen with progesterone and immunohistochemical staining was negative for ER and PR. And endometriosis as precursor lesion was
not identified. So, we think that the tumor in this patient have different pathogenesis compared to previously reported cases. To the best
of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of extraovarian endometrioid adenocarcinoma developed at urethrovaginal septum.
Understanding normal functional anatomy and meticulous physical examination are essential to early detection of this rare tumor in
urethrovaginal septum. T2-weighted sagittal MR image shows an ovoid and solid mass between urethra and vagina. Note the ill-defined margin
of mass (arrows) with bladder and urethra suggesting invasion. Endometrioid adenocarcinoma in the urethrovaginal septum. (A) Posterior
surface of gross surgical specimen of anterior pelvic exenteration. Defect in vaginal wall from previous punch biopsy was seen in the center
of the elevated mass. (B) Microscopic finding of endometrioid adenocarcinoma (H&E, ×40). Illustration of "retropubic shadow". (A) Vaginal
axis formed by levator ani make the upper third of the vagina lays almost horizontally to the 3rd & 4th sacral vertebrae. (B) Meticulous
bimanual pelvic examination (full line). A procedure that incorporates scrubbing towards the posterior aspect of the pubic bone as pulling
out intravaginal fingers while bending of fingertips above symphysis pubis to palpate urethrovaginal mass should be carried out after
routine bimanual pelvic examination (dotted line).
