Conceived and designed the experiments: ESM MAS. Performed the experiments: AOA DVN. Analyzed the data: ESM AOA DVN PL MAS. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: ESM DVN PL SCMC RHO MAS. Wrote the paper: ESM MAS. Current address: Rega Institute, Katholieke
Universiteit Leuven, Leuven, Belgium The use of antiretrovirals (ARV) during pregnancy has drastically reduced the rate of the human
immunodeficiency virus perinatal transmission (MTCT). As a consequence of widespread ARV use, transmission of drug resistant strains from
mothers to their babies is increasing. Ultra-sensitive PCR techniques have permitted the quantification of minority viral populations, but
little is known about the transmission of drug-resistant HIV-1 minority population in the setting of MTCT. We describe the case of a female
child born to an HIV-infected mother, which had not taken any ARV during the pregnancy. The child's first genotype demonstrated a minor non-
nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (K101E), and during her treatment with reverse transcriptase and protease inhibitors full
resistance to non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors (NNRTI) emerged (G190A). Phenotypic/genotypic analysis of variant quasispecies
through yeast TyHRT assay was conducted to characterize minority resistant viral strains circulating in both mother and child. Maximum
likelihood and Bayesian MCMC phylogenetic analyses were performed with samples from the pair to assess genetic relatedness among minor viral
strains. The analysis showed that the child received a minor NNRTI resistant variant, containing the mutation K101E that was present in less
than 1% of the mother's quasispecies. Phylogenetic analyses have suggested common ancestry between the mother's virus strain carrying K101E
with the viral sequences from the child. This is the first documentation of MTCT of a minority resistant strain of HIV-1. The transmission
of minor resistant variants carries the threat of emergence of multi-drug primary mutations without identified specific selective pressures.
The use of antiretrovirals (ARV), particularly the combination therapy known as highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) during
pregnancy, has substantially decreased mother-to-child transmission (MTCT). In addition to AZT prophylaxis during delivery and to the
newborn, C-section when viral suppression is not achieved and avoidance of breastfeeding has reduced the rate of MTCT to less than 2% . As a
consequence of ARV selective pressure and widespread use, transmission of resistance strains from mothers to their babies is increasing .
Vertical transmission of HIV-1 variants resistant to reverse transcriptase inhibitors has been reported and some studies suggest that
resistant mutations are selectively transmitted . More recently, however, no vertical transmission of NNRTI and PI major mutations has been
observed, even when representing the predominant maternal variant . Studies using single-dose nevirapine to MTCT prevention suggest that
transmission of NNRTI-resistant strains is a rare event, if it occurs at all . Transmission of major NNRTI and PI mutations has been rarely
reported in infants born to mothers who acquired primary resistance mutations by heterosexual transmission or during the course of their
treatment . Transmitted resistant mutations can take years to fade away even when the population transmitted is a mixture of wild-type and
drug-resistant virus . Little is known about the transmission of drug-resistant HIV-1 minority population in the setting of MTCT. We report
here a possible transmission of a minor variant carrying an NNRTI resistance mutation from an ARV-naïve mother to a child and subsequent
emergence of this variant as a dominant population during an NNRTI non-based ARV treatment. P50 is a female child born on May 1, 1999 and
diagnosed with HIV on January 29, 2002. She was the index case of HIV-1 in the family. Her parents had not taken any ARV at the time of the
child's diagnosis and her mother did not take any ARV during the pregnancy. The child was not breastfed. Her first CD4+ T-cell count was
308/µL (14%) and her viral load (VL) was 390,000 copies/ml. She was started on zidovudine and didanosine in August, 2002. One month after
initiation of treatment her CD4+ counts rose to 28% and her VL was 1,700 HIV-RNA copies/ml, but DDI was changed for lamivudine and
nelfinavir due to intolerance. She experienced immunological improvement during HAART although her VL was never undetectable. Her baseline
genotyping test before ARV therapy showed the K101E RT mutation. A second genotyping performed one month after HAART showed K101E, G190A,
and T215F. Another test performed 13 months after HAART initiation revealed the persistence of G190A and K101E and the accumulation of
various NRTI mutations (Table 1). Only major drug resistance mutations are listed. ARV = antiretrovirals, AZT = zidovudine,
DDI = didanosine, 3TC = lamivudine, NFV = nelfinavir. In order to evaluate whether the NNRTI primary mutation, G190A, was already presented
in the child's quasispecies before the introduction of ARV, we analyzed the child's sample before the initiation of therapy. One sample of
the mother (M50), collected on October, 2005, while she was still ARV-naïve was also analyzed for minor variants. Written informed consent
was obtained from the mother prior to inclusion of both mother and child in the study. Patient-derived HIV-1 RT domain DNA encompassing
codons 37–250 was isolated through nested PCR from infected PBMC genomic DNA using primers Dp10 (5′CAACTCCCTCTCAGAAGCAGGAGCCG3′) and PolM4
(5′TATGTAGATGGGGC AGCTAACAG3′) for the first round, and primers Dp16 (5′CCTCAAATCACTCTTTGG CAAC3′) and RT-20 (5′GAAGAAGCAGAGCTAGAACTGGCAG3′)
for the second round. RT sequences were incorporated into TyHRT elements by in vivo homologous recombination following transformation into
Saccharomyces cervisiae. HIV-1 RT assays using TyHRT elements in yeast and the construction of RT domain libraries were carried out as
described previously. Clones were assayed in the absence and presence of efavirenz and nevirapine (obtained from the NIH AIDS Research and
Reference Reagent Program) to monitor RT activity and NNRTI susceptibility. Nevirapine- and efavirenz-resistant RTs with increased activity
in the presence of inhibitor were characterized further. HIV-1 RT domains of interest were isolated and sequenced as described previously .
RTs were amplified using primers A-35 (5′GAACCTCCGAGATCGAAGA3′) and I1097 (5′GCACTGCCTCTGTTAATTGT3′) and sequenced with internal primers 44F
(5′GGATGGATGGCCCAAAAGT3′) and J801 (5′ATCCCTGGGTAAATCTGACT3′). Phylogenetic analysis was performed using both maximum likelihood (ML) and
Bayesian inference algorithms. To establish the epidemiological linkage of the M50-P50 mother-child pair, additional subtype B control
sequences were obtained from the same geographical region (14 sequences form HIV infected children in Rio de Janeiro) and using BLAST
similarity searches in GenBank (49 sequences). Analyses for the M50-P50 sequences were performed with and without codon 101 to avoid the
effect of convergent evolution of the K101E substitution. ML trees were inferred using PhyML , employing a General Time Reversible model
with discrete gamma-distributed rate variation among sites (GTR-γ; 4 categories). Bootstrap analysis was performed using 500 replicates.
Bayesian phylogenetic analysis was performed using MrBayes with the same model settings as the ML analyses. Two independent Markov Chain
Monte Carlo (MCMC) runs were carried out, each consisting of 4 chains and a default heating scheme. ML trees and MCMC consensus trees were
visualized in FigTree (http://tree.bio.ed.ac.uk/software/figtree/). Ethics Statement A total of 680 isolates with active RT from the child
(referred as P50) and 2,931 sequences from the mother (M50) were tested. With respect to resistance phenotype, P50 showed 46 isolates
associated with resistance to nevirapine and twenty resistant to efavirenz. Among M50 sequences, 22 were associated with resistance to
nevirapine and 16 to efavirenz. None of 344 NNRTI sensitive clones from M50 sequenced showed the K101E mutation. Successful sequencing of
resistant clones was obtained for 14 NNRTI-resistant variants from P50 and 30 from M50. Among P50 sequences the mutations A98S, K101E, I135T
and E138A were observed in all isolates. In seven of these sequences the G190A mutation was present. Other polymorphisms (L100I, L100S,
V106A) were observed in individual sequences but were not associated with G190A mutation. M50 sequences also showed mutations A98S, I135T
and E138A. NNRTI-resistant V106A and K103N variants were seen in two sequences, Y181C and Y188C in two sequences, and Y188H in five
sequences. K101E was found in one sequence. Phylogenetic analysis of M50-P50 clonal sequences and additional controls clearly showed the
mother-to-child transmission linkage with high bootstrap support. Only sequences larger than 780 bp were included for clarity of
phylogenetic signal (Figure 1). A well-supported cluster was inferred for both the transmission chain and the individual patient sequences.
The phylogenetic relationships between the mother and the child clones are presented in more detail in Figure 2. The K101E-containing
variant from the mother (M50_13B_K101E) showed phylogenetic evidence of common ancestry with the child cluster, as seen by the net formed by
both clusters (Figure 2A). Although exclusion of codon 101 from the analysis failed to show such linkage, M50_13B_K101E still remained at
the base of the mother cluster, as one of the sequences from the mother most similar to the child cluster (Figure 2B). Only bootstrap
support values over 70% are shown. The Bayesian phylogenetic inference produced very similar results. The formation of a net (pointed by the
arrow) in A depicts genetic relatedness between sequence M50_13B_K101E and the child viral sequence cluster. M50_13B_K101E is boxed in both
panels. The Bayesian MCMC analysis revealed that the cluster from the mother harboring sequence M50_13B_K101E was indeed more closely-
related to the child cluster (Figure 3). Taken together, all phylogenetic evidences suggest that M50_13B_K101E, the only viral sequence from
the mother carrying K101E, share common ancestry with viruses circulating in P50. Only posterior probablities >0.75 are shown. The maximum
likelihood tree showed a very similar clustering. The arrow indicates the closer relatedness between the mother sequence cluster harboring
M50_13B_K101E (boxed) and the child cluster. We have reported here the description of MTCT of a minor HIV-1 variant carrying the NNRTI
mutation K101E. The child HIV variant evolved shortly after treatment with 2 NRTIs to a predominant species also carrying the G190A
mutation, which confers resistance to all NNRTI, albeit in the absence of NNRTI selective pressure. K101E mutation can cause resistance to
nevirapine and a low level resistance to efavirenz and etravirine . The fitness of variants containing solely the K101E mutation remains to
be determined but its persistence in the child along all her follow-up and our phylogenetic evidences suggest that this variant was the
founder species transmitted to the child even though it was present in less than 0.3% of the mother's viral quasispecies. Our standard
genotyping showed that K101E was already present in the first sample of the child (before treatment) but only the minority of the virus
population had the NNRTI major mutation G190A. The standard genotyping was able to detect G190A mutation only one month after start of ARV,
when the T215F mutation was already present (Table 1). The fact that G190A was not observed in the mother's genotyping may suggest that it
could have emerged de novo in the backbone containing K101E during evolution of the child quasispecies. G190A is known to impact only
slightly in viral fitness , and could have remained in the quasispecies until selected as a major variant by the emergence of T215F and NRTI
selective pressure. Alternatively, it may have faded away over time from the mother's virus population, as her first sample was collected 4
years after her HIV diagnosis. The mother presented some minor HIV variants carrying NNRTI resistant mutations, suggesting that she was
infected with a NNRTI primary resistant virus. Finally, G190A could be present in a very small frequency in the mother's viral quasispecies,
below the detection limit of the assays. Wang et al. have shown that certain NRTI mutations, including T215Y, can increase the fitness of
K101E+G190S variants. We speculate that T215F has emerged in those viral species already carrying both NNRTI mutations, and the selective
pressure of NRTI in the child propitiated the emergence of G190A-containing strains as major variants. Although the horizontal transmission
of HIV minority resistant strains and the vertical transmission of resistant strains have been both previously reported, this is the first
documentation, to the best of our knowledge, of MTCT of minority resistant strains of HIV-1. Our report highlights the importance of
transmission of resistant minority strains, as it carries the threat of emergence of multi-drug resistance primary mutations without
specific selective pressures. Pediatricians who provide care to HIV-infected children should be aware of this possibility, especially when
dealing with children who acquired HIV by vertical transmission and whose mothers were treated with ARV during pregnancy. The use of
ultrasensitive genotyping technologies for the detection of drug resistance in MTCT cases may not be feasible for most developing countries.
In this setting, the early use of standard genotyping tests in children with virologic failure during treatment can promote the detection of
unsuspected resistant mutations and optimization of their future ARV regimens. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no
competing interests exist. Funding: This study has been funded by grants of the National Institutes of Health R01 HD37780-01 (U.S.A.), by
the Brazilian Ministry of Health and by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnologico (CNPq) - Research Grant to ESM. This
project has been also partly funded with federal funds from the National Cancer Institute, National Institutes of Health, under contract
N01-CO-12400. The content of this publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Health and Human
Services, nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organizations imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. The funders had
no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript.
