Percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) has been used to relieve pain and to prevent further collapse of the vertebral body in patients with an
osteoporotic compression fracture. The most commonly affected site for the use of PVP is the thoracolumbar junction. There are few reports
that have described on the usefulness of PVP in the treatment of a high thoracic compression fracture. We report a case of an upper thoracic
compression fracture that was treated with computed tomography (CT)-guided PVP. It was possible to obtain easy access to the narrow thoracic
pedicle and it was also possible to monitor continuously the proper volume of polymethylmethacrylate employed, under CT guidance.
Percutaneous vertebroplasty (PVP) has been widely used for the management of osteoporotic vertebral fractures. However, the percutaneous
approach to the upper or middle thoracic vertebrae is difficult due to the small size of the pedicle and vertebral anatomy in the thoracic
vertebrae (1-3). In a lateral view under fluoroscopy, it is very difficult to confirm the precise location of the pedicle of the upper
thoracic spine due to interference from the shoulders. The use of a computed tomography (CT) scan during vertebroplasty provides excellent
imaging and the possibility of exact positioning of the vertebroplasty needle. Potential polymethylmethacrylate (PMMA) leakage can be
detected early in the procedure with the use of an axial CT scan. Therefore, the amount of leakage can be reduced and optimal filling of the
vertebral body can be achieved (2). A 51-year-old woman was hospitalized due to posterior neck pain and left arm weakness after a traffic
accident while riding a bicycle. On admission, there was a four-fifths decrease in motor function of the left arm. The patient had a
paresthesia on the left C6-7 dermatome. Plain radiographs of the cervicothoracic spine revealed compression fractures of C7-T3 with anterior
subluxation of facets at C6-7. CT and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed anterior wedging of the C7 vertebral body, ligamentous
disruption at the C6-7 level and acute compression fractures at T1-3 (Fig. 1A, B). In general, vertebral compression fractures have been
treated mainly with bed rest, the use of analgesics, braces and various physical therapies. However, unlike lumbar compression fracture
patients, the patient was uncomfortable in the supine position and even lying down in bed. The patient had to keep her posture in the
sitting or a semi-Fowler position all day, and the patient had slight difficulty in deep breathing. The cervicothoracic junction was
unstable due to injury of the posterior ligamentous complex. The patient underwent CT-guided vertebroplasty at T1-3 and an anterior
discectomy and instrumented interbody fusion at C6-7. The procedure was performed in strictly sterile manner in the CT (Somatom Sensation
Open scanner, Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) room. After the patient was placed on the CT table, blood pressure and pulse
oximetry were monitored continuously. The area to be treated was prepared in a strictly sterile manner and then CT topography for the upper
thoracic spine, including the symptomatic lesion, was checked. On this topographic image, the T3 vertebral body was identified and the
course of needle insertion was determined. Axial CT scanning was performed for the T3 vertebral body and a sectional image for needle
insertion was selected. The image mode was converted to CT fluoroscopy, and the image size was magnified for precise monitoring. With the
administration of local anesthesia with 1% lidocaine, a 10-gauge vertebroplasty cannula was inserted to the affected vertebral body via the
unilateral transpedicular route. The tip of the cannula was placed in the anterior half of the vertebral body (Fig. 1C, D). A Total of 3 cc
PMMA was applied to the T3 vertebral body. During the procedure, needle advancement, venous leakage, the injection process of PMMA and
extravasation out of the vertebral body were carefully monitored by real-time CT fluoroscopy. Compression fractures of the T1 and T2
vertebral bodies were managed under the same conditions. Six days after the procedure, the patient underwent an anterior discectomy and
instrumented interbody fusion and interspinous wiring with a Songer cable at C6-7. Postoperative radiographs and CT images demonstrated
complete reduction of the C7 vertebral body and a good position of instruments (Fig. 1E). Posterior neck and shoulder pain were
significantly decreased following PVP. A Philadelphia collar was used for postoperative neck immobilization. The patient was discharged six
days after surgery with significant improvement in the left arm weakness and neck pain. However, paresthesia on the left arm still remained.
At a 5-month follow-up examination, the patient reported no neck pain or limb weakness. A radiological study of the cervical spine performed
five months after surgery revealed evidence of solid bone fusion and no cervical instability (Fig. 1F). Percutaneous vertebroplasty was
developed by Deramond and colleagues (4) in 1987 and has been widely used in the therapy of vertebral compression fractures. The procedure
provides benefits in terms of pain relief, increased activity and decreased analgesic drug consumption in patients with an osteoporotic
compression fracture. The use of PMMA leads to stabilization and immobilization of compressed vertebral bodies and the heat effect of cement
on nerve endings plays a role in pain reduction (4, 5). The average transverse diameter of the pedicle at T1 vertebral body is 6.4 mm in
women and 7.3 mm in men. At T3, however, the mean diameter is 3.4 mm in women and 3.9 mm in men (3). The thoracic vertebral arch encloses a
small, round spinal canal that will not admit the tip of an index finger. For this reason, the percutaneous transpedicular approach to the
upper thoracic vertebrae is difficult and even a small amount of cement leakage can cause serious neurological complications. Cho et al. (1)
have used the posterolateral percutaneous vertebral body access technique (PVBA) to avoid the pedicle and provide direct access to the
vertebral body in a middle thoracic compression fracture. This technique at the thoracic level is very safe in that direct injury to the
nervous system is prevented as the needle passes through the costotransverse facet, rib head and lateral margin of the pedicle. This is
further from the spinal canal than is the case with the transpedicular approach. However, Cho and colleagues were concerned about the
potential risk of pneumothorax due to the posterolateral trajectory of the use of the PVBA technique. It is also very difficult to visualize
the upper thoracic spine in a lateral view under fluoroscopy because of shoulder overlap. With the use of our CT guided technique, however,
we could obtain good access to the high thoracic vertebra with monitoring of the full passage of needle advance from the skin to the
vertebral body. Inadvertent leakage of PMMA into spinal canal is the most serious complication, and can cause a major postprocedural
neurological deficit (4-8). Ryu et al. (9) have advocated dose-dependent epidural leakage of PMMA after PVP in patients with osteoporotic
vertebral compression fractures. With the help of the use of CT fluoroscopy, we could monitor the volume of PMMA injected until the optimal
filling of the vertebral body, thus avoiding the risk of epidural leakage. The use of CT fluoroscopy can help detect unintended PMMA leakage
at an early stage of the procedure (2, 6, 8, 10). This is another advantage of the use of the CT guidance procedure as compared with the use
of a conventional fluoroscopic guide. Early detection of PMMA leakage can help prevent a serious neurological complication and a pulmonary
embolism. The PMMA leakage rate is variable as reported in the literature (range, 8-87.5%) (2, 4-10). However, the majority of the
extravasations were asymptomatic. In our case, no PMMA leaking to the epidural space or paravertebral area occurred as seen on CT
monitoring. In spite of the feasibility and benefits, the use of CT fluoroscopic guidance has several limitations. One of the limitations is
that the radiation dose associated with CT fluoroscopy is much higher than that of C-arm fluoroscopy (2). Therefore, the operator should
avoid radiation exposure during the procedure by use of lead gloves or other protective devices. Another limitation is the inability to
monitor intraoperative venography as the image of CT fluoroscopy is confined to an axial two-dimensional view. However, the necessity of
venography during PVP in osteoporotic compression fractures has recently been questioned. In addition, the risk of contamination is
relatively high due to the small working space, so operators should pay close attention to the possibility of postoperative infection. In
conclusion, we have presented a case of upper thoracic compression fracture treated with CT-guided PVP. This procedure might be a good
treatment option for compression fractures, especially at the upper thoracic level. The procedure can overcome the problem of shoulder
interference in the lateral X-ray image by providing a clear and precise trajectory toward the target point of the upper thoracic spine and
can help to prevent a serious neurological complication by early detection of unintended PMMA leakage. This study was supported by a grant
from the Wooridul Spine Foundation. CT-guided percutaneous vertebroplasty in upper thoracic compression fracture in 51-year-old woman. A.
Sagittal T1-weighted MR image shows low signal intensities within marrow of C7 to T3 vertebral bodies. B. Fat saturation sagittal
T2-weighted MR image shows high signal intensities from C7 to T3, suggesting acute stage of compression fracture. C, D. Axial computed
tomographic images show preoperative planning of CT-guided vertebroplasty (C) and well-placed cannula in anterior half of vertebral body
(D). E. Sagittal, coronal, and three-dimensional reconstruction CT images show well-injected polymethylmethacrylate cement from T1 to T3
level, respectively. F. Plain radiographs of cervical spine taken five months after surgery show solid bone fusion and good alignment.
