Extraskeletal osteosarcoma (EOS) is a rare entity. Most human cases have been described in the soft tissues of the limb.1 Primary hepatic
osteosarcoma is extremely uncommon with only seven cases reported in the world’s literature. Of these cases, no patient survived more than
8 weeks from the time of diagnosis. We describe a young patient with a symptomatic primary hepatic osteosarcoma that was successfully
treated by surgical resection and adjuvant chemotherapy. She is alive and tumor free 3 years after surgery. A healthy, athletic 19-year-old
African American woman presented for a surgical evaluation of a newly diagnosed hepatic mass. The patient reported approximately 18 months
of occasional and intermittent episodes of epigastric discomfort. Recently, she had developed symptoms of early satiety and anorexia. On
physical exam, she had vague diffuse upper abdominal tenderness and a firm, palpable mass in the left upper quadrant extending to the
midline. A calcified left upper quadrant mass was seen on abdominal X-ray taken during an emergency room visit. Laboratory evaluation was
remarkable for moderate elevations of alkaline phosphatase and alpha fetoprotein. To further evaluate the mass, a CT scan of the chest,
abdomen, and pelvis was performed (Fig. 1), which showed a large heterogeneous mass occupying the left lobe of the liver with a 5-cm area of
calcification in the anterior aspect. MRI demonstrated a single heterogeneously enhancing 15 × 10 × 13.8 cm lobulated mass inseparable from
the left lobe of the liver (Fig. 2). The left portal vein was not visualized and there was no biliary dilatation. T1- and T2-weighted
sequences showed a 5-cm area of signal hypointensity with multiple hypointense non-enhancing linear areas throughout the mass consistent
with areas of calcification. A small amount of intraperitoneal free fluid was present. Staging chest and brain CT demonstrated no evidence
for metastatic disease. Whole body Tc-99m MDP bone scan demonstrated no evidence of skeletal metastatic disease. The radiologic differential
diagnosis includes sarcoma, including metastatic osteosarcoma, and fibrolamellar hepatocellular carcinoma. Figure 1Post-contrast axial CT
demonstrates a heterogeneous mass replacing the left lobe of the liver, hypoenhancing to liver parenchyma, with areas of calcification. It
displaces the stomach posteriorly and inferiorly. The left portal vein is not visualized.Figure 2Coronal T2-weighted MR demonstrating the
lobulated mass, predominantly hyperintense to liver. The calcified component is hypointense. Post-contrast axial CT demonstrates a
heterogeneous mass replacing the left lobe of the liver, hypoenhancing to liver parenchyma, with areas of calcification. It displaces the
stomach posteriorly and inferiorly. The left portal vein is not visualized. Coronal T2-weighted MR demonstrating the lobulated mass,
predominantly hyperintense to liver. The calcified component is hypointense. At operation, a large, scarred lesion replacing the left
hepatic lobe was immediately identified. The lesion extended across the falciform ligament into segment 4 of the liver. It was also adherent
to, but did not invade, the stomach. The abdominal cavity was examined and no metastatic deposits were noted. The right hepatic lobe was
examined with both palpation and intraoperative ultrasound, and was free of tumor. A left hepatic lobectomy was performed with en-bloc
cholecystectomy using a combination of electrocautery and hydrojet dissection. The middle hepatic vein was not involved in the mass and was
left in-situ. Her post-operative recovery was uneventful. She was discharged on the fifth post-operative day. The patient received adjuvant
chemotherapy with ifosfamide and mesna at 14 g/m2 for two courses followed by cisplatin at 100 mg/m2 with doxorubicin at 75 mg/m2.
Chemotherapy courses were administered at 3-week intervals. She received a total of four courses of ifosfamide and two courses of cisplatin
and doxorubicin with a cumulative dose of doxorubicin of 150 mg/m2. The patient has been followed clinically as well as by serial CT imaging
of her abdomen, pelvis, and chest. She is alive without recurrence 36 months after surgery. Pathologic examination of the left lobe
resection revealed a 15.0 × 13.8 × 12.0 cm, 1,390 g well-demarcated non-encapsulated tan-gray rubbery intraparenchymal mass with diffuse
punctate hemorrhagic areas involving 95% of the specimen (Fig. 3). A focal 5.5 × 4.5 × 4.5 cm gray-white calcified area was present and a
thrombus was in a large portal vein. The surrounding liver parenchyma was tan-brown and non-cirrhotic appearing. The specimen was processed
with formalin fixation and paraffin embedding. Figure 3Cut surface of the resection specimen shows a tan-gray, rubbery, firm well-demarcated
tumor with multifocal areas of hemorrhage and a thrombus at the right upper portion of the specimen. The scale shows centimeters. Cut
surface of the resection specimen shows a tan-gray, rubbery, firm well-demarcated tumor with multifocal areas of hemorrhage and a thrombus
at the right upper portion of the specimen. The scale shows centimeters. Histological examination showed an undifferentiated spindle cell
neoplasm with foci of osteoid formation. The calcified area was composed of multiple osteoid islands circumferentially surrounded by
undifferentiated malignant spindle cells. These pleomorphic spindle cells were characterized by indistinct cytoplasmic borders, vesicular
nuclei with inconspicuous nucleoli, and irregular nuclear membrane (Fig. 4). The spindle cells reacted with antibody directed against
vimentin and there was no immunostaining for smooth muscle actin (SMA), S-100, desmin, epithelial membrane antigen (EMA), CD 57, or AE1/3. A
high mitotic rate with greater than 80% staining for proliferative marker Ki-67 was seen. Tumor was present in the portal vein and in many
intra-hepatic portal vein branches. Figure 4Malignant spindle cells with high mitotic activity, lacey osteoid formation, and necrosis (H&E
×20). Malignant spindle cells with high mitotic activity, lacey osteoid formation, and necrosis (H&E ×20). Skeletal osteosarcoma is the most
common malignant bone tumor in children and adolescents. Modern multimodality therapies including surgery and multiagent chemotherapy have
produced 60–70% 3-year survival rates.2 Extraskeletal osteosarcoma is a rare entity and case descriptions can be found throughout the
literature mostly in the limbs and limb girdles.3 Even fewer are reports of parenchymal osteosarcoma, but such cases have been documented in
thyroid, kidney, gallbladder, breast, mesentery, liver, and colon.4–10 In adults, primary sarcomas of the liver are very uncommon. Attention
has been focused particularly on angiosarcoma in connection with thorotrast and polyvinyl chloride.11 Cases of primary hepatic fibrosarcoma
and leiomyosarcoma have been reported as have undifferentiated sarcomas, though these tumors are seen almost exclusively in the pediatric
age group.12 Primary osteosarcoma of the liver is an exceedingly rare neoplasm of the liver which requires that the presence of other
neoplastic components be excluded.13 It is important to note that, after extensive radiologic imaging and physical examination, no evidence
of a primary skeletal osteosarcoma was found in the patient described in this report. Sumiyoshi and Niho reported the case of a 52-year-old
man who was hospitalized for hepatic failure.14 He died 2 months after onset of symptoms. Autopsy revealed a cirrhotic liver with a large
mass with histologic features of osteosarcoma. A literature search revealed a total of seven cases of primary osteosarcoma of the liver in
humans and two case reports in animals.8,13–20 We are unaware of a pre-operative diagnosis being made on any patient with this disease. This
may be related to the rarity of the lesion or, alternatively, that if a biopsy were to return osteoid in a large liver tumor, various more
common tumors would be suspected including hepatoblastoma, hepatic teratoma, malignant mesenchymoma, carcinosarcoma, hepatic angiosarcoma,
or other hepatic sarcoma. Moreover, when mixed epithelial components are present, the pattern of differentiation is essential to
characterize the tumor. This would be impossible with only a needle biopsy. The age of patients with primary hepatic osteosarcoma in prior
reports ranged from 52 to 73 years. Each previously described case resulted in either quick progression to death after diagnosis or the
diagnosis was only established at autopsy. This case is notable for the young age at presentation (19 years old) and the prolonged disease-
free survival she has experienced following surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy with multiagent chemotherapy. Open Access This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
