With the expanding use of immunosuppressive therapies and broad-spectrum antibiotics, Candida species has become an increasingly important
cause of infections, particularly in the presence of anti-tumor necrosis factor-α therapy. We report the case of a 17-year-old female with
ulcerative colitis who developed oliguric renal failure following immunosuppressive and nephrotoxic therapy. Although urine cultures and
urinary tract imaging were negative in the face of fungemia, renal biopsy was the key to establishing the diagnosis of fungal tubulo-
interstitial nephritis as the primary reversible cause of the renal failure. The use of stronger biological agents for treating immune-
mediated diseases carries an increased risk of invasive opportunistic infections. With the expanding use of immunosuppressives and broad-
spectrum antibiotics, fungi have become an increasingly important cause of infections. Candida species may have a predilection for renal
involvement, as up to 90% of patients with disseminated candidiasis can have renal involvement at autopsy . Acute renal failure in this
population has been largely reported as a complication of urinary tract obstruction from fungal bezoar [2, 3]. Only a single case of acute
tubulointerstitial nephritis from Candida albicans in a patient receiving steroids and antibiotics has been reported to date , but the
concurrent use of nephrotoxic and immunosuppressive agents can mask the primary cause of acute renal failure. We report here for the first
time a pediatric case of oliguric acute renal failure in an immunosuppressed patient with disseminated Candida species where renal biopsy
led to the diagnosis of fungal tubulointerstitial nephritis in light of negative urine cultures and concurrent nephrotoxic therapy. A
17-year-old female with ulcerative colitis presented with colonic inflammation on biopsy despite corticosteroid treatment. Blood and urine
cultures were negative, and renal function was normal (serum creatinine 0.5 mg/dL). Infliximab was initiated at a starting infusion dose of
5 mg/kg, and the patient developed a fever. Laboratory test results were significant for an elevated white blood cell count (29.3 × 103/µL)
with band count (82%) in the face of decreased renal function (serum creatinine 1.3 mg/dL). Urinalysis revealed a specific gravity of 1.010,
trace blood, and no protein, leukocytes, nitrites, casts, or other sediment. A blood culture was positive for Candida albicans. Neither a
blood-to-urine β2-microglobulin level nor plasma β-D-glucan level were available. Stool, cerebrospinal fluid, and urine cultures were
negative. Drug therapy with intravenous fluconazole was initiated and then subsequently switched to caspofungin. A Doppler renal ultrasound
revealed enlarged echogenic kidneys with no evidence of abscess or hydronephrosis. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed the absence of
systemic infiltrates, and an echocardiogram was normal. Repeat urine cultures remained negative. Renal function continued to decline with
the emergence of oliguria (serum creatinine 7.1 mg/dL). A percutaneous renal biopsy was performed, and hemodialysis was initiated for fluid
overload and hyperphosphatemia. The renal biopsy showed severe active tubulointerstitial nephritis with budding yeast forms and pseudohyphae
consistent with Candida that were visualized within the tubules (Fig. 1). The interstitium and tubules were infiltrated with numerous
neutrophils but not eosinophils. The tubular basement membranes were disrupted, indicating likely evolution to focal renal scarring. The
glomeruli were essentially normal. Neither vasculitis nor granulomas were detected. Immunofluorescence microscopy was negative for
immunoglobulins, complement, and fibrin. Fig. 1Masson’s trichrome staining of the kidney reveals severe tubulointerstitial disease and a
relatively normal glomerulus. Magnification ×100. Insert Fungal organisms (arrows) and neutrophils are present in the tubules and adjacent
interstitium. Periodic acid-Schiff stain, magnification ×200 Masson’s trichrome staining of the kidney reveals severe tubulointerstitial
disease and a relatively normal glomerulus. Magnification ×100. Insert Fungal organisms (arrows) and neutrophils are present in the tubules
and adjacent interstitium. Periodic acid-Schiff stain, magnification ×200 Antifungal therapy was strengthened with the addition of liposomal
amphotericin B administered both intravenously and via bladder irrigation. A urine culture performed after the renal biopsy returned
positive for Candida albicans several days later. Within 1 year of discharge, the patient’s serum creatinine had stabilized to a new
baseline of 0.9 mg/dL. Before the renal biopsy, the differential diagnosis for acute renal failure in this patient included medication-
mediated nephrotoxicity, an autoimmune-mediated lupus-like syndrome or cortical necrosis that has been reported with infliximab, fungal
nephritis (obstructive versus interstitial), and endocarditis-associated nephritis [5, 6]. The absence of clinical signs of lupus together
with a negative anti-double stranded DNA antibody made the classic diagnosis of infliximab drug-induced lupus unlikely . The absence of
vegetations on the echocardiogram as well as the absence of immune-complex-mediated staining on immunohistopathology ruled out endocarditis-
associated nephritis. Doppler and magnetic resonance imaging highlighted the absence of an obstructing fungal bezoar of the urinary tract,
which is the more typical presentation of fungal-associated acute renal failure [2, 3, 8]. As illustrated in this case, the overlapping use
of anti-tumor necrosis factor (TNF) immunosuppressive therapy and nephrotoxic agents can complicate the diagnosis of acute renal failure.
The use of infliximab, similar to the use of other anti-TNF-α antibody agents, presents a particularly strong risk for severe fungal
infection via its binding to TNF, which is released by the immune system, constraining the patient’s ability to respond to infectious
stimuli [9, 10]. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) recently warned of an increase in reported invasive fungal infections with the
use of TNF blockers, based on primarily adult case reports of pulmonary involvement in histoplasmosis-endemic regions . Percutaneous renal
biopsy was key to the early establishment of fungal interstitial nephritis as a contributor to our patient’s persistent renal failure, as
standard urine cultures for fungi may take up to 4 weeks to become positive . The diffuse visible yeast forms and pseudohyphae visualized
within the tubules and interstitium on biopsy were striking given the prior absence of positive urinary cultures. Confirmation of a fungal
cause for the renal failure allowed for targeted augmentation of antifungal therapy as well as further reductions in immunosuppressive
therapy. This early detection and treatment of the fungal infection in the face of TNF-blockade with significant improvement in renal
function on follow-up was consistent with other adult case studies and is supported by a recent FDA report that over half of the patients
who experienced a delay in diagnosis ultimately died [4, 11]. In summary, the differential for acute renal failure in the immunosuppressed
fungemic pediatric patient should include fungal tubulointerstitial nephritis, particularly when other fungal risk factors exist, such as
with concurrent anti-TNF-α therapy. Early detection of such invasive infections are of increasing importance with the expanded use of TNF-
blockers to the pediatric patient population, and renal biopsy should be considered when clinical, laboratory and radiologic methods are
inconclusive. Funding for research support None. IRB approval granted April 17th, 2008 (Rady Children’s Hospital of San Diego, study
reference no. 08021C). Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License
which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
