Hemangiopericytoma is an aggressive, highly metastatic tumor of the soft tissues and meninges. Metastases have been reported in the liver,
lungs, bones and rarely other organs. To the best of our knowledge, 18 cases of pancreatic metastases have been reported, but none have been
described in the radiology literature. We report a case of hemangiopericytoma with metastasis to the pancreas and describe the CT imaging
features of hemangiopericytoma with a review of the literature. Hemangiopericytoma (HPC) is a rare mesenchymal tumor derived from pericytes
of Zimmerman. Theoretically, the tumor can occur wherever there are capillary beds, but most commonly occurs in the soft tissues of the
lower extremity, pelvis or retroperitoneum. Intracranial HPCs are less common than soft tissue HPCs and are generally associated with the
meninges. In the past, intracranial HPCs have been considered a variant form of aggressive meningioma (angioblastic meningioma). Regardless
of its location, the tumor is considered aggressive with a high rate of local recurrence and metastasis. Metastases have been described in
the liver, lung, bones and rarely other locations. The radiologic appearance of HPC, primary or metastatic, is non-specific. The tumor is
hypervascular with a well developed vascular network not dissimilar from hepatocellular carcinoma or other hypervascular metastases. Several
reports have described features that are frequently seen in these tumors but no distinguishing features have been identified. We report a
case of metastatic hemangiopericytoma with pancreatic involvement. Rare cases of pancreatic metastases of HPC have been previously described
in the English literature, but to the best of our knowledge, this is the first case report of pancreatic metastasis of HPC in the radiology
literature. A 67-year-old woman with a history of recurrent meningeal hemangiopericytoma presented for abdominal CT with symptoms of nausea,
abdominal pain and a palpable abdominal mass. Approximately 12 years earlier, the patient had undergone primary resection of a meningeal
hemangiopericytoma. This had subsequently recurred and required repeat craniotomy 3 and 8 years after primary resection. A repeat MR of the
head approximately 8 months before presentation demonstrated a third recurrence in the operative bed. Given the patient's abdominal
symptoms, CT of the abdomen was obtained at an outside institution prior to repeat craniotomy. This revealed an enhancing mass in the head
of the pancreas. Based on this finding, a dedicated CT of the pancreas was performed at our institution according to our standard arterial
and venous pancreas protocol. Following ingestion of Volumen oral contrast material and injection of 125 cc Ultravist 370 with a 50 cc
normal saline ‘chaser’, helical CT was obtained with 40 and 65 s delays using a 64 slice GE Lightspeed VCT scanner (GE Medical Systems;
Milwaukee, WI). Scanner settings for this protocol are: kVp = 120, mA = 500, 40 mm collimation, 0.675 mm slices at a pitch of 1.375:1.
Images were reconstructed into 2.5 mm slices, and coronal and curved reformats were performed to better define the anatomy prior to surgical
resection. CT revealed a well circumscribed, enhancing 6.3 x 4.9 cm mass arising from the anterior inferior aspect of the pancreatic head
(Fig. 1). Small areas of low attenuation centrally were presumed to represent necrosis. No calcification was evident. Numerous large
supplying arteries arising from the gastroduodenal and superior mesenteric arteries were noted on the parenchymal phase imaging (Fig. 2).
The biliary duct was mildly dilated but there was no significant pancreatic ductal dilatation. No definite evidence of encasement of the
adjacent vasculature was noted and no other foci of metastatic disease were appreciated in the abdomen. Figure 1CT images from the described
case demonstrating metastatic hemangiopericytoma involving the pancreas. During the parenchymal phase (A) the mass appears well defined and
heterogeneously enhancing. Multiple, prominent feeding vessels surround the mass. Subsequent venous phase imaging (B) further defines the
mass which is clearly delineated from the pancreatic parenchyma and has central areas of low attenuation consistent with necrosis. The
adjacent duodenum is compressed by resultant mass effect. Curved axial reformatting in the venous phase (C) and curved coronal reformatting
in the parenchymal phase (D) better define the position of the mass relative to the pancreatic head. The mass again appears well defined and
associated mass effect leads to pancreatic ductal dilatation and compression of the second portion of the duodenum. Numerous dilated,
feeding vessels are seen as foci of high attenuation throughout the mass on the parenchymal phase image (D). Figure 2Maximum intensity
projection reformat of the patient's large pancreatic mass. This reformatted image clearly demonstrates the multiple, large feeding vessels
which supply the mass in the head of the pancreas. Due to the plane of imaging, the pancreatic body and tail are not seen. CT images from
the described case demonstrating metastatic hemangiopericytoma involving the pancreas. During the parenchymal phase (A) the mass appears
well defined and heterogeneously enhancing. Multiple, prominent feeding vessels surround the mass. Subsequent venous phase imaging (B)
further defines the mass which is clearly delineated from the pancreatic parenchyma and has central areas of low attenuation consistent with
necrosis. The adjacent duodenum is compressed by resultant mass effect. Curved axial reformatting in the venous phase (C) and curved coronal
reformatting in the parenchymal phase (D) better define the position of the mass relative to the pancreatic head. The mass again appears
well defined and associated mass effect leads to pancreatic ductal dilatation and compression of the second portion of the duodenum.
Numerous dilated, feeding vessels are seen as foci of high attenuation throughout the mass on the parenchymal phase image (D). Maximum
intensity projection reformat of the patient's large pancreatic mass. This reformatted image clearly demonstrates the multiple, large
feeding vessels which supply the mass in the head of the pancreas. Due to the plane of imaging, the pancreatic body and tail are not seen.
Fine-needle aspiration of the mass was performed and histopathology revealed a neoplasm of high-grade spindle cells, similar in appearance
to the patient's prior meningeal tumors, compatible with metastatic hemangiopericytoma. Immunohistologic staining confirmed this diagnosis
with CD34 and vimentin positivity and cytokeratin negativity. Prior to repeat craniotomy, resection of the pancreatic mass was performed.
The patient underwent a pylorus preserving Whipple with resection of a 5 × 5 × 6.4 cm mass. Surgical pathology revealed a firm, well
circumscribed tan mass with central necrosis and hemorrhage. There was no vascular invasion, involvement of the pancreatic or biliary ducts,
or extension of the tumor through its capsule. Hemangiopericytoma (HPC) is a rare, aggressive tumor that primarily involves the soft tissues
and less commonly the meninges. The tumor is more common in men and typically occurs in the fourth or fifth decade. HPC is considered
locally aggressive with high rates of local recurrence and metastases. Local recurrence rates of up to 90% and metastatic rates of up to 33%
have been reported. The most common sites of metastases described in the literature are the liver, lungs and bones, with reports of
metastases to other organs being much less common. To the best of our knowledge, 18 cases of pancreatic metastases from primary intracranial
HPC have been described in the English language literature. The exact means of metastases is not yet understood. Lymph node metastases
appear incredibly rare, indicating that tumor cells may be hematogenously disseminated by entering damaged vessels at the time of surgical
resection. Given the rarity of these tumors, few data are available defining prognostic factors which can be used to guide future therapy.
Histologic grade has not been shown to correlate with the risk of metastasis. Additionally, recurrences and metastases have been
demonstrated to occur as long as 20 years after the primary resection. Because of the significant risk of local recurrence and high rates of
metastatic disease, some authors have recommended close follow-up with cross-sectional imaging. The imaging findings of hemangiopericytoma
are similar regardless of whether the tumor is intra- or extracranial. Alpern et al. described a small series of primary abdominal HPCs and
described CT findings of a lobulated mass with enhancing solid components, cystic areas and speckled calcification as ‘suggestive of, but
not specific for, hemangiopericytoma’. Calcifications and cystic areas were less commonly found in other series. The finding of a highly
vascular mass appears common among all reports. HPCs are frequently described to have well developed vascular networks with a dense
capillary blush on angiography and intense enhancement on CT. Given that these findings are non-specific, a differential diagnosis of
hypervascular pancreatic masses should be considered. The primary differential diagnoses include: neuroendocrine tumor, renal cell carcinoma
metastasis, intrapancreatic portal cavernoma, and intrapancreatic accessory spleen. Differentiation among these lesions is primarily based
on the clinical history. Renal cell metastases occur in patients with a history of a primary renal lesion. Neuroendocrine tumors are
predominately identified in patients with von Hippel Lindau or endocrine abnormalities such as hyperinsulinemia, but can also occur
sporadically. Functioning neuroendocrine tumors typically present as small enhancing lesions while non-functioning tumors are usually larger
at presentation. Intrapancreatic portal cavernoma occurs in the setting of portal venous occlusion and appears as a tangle of engorged
collateral vessels within the pancreas. Intrapancreatic accessory spleen cannot be differentiated on the basis of history but are primarily
located in the tail of the pancreas and should have an enhancement pattern which follows that of the spleen. In addition to
hypervascularity, the vast majority of HPCs have been described as either well circumscribed or encapsulated without invasion of the
adjacent organ parenchyma. These features were observed in the case described herein. Rare cases in the literature have been described to
have a more invasive profile. In a previous report of the CT findings of hepatic metastasis of HPC, Shin et al. described an ill defined
mass with areas of sclerosis and minimal contrast enhancement. These characteristics appear to be the exception rather than the rule, and it
should be noted that MR examination of the same lesion revealed a well circumscribed mass which did not appear infiltrative. The prospective
identification of hemangiopericytoma on CT, whether primary soft tissue or metastatic intracranial, will remain difficult despite multiple
case reports of this entity. The tumor is rare and the imaging findings are non-specific and similar to the findings of hypervascular
primary and secondary tumors. However, in the setting of a patient with a known primary HPC, a hypervascular/enhancing, well encapsulated
lesion in distant organs, such as liver, lung or pancreas, as described in this case, should be considered to possibly represent metastatic
disease.
