Schistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia, bilharziasis, bilharziosis or snail fever) is a human disease syndrome caused by infection from
one of several species of parasitic trematodes of the genus Schistosoma. The three main species infecting humans are S haematobium, S
japonicum, and S mansoni. S japonicum is most common in the fareast, mostly in China and the Philippines. We present an unusual case of S
japonicum in a 32-year-old Filipino woman who had schistosomal ova studding the peritoneal cavity and forming a mass in the right iliac
fossa. Schistosomiasis (also known as bilharzia, bilharziasis, bilharziosis or snail fever) is a human disease syndrome caused by infection
from one of several species of parasitic trematodes of the genus Schistosoma. Approximately 200 million persons are infected with
schistosomes worldwide.1 Most human schistosomiasis is caused by S haematobium, S mansoni, or S japonicum. Less prevalent species such as S
mekongi and S intercalatum may also cause systemic human disease. Less importantly, other schistosomes with avian or mammalian primary hosts
can cause severe dermatitis in humans (e.g. swimmer's itch secondary to Trichobilharzia ocellata). The parasite S japonicum is found in the
Far East, particularly China and the Philippines.12 The disease manifestations caused by S. japonicum in humans have been extensively
covered in the literature and will be reviewed in this paper. We present an unusual case of S japonicum where the patient had schistosomal
ova studding the peritoneal cavity and forming a mass in the right iliac fossa (RIF). A 32-year-old Filipino woman presented with a 5-day
history of generalized abdominal pain and a 3-day history of nausea and vomiting. The pain settled in the RIF. She was admitted with a WBC
count of 11×109/L and a temperature of 38.5° C. Ultrasound studies of the abdomen showed heterogeneous echogenicity of the liver (Figure 1).
CT examination showed multiple calcific foci throughout the abdomen, particularly in the RIF. Prominent small bowel dilatation and fluid
collection in the pouch of Douglas were also noted (Figure 2). The liver appeared surprisingly normal on the CT study. Diagnostic
laparoscopy was immediately converted to an open laparotomy once a RIF mass with pus involving the appendix was seen. Dilated small bowel
loops were present in the RIF and next to the spleen. The mass was dissected and released and the appendix was removed, after which the
small intestinal obstruction subsided. Intraoperatively, multiple whitish yellow peritoneal nodules were noted covering the abdominal
peritoneal surface and the surface of the liver. The liver, however, did not appear to be cirrhotic. On gross examination, the appendix was
severely congested, measured 6×2×1 cm and showed an area of perforation at the body. The adherent omentum had focal areas of pus, and in
other areas, firm yellow white nodules were present. The microscopic sections showed the appendiceal wall studded with schistosomal ova
(Figure 3). Furthermore polymorphonuclear leukocytes were also seen in the wall along with areas of suppurative inflammation and necrosis.
Sections from the adherent omental mass also showed suppurative inflammation and multiple foci of shistosomal ova. The ova were oval to
round in shape and showed outpouchings highly indicative of S japonicum species (Figure 4). No granulomatous response was present in the
sections examined. Stains for bacterial, fungal and acid fast organisms were all negative. The histopathologic diagnosis was acute
suppurative appendicitis and peritonitis with disseminated schistosomal ova involving the appendix and omentum. Ultrasound of the liver
shows heterogenous echogenicity. CT scan shows multiple dilated small bowel loops with multiple calcific peritoneal deposits. Appendiceal
wall studded with schistosomal ova (hematoxylin and eosin stain ×200). Schistosoma Japonicum ova with characteristic lateral outpouchings
(hematoxylin and eosin stain ×200). From a clinical perspective S japonicum usually causes an acute serum sickness also called ‘Katayama’
fever,3 which is associated with the onset of the female parasite laying eggs (approximately 5 weeks after infection) and granuloma
formation around eggs trapped in the liver and intestinal wall. It manifests with hepatosplenomegaly and leucocytosis with eosinophilia.
This phase of the infection is often asymptomatic, but when symptoms do occur they include fever, nausea, headache, an irritating cough and,
in extreme cases, diarrhea accompanied with blood, mucus and necrotic material. These symptoms, if present, last from a few weeks, to
several months and are not as commonly associated with S hematobium or S mansoni infections compared with those of S japonicum. The chronic
phase of infection, however, is the more important part of the infection.3 From a pathological perspective, common morphological
manifestations of the chronic phase are intestinal and hepatic schistosomiasis. Both manifest a number of years after infection. A large
autopsy study involving 349 cases showed that the dominant pathology is evident in the liver.4 The pathogenic reaction is a cellular,
granulomatous inflammation around eggs trapped in the tissues, with subsequent fibrosis. Specific liver pathology was destruction of
limiting plates, reparative hepatic lesions such as regeneration of the collapsed parenchyma, newly formed limiting plates and subsequent
narrowing and disappearance of fibrous septa. In more chronic lesions, fibrosis and cirrhosis are seen. Complications of liver cirrhosis and
hepatocellular carcinoma related to viral hepatitis B and/or C were also increased. Clonorchiasis was also consistently found.4 All areas of
both the small and large intestine may be involved, with the large intestine showing the most severe lesions, whereas severe pathology in
the small intestine is only rarely observed, even though a large number of eggs may be deposited there.5 The theory is that the adult worms
have a predilection for inhabiting the branches of the inferior mesenteric vein and superior haemorrhoidal vein and their eggs are deposited
in much higher density in the large intestine, especially in the rectum, sigmoid and descending colon, than in the small intestine.5
Gastrointestinal findings may include polyp formation. The friable vascular nature of these inflammatory polyps may lead to lower
gastrointestinal bleeding.6 Large polyps, or bilharziomas, may cause intestinal obstruction, intussusception, or be confused with a
malignancy.7 Colonic polyps are of higher prevalence in Egypt for reasons that are not clear.8 Other cited gastrointestinal findings may
include strictures, fistulae and bowel perforation.79 S japonicum eggs may also be deposited in the appendix and may manifest as
appendicitis. Schistosomal appendicitis acquired in a traveler has been described.10 Liver-related and gastrointestinal complications can be
prevented with early recognition and therapy of schistosomiasis. In a radiologic study of 12 patients that underwent CT of the abdomen to
detect what proved to be S japonicum by pathologic examination, the CT demonstrated curvilinear or nodular calcification in the colon in 11
patients, in the appendix in 2, and in the distal ileum in 1 patient. Pathologic examination of the specimens showed calcified eggs of S
japonicum deposited more extensively in the submucosa and subserosa than in the muscularis propria, which led to the curvilinear
appearance.6 The pathology in the liver is similar to that seen in the intestine, with a cellular, granulomatous inflammation around eggs
trapped in the liver, leading to fibrosis and hepatosplenic disease and subsequent cirrhosis in chronic disease. Studies on the effect of S
japonicum and the liver have been recorded since the early 1970s from endemic areas. Kurniawan et al studied 52 S japonicum-infected
patients from an endemic area in Indonesia.11 All of these patients exhibited signs and symptoms of chronic hepato-splenic schistosomiasis.
None of the patients showed evidence of liver cirrhosis on histopathological examination. However, varying degrees of portal fibrosis were
exhibited and the authors concluded that liver biopsy has proved to be a valuable method of diagnosis in this particular type of infection.
S japonicum resides in the mesenteric veins which drain to the liver, and therefore causes liver fibrosis after depositing in that organ.12
A study of the ultrasound and CT scan findings of patients with biopsy-proven hepatic S japonicum revealed characteristic findings.13 They
observed a “network pattern of calcification” on ultrasound and a “turtle-back” pattern on contrast CT scan. Laparoscopic findings of nine
patients with chronic S japonicum were analyzed and compared with histological findings from the same patients.14 In all nine patients
laparoscopy revealed yellowish, small speckles clustered over the liver surface, which were later found to be the subcapsular calcified ova
of S japonicum. While the liver surface was almost smooth in mild schistosomiasis, multiple whitish markings and irregular, relatively wide,
groove-like septums were seen in more advanced cases. In severe schistosomiasis, block-like formations of variable size, separated by
groove-like depressions, made the liver surface appear like a tortoise shell on the CT scan. Other organs may rarely contain granulomas
around eggs, like the Breast15 and fallopian tube.16 What is unusual and novel about our case from a morphologic perspective is that there
has not been a reported case in the English language literature of S japonicum disseminating and covering the peritoneum in this. The
patient was lost to followaup and no colonoscopy was done to rule out any colonic pathology which may have been present in the patient.
Similarly, the liver might have been involved with S japonicum ova, as suspicious nodular lesions were seen studding the surface of the
liver intraoperatively, but no liver biopsy was performed. The liver enzymes were normal in the patient and no overt liver cirrhosis was
present. The other unusual feature was the lack of a granulomatous reaction in the tissue examined in our laboratory.
