To the Editor: Tuberculosis is a chronic wasting disease in domestic birds (especially hens) and free-ranging birds worldwide (1). Most
mycobacterial infections in birds are caused by Mycobacterium avium subsp. avium (mainly domestic birds) or by M. genavense (especially pet
birds). Nontuberculous (potentially pathogenic) mycobacteria (i.e., M. fortuitum, M. gordonae, and M. nonchromogenicum) occasionally have
been isolated from necropsied pet birds (2). Because potentially pathogenic mycobacteria also are increasingly problematic in
immunocompromised human patients, they merit special attention. M. avium subsp. hominissuis can infect humans, especially immunocompromised
persons. M. avium subsp. hominissuis infections have been documented in pigs and cattle (3) and rarely in dogs (4), birds (5), and other
animals. We report a case of Mycobacterium infection in a female blue-fronted Amazon parrot (Amazona aestiva; pet bird) ≈6 months of age
that was brought to a clinic because of inappetence over a 3-day period and polydipsia and yellow coloration of urine. Clinical examination
showed slight emaciation, heavy biliverdinuria, ascites, and melena. By coprologic examination, 3 eggs of Ascaridia sp. worms were found in
1 field of view using 40× magnification. A Gram stain of fecal material showed sporadic gram-positive rods. On the basis of these signs,
chlamydiosis was suspected. Differential diagnosis suggested liver cirrhosis, neoplasia, and Pacheco disease. Enrofloxacin (Baytril 2.5%
injectable; Bayer AG, Frankfurt am Main, Germany) was administered subcutaneously (0.15 mL injected subcutaneously) and albendazole (Aldifal
2.5% suspension; Mevak a.s., Nitra, Slovakia) were administered orally (0.2 mL injected subcutaneously). The bird died 1 day later. Necropsy
showed ascites (clear yellowish fluid), hepatomegaly (stiff liver consistency, yellow-pink), mild splenomegaly, and hemorrhagic enteritis
with thickening of the intestinal wall; the finding of hemorrhagic enteritis was unclear because the intestinal mucosa was hyperemic and
covered with a thick layer of viscous mucus that contained blood. Twenty worms (Ascaridia sp.) were observed in the intestinal lumen.
Histopathologic examination showed diffused liver fibrosis with cystic dilatation of the bile ducts and focal extramedullary hematopoiesis.
The hepatic parenchyma was nearly completely atrophic. Only some clusters of atrophic hepatocytes were observed. The other organs (kidneys,
spleen, lungs, brain, and intestines) were free of histopathologic lesions. Hypertrophic cirrhosis (chronic active hepatitis) was diagnosed.
Neither granulomatous nor other lesions were observed. After Ziehl-Neelsen stain of tissue impressions, acid-fast rods (AFRs) were
microscopically detected in the liver and intestine. Cultivation according to Matlova et al. (6) grew 6 acid-fast rod–positive isolates from
9 examined tissue specimens. A PCR assay confirmed M. avium spp., and a subsequent PCR assay for M. avium differentiation indicated M. avium
subsp. hominissuis (IS1245+ and IS901–); both PCR assays were performed as described (7). The M. avium subsp. hominissuis isolate was
classified as serotype 9. Typing of all isolates by IS1245 restriction fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis according to Van
Soolingen et al. (8) showed 2 different multibanded IS1245 RFLP types, which varied in only 1 band position (Table). *ZN, Ziehl-Neelsen
microscopy of homogenate for acid-fast rods; RFLP, restriction fragment length polymorphism; –, not detected/negative; +,
detected/positive. †PCR for IS1245 and IS901 was carried out according to the method described in (7). ‡Culture examination performed as
described by Matlova et al. (6); colony-forming units per isolation are shown in parentheses. §Standardized IS1245 RFLP method was performed
according to Van Soolingen et al. (8). M. avium subsp. hominissuis is not considered an avian pathogen and rarely has been isolated from
tuberculous lesions (5). However, our case study reports the isolation of M. avium subsp. hominissuis from multiple organs of 1 exotic bird
that had developmental anomaly and liver fibrosis (Table). In addition to a few nonspecific gross lesions, nontuberculous lesions were
observed in the liver, spleen, and intestinal organs. The etiology of mycobacteriosis, especially in pet birds, is rarely identified. This
may be because intravitam and postmortem findings are nonspecific. Infection with M. avium subsp. hominissuis may not lead to tuberculous
lesions in birds, particularly when the infection occurs without complications. Susceptibility to mycobacterial infection, including M.
avium subsp. hominissuis , depends on the host’s immune and nutritional status, environmental conditions unfavorable for the host, and
genetic factors (1,9). Consistent with these reports, in this case, the histologic findings such as fibrosis of the liver associated with
cystic dilatation and intestinal ascaris infestation may have aggravated the intensity of the mycobacterial infection. IS1245 RFLP analysis
showed isolates with 2 profiles that differ in the presence of only 1 band. The additional band in the rest of the isolates probably
represents the transpositional event. The variability in 1 or 2 bands of 1 strain was also observed previously (10); therefore, we presume
the bird was infected by only 1 strain of M. avium subsp. hominissuis . Unfortunately, the source of infection for this bird was not
identified. A multibanded IS1245 RFLP profile was described in a M. avium isolate from a parrot (4), but no details about this case were
given. Our findings suggest that owners of pet birds and their family members may be at risk from this pathogenic causal agent. Hence,
immunocompromised persons, children, and others involved in the breeding of exotic birds should avoid contact with birds with clinically
suspected M. avium subsp. hominissuis . Suggested citation for this article: Shitaye EJ, Grymova V, Grym M, Halouzka R, Horvathova A,
Moravkova M, et al. Mycobacterium avium subsp. hominissuis infection in a pet parrot . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Apr
[date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/4/617.htm We thank Eva Slezakova for technical assistance. We also thank
Ludmila Faldikova and Neysan Donnelly for their critical grammatical corrections. This study was supported by grant nos. MZE0002716201 and
NPV 1B53009 from the Ministry of Agriculture of the Czech Republic and PathogenCombat (no. FOOD-CT-2005-007081, Brussels, EC).
