Intrahepatic arterial aneurysms are rare and typically related to trauma, transplantation, iatrogenic injury, or infection. They account for
approximately 10% of clinically significant hemobilia. We present the case of a 49-year-old man with an intraparenchymal hepatic artery
aneurysm that presented as massive hemobilia following a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The aneurysm could not be managed by interventional
embolization and required a left hepatic lobectomy, which was performed laparoscopically. Evaluation of hemobilia requires a
multidisciplinary team approach. The diagnosis of hepatic artery aneurysm can be most readily made by MRI or CT scan. Interventional
embolization of the aneurysm may be effective treatment but is not always possible due to anatomic considerations. Where indicated, surgical
resection in a manner that preserves a maximal amount of normal hepatic parenchyma is the treatment of choice. This is the first report of
laparoscopic liver resection performed for bleeding from a hepatic artery aneurysm and adds an effective treatment modality to the surgical
armamentarium. Hemobilia, the phenomenon of bleeding into the biliary tree, from an intrahepatic aneurysm is an extremely rare occurrence.
Hepatic artery aneurysms account for approximately 10% of hemobilia cases, and most are related to trauma, transplantation, surgical injury,
or infection.1 Hemobilia caused by an intrahepatic arterial aneurysm is rare and presents a challenging medical diagnosis. Currently,
several potential therapeutic options are available, including embolization, stenting, and resection. The choice of treatment must consider
the acuity of the bleeding and the anatomic location of the aneurysm as well as the underlying cause. The role of laparoscopic liver
resection in the treatment of a bleeding hepatic artery aneurysm has not been evaluated previously. We report on a 49-year-old male with
massive hemobilia, a recent laparoscopic cholecystectomy, a past medical history of hypertension, and a newly diagnosed aortic dissection.
We present the diagnostic approach, a review of the literature, and treatments for hemobilia caused by an intrahepatic aneurysm. In this
case, laparoscopic left hepatic lobectomy was performed for definitive treatment. A 49-year-old African-American male with abdominal pain
and dark tarry stools was seen at a community hospital. He had a past medical history significant only for hypertension. He had developed
right upper quadrant pain and had passed several dark melanotic stools over 2 days. Hospital admission laboratory tests showed his
hemoglobin and hematocrit were 5.3 and 16.8, respectively. He required transfusion of several units of packed red blood cells but remained
hemodynamically stable. An ultrasound demonstrated gallbladder sludge, stones, and thickening consistent with cholecystitis. Within 72 hours
of admission, the patient's hematocrit became stable, and he did not require further transfusion. A laparoscopic cholecystectomy was
performed. During back-table dissection of the gallbladder, coagulated blood was found. Postoperatively, the patient had further
gastrointestinal bleeding with significant drops in hemoglobin and hematocrit requiring repeated transfusions. He received 7 units of blood
within 48 hours after cholecystectomy and was transferred to our hepatobiliary service for further treatment. A CT scan with intravenous
contrast was obtained. The CT scan revealed a previously undiagnosed aortic dissection beginning just distal to the left subclavian artery
and terminating at the level of the left renal artery. The scan also showed intrahepatic biliary dilatation and an accompanying left hepatic
artery aneurysm with associated outpouching of the right portal vein that likely represented a venous varix (Figure 1a). An MRA was obtained
to further define the hepatic vascular abnormalities. The MRA showed a lobulated area in the left lobe of the liver, which measured 3cm by
3cm, highly suggestive of a portal venous varix (Figure 1b). A. CT scan demonstrating left lobe hepatic artery aneurysm and aortic
dissection. B. Sagittal MRI with lobular vascular abnormality in left hepatic lobe. The aortic dissection was thought to be stable, not
requiring intervention. The options for treatment of the hepatic vascular/biliary abnormality included embolization by interventional
techniques or hepatic resection. As an initial treatment approach, an arteriogram with embolization was attempted. The arteriogram and
subsequent catheter placement were technically challenging, secondary to the aortic dissection with prominent false and true lumens. The
catheter was guided to the common hepatic artery and further to the left hepatic artery; however, secondary to high-grade stenosis at the
origin of the left hepatic artery aneurysm, the catheter could not be advanced, preventing embolization. Definitive treatment required a
left hepatic lobectomy. The laparoscopic approach consisted of four 12-mm ports. Intraoperative ultrasound duplex was used to identify the
location of the aneurysm with the left lobe of the liver. A plane of resection that maximized preservation of normal parenchyma was marked
using cautery. The hepatic parenchyma was divided using the LigaSure Altas. The left portal vein and left hepatic artery were divided
intrahepatically by using a 45-mm laparoscopic linear stapler, with 2.5-mm staples. Ultimately, the left hepatic vein was isolated and
similarly divided. A 5-cm left subcostal incision was made to remove the specimen. The specimen contained a large aneurysm with connection
to the biliary system (Figure 2). The final pathology was consistent with an aneurysm that communicated with the biliary system and also
demonstrated thrombi in adjacent portal vein tributaries. The patient had an uncomplicated hospital course without further bleeding. He was
discharged on postoperative day 3. Specimen after resection with 2-cm aneurysm. A hepatic artery aneurysm is very rare but potentially life-
threatening. Of the visceral arteries most prone to true aneurysmal formation, the splenic and hepatic arteries are most common. Splenic and
hepatic aneurysms account for 60% and 20% of all visceral artery aneurysms, respectively.2,3 Hepatic artery aneurysms may occur anywhere
along the hepatic arterial system, both external to the liver and within the liver parenchyma. Seventy-seven percent of hepatic aneurysms
are confined to the segment proximal to the liver, 20% have combined intra- and extraparenchymal involvement, and 3% are exclusively within
the liver.4 Excluding traumatic aneurysms, patients most commonly present within the sixth decade of life.5 There is a male predominance
(approximately 3:2). Historically, most hepatic artery aneurysms have been mycotic in origin.6 Today, nearly 50% of hepatic aneurysms are
traumatic in nature. Traumatic hepatic aneurysms typically result from either trauma (car accidents) or are iatrogenic, resulting from a
diagnostic procedure.7 The remainder is associated with medial degeneration and secondary atherosclerosis, with hypertension as the
predominant comorbid condition. Interestingly, the populations most at risk for developing hepatic aneurysms are patients with fibromuscular
dysplasia or polyarteritis nodosa.4 Most hepatic aneurysms are found incidentally on CT scan or angiography.2 Patients with symptoms often
present with hemobilia and melena. Abdominal pain is associated with rapidly expanding aneurysms. Decompression into the biliary tree with
resulting hemobilia is more common than free rupture is into the abdominal cavity.4 Hemobilia is an unusual cause of upper gastrointestinal
bleeding. In recent years, hemobilia has increased in incidence, presumably secondary to increasing numbers of surgical and interventional
radiologic procedures involving the liver.8 Approximately 10% of hemobilia cases are associated with a hepatic artery aneurysm.1 The most
common symptoms associated with hemobilia are jaundice (30%), biliary colic (52%), and gastrointestinal hemorrhage (73%). These 3 symptoms
are referred to as Quincke's classic triad of hemobilia. The complete triad occurs in approximately 20% of symptomatic patients.8 Once an
upper gastrointestinal (UGI) bleed is suspected, endoscopy is the first-line diagnostic modality. If blood or clot is seen at the ampulla of
Vater, hemobilia is highly likely. However, only 12% of the upper endoscopies done to evaluate acute UGI bleeding are diagnostic.9 The
choice between other diagnostic modalities depends on patient history and clinical examination. Radiologic studies, such as computed
tomography, abdominal sonography, magnetic resonance, and angiography, are all potentially useful in identifying hepatic arterial
abnormalities. Angiography can detect the source of significant hemobilia in over 90% of patients, allowing for localization of the vascular
abnormality and possible therapeutic stenting or embolization.10 Treatment options for intrahepatic versus extrahepatic aneurysms are quite
different. The ultimate goal is to prevent or stop active hemorrhage and relieve any associated biliary obstruction. For extrahepatic
aneurysm excision, arterial reconstruction or intraarterial stenting to affect aneurysm exclusion are the most effective options.11 Ligation
is considered as definitive treatment where no other options exist. If the aneurysm is intrahepatic, transarterial embolization is the
first-line treatment. Embolization has a success rate of between 80% and 100% in some reports and a lower morbidity and mortality rate
compared with that in open surgery.10 Embolization can maximize preservation of hepatic parenchyma. If embolization fails or is
contraindicated, surgical intervention, such as ligation of the artery or aneurysm excision, should be considered.11 Laparoscopic surgery
for hemobilia caused by a hepatic artery aneurysm has not been described previously in the literature. In centers experienced in
laparoscopic liver resection, this approach adds an additional treatment modality. In our patient, laparoscopic resection allowed for
complete removal of the aneurysm, preventing further bleeding or other potential complications that could result from a vascular-biliary
fistula. Hemobilia secondary to intrahepatic aneurysm in a patient with newly diagnosed aortic dissection is a rare finding. A systematic
approach to hemobilia should be followed to decrease morbidity and mortality. Embolization is a first-line therapy for intrahepatic
aneurysms but could not be accomplished in this case secondary to stenosis and anatomic limitations imposed by aortic dissection. In this
case, laparoscopic left lobe resection provided definitive treatment without complications. Increasing familiarity with laparoscopic liver
resection in centers familiar with the techniques involved provides additional options for patient treatment that may expedite treatment and
enhance patient recovery.
