Natural orifice surgery has evolved from a preclinical setting into a common occurrence at the University of California San Diego (UCSD).
With close to 40 transvaginal cases, we have become comfortable with this technique and are exploring other indications. One of the
perceived advantages in natural orifice surgery is the potential reduction in the incidence of hernia formation. Patients with abdominal
wall hernias may be at increased risk of forming additional hernias at incision sites. In addition, patients with recurrent incisional
hernias may, likewise, be at increased risk. We believe that reducing or eliminating abdominal wall incisions may be of benefit in the
repair of abdominal wall hernias. Here, we describe what we believe to be the first natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgical (NOTES)
approach to the repair of an abdominal wall hernia. The patient is a 38-year-old female with a painful recurrent umbilical hernia,
previously repaired 8 years prior with a polypropylene-based mesh. The patient underwent a transvaginal recurrent umbilical hernia repair
with one other 5-mm port in the abdomen for safety. The patient had no intraoperative or postoperative complications. At 5 months follow up,
the patient had no complaints, no evidence of hernia recurrence, and was very pleased with her result. The repair of primary and incisional
hernias of the ventral abdominal wall via a transvaginal approach is technically feasible, and the result of our initial case was
exceptional. However, there are still significant obstacles which must be addressed before this approach can be widely utilized. These
obstacles include safe entrance into the abdominal cavity via a transvaginal approach, the proper mesh to be placed during the repair, and
the risk of infection. Natural orifice surgery has evolved from a preclinical setting into a common occurrence at the University of
California San Diego (UCSD). With close to 40 transvaginal cases, we have become comfortable with this technique and are exploring other
indications. The laparoscopic repair of recurrent umbilical defects, or defects greater than 3 cm in size, has been shown to decrease
recurrence rates . We have chosen to further investigate the benefits of laparoscopy by applying a natural orifice approach. One of the
perceived advantages in natural orifice surgery is the potential reduction in the incidence of hernia formation. Patients with abdominal
wall hernias may be at increased risk of forming additional hernias at incision sites. In addition, patients with recurrent incisional
hernias may, likewise, be at increased risk. We believe that reducing or eliminating abdominal wall incisions may be of benefit in the
repair of abdominal wall hernias. To this end, a preclinical research protocol in transvaginal incisional herniorrhaphy was undertaken in a
porcine model. After obtaining comfort with the technical procedure, the work was translated into the clinical arena. Here, we describe what
we believe to be the first natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgical (NOTES) approach to the repair of an abdominal wall hernia. The
patient is a 38-year-old female with a painful recurrent umbilical hernia who was repaired 8 years prior with a polypropylene-based mesh.
The patient has had three children since the time of her repair and had a recurrence of her umbilical hernia, which was approximately
2 × 2 cm in size. The patient denied any obstructive signs or symptoms, but rated her daily pain at the site as 5/10. Her past medical and
surgical history is only pertinent for a cesarean section and the aforementioned hernia repair. The risks, benefits, and alternatives to a
transvaginal incisional hernia repair were explained to the patient in detail and she agreed to proceed. She was consented under an approved
UCSD transvaginal incisional hernia repair institutional review board (IRB) protocol. Importantly, all current UCSD NOTES protocols
stipulate that an abdominal port be utilized for visualization of the transvaginal access. The patient was brought to the operating room,
sequential compression devices applied, 1 g of cefazolin was given, and general anesthesia induced without complication. The patient was
placed in the lithotomy position and prepped and draped in standard sterile fashion. This included a vaginal prep with betadine. A lower
left quadrant 5-mm trocar was placed below the pubic hairline using optical assistance. The abdomen was then insufflated and the peritoneal
cavity inspected. A well incorporated mesh was noted in the umbilical region with a small herniation of falciform material through a 2-cm
defect superiorly. Given that the mesh was well incorporated and peritonealized, it was left in place. The cervix was then sequentially
dilated and a uterine sound placed. A uterine retractor was then placed and a 15-mm dual-lumen trocar (Applied Medical) was placed through
the retrocervical cul-de-sac. A sterile endoscope was placed into the abdomen (Fig. 1). The dual-lumen trocar allows for placement of the
scope, as well as another 5-mm rigid or flexible instrument. The herniated falciform was then dissected free of the fascial edges using a
combination of endoscopic and flexible instrumentation delivered through the vaginal port. Next, the peritoneum was cleared superiorly
approximately 4 cm using the same method. Having dissected the facial edges free, the defect was then re-approximated primarily in the
manner of Franklin et al. . This was done transcutaneously using a suture passer through the center of the skin overlying the defect, and
sequentially passing an 0-Ethibond suture approximately 1 cm lateral to each fascial edge. Next, a 7 × 7-cm Flex HD acellular human dermis
mesh (Johnson & Johnson) was inserted through the vaginal trocar once four anchoring Ethibond sutures were tied to the corners. A needle
passer was passed in four quadrants, tacking the mesh in a transfascial manner. Lastly, a ProTack (Autosuture) device was used to anchor the
remainder of the material to the patient’s anterior abdominal wall at approximately 1-cm intervals circumferentially (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Entrance
of the vaginal trocarFig. 2Final view of the hernia repair Entrance of the vaginal trocar Final view of the hernia repair The abdomen was
inspected and had good hemostasis; the 5-mm abdominal port was removed. The gynecology team then closed the patient’s vaginal access site
with a 2-0 Vicryl suture in a running fashion. The 5-mm trocar was removed and the skin closed with a 4-0 Monocryl suture. The patient was
extubated and taken to recovery in a stable condition. The patient was admitted to the hospital for observation as per the IRB and was
discharged on postoperative day 2 in good health. At 6 weeks postoperative follow up, the patient was doing well without complaints. She was
then seen at 3 and 5 months and is still completely satisfied with her repair. The repair of primary and incisional hernias of the ventral
abdominal wall via a transvaginal approach is technically feasible, and the result of our initial case was exceptional. However, there are
still significant obstacles which must be addressed before this approach can be widely utilized. The primary concern of the surgical team is
for the safety of the patient. Some have suggested that blind or primary access of the vagina for natural orifice surgery is safe [3, 4]. We
do not agree. At this time, we still believe that visualization of the trocar insertion through the vagina is necessary. Though all of the
key steps of the described operation were performed utilizing the vaginal access port, we still believe that blind access to the abdomen
with a trocar through the vagina may put the patient at risk for visceral or vascular injury. An additional concern in the application of
natural orifice surgery to the repair of ventral hernias is the selection of the proper material for the hernia repair. Several authors have
described the preclinical technical aspects of NOTES hernia repair in a cadaver or animal model, and most have questioned whether a
prosthetic material can be used in regard to potential mesh infection [5, 6]. We believe this to be a very valid point. Additionally, many
recurrent ventral hernias have also had prior implantation of prosthetic materials, as did this patient. Her mesh was firmly incorporated
and peritonealized. Given this, we decided to progress with the operation. Had the initial mesh been exposed or not incorporated, we would
have abandoned the NOTES approach in favor of a more traditional method. We do not believe that there is sufficient preclinical data from
our own laboratory, or others, to advocate the placement of a prosthetic device in the face of transvaginal or transgastric abdominal
access. Therefore, we used a biologic material for the repair. The use of biologic materials for abdominal wall reconstruction in
contaminated or infected fields is well established . However, there is increasing concern that the re-herniation rate will be unacceptably
high if the material is used to bridge the defect, rather than to buttress an appropriately re-approximated fascia . Fascial re-
approximation was fairly simple with this small defect, but this severely limits the patient population which may benefit from a natural
orifice approach to ventral hernias. For the procedure to have widespread utilization, prosthetic devices will have to be used. Further work
in the preclinical area is necessary to evaluate potential infectious complications. One of the main benefits that we have seen in our
transvaginal cholecystectomy population has been the reduction of postoperative pain. While our patient was fairly comfortable
postoperatively, she still experienced some pain (5/10) at the transfacial fixation sutures on postoperative day 1. Whether or not these
sutures are still necessary when using a material that is ultimately absorbed or incorporated is questionable. There are no large case
series from which to draw observations in regard to the laparoscopic placement of biologic materials for the repair of ventral hernias.
Given the minimal penetration of the abdominal tacks into the posterior fascia once passed through biologic material, we still believe them
to be necessary. The initial application of natural orifice techniques to the repair of an abdominal wall defect was technically feasible
and clinically successful. The patient presented here did very well postoperatively, with minimal complaints of pain or any signs of
infection. She has no signs of recurrence at 5 months. The outcome from this operation was encouraging and we look toward further
investigation to answer the aforementioned questions noted in this paper. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author(s) and source are credited.
