In cases of large hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), neoadjuvant treatment such as transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) and radiation therapy
can be performed. The aim of this study was to evaluate the outcome of these treatments prior to hepatic resection. Between January 1994 and
May 2007, 16 patients with HCC greater than 5 cm in size were treated with TACE and radiation therapy prior to hepatic resection. The
clinicopathologic factors were reviewed retrospectively. Of the 16 patients, there were 14 men and two women, and the median age was 52.5
yr. TACE was performed three times in average, and the median radiation dosage was 45 Gy. The median diameter of tumor on specimen was 9.0
cm. The degree of tumor necrosis was more than 90% in 14 patients. The median survival time was 13.3 months. Five patients had survived more
than 2 yr and there were two patients who had survived more than 5 yr. Although the prognosis of large HCC treated with neoadjuvant therapy
is not satisfactory, some showed long-term survival loger than 5 yr. Further research will be required to examine the survival and disease
control effect in a prospective randomized study. Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common malignancy in the world (1) and
the third most common cause of death due to cancer in Korea (2). Multiple treatment modalities are available for patients with HCC, and
hepatic resection has been successful as a treatment option with curative intent (3). However, more than 80% of patients are not candidates
for surgical resection at the time of diagnosis due to advanced lesions and/or associated liver disease (4). In those cases, clinicians are
confronted with the difficulty of selecting the optimal treatment option. The usual goals of the neoadjuvant therapy are to eradicate
subclinical disease to reduce recurrence and the tumor bulk to prevent tumor spillage during operation. In the cases of large HCC greater
than 5 cm in size, neoadjuvant treatments such as transarterial chemoembolization (TACE) and radiation therapy can be performed. Initially,
TACE was performed to treat unresectable HCC (5). Recently, TACE has been used as preoperative adjuvant therapy in patients with resectable
HCC in the hope of increasing disease-free survival rates and improving long-term results after hepatectomy (6, 7). In those cases, however,
the efficacy of improving postoperative survival remains controversial. Moreover, TACE alone frequently results in incomplete tumor necrosis
(8). Radiation therapy alone has been of limited benefit in the treatment of HCC. However, in several reports showing the results of HCC
with combined treatment of radiation and chemotherapy, a beneficial effect has been suggested (9, 10). Currently, surgical resection of
advanced HCC following neoadjuvant treatment is challenging with the development of surgical techniques. Furthermore reductive or salvage
surgery that resulted in the downstaging of unresectable HCC following palliative treatment showed some benefits for survival (11, 12). For
large HCC, efforts to increase the curative rate and survival will be important in the search for various therapeutic modalities. The
efficacy of preoperative TACE and radiation therapy prior to hepatic resection has not been extensively reported. In this retrospective
study, we analyzed sixteen patients with HCC greater than 5 cm in size that underwent hepatic resection after neoadjuvant combined TACE and
radiation therapy. Between January 1994 and May 2007, 436 patients with HCC underwent hepatic resection. Among these patients, 16 patients
with HCC of greater than 5 cm in size were given preoperative TACE and radiation therapy prior to hepatic resection at Severance Hospital,
Yonsei University College of Medicine in Seoul, Korea. Medical records, histopathology, and survival data were reviewed and analyzed
retrospectively. TACE and radiation therapy were carried out as described below. TACE was performed with an infusion of a mixture of 5 mL
iodized oil contrast medium (Lipiodol, Guerbet, Aulnay-sous-Bois, France) and 50 mg Adriamycin (Adriamycin, Ildong pharm, Seoul, Korea) and
followed by embolization using gelatin sponge particles (Cutanplast, Mascia Bruneili Spa, Milano, Italy). Patients that received radiation
therapy in the primary lesion of the liver were included in the study, whereas patients who received radiation therapy in the extrahepatic
metastatic organs were excluded. Simulating computed tomography (CT) scans were taken to determine the radiation volume for each patient,
including the tumors with 2-3 cm margin. We investigated the effect of preoperative TACE and radiation therapy through the reduction of the
tumor size. We also evaluated the level of alpha-fetoprotein (AFP), Indocyanine Green retention rate at 15 min (ICG-R 15), Child-Pugh
classification, operative factors, and pathologic results-tumor size and number, the presence of vessel invasion, the extent of tumor
necrosis, and resection margin and stage according to the Japanese TNM classification (13). The effectiveness of preoperative therapy on
tumor response was evaluated by comparing serial CT scans before and after treatment. The response evaluation criteria in solid tumors
(RECIST) (14) was used for evaluation of the tumor response. The RECIST uses unidimensional measurement. Complete disappearance of the tumor
was considered as a complete response (CR). A reduction of at least 30% in the sum of the longest diameters of target lesions, taking as
reference the baseline study, was considered a partial response (PR). An increase of at least 20% in the sum of the longest diameters of
target lesions, taking as reference the smallest sum of the longest diameters recorded since treatment started or new lesions appeared, was
regarded as a progressive disease (PD). However, neither the PR nor PD criteria were met, taking as reference the smallest sum of the
longest diameters recorded since treatment started was regarded as a stable disease (SD). All patients received anatomical hepatic
resections with the goal of achieving negative resection margins. In most patients, however, due to the cirrhosis and liver atrophy
accompanied by huge liver mass, the achievement of enough resection margins being greater than 1 cm was difficult. Patients were followed up
at 1 month after operation and then every 3 months. Patients were screened for AFP, and they underwent dynamic CT. When intrahepatic
recurrence was suspected, most of the patients underwent hepatic angiography or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) to confirm the existence of
recurrence. Statistical calculations were performed using SPSS, version 13.0 for Windows (SPSS Inc. Chicago, IL, U.S.A.). Overall survival
and recurrence rates were calculated using the Kaplan-Meier method. The 16 patients examined in the study included 14 men and two women with
a median age of 52.5 yr (ranging from 22-70 yr). The clinicopathological characteristics of the 16 patients are shown in Table 1. Fifteen
patients had hepatitis B viral infection and 1 patient had hepatitis C viral infection. Median numbers of TACE performed preoperatively was
three times and median radiation dosage was 45 Gy (with a range of 30-68 Gy). The median interval between the termination of radiation
therapy and hepatic resection was 4.7 months. The median tumor diameter before the neoadjuvant therapy measured on the CT scans was 10.0 cm
(with a range of 6.3-18.0 cm). Changes in tumor size comparing the CT scans before and after the treatment were following: size reduction
was achieved in nine cases, an increase in tumor size was noted in three cases, and four cases displayed no change. None of the 16 patients
demonstrated a CR, and only two patients showed a PR according to RECIST criteria. The response rate calculated for the proportion of CR and
PR to 16 patients was 12.5% in preoperative CT scan. All patients belonged to Child-Pugh class A before and after treatment.The median ICG-R
15 (preoperative status) was 12.7% (and ranged from 1.0-22.7%). Seven patients showed elevation of ICG-R 15 after treatment (ICG-R15 was not
checked at initial diagnosis in three patients). The median value of AFP at initial diagnosis was 1,507.3 IU/mL (with a range from 4.4 to
>50,000 IU/mL). The median value of AFP after treatment (just preoperative status) was 13.1 (with a range from 2.0 to 2,648 IU/mL). Thirteen
patients demonstrated more than 50% decrease of AFP levels after treatment. Two patients demonstrated elevation of AFP levels after
treatment. Various surgical procedures were performed, including right hemihepatectomy (n=8), left hemihepatectomy (n=4), central
bisectionectomy (n=1), trisegmentectomy (n=1) and bisegmentectomy (n=2). In the cases of large tumors combined with severe adhesion making
difficulties in liver mobilization, anterior approach rather than conventional technique of liver mobilization was performed. Thirteen of 16
patients had a single tumor. The median tumor diameter measured on the specimen was 9.0 cm (with a range of 5-18 cm). The degree of tumor
necrosis noted upon microscopic examination was more than 80% necrosis in 15 patients. Microvessel invasion was detected in five patients.
The pathology of the remaining liver was characterized as normal in three patients, as chronic hepatitis in eight patients, and as cirrhosis
in five patients. Ten patients had pathological stage II tumors, four patients had stage III tumors, and two patients had stage IVA tumors
accordingt to Japanese TNM system. Finally, the staging discrepancies were noted between the clinical and pathological stages in five
patients whose tumor stages were upgraded due to microvessel invasion. No postoperative mortality occurred in the cases reviewed in this
study. The mean follow-up period was 24.2 months (with a range of 3.2-87.4 months) (Fig. 1). The median survival time was 13.3 months. The
median disease-free survival time was 5.7 months. The patterns of recurrence were intrahepatic (n=7) and lung (n=2), and most recurrences
occurred within 4 months of the operation. Eleven patients died due to tumor recurrences (n=8) and hepatic failure (n=2). Five patients
survived more than 2 yr, and 2 patients survived more than 5 yr (Table 2). The two long-term survivors showed complete total necrosis of the
tumor although 1 patient showed vascular invasion of the necrotic tumor. The pathology of remaining liver showed non-cirrhotic liver.
Several treatment modalities are available for patients with HCC, including TACE, radiofrequency ablation, hepatic arterial infusion, and
radiation therapy. When adequate neoadjuvant treatment is achieved, sequential hepatic resection may be a valuable option for prolonging
survival. However, the main problem with these tumor-shrinking treatments is that only a small proportion of patients respond well enough to
allow hepatic resection following therapy, and the responders cannot be predicted. The efficacy of salvage or reductive surgery for HCC
following adjuvant therapy has been reported by several authors (11, 12, 15). Nevertheless, the efficacy of preoperative TACE is
controversial. Some authors have demonstrated the adverse effects of preoperative TACE (16, 17), while others have reported its efficacy (7,
18). The main limitation of TACE is incomplete necrosis due to dual blood supply around the capsule, multiple collateral circulation, or
recanalization of the embolized artery (19). Furthermore, patients with large HCC can rarely achieve complete remission by TACE alone. To
overcome the limitations associated with TACE, combined treatment with radiation therapy can produce synergistic effects such as the
elimination of residual cancer cells following TACE. Tumor shrinkage after TACE allows the use of smaller irradiation fields, which permits
higher tumor doses and improves normal liver tolerance. Furthermore, retainment of the anticancer drug in the tumor has been documented to
have a radiosensitizing effect (20, 21). There are few reports that have examined the patients with HCC who underwent hepatectomy following
TACE and radiation therapy. The response rates of advanced and unresectable HCC treated with only TACE and radiation therapy were previously
reported to be 18-65.8% in the review of the literatures (22-25). The response rate calculated by the proportion of CR and PR according to
RECIST criteria based on CT scan was 12.5% (two of sixteen patients). However, actually the pathologic specimen showed CR in 10 patients
(total necrosis) and PR in 5 patients (80-95% necrosis). Therefore reduction of tumor size in imaging study did not reflect the response to
treatment exactly. Fourteen patients showed greater than 90% necrosis. The role of tumor necrosis in patient prognosis remains
controversial. Some authors reported that the extent of necrosis was not a favorable prognostic factor (26, 27). Other authors have reported
that preoperative TACE resulted in better disease-free survival rates when complete tumor necrosis was induced (28). In our study, the two
patients who survived beyond 5 yr showed total tumor necrosis on the specimen. In patients with partial necrosis, the remaining tumor cells
are less firmly attached and more likely to be dislodged into the bloodstream during hepatic resection (28, 29). The residual viable cancer
cells may facilitate tumor progression and induce intrahepatic metastasis. Such intrahepatic recurrences are considered to arise from
intrahepatic metastasis by means of venous dissemination (30). However it is still unclear that tumor necrosis improves the disease-free
survival or the pattern of recurrence after curative resection of HCC. In the 16 patients who underwent hepatectomy following TACE and
radiation therapy, tumors recurred in eight cases mostly within 4 months of the operation. The median survival duration was 13.3 months. The
results from patients with unresectable or advanced HCC who were treated with TACE and radiation therapy for palliation and not given
surgery at other institutions were reviewed due to rarity of hepatic resection after neoadjuvant TACE and radiation therapy. It seemed that
the result of our study did not reveal any survival benefit when compared with the results of these studies (24, 31). In the previous study
in our institute, the preoperative TACE and non-TACE group undergoing curative resection greater than 5 cm in size did not show significant
difference in disease-free survival. And the 16 patients in current study did not reveal any disease free survival benefit comparing with
these preoperative TACE and non-TACE group in our institute. And the pattern of recurrence between the TACE and non-TACE groups undergoing
curative resection did not reveal any difference (27). The efficacy of hepatectomy following TACE and radiation therapy was difficult to
determine because the number of patients in this study was small. In this retrospective study, the prognosis of HCC patients who underwent
hepatectomy following TACE and radiation therapy was not satisfactory although two long term survivors were noted. Surgical resection can be
one of treatment option when the patient did not show complete response following TACE and radiation therapy. Therefore further research
will be required to examine the survival and disease control effect in a prospective randomized study. Overall survival curve of the 16
patients. Clinicopathological characteristics *, Median value; †, This clinical staging was done after neoadjuvant therapy, just before
liver resection. AFP, alpha-fetoprotein; ICG R15, indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min; TACE, transarterial chemoembolization; CR,
complete response; PR, partial response; SD, stable disease; PD, progressive disease. The clinicopathological characteristics and survival
of 16 patients *, AFP level at initial diagnosis; †, AFP level after TACE and radiation therapy. TACE, transarterial chemoembolization; AFP,
alpha-fetoprotein; ICG R15, indocyanine green retention rate at 15 min; SD, stable disease; PD, progressive disease; PR, partial response.
