Polyfibromatosis syndrome is a rare disease entity that is characterized by various clinical features such as palmar, plantar, and penile
fibromatoses, keloid formations of the skin, and erosive arthropathy. Its precise pathophysiology or etiology remains unclear. In addition
to distinctive diverse skin manifestations, patients with polyfibromatosis have been previously reported to show erosive arthropathy with
significant limitation of movement at affected joints. However, the presence of erosive polyarthropathy in polyfibromatosis has not
emphasized in previous cases. Here, we report a case of polyfibromatosis syndrome combined with painless massive structural destruction of
hand and foot joints, and review the characteristics of erosive arthropathy in previous cases. Polyfibromatosis syndrome is a rare disease
with unknown etiology, and is characterized by cutaneous keloid formation, fibromatoses of diverse sites including palmar, plantar, penile,
and knuckle areas, and erosive changes of the hand and foot joints (1, 2). In 1945, Tourain et al. (3) first described hereditary
polyfibromatosis as a rare syndrome that mainly presented with various connective tissue changes. Pierard et al. (1) identified osteolysis
of joints in a patient with phenytoin-related polyfibromatosis. Histopathological findings of erosive arthropathy were first reported in a
patient with an aggressive form of polyfibromatosis syndrome (4). A follow-up presentation in the same patient was described after 10 yr
without any suggestions of effective treatments or definite etiology (5). The precise pathogenesis and clinical or radiographic
characteristics of this disease entity remain unclear, although some investigators have attempted to identify the pathogenesis in respect to
genetic backgrounds or mechanical properties (6, 7). Clinical and radiological characteristics for erosive arthropathy in polyfibromatosis
have rarely been described, although comments about the presence of arthropathy in some cases have been presented in the literature (1, 4,
5, 8). Here, we described the radiological and clinical features for erosive arthropathy in our case and reviewed erosive arthropathy for
cases with polyfibromatosis syndrome in previous reports. A 44-yr-old male visited our rheumatology clinic because of painless progressive
deformities of his hands and feet, in addition to multiple dysmorphic skin lesions with keloid formation on the whole body, especially the
chest wall and extremities. Over the next eight years, painless deformities in his hands and feet gradually progressed, leading to the
severe palmar and plantar contractures that were seen at his first visit to our clinic. He denied any signs of either articular or
periarticular inflammation, such as heat, swelling, or tenderness, during the course of this condition. His family history and drug history
were unremarkable. Keloid formations were visible on his left shoulder, anterior chest wall, both arms, and right leg due to previous
injuries including BCG vaccination, thoracostomy site, and blunt traumas. There were ulcerated keloid skin lesions on both of his feet, to
which he denied any antecedent trauma. His hands and feet revealed severe flexion deformities without signs of active inflammation in any of
his joints. Nodules in his palm and sole also were also identified. The complete blood count, liver and renal function tests, muscle
enzymes, and urinalysis of the patient were normal. Antinuclear antibody, antineutrophilic cytoplasmic antibody, and rheumatoid factor tests
were negative, and acute phase reactants such as erythrocyte sediment rate (ESR) and c-reactive protein (CRP) were also within normal range.
Pulmonary function tests and nailfold capillary microscopy did not show abnormal findings. Plain radiography of both hands revealed multiple
erosive lesions with sclerotic margins or a punch-out appearance in his metacarpophalangeal (MCP) and proximal interphalangeal (PIP) joints
and resorptive changes (acrolysis) in distal phalanges (Fig. 1A). A coronal T1-weighed magnetic resonance image (MRI) demonstrated erosive
changes at the MCP and PIP joints of the right hand after radio-contrast administration (Fig. 1B). Biopsies of the cutaneous lesions on the
trunk showed dermal fibrous proliferation consistent with keloid formations (Fig. 2). We diagnosed the patient with polyfibromatosis
syndrome due to evidence of visible typical skin lesions with compatible pathologic findings on multiple sites and articular or
periarticular manifestations such as joint deformities accompanied with skin contractures and nodular formations. Even though we have tried
various treatments over the past years, including D-penicillamine, intralesional and medium-dose oral steroids, colchicine, and intravenous
cyclophosphamide, none of these have been effective on either his cutaneous or articular manifestations. Polyfibromatosis syndrome is known
for complex fibrosing conditions including knuckle pads, palpable fibrotic nodules of penile area (Peyronie's disease), plantar fibromatosis
(Ledderhose's disease), plamar fibromatoses (Dupuytren's contractures), and keloid formations (3). The pathogenesis of polyfibromatois
syndrome itself has not yet been determined, although research on the pathophysiology of some components in polyfibromatosis syndrome such
as Dupuytren's contractures and Peyronie's disease are relatively well-described (9, 10). Here, we focused on the massive erosive
arthropathy in polyfibromatosis syndrome (Table 1). Polyfibromatosis syndrome accompanied with erosive polyarthropathy is a rare
dermatoarthropathy (1, 4, 5, 8) after the first historical description for polyfibromatosis syndrome by Tourain et al. (3) in 1945. It seems
that the presence of arthropathy in a patient with phenytoin-related polyfibromatosis was first described by Pierard et al. (1) in 1979,
although Black et al. (4) used the term 'erosive arthropathy' in their description. Pierard et al. first described a 20-yr-old Caucasian
male with polyfibromatosis and erosive arthropathy associated with phenytoin-dependent fibrosis, who presented with diverse skeletal
abnormalities including camptodactyly, facial bone hypoplasia, scoliosis, and osteolytic changes of the wrists, hands, and feet joints (1).
Then, histopathologic findings on bone biopsy from a finger with erosive arthropathy in a 48-yr-old Western Indian man with aggressive
polyfibromatosis was described by Black et al. (4). The biopsy results showed an increased number of osteoclasts associated with erosion of
trabecular bone. Recently, a novel case of polyfibromatosis syndrome combined with interstitial granulomatous dermatitis and arthritis was
also reported in the literature (8). Radiologic findings in a new form of an Australian case were also similar with the previous cases of
polyfibromatosis syndrome. This case included the first description of radiographic features in erosive arthropathy of polyfibromatosis
syndrome by advanced radiologic imaging modalities such as MRI. The pathogenesis underlying the combined articular and cutaneous
manifestations seen in aggressive polyfibromatosis syndrome is unknown. There may be common triggering factors causing not only an abnormal
balance between the proliferation and apoptosis of dermal fibroblasts leading to superficial fibromatosis and keloid formation (11, 12), but
also that of synovial fibroblasts stimulating the differentiation and activation of osteoclasts that lead to joint erosion (13). Possible
differential diagnosis for punch-out bony erosion and osteolysis in the radiographic findings of this patient without any symptomatic signs
or symptom of joint inflammation may include Gorhan-stout syndrome, chronic gout arthritis, nodulosis, arthropathy, osteolysis (NAO)
syndrome, or neuropathic arthropathy. Gorham-stout syndrome is a rare disorder that is characterized by massive bone matrix loss with
swelling or pain in an affected joint, and is mainly involved in a single joint (14). The distribution of involved joints and MRI findings
with enhancement of synovia, marrow, and soft tissue after contrast administration in Gorhan-stout syndrome differed from those in
polyfibromatosis syndrome without enhanced lesions. In addition, we could exclude chronic gouty arthritis in diagnosis with respect to the
normal range of serum uric acid and absence of typical clinical manifestations of gout. NAO syndrome has an unknown origin that mainly
presents with nodulosis and arthropathy with deformed joints (15). This syndrome could be differentiated from our case because it was an
autosomal recessive trait, showed early onset of disease, and was responsive to medication. Considering the prevalent sites of involved
joints or the presence of underlying diseases such as syphilis, syringomyelia, or diabetes, neuropathic arthropathy could be excluded. With
respect to the treatment of polyfibromatosis syndrome, although various treatments were tried, including steroids, potassium para-
aminobenzoic acid, D-penicillamine, methotrexate, minoxidil, and isotretinoin, none of these therapies showed efficacy during a follow-up
period of up to 10 yr (4, 5). Our case was also treated with D-penicillamine, intralesional and medium-dose oral steroids, colchicine, and
intravenous cyclophosphamide, but these trials resulted in no response. We proposed a possible association between polyfibromatosis syndrome
and erosive arthropathy from the results of our literature review. Our case offers information on another disorder in which rheumatological
and dermatological manifestations occurred together. Thus, physicians should be aware of the considerable overlap between the two
specialties and increase collaborations to elucidate an etiologic link and, hopefully, an effective treatment. (A) Hand radiography showing
multiple erosions with sclerotic margin at the PIP and MCP joints with flexion deformities of the hand due to Dupuytren's contractures.
Resorptive changes (acrolysis) at distal phalanges of both hands were also noted. (B) Coronal T1-weighted spin-echo image (TR/TE 600/29) of
the right hand showed multiple bony erosions at the MCP and PIP joints and fatty replacement in soft tissue. The biopsy demonstrated fibrous
changes composed of interlacing bundles of collagens and fibroblasts in deep dermis and subcutaneous tissue (H&E stain ×40). Clinical and
radiographic characteristics of involved joints in polyfibromatosis syndrome with erosive arthropathy NA, not assessed or identified.
