To the Editor: The clinical spectrum of Whipple disease has widely expanded since its etiologic agent, Tropheryma whipplei, was isolated in
2000 (1). Systematic 16S rDNA sequencing unexpectedly identified T. whipplei in patients for whom blood cultures were negative for
endocarditis, spondylitis, and uveitis (2). Features common to these conditions and to Whipple disease include long-standing, unexplained
arthralgia and deterioration of the patient’s condition after treatment with immunosuppressive drugs (2). We report an unexpected case of
postoperative panendophthalmitis identified by systematic 16S rDNA sequencing of a vitreous sample in a patient who had unexplained
arthralgia and had been given topical corticosteroids after cataract surgery. A 78-year-old woman in France underwent left eye
phacoemulsification with intraocular lens implantation in May 2005 and retinal surgery followed by local corticoid application in April
2006. She had experienced cortisone-resistant polyarthralgia for 2 years before the first surgery. In July 2006, she showed decreased visual
acuity (20/1,000) and a painful, red eye. Chronic postoperative endophthalmitis was suspected, and the patient underwent anterior chamber
paracentesis (ACP). Parameters included 0.614 × 109 eosinophils/L in the blood and an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 70 mm in the first
hour. Sequencing of 16S rDNA of the ACP specimen showed 99.9% similarity with that of T. whipplei (GenBank accession no. AJ551273). A
specific PCR confirmed this result in the ocular sample and detected T. whipplei in saliva and stool samples, whereas blood and
cerebrospinal fluid were negative for the organism by PCR. Duodenal biopsy specimens were negative by periodic acid–Schiff staining,
specific immunohistochemical analysis, and PCR. The patient was treated with topical corticosteroids, cycloplegic drugs, doxycycline (200
mg/d), hydroxychloroquine (200 mg 3×/d), and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (1,600 mg and 320 mg 3×/d) (2). She was hospitalized for 7 days
in the ophthalmology department and for 4 days in the infectious disease department. At 8-month follow-up, visual acuity had improved
(20/50) despite intraocular inflammation with a Tyndall effect, moderate capsular opacification, decreased vitreitis, macular edema, and
retinal macular abnormalities shown by optical coherence tomography. T. whipplei DNA was again not detected by PCR in saliva and stool
samples at 8-month follow-up, and the patient remained free of symptoms at 16-month follow-up when treatment was stopped. Diagnosis of
Whipple disease uveitis was confirmed by detection of T. whipplei DNA in the ocular sample by 2 laboratories that used 2 molecular targets
and negative controls. T. whipplei was identified by 16S rDNA sequencing and by detection of T. whipplei–specific repeat sequences. Further
investigations detected T. whipplei in saliva and stool samples. Uveitis was the initial manifestation of Whipple disease, although patient
evaluation showed a 2-year history of idiopathic, corticoresistant polyarthralgia described as a hallmark of Whipple disease (2). Initial
unexplained eosinophilia in blood was observed, as in several confirmed cases of Whipple disease (2). Uveitis has been reported in Whipple
disease (2), but <20 patients had T. whipplei in a diseased eye (Table). T. whipplei has been found by periodic acid–Schiff staining of
foamy macrophages, electron microscopy, and immunocytochemical detection in ocular monocytes (3–10). Detection of T. whipplei DNA (6–10) has
been confirmed by sequencing in only 2 patients, including the case reported herein. *PAS, periodic acid–Schiff; EM, electron microscopy; I,
intermediate; B, bilateral; ND, not done; A, anterior; Pa, panuveitis; U, unilateral; NR, not reported; P, posterior. †Reviewed by Drancourt
et al. (7). ‡These patients were considered to have suspected cases. Diagnosis of T. whipplei uveitis in our patient was made 3 months after
ocular surgery. The patient’s condition was diagnosed as chronic postoperative panendophthalmitis, which raised the issue of nosocomial
transmission of T. whipplei. We have reported a correlation between diagnosis of T. whipplei uveitis and a history of ocular surgery (7). By
reanalyzing detailed published reports, we found that 11 of 19 patients with intraocular demonstration of T. whipplei had a history of
ocular surgery before documentation of Whipple disease uveitis (Table). T. whipplei has not been reported as being responsible for
nosocomial infection. Items used during the patient’s ocular surgery were confirmed to be disposable and nonreused. Topical drops of
corticosteroids commonly applied during cataract surgery for intraocular lens implantation penetrate ocular structures. An alternative
hypothesis is that corticosteroids applied during ocular surgery reactivate a latent ocular infection. Our review indicated that 13 of 19
patients with documented T. whipplei uveitis had received topical or systemic corticosteroids before the diagnosis (Table) (7). Worsening of
Whipple disease has been reported in patients receiving corticoid therapy for arthralgia (10). We speculate that our patient had an
asymptomatic ocular infection before surgery. This case shows that ocular surgery and use of topical corticosteroids that penetrate ocular
structures could reactivate a latent T. whipplei ocular infection. We suggest that patients with postoperative panendophthalmitis be tested
for T. whipplei by PCR. Suggested citation for this article: Drancourt M, Fenollar F, Denis D, Raoult D. Postoperative panophthalmitis
caused by Whipple disease . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 May [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/5/825.htm M.D., F.F., and D.R. were supported by Unité de Recherche sur les Maladies Infectieuses et
Tropicales Emergentes; D.D. was supported by Assistance Publique–Hôpitaux de Marseille.
