Pyometra is an uncommon condition with an incidence of less than 1% in gynaecologic patients. Spontaneous rupture of pyometra in cervical
cancer presenting as generalized peritonitis is very rare. Only four cases have been described in the English literature to the best of our
knowledge and from a PubMed search. The index case is an elderly postmenopausal female who was diagnosed with cervical cancer, started on
radiotherapy and presented with features of generalized peritonitis. Contrast-enhanced CT revealed uterine perforation at the fundus with
multiple abdominal and pelvic collections. A brief review of all the cases of ruptured pyometra in cervical cancer in the literature and a
discussion of the role of imaging is presented. A 60-year-old female presented with a history of serosanginous discharge and bleeding (small
amount) per vaginum for the last 4 months. She was postmenopausal for the last 10 years with P5+1+0+5. Local examination revealed hard
infiltrative growth destroying both cervical lips and involving the vaginal wall. The upper third of the lateral and upper half of the
anterior and posterior walls of the vagina were involved. Biopsy from the lesion was performed which showed adenocarcinoma (moderately
differentiated). Hemogram (Hb = 11.4 gm%, TLC = 7600/μl) and renal function tests (urea = 24 mg/dl and creatinine = 0.81 mg/dl) were normal.
Her intravenous pyelography (IVP) and cystoscopy studies were normal. Ultrasound of the abdomen and pelvis showed no intra-abdominal/pelvic
collection or pyometra. With Carcinoma cervix III B (FIGO clinical staging), she was planned for external radiotherapy (46Gy in 23 fractions
over 4.5 weeks). But after receiving 18Gy/9 fractions, she presented with pain in the abdomen and vomiting. Ultrasound showed a bulky and
heterogeneous cervix with multiple intra-abdominal loculated collections. Contrast-enhanced CT showed multiple pelvic and intra-abdominal
collections, a dilated endometrial cavity with breach at the uterine fundus and its continuation with large pelvic collection, suggestive of
perforated pyometra. Sagittal and coronal reformats in multi-detector CT depicted the site and size of the uterine breach. The patient was
managed with pigtail drainage of the larger pelvic and subhepatic collections, and with appropriate antibiotic cover (cefoperozone,
sulbactam and amikacin). Pus culture and sensitivity showed Acinobacter. The pigtail drained approximately 300 ml of thick pus. She improved
clinically and follow-up ultrasound after 1 week showed near complete resolution of the abscesses, and the catheter was taken out (Fig. 1
and 2). Figure 1Contrast-enhanced axial CT images showing dilated endometrial cavity with site of the breach at uterine fundus (arrow).
Pelvic collections (*) are seen with the abdominal/mesenteric extension and resultant intra-abdominal collections (*). Figure 2Contrast-
enhanced coronal and sagittal reformatted CT image depicting dilated endometrial cavity with site and size of the breach at uterine fundus
(arrow). Multiple pelvic and intra-abdominal collections (*) are seen. The larger pelvic collection is seen in continuation with the
ruptured uterus. Contrast-enhanced axial CT images showing dilated endometrial cavity with site of the breach at uterine fundus (arrow).
Pelvic collections (*) are seen with the abdominal/mesenteric extension and resultant intra-abdominal collections (*). Contrast-enhanced
coronal and sagittal reformatted CT image depicting dilated endometrial cavity with site and size of the breach at uterine fundus (arrow).
Multiple pelvic and intra-abdominal collections (*) are seen. The larger pelvic collection is seen in continuation with the ruptured uterus.
Pyometra is an uncommon condition occurring mainly in elderly postmenopausal females, and results when natural drainage of the uterine
cavity is compromised. It is an accumulation of purulent material/pus in the uterine cavity. The common causes of pyometra include malignant
condition of the genital tract and sequele of their treatment, benign conditions such as infection and congenital cervical anomalies. The
benign or malignant conditions cause accumulation of secretions and gradual enlargement of the uterus, leading to thinned uterine walls
which may be sloughed with spontaneous uterine rupture and causing generalized peritonitis. Spontaneous uterine perforation is rare and
extensive review of the English literature has revealed only 26 such reported cases to date. Furthermore, spontaneous rupture of pyometra in
cervical cancer presenting as generalized peritonitis is extremely rare and only four cases have been described. We reviewed all the cases
of spontaneous uterine perforation in cervical cancer and the findings are summarized in Table 1. Table 1Cases of spontaneous uterine
perforation in cervical cancerRef. no.AgeSymptomsProvisional diagnosisPerforation siteHistologyTreatment867AP, GBGPFundusSquamous cell
carcinomaAspiration and drainage234APGP,PPLeft corneal regionSquamous cell carcinomaDrainage and PL272APGPFundusSquamous cell
carcinomaDrainage and PL160AP,FGPFundusSquamous cell carcinomaTAH with BSOPresent case60AP,F,VGPFundusAdeno-carcinomaPigtail drainageAP,
abdominal pain; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; F, fever; GB, genital bleeding; GP, generalized peritonitis; PL, peritoneal lavage;
PP, perforated pyometra; TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy; V, vomiting. Cases of spontaneous uterine perforation in cervical cancer AP,
abdominal pain; BSO, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; F, fever; GB, genital bleeding; GP, generalized peritonitis; PL, peritoneal lavage;
PP, perforated pyometra; TAH, total abdominal hysterectomy; V, vomiting. All the patients presented with features of generalized peritonitis
including the index case. Common presenting symptoms were abdominal pain, vomiting and fever. All the cases were elderly postmenopausal
females except one. The most common perforation site was the uterine fundus and in only one case it was the uterine cornual region.
Perforated pyometra was not the preoperative diagnosis in any of the cases. CT features of perforated pyometra have been described in only
one case in which CT revealed the diagnosis and surgical intervention was performed. In our case, the patient presented with features of
generalized peritonitis, CT showed perforated pyometra at the uterine fundus with multiple pelvic and intra-abdominal collections. Sagittal
and coronal reformats in multi-detector CT are very helpful in depicting the site and size of uterine breach, demonstrating the resultant
intra-abdominal collections and staging of cervical cancer. The site of uterine breach can be missed on axial images as it is usually seen
in fundus; hence, in elderly postmenopausal females with peritonitis sagittal and coronal reformats of uterus should be carefully evaluated.
Sonography plays a limited role in the diagnosis of ruptured pyometra because of its inability to demonstrate the uterine breach and the
limited sonographic window available due to perforation. Treatment of ruptured pyometra in cervical cancer patients varies depending on the
clinical condition of the patient and the preoperative diagnosis. In most cases drainage of the collections was carried out, except for one
case in which total abdominal hysterectomy and bilateral salpingoophorectomy were peformed. The index case was managed by putting
percutaneous pigtail catheters in pelvic and subhepatic collections. Spontaneous rupture of pyometra in cervical cancer is very rare and
should be considered in elderly postmenopausal women with cervical cancer presenting with an acute abdomen. Multi-detector CT with sagittal
and coronal reformatted images could play an important role in the diagnosis of ruptured pyometra.
