Vibrio spp. is a pathogen rarely isolated in cancer patients, and in most cases it is associated with haematological diseases. Cutaneous
manifestations of this organism are even rarer. We report a case of Non-O1 Vibrio cholerae inguinal skin and soft tissue infection
presenting bullous skin lesions in a young type II diabetic patient with a penis squamous cell carcinoma having a seawater exposure history.
Vibrio cholerae is mainly related to water sources . Contaminated seawater exposure or contaminated seafood ingestion are frequently
associated with diarrhoea and/or extraintestinal infections such as otitis media, skin and soft tissue infections (SSTI) and bacteremia .
Vibrio spp. is a pathogen rarely isolated in cancer patients, and in most cases it is associated with haematological diseases. Although the
clinical picture may have a wide range in Vibrio spp. SSTI, bullous lesions are almost exclusively associated with V. vulnificus infection
and have rarely been reported with non-O1 V. cholerae infections . We report here the case of a non-O1 V. cholerae SSTI presenting bullous
skin lesions in a diabetic patient with a solid tumour. A 36-year-old patient from the Canary Islands (Spain) with controlled type II
diabetes mellitus was diagnosed with a moderately differentiated squamous cell carcinoma of the penis in December 2006 in his local
hospital. The patient underwent a partial penectomy. In the initial follow-up after surgery, the abdominal CT and granulation tissue were
normal. The patient had been exposed to seawater and seafood from December 2006 to October 2007 when bullous skin lesions were observed in
both inguinal regions during a examination. Lesions were fitted with inguinal metastases, and the patient underwent inguinal surgery
followed by radiotherapy. In November 2007 he was admitted to our hospital for a second consultation. Physical examination showed stinking
lesions in both inguinal regions with cellulitis and bullae. Patient underwent an abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan with contrast that
revealed the existence of several large necrotic adenopathies in the inguinal, scrotal and pubic areas (Figure 1). A right abdominal wall
nodule and a left groin abscess extending from psoas muscle to skin were also observed. A CT scan of the chest showed pulmonary lesions
compatible with metastases. Initial laboratory findings showed increased a white blood cell count of 20,3 × 109/L with 88,1% neutrophils,
haemoglobin of 8,3 g/dL and a C-reactive protein of 8,7 mg/dL (normal range 0–1 mg/dL). Several large necrotic adenopathies in inguinal,
scrotal and pubic area (CT scan). The patient was treated with a left inguinal region debridement, percutaneous drainage and flamazine
therapy. Purulent fluid was obtained by swabbing from the fistulized left bulla and was sent for culture (Figure 2). At that time, two sets
of blood cultures were drawn. Empiric intravenous antimicrobial therapy with ceftriaxone 1 g/24 h and metronidazole 500 mg/8 h was started.
Daily cures with Flamazine were also indicated. A Gram stain of the sample showed abundant polymorphonuclear leukocytes, and cultures
yielded Escherichia coli, Serratia marcescens and V. cholerae susceptible to the empiric antimicrobial therapy instituted. Blood cultures
were sterile after incubation for six days. As the patient was not improving after 7 days of therapy, a new sample was taken with a syringe.
Methicillin-susceptible Staphylococcus aureus and the same E. coli, characterized by phenotypic methods (biotype and antimicrobial
susceptibility) were isolated. Those microorganisms were carbapenems-susceptible so the antibiotic therapy was switched to ertapenem 1 g/24
h i.v. and cellulitis gradually improved. Skin lesions and cellulitis after a mayor cure. A new sample was taken for control with a syringe
from the left inguinal lesion after 2 weeks of treatment with ertapenem. Enriched alkaline peptone water (1% NaCl pH 8.5) and TCBS agar were
added to the conventional media plates and only V. cholerae was again isolated. The therapy was changed to oral levofloxacin 500 mg/12 h.
After one month of treatment with levofloxacin a new sample for control from the left inguinal lesion was taken with a syringe, resulting
sterile after incubation for a week in selective media. Thus, the levofloxacin dosage was switched to oral levofloxacin 500 mg/24 h. After
40 days with levofloxacin 500 mg/24 h, the right bulla fistulized, so a new debridement and percutaneous drainage was done in order to
eliminate the necrotic tissue. New samples of both inguinal regions were obtained by means of syringe and were found sterile after 7 days of
incubation in selective media. During this time, the patient was treated with two cycles of first- and second-line palliative chemotherapy
and one cycle of third-line palliative chemotherapy. Due to the metastasis progression, it was decided to stop the chemotherapy. In March,
the patient returned to the Canary Islands under treatment with oral levofloxacin 500 mg/24 h. The patient died two weeks later due to his
underlying disease. V. cholerae is a curved Gram-negative rod that grows as beta-hemolytic mucous colonies on blood agar plates and yellow
colonies on thiosulfate-citrate-bile salts-sucrose (TCBS) agar plates. V. cholerae was identified by two commercial identification systems:
VITEK 2 (bioMérieux® SA, Marcy-L'Etoile, France) and API 20E Enterobacteriaceae (bioMérieux®, France). It was susceptible to the O/129
vibriostatic agent (Oxoid, Ltd., Basingstoke, UK), and slide agglutination tests with polyvalent antisera showed a non-O1, non-O139
serotype. Antibiotic susceptibility testing was performed by standard disk diffusion method on Mueller-Hinton agar, and minimal inhibition
concentrations (MICs) were determined by the Etest® diffusion method (AB Biodisk®, Solna, Sweden). According to CLSI guidelines
interpretative criteria for Vibrio spp. the strain was susceptible to ampicillin (8 μg/ml), amoxicillin-clavulanic (4 μg/ml), ceftriaxone
(0.016 μg/ml), ceftazidime (0.25 μg/ml), gentamicin (1 μg/ml), tobramycin (4 μg/ml), amikacin (8 μg/ml), ciprofloxacin (0.004 μg/ml),
levofloxacin (0.008 μg/ml), piperacillin-tazobactam (0.38 μg/ml), chloramphenicol (8 μg/ml), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (0.125 μg/ml) and
doxycycline (2 μg/ml). The sample was sent to the National Center for Microbiology (Majadahonda, Madrid, Spain) and was confirmed to be
non-O1 V. cholerae non-producer of toxin. The gene sodB for the identification of V. cholerae was detected. Neither the genes wbeO and rfb
for the O1 and O139 serotype identification, nor the gene ctxA encoding cholera toxin were detected by multiplex PCR technique. SSTI are
often deep and devastating . Etiology may be mono or polymicrobial involving a mixed aerobe-anaerobe bacterial flora . Although this case
involved a necrotizing skin and soft-tissue infection with polymicrobial etiology repeated V. cholerae isolates suggested V. cholerae was
likely a major player in this patient's infection. Vibrio spp. SSTI may range from bullous skin lesions and localised cellulitis to severe
necrotizing soft-tissue infection with secondary septicaemia . V. vulnificus followed by V. parahaemolyticus and V. alginolyticus are the
species most commonly isolated from wounds whereas non-O1 V. cholerae is the less common involved species . Although bullous lesions occur
mainly in patients with V. vulnificus, infection, bullae in non-O1 V. cholerae infection have been rarely reported . Vibrio spp. infections
are rarely documented in cancer patients and they are infrequent in solid tumours . Cellulitis due to non-O1 V. cholerae is rare and it is
normally associated with the presence of chronic underlying diseases such as liver cirrhosis, diabetes mellitus, immunocompromised states or
haematological malignancies such as chronic lymphocytic leukaemia, acute myeloid or lymphoblastic leukaemia and multiple myeloma or
lymphocytic lymphoma . To the best of our knowledge, only 13 cases of non-O1 V. cholerae extraintestinal infections in immunocompromised
patients have been reported since 1978 (Table 1). Only one case had a documented cellulitis . Patients were largely male (10 cases) with a
mean age of 61 years (range, 36–78 years). Risk factors for Vibrio spp. infection were found in ten cases; 8 of them had liver disease.
Interestingly, 10 patients had a solid tumour and only 3 patients had a hematological disease. Twelve cases presented fever, bacteremia or
diarrhoea. Nine patients survived. The remaining patients died from V. cholerae infections or from underlying diseases. Our case is
remarkable because it represents the second reported case of bullous lesions and cellulitis associated with non O1-V. cholerae in a cancer
patient. Clinical summary of 14 published cases of non-O1 V. cholerae extraintestinal infections in immunocompromised patients. MM, multiple
myeloma; CLL, chronic lymphocytic leukemia; NSCLC, non-small-cell lung carcinoma; GC, gastric cancer; PC pancreatic cancer; CC, cervix
carcinoma; ML, myeloid leukemia; SCPC, squamous-cell penis carcinoma. The case reported shows that non O1-V. cholerae may produce wound
infections in cancer patients with infrequent clinical manifestations. In conventional mediums Vibrio spp. can easily remain undetected
especially when polymicrobial infections occur. Consequently, Vibrio spp. should be considered in the differential diagnosis of any SSTI in
immunocompromised patients, principally those occurring after seafood ingestion or contact with salt or estuary water. Thus, in these cases,
physicians should alert the microbiology laboratory to add selective and enriched culture mediums in addition to routine media. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AA and MP carried
out the microbiological assays and drafted the manuscript. JY and JdP participated in clinical infectious disease's diagnosis and treatment.
EGT carried out inguinal debridement. JPG participated in the chemotherapy. JL participated in its design and coordination. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
