The incidence of cancer during pregnancy is approximately 1 in 1000. The most common types encountered during pregnancy are cervical, breast
and ovarian. Epithelial tumors of the appendix on the other hand are rare and account for only approximately 1% of all colorectal neoplasms;
the occurrence of this neoplasm during pregnancy is extremely rare. The medical history of a 30 year old woman diagnosed at 17 weeks
gestation with an appendiceal mucinous tumor with large volume pseudomyxoma peritonei was presented. Her pregnancy was preserved and she had
an early vaginal delivery of a healthy baby at 35 weeks. At 2 1/2 weeks postpartum the patient underwent extensive cytoreductive surgery and
intraperitoneal chemotherapy. She remains disease-free 5 years after her initial diagnosis. A literature review of this clinical situation
and a discussion of treatment plans were presented. The management of an appendiceal tumor with pseudomyxoma peritonei diagnosed during
pregnancy requires full knowledge of the natural history of this disease to achieve a balance of concern for maternal survival and fetal
health. Epithelial tumors of the appendix are rare, accounting for approximately 1% of all colorectal neoplasms . The tumor can range in
presentation from a malignant mucocele found at routine appendectomy, to a ruptured high grade appendiceal malignancy with large volume
pseudomyxoma peritonei . During pregnancy, cancer occurs in approximately 1 in 1000 women, with the most common types being cervical, breast
and ovarian . There are only a few reports of appendiceal tumors occurring during pregnancy. Management of malignancy during pregnancy is
challenging, requiring a balance of concern for maternal survival and fetal health and well-being. The management plan, which may require
induced abortion, is determined by the stage of pregnancy and the predicted behavior of the cancer. We present here the medical history of a
patient having an appendiceal mucinous tumor with large volume pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome during pregnancy and the treatments she had
at our institution. A review of the literature regarding this clinical situation and a discussion of treatment options are presented. A 30
year old primagravid woman at 17 weeks gestation was found on routine prenatal ultrasound to have a complex right ovarian mass. She
underwent surgery and was found to have a ruptured appendiceal mucinous neoplasm with a large volume pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome. The
right ovary and appendix were removed and an omental biopsy was performed. The final pathology confirmed a well-differentiated mucinous
adenocarcinoma of appendiceal origin. She recovered without incident from this surgery and was referred for assessment to the Washington
Hospital Center at 26 weeks gestation. In consultation with the patient and her obstetrician it was decided to preserve the pregnancy and
schedule an early vaginal delivery at 35 weeks gestation. Following an uncomplicated vaginal delivery of a healthy baby, she underwent a
staging CT. It showed no evidence of metastases within the liver parenchyma or outside of the peritoneal cavity. A large volume of mucinous
cancer was imaged beneath right and left hemidiaphragm and in the pelvis. Small bowel except for the terminal ileum was spared. Preoperative
tumor markers revealed an elevated CEA at 68.2 ng/mL (normal 0–5 ng/mL), CA-125 of 177 units/mL (normal 0–35 units/mL) and CA 19-9 of 361
units/mL (normal 0–37 units/mL). At 2 1/2 weeks after delivery, the patient underwent an abdominal exploration followed by cytoreductive
surgery. She had thick, densely packed tumor covering most of the parietal peritoneal surface, with an especially large volume of disease in
the lesser omentum, omental bursa and surrounding the porta hepatis. The stomach and the small bowel except for the terminal ileum were
spared. An extensive cytoreduction surgery was performed including total anterior parietal peritonectomy and resection of tumor in the
abdominal wall scar, greater and lesser omentectomy with stripping of the omental bursa, right and left upper quadrant peritonectomies
including total diaphragm stripping bilaterally, splenectomy, electroevaporation of tumor on liver capsule, cholecystectomy, and a right
hemicolectomy including the distal 15 cm of terminal ileum. A total pelvic peritonectomy with abdominal hysterectomy, left salpingo-
oophorectomy and rectosigmoid colon resection was performed. The peritoneal cancer index score was 28 (out of a maximum of 39), and the
cytoreduction was scored as complete (residual tumor less than 2.5 mm) . Intraoperative intraperitoneal heated chemotherapy was administered
through the open coliseum technique, with 15 mg/m2 mitomycin C at 41.5°C for 90 minutes. A Tenckhoff catheter and Jackson-Pratt drains were
inserted for early postoperative intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil chemotherapy . Following completion of the hyperthermic intraoperative
intraperitoneal chemotherapy an ileocolic and colorectal anastomosis was performed. The total operating time was 9 hours, and the blood loss
was estimated at 350 mL, with 2 units of packed red blood cells and 4 units of fresh frozen plasma administered during the operation. On
postoperative day 1 through 5, 900 mg intraperitoneal 5-fluorouracil in 1.5% dextrose peritoneal dialysis solution was administered daily
for 23 hours. The patient developed uncomplicated neutropenia on postoperative day 16, with neutrophil count of 0.9 × 103/uL and a total
leukocyte count of 1.3 × 103/uL, which was treated successfully with granulocyte colony stimulating factor. On postoperative day 18 she was
diagnosed with a left lower extremity deep venous thrombosis and was treated with intravenous heparin which was converted to warfarin prior
to discharge from the hospital. She had a postoperative ileus requiring nasogastric drainage for 2 weeks and received total parenteral
nutrition during this time. She was discharged in good condition on postoperative day 24. Three weeks following surgery her tumor marker
levels decreased with CEA at 0.5 ng/mL, CA 125 at 92.1 units/mL, and CA 19-9 at 10.6 units/mL. CA 125 normalized by 2 months post-
operatively. After recovery from surgery, she was treated with the Xelox regimen (Xeloda 1000 mg/m2 bid for 14 days then 7 day rest and
oxaliplatin 130 mg/m2 intravenous over 90 minutes on day 1) for 8 cycles over 24 weeks. In follow-up at five years after, the patient and
her child are in good condition. She has had two episodes of transient small bowel obstruction treated conservatively. On her most recent
clinical, radiologic and biochemical assessment at 5 years after her initial diagnosis she remains disease-free. Pseudomyxoma peritonei
syndrome is a rare disease registered as number 843 by the National Organization for Rare Disorders . To our knowledge there is only one
previous report of a disseminated appendiceal tumor occurring during pregnancy . Our case of pseudomyxoma peritonei presenting in early
pregnancy highlights some interesting challenges in the management of cancer in pregnancy. In this case, as in most other cancers occurring
during pregnancy, there is a paucity of evidence to guide the clinician in optimal management. Maternal health and timely treatment of the
malignancy is balanced by health and safety of the fetus, as many treatment interventions, including abdominal surgery, radiation, and
chemotherapy, are known to be harmful to the fetus. Therefore during pregnancy, in addition to the stage and prognosis of the cancer, the
stage and value of the pregnancy must also be considered. For cancer diagnosed during the latter part of pregnancy, an optimal decision
often involves a negligible delay in definitive treatment following an early delivery at about 34 weeks gestation when the risk to the
premature infant is quite low. During the first trimester the fetus is most susceptible to teratogenic effects; x-rays and most
chemotherapeutic agents are contraindicated. Also, spontaneous abortion is common. A long delay in treatment of an aggressive cancer is
often unacceptable to the woman and her treating physicians, and a recommendation for termination of the pregnancy must be considered.
During the second trimester, as in our patient, abdominal surgical procedures have the lowest risk of spontaneous abortion or premature
labor. Additionally, many chemotherapeutic agents have been successfully used in the second and third trimester. Plain radiographs and even
abdominal CT scans pose minimal risk to the fetus at this stage of the pregnancy. With increasing experience with abdominal MRI, this is
becoming the recommended imaging modality for pregnant women with appendiceal or other gastrointestinal malignancy. In our patient the
appropriate diagnostic surgical evaluation, an appendectomy, was made at the safest time, during the second trimester. Unexpectedly at
laparotomy, a diagnosis of large volume pseudomyxoma peritonei from a ruptured appendiceal mucinous carcinoma was made. The natural history
of pseudomyxoma peritonei was then considered to guide our management . As described by Ronnett and coworkers pseudomyxoma peritonei
describes mucinous intraabdominal tumors usually of appendiceal origin with a broad spectrum of aggressiveness. The low grade appendiceal
mucinous tumors (disseminated peritoneal adenomucinosis) usually have a slowly progressive course over several years. The clinical entity
with the non-invasive disease is referred to as pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome. In contrast mucinous carcinomatosis from poorly
differentiated cancers of the appendix usually with signet ring morphology have an aggressive behavior, progress rapidly, and carry a worse
prognosis. Well-differentiated appendiceal mucinous adenocarcinoma with pseudomyxoma peritonei, as in our patient, is a less aggressive
disease, shows a less rapid progression and an intermediate prognosis. With all appendiceal mucinous neoplasms the prognosis is dependent
not only on the histologic grade of the tumor but also the completeness of cytoreduction score . The volume of intraabdominal tumor as
assessed by the peritoneal cancer index has no impact on prognosis . In this patient a delay in definitive treatment undoubtedly allowed an
increase in tumor volume to occur. However, since the cytoreduction was complete, minimal compromise in the prognosis was expected. In a
review of the literature, there have been 7 previous reports of appendiceal mucinous tumors occurring during pregnancy in the absence of
pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome . Six were appendiceal mucinous tumors confined to the appendix and one non-mucinous appendiceal
adenocarcinoma with peritoneal carcinomatosis (Table 1). In one case, the diagnosis was made in the third trimester and an early delivery
was carried out prior to definitive treatment. In one case the diagnosis was made at the time of Cesarean section at term. Four patients
presented with an acute abdomen and the diagnosis of appendicitis, with the correct diagnosis being revealed at laparotomy. One of these
patients elected to have a therapeutic abortion prior to reoperation for a right hemicolectomy, one patient had a right hemicolectomy at
initial operation at 26 weeks gestational age and went on to deliver at term, and the remaining two were treated with appendectomy. The
final patient was diagnosed in very early pregnancy at the time of a spontaneous abortion, and underwent surgical treatment 3 months later
after progression of disease was revealed on imaging. Case reports of appendiceal epithelial (mucinous) tumors during pregnancy. HIPEC:
heated intraperitoneal chemotherapy EPIC: early postoperative intraperitoneal chemotherapy 5-FU: 5-fluorouracil Based on our case and the
previous case reports, it appears reasonable to carry out a diagnostic surgical evaluation of a mucinous appendiceal tumor during pregnancy,
ideally in the second or third trimester. If a patient presents with an acute abdomen from a ruptured mucinous tumor, initial surgery should
consist of a complete appendectomy and mesoappendectomy, and biopsy of omental or peritoneal tumor deposits. Since the rate of lymph node
positivity in appendiceal mucinous neoplasms is less than 5%, more extensive surgery involving a right hemicolectomy at the time of initial
diagnosis is not warranted and poses undue risk to the mother and fetus . Definitive management of moderate or low grade appendiceal cancer
with pseudomyxoma peritonei should be delayed until after delivery, as extensive cytoreduction and intraperitoneal chemotherapy would be
impossible and contraindicated during pregnancy. It is reasonable to have the delivery at an earlier date, 34–35 weeks gestation, in order
not to further delay treatment of appendiceal adenocarcinoma (Table 2). The method for childbirth is important if the delivery is to occur
prior to definitive cytoreduction. A vaginal delivery is required. A Cesarean section is contraindicated. An abdominal incision for Cesarean
section will allow for mucinous cancer cells to implant and progress within the abdominal incision and parametrial tissues. This would
potentially compromise the completeness of cytoreduction and the likelihood of a curative result . If a Caesarian section is necessary for
obstetrical reasons, a midline incision should be used, which can be excised with subsequent cytoreductive surgery. Stage for stage, one
would postulate that pregnant cancer patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei may have similar outcomes as non-pregnant patients. With optimal
management including complete cytoreduction and intraperitoneal chemotherapy, patients with pseudomyxoma peritonei from well-differentiated
appendiceal mucinous carcinoma will have a 15-year survival of 50% . Suggested management strategy for pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome
occurring during pregnancy. (CRS = cytoreductive surgery, HIPEC = hyperthermic intraperitoneal chemotherapy) Koops and colleagues wrote
about pseudomyxoma peritonei syndrome diagnosed in women who were attempting pregnancy (Koops A, Smeenk RM, Zoetmulder FAN, Hoek A.
Pseudomyxoma peritonei and pregnancy. Report of two cases, unpublished data). They recommend that definitive treatment of the appendiceal
tumor be delayed to allow pregnancy to occur if the disease was minimally aggressive. In patients with progressive disease their experience
with delay led to an advanced, untreatable disease state. In patients with slow or moderate advance of disease, the pregnancy (or pregnancy
wish) should be allowed to proceed to a vaginal delivery. In patients with a rapid progression, termination of the pregnancy and definitive
treatment may be necessary to protect the mother. CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen; CA 19-9: cancer antigen 19-9; CA 125: cancer antigen 125;
CT: computed tomography. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. All Authors made substantial contributions to the concept, design, acquisition of data, analysis and interpretation of
data, drafting and revising the intellectual content of the manuscript. All Authors read and approved the final manuscript.
