Keratoacanthoma (KA) is a self-limited benign epithelial proliferative lesion that eventually presents with very similar clinical features
to squamous cell carcinoma. Many KA appear in the vermilion border of the lips and therefore dental professionals must be familiar of the
disease. This article reports the case of a 40-year-old female patient presenting with an exophytic ulcerative tumor in her lower lip that
resolved after incisional biopsy. Photographic documentation of the case is presented and topics that are relevant to the clinical
management of the disease are addressed. Keratoacanthoma (KA) is a benign epithelial proliferative lesion that commonly affects the
vermillion border of the lips7.The disease usually represents a diagnostic challenge for the clinician since both clinical and
histopathologic features of KA may resemble those of a well differentiated squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)8,9. Notwithstanding this alarming
presentation, the hallmark of the disease is spontaneous resolution after an intermediary stationary stage8,9. In this sense, observational
and experimental data about the biological behavior of KA have suggested that the outer root sheath of the hair follicle infundibulum is the
origin of these lesions, since pillous follicles naturally evolve through cycles comprising phases of activity/growth (anagen), transition
(catagen) and resting/loss (telogen)3,9. Immunohistochemical studies corroborated similarities between KA and the outer root sheath beneath
the infundibulum5. Furthermore, the disease is also much more frequent in hair-bearing skin9. Finally, KA may be multiple, disseminated and
associated with syndromic diseases (e.g. Muyr-Torre, xeroderma pigmentosum), probably due to autossomal defective DNA-repair mechanisms2,9.
Almost all KA cases are treated by surgical excision. For this reason, very few cases have been documented until resolution, which
constitutes the "goldstandard" for this diagnosis1,11. This article presents a photographic documentation of a KA in the lower lip of a
40-year-old female. The initial presentation was suggestive of SCC and the patient was submitted to an incisional biopsy. After an
inconclusive pathological impression, the patient was reevaluated and incidental partial regression was noticed. The diagnosis was then
revised to KA. Complete resolution was achieved within two months without significant scarring. A discussion on the diagnostic and
therapeutic management of lesions suspected as being KA is presented. A 40-year-old female was referred to the Oral Diagnosis service of our
institution with a 7-month complaint of lower lip ulceration. There was no description of previous local trauma, but the patient reported
continuous out-door working without sunscreen protection, as well as 20 years of smoking. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable.
Facial examination revealed a 1.5-cm nodule on the left side of the vermillion border of lower lip. It was asymptomatic, sessile, flat and
well-defined. Its surface was erythematous and ulcerated, partially recovered by a brown and adherent crust (Fig 1). The margins of the
lesion were indurated and apparently infiltrative. There was no other alteration in the face or neck. The patient did not mention any other
lesion throughout her body. Intraoral examination was also non-contributory. An incisional biopsy was performed to rule out the possibility
of squamous cell carcinoma. The histopathologic examination revealed an epithelial proliferation with elongated rete ridges, some presenting
a droplet shape, hyperkeratosis, dyskeratosis, basal cell nuclear hyperchromatism, conspicuous nucleoli, increased mitotic activity with
normal morphology, and focal loss of basal membrane. Epithelial islands were intermingled with the underlying connective tissue and were
accompanied by mild inflammatory infiltrate, reminding a pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia (Fig 2). Basophilic change was also identified in
the lamina propria. PAS and Grocott's silver methenamine stains were performed but did not reveal infectious agent. The pathological
findings were considered compatible, but highly inconclusive with a well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, and another biopsy was
suggested by the surgical pathology staff. The patient returned 7 days after the initial biopsy with mild regression of the tumor (Fig 3),
which is a completely unexpected finding for a true malignant neoplasm. Association of this observation with the initial clinical aspect of
the lesion as well as its histopathological presentation raised the hypothesis of keratoacanthoma. The patient was informed about this
possibility, but refused further surgical treatment. It was then proposed clinical follow-up at every two weeks associated to hat and
sunscreen use. The lesion completely disappeared after two months without significant scarring (Fig 4). There was not recurrence throughout
two years of follow up. Keratoacanthomas (KAs) are common in pale-complexioned populations that are chronically exposed to sun radiation,
such as in Australia and Brazil9,10. It is frequent on the face, especially in the lower lip, and therefore dentists should be alert for
this disease4,8. In general, KAs are solitary tumors depicting a central keratin plug. It is usually present for some months before the
initial appointment, and a history of rapid growth followed by a stationary period and then sometimes by partial regression is eventually
reported8,9. However, as in the present case, some KAs do not completely fit to this pattern. Our patient did not recall stationary or
regressive behavior, clinical aspect was more suggestive of a true neoplastic alteration, and involution was only observed after surgical
intervention. In this sense, KA must be included in the diagnostic hypothesis list for every nodular-ulcerative conditions of the lower lip,
even though such alterations more likely resemble solitary manifestation of specific bacterial and mycotic infections, actinic cheilosis,
and even SCC. Cases suspected for KA must be carefully conducted. Griffiths4 proposed principles for "watch and wait" management. It should
include initial identification that the lesion had been larger, had reached its growth plateau phase or even is actually regressing, with no
biopsy in case of high suspicion, close follow-up every 2 weeks, and photographic documentation at each visit. However, any lesion in
immunocompromised individuals must be immediately excised. Furthermore, suspected solitaries cases that fail to respond within 4 to 6 weeks
demands obligatory surgical excision. We completely agree with these propositions, but this protocol is not always straightforward, as
occurred in the present case. In this sense, only those cases with clear identification of static or regression phases should be closely
accompanied. As in the present case, noticeable involution after surgical intervention should also be regarded as indicative of KA. On the
other hand, lesions that are clinically or even histopathologically identified as possible KA but that are examined on its growth stage
should be better treated aggressively since it is very difficult at this moment, if not impossible, to reach an absolute distinction of this
lesion from a SCC or other aggressive entity. Microscopic diagnosis of KA requires complete excision or at least a partial biopsy that
includes the center and both margins of the lesion, which are essential to evidence sharp demarcation between tumor and stroma, cup-shaped
appearance and a deep but distinct collar-like invasive front of the epithelium1,6,7,8. Abundant and atypical mitosis, as well as
pleomorphism must favor SCC 4. Immunohistochemistry can be performed to aid in differentiation between KA and SCC 1,9 Whether spontaneous or
stimulated by prior surgical manipulation, regression has been highlighted as the only definitive evidence for KA, but only few
photographic-proven series are available in the English literature4,6,11. In this sense, most of the KA is completely excised because
pathological and esthetically unpleasant scarring may develop in the lesion site after involution6. It was not observed in the present case.
There are other reports demonstrating none to only acceptable scar after resolution4. Finally, initial presentation of KA may be worrisome,
but there are indications that patients usually tolerate well follow-up as they see the lesion getting smaller4. Observation procedure is
not necessarily associated with increased rates of recurrences, but evidence for this is still scarce6. The herein documented complete
regression of KA was probably influenced by inflammatory changes occurred after biopsy. Since it may be very difficult to distinguish KA
from other aggressive pathological entities, it should be better managed by complete resection. Only cases presenting indisputable
regression should be carefully followed-up until complete disappearance.
