Germinomas arising in the sella turcica are difficult to differentiate from autoimmune hypophysitis because of similar clinical and
pathological features. This differentiation, nevertheless, is critical for patient care due to different treatments of the two diseases. We
report the case of an 11-year-old girl who presented with diabetes insipidus and growth retardation, and was found to have an intra- and
supra-sellar mass. Initial examination of the pituitary biopsy showed diffuse lymphocytic infiltration of the adenohypophysis and absent
placental alkaline phosphatase expression, leading to a diagnosis of hypophysitis and glucocorticoid treatment. Because of the lack of
clinical and radiological response, the pituitary specimen was re-examined, revealing this time the presence of scattered c-kit and Oct4
positive germinoma cells. The revised diagnosis prompted the initiation of radiotherapy, which induced disappearance of the pituitary mass.
Immunological studies showed that the patient’s serum recognized antigens expressed by the patient’s own germinoma cells, as well as
pituitary antigens like growth hormone and systemic antigens like the Sjögren syndrome antigen B and alpha-enolase. The study first reports
the presence of pituitary and systemic antibodies in a patient with intrasellar germinoma, and reminds us that diffuse lymphocytic
infiltration of the pituitary gland and pituitary antibodies does not always indicate a diagnosis of autoimmune hypophysitis. Germinomas of
the brain are rare, representing between 0.4 and 3.4% of all primary intracranial tumors . They affect predominantly pre-pubertal children ,
and localize more often to the pineal gland or the suprasellar region [2, 3], although bifocal lesions are also described . Clinically,
sellar germinomas present with a triad of diabetes insipidus, hypopituitarism (most commonly GH deficiency), and visual disturbances (both
in acuity and fields). Serologically, germinomas of the brain are usually (85–90%) negative for beta human chorionic gonadotropin (β-hCG)
and alpha-fetoprotein. Pathologically, germinomas feature a characteristic large cell having a centric nucleus with one or more prominent
nucleoli surrounded by a clear and abundant cytoplasm (so-called fried-egg appearance). In addition, these tumors contain numerous
infiltrating lymphocytes. In the majority (75%) of cases, infiltrating lymphocytes are seen side-by-side to nests of neoplastic cells,
establishing a two-cell pattern. In the remaining minority (25%), lymphocytes largely outnumber few isolated neoplastic cells, which
therefore become much more difficult to identify . Sellar germinomas enter most commonly in the differential diagnosis of suprasellar
masses, together with craniopharyngiomas, Rathke cleft cysts, arachnoid cysts, pituitary adenomas, pituitary metastasis, and Wegener
granulomatosis. Occasionally, sellar germinomas localize within the sella turcica and thus enter in the differential of other pituitary
lesions rich in lymphocytes, such as lymphocytic hypophysitis. Hypophysitis can be primary or secondary to systemic or local lesions, such
as Rathke’s cleft cyst, craniopharyngioma, or germinoma . Primary hypophysitis is caused by an autoimmune reaction directed against the
pituitary gland, which becomes pathologically infiltrated by lymphocytes. Primary lymphocytic or autoimmune hypophysitis, abbreviated here
as AH, is more common in women during the fourth decade of life , but rare in children. Only 25 cases have been reported in patients
<18 years old at the time of presentation . During the past 10 years, nine cases of lymphocytic hypophysitis secondary to a germinoma
initially misdiagnosed as primary AH have been reported . In some patients, the initial diagnosis originated from a clinical and
radiological suspicion of hypophysitis, later disproved upon pathological examination . In other patients, a germinoma was suspected
clinically but the first pathological examination failed to reveal germinoma cells because of the dense lymphocytic infiltrate [8–11, 16].
We report here an additional patient with an intra-sellar and supra-sellar germinoma initially misdiagnosed and treated for AH, and describe
the immunological findings as related to antibodies recognizing pituitary and extra-pituitary antigens. An 11-year-old girl was referred for
blurred vision, fatigue, polyuria and polydipsia of 18 months duration. Height and body weight were at the 10th and 3rd percentile,
respectively, and no pubertal development (Tanner I) was present. Her medical and family history was unremarkable. Ophthalmological
examination showed decreased visual acuity and bitemporal inferior quadrantanopia with diffuse bilateral optic pallor. Baseline assessment
of pituitary hormones revealed central hypothyroidism (low free T4 of 0.4 pmol/L with inappropriately normal TSH of 2.24 μIU/mL), decreased
serum IGF-1 (34 ng/mL), and slightly increased prolactin (23.2 ng/mL). Gonadotropins were in the pre-pubertal range (LH < 0.2 mIU/mL and
FSH < 0.7 mIU/mL). Serum AFP (6.2 ng/mL) and β-hCG (<0.2 mIU/mL) were negative. Serum cortisol rose only to 11.2 μg/dL after administration
of 1 μg of ACTH, indicating a partial adrenal insufficiency. Serum and urine electrolytes were normal. She was diagnosed with central
diabetes insipidus based on the clinical presentation and response to DDAVP, and treated with desmopressin nasal spray. Anterior pituitary
hormones were replaced. Cranial MRI (1.5 Tesla magnet) showed an intra- and supra-sellar mass measuring 22 × 16 × 17 mm (Fig. 1a). The mass
compressed the optic chiasm, extended minimally into the hypothalamus and down into the pituitary with no visible posterior pituitary bright
spot. The mass was iso-hypointense on T1 and T2 weighted images, and heterogeneous on T2 weighted images without cystic components or focal
areas of decreased signal suggestive of calcification. The mass markedly enhanced after gadolinium injection; it remained clearly distinct
from the cavernous sinuses, although caused a slight bowing of the supraclinoid portion of both internal carotid arteries with normal flow
void. No other abnormalities were identified. Preoperatively, craniopharyngioma was the favored diagnosis, although germinoma and
granulomatous entities such as sarcoidosis were also included in the differential.Fig. 1Cranial MRI images. Sagittal T1 post-contrast images
showing the sellar and supra-sellar mass at diagnosis (a), after glucocorticoid treatment (b), and after radiotherapy (c) Cranial MRI
images. Sagittal T1 post-contrast images showing the sellar and supra-sellar mass at diagnosis (a), after glucocorticoid treatment (b), and
after radiotherapy (c) A pituitary biopsy was obtained through a fronto-temporal craniotomy approach. Pathological examination of the biopsy
showed an anterior pituitary lobe heavily infiltrated by mononuclear cells, with extensive loss of the normal endocrine cells and acinar
architecture (Fig. 2a). Immunostainings revealed an equal mixture of B (CD79 positive, Fig. 2b) and T (CD3 positive, data not shown)
lymphocytes, and absent placental alkaline phosphatase (PLAP) or β-hCG expression (data not shown). No immunostainings for c-Kit or Oct4
were performed because germinoma cells were not evident, and thus germinoma was not suspected. A diagnosis of AH was made and the patient
began immediately an intravenous steroid pulse therapy (methylprednisolone, 30 mg/kg over 2 h for 3 days), followed by oral prednisone
(2 mg/kg/day) for 2 weeks, tapering the dose in 6 weeks. After such treatment, MRI showed only a marginal decrease in the size of the mass
(Fig. 1b), and visual fields worsened rather than improved. The initial diagnosis of AH was, thus, questioned, prompting a reexamination of
the pituitary biopsy. This second pathological analysis showed in the anterior pituitary single, large, round cells with prominent nucleoli
and abundant clear cytoplasm (Fig. 2c), amongst the dense lymphoid infiltrate. The diagnosis of germinoma was established by demonstrating
that these large cells were positive for c-Kit (Fig. 2d) and Oct4 (data not shown).Fig. 2Pituitary histopathology. a Frozen section of the
pituitary biopsy showing a marked mononuclear cell infiltration of the anterior pituitary. b A pan-B cell staining (CD79) shows the heavy
infiltrate of B lymphocytes (similar pattern was obtained using CD3 for T lymphocytes, data not shown). c H&E staining of the formalin-fixed
pituitary biopsy, showing a few germinoma cells (inset). d c-Kit staining clearly highlights the germinoma cells Pituitary histopathology. a
Frozen section of the pituitary biopsy showing a marked mononuclear cell infiltration of the anterior pituitary. b A pan-B cell staining
(CD79) shows the heavy infiltrate of B lymphocytes (similar pattern was obtained using CD3 for T lymphocytes, data not shown). c H&E
staining of the formalin-fixed pituitary biopsy, showing a few germinoma cells (inset). d c-Kit staining clearly highlights the germinoma
cells The girl was treated promptly with radiation therapy, using the most conformal plan possible to spare the normal adjacent brain. She
received 25.2 Co Gy equivalent to the ventricular region and then a cumulative dose of 41.4 Co Gy equivalent to the area of concern. After
radiation therapy, the visual acuity and the right visual field defect and optic nerve pallor stabilized, whereas the left temporal visual
field defect disappeared. One year after completion of the proton therapy, cranial MRI showed resolution of the suprasellar mass, thickening
of the optic chiasm without definite residual tumor, and a still absent posterior pituitary bright spot (Fig. 1c). Anterior and posterior
pituitary function never recovered. The patient’s serum was tested for the presence of pituitary antibodies by indirect immunofluorescence,
using Macaca mulatta pituitary as the substrate . No pituitary antibodies were found using this method (data not shown), which is known to
have low sensitivity and specificity . To increase the sensitivity of pituitary antibody detection, the patient’s serum was reacted against
normal human pituitary cytosolic proteins, separated by 2-dimensional (2D) gel electrophoresis and blotted onto nitrocellulose membranes as
described . The membranes of three pH ranges (4–5, 5–6, and 6–7) were incubated overnight with the patient’s serum diluted 1:100, and the
antibody binding detected by chemiluminescence as described . After exposure of the film, the membranes were stripped and incubated in the
same fashion with the sera of a known patient with primary AH. Unique protein spots recognized by the germinoma patient were excised from
the gel, digested with trypsin, and sequenced using MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. The germinoma serum recognized six unique protein spots not
detected by the AH serum, in the pH ranges from 5 to 6 (Fig. 3c) and 6 to 7 (Fig. 3d). These spots contained both proteins preferentially
expressed in the pituitary gland, such as growth hormone, and systemic proteins like the Sjögren’s syndrome autoantigen B (La autoantigen)
(Table 1). Accuracy of mass spectrometry identification was confirmed by 1-dimensional gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting using a
recombinant La protein (Fig. 4). The patient’s serum recognized the Sjögren syndrome La protein (lanes 3, 4, and 5), similarly to the serum
of a patient with systemic lupus erythematosus known to have La autoantibodies (lane 1).Fig. 32-D gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting.
Panels a and b represent the Coomassie blue staining of 2-D gels prepared from human pituitary cytosolic proteins, in the pH range from 5 to
6 (a) and 6 to 7 (b). c,d Show the corresponding immunoblotting, after the gels were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and probed
using the serum from the germinoma patientTable 1Mass spectrometry sequencing results, showing amino acid sequences and key features of
peptides identified following trypsin digestion of pituitary cytosolic spot 1 through 6. Spot locations are shown in Fig. 3SpotTryptic
peptide(s)Protein nameIDMW (kDa)aProtein locationProtein function1FDTNSHNDDALLKGrowth hormone 1NP_00050625Cytosol and granulesPromotes
linear growth, influences protein, lipid, and sugar metabolism2KSAIDLEEMASGLNKRSignal recognition particle 54 kDaNP_00312754CytosolBinds to
the signal sequence of a secretory protein, like prolactin, as it emerges from the ribosome2,4MAENGDNEKMAALEAKLa autoantigen (Sjögren
syndrome antigen B, SSB)NP_00313347NucleusInvolved in RNA metabolism2IGSSLYALGTQDSTDICKFSorting nexin 6NP_689419NP_0670724834Mainly in
cytosol but also in nucleus upon signalingAssociates with the cytosolic face of endosomes and mediates retrograde transport of transmembrane
cargo from endosomes to the trans-Golgi network.3TEAASDPQHPAASEGAAAAAASPPLLRVesicle amine transport protein 1NP_06597842Membrane
proteinInvolved in vesicular transport4KDATNVGDEGGFAPNILENKE and KVVIGMDVAASEFFRSEnolase 1, (alpha)NP_00141947CytosolCatalyzes the
reversible dehydration of 2-phosphoglycerate into phosphoenolpyruvate, as part of glycolysis and gluconeogenesis5KPDTIEVQQMK and
AQMVQEDLEKMoesinNP_00243568CytosolAct as a cross-linker between plasma membranes and actin-based cytoskeletons6LALASLGYEK, LANQAADYFGDAFK,
and LLDEEEATDNDLRProgrammed cell death 6 interacting proteinNP_03750696CytosolParticipates in programmed cell deathaApproximate MW(in kDa)
deduced by the amino acid sequenceFig. 41-D gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting. The gel showed that the germinoma patient’s serum
recognized La recombinant protein (added in decreasing concentration from lane 3 to 5). Lane 1 is the positive control using the serum from
a lupus patient known to have La autoantibodies 2-D gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting. Panels a and b represent the Coomassie blue
staining of 2-D gels prepared from human pituitary cytosolic proteins, in the pH range from 5 to 6 (a) and 6 to 7 (b). c,d Show the
corresponding immunoblotting, after the gels were transferred to nitrocellulose membranes and probed using the serum from the germinoma
patient Mass spectrometry sequencing results, showing amino acid sequences and key features of peptides identified following trypsin
digestion of pituitary cytosolic spot 1 through 6. Spot locations are shown in Fig. 3 aApproximate MW(in kDa) deduced by the amino acid
sequence 1-D gel electrophoresis and immunoblotting. The gel showed that the germinoma patient’s serum recognized La recombinant protein
(added in decreasing concentration from lane 3 to 5). Lane 1 is the positive control using the serum from a lupus patient known to have La
autoantibodies Once the diagnosis of germinoma was established, we asked whether germinoma cells were antigenic and recognizable by the
patient’s own antibodies. We thus incubated the patient’s serum with the patient’s pituitary gland biopsy. Pituitary sections (3 μm-thick)
prepared from the formalin biopsy were deparaffinized, re-hydrated, and incubated with hydrogen peroxide to block endogenous peroxidase
activity. Sections underwent microwave antigen retrieval in a 0.1 mmol/L citrate buffer for 18 min, and then overnight incubation at 4°C
with undiluted patient’s serum. After proper washing, sections were treated for 1 h at room temperature with a biotinylated goat anti-human
IgG (diluted 1:500, Jackson Immunoresearch), and then with peroxidase-labeled streptavidin. Sections were finally developed with
3-3′-diaminobenzidine (Sigma, USA) chromogen, and counterstained with hematoxylin. In addition to the expected strong staining of the
numerous IgG-producing plasma cells that infiltrated the patient’s pituitary, the patient’s serum also recognized antigens expressed on the
membrane and cytoplasm of the large neoplastic germinoma cells (Fig. 5).Fig. 5Immunohistochemistry performed using the patient’s own
pituitary biopsy and serum. The serum contains antibodies that recognize the large germinoma tumor cells (arrow), among the heavy lympho-
plasmacytic infiltrate Immunohistochemistry performed using the patient’s own pituitary biopsy and serum. The serum contains antibodies that
recognize the large germinoma tumor cells (arrow), among the heavy lympho-plasmacytic infiltrate The present case report emphasizes the
difficulties sometimes encountered in establishing the correct etiology of non-functioning pituitary masses. These masses share similar
clinical presentations and radiological findings, and often a similar natural history. In both sellar germinomas and AH, in fact, the
hypopituitarism can precede for years a visible pituitary mass [8, 19], so that prolonged symptomatic periods prior to diagnosis are common
. In addition to the similarities indicated above, germinomas and AH can share similar pathological findings. AH is characterized
pathologically by a diffuse infiltration of the pituitary gland with mononuclear cells, predominantly lymphocytes, which disrupt the normal
acinar architecture and destroy the endocrine cells. A similar lymphocytic infiltration can also be seen in germinomas, and sometimes it is
so marked to render the identification of the neoplastic germinoma cells very challenging. It is therefore not unusual for intrasellar
germinomas to be misdiagnosed as AH [9, 20]. Germinomas are highly immunogenic tumors, showing perhaps the highest degree of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes among human neoplasias. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes have been characterized by immunohistochemistry , and are
known to favorably affect the clinical outcome of germinomas [5, 22]. Tumor infiltrating lymphocytes are present independently of the
anatomic location of the germinoma and despite a low or absent expression of major histocompatibility class I molecules . The reason for
this rich lymphoid infiltrate in germinomas, however, remains unknown. We postulated that germinoma cells express a variety of antigens,
some of which are never seen by the host immune system, and thus capable of initiating a polyclonal immune response. In keeping with this
hypothesis, we showed that the patient’s germinoma cells, located within her pituitary gland, were recognized by the patient’s own serum,
indicating the existence of germinoma-specific autoantigens. The patient’s serum also contained autoantibodies recognizing numerous proteins
present in the pituitary. Some proteins, like growth hormone, were restricted to the pituitary gland, thus indicative of pituitary-specific
autoimmunity. Other proteins, like the La autoantigen, were systemic and detected in the absence of signs or family history of Sjögren
syndrome. This “aberrant” and broad antigenic recognition could represent an early event in the pathway leading to the recruitment of tumor
infiltrating lymphocytes by germinoma cells. Once homed to the germinoma site, the immune response could then spread to the organ/tissue
harboring the germinoma (the pituitary gland in this case), secondarily causing organ-specific abnormalities (hypopituitarism in our
patient). In summary, we report a case of intra- and supra-sellar germinoma initially misdiagnosed as AH, and provide insights to explain
the lymphocytic infiltration typically seen in germinomas. This work was supported in part by NIH grant DK080351 to PC. The recombinant La
protein was a gift of Dr. Felipe Andrade. Angelika Gutenberg and Jennifer J. Bell contributed equally.
