Despite the different orthodontic approaches to Class II subdivision malocclusions one has also to consider the skeletal components before
undertaking any treatment protocol. Significant involvement of the skeletal structures may require a combined surgical orthodontic
treatment, which has remained stable for more than four years, as illustrated in this case report. Class II subdivision malocclusions can be
corrected through a variety of treatment protocols, depending on the etiological factor which produces the asymmetric dentoalveolar
characteristics of the malocclusion1,11–15,24,29. However, when there is also a severe skeletal component associated with the malocclusion,
such as a vertical growth pattern and a retruded mandible, a combined surgical approach would be the best treatment option2,7,8,26,30,33.
Therefore, the purpose of this article is to describe the combined surgical/orthodontic diagnosis and treatment of a Class II subdivision
malocclusion with these characteristics and discuss the pros and cons of this approach. J.F.P presented for orthodontic treatment at the
private office of Dr. MJ with the chief complaint of protrusive incisors and gummy smile. He was 16 years and 9 months old with a Class II
Division 1 subdivision right malocclusion with 7mm of overjet, lower midline deviated 2 mm to the right, a retrognathic mandible, a
hyperdivergent skeletal pattern and incompetent lips (Figures 1 to 3 and Tables 1 and 2). The treatment objectives were to improve the
facial profile, correcting the retrognathic mandible, the excessive lower anterior face height, the gummy smile and the mandibular dental
midline discrepancy, finishing with ideal overbite and overjet. Based on the objectives one of the treatment options would be to extract 2
maxillary premolars and 1 mandibular premolar on the Class I side1,5,6,11–15,28,29,32. However, this would not reduce his excessive lower
anterior face height and would not improve his retrognathic mandible. Consequently, no improvement in his gummy smile could be anticipated.
Another treatment option consisted of extracting the mandibular left first premolar, retracting the lower anterior teeth and surgically
advancing the mandible while impacting the maxilla. Maxillary impaction can significantly improve a gummy smile3,20,21. Because the patient
and his parents were chiefly concerned with the gummy smile, they chose the second option. Pre-adjusted 0.022x0.030-inch slot fixed
appliances were used. After extraction of the mandibular left first premolar, leveling and alignment with the usual wire sequence of
0.016-inch nitinol, followed by 0.016, 0.018 and 0.020-inch round stainless steel archwires was accomplished (Figure 4). Left anterior
retraction was performed with rectangular stainless steel archwires (0.019 x 0.025-inch). Twenty-five months later, when the left canine
reached a Class II relationship and the extraction space was closed, orthognathic surgery was undertaken. The surgical protocol consisted of
impacting the maxilla 7mm anteriorly and 4mm posteriorly, with 1mm of advancement. This would also produce a counter-clockwise mandibular
rotation, projecting the chin anteriorly. Surgery in the mandible consisted of an advancement and counterclockwise intramandibular rotation
to adapt it to the differencial impaction of the maxila. Subsequent minor orthodontic finishing procedures took an additional year. The
patient was retained with a maxillary Hawley plate and a mandibular bonded canine-to-canine retainer. Total active treatment time was 3
years and 1 month. The extraoral photographs show a symmetric, harmonious relationship of the facial soft tissue and a pleasant profile,
with passive lip competence. A Class I bilateral canine occlusion with normal anterior relationship was obtained (Figures 5 to 7). The
panoramic radiograph revealed good root parallelism and bone integration in the maxillary right canine area, as well as root length control
in the maxillary incisors (Figure 8). The superimposition shows the amount of maxillary impaction and consequent mandibular counterclockwise
rotation contributing to a more favorable anteroposterior chin position and improvement in lip competence, despite the increase in lower
anterior face height (Figure 9). Cephalometrically, there was no increase in mandibular length, but due to the counterclockwise mandibular
rotation there was an increase in mandibular protrusion, which contributed to reduce the apical base anteroposterior discrepancy and profile
convexity. According to recently suggested classification of Class II subdivision malocclusions, this case would be classified as a Type 1
subdivision case because the maxillary midline is coincident to the midsagittal plane and the mandibular midline is deviated to the
right11–15,29. It is also suggested in these cases, extraction of two maxillary premolars and one mandibular premolar on the Class I side,
provided that the patient's profile allows for some incisor retraction1,5,6,11–15,28,29,32. The patient's profile would allow some
retraction of the incisors. However, this treatment protocol would not be able to decrease his gummy smile, which was his chief complaint,
and improve his mandibular retrognathism. Therefore, this was the reason why the patient and his parents selected the surgical-orthodontic
approach. This shows that despite there are some suggested treatment protocols for Class II subdivision treatment, a thorough examination of
all the aspects has to be performed before a conclusive treatment plan is elaborated. Had the patient refused a surgical intervention, the
three-premolar extraction protocol could be performed. However, the gummy smile and the mandibular retrognathism would not improve.
Extraction of the first left mandibular premolar and retraction of the anterior segment was performed with the intention of creating a
bilateral canine Class II dental malocclusion that would allow symmetric advancement of the mandible, whereas it was symmetric. If the
mandible was asymmetric, maintenance of the asymmetric canine malocclusion would be indicated, requiring surgical correction with asymmetric
mandibular advancement16. With differential impaction of the maxilla, 7mm anteriorly and 4mm posteriorly, there was a counterclockwise
mandibular rotation which concurrently advanced the mandible, correcting the Class II malocclusion. The surgical mandibular advancement was
also associated to an intramandibular counterclockwise rotation to adapt it to the differential impaction of the maxilla, so that no
increase in the effective mandibular length was observed (Table 2). This treatment protocol was possible to be undertaken because there was
no apparent skeletal facial asymmetry of the patient as is usually the case in Class II subdivision patients1,15,24 (Figure 1). Therefore,
no asymmetric surgery had to be performed. The cephalometric treatment changes demonstrate the effect of the treatment protocol on the
dentoskeletal structures. There was an increase in mandibular prognathism, with resultant improvement in apical base anteroposterior
relationship and facial convexity. The SN to occlusal plane angle increased, despite the counterclockwise mandibular rotation. Probably this
was consequent to post-surgical use of Class II elastics to improve the dental anteroposterior relationship4,18,22,25. FMA and SN.GoGn
decreased, as expected, with the counterclockwise mandibular rotation. Another possible side effect of Class II elastics were the mandibular
incisor labial proclination and protrusion that occurred. In fact, despite the good patient compliance with elastics use, the canines on the
left side still demonstrate a slight Class II relationship (Figures 5 and 6). The maxillary impaction decreased the interlabial gap and the
maxillary incisor exposure. These were the most important changes required by the patient and his parents. Therefore, as these expectations
were met with the proposed treatment, they were very satisfied with the results. Treatment of Class II subdivision malocclusions, after a
careful diagnosis is performed, can be orthodontically handled throughout a variety of treatment protocols. However, if a severe skeletal
discrepancy is associated with the malocclusion, a combined orthodontic-surgical approach, as presented, will provide a better esthetic
result for the patient. Asymmetry of the malocclusion has to be associated with facial asymmetry. If the face is also asymmetric, the
asymmetric malocclusion is maintained pre-surgically, but if the face is symmetric, the malocclusion must be modified so that the basal bone
can be symmetrically manipulated.
