SUNCT has been reported in association with abnormalities of the brainstem and pituitary region. We present a patient with a history of left
optic nerve hypoplasia, mild hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction, and SUNCT starting in adolescence. SUNCT with an early age of onset may be
associated with congenital abnormality of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis. Short-lasting unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with
conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT) was first described in 1978 with diagnostic criteria established in 2004 [1, 2]. If associated
with other cranial autonomic symptoms or without both conjunctival injection and tearing, the syndrome is classified as SUNA (short-lasting
unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with autonomic features) . SUNCT and SUNA are classified as trigeminal autonomic cephalalgias along
with cluster headaches, and paroxysmal hemicrania with all of these headache syndromes sharing unilateral headache pain in a V1 trigeminal
distribution and ipsilateral activation of cranial parasympathetics . SUNCT has been reported in association with acquired and congenital
abnormalities of the brainstem and pituitary region . We report a case of SUNCT with onset in adolescence in a patient with unilateral optic
nerve hypoplasia (ONH) and mild hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. A 27-year-old Caucasian woman with a history of left ONH diagnosed
before 2 years of age was seen for evaluation of brief head pains. These headaches began at age 14. These head pains occurred over the right
orbital region and lasted for around 30 s and rarely for more than a minute. The pain was described as sharp and severe. The right eye
became injected with tearing and right eyelid edema also occurred during the headaches. The headaches would occur three or more times per
day for 2–3 days. The patient would have this pattern of headaches 2–3 times per year with no apparent seasonal or diurnal pattern. The
attacks appeared to be spontaneous with no clear triggers. The episodes were relatively infrequent but were frightening to the patient and
her family. These had been previously considered a manifestation of anxiety. The patient had a history of abnormal menstrual cycles and
galactorrhea starting in adolescence. The patient reported having hyperprolactinemia but prolactin levels from adolescence were not
available for our review. In adolescence, she was tried on bromocriptine that did not adequately control her galactorrhea, but she had not
had galactorrhea over the preceding 3 years. She has a history of two miscarriages although she completed three natural pregnancies. The
patient had elevated prolactin levels of 31.0 and 50.3 ng per milliliter (normal range 3.34–26.72 ng/ml) drawn at our facility and a low
level of luteinizing hormone 0.76 milli-international units per milliliter (normal range 1.2–103.0 mIU/ml depending on stage of menstrual
cycle) with normal levels of follicle stimulating hormone, renin, aldosterone, growth hormone, insulin-like growth factor-1,
adrenocorticotrophic hormone, and thyroid stimulating hormone. Beginning in adolescence, the patient had spells of brief confusion and
autonomic symptoms felt to be related to hypoglycemia with finger stick blood glucose levels of 40–50 during or immediately after these
spells. The patient had a personal history of simple febrile seizures occurring before age 2 with a family history of simple febrile
seizures in her father, twin brother, and in two of her children. There is no other family member with documented ONH. The patient had a
normal developmental history and growth velocity throughout childhood and adolescence. Neurologic examination was remarkable for strabismus
and visual function limited to light perception in the left eye. MRI of the Brain with and without contrast revealed a hypoplastic left
optic nerve (Fig. 1). The septum pellucidum was present. An MRI of the sellar region with contrast revealed an abnormality that followed the
signal of cerebrospinal fluid on T1 and T2 sequences without complete attenuation on FLAIR sequences consistent with a pituitary cyst
(Fig. 1). The sellar region otherwise appeared normal and there was no deviation of the infundibulum. A seizure protocol MRI brain did not
reveal any abnormalities suggestive of a malformation of cortical development. No abnormalities of the Meckel’s cave region or posterior
fossa were noted on any of these studies. An electroencephalogram was within normal limits for age.Fig. 1a Coronal T2 sequence and b coronal
FLAIR sequence showing a small right pituitary cyst and normal septum pellucidum. c Coronal T1 sequence with gadolinium showing a normal
pituitary gland and infundibulum. d Coronal orbital inversion recovery sequence showing left optic nerve hypoplasia a Coronal T2 sequence
and b coronal FLAIR sequence showing a small right pituitary cyst and normal septum pellucidum. c Coronal T1 sequence with gadolinium
showing a normal pituitary gland and infundibulum. d Coronal orbital inversion recovery sequence showing left optic nerve hypoplasia The
patient has been followed for 8 months and continues to have a similar headache pattern. The patient’s headaches are infrequent and
unpredictable and determining an appropriate treatment strategy has been difficult. The headaches do not occur frequently enough to require
preventive therapy. The patient is hesitant to start anti-epileptic medications such as topiramate or lamotrigine, so we prescribed
indomethacin 25 mg to be used up to three times per day during symptomatic periods with the goal of reducing headache frequency and headache
days. The patient has not yet tried the medication. The patient’s headache syndrome met ICHD-2 criteria for short-lasting, unilateral
neuralgiform headaches with conjunctival injection and tearing (SUNCT), and was consistent with more recent descriptions of this syndrome .
This patient did not report cutaneous or other triggering factors as seen in many SUNCT patients although spontaneous attacks may be present
in 14–28% of SUNCT patients . The clinical features were not suggestive of short-lasting paroxysmal hemicrania or trigeminal neuralgia. We
elected a trial of indomethacin during symptomatic periods. The efficacy of this therapeutic strategy has not yet been determined. SUNCT has
been shown to have increased activation in the hypothalamus ipsilateral to the symptoms and in another case bilaterally on functional MRI
[4, 5]. There is also a case of SUNCT responding to hypothalamic stimulation ipsilateral to the symptoms and a case of a SUNCT patient
responding to treatment with clomiphene citrate presumably due to its effects on the hypothalamus . There are numerous cases of SUNCT
occurring in patients with prolactinomas sometimes during treatment with cabergoline or bromocriptine . SUNCT has also been in two patients
with congenital bone abnormalities, basilar impression and craniosynostosis, with presumed involvement of the posterior fossa . SUNCT
typically has age of onset between 35 and 65 years with a mean around age 50 although ranges of age 10–77 have been reported [2, 3]. SUNCT
associated with pituitary or brainstem abnormalities may have a slightly earlier age at onset with a mean around age 43 in one review . The
case of craniosynostosis had onset of SUNCT at age 14 similar to the age of onset in our patient suggesting that congenital abnormalities of
the posterior fossa or hypothalamic-pituitary axis may precipitate an earlier age of onset . ONH is bilateral in 80% of cases .
Hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction occurs in 75% of patients with ONH and hyperprolactinemia occurs in 62% of these patients . The pituitary
gland is abnormal in only 13% of patients with ONH and the septum pellucidum is absent in 38% of patients . There may be a higher risk of
endocrine dysfunction in ONH patients with an absent septum pellucidum and abnormal pituitary gland on neuroimaging but this is not absolute
as patients without these imaging features can still have hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. Patients with unilateral ONH are at lower risk
of hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction than those with bilateral disease although dysfunction occurs in 69% of patient’s with unilateral ONH
(compared to 81% with bilateral ONH) . Our patient’s chronic hyperprolactinemia, abnormal menstrual cycles, and presumed hypoglycemic
episodes were suggestive of mild hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction. We were able to document hyperprolactinemia and low levels of
luteinizing hormone, which were the likely associated with her history of abnormal menstrual cycles and galactorrhea. The strong personal
and family history of simple febrile seizures may indicate a dysfunction of temperature regulation although another heritable cause cannot
be excluded. Problems with body temperature regulation have been reported in ONH, presumably due to hypothalamic dysfunction, with these
patients sometimes requiring hospitalizations to rule out infections . Growth hormone deficiency and adrenocorticotrophic hormone deficiency
are among the most common endocrinopathies in ONH patients, both of which can result in hypoglycemia . We were not able to document a
deficiency of growth hormone or adrenocorticotrophic hormone to explain the episodes of presumed hypoglycemia. Our patient had a pituitary
abnormality on MRI ipsilateral to her symptoms. The imaging characteristics were most consistent with a pituitary cyst and there was no
other abnormality of her sellar region. We felt the pituitary cyst was most likely an incidental finding and not the likely cause of her
mild hypothalamic dysfunction and SUNCT headaches. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of SUNCT in a patient with ONH. We
hypothesize that there is an association between SUNCT headaches and the mild, hypothalamic-pituitary dysfunction in our patient. Congenital
abnormality of the hypothalamic-pituitary axis may also explain the onset of this headache syndrome in adolescence. None. The opinions or
assertions contained herein are the private views of the authors and are not to be construed as official or as reflecting the views of the
Department of the Army or the Department of Defense.
