A 37-year-old female, who had received modified radical mastectomy for cancer of her right breast, presented with decreased visual acuity in
the left eye after radiation therapy for the management of the metastasis to her right brain 14 months ago. After ocular examination, we
diagnosed her as radiation retinopathy. At the time of the first visit, the corrected best visual acuity was 0.4 in the left eye, and fundus
examination revealed cotton wool spots and cystoid macular edema (CME). The findings in the right eye were normal except for cotton wool
spots in the superior major arch. Fluorescein angiography (FA) showed marked telangiectasia and microaneurysms in her left eye but tiny
microaneurysms in her right eye. Subsequent optical coherent tomography (OCT) showed CME. We injected intravitreal triamcinolone acetonide
(TA). Two weeks after treatment, the visual acuity was improved to 0.6 and the retinal thickness was decreased. Three months later, the
visual acuity in the left eye was dropped to 0.3 due to the recurrence of CME, so we injected intravitreal TA again. Five months later,
visual acuity was improved to 0.5 and OCT revealed the improvement of CME. The incidence of radiation retinopathy is higher in the side
nearer to radiation, but careful radiation blocking is also required on the opposite side of irradiation site considering the possibility of
radiation retinopathy and careful observation is required on both sides of the eyes when performing fundus examination. Radiation
retinopathy gradually progresses for a given period of time after irradiation in oculi or cranium, and results in various lesions of the
retina and the retinal vessels such as microaneurysm, telangiectasia, capillary non-perfusion, vascular obstruction, vascular leaking,
perivascular inflammation, papilledema, hard exudates, and neovascularization. It finally gives rise to neovascular glaucoma, retinal new
vessel, tractional retinal detachment and vitreous hemorrhage at late stage.1-4 It is difficult to presume the exact incidence of radiation
retinopathy, but it is reported that radiation retinopathy is rarely induced 6 months before or 3 years after radiation therapy.5 As the
dose of total radiation increases, the possibility of developing radiation retinopathy also increases, and at the same radiation dose, the
frequency of radiation retinopathy increases in the closer eye.6 In this case, radiation retinopathy occurred in the left eye despite the
radiation therapy to the right frontal area. We report this case in which the contralateral eye radiation retinopathy developed sparing the
ipsilateral eye. A 37-year-old female visited with a complaint of gradually decreased visual acuity. At the first ophthalmological
examination, the corrected best visual acuities in the right eye and the left eye were 1.0 and 0.4 respectively. Slit lamp examination
revealed that there was no specific finding in the anterior segment, and the funduscopic finding of both eyes showed that cotton wool spots,
macular edema and vascular tortuosity were present around the optic disc in the left eye (Fig. 2A), but the right eyes was unremarkable
except the suspected cotton wool spots near superotemporal arcade (Fig. 2C). Fluorescein angiography revealed microaneurysms and macular
edema in the left eye (Fig. 2B), and right eye showed minimal microaneurysms without macular edema (Fig. 2D). We found that the thickness of
macula was increased when measured by optical coherent tomography (Fig. 3A). Past medical history included modified radical mastectomy for
right breast cancer 5 years ago. She had no medical history of diabetes, hypertension and systemic vascular disease and no evidence of
abnormalities in laboratory finding. One year before this visit, she was confirmed to have metastatic tumor on her right frontal lobe shown
on MRI (Fig. 1) which was taken after a sudden convulsion. And she had received radiation therapy of fractionated external irradiation to
the whole brain (3,000 cGy/10fraction) for 2 weeks and local boost irradiation (1,200 cGy) After that, she was transferred to another
hospital for gamma knife surgery on that lesion. Total dose of gamma knife surgery on the tumor bed was 40 Gy and the amount of irradiation
for each eye was 0.2 Gy. Immediate intravitreal TA injection was performed for macular edema and two weeks later, the visual acuity was
improved to 0.6. But the visual acuity was decreased to 0.3 again 3 months later, so we performed intravitreal TA injection again. Three
months after the second injection, the fundus examination and optical coherent tomography revealed that retinal thickness was improved and
the corrected best visual acuity was 0.5. Radiation therapy is a useful treatment option for malignant or benign tumor, and it is an
important treatment for head and neck cancer. However, there are various side effects of radiation therapy including blepharitis,
keratoconjunctivitis, corneal epithelial atrophy, cataract, etc. But it is reported that complication appears slowly at posterior segment
such as the optic nerve as compared to anterior segment after radiation therapy.3,7 Radiation retinopathy is microangiopathy that is
developed several months or several years after radiation therapy, accompanying with occlusion of retinal vessels and change of
permeability.5 In 1933, Stallard8 reported radiation retinopathy for the first time, and Seong et al.9 reported a case of radiation
retinopathy for the first time in Korea followed by several reports on cases. It is reported that the higher the total exposed radiation
dose and the higher the fraction dose, the higher frequency of development of radiation retinopathy.1 In general, 35 Gy is the highest limit
of safe radiation dose,10 and there is little chance of causing radiation retinopathy with lesser radiation dose than that.6,11-13 It is
reported that there is a 50% chance of developing radiation retinopathy with a dose of 60 Gy and 85-90% chance with a dose of 70-80 Gy.10,14
Parsons et al.12 reported that the danger of radiation retinopathy is higher in the higher radiation dose exposed per a time, and the
radiation dose should not exceed 1.8-1.9 Gy per a time. Furthermore, the nearer the eye is to the irradiation site, the more radiation
retinopathy develops. According to Amoaku et al.,6 after performing radiation therapy, radiation retinopathy develop in ocular or
periorbital area with 85.7% chance, in paranasal sinus with 45.4% chance, in nasopharynx with 36.4% chance and in cranium with 3.1% chance.
Although the higher amount of total radiation dose and increased fraction dose, the higher chance of developing radiation retinopathy gets,
there is a discrepancy among reporters about threshold of radiation dose that causes radiation retinopathy. Merriam et al.10 reported that
it is safe within 35 Gy of radiation dose, while they reported that radiation retinopathy can be developed with lesser amount of radiation
dose in another report. Peterson et al.15 performed radiation therapy with a dose of 20 Gy to 242 people and 30 Gy to 69 people, and
reported that there was no occurrence of radiation retinopathy during the follow-up period. And some report that radiation retinopathy was
not developed to a patient who was exposed to 25-45 Gy of radiation dose.12,16 It is also reported that the development of radiation
retinopathy can be quickened when accompanying chemotherapy that makes retinal vasculature be easily damaged by radiation and increases the
risk of radiation retinopathy.5,7 It is also reported that existing abnormal vascular disease such as diabetic retinopathy, works as a risk
factor for the development of radiation retinopathy. According to Gass,17 diabetic retinopathy can be aggravated in the retina where
radiation therapy was performed, and Brown et al.5 reported that macular injury was induced to one person among 20 people who have diabetes.
In general, the nearer to irradiation site, the frequency of developing radiation retinopathy increases, but in this case, total dose of
external beam radiation was 30 Gy and local booster irradiation dose on tumor bed was 12 Gy which are lower doses to induce radiation
retinopathy. We could not find radiation retinopathy in the right eye despite the large dose of brachytherapy given to the right eye.
Rather, radiation retinopathy was developed only in the left eye where the lesser amount of radiation was exposed. This patient does not
have diabetes, but was being treated with chemotherapy as well as radiation therapy. Despite of the effects of comparatively small amount of
radiation, radiation retinopathy was induced in the left eye that can be explained by several reports that said radiation retinopathy can be
induced with little amount of radiation when accompanying chemotherapy.5,7,17 Laser photocoagulation is a widely used and approved treatment
for macular edema caused by radiation retinopathy,18-20 but in this case, we performed injection of intravitreal triamcinolone acetonide for
the treatment of macular edema resulting in decreased retinal thickness and improved the visual acuity. Cortcosteroids have been used for
the treatment of cystoids macular edema as a mechanism that includes inhibition of arachidonic acid pathway, downregulation of vascular
endothelial growth factor and reduction of blood-retinal barrier breakdown.21-23 After 3 months of observation additional intravitreal
triamcinolone acetonide injection was performed because of recurrence of macular edema, and that decreased retinal thickness and improved
the visual acuity. After 5 months of observation, there was no recurrence of CME and the vision remains stable. From this case, we conclude
that careful radiation blocking is also required on the opposite side of irradiation site, considering that radiation retinopathy can be
developed with a little amount of radiation if combined with chemotherapy, at the site away from irradiation site. This case also
demonstrates that careful observation is needed for both eyes when performing fundus examination, and the injection of intravitreal
triamcinolone acetonide is an effective treatment for cystoid macular edema when radiation retinopathy has developed. Axial section (A)
coronal section (B) of T1 weighted MRI shows the brain metastasis at the right frontal lobe. Color fundus photograph and fluorescein
angiography of both eyes. (A) Color fundus photograph of the left eye at initial examination shows diffuse macular edema, cotton wool spots
and tortuous retinal vessel at the superotemporal arcade. (B) Fluorescein angiography of left eye at initial examination shows vascular
telangiectasis, and aneurysmal dilation of retinal vessels with leakage of dye. (C) Color fundus photograph of the right eye at initial
examination shows suspected cotton wool spot near superotemporal arcade and other findings are unremarkable. (D) Fluorescein angiography of
right eye at initial examination shows minimal microaneurysms without macular edema. (A) Optical coherence tomogram shows marked cystoid
macula edema. (B) Five months after intravitreal triamcinolone acetonide injection, optical coherence tomogram shows decreased macular
thickness and marked improvement of cystoid macula edema.
