Radiofrequency ablation (RFA) is a minimally invasive, image-guided procedure for the treatment of hepatic tumors. While RFA is associated
with relatively low morbidity, sporadic bronchobiliary fistulae due to thermal damage may occur after RFA, although the incidence is rare.
We describe a patient with a bronchobiliary fistula complicated by a liver abscess that occurred after RFA. This fistula was obliterated
after placement of an external drainage catheter into the liver abscess for eight weeks. A bronchobiliary fistula (BBF), defined as a
passageway between the biliary and bronchial trees, is a very rare condition. In Western countries, trauma, postoperative biliary stenosis
and biliary lithiasis are the predominant causative factors of a BBF (1, 2). For the treatment of patients with a BBF, endoscopic or
transhepatic biliary drainage has been successful and avoids the need for surgical exploration (1, 3, 4). A BBF is also an extremely rare
complication of radiofrequency ablation (RFA). To date, only seven cases of BBF, including one fatality, have been reported after RFA of
hepatic tumors (5-10). In one case, a patient was managed with the use of an endoscopic sphincterotomy that resulted in complete closure of
the fistulae (5). Four patients underwent both endoscopic and percutaneous drainage for successful management of a BBF and/or an associated
biloma or abscess (6, 7, 10). Another patient was managed with the use of an external drainage catheter; however, the fistula was still
persistent two months later, although symptomatic improvement was achieved (8). We present the first case of a BBF as a complication of RFA
that was eliminated by catheter placement for external drainage. A 43-year-old woman positive for hepatitis B surface antigen was diagnosed
as having hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) with two intrahepatic tumor nodules, one nodule 2 cm in diameter in the left lateral segment of the
liver and the other nodule 3.5 cm in diameter in the dome. The patient underwent one session of transarterial chemoembolization (TACE),
followed by percutaneous ethanol injection targeting the area of the residual viable tumor in the liver dome. However, two months later, a
viable portion was found to be present at the margin of the nodule in the hepatic dome and the patient was referred to our center. At that
time, the laboratory test results included an aspartate transaminase (AST) level of 86 IU/L (reference, 0-40 IU/L), alanine transferase
(ALT) level of 88 IU/L (reference, 0-40 IU/L), total bilirubin level of 1.0 mg/dL (reference, 0.2-1.2 mg/dL) and alpha-fetoprotein level of
1,460 ng/mL (reference, 0-20 ng/mL). RFA was performed percutaneously under ultrasonographic guidance, with the use of local anesthesia and
conscious sedation. A single, 17-G, internally cooled electrode (ValleyLab, Burlington, MA) was used and radiofrequency current was emitted
for 12 minutes with a 200 W generator set to deliver maximum power with the automatic impedance control method. Two ablations were performed
with the use of the same method. A follow-up CT scan obtained immediately after RFA showed complete ablation of the HCC without direct
evidence of diaphragmatic injury except for a small amount of reactive pleural effusion (Fig. 1A). The patient reported pain at the right
upper quadrant of the abdomen and right shoulder after RFA and the pain gradually improved over five days with the administration of
analgesics. The patient developed a 38.0℃ fever on the next day after RFA, which subsided after one day. Two months after RFA, the patient
revisited our hospital with a complaint of a productive cough with large amounts of green-yellow sputum (up to 200 mL per day), accompanied
with a 38.4℃ fever with chills and right upper quadrant abdominal pain. Decreases in breath sounds on the right lower lung field and slight
tenderness to percussion of the right upper quadrant of the abdomen were noted on a physical examination. Icteric sclera or
hepatosplenomegaly was not noted. Plain chest radiograph demonstrated the presence of an ill-defined consolidation in the right lower lobe
with right-sided pleural effusion. An abdominal CT scan showed the presence of a liver abscess at the RFA site and pneumonia, with a small
abscess in the right lower lung, suggestive of a focal diaphragmatic defect with communication between the lung and liver abscesses (Fig.
1B, C). Ultrasonography-guided percutaneous drainage of the liver abscess with a 10.2 Fr pigtail catheter was performed and 10 ml of thick
dark-yellowish pus mixed with necrotic debris was drained. Contrast material injection via the needle demonstrated the presence of opacified
cavities of the lung and the bronchial tree communicating with the biliary tree, which was consistent with a BBF (Fig. 1D). The patient
coughed vigorously when the above contrast study was performed. No organism other than Bacillus spp, which is a common contaminant, was
isolated from a culture of the drainage material. Following catheter insertion and treatment with antibiotics, symptoms including fever and
bilioptysis were markedly improved. Bile mixed with pus (20 to 100 ml daily) was drained initially, but the rate of drainage gradually
decreased to less than 10 ml per day over a month. Follow-up abdominal CT scans obtained five weeks after catheter insertion showed the
presence of a small residual lesion with low attenuation in the hepatic dome around the catheter, and repeated cholangiography confirmed no
leakage of contrast material through the fistula. The pigtail catheter was therefore removed and antibiotic treatment was discontinued.
However, fever and productive cough with sputum containing bile resumed the day after removal of the pigtail catheter. A new cavitary lesion
with low attenuation and parenchymal consolidation in the right basal lung were observed on CT images, suggesting reopening of the BBF. A
pigtail catheter was reinserted into the remnant abscess in the liver through the previous drainage tract. Percutaneous tubography showed
filling of the contrast material in the right lower lobe of the lung, with contrast material leakage into the right subphrenic space,
indicating the presence of a BBF although there was no definite communication between the biliary and bronchial systems (Fig. 1E).
Thereafter, the amount of percutaneous drainage decreased gradually and the lesions in the liver and lung shrank significantly, as shown on
follow-up CT scans three weeks after reinsertion of the pigtail catheter (Fig. 1F). As there was no drainage for a week and the patient did
not complain of any fistula-related symptoms, the pigtail catheter was removed. Four weeks after removal, there was no evidence of a BBF or
other related lesions on CT images. Two months later, the patient underwent a repeat session of RFA for a recurrent HCC in segment 7 without
any treatment-related complications, including a BBF. Radiofrequency ablation has been increasingly used for the treatment of primary and
metastatic hepatic tumors as an alternative or adjunct to surgical resection. Although RFA is a safe modality overall, RFA is associated
with minor and major complication rates of 9% (9). Biliary complications, including stricture and leakage, are relatively uncommon, with a
prevalence of 1% (9). A BBF as a complication of RFA is extremely rare, with only seven cases reported worldwide (Table 1) (5-10). To the
best of our knowledge, no patient with a BBF that occurred after RFA has undergone successful percutaneous drainage leading to complete
blockage of the fistula. Thus, the present case is the first report of BBF due to RFA that was successfully managed by percutaneous drainage
and safe removal of the catheter. A BBF due to RFA may be caused by rupture of a growing biloma into a diaphragmatic defect caused by
thermal injury, a finding supported by our imaging results. A BBF that occurs after RFA may also depend on tumor location and size. The
proximity of a tumor to the lung base could cause thermal injury to the diaphragm following RFA, and symptomatic biloma formation may
develop in patients with large tumors owing to more severe bile duct damage (8). The ablated tumor in our patient was located in the hepatic
dome adjacent to the right diaphragm, although the tumor was not large. As described in the present case, clinical findings for a BBF
include pneumonitis, fever, chest pain, right upper abdominal pain and cough productive of bile-stained sputum, known as bilioptysis (8).
Plain chest radiographs often show abnormal findings and may demonstrate right pleural effusion, right basilar atelectasis or the presence
of a lung abscess. A CT scan can be used to identify both hepatic abscesses and air within the biliary tree, but images will not delineate a
fistulous tract. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography or percutaneous transhepatic cholangiography will adequately demonstrate the presence
of a BBF (3, 4). In our patient, we were able to identify the fistula tract with tubography after percutaneous drainage. To date, there has
been no consensus on the standard treatment for a BBF. Traditionally, the definitive treatment for a BBF has involved extensive surgery,
with or without simple drainage of the subdiaphragmatic abscess and resection of the fistulous tract (2). The conservative approach that has
been reported most frequently has involved the use of endoscopic sphincterotomy with removal of any stones or sludge, followed by stent
placement in the common bile duct (3, 5). Reduction of the pressure gradient between the common bile duct and the duodenum may lead to
preferential drainage of bile through the stent, which then has a lower pressure than the fistula. The resultant decrease in fistula output
allows the tract to close and heal. Percutaneous drainage for a BBF not related to RFA has been previously described (4). In patients with a
BBF complicated with liver abscess, as in our patient, external drainage of an abscess or biloma can facilitate both alleviation of hepatic
inflammation and the pressure gradient across the biliary tract and bronchial tree. In all of the previous cases, patients with a BBF
following RFA complicated by a biloma or liver abscess underwent external drainage with or without endoscopic drainage (6, 8, 10). We found
that an initial five weeks of percutaneous drainage plus antibiotic therapy was insufficient to clear the fistula tract. Hence, long-term
drainage maintenance with antibiotics after symptomatic improvement is likely to be required for complete remission of a BBF. In summary,
although RFA is a safe and effective modality for the treatment of HCC, the procedure should be performed with caution to prevent BBF
formation in patients with liver dome tumors. We report the first case of a BBF as a complication of RFA in a patient with HCC in the liver
dome adjacent to the right diaphragm, which was successfully eliminated by percutaneous drainage and antibiotic treatment. Bronchobiliary
fistula in 43-year-old woman. A. Follow-up CT scan obtained immediately after radiofrequency ablation shows complete ablation of
hepatocellular carcinoma without direct evidence of diaphragmatic injury, except for small amount of reactive pleural effusion. B. CT scan
obtained two months after radiofrequency ablation shows that previously ablated area has become more hypodense, which was identified as
abscess (arrow). C. Coronal CT image shows consolidation with abscess in right lower lobe of lung (white arrow) and abscess at
radiofrequency ablation site (black arrow), suggestive of focal diaphragmatic defect with communication between lung and liver abscess. D.
Contrast material injection via percutaneous needle opacifies liver abscess (thin white arrow), lung abscess (thick black arrow), bronchial
tree (thick white arrow) and biliary tree (thin black arrow), confirming presence of bronchobiliary fistula. Patient coughed vigorously when
above contrast study was performed. E. Tubography performed with reinsertion of pigtail catheter shows filling of contrast material in right
lower lobe of lung (thick arrow), with contrast leakage into right subphrenic space (thin arrow). F. Abdominal CT image obtained three weeks
after reinsertion of pigtail catheter shows decreased size of abscess in liver dome (arrow). Summary of Literature Describing Bronchobiliary
or Biliopleural Fistula as Complication of Radiofrequency Ablation Note.-BBF = bronchobiliary fistula, BPF = biliopleural fistula, ED =
endoscopic drainage, PD = percutaneous drainage, NA = not available, HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma, RFA = radiofrequency ablation
