Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) are rare malignant tumors, affecting mostly children and adolescents. Only three cases of
primary breast PNETs have been reported in the medical literature, with none in Korea. We present a case of a primary PNET of the breast in
a 33-year-old woman, with imaging and immunohistopathology findings. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNET) are rare, malignant, small-
round-cell tumors of the bone and soft tissue that usually occur in children and young adults (1). In adults, they are extremely rare, but
have been reported in the chest wall and other body parts, including the breast (2-4). Here, we present a case of a primary PNET of the
breast in a 33-year-old woman, with a brief review of the current literature. A 33-year-old woman was referred to the Center for Breast
Cancer because of a growing, palpable mass in her left breast. Two years earlier, she had an excisional biopsy for fibroadenoma in her left
breast at another hospital. During her follow-up care, new lesions were found in her left breast, and these lesions grew over a 6-month
period. One of the masses was biopsied using a Mammotome® (Johnson & Johnson, New Brunswick) biopsy device under sonographic guidance. The
initial pathologic diagnosis was a PNET. After referral to our hospital, the patient underwent positron emission tomography (PET) and no
uptake was reported. Bilateral mammography was performed and showed an ill-defined, isodense mass deep in the left upper inner quadrant,
without evidence of microcalcifications (Fig. 1A). Sonography revealed two adjacent circumscribed, oval, homogeneously low echoic masses
with posterior acoustic enhancement (Fig. 1B). A flow signal was not seen on color Doppler sonography. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
revealed two adjacent circumscribed masses with intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted
images. After gadolinium administration, intense enhancement with washout was seen (Fig. 1C). There was no evidence of infiltration into the
chest wall. The patient underwent a left lumpectomy. The lumpectomy specimen of the left breast revealed a relatively well-circumscribed
tumor, measuring 2.5×2.0×1.5 cm. The cut surface of the tumor was grayish tan, fish flesh-like, and slightly friable (Fig. 1D).
Microscopically, the tumor was composed of small, round cells with inconspicuous nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm. The tumor cells were
arranged in diffuse or compact sheets or lobules (Fig. 1E). By immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were strongly positive for
vimentin, CD99 (Fig. 1F), and FLI-1 but were negative for cytokeratin, leukocyte common antigen, synaptophysin, chromogranin, CD56, desmin,
and myoD1. Six months after the lumpectomy, the patient had no evidence of metastasis or local recurrence. Primitive neuroectodermal tumors
are uncommon, malignant, small-round-cell tumors that arises in soft tissues or bone, most commonly in children and young adolescents.
Primary PNETs demonstrate a predilection for the truncal and axial soft tissue, including the chest wall (Askin tumor), the paravertebral
region (50-60% of cases), and the extremities (20-25% of cases) (5). The thoracopulmonary region (Askin tumor) is the single most common
primary site. Primary PNETs of many organs of the body have been documented (6-11), but only three papers report primary PNET of the breast
(2-4). Previous reports of primary breast PNET show common clinical findings of a growing mass, over a 2-year or 4-month follow-up (2, 3).
In our case, the mass grew over a 6-month period. PNETs of other visceral organs usually present with a painful mass and constitutional
symptoms (5), but in this case, the patient only complained of a palpable, growing mass. Maxwell et al. (3) described sonographic findings
of primary PNET of the breast as a superficial, circumscribed, hypoechoic mass with posterior acoustic enhancement and an apparent
hypoechoic tract extending to the skin. These lesions were misdiagnosed as epidermal inclusion cysts and considered benign (3). In our case,
sonographic findings were similar, but the mass was deep and the mammogram showed no microcalcifications. Our case was an adult patient with
small PNETs on her left breast and no other lesions, such as in the thoracopulmonary region, bone, or other organs, suggesting that the
breast is the primary site. Immunohistochemistry and histology were necessary to confirm the diagnosis. In our case, the tumor was composed
of small, round cells with inconspicuous nucleoli and scanty cytoplasm. The tumor cells were arranged in diffuse or compact sheets or
lobules (Fig. 1E). By immunohistochemical staining, the tumor cells were strongly positive for vimentin, CD99 (Fig. 1F), and FLI-1. CD99
(MIC2) is a cell surface glycoprotein involved in cell adhesion and CD99 positivity confirms the diagnosis of PNET (2, 4). In addition,
fluorescence in situ hybridization is highly specific for Ewing's sarcoma and PNET (4). The findings in computed tomography (CT) and MRI of
PNETs cannot differentiate PNETs from other types of bone and soft tissue tumors (5, 12), but they usually appear as large, non-calcified,
soft tissue masses with a heterogeneous appearance and cystic or necrotic areas on CT. By MRI, signal intensity was similar to muscle on
T1-weighted images and heterogeneously high on T2-weighted images, with variable gadolinium enhancement. Bright, heterogeneously high signal
intensity on T2-weighted images is caused by focal areas of hemorrhage or necrosis (12). We obtained MR images with gadolinium enhancement,
which showed a washout pattern. In conclusion, we diagnosed a primary breast PNET. Although primary breast PNET is extremely rare, a PNET
differential diagnosis might be considered with a growing, morphologically benign mass. Primary primitive neuroectodermal tumors in 33-year-
old woman with palpable mass in left breast. A. Mediolateral oblique mammogram of left breast shows ill-defined, isodense mass deep in upper
inner quadrant (arrows). B. Sonography reveals two adjacent, circumscribed, oval, homogeneously hypoechoic masses with posterior acoustic
enhancement. C. On breast MRI, mass showed intermediate signal intensity on T1-weighted image (T1) and high signal intensity on T2-weighted
image (T2). Intense enhancement was seen during contrast enhancement (CE) (arrows). D. Grossly, tumor is well-circumscribed, grayish tan,
fish flesh, and slightly friable (black arrows). E. Microscopically, tumor is composed of small, round cells with inconspicuous nucleoli and
scanty cytoplasm, which are arranged in sheets or solid nests (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, ×200). F. On immunohistochemical staining,
tumor cells show strong membranous immunoreactivity for CD99.
