Primary erythromelalgia is characterized by burning pain, redness, and warmth in the extremities. We present two cases of primary
erythromelalgia both of whom presented with a history of several months of severe burning pain in both hands and feet. Both patients had
received multiple pain medications with no improvement in symptoms. Pain was relieved by putting affected parts in ice cold water, which
resulted in immersion injury of the affected parts. Both patients stopped taking part in school and social activities. We tried oral
mexiletine, a class Ib antiarrythmic agent, in view of its reported role in various chronic painful conditions. Dramatic improvement was
observed with its use. Both patients improved after several weeks of use, and there were fewer soaking episodes. We observed no adverse
effects with mexilitine therapy. Erythromelalgia is a disorder characterized by severe burning pain, mainly involving the extremities and
associated with erythema and increased temperature of the affected parts. Warmth aggravates the symptoms and cold provides relief.1 Frequent
immersion into ice cold water for relief of pain is a constant feature of the disease and is considered pathognomonic.2 The pain associated
with erythromelalgia is often resistant to treatment. Although a wide variety of therapies have been tried, no effective treatment is yet
available. In a review of data for 168 patients with erythromelalgia at the Mayo clinic it was found that patients had used 84 different
types of medications.3 We present two patients with primary erythromelalgia, both of whom had received a number of painkillers before
reporting to us. Both patients were given a trial of oral mexilitene and showed remarkable response. A 12-year-old male presented to us with
a history of severe burning pain in both hands and feet associated with redness and erythema for the previous 3 months. Pain was aggravated
by heat and classically relieved by placing the hands and feet in ice cold water. Because of the severe pain, the patient would keep both
hands and feet immersed in ice cold water most of the time, as a result of which the patient developed a severe immersion injury (Figure 1).
There was no prior history of drug intake or immunization. Photograph of a 12-year-old child showing erythromelalgia of both hands. Clinical
examination revealed a weight of 35 kg. There was no abnormality apart from the immersion injury and no neurological deficit. The complete
blood count was normal apart from a hematocrit of 45%. RBC mass was 34 mL/kg. A complete metabolic workup, liver function tests, a work-up
for connective tissue disorders (antinuclear antibodies, anti-double stranded DNA), coagulation tests, nerve conduction velocity (NCV),
electromyography (EMG) were within normal limits. Initially, the patient was given aspirin (15 mg/kg/day) for about 1 week with no
improvement in symptoms. Subsequently, morphine (2.5 mg IV every 4 hours) was added, but again the patient showed no improvement. Treatment
was discontinued after 2 weeks. The patient was started on oral mexiletine initially at 100 mg three times a day, which was increased
subsequently to 200 mg three times a day. No adverse effect was observed. Improvement began after 2 weeks of therapy. The frequency,
duration, and intensity of the pain episodes continued to decrease significantly and by 5 weeks of therapy all symptoms completely resolved.
As of 6 months from discharge the patient had experienced very few episodes of mild burning pain, which did not incapacitate the patient.
The patient reported no side effects from mexiletine therapy. An 8-year-old male child presented with burning pain in both hands and feet
associated with erythema for the previous month. Classically, the pain was relieved by immersing the affected part in cold water. Symptoms
were aggravated by heat. The patient had developed immersion injury to both hands. There was no significant illnesses in the past prior to
the disease. The patient was a product of a nonconsanguinous marriage with no family history of any myeloproliferative or connective tissue
disorder. Clinical examination revealed a weight of 25 kg, and immersion injury of the left foot. A complete blood count revealed a
hematocrit of 36%. A complete metabolic workup, liver function tests, workup for connective tissue disorders (antinuclear antibodies, anti-
double stranded DNA), coagulation tests, nerve conduction velocity (NCV), electromyography (EMG) were within normal limits. Initially, the
patient was treated with aspirin for about 1 week with no improvement. Subsequently, gabapentin was added. He showed a partial response to
combination therapy, but the patient was still not able to participate in school and other social activities. He was started on oral
mexiletine, initially 100 mg three times a day, which was increased subsequently to 200 mg three times a day. The frequency, duration, and
intensity of the pain episodes continued to decrease significantly. During regular follow-up for two months after discharge the patient
experienced no side effects from mexilitine and had marked improvement in symptoms with only a few episodes of pain, which were not
incapacitating. Because of lack of understanding of the pathophysiology and its low prevalence, treatment of erythromelalgia is poorly
understood and often difficult to treat. Early studies suggested that aspirin effectively relieved symptoms, but aspirin appears to be
significantly more effective when there is an associated thrombocythaemia and polycythemia vera.2 Various pharmacologic trials have been
conducted with varied results. These include use of tricyclic antidepressants, gabapentin, anticonvulsants, and others.45 Mexiletine has
been used in various chronic painful conditions and has been found quite effective.6 It is a class IB orally active anti-arrhythmic agent, a
sodium-channel inhibitor that shortens the action potential duration. Mutations in regions of chromosome 2q, which contain a cluster of
sodium channel genes, have been identified among patients with primary erythromelalgia.7 Sodium-channel blockers like mexiletine are widely
used to treat neuropathic pain. Subacute or chronic inflammation also produces profound changes in the excitability of primary afferent
neurons innervating the inflamed tissue.8 Recent evidence suggests that post-translational modifications or abnormal expression of sodium
channels in dorsal root ganglion neurons occurs after tissue inflammation.9 In fact, there are few published case reports on the benificial
effect of oral mexiletine in primary erythromelalgia.10 Nathan et al11 reported on an 11-year-old, white male child with primary
erythromelalgia who demonstrated marked improvement following treatment with a combination of intravenous lidocaine and oral mexiletine
therapy. Kuhnert et al10 also demonstrated a similar effect in an adult patient with severe erythromelalgia. Mexiletine has also been found
useful in inflammatory pain in experimental animals12 and in the pain associated with diabetic neuropathy.13 Mexiletine provides analgesia
by blocking sodium channels at both peripheral and central sites. The ability of mexiletine to selectively block nerves in a more
depolarized state makes this drug useful for blocking pain pathways in which neural activity is increased. In summary, we present two cases
of primary erythromelalgia who were suffering from a severe burning pain with a severe degree of immersion injury whose symptoms were
signficantly controlled by oral mexiletine with no recognizable side effect of therapy.
