We report 4 chinese patients with hepatitis B e antigen-positive chronic hepatitis B achieving clearance of HBsAg by using pegylated
interferon alpha-2a for less than 1 year, to provide one clinical clue for the treatment of chronic hepatitis B. Chronic infection with
Hepatitis B virus(HBV) is a major global health problem, affecting 350–400 million people worldwide . Patients who have HBV infection with
positivity for hepatitis B e antigen(HBeAg) and persistently active disease have increased risks for progressive disease leading to liver
cirrhosis and hepatocellular carcinoma. Therefore, for patients with HBeAg positive chronic hepatitis B(CHB), anti-viral therapy is most
important if they have indications for treatment. The end points to assess efficacy of therapy include: reduction of serum HBV DNA to the
undetectable level, normalization of alanine aminotransferase(ALT) levels, HBeAg seroconversion and an improvement of liver disease at
histology. But it is gradually thought that the ultimate therapeutic goal of anti-HBV therapy should furthermore make patients achieve
clearance of hepatitis B surface antigen(HBsAg) or even HBsAg seroconversion . In view of current anti-HBV drugs, however, it is extremely
difficult to implement this goal. Nevertheless, on condition that there is a treatment with effective anti-viral drugs and appropriate
therapeutic schemes, some patients may still be able to achieve it. All 4 patients aged from 14 to 49 yrs-old, including 3 males and 1
female, had suffered from CHB for 1 to 3 years with the sera profile of HBeAg, HBsAg positive, and HBV DNA leveled from 2.71 × 106 copies/mL
to 5.00 × 107 copies/mL. They came to our hospital for pegylated interferon alpha-2a(Pegasys) treatment from March 2006 to Ten 2007. All of
them had neither complications nor other accompanying diseases, also with no history of anti-HBV drug use. Pegasys monotherapy Case 1 was
treated with pegasys at a dose of 135 ug intracutaneously one time per week(for her age was below 18). Case 2 was treated with pegasys at a
dose of 180 ug intracutaneously one time per week. Sequential therapy As both leucopenia and thrombocytopenia occurred in case 3 and case 4
during the treatment of pegasys, we adopted sequential therapy with pegasys and entecavir(Baraclude). Pegasys was administered at a dose of
180 ug intracutaneously one time per week. Baraclude was administered at a dose of 0.5 mg orally one time per day. Leukocyte and platelet
counts, serum HBV DNA and ALT were detected once every month. HBV markers(HBsAg and anti-HBs, HBeAg and anti-HBe, anti-HBc) were detected
once every three months. Among them, serum HBV DNA was arrayed by fluorescent quantitative PCR and HBV markers were arrayed by ELISA. Within
less than 1 year, serum HBV DNA loss, ALT normalization, HBeAg seroconversion, HBsAg clearance occurred in the 4 patients treated with
either pegasys monotherapy (the longest period of treatment was 40 weeks, the shortest period of treatment was 20 weeks) or sequential
therapy with pegasys and baraclude (the longest period of treatment with pegasys was 24 weeks, the shortest period of treatment with pegasys
was 16 weeks). Among them, the latest time when HBsAg clearance occurred (in case 4) was at week 44, and the earliest time when HBsAg
clearance occurred (in case 1) was at week 17. Furthermore, HBsAg seroconversation occurred in case 1 at week 20, which is sustained
positive in 48 weeks follow-up, while HBsAg negative also kept steady in case 2, case 3, case 4 in 60 weeks follow-up, 60 weeks follow-up,
72 weeks follow-up, respectively. All of them are kept under observation until now. The Variations of sera HBV DNA, ALT and HBV markers in
the four patients are outlined in Table 1. Therapeutic efficacy of pegasys in 4 patients with chronic hepatitis B yr, year; wk, week; ALT,
alanine aminotransferase; HBeAg, hepatitis B e antigen; HBsAg, hepatitis B surface antigen; HBV, hepatitis B virus. a interval between the
first time when HBsAg-positive was detected and the date before treatment. b cumulate course between the first day of anti-HBV treatment and
the date when complete response occurred. c HBV DNA<1000 copies/ml. During the course of pegasys treatment, apparent reduction of leukocyte
and platelet counts had occurred in 2 patients (case 3 and case 4) at week 4 and week 10 of therapy respectively, but returned to baseline
levels one month after sequential therapy was adopted (pegasys was paused temporarily, baraclude was administered until the leukocyte and
platelet counts recovered). There were no other remarkable adverse events in all the four cases during the total course of anti-viral
therapy. The aims of treatment for CHB are to achieve sustained suppression of HBV replication, thereby inducing remission of liver diseases
and interrupting progression to liver cirrhosis or hepatocellular carcinoma. Pegylated interferon alpha-2a is created by attaching a large,
branched, 40-kD polyethylene glycol molecule to interferon alfa-2a, This allows for convenient once-weekly dosing, with effective serum
levels maintained throughout the dosing interval. It could efficaciously inhibit the replication of HBV and help eradicate HBV infectious
hepatocytes by dual anti-viral and immunomodulatory mode of action. In contrast to nucleoside analogues, pegylated interferon alpha-2a has a
higher rate of HBeAg seroconversion, lower rate of relapse after treatment cessation, moreover, it has not been observed to induce mutation
of HBV . However, it has a few adverse events such as transient flu-like symptoms, depression and abnormal blood counts . In this study,
both leucopenia and thrombocytopenia had been observed in case 3 and case 4, so we adopted sequential therapy with pegasys and baraclude
(one kind of nucleoside analogues). The results showed that their leukocyte and platelet counts gradually returned to the baseline levels
one month after pegasys was paused and baraclude was administered sequentially, then we continued the administration of pegasys. For the
reason that sequential therapy could effectively evade the inherent adverse events of pegasys and meanwhile, nucleoside analogues could keep
sustained suppression of HBV during the time when pegasys is paused, so the advantageous efficacy of pegasys could be brought into play as
much as possible. By analyzing above materials, we had observed one phenomenon that the clearance of HBsAg occurred in the 4 patients not
very long(1 wk, 18 wks, 1 wk and 6 wks, respectively) after they had achieved HBeAg seroconversion. This may imply that pegylated interferon
alpha-2a probably plays an important role in helping clear HBsAg by means of activating the host immune reaction. Additionally, ALT levels
in the 4 patients were elevated during treatment but gradually normalized at the end of therapy, they also had no clinical symptoms.
Considering that pegylated interferon alpha-2a takes effect by improving the host immune function, we suppose the occurrence of transient
elevated ALT might be a reflection of the course during which HBV infectious hepatocytes are being eradicated. Although limited case numbers
are reported in this article and more patients need to be included for further study, one certain clue, which can be provided to clinical
doctors, is that some patients with HBeAg-positive CHB could probably be expected to achieve the ideal therapeutic goal of HBeAg
seroconversion, HBsAg clearance and even HBsAg seroconversion if they are treated with effective anti-viral drugs and appropriate
therapeutic schemes. Based on our clinical observation, either pegasys monotherapy or sequential therapy with pegasys and baraclude is
efficacious and relatively safe for treating patients with CHB. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YJ conceived the
study and made substantial contributions to its design, acquisition, analysis and interpretation of data. ZL participated in the design and
revised the manuscript critically for important intellectual content. We are grateful to Ping Feng for her helpful comments and suggestions.
