A 15-year-old girl was referred to our hospital because of lethargy, palpitation and headache. Physical examination revealed a girl with
short stature, café-au-lait spots, and left thumb abnormality. The hematologic parameters of the patient included hemoglobin 5.5 g/dL, WBC
2.96×109/L, platelets 38×109/L, and mean corpuscular volume 100 fL. Radiologic examination of the hands and abdomen revealed abnormal
findings that gave a clue to the diagnosis. What is the abnormal finding on this plain radiograph of the hands (Figure 1)? Figure 1Plain
radiograph of the hands. What are the abnormal findings on this abdominal CT scan (Figure 2)? Figure 2Abdominal CT scan. What's your
diagnosis? What is the abnormal finding on this plain radiograph of the hands (Figure 1)? Figure 1Plain radiograph of the hands. Plain
radiograph of the hands. What are the abnormal findings on this abdominal CT scan (Figure 2)? Figure 2Abdominal CT scan. Abdominal CT scan.
What's your diagnosis? FOR THE ANSWER, VISIT: http://www.saudiannals.net The abnormal finding in Figure 1 is the absence of the left thumb.
In Figure 2, the abnormal findings are the absence of the left kidney and compensatory hypertrophic large right kidney. The diagn nosis is
Fanconi anemia with short stature, café-au-lait spot, pancytopenia, absence of the left thumb, and absence of the left kidney. Fanconi
anemia (FA) is an autosomal recessive disease, characterized by congenital abnormalities,1 in addition to defective hematopoiesis, and a
high risk of developing acute myeloid leukemia and certain solid tumors.23 Congenital abnormalities include skin pigmentation and/or café au
lait spots, short stature, malformation of the skeleton (microcephaly, spina bifida, scoliosis, absent radii or thumbs). Congenital
malformations of the thumbs are variable and often bilateral.4 Abnormal male gonads formation, head, eyes, ear, genitourinary,
gastrointestinal tract, cardiopulmonary, central nervous system can occur.15–7 The most important clinical features of Fanconi anemia are
hematological. Fanconi anemia is the commonest type of inherited bone marrow failure syndrome and the incidences of aplastic anemia,
myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), and acute myeloid leukemia (AML).89 Cells from Fanconi anemia patients show an abnormally high frequency of
spontaneous chromosomal breakage and the diagnostic test is elevated breakage after incubation of peripheral blood lymphocytes with DNA
cross-linking diepoxybutane (DEB test).1011 Allogeneic stem cell transplantation from an HLA-matched sibling donor is the only curative
therapy, and mild conditioning regimes are used because of the sensitivity of patient's cell to DNA damage.1213
