Rheumatoid nodules are the most common extra-articular findings in patients with rheumatoid arthritis. They occur most commonly at pressure
points such as the extensor surfaces of the forearms, fingers, and occiput, but have also been reported to occur in unusual locations
including the central nervous system, pericardium, pleura, and sclera. We present the unusual case of rheumatoid nodules in the small bowel
mesentery masquerading as an intra-abdominal malignancy. A 65-year-old-male with a known history of longstanding erosive, nodular,
seropositive rheumatoid arthritis was incidentally found to have a mesenteric mass on computed tomography (CT) exam of the abdomen. This
mass had not been present on prior imaging studies and was worrisome for a malignancy. Attempts at noninvasive biopsy were nondiagnostic but
consistent with a "spindle" cell neoplasm. Laparotomy revealed extensive thickening and fibrosis of the small bowel mesentery along with
large, firm nodules throughout the mesentery. A limited bowel resection including a large, partially obstructing, nodule was performed.
Pathology was consistent with an unusual presentation of rheumatoid nodules in the mesentery of the small bowel. Rheumatoid nodules should
be considered in the differential diagnosis of a patient who presents with an intra-abdominal mass and a history of rheumatoid arthritis.
Currently, no tests or imaging modality can discriminate with sufficient accuracy to rule out a malignancy in this difficult diagnostic
delimma. Hopefully, this case will serve as impetus for further study and biomarker discovery to allow for improved diagnostic power.
Rheumatoid arthritis (RA) is a systemic inflammatory disease categorized as an autoimmune disorder, affecting about 1% of the United States
population. The pathophysiology is not completely understood but involves inappropriate activation of B and T cells which stimulates an
inflammatory response most notably against synovial tissues of the body causing the classic chronic inflammatory arthritis. This autoimmune
disease is often associated with increased serum levels of Rheumatoid Factor (RF) which is an autoantibody against the constant region (Fc)
of immunoglobulin G (IgG) type antibodies. The chronic inflammatory nature of this disease appears to be driven by cytokines, most notably
by TNFa. The diagnosis of RA is based on a spectrum of clinical criteria as listed in Figure 1. Treatment of RA is founded in classic
immunosuppressive therapy combined with newer agents targeting the specific inflammatory response of RA. An example of these newer agents is
etanercept, which is a fusion protein combining the TNFa receptor with the Fc portion of the immunoglobulin protein. This molecule acts to
dampen the effects of the excess TNFa released in patients with RA driving the inflammatory reaction . Clinical criteria for the diagnosis
of rheumatoid arthritis. At least four of the seven criteria must be met for classification as RA. In addition to the classic symptom of
chronic inflammatory arthritis, RA is also associated with many extra-articular findings, including rheumatoid nodules, pyoderma
gangrenosum, pericarditis, pleuritis, felty's syndrome, interstitial lung disease, glomerulonephritis, peripheral neuropathy, scleritis,
episcleritis, and vasculitis. Rheumatoid nodules are the most common extra-articular findings, occurring in about 25% of patients with RA.
Rheumatoid nodules occur most commonly at pressure points such as the extensor surfaces of the forearms, fingers, occiput, ischial areas,
and the Achilles tendon. They may also occur within internal tissues of the body: central nervous system, heart, pericardium, lungs, pleura,
peritoneum, bones, vocal cords, and sclera. Pulmonary nodules have been associated with pleural effusions, pneumothoraces, and fibrosis.
Cardiac nodules may be noted on echocardiogram and can cause symptoms of heart block and syncope. There have been no reports of rheumatoid
nodules within the mesentery, and as is exemplified by our case, this entity has the potential to masquerade as a malignancy. A 65-year-old-
male with a known history of longstanding erosive, nodular, seropositive rheumatoid arthritis presented with the chief complaint of
persistent fevers. His work up included chest and abdominal computed tomography (CT) which demonstrated both a pneumonia and an incidentally
discovered mesenteric mass (Figure 2). After the pneumonia was treated and resolved, surgical oncology was consulted for further
investigation of the mesenteric mass. Upon questioning, the patient admitted to intermittent crampy abdominal pain, occasional diarrhea, and
a 5 lb unintentional weight loss over the previous 2 months. The patient's RA regimen consisted of etanercept and methotrexate prior to his
pneumonia but these two immunosuppressive medications were withheld secondary to his diagnosis of pneumonia and workup for possible intra-
abdominal malignancy. The patient's past surgical history was significant for sigmoidectomy for diverticulitis and a cholecystectomy for
symptomatic cholelithiasis. Of note, there was no significant family history of malignancies. On examination, the patient was noted to have
a well healed midline and right upper quadrant scar, the abdomen was nondistended and nontender to palpation, and no masses were noted.
Review of previous cross-sectional imaging studies revealed that this mesenteric mass was not present 6 years ago. Thus, malignancy was
suspected, with the differential including small bowel carcinoid tumor, metastatic adenocarcinoma, desmoid tumor and gastrointestinal
stromal tumor. Positron emission tomography (PET) with fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) showed a moderately hypermetabolic focus in the
periumbilical anterior abdomen with no other abnormal hypermetabolic foci (Figure 2). An octreotide scan was negative. A percutaneous CT
guided needle biopsy was obtained and pathology revealed a spindle cell lesion with an inflammatory background and focal palisading
necrosis; a spindle cell neoplasm could not be ruled out. Immunohistochemical stain for CD117 (C-kit receptor) was negative. Pre-operative
CT and FDG-PET demonstrating the incidentally discovered mesenteric mass. (A) The CT scan shows an ill-defined mass in the anterior aspect
of the small bowel mesentery with linear adjacent fat stranding (arrow). (B) FDG-PET scan shows a heterogeneous moderately hypermetabolic
focus in the anterior abdomen corresponding to the lesion on the CT scan (arrow). There are no other abnormal hypermetabolic foci. (C)
Coronal image of the FDG-PET scan. Given a nondiagnostic core needle biopsy but suggestive of malignancy, along with symptoms of
intermittent obstruction, an exploratory laparotomy was undertaken. At exploration, the patient was noted to have extensive thickening and
fibrosis of the entire small bowel mesentery along with centimeter sized, firm nodules throughout the mesentery. One nodule measuring
approximately 2 × 2 cm was causing severe narrowing of the small bowel. This nodule along with 10 cm of the involved small bowel were
resected and sent to pathology for frozen section analysis, which revealed acute and chronic inflammation, extensive necrosis, and foci of
partial fibrinoid granulomas. Given the extensive nature of this disease process, no further attempts at resection were made as this disease
process was incompatible with complete resection. The patient's postoperative course was complicated by a small, superficial, wound
infection but was otherwise unremarkable. Final pathology revealed mesenteric fat necrosis along with chronic inflammation and fibrosis,
extending to the subserosal fat of the small intestine, and upon consultation with rheumatology, this was deemed to be an unusual
presentation of rheumatoid nodules in the mesentery of the small bowel (Figure 3). The patient was re-started on etanercept and low dose
prednisone to control his RA. The patient did well without any further complaints of abdominal pain or symptoms of obstruction. He proceeded
to gain weight over the next several months and continues to do well. After 4 months of therapy a repeat FDG-PET/CT imaging study was
obtained and demonstrated a decrease in the size of the abdominal rheumatoid nodules and no associated FDG-PET activity in the abdomen (FDG-
PET negative) (Figure 4). Permanent pathology sections of the mesenteric mass. These sections show mesenteric fat necrosis along with
inflammation and fibrosis, extending to the subserosal fat of the small intestine. There is no evidence of a neoplasm. (From left to right:
25×, 50×, 100×). Imaging studies after RA treatment with etanercept and prednisone. (A) CT exam of the abdomen demonstrating moderate
resolution of the previous mass/lesion shown in Figure 2 Panel A (arrow). (B) FDG-PET transverse image demonstrating decreased tracer uptake
in the anterior abdominal lesion after treatment of RA (arrow). Rheumatoid arthritis is associated with many extra-articular manifestations,
of which rheumatoid nodules are the most common, occurring in approximately 25% of patients with RA. Rheumatoid nodules are more common in
Caucasian males and occur more frequently in patients who are RF positive. Rheumatoid nodules occur most commonly at pressure points such as
the extensor surfaces of the forearms, fingers, occiput, ischial areas, and the Achilles tendon, but may also occur within internal tissues
of the body: central nervous system, heart, pericardium, lungs, pleura, peritoneum, bones, vocal cords, sclera, and the mesentery. From a
histological standpoint, rheumatoid nodules are characterized by a central area of necrosis that includes collagen fibrils, fibrin, and
proteins. Surrounding this central area are palisading epithelioid cells and chronic inflammatory cells. Fibroblasts are also present within
the nodule and produce significant quantities of metalloproteases. Similarly, histology from our case demonstrated extensive mesenteric fat
necrosis, chronic inflammation and fibrosis. Immunohistochemical staining of rheumatoid nodules has shown positive staining of epithelioid
cells for HLA-DR, CD68, lysozyme, MMP-2, MMP-3, MMP-9 and Ki67. These markers are helpful but may not provide adequate discrimination to
rule out a malignancy as many tumors are also positive for MMPs. There have been numerous reports of accelerated rheumatoid nodulosis,
defined as a significant increase in the size and number of rheumatoid nodules, secondary to the use of methotrexate. RF seropositivity
seems to be a risk factor for the development of these accelerated nodules, and they usually favor the hands, but can also occur in various
other anatomic locations. Most of these accelerated nodules are histologically identical to the classic rheumatoid nodules described
earlier. In addition to methotrexate, azathioprine has also been associated with this phenomenon of accelerated rheumatoid nodulosis. Our
seropositive patient actually had a history of methotrexate use and this may have been the etiological agent responsible for the accelerated
rheumatoid nodulosis evident in his small bowel mesentery. This medication was completely discontinued and the patient was instead started
on etanercept and low dose prednisone, allowing for good control of his RA and moderate regression of the abdominal rheumatoid nodules.
Rheumatoid nodules should be included in the differential diagnosis of a patient who presents with an intra-abdominal mass and a history of
RA. Special attention should be paid to the medication regimen of a patient with RA, as some of these agents have been shown to exacerbate
the growth of rheumatoid nodules. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. ST conceived the idea for the manuscript, conducted a literature search, and drafted the manuscript. JST
performed the surgery, critically revised the manuscript, and obtained images used in the manuscript. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The authors would like to thank the VAGLA pathology department and specifically Dr. G.H. Pez for providing the
histological images and insightful discussions regarding the preoperative differential diagnosis as well as the final diagnosis being
consistent with RA nodules.
