A 49-year old patient presented late with an anterolateral ST-elevation myocardial infarction and was treated with rescue angioplasty to an
occluded left anterior descending artery. Her recovery was complicated by low-grade pyrexia and raised inflammatory markers. Cardiovascular
magnetic resonance 5 weeks after the acute presentation showed transmural infarction and global late gadolinium enhancement of the
pericardium in keeping with Dressler's syndrome. Secondary pericarditis can occur following myocardial infarction; this is relatively common
acutely between 2 and 4 days after myocardial infarction. In contrast Dressler's syndrome presents with a low-grade fever and chest pain 2
to 10 weeks after myocardial infarction, and is less common, affecting between 1 and 5% of patients . In Dressler's initial description the
cause was hypothesised to be irritation due to the presence of blood in the pericardial space, however several possible pathogenic
mechanisms have been proposed since including; autosensitisation to myocardial antigens released into the circulation during infarction,
latent viruses or simply that the syndrome represents a prolonged and exaggerated form of early post-infarction pericarditis. Since the
introduction of reperfusion, with thrombolysis and balloon angioplasty, the incidence of DS has decreased. It is postulated that the
diminution of the infarct size and the shortened time of exposure of myocardial antigens to the immune system may be responsible. However it
has been suggested that the immunomodulatory properties of modern post-myocardial infarction drug therapies, such as ACE inhibitors, statins
and B-blockers, may play a role. The clinical presentation can be classical, with pleuritic pain and an associated pericardial rub; however
the differential diagnosis includes further acute coronary syndrome and pulmonary embolism which may result in the need for further
diagnostic investigation. We describe a case where global pericardial inflammation late post-myocardial infarction is clearly demonstrated
by late gadolinium enhancement (LGE) cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR). A 49 year old woman presented with jaw and arm pain to her
local Emergency Department. She had the pain since the previous evening, approximately 14 hours, and had initially presented to her dentist
before being redirected. Cardiac risk factors included hypertension, smoking and a positive family history of ischaemic heart disease in her
father. The ECG showed anterolateral ST elevation and because of this and ongoing pain, she was thrombolysed with retaplase despite the late
presentation. At 90 minutes the ECG changes and pain had not resolved and therefore she was transferred to our tertiary centre for rescue
angioplasty. The left anterior descending artery (LAD) was occluded with a large thrombus load. The LAD was successfully opened and a Vision
3.5 × 15 mm bare metal stent was deployed, the procedure was covered with heparin and abciximab and an intra-aortic balloon pump. There was
moderate circumflex and right coronary artery disease which was not intervened upon. Cardiac enzymes were elevated with peak CK of >4000
iu/L and troponin I of 98 μg/L. A transthoracic echocardiogram the following day showed a mildly dilated left ventricle (LV) with mild
hypertrophy. The anterolateral wall was akinetic with moderate to severely impaired LV function. There was no significant valvular disease
and a 1 cm pericardial effusion around the posterior, inferior and lateral walls and right heart with no haemodynamic compromise. Her
recovery was complicated by low-grade pyrexia and raised inflammatory markers, peak CRP 321 mg/L. Blood, urine and sputum cultures were
negative however she was treated empirically for a chest infection with doxycycline. An episode of hypoxia and chest pain without gross
changes on chest radiograph resulted in a CT pulmonary angiogram which did not show any evidence of pulmonary embolism but some basal
atelectasis. Two weeks after admission she was asymptomatic. Prior to discharge an exercise tolerance test was arranged to assess for
ischaemia in view of the moderate untreated coronary disease. She completed 6 minutes of the Bruce protocol achieving 85% of her maximal
predicted heart rate, there was no pain but mild ST depression inferiorly. The test was submaximal but did not show gross ischaemia. In view
of this she was discharged home with a plan for outpatient myocardial perfusion imaging. She attended for a CMR stress perfusion study 5
weeks after her initial infarct. At this point she did not report any symptoms. The LV was moderately dilated with an akinetic anteroseptal
wall (Additional files 1 and 2). LGE images demonstrated extensive transmural anteroseptal and apical myocardial infarction (Figure 1).
There was moderate functional mitral regurgitation. Stress perfusion did not demonstrate any reversible ischaemia. LGE images also showed
striking global pericardial inflammation (Figure 2). There was no obvious pericardial thickening demonstrable on long axis (Figure 3) or
short axis imaging (Figure 4). LGE of the infarcted anterior, anteroseptal and anterolateral wall (black arrows). (A) 4-chamber, (B)
2-chamber and (C) 3-chamber views. LGE of the pericardium can also be seen (white arrows). Global LGE of the pericardium on short axis views
from base to apex (A-F), marked with white arrows on first slice. LGE of the infarcted anterior and anteroseptal walls extending into
lateral wall towards apex (black arrows). 4-chamber view demonstrating global pericardial inflammation with no obvious pericardial
thickening; (A) HASTE images, (B) FISP images, (C) LGE. Short axis view demonstrating global pericardial inflammation with no obvious
pericardial thickening; (A) FISP images, (B) LGE. This patent presented late after ST elevation myocardial infarction with a resulting large
rise in cardiac enzymes and significant transmural myocardial infarction. Her inpatient stay was complicated by low-grade pyrexia, raised
inflammatory markers and a small pericardial effusion. In view of the negative cultures and subsequent CMR findings this was likely to have
been due to pericardial inflammation. CMR is one of the most versatile modalities to assess pericardial disease. Pericardial inflammation
has been demonstrated by LGE with excellent sensitivity and specificity . CMR signs of pericarditis have been reported in up to 40% of
patients post-myocardial infarction when imaged early, 6.1 ± 2.2 days, and this tends to be localised at the site of infarction . The CMR in
this case was performed 5 weeks after the acute presentation. This case is unique in that it demonstrates global pericardial inflammation
late post-myocardial infarction and given the clinical context is consistent with a diagnosis of Dressler's syndrome. Whether such findings
are commonplace is unclear given CMR is not usually requested for this indication. This case demonstrates that global pericardial
inflammation in Dressler's syndrome can be clearly visualised by LGE on CMR. This may prove clinically useful when trying to establish a
cause for atypical post-myocardial infarction pain without requiring exposure to invasive procedures or ionizing radiation. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. CS drafted the
manuscript and manipulated the CMR images for inclusion. JKhoo helped draft the manuscript. JKovac is the cardiologist responsible for the
patient's care. GM acquired and interpreted the CMR images and helped draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. 4-chamber view. SSFP cine demonstrating moderate LV dilatation, apical dyskinesis and functional mitral regurgitation. Click
here for file Short axis view. SSFP cine at mid-ventricular level demonstrating thinned and akinetic anterior and anteroseptal segments.
Click here for file
