Hemifacial atrophy (Parry-Romberg syndrome) is a relatively rare disease. The etiology of the disease is not clear. Some authors postulate
its relation with limited scleroderma linearis. Linear scleroderma "en coup de sabre" is characterized by clinical presence of most commonly
one-sided linear syndrome. In a number of patients, neurological affection is the medium of the disease. The treatment of both scleroderma
varieties is similar to the treatment of limited systemic sclerosis. We present two cases of a disease: a case of a 49-year-old woman with a
typical image of hemifacial atrophy, without any changes of the nervous system and a case of a 33-year-old patient with an "en coup de
sabre" scleroderma and with CNS tumor. We described typical cases of a rare diseases, hemifacial atrophy and "en coup de sabre" scleroderma.
In the patient diagnosed with Parry-Romberg syndrome, with Borrelia burgdoferi infection and with minor neurological symptoms, despite a
four-year case history, there was a lack of proper diagnosis and treatment. In the second patient only skin changes without any neurological
symptoms could be observed and only a precise neurological diagnosis revealed the presence of CNS tumor. Hemifacial atrophy (Parry-Romberg
syndrome) is a relatively rare disease. The etiology of the disease is not clear. Some authors postulate its relation with limited
scleroderma linearis . In a number of patients, neurological affection is the medium of the disease. Cory et al. consider the origin of the
disease to be a non-infectious, one-sided inflammatory process, connected with chronic, vasomotoric disturbances and with sympathetic nerves
inflammation. Trauma appear in some patients. In some cases, the disease had of hereditary and autosomal character . Clinically it comes to
a face deformation, including skin, subcutaneous tissue and bones. A face asymmetry becomes visible. One side of a face seems smaller. The
affected side eyeball is situated deeper, the mouth angle is lifted. The skin changes can include the hairy skin of the head, eyebrows and
lashes, resulting in baldness focuses formation. The skin within the changes is of an increased compactness, tension and often it becomes
over-colored or decolorized. Some patients suffer from headaches, which can be located in the area of trigeminal nerve innervations, and
from temporary sensor disturbances . Focal epilepsy on the opposite side can sometimes be diagnosed after neurological examination .
Histopathological examination proves fibrosis of the skin and adipose tissue atrophy without any features of an early inflammatory
infiltration. This disease is a type of condition which expires throughout many years. Deformations however, are permanent. The connections
of Parry-Romberg syndrome with scleroderma linearis or with en coup de sabre – typed limited scleroderma are often discussed. Some authors
consider these to be two different diseases. For some however, hemifacial atrophy is an intensified form of linear scleroderma . Linear
scleroderma "en coup de sabre" is characterized by clinical presence of most commonly one-sided linear syndrome. The frontal region, from
the eyebrows to the hairy skin of a head is the most typical location. The skin within the changes is of waxy-yellow color. On the head's
hairy skin, linear focuses of cicatricial baldness appear. The progression of subsiding changes within the skin and hypodermis can lead to
cranial bone deformation, to changes in the central nervous system tissue and to neurological symptoms alike in Perry-Romberg syndrome. The
histological image of both diseases is similar. However, in case of "en coup de sabre" scleroderma, a massive lymphocytic inflammatory
infiltration around the vessels of surface and deep plexuses of skin can be observed in an early stage. The treatment of both scleroderma
varieties is similar to the treatment of limited systemic sclerosis. Penicillin and other antibiotics are applied. Braun-Falco et al.
provide a scheme based on antimalarial medicines: chloroquine and hydrochloroquine (1 pill/day) for 3–6 months. In severe cases drugs
applied are: corticosteroids generally, retinoids, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, methotrexat. Locally – emollients, vitamin D analogs,
light therapy – PUVA, UVA1 (10–50 J/cm2). When the pathological process is over, good effects are achieved by plastic surgery, including
injection of autologic adipose tissue, synthetic collagen, filling preparation, containing hialuronic acid . We present two cases of a
disease: a case of a 49-year-old woman with a typical image of hemifacial atrophy, without any changes of the nervous system and a case of a
33-year-old patient with an "en coup de sabre" scleroderma and with CNS tumor. We have approval of ethics committee of Silesian Medical
University (ref. 1278/2008). A female patient 49-year-old, cook. First discreet skin changes, with increased compactness and
hyperpigmentation of the right side of the face, were noticed about 4 years ago by the patient. Astringing skin sensation and periodic,
weakly intensified pains in the right side of the face and head, treated as a migraine, accompanied the appearance of the changes. The
patient did not go through any injuries and did not complain about other neurological aliments. The skin symptoms were disregarded by the
patient and were treated as a variant of a regular condition (?!). Because of that the patient was not diagnosed or treated. Nobody from the
patient's surroundings and the general practitioners noticed the progressing face asymmetry. The patient is not suffering from any other
chronic diseases and does not take any medicine on a regular basis. The family history towards autoimmunological and neurological diseases
was negative. In July 2008 the patient was admitted to our Clinic with suspected hemifacial atrophy ("en coup de sabre" scleroderma?).
Clinically, in admission to the hospital, strongly distinct face asymmetry could be observed. The right side of the face was clearly
smaller. The mandible angle was lifted and smoothed. The lip redness on the affected side became thin and lifted. The cheek was sunken. The
eyeball was situated deeper. The skin surrounding the changes was more coherent, thin and strongly seal-colored. There were linearly
arranged, oval, sunken baldness focuses on the head's hairy skin, near the right temple. Skin surrounding these focuses was unchanged. The
mucous and genitals membranes and nail plates were normal. The peripheral lymph glands – not enlarged (fig. 1,2). A female patient 49-year-
old, strongly distinct face asymmetry – the right side of the face was clearly smaller. A female patient 49-year-old, linearly arranged,
oval, sunken baldness focuses on the head's hairy skin, near the right temple. In the performed laboratory tests (morphology with smear,
fasting glucoses level, glycemia profile, AspAT, AlAT, bilirubin, GGTP, alkaline phosphatase, creatinine, urea, uric acid, protein with
electrophoresis, ASO, Latex-R, Waaler-Rose test, VDRL, general urinalysis with culture) no aberrations were found. Antigens against Borrelia
burgdorferi in IgM class with a 1,26 titre (positive, norm up to 1,1) were found in blood serum. IgG antibodied – negative. Penicillin test
– positive. Histopathological examination of the right cheek change revealed traits of fibrosis, collagen fibers thickening, skin edema and
skin adnexa and vessels atrophy, without an inflammatory infiltration. Image examination – x-ray of the chest, upper part of the digestive
tract, abdominal cavity USG were all normal. Capillaroscopy – within the norm. Head CT performed in a spiral technique, in transverse
section, in forehead and fibular reconstructions, before and after the intravenous administration of contrast medium revealed only a bone
septum on the right side of the sphenoidal sinus and the mucous membrane thickening within its area. The encephalon image – normal. NMR of
the head – without pathology. Electromyography (the muscles end the nerves of the face: the right and left roundabout muscle of the mouth,
the right and left facial nerve) – in the right roundabout muscle of the mouth the small impoverishment of the effort record. Conducition in
both facial nerves without pathology. With an indirect, immunofluorescent method on Hep2 cells, no ANA antigen antibodies were found.
Mycological examination on skin changes was also negative. Laryngological, dental consultation have not shown any abnormalities.
Neurological examination confirmed one-sided headaches in patient's anamnesis, without any focal symptoms of CNS damages. Suggested
performing head CT and NMR and EMG (results a.b.). During the patient's stay at the Clinic, cefuroxym (Plixym) in a dose of 2 × 1,5 g iv for
10 days was applied, continuing the treatment with oral cefuroxym (Zinnat) 2 × 250 mg for 4 weeks. Emollients and low-energy laser was
applied locally (15 procedures). The patient was sent to the Infectious Diseases Outpatient Clinic in order to have a Borrelia burgdorferi
infection confirmed with the use of Western-blot method (positive). Currently, the patient is under supervision of Dermatological Outpatient
Clinic in order to continue the treatment and a possible committal to plastic surgery treatment after the pathological process is over.
33-year-old patient, a teacher. First, slightly visible skin changes appeared, with a linear structure, increased compactness and with skin
atrophy within the right side of the forehead, they were noticed by the patient about 2 years before. The appearance of these changes was
not accompanied by any subjective symptoms. The patient did not go through any injuries and did not complain about other neurological
aliments. Because of this, the patient was not diagnosed or treated. The patient is not suffering from any other chronic diseases and does
not take any medicine on a regular basis. The family history towards autoimmunological and neurological diseases was negative. In February
2007 the patient was admitted to our Clinic with suspected circumscribed scleroderma, "en coup de sabre" – type. When admitting to the
hospital, observed skin changes included the forehead and head's hairy skin. On the right side of the forehead, linear, ivory-colored scar
change could be seen, with skin and hypodermis atrophy and bone recess. The scar was reaching the head's hairy skin. In the right parieto-
temporal area, linearly arranged, oval, recessed focuses of baldness were located. The skin around these changes was unchanged. The mucous
of oral cavity, genital area and nail plates were normal. The peripheral lymph glands – not enlarged (fig. 3). 33-year-old patient, woman –
on the right side of the forehead, linear, ivory-colored scar with skin and hypodermis atrophy and bone recess. In laboratory examination no
aberrations found (morphology with smear, fasting glucoses level, glycemia profile, AspAT, AlAT, bilirubin, GGTP, alkaline phosphatase,
creatinine, urea, uric acid, protein with electrophoresis, ASO, Latex-R, Waaler-Rose test, VDRL, general urinalysis with culture). No
antigens against Borrelia burgdorferi in IgM and IgG class found in blood serum. Penicillin test – positive. Imagine examination – x-ray of
the chest, upper part of the digestive tract, abdominal cavity USG were all normal. Capillaroscopy – within the norm. Head CT-performed in a
spiral technique, in transverse aspect, before and after the intravenous administration of contrast medium. The CT revealed: a extracerebral
tumor located subtentorially (in the upper part), towards the back from the callous body and from the III cerebral ventricle, without any
clear features of growing into these structures. The change seems to be adjacent to the tegmentum of midbrain to the inferior direction and
adjoins the cerebellum in the inferior and posterior directions. Tumor, which is of about 28 × 26 × 24 mm, is heterogeneous, with a large
amount of calcifications and does not show any features of contrast-induced augmentation. It is slightly modeling the straight sinus in the
inferior direction, with no evident features of its infiltration. In the anterior direction the tumor seems not to be reaching the pineal
gland area, in the pineal gland area visible minor calcifications. The supratentorial ventricular apparatus is not enlarged, the CT does not
clearly show cerebral aqueduct, the IV cerebral ventricle is within the norm. CT does not show any other changes. Conclusions: tumor like,
extracerebral structure demanding further diagnosis in MRI examination. NMR of the head: expansive process located posterioly to the pineal
gland near the upper vermis of cerebellum. Brain angiography – no pathological vascularization features. MRI and MRI spectroscopy suggest
the presence of a change in a form of teratoma (fig. 4). 33-year-old patient, woman, MRI and MRI spectroscopy suggest the presence of a
change in a form of teratoma. Beta-HCG – within the norm. AFP – within the norm. With an indirect, immunofluorescent method on Hep2 cells,
no ANA antigen antibodies were found. Mycological examination on skin changes was also negative. Neurological consultation did not reveal
any focal signs of OUN injury. Neurosurgical consultation was suggested, due to the presence of an extracerebral tumor in the CT examination
of the head (Osteoma? Cylindoma?) During the patient's stay at the Clinic, an oral antibiotic therapy with cefuroxym (Zinnat) 2 × 250 mg for
14 days was applied. Emollients were applied locally. The patient was sent to the Neurosurgical Clinic for further diagnosis and for the
extracerebral tumor treatment. On account of suspected teratoma, the lack of intracranial hypertension and signs of focal CNS injury, the
Neurological Clinic decided to temporarily put the medical procedure on hold. Currently, the patient is under the supervision of the
Dermatological Clinic in order to continue the treatment and a possible committal to plastic surgery treatment after the pathological
process is over. Hemifacial atrophy (Parry-Romberg syndrome) is a relatively rare disease. "En coup de sabre" scleroderma is more common,
which, by some authors, is treated as variously intensified forms of the same nosologic unit. The etiology of both diseases is not clear .
Frequent coexistence of skin changes within hypodermis and bones of face, with neurological symptoms and with structural and functional
changes of CNS are uncontested. Braun – Falco et al. claim, that in most patients pains within trigeminal nerve innervations occur before
visible deformations appear. In case of our first patient, the anamnesis, for many years showed there were weakly intensified, one-sided
headaches, treated as migraine. Neurological treatment however, did not show any deviation. The second patient did not report any subjective
symptoms which would accompany skin changes. Neurological treatment also did not show any deviation. CT however, revealed the presence of
CNS tumor located subtentorially (in the upper part), towards the posterior side from the callous body and from III cerebral ventricle,
without any clear features of growing into these structures. Aynaci et al. described a child with hemifacial atrophy features without any
neurological deficiency, with Adie's syndrome on the affected side of the face – with mydriasis, no reaction to light, with a slow reaction
to convergence and accommodation (tonic pupil). Schnitzler et al. introduced a 25-year-old patient. At the age of 14, he had a tonic pupil
on the right side and epilepsy attacks. At the age of 22, the patient noticed progressive atrophy of the right side of his face. Authors
postulate the common, immunological etiology of hemifacial atrophy, Adie's syndrome and epilepsy. The literature informs that in many
patients changes in CNS, visible in CT and NMR appear. Both examinations performed on our patient with diagnosed Perry-Romberg syndrome were
normal. The changes described above were found in the patient with „en coup de sabre" scleroderma. Unterberger et al. introduced a case of a
24-year-old patient, with „en coup de sabre" scleroderma and with focuses of scleroderma linearis. In the 33rd week of the patient's
pregnancy, right hemiplegia symptoms appeared, with a positive Babinski's sign on the affected side. The symptoms escalated significantly
after the labor (caesarean section). NMR of the head revealed numerous focuses of an increased signal in the left hemisphere, spreading
towards the fronto-temporal area, including the white substance, with minor subcortical hyper intensive focuses from the right frontal side.
In case of the child described by Cory et al. , the symptoms of hemifacial atrophy were developing for a 20 month period. The tomography and
the magnetic resonance revealed numerous, one-sided focuses of infarcts in the amygdaloid body, multiple deep and subcortical changes of the
signal in the white substance and a mild thinning of the cortex. The angiographic examination was normal. Okumura et al. performed precise
pictorial examination of the patient with Parry-Romberg syndrome. Focuses of an increased condensation in the white substance of the left
hemisphere were described in NMR. In the proton spectroscopy, a form of NMR, no aberrations has been found. Monoprotonic, emissive
tomography showed an increase of blood perfusion in the left hemisphere. These results correlate with the aberrations in the clinical
research and with hemifacial atrophy signs. In the case of a 32-year-old patient described by Moon et al. , with diagnosed Perry-Romberg
syndrome, except for the visible face asymmetry, intermittent headaches occurred, accompanied by sensory disturbances affecting the hearing
and the sight. NMR revealed a mild asymmetric atrophy of the right hemisphere and few nonspecific white substance condensations on the
affected side. DTI (Diffusion tensor imaging) and the tractography confirmed the changes in the nervous fibers of the white substance
sensory tracts on the right hemisphere. Sathornsumetee et al. introduced a case of a 4-year-old boy with a progressive hemifacial atrophy,
which was accompanied by multiple neurological symptoms. The patient was diagnosed with epilepsy, progressive hemisphere atrophy and severe
changes within the brain stem. Paprocka et al. introduced a 10-year-old girl patient, with Rasmussen's encephalitis, which is connected with
a chronic inflammatory condition and with a damage of one, intact hemisphere. Epilepsy focuses and one-sided neurological symptoms are
observed clinically. Right-sided hemiparesis was observed in the patient. From the age of 2, the patient was diagnosed with left hemifacial
atrophy and with a focus of „en coup de sabre” linear scleroderma within the forehead. The authors examine the potential relation of linear
scleroderma, hemifacial atrophy and described Rasmussen's encephalitis. In 2003 Stone performed an internet research on 205 patients with
Parry-Romberg syndrome and found 11% with epilepsy and 19% with limb motor activity changes. Błaszczyk et al. examined 19 patients with
signs of progressive hemifacial atrophy and en coup de sabre scleroderma towards changes in CNS. Routine examination, EEG, NMR, angio-NMR
and 99 mTc-HM-PAO-SPECT were performed. The examinations revealed significantly increased frequency of change occurrence in CNS in patients
with hemifacial atrophy and en coup de sabre scleroderma signs than in the control group. Gambichler et al. introduced a 23-year-old patient
with two-sided en coup de sabre scleroderma and with a left-sided hemifacial atrophy. The patient also suffers from epilepsy attacks and a
paralysis of oculomotor nerves and of right-sided facial nerve. The authors suggest a close relation between en coup de sabre scleroderma,
hemifacial atrophy and neurological symptoms in the patient. In our first patient examined, antibodies against Borrelia burgdofei in IgM
class were found. The infection was confirmed with Western-blot method. It is difficult however, to talk about the relation of a fresh
infection with lasting for over 4 years progressive process of facial atrophy. This is rather a coexistence of both diseases. Sommer et al.
research also did not confirm the relation of Borrelia burgdofei infection and the progressive facial atrophy. 278 patients took part in
this research. Relatively few reports concern the treatment of hemifacial atrophy and "en coup de sabre" scleroderma linearis. Most authors
use similar medicines as in the treatment of scleroderma: procaine penicillin and other antibiotics, anti-malarial medicine, corticosteroids
generally, retinoids, cyclosporine, cyclophosphamide, methotrexat. Locally – emollients, vitamin D analogs, light therapy – PUVA, UVA1
(10–50 J/cm2). This treatment however, aims to speed up the pathological process towards its end, because, in fact there is no medicine for
an effective therapy of both scleroderma and Perry-Romberg syndrome. Tollefson et al. used anti-malarial medicine in 57,1% of patients and
methotrexat in 28,6% of patients with hemifacial atrophy and "en coup de sabre" linear scleroderma. The rest of the patients were only
taking emollients. The effectiveness in all groups was controversial. The described patient, without changes in CNS received cefuroxym in a
dose of 2 × 1,5 g iv for 10 days, continuing the treatment with oral cefuroxym (Zinnat) for 4 weeks. In the case of the second patient,
cefuroxym in a dose of 2 × 1,5 g iv for 10 days was applied and the patient was sent to neurosurgical treatment. After the pathological
process is over, good effects are achieved by plastic surgery, including injection of autologic adipose tissue, synthetic collagen, filling
preparation, containing hialuronic acid . These techniques are planned to be implemented in the future. We described typical cases of a rare
diseases, hemifacial atrophy and "en coup de sabre" scleroderma. In the patient diagnosed with Parry-Romberg syndrome, with Borrelia
burgdoferi infection and with minor neurological symptoms, despite a four-year case history, there was a lack of proper diagnosis and
treatment. In the second patient only skin changes without any neurological symptoms could be observed and only a precise neurological
diagnosis revealed the presence of CNS tumor. We confirm that written consent was obtained from the patient or their relatives for
publication of study and the use of any images. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. This manuscript was draft by BBC,
ALŚ, LBW. BBC – main conception, design, acquisition of data, interpretation of data, writing; ALŚ – writing assistance, acquisition of
data; LBW – references, writing assistance. All authors contributing to its critical review and approving the final draft. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
