Arif O. Khan and Mohammed A. Aldahmesh contributed equally to this work and are considered co-first authors. To assess for γD-crystallin
(CRYGD) mutation in 2 Saudi patients with cerulean cataract and in a brother of one of the patients who had coralliform cataract. Patients
and all of their available relatives underwent ophthalmic examination and subsequent sequencing of the candidate gene CRYGD. In the first
family, a 4-year-old boy with bilateral cerulean cataract and his 6-year-old brother with similar bluish lens discoloration but in a
coralliform pattern were heterozygous for the p.P23T CRYGD mutation. Their father and 2 older brothers, all of whom underwent childhood
cataract surgery, also harbored the mutation while the 2 asymptomatic immediate family members did not. In the second family, a 7-year-old
girl with bilateral cerulean cataract was heterozygous for the same CRYGD mutation. Details of her family history were limited. The patients
in the two families shared a common disease haplotype. This first report of p.P23T CRYGD mutation underlying cerulean cataract in the Saudi
population strongly supports the mutation’s relation with the phenotype. Coralliform cataract can represent variable expressivity for the
same mutation rather than a distinct entity. Cerulean (“blue-dot”) cataract is an unusual phenotype characterized by dominant early
(juvenile) onset of multiple bluish and white opacities predominantly in the lens cortex with occasional radial central lesions . The most
commonly-documented cause is heterozygous p.Q155X βB2-crystallin (CRYBB2) mutation, which has been reported in 3 affected families – one
from America , one from India , and one from China . In addition, 2 other heterozygous gene mutations have been associated with cerulean
cataract – p.K297R mutation in MAF (v-maf avian musculoaponeurotic fibrosarcoma oncogene homolog) in one Indian family (with variable
microcornea) and p.P23T CRYGD mutation in one Moroccan family . Heterozygous p.P23T CRYGD mutation has also been associated with coralliform
cataract, an even less-frequently reported dominant cataract phenotype which is characterized by generally static central radial lenticular
opacities that resemble sea coral . Coralliform cataract due to p.P23T CRYGD mutation has been reported in an affected Caucasian and Chinese
family . In addition, 2 other heterozygous CRYGD mutations have also been associated with coralliform cataract. In another Chinese family,
p.R14C CRYGD mutation segregated with nuclear cataract in some family members and with coralliform cataract in others . In a third Chinese
family, heterozygous p.G61C CRYGD mutation segregated with coralliform cataract . To the best of our knowledge mutations in a gene other
than CRYGD have not been associated with coralliform cataract. The purpose of this study is to assess for CRYGD mutations in 2 Saudi
patients with cerulean cataract and in a brother of one of the patients who had coralliform cataract. CRYGD was selected as a candidate gene
because one patient with cerulean cataract had a brother with coralliform cataract and both types of cataract have been previously-
associated with CRYGD mutations . Institutional review board approval was granted for this report. Informed consent was obtained from the 2
participating families, who were not known to be related to each other. Clinical ophthalmic assessment and CRYGD sequencing was done on a
diagnostic basis for the 2 affected patients, a brother of one of the patients who had coralliform cataract, and all available family
members. SNP haplotypes for CRYGD were constructed, and CRYGD was sequenced in ethnically-matched controls. Ophthalmic examination consisted
of visual acuity, slit-lamp biomicroscopy, intraocular pressure, pupillary examination, ocular motility assessment, fundus examination, and
cycloplegic refraction (cyclopentolate 1%). Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood anti-coagulated with EDTA using the Purgene Gentra
DNA Extraction Kit (Cat. # D-5000; Gentra Systems, Minneapolis, MN) according to the manufacturers instructions. The DNA was quantified
spectrophotometrically and stored in aliquots at -20 °C until required. PCR amplification was performed on a thermocycler (DNA Engine
Tetrad; MJResearch, Inc., Hercules, CA) in a total volume of 25 µl, containing 10 ng DNA, 50 mM KCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl (pH 9.0), 1.5 mM MgCl2,
0.1% Triton X-100, 0.25 mM of each dNTP, 0.8 µM of each primer and 0.5 Units of Taq polymerase (D-40724; QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). For PCR,
an initial denaturation step at 95 ºC for 10 min was followed by 40 cycles of denaturation at 95 ºC for 30 s, with annealing at 59 ºC for 30
s and extension at 72 ºC for 30 s followed by a final extension step of 72 ºC for 10 min. The primers used for amplification of the coding
regions of CRYGD are listed in Table 1. All exons and their intronic boundaries of CRYGD were sequenced using an Amersham ET Dye Terminator
Cycle Sequencing Kit (Amersham Biosciences, Piscataway, NJ) following the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequence analysis (3730xl DNA
Analyzer; Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) was performed using the SeqManII module of the Lasergene (DNA Star Inc., Madison, WI)
software package using normal sequence for comparison. A haplotype for CRYGD was constructed using intragenic and surrounding SNPs. CRYGD
sequencing was done in 96 Saudi controls (192 chromosomes). The primers used for gene sequencing were as shown. The GenBank accession number
used for CRYGD was U66583. Family 1 (Figure 1A): A 4-year-old boy with no other history of medical disease was examined because of worsening
photophobia. There was a family history of cataract surgery for juvenile cataract in 2 older brothers and the father. A 6-year-old brother
similarly complained of worsening photophobia while the mother and other older brother were asymptomatic. The parents were not
consanguineous. Ophthalmic examination of the referred child (II.5) was significant for bilateral cerulean (“blue-dot”) cataract (Figure 2)
with approximately 20/40 visual acuity in either eye. His symptomatic brother (II.4) had a medical history significant for difficult
delivery, cerebral palsy, difficulty hearing, and developmental delay. Vision could not be quantified because of developmental delay.
Ophthalmic examination was significant for bilateral bluish lens discoloration like in his brother but in a coralliform pattern (Figure 3).
Ophthalmic examination of the individuals with a history of childhood cataract surgery (I.1, II.1, and II.3) was significant for bilateral
pseudophakia. Ophthalmic examination of the asymptomatic individuals (I.2 and II.2) was unremarkable. CRYGD sequencing revealed heterozygous
p.P23T CRYGD mutation (c.C67A) in the 2 boys with cataract (II.4 and II.5) and the 3 pseudophakic individuals (I.1, II.1, and II.3) [Figure
4]. The mutation was not detected in the 2 asymptomatic individuals (I.2, II.2). Family pedigrees. The pedigrees of family 1 (A) and family
2 (B) are shown. Symbols with numbers underneath represent individuals who participated in the study. Cerulean cataract in family 1. The
left eye of the boy with cerulean cataract is shown. Multiple bluish and white opacities predominantly in the lens cortex with occasional
radial central lesions are apparent. Coralliform cataract in family 1. The right eye of the boy with coralliform cataract is shown (the
brother of the patient from Figure 2). Central radial lenticular opacities with a resemblance to sea coral are apparent. DNA chromatograms
of family 1. CRYGD sequence chromatograms from the first family highlight the mutation and a novel silent SNP. Family 2 (Figure 1B): A
7-year-old girl had been diagnosed with visually-significant congenital cataract soon after birth but never underwent treatment. There was
no other history of medical disease. The mother was unaware of any family history of childhood eye disease. According to the mother all
siblings of the referred child (3 siblings and 9 step-siblings) were asymptomatic. The parents were first cousins. Ophthalmic examination of
the referred child (II.5) was significant for bilateral cerulean cataract (Figure 5) with visual acuity of 20/400 in either eye. Only the
referred child was available for ophthalmic evaluation and CRYGD sequencing, which revealed heterozygous p.P23T mutation (c.C67A). Cerulean
cataract in family 2. The right eye of the girl with cerulean cataract is shown. Multiple bluish and white opacities predominantly in the
lens cortex with occasional radial central lesions are apparent. Analysis of SNPs flanking CRYGD revealed a common disease haplotype for the
2 families (Table 2). CRYGD sequencing of controls from the Saudi population (192 chromosomes) was negative for the p.P23T variant. Analysis
of SNPs surrounding CRYGD in the 2 families revealed a common disease haplotype for the 2 families. The disease haplotype (bottom row) can
be inferred from the findings in the unaffected mother of family 1. Heterozygous p.P23T CRYGD mutation has been reported as a cause of
cerulean cataract only once previously, in a single Moroccan family . The identification of this mutation in 2 Saudi families with cerulean
cataract and a common disease haplotype is further evidence for the p.P23T variant as a cause for this rare phenotype. In addition, the
finding of heterozygous p.P23T mutation in the patient’s brother with coralliform cataract suggests coralliform cataract and cerulean
cataract can represent forms of variable expressivity rather than distinct clinical entities. This idea is also supported by 2 previous
reports that similarly described the p.P23T CRYGD mutation as a cause for coralliform cataract . Although the phenotypic description of the
Moroccan family with cerulean cataract specifically denied that any individual in the family had coralliform cataract, careful inspection of
Figure 1B in that report reveals what appears to be a coralliform cataract . Heterozygous p.P23T CRYGD mutation apparently has several
measurable effects on γD-crystallin but without significant loss in stability of the protein . Solubility experiments show that the p.P23T
mutant has significantly decreased solubility when compared to wild-type γD-crystallin . The physical basis for this may relate to the
position of Pro23 on the edge of one of the β-sheets of γD-crystallin. Proline in the edge strand of a β -sandwich minimizes the potential
for edge-to-edge aggregation events; therefore, its loss in the p.P23T mutant would be expected to lead to increased precipitation of the
protein . Other changes in secondary structure of the p.P23T mutant include a small decrease in residues in turn conformations with a
commensurate increase in β-sheet contents . Despite the decrease in solubility and local alteration of secondary structure, the p.P23T
mutant does not have an appreciable loss of stability . The absence of the p.P23T variant in our controls and evolutionary analysis of
position 23 in the predicted protein both support the pathogenecity of p.P23T CRYGD mutation. Both intrafamilial and interfamilial
phenotypic variability in autosomal dominant cataract for the same genetic mutation is a recognized phenomenon . In addition to cerulean
cataract and coralliform cataract, the heterozygous p.P23T CRYGD mutation has been associated with lamellar cataract in an Indian family and
fasciculiform cataract in a Chinese family . The most common cause of cerulean cataract – heterozygous p.Q155X CRYBB2 mutation – has also
been associated with Coppock-like cataract in a Swiss family , progressive polymorphic cataract in a Chinese family , and cataract with
marked intrafamilial variability in a Chilean family . The other reported cause of cerulean cataract (with variable microcornea) – a
heterozygous MAF mutation (p.K297R) – has not been associated with another phenotype to the best of our knowledge. Regarding coralliform
cataract, p.R14C CRYGD mutation has also been associated with progressive punctuate juvenile cataract (in a family of unspecified ethnicity)
while the p.G61C variant has not been associated with another phenotype to the best of our knowledge. The interaction of background
environmental and/or genetic factors with a given crystalline mutation is what leads to a final lens phenotype. This report of p.P23T CRYGD
mutation underlying cerulean cataract in the Saudi population is the second time the association has been described and thus supports
causation of the phenotype by the genotype. The finding of the variant in the patient’s brother with coralliform cataract is the third time
the p.P23T CRYGD mutation has been associated with coralliform cataract and supports the concept of coralliform and cerulean cataract as
forms of variable expressivity rather than distinct entities. This work was supported by intramural fund from KFSHRC to F.A. (RAC#2070023).
