An incidental finding was noted during routine radiographic examination of a 18 year-old male. A panoramic radiograph revealed a well-
defined, radiopacity with a surrounding peripheral radiolucent zone partially obscuring and resorbing the roots of the left mandibular first
molar (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Round radiopacity with radiolucent rim at the apical region of left mandibular first molar tooth Round radiopacity with
radiolucent rim at the apical region of left mandibular first molar tooth Excision of the mass and extraction of the left mandibular first
molar tooth was performed. Histologic examination revealed sheets and masses of paucicellular cementum attached to the root of the tooth
(Fig. 2). The cementum displayed prominent basophilic reversal lines and cementoblastic rimming (Figs. 3 and 4). The cementoblasts were
plump with moderate amounts of cytoplasm, hyperchromatic nuclei, and conspicuous nucleoli. The intervening stroma consisted of loose
fibrovascular tissue with scattered multinucleated osteoclast-type giant cells. At the periphery of the lesion, radiating columns of
unmineralized tissue were oriented perpendicular to the surface of the lesion.Fig. 2Calcified mass fused to the root of a molar tooth
Calcified mass fused to the root of a molar tooth Cementoblastoma, in the current World Health Organization (WHO) classification of
odontogenic tumors, is in the category of tumors of mesenchyme and/or odontogenic ectomesenchyme with or without odontogenic epithelium .
Cementoblastoma is a rare benign odontogenic tumor that accounts for less than 1% of all odontogenic tumors [2, 3]. These tumors primarily
affect young adults in the second and third decades of life, with approximately one-half occurring under the age of 20 years and
approximately three quarters occurring under the age of 30 years . Although there does not appear to be a definitive gender preference, some
authors have reported both a male and a female predominance [1, 2, 4]. Cementoblastoma has a predilection for involving the mandibular
permanent first molar which remains vital [1, 2, 4–6]. Cementoblastoma has, only rarely, been associated with a primary or impacted tooth .
All cases are connected to the root of the involved tooth . Cementoblastoma commonly presents with pain and associated swelling due to bony
expansion of the buccal and lingual aspects of the alveolar ridges . Radiographically, cementoblastoma typically demonstrates a well-
circumscribed, radiopaque mass attached to the root of the involved tooth with a surrounding thin radiolucent zone . When the attachment to
the root of the involved tooth is apparent, this radiographic finding is nearly pathognomonic [2, 4]. Additional radiographic features
include root resorption, loss of the root outline, invasion of the root canal, bony expansion, displacement and involvement of adjacent
teeth, cortical erosion, and obliteration of the periodontal ligament space . Grossly, a round to ovoid, well-circumscribed mass of hard,
calcified, tan tissue surrounds the root of the affected tooth [1, 3, 4]. This is usually surrounded by an irregular layer of gray-tan soft
tissue [1, 3]. Histologically, cementoblastoma is characterized by masses of hypocellular cementum embedded in a fibrovascular stroma [1, 2,
5–7]. There is typically prominent cementoblastic rimming [2, 3, 5–7]. Another characteristic feature is the formation of prominent
basophilic reversal lines within the cementum giving the lesion a Pagetoid appearance [1, 2, 5–7]. Multinucleated osteoclast-type giant
cells and plump cementoblasts may be present within the fibrovascular stroma [1–3, 5–7]. At the periphery of the lesion, there is a rim of
connective tissue and commonly radiating columns of cellular unmineralized tissue that accounts for the radiographic radiolucent zone [1–3,
5, 7]. Although the cytologic features of the cementoblasts and cementoclasts, particularly in the peripheral cellular zone, may have
considerable pleomorphism, mitotic figures are not seen [2, 3, 5]. The differential diagnosis of cementoblastoma includes osteoblastoma and
osteosarcoma. Osteoblastoma and cementoblastoma are essentially identical histologically and the only distinguishing feature is the
attachment of cementoblastoma to the root of a tooth [1–5, 7]. Osteosarcoma must also be differentiated from cementoblastoma.
Histologically, the cementoblasts in cementoblastoma may be plump with pleomorphic and hyperchromatic nuclei; however, mitotic figures are
not seen in cementoblastoma [1–3, 5, 7]. Differentiation, of the above mentioned lesions, from cementoblastom requires correlation with the
clinical and radiographic findings [1, 4, 6]. The treatment of choice for cementoblastoma is complete excision of the mass with removal of
the affected tooth [1–4, 6]. With incomplete removal, recurrence is common and recurrence risk appears to be highest for those treated with
curettage alone . Some authors advocate curettage after extraction to decrease the overall rate of recurrence [3, 4].Fig. 3Cementum with
basophilic reversal lines and intervening loose fibrovascular connective tissue stroma Fig. 4Cementum with prominent cementoblastic rimming
Cementum with basophilic reversal lines and intervening loose fibrovascular connective tissue stroma Cementum with prominent cementoblastic
rimming I would like to give credit to Dr. Dave Wells, D.D.S., M.S. for providing the images of figure 3 and 4. Open Access This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
