The most common cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children and younger adults is the minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS). In
the elderly MCNS is relatively uncommon. Over the last decade some reports suggest a rare but possible association with the administration
of various vaccines. A 82-year old Caucasian female presented with pronounced nephrotic syndrome (proteinuria of 7.1 g/d, hypoproteinemia of
47 g/l). About six weeks prior to admission, she had received a combination vaccination for tetanus, diphtheria and poliomyelitis as a
booster-vaccination from her general practitioner. The renal biopsy revealed typical minimal change lesions. She responded well to the
initiated steroid treatment. As through physical examination as well as extensive laboratory and imaging studies did neither find any
evidence for malignancies nor infections we suggest that the minimal change nephrotic syndrome in this patient might be related to the
activation of the immune system triggered by the vaccination. Our case as well as previous anecdotal reports suggests that vaccination and
the resulting stimulations of the immune system might cause MCNS and other severe immune-reactions. Increased awareness in that regard might
help to expand the database of those cases. The most common cause of idiopathic nephrotic syndrome in children and younger adults is the
minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS). In the elderly MCNS is relatively uncommon. If present it can be associated with several
conditions as malignancies , viral infections, allergies and various drugs. Over the last ten years four anecdotal reports linking MCNS to
vaccinations against hepatitis pneumococcus and influenca have been published. Here we report the first case of MCNS following a combined
tetanus-diphteria-poliomyelitis-vaccination and also summarize all previous published reports on MCNS after vaccination. An 82 year old
Caucasian female was admitted to our hospital in April 2008 with pitting edema of her legs arms and back. Her past medical history was
significant for an appendectomy at the age of 29 years, a hyster- and ovariectomy at the age of 50 years, as well as status post varicose
stripping, bilateral knee arthrosis, hypercholesterolemia and a reported diphtheria infection as a child. No history of allergic diseases or
malignoma was present. Her regular medication consisted of low dose acetylsalicylic acid (100 mg/d), simvastatine (5 mg/d) and occasionally
diclofenac (about 3 times a year, last time four months prior to admission). The outpatient nephrologist started medical therapy with
spironolactone (25 mg) and furosemide (up to 400 mg/d) three days prior to admission. Laboratory data from her routine outpatient visits
showed no proteinuria as well as normal renal function until January 2007. On January 17th 2008, the patient received a combined
intramuscular vaccination for tetanus, diphtheria and poliomyelitis (REVAXIS, Sanofi Pasteur MSD GmbH, Leimen, Germany), as her last
vaccination for tetanus had been performed in April 1998. The vaccination was composed of cleaned tetanus toxoid, cleaned diphtheria toxoid,
inactive poliomyelitis virus Typ 1–3, aluminiumhydroxide, 2-Phenoxyethanol, formaldehyde, medium 199 (mixture of aminoacids, minerals,
vitamins, polysorbat 80) and trace amounts of neomycin, streptomycin and polymyxin B. No local vaccination reaction occurred after
injection. At the end of February slight leg edema occurred. The general practitioner performed echocardiography for suspected heart
failure. As the echocardiography revealed only mild aortic-valve-insufficiency and mild mitral valve-insufficiancy, with an intact overall
contractility this diagnosis was dismissed. Meanwhile the edema worsened constantly, impressively indicated by an increase in bodyweight
from 72 kg to 84 kg in one month. Moreover, the previous normotensive patient became hypertensive with blood pressure of 186/101 mmHg.
Urinary dip-stick analysis now showed massive (+++) proteinuria on which the patient was transferred to a nephrologist. The 24 hours
collected urine showed massive unselective proteinuria (12 g/day), therapy with spironolactone and furosemide failed to alleviate the
edematous state. The urine sediment revealed multiple erythrocyte cylinders on which the patient was transferred to our tertiary care
hospital for further nephrological evaluation and treatment. Upon admission physical examination was significant for general edema and
multiple localised makulopapulous exanthema of the feet and legs. Vital parameters were unremarkable. The chest radiograph showed no signs
of pleural effusions or malignancies. Laboratory tests revealed unselective nephrotic proteinuria (7.13 g/d), hypoproteinemia (47 g/l) and
hypercholesterolemia (605 mg/dl). Serum creatinine was 74 μmol/l. The 24 hour collected urine revealed a reduced creatinine-clearance of 46
ml/min. Urinary sediment showed mild microhaematuria (5–10 erythrocytes/μl) and a few granulated and hyaline cylinders but no signs of an
active sediment. Analysis for antinuclear antibodies, ANCA, antibodies against double-strain-DNS, anti-GBM-antibodies and Hepatitis B and C
were negative or within normal limits. The kidneys were of normal size but showed bilateral mild enhancement in the abdominal ultrasound.
Further diagnostic workup showed no evidence of malignancies. Renal biopsy was performed and showed typical minimal change lesion without
evidence of focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (Figure 1). Three of the 22 glomerula showed globalsclerosis, minimal tubulo-atrophie and
interstitial fibrosis (< 5% of the cortex). Further immunological staining excluded mesangial and glomerular IgM, IgA, IgG, C3 or
fibrin/fibrinogen deposits. Light-microscopy of a representative Glomerulum and the tubulus-interstitium (A, B) and ultrastructure of a
glomerulum with missing podocytes and thin basements without deposits (C, D). After minimal change diagnosis was assured by biopsy, therapy
with steroids (1 mg/kg body weight/day) and an ACE-inhibitor (ramipril 5 mg/d) was initiated. After ten days of therapy with steroids (75
mg/d) with concomitant oral phenprocourmon the nephrotic range proteinuria reduced to 1.17 g/24 h (Figure 2). On the last follow-up in the
end of April 2009 serum-creatinine fell to 62 μmol/l, the blood pressure normalized and proteinuria was not detectable in a 24 h urine
collection. Clinical course of the patient. For this paper we searched PubMed for relevant articles using the following medical subject
headings: "minimal change nephropathy," "vaccination," through Feburary 1, 2009. We supplemented the search by scanning references of
selected articles identified by this search. Minimal change nephrotic syndrome (MCNS) is a major cause of nephrotic syndrome in both
children and younger adults. Although the exact underlying cause of MCNS is not fully understood a burgeoning body of evidence suggests that
systemic T cell dysfunction results in the production of a glomerular permeability factor. This circulating factor directly induces foot
process fusion resulting in severe alteration of the glomerular filter system and resulting in marked proteinuria. The clinical and
histopathological findings in our patient as well as the course of the disease were typical for MCNS. This syndrome is rarely seen in
elderly patients (3/million/year) . The fact that our patient did not exhibit any other condition known to be associated with MCNS at the
time of presentation nor on follow up, suggests that the vaccination might have caused MCNS in our patient. To date six reports of MCNS
after vaccination had been published, including our report (Table 1). The first published evidence for a nephrotic syndrome following
vaccination is given in an article from Chamberlain et. al in 1966 . A woman suffered a nephrotic syndrome 10 days after smallpox
vaccination. Biopsy and later necropsy was performed showing slight basement thickening making MCGN an unlikely diagnosis. In all presented
cases the patients suffered a nephrotic syndrome shortly after vaccination of different sera (Tetanus-diphteria-poliomyelitis; Pneumococcus;
Influenza; Hepatitis B). In 4 cases diagnosis was assured by biopsy, except one patient all others were treated with steroids. In three of
the published cases follow-up phase was negative concerning proteinuria. Our patient reported the occasional use of diclofenac. Non-
steroidal-anti-rheumatic-drugs (NSAID's) are well known to cause MCGN as Galesic et al have recently published . In our case this cause is
unlikely because the patient denied the use of any NSAID four month prior to the admission. Summary of MCNS following vaccination in
literature On admission in our hospital the patient complained of multiples makulopapulous exanthema on her legs which shortly occurred
after the ambulatory start of the diuretic therapy with furosemide. As furosemide is known to cause skin exanthema and the lesions
disappeared after discontinuation of the loop-diuretic, we attribute the skin lesions to the furosemide administration as an allergic drug
exanthema and not as an erythema exsudativum multiforme as a sign for an infection. The allergic origin is supported by the fact that was a
lag period between the clinical signs of the nephritic syndrome and a temporal association between the begin of the furosemid therapy and
the begin of the exanthema. In our patient the time of onset of the nephrotic syndrome after the vaccination correlates with the reported
time at which seroprotective antibody-levels are confirmed after vaccination with REVAXIS (28 days after injection) . The time until the
onset of symptoms varies in all described cases cases from days to months, which could be explained by the different time it took for the
respective vaccine to trigger an immune response. Nephrotic syndrome occurred after the second administration of the vaccine which suggests
that the last administration has boosted a pre-existing immune response from the first vaccination. Similar findings are described in a case
from Floege et al. . Another serious reaction after vaccination on renal function is described in several cases. Santoro reported a Lupus
nephritis as an uncommon complication following a hepatitis B vaccination . In another case from Poland, a 17-year-old girl suffered a
necrotizing glomerulonephritis after a vaccination against influenza, which underlines the hypothesis of the activation of the immune-system
after vaccination . Should we than stop vaccinations, at least for children with nephrotic syndrome? In a study assessing the relapse rate
of 54 children with known steroidsensitive nephrotic syndrome showed no evidence that meningococcal C conjugate vaccine (MCCV) triggered
relapses of nephrotic syndrome . This is in contrast to findings by Abeyagunawardena and colleagues who advised to carefully consider the
vaccination of children with steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome. In their cohort of 106 children with nephrotic syndrome showed a
significantly higher relapse rate after MCCV-vaccination with a relative incidence of 1.52 (95% CI 1·10–2·11) comparing 12 months pre- and
post-vaccination . This is in line with a another study showing a nephrotic syndrome relapse rate of 9% after vaccination against viral
hepatitis B in children . In summary, various vaccinations are associated with a higher relapse of steroid-sensitive nephrotic syndrome, yet
the benefit for the preventive medicine prevails the risks of triggering a relapse these patients. The currently available data do in our
view not allow giving any firm recommendation concerning the use vaccines patients with nephrotic syndrome. In the general population the
benefit of various vaccines has been clearly documented as an effective way of primary prevention of diseases. Extremely rare side effects
of vaccinations, like MCNS, can by no means outweigh the benefits of vaccinations. It is beyond the scope of a case report to elucidate the
possible pathophysiology between the immune response after vaccination in MCNS. Still one could hypothesize that under certain
preconditions, the immune response after vaccination influences the cytosceleton of podocytes, leading to proteinuria. Indeed, recent
publications showed that the podocyte is not only heavily equipped with cytokine receptors but is also a target of immunosuppressive drugs
like cyclosporin. Hence, podocyte integrity could, under certain preconditions, be altered in the context of a stimulated immune system
after vaccination. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. CC, JS, CC and JTK were the treating physicians of the patient
reported. VB performed the evaluation of the renal biopsy. All of the authors have participated in the discussion and in writing of the
submitted manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2369/10/21/prepub
Written consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this study.
