Vaginal atresia is often associated with high imperforate anus. Because the commonly used methods of surgical vaginal creation (eg, McIndoe,
intestinal segment interposition) may adversely affect urinary and fecal continence, the less-invasive Vecchietti procedure was selected for
a young adult with a successfully corrected high imperforate anus. A 21-year-old was born with a high imperforate anus, vaginal atresia,
right hemi-uterus, and left renal agenesis. A colostomy was done at birth, a pull-through procedure at 9 months, and a stoma closure 3
months later. At age 13, an obstructed and dilated right hemiuterus and fallopian tube were resected. A laparoscopic version of the
Vecchietti procedure was used for creation of a neovagina. After the patient had been in the hospital for 2 days, traction was gradually
advanced every other day in the office. At 2 weeks postoperatively, the bead was removed revealing a 7-cm vagina. Further elongation was
achieved using the Frank method, while continence remained intact. The Vecchietti procedure is an attractive, minimally invasive alternative
for creation of a neovagina in patients at risk for compromise to their vesico-anorectal continence. Müllerian agenesis, also known as
Mayer-RokitanskyKüster-Hauser syndrome, affects 1 in 4 000 to 1 in 10 000 women, and involves congenital absence of the vagina with either
rudimentary or no uterine and tubal structures, normal ovaries, and normal secondary sexual characteristics.1,2 Women affected by this
disorder often have accompanying renal, skeletal, and other anomalies. Various techniques have been described for creation of a neovagina in
these patients, including nonoperative ones using dilators and either intermittent pressure by the patient (Frank method), or passive
pressure applied by a bicycle seat beneath the perineum (Ingram method).3,4 Operative techniques include interposition of intestinal
segments, such as ileum or sigmoid,5,6 myocutaneous flaps,7–9 grafts of skin,10 peritoneum,11 or amnion,12 and even use of synthetic
absorbable membranes, such as oxidized regenerated cellulose (Interceed, Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) to simulate vaginal mucosa.13
In general, non-operative techniques require a great deal of patient motivation and participation, with functional success achieved after
many months of effort. Operative techniques hold the distinct advantage of being faster, but most require hospitalization and significant
risk for perioperative morbidity, such as infection and graft rejection. A unique hybrid of surgical and nonsurgical techniques is the
Vecchietti procedure, introduced in the medical literature in 1965, then later modified via a laparoscopic approach and first described in
1992.14–16 It involves continuous upward traction on a bead placed in the vaginal dimple that is attached to sutures that pass through the
vesicorectal space into the abdominal cavity, through the extraperitoneal space, and later traverse the anterior abdominal wall with
attachment to a traction device (Marina Medical, Sunrise, FL). Continuous upward pressure on the vaginal vestibule stretches the mucosa,
leading to elongation of the cavity to a more normal depth, typically 7cm to 10cm, after several weeks. The procedure can be accomplished in
less than one hour with excellent anatomical and functional results to follow.17 The case presented below involves a young woman born with
vaginal agenesis and several anomalies that were surgically corrected in the past that could potentially be damaged by further pelvic floor
surgery. In an effort to create a functional, copulatory vagina with minimal disruption of surrounding structures, a laparoscopic Vecchietti
procedure was chosen. The patient is a 21-year-old, single, Hispanic woman born with a high imperforate anus, vaginal aplasia, right
hemiuterus, and left renal agenesis. She underwent surgery for creation of a colostomy in the early neonatal period, with a later pull-
through procedure performed using the technique of Peña.18 At the age of 12 months, her stoma was closed and complete fecal continence
achieved. At age 13, she began having cyclic, monthly pelvic pain in her suprapubic region with subsequent imaging revealing a unicornuate
uterus with functional endometrial tissue. She underwent an uncomplicated abdominal hysterectomy with resolution of pain symptoms. She
continued to do well until the age of 17 when she presented with lower abdominal pain due to an inguinal hernia that was repaired shortly
thereafter. She presented to the author (PM) desirous of a functional vagina. On presenting examination, a 1-cm vaginal dimple was present
with otherwise normal female external genitalia. The patient was counseled as to options for creation of a neovagina, with an impending move
to another region of the country heavily influencing her decision to proceed with a surgical form of therapy. Several weeks after her
initial consultation, laparoscopic creation of a neovagina was accomplished using the Vecchietti technique.19 In short, under laparoscopic
guidance, 2 monofilament sutures attached to an acrylic bead were passed through the vaginal vestibule into the peritoneal cavity. Correct
positioning of the sutures was ascertained by using cystoscopy and a digital rectal examination. Two grasping instruments were then inserted
through ancillary abdominal ports on both sides of the rectus abdominis muscles and tunneled through the extraperitoneal space down to the
level of suture entry into the pelvis. The sutures were withdrawn through the port incisions and attached to a specially designed traction
device where they were tightened, creating upward tension on the bead. The sutures were tightened daily during the patient's 2-day hospital
stay and every other day for 2 weeks in the surgeon's office following discharge. Oral analgesic tablets containing either naproxen or
hydrocodone with ibuprofen were prescribed for the patient and were taken as needed prior to suture tightening. Upon removal, the patient
was noted to have a vaginal length of 7cm with intact mucous membranes lining the newly created cavity. She was instructed in the use of
vaginal dilators to maintain vaginal length and patency until a future time when she would become sexually active. One month following
surgery, the patient reported normal urinary and fecal continence with ongoing successful use of vaginal dilators. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first case of a woman with previous pelvic and anorectal surgery undergoing a laparoscopic Vecchietti procedure to
treat vaginal agenesis. This procedure has well-recognized benefits compared with alternatives, including minimal scarring, shorter
hospitalization, elimination of graft harvesting, and the presence of a stratified squamous epithelium similar to a normal vagina. Further
virtues and comparisons to other techniques have been well-described in previous reviews.17,20 In the largest published case series to date
by Fedele and colleagues21 in which 110 consecutive cases were followed prospectively, 98% of patients achieved anatomic success, defined as
a functional vagina within 6 months of surgery 6cm or more in length and 2 fingerbreadths in width. Moreover, 97% of patients reported
satisfactory sexual intercourse with no differences in functional results, such as arousal, lubrication, and orgasm when compared with age-
matched peers. In this case, the tenuous nature of the patient's continence mechanism made this minimally invasive approach especially
attractive. It also mandated meticulous cystoscopic examination of the bladder and inspection of the rectum intraoperatively to verify
proper placement of the sutures through the vesicorectal space. Of course, maintenance and elongation of the neovagina still requires
nightly insertion of a dilator until such time that regular intercourse ensues, but should not require the 6 months to 12 months of dilator
use that is typical for the Frank and Ingram methods. With regular use of oral analgesics, our patient found that the discomfort and
inconvenience of office visits at 48-hour intervals for 2 weeks was acceptable and preferable compared with other alternatives. Long-term
follow-up will be necessary before concluding whether this patient achieves a functional level of success. Given the collective experience
reported here and elsewhere, creation of a neovagina via a modified Vecchietti technique should be considered by an experienced
laparoscopist for patients with prior correction of anorectal malformations.
