Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is a rare autosomal dominant inherited neuromuscular disease involving several systems. The anesthetic method of
choice remains uncertain. The risk of perioperative complications, particularly pulmonary and cardiac complications, in these patients is of
major concern. We report on a 16-year-old female patient with DM type 1 undergoing laparoscopic cholecystectomy for symptomatic
cholelithiasis, who had a smooth, uncomplicated recovery. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is feasible and safe in patients with DM but requires
individual multidisciplinary perioperative management. Myotonic dystrophy (DM) is an autosomal dominant RNA-mediated disease and is the most
common inherited neuromuscular disease in adults. Two genetic loci have been associated with the DM phenotype: DM1 on chromosome 19, and DM2
on chromosome 3.1 The responsible mutation of DM type 1 is a (CTG) repeat expansion at the 3′ end of the dystrophic myotonic protein kinase
gene (DMPK) on chromosome 19.2,3 The disease affects multiple systems (skeletal muscle, heart, eye, and the endocrine system), and the
clinical picture includes myotonia (impaired muscle relaxation), progressive skeletal muscle wasting, arrhythmias, cataracts, insulin
resistance, and altered CNS function.1 The risk of perioperative complications, particularly pulmonary and cardiac complications, in
patients with myotonic dystrophy is high, and various anesthetic agents are suspected.4 There are very few reports of DM patients undergoing
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, so we present a 16-year-old female patient with DM type 1 who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy for
symptomatic cholelithiasis with a smooth, uncomplicated recovery. A 16-year-old female patient was admitted to our department for
symptomatic cholelithiasis. She had been diagnosed with DM1 4 years earlier. Her body mass index (BMI) and nutritional status were normal;
in particular, her BMI was 25kg/ m2. Abdominal ultrasonography revealed cholecystolithiasis. On admission, weakness of facial and anterior
neck muscles and reduced muscular tone and reflexes in the lower extremities were found, but myotonic phenomena were not. Blood tests were
within normal ranges. Chest x-ray, arterial blood gas analysis, pulmonary function tests, electrocardiogram, and echocardiogram were also
normal. A dose of cefazolin (500 mg) was administered intravenously (IV) one hour before the operation. In the operating room, midazolam
(2.5mg) was initially administered IV. After insertion of an epidural catheter between the T7-T8 interspace, fentanyl (50 µg) was given
epidurally; lornoxicam (8mg) was administered IV. After preoxygenation, anesthesia was induced with bolus IV propofol (200 mg) and
remifentanil (100 µg). The patient was intubated easily without administering muscle relaxants. Anesthesia was maintained with oxygen in the
air and sevoflurane (1.6 minimum alveolar concentration). A typical laparoscopic cholecystectomy, using 4 trocars, as previously described
by our group,5 was performed. After the establishment of pneumoperitoneum and insertion of the laparoscope, a thorough inspection of the
entire peritoneal cavity was performed and revealed no abnormality. The other 3 working ports were then inserted. Following ligation of the
cystic duct and cystic artery, the gallbladder was mobilized and dissected. Meticulous hemostasis was achieved by using electrocautery. The
resected specimen was introduced into a retrieval bag and removed. No technical difficulties were encountered during the whole procedure.
The operating time from skin incision to skin closure was 33 minutes. The wounds were infiltrated with 0.5% Chirocaine hydrochloride. The
patient was extubated when she gained consciousness and had spontaneous respirations. The epidural catheter was removed; the patient was
observed in the postoperative intensive care unit for 12 hours after the operation and then was transferred to the surgical ward. Lornoxicam
(8mg) was administered IV 12 hours after the operation for analgesia. The postoperative course was uneventful, and the patient was
discharged the following day. Various anesthetic techniques have been described, as there is no general agreement about the safest method.
Hazards have been associated with the use of thiopentone, suxamethonium, neostigmine, and halothane, which may cause prolongation of
recovery from anesthesia, apnea, and respiratory depression. However, in a Canadian study,4 halothane was used in 154 patients and
suxamethonium in 113 patients without any episodes of myotonia or shivering. In a series of 13 DM patients undergoing oropharyngeal and head
surgery,6 the authors used continuous propofol infusion with fentanyl and atracurium with no perioperative complications. Propofol was used
for induction in the presented patient and, although there is large variability in propofol sensitivity in DM patients,7 there was no
adverse effect. Epidural anesthesia has been reported as a single method7 but was used in combination with general anesthesia in our
patient. We also administered nonsteroidal inflammatory drugs, which are good analgesics and cause no respiratory depression.7 Local wound
infiltration provided additional postoperative analgesia. Patients with myotonic dystrophy have chronic restrictive respiratory
insufficiency.8,9 Involvement of the upper airway and expiratory muscles occurs early, but inspiratory muscle weakness becomes prominent
when proximal limb weakness is obvious.8 Expiratory muscle weakness may preclude effective cough and lead to atelectasis.3 The disability of
inspiratory muscles decreases the inspiratory capacity and increases the risk of alveolar hypoventilation.8,9 The diaphragm has been found
to be weak in such patients predisposing further to perioperative pulmonary complications.4 Central disturbances may lead to hypoventilation
and reduced ventilatory response to carbon dioxide.8,9 The largest study of perioperative complications in 219 patients undergoing a variety
of procedures found an 8.2% rate.4 Almost all complications (16 out of 18) were pulmonary complications. Eighteen patients underwent
cholecystectomy, and 7 had respiratory complications (atelectasis, pneumonia, and ventilatory failure); death occurred in one of them.4
Multivariate analysis showed that the risk of complications was significantly higher after upper abdominal surgery (Odds Ratio: 24.4) and in
patients with severe muscular disability (Odds Ratio: 14.1).4 Careful perioperative management in the described patient avoided any
pulmonary complications. Only 3 patients with DM who underwent laparoscopic cholecystectomy have been described.10–12 The authors reported
no perioperative complications, and the patients were discharged after 3 and 4 days compared with the 1-day hospital stay of our patient.
The fact that pulmonary function deteriorates significantly less in laparoscopic cholecystectomy compared with the open procedure13
contributes to the smooth postoperative course of these patients. DM is also frequently associated with conduction disorders
(atrioventricular block, bundle-branch block, or intraventricular conduction delays), severe arrhythmias (sinus bradycardia and
tachyarrhythmias, including atrial flutter, atrial fibrillation, ventricular tachycardia, ventricular fibrillation) and dilated
cardiomyopathy.14 The reported patient did not experience a perioperative cardiac event. The presented case indicates that laparoscopic
cholecystectomy can be performed safely in patients with myotonic dystrophy under careful multidisciplinary perioperative management.
Because the severity of myotonic dystrophy varies among patients, the anesthetic strategy should be individually planned. September 9-12,
2009, Boston, Massachusetts, USA. 18th SLS Annual Meeting and Endo Expo 2009, presented by the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons. This
multispecialty conference helps increase knowledge of laparoscopic, endoscopic and minimally invasive surgical techniques. The Meeting
consists of Postgraduate Master's Classes; Plenary Sessions; Lap Updates of multiple topics; Live Surgery Telecasts; Exhibitions;
Competition for Best Papers, Videos and Posters from Professors to Fellows and Residents; Future Technology Sessions; and over 200
Scientific Presentations in General Surgery, Gynecology and Urology. LOCATION: Westin Copley Place. DIRECTORS: Charles H. Koh, MD; Gustavo
Stringel, MD; GENERAL CHAIR: Paul Alan Wetter, MD; SCIENTIFIC CHAIRS: Raymond J. Lanzafame, MD, MBA, Carl J. Levinson, MD. February 10-13,
2010, Honolulu, HI, USA. AsianAmerican MultiSpecialty Summit IV Laparoscopy and Minimally Invasive Surgery presented by the Society of
Laparoendoscopic Surgeons. LOCATION: Hilton Hawaiian Village Beach Resort and Spa. September 1-4, 2010, New York, New York, USA. 19th SLS
Annual Meeting and Endo Expo 2010, presented by the Society of Laparoendoscopic Surgeons. LOCATION: Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers.
September 14-17, 2011, Los Angeles, California, USA. 20th SLS Annual Meeting and Endo Expo 2011, presented by the Society of
Laparoendoscopic Surgeons. LOCATION: Hyatt Regency Century Plaza. For more information go to www.sls.org or contact the Society of
Laparoendoscopic Surgeons, 7330 SW 62nd Place, Suite 410, Miami, FL 33143-4825, USA. Tel: 305.665.9959, Toll Free: 800.446.2659, Fax:
305.667.4123, E-mail: Conferences@SLS.org. SLS CALENDAR CLASSIFIED Calendar of Events Listings are available at the rate of $165 USD per
listing (maximum 150 words per listing). To add your event, please send the text and check in US funds made payable to: Society of
Laparoendoscopic Surgeons, Attn: JSLS Calendar Listings, 7330 SW 62nd Place, Suite 410, Miami, FL 33143-4825, USA. For more information on
advertsing rates, contact SLS: Tel: 305.665.9959, Toll Free: 800.446.2659, Fax: 305.667.412, E-mail: Publications@SLS.org
