Spigelian hernia is an uncommon ventral hernia characterized by a defect in the linea semilunaris. Repair of spigelian hernia has
traditionally been accomplished via an open transverse incision and primary repair. The purpose of this article is to present 2 case reports
of incarcerated spigelian hernia that were successfully repaired laparoscopically using Gortex mesh and to present a review of the
literature regarding laparoscopic repair of spigelian hernias. Retrospective chart review and Medline literature search. Two patients
underwent laparoscopic mesh repair of incarcerated spigelian hernias. Both were started on a regular diet on postoperative day 1 and
discharged on postoperative days 2 and 3. One patient developed a seroma that resolved without intervention. There was complete resolution
of preoperative symptoms at the 12-month follow-up. Minimally invasive repair of spigelian hernias is an alternative to the traditional open
surgical technique. Further studies are needed to directly compare the open and the laparoscopic repair. The semilunar line was first
described by the Belgian anatomist Adriaan van der Spieghal in 1645. Almost a century later, a Flemish anatomist, Josef Klinkosch, coined
the term “spigelian hernia” to describe a defect in the semilunar line.1 Throughout history, spigelian hernias have also been known as
“spontaneous lateral ventral hernias,” “hernia of the semilunar line,” and “hernias through the conjoint tendon.”2 Spigelian hernias
constitute approximately 1% to 2% of all abdominal wall hernias.3 Previous studies have suggested that the total number of previously
reported cases worldwide is around 900.4,5 In the initial stages of development, Spigelian hernias are often difficult to diagnose by
physical examination because the hernia originates inferior to an intact external oblique aponeurosis.6 Physical diagnosis correctly
identifies spigelian hernias approximately 50% of the time; thus, with the advances in radiological imaging, an increase has occurred in the
number of spigelian hernia cases diagnosed in the past decade compared with previous decades. Both ultrasound and computed tomography are
useful radiological adjuncts for diagnosing spigelian hernias.6 Traditionally, spigelian hernias have been repaired with an open surgical
technique. However, in the past few decades, laparoscopic repair has become a promising alternative for repair. The purpose of this article
is twofold: first, to present 2 case reports of incarcerated spigelian hernias that were successfully repaired laparoscopically using a
dual-sided polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE, Gortex) mesh, and second, to compare the various laparoscopic repair techniques reported in the
published literature to date. A 54-year-old woman presented with intermittent, crampy, abdominal pain of several months duration. The
patient complained of a bulge on the right side of her abdomen that had developed rather suddenly over several weeks. The patient denied any
nausea, vomiting, or constipation. Her past surgical history included 2 cesarean deliveries and a total abdominal hysterectomy with
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. On physical examination, a tender bulge was found on the right side of the patient's abdomen that was most
prominent while the patient was standing. An abdominal computed tomography scan showed a large right-sided incarcerated spigelian hernia
(Figure 1). The patient elected to have a laparoscopic spigelian hernia repair with mesh. The operation was performed with the patient under
general anesthesia. Four trocar sites were used, duration was approximately 1.5 hours, estimated blood loss (EBL) was minimal, and dual-
sided polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE, Gortex) mesh was used for the repair. The patient was tolerating a liquid diet on postoperative day
one (POD 1). The patient had some nausea that was controlled with medication, tolerated a regular diet on POD 2 and was discharged home on
POD 3. One week after surgery, the patient was noted to have an asymptomatic seroma, approximately 4 × 3 cm in size. The seroma was observed
and resolved within 4 weeks without treatment. Abdominal computed tomography of a right-sided incarcerated spigelian hernia. White arrow
depicts the right-sided hernia sac that has protruded through the transverses abdominus, internal oblique, and external oblique muscles. The
second patient is a 39-year-old woman who presented with constipation and intermittent abdominal pain of several months duration. Her past
surgical history was significant for a kidney transplant in 2003, cholecystectomy in 2004, and an appendectomy in 1980. She had a past
medical history of systemic lupus erythematosus and was taking maintenance immunosuppression medications. On physical examination, she had a
mass on the right side of the abdomen that was tender to palpation. This mass did not appear to be an incisional hernia from previous
surgeries. As in the first case, the mass was most prominent when the patient was standing. An abdominal computed tomography scan
demonstrated an incarcerated right-sided spigelian hernia. The patient also underwent a laparoscopic repair of the spigelian hernia. The
same method was used as in the first case except that most of the hernia sac was resected. The operation was performed with the patient
under general endotracheal intubation, 4 trocar sites were used, duration was approximately 1.5 hours, EBL was minimal, dual-sided
polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE, Gortex) mesh was used for the repair. The patient was tolerating a liquid diet on POD 1, a regular diet on
POD 2, and was discharged home on POD 2. Both patients had laparoscopic reduction of their incarcerated spigelian hernias and repair using
dual-sided 2-mm Gortex, ePTFE mesh. Four laparoscopic ports were used with a 30-degree scope placed in the supraumbilical location.
Following pneumoperitoneum, the abdomen was inspected, and adhesions were taken down with the LigaSure system (ValleyLab, Colorado). Both
incarcerated spigelian hernias contained bowel and omentum (Figure 2). No physical evidence was found of any necrotic bowel. Intraoperative
image of the right-sided incarcerated spigelian hernia. The hernia sac contained omentum and bowel. Both hernia defects measured
approximately 8 × 6 cm. A 2 mm × 15 cm × 10 cm dual-sided Gortex ePTFE mesh was used to repair both fascial defects. Using a 0-Gortex
suture, stay sutures were placed extraperitoneally in the 4 corners of the Gortex mesh. The mesh was then rolled up and inserted into the
abdomen. Atraumatic graspers were used to unroll the mesh with the smooth side of the mesh towards the intestines. The appropriate locations
of the 4 corners of the fascia surrounding the hernia defect were identified. Beginning laterally, a suture passer was inserted in the upper
outer margin of normal fascia (to the right of the superior most border of the fascial defect). The corresponding stay suture was secured in
the needle passer and withdrawn through the insertion side and secured outside of the abdomen with a hemostat (Figure 3). Intraabdominal
photograph depicting the dual-sided Gortex mesh with all 4 Gortex stay sutures. The remaining corner stay sutures were similarly secured
outside the abdomen and then all 4 sutures were tied securely with the knots carefully pushed down through the single corresponding stab
incision. This maneuver allowed the mesh to be flush against the anterior abdominal wall, completely covering the hernia defect with a
minimum 3-cm margin (Figure 3). The mesh was further secured to the anterior abdominal wall by metallic spiral tacks. The tacks were placed
approximately 1 cm to 1.5 cm apart around the entire edge of the mesh. Care was taken to provide counterpressure while securing the spiral
tacks (Figure 4). Intraabdominal photograph depicting the dual-sided Gortex mesh flush against the anterior abdominal wall with the metallic
spiral tacks. Spigelian hernias have traditionally been repaired with an open surgical technique; however, minimally invasive repair has
become a promising alternative for surgical repair. One of the limitations of doing a literature review to compare various laparoscopic
techniques is that spigelian hernias constitute only 1% to 2% of all ventral hernias and the majority of studies are single case reports.
Therefore, few randomized controlled trails directly compare the open surgical technique with the laparoscopic technique for repairing
spigelian hernias. Mareno-Egea and colleagues7 completed one of the few randomized controlled trials comparing the open versus the
laparoscopic surgical repair in nonincarcerated spigelian hernias as shown in Table 1. They reported on 22 patients, with 11 having an open
repair and 11 having a laparoscopic repair. No significant difference occurred in hernia recurrence between the 2 groups after a 3.5-year
follow-up. There were, however, significant differences in morbidity and hospital stay between the open and laparoscopic groups. Length of
stay for patients having open surgical repair averaged 5 days, while the patients with the laparoscopic repair averaged 1 day in the
hospital. One of the limitations of this study was that the laparoscopic repair included both an extraperitoneal on-lay technique using
polypropylene and an intraperitoneal underlay technique using Parietex composite double-layer mesh. Eight patients were in the
extraperitoneal group, and 3 were in the intraperitoneal group. One of the disadvantages of this study was that it did not directly compare
laparoscopic intraperitoneal repair with an open surgical technique. List of the Recent Studies Regarding Laparoscopic Repair of Spigelian
Hernias RCT = randomized controlled trial; open = open surgical repair, lap = laparoscopic repair; TEP = total extraperitoneal repair; IA =
intraabdominal (intraperitoneal) repair, LIH = left inguinal hernia; PTFE = Polytetrafluoroethylene. Several prospective case series have
used polypropylene mesh for laparoscopic repair of spigelian hernias. In 2006, Palanivelu and colleagues8 repaired 8 spigelian hernias with
a primary fascial repair followed by placement of a polypropylene mesh for reinforcement. The polypropylene mesh was secured by several
interrupted polypropylene sutures. Three of the patients had incarcerated hernias containing bowel or omentum. There were no postoperative
complications or recurrences after a 3.5-year follow-up.8 Felix and colleagues9 reported successful laparoscopic repair of 4 spigelian
hernias with intraperitoneal underlay of polypropylene mesh. No immediate postoperative complications occurred; however, long-term follow-up
was not addressed in the article. One of the disadvantages of the case series was that the mesh was made of polypropylene and closure varied
from primary fascial closure to intraperitoneal overlay. In addition to the case series, there have been several case reports of successful
laparoscopic repair of spigelian hernias. In the majority of reported cases polypropylene mesh has been used and both incarcerated and
nonincarcerated hernias have been repaired. Amendolara et al10 repaired 2 incarcerated spigelian hernias with polypropylene mesh securing
the mesh edges with titanium clips. Martell et al11 repaired a single incarcerated spigelian hernia using polypropylene mesh, but secured
the mesh using spiral tacks. Similarly, Fisher12 in 1994 published a case report on successfully repairing an incarcerated spigelian hernia
in a 71-year-old man by using polypropylene mesh. In general, the patients in these case series had a benign postoperative course and were
discharged 24 hours to 49 hours postoperatively. While polypropylene mesh was used in the majority of case reports, the report by Lopez-
Tomassetti et al13 is one of the few where polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE, Gortex) mesh was used to repair an incarcerated spigelian hernia.
The fascial defect measured approximately 7 cm × 6 cm, and a 10 cm × 15 cm Gortex mesh was used for an underlay intraperitoneal repair. No
evidence was found of necrotic bowel. The mesh was secured by using 2 rows of spiral tacks with one row of tacks about 3 cm and the other
row of tacks about 0.5 cm from the fascial defect. The patient had a benign postoperative course and was discharged within 72 hours of
surgery. At the 10-month follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic. One of the advantages of this case report is that dual-sided Gortex
mesh was successfully used for an incarcerated spigelian hernia. Due to the location of spigelian hernias, diagnosis of this type of hernia
by physical examination is unreliable. Such findings can include a bulge made worse by lumbar flexion located on the lateral aspect of the
abdominal wall. In the initial stages of development, spigelian hernias are often difficult to diagnose by physical examination because the
hernia originates inferior to an intact external oblique aponeurosis.6 Symptoms can include abdominal pain or discomfort with or without
obstructive symptoms, often made worse with straining or other increases in intraabdominal pressure. Today, the majority of spigelian
hernias are diagnosed with either ultrasound or computed tomography, but traditionally they were diagnosed during operative exploration.
Previous authors14,15 have speculated that spigelian hernias can be both acquired and inherited. While the exact cause is unknown, the
development of a spigelian hernia is likely multifactorial involving one or more factors: collagen disorders, aging, obesity, rapid weight
loss, multiple pregnancies, chronic pulmonary diseases, trauma, iatrogenic, and congenital.4,16,17 Although multiple conditions predispose
people to acquire spigelian hernias, recent reports have found that at least 50% of all patients with spigelian hernias had previous
abdominal surgeries including both open and laparoscopic surgeries.17,18 The spigelian aponeurosis is formed by the fusion of the internal
oblique and the transverses abdominis aponeurosis. The spigelian aponeurosis is limited laterally by the linea semilunaris, and medially by
the lateral edge of the rectus muscle. The spigelian aponeurosis extends from the costal cartilage of the eighth rib to the symphysis
pubis.1,5,17 In the upper abdominal wall, the spigelian aponeurosis is posterior to the rectus muscle making it difficult to locate a
fascial defect on physical examination. Superior to the umbilical region, the aponeurosis of the internal oblique crosses over the
transverses in a perpendicular fashion creating a strong abdominal wall barrier. Inferior to the umbilical region, these aponeuroses run
parallel to each other. These parallel fibers form a weak barrier that is susceptible to protruding peritoneal sacs or extraperitoneal
fat.1,2,17,19 More than half of all spigelian hernias are located in a 6-cm wide region inferior to the umbilicus and superior to the
inferior epigastric vessels. This region is referred to as “the spigelian hernia belt.”1 The spigelian hernia sac often contains
extraperitoneal fat, peritoneum, small bowel, or omentum.3 In addition, previous studies have reported various abdominal contents including
stomach, gallbladder, Meckel's diverticulum, ovary, testis, and bladder.1,20 Spigelian hernias often have a narrow fascial defect and
therefore have an increased risk of incarceration and strangulation. The incarceration rate has been reported to be as high as 24%.4
Spigelian hernias are an uncommon type of ventral hernia. To date, most surgical repairs have used an open technique. However, minimally
invasive repair of spigelian hernia has become a promising alternative to open surgery. Due to the rarity of this hernia, the majority of
the literature contains case reports, and the majority of laparoscopic repairs have been done with polypropylene mesh. Further studies are
needed to directly compare recurrence rates of the minimally invasive repair with that of the open surgical repair. This paper demonstrates
that an incarcerated spigelian hernia can be successfully repaired by using dual-sided polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE, Gortex) mesh. Based
on available evidence published on laparoscopic ventral hernia repair, especially the more common incisional hernia, we conclude that
laparoscopic repair is becoming the preferred method where expertise exists. However, the optimal laparoscopic technique remains
debatable.20 Advancements in mesh technology and fixation devices (tackers) or potentially the application of energy-based tissue fusion
will likely allow for further improvements in the outcomes of spigelian hernia repair.
