As the number of minimally invasive and laparoscopic procedures increases, hemostatic agents are becoming more popular as a means of
achieving rapid hemostasis. The patient is a 61-year-old woman who underwent a laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy. FloSeal Hemostatic
Matrix (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield Illinois) was used at the conclusion of the procedure. Pathology unexpectedly revealed high-grade
leiomyosarcoma of the uterus. The patient then presented to our facility for consultation and was scheduled for robotic trachelectomy and
lymphadenectomy. Laparoscopy revealed nodular lesions throughout the abdomen and pelvis. Biopsies were performed and the case aborted. Final
pathology however showed caseating foreign body giant cell granulomata in all specimens. No malignancy was found. The patient then underwent
exploratory laparotomy, trachelectomy, and a staging procedure. All pathology specimens and pelvic washings were negative for malignancy.
Use of gelatin-thrombin hemostatic agents may elicit a foreign body reaction leading to large giant cell granulomata. In this case, the
presence of these granulomata mimicked metastatic disease. Egyptians used various high-temperature cautery, waxes, and poultices to obtain
hemostasis, Native Americans applied scrapings from animal hides to wounds, and the Greek scholar Hippocrates described the use of high-
temperature cautery and various topical hemostatic agents to stop bleeding. In the modern era, fibrin used as a topical hemostatic agent was
introduced in the early 1900s. In 1940, the use of Gelfoam in neurological procedures was popularized. More recently, multiple new products
have entered the market. FloSeal Hemostatic Matrix (Baxter Healthcare, Deerfield, Illinois) consists of a bovine-derived gelatin matrix
component, a human-derived thrombin component, applicator tips, and several mixing accessories. It is approved by the FDA for broad
applications in surgical care as an adjunct to hemostasis when control of bleeding by ligature or conventional procedures is ineffective or
impractical. There is scant literature regarding complications with the use of FloSeal. The patient is a 61-year-old female with a 2-year
history of postmenopausal bleeding. She underwent hysteroscopic resection of a submucousal leiomyoma at the age of 59. She presented again
for postmenopausal bleeding. An ultrasound showed a large 5-cm subserosal leiomyoma and several new submucosal leiomyomata. An endometrial
biopsy was negative for malignancy. Cervical cytology examinations including human papilloma virus testing were negative. The patient
underwent a laparoscopic supracervical hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy. The specimen was removed by morcellation. According
to the operative report, FloSeal was applied to the cervical stump for adhesion prevention. The specimen weighed 229 grams and showed
fragments of intermediate to high-grade leiomyosarcoma. Trachelectomy and a staging procedure were advised soon after the initial surgery,
but the patient desired a second opinion. At our facility, the patient was offered trachelectomy and robotic-assisted laparoscopic staging
versus exploratory laparotomy and staging. She opted for the robotic approach. Upon introduction of the laparoscope, extensive nodular
lesions throughout the abdomen and pelvis were noted, involving the bowel, omentum, abdominal wall, and cervical stump (Figures 1, 2, 3).
Several biopsies were obtained, and the case was aborted assuming advanced metastatic leiomyosarcoma. The final pathology revealed caseating
giant cell granulomata without evidence of malignancy (Figures 4, 5, 6). Caseating granuloma caused by hemostatic agent posing as
leiomyosarcoma laparoscopic image of lesions involving cul de sac and right pelvic sidewall. Caseating granuloma caused by hemostatic agent
posing as leiomyosarcoma laparoscopic image of lesions involving right abdominal wall peritoneum. Caseating granuloma caused by hemostatic
agent posing as leiomyosarcoma laparoscopic image of lesions involving cervical stump, omentum and peritoneum overlying bladder. Caseating
granuloma caused by hemostatic agent low power image of caseating granuloma. Caseating granuloma caused by hemostatic agent multinucleated
giant cell within granulomata. Caseating granuloma caused by hemostatic agent pathology showing foreign material within granuloma. The
patient subsequently underwent exploratory laparotomy, trachelectomy, and staging. Operative findings were unchanged from the previous
procedure. The pathology revealed extensive caseating granulomata, a lower uterine segment and cervix with leiomyomata, but no evidence of
malignancy. All lymph nodes and biopsies were negative. The postoperative course was uncomplicated. Adjuvant chemotherapy was offered but
the patient declined. FloSeal Matrix Hemostatic Agent (Baxter HealthCare, Deerfield, IL) is composed of thrombin and a proprietary gelatin
matrix that is manufactured by extracting collagen from bovine corneal tissue. The collagen then undergoes gelatinization and cross
linking/stabilization with glutaraldehyde. This compound is ground into 500-µm to 600-µm particles. The thrombin component, ThrombinJMI
(King Pharmaceuticals, Inc., Bristol, TN), is of bovine origin and is supplied as a sterile freeze-dried powder that is reconstituted in
0.9% sodium chloride and mixed with the gelatin matrix in the operating room just before use. Bovine thrombin directly activates fibrinogen
and converts it into fibrin monomers, bypassing the intrinsic and extrinsic systems.1 Because FloSeal contains no fibrinogen, contact with
blood is required for thrombin to convert endogenous fibrinogen to fibrin. The combination of thrombin and gelatin matrix creates a granular
hemostat that uses both active and mechanical components to achieve hemostasis.2 As blood percolates through the matrix in the presence of
bleeding, the granules swell approximately 20% within 10 minutes, conforming to the shape of the wound and forming fibrin polymers. Gelatin
matrix is therefore used best as a pure hemostatic agent, not as tissue glue, urinary tract sealant, or for adhesion prevention. The matrix
is applied to a source of bleeding and kept in place for approximately 2 minutes. Excess FloSeal should be removed by gentle irrigation.
FloSeal is resorbed by the body within 6 weeks to 8 weeks, consistent with the time frame of normal wound healing.3 Gelatin-based hemostatic
agents may serve as a nidus for infection and abscess formation and have been reported to potentiate bacterial growth. Giant cell
granulomas, as presented in this case, have been observed at implant sites when used in the brain.4 In a case reported by Nakajima et al,5
granulomatous masses secondary to microfibrillar collagen hemostat (Avitene, Davol, Inc, Cranston, RI) were thought to be metastatic
mucinous cystadenocarcinoma. In the case presented, giant cell granulomas secondary to the use of FloSeal Hemostatic Matrix were mistaken
for metastatic leiomyosarcoma. This led to cancellation of the planned procedure and need for a second procedure. This product should be
used only when control of bleeding is needed and conventional procedures are ineffective or impractical. It should not be used as a
prophylactic measure or for adhesion prevention. When using all gelatin-based hemostatic agents, excess material, not incorporated in the
clot, should be removed to prevent foreign body reactions.
