Pulmonary vein ablation with a single-tip catheter remains long and complex. We describe a typical case of a novel efficient technique with
a decapolar ring catheter utilizing alternating unipolar/bipolar radiofrequency energy. Voltage analysis and electrical mapping demonstrate
the potential for antrum ablation and pulmonary vein isolation. Pulmonary vein (PV) isolation remains the cornerstone of ablation for atrial
fibrillation.1 Procedures using single-tip catheters are long and require additional techniques like three dimensional (3D) mapping systems
and intracardiac echo imaging.2–4 Recently, a quick and efficient novel ablation technology has been introduced that uses multi-electrode
catheters and alternating unipolar and bipolar radiofrequency (RF) energy at a maximum power of 10 W.5 This report provides a typical
example showing the potential for antrum ablation and PV isolation. Details of the ablation system have been described previously.5 Briefly,
a quadripolar catheter is placed in the coronary sinus (CS) for pacing. A 9.5F inner lumen diameter sheath (Channel, Bard or Frontier
Advance) is introduced, and selective biplane PV angiography is performed. The decapolar PV ablation catheter (PVAC) is deployed in the
antrum with the guidewire inside the PV (Figure 1). Clockwise and counter-clockwise rotation may increase or decrease the 25 mm diameter of
the circle, and the tip can be extended to adapt to PV anatomy. Multiple applications (60 s, target temperature 60°C) are then performed for
each vein until the local electrical activity within the antrum has disappeared. The default setting with the PVAC uses a 4:1 ratio RF duty-
cycle resulting in 80% bipolar and 20% unipolar energy with a maximum power of 8 W. Bipolar current flows between adjacent electrodes of all
pairs that are selected for energy delivery, except for electrodes 1 and 10. After ablation, the PVAC is introduced for mapping inside the
vein, and isolation can then be verified with pacing from the CS or inside the vein. In the present case, a 15 mm diameter decapolar LASSO
mapping catheter (Biosense-Webster) and a 3D imaging system (Endocardial Solutions, St Jude, USA) were used to construct a complete 3D cast
and voltage map of the LA (298 points) and demonstrate the effect of PVAC ablation. During SR, there is a high voltage of 2 mV and more at
the anterior and posterior LA and PVs (Figure 2, left maps). The voltage maps on the right after PVAC ablation were obtained in the same way
with special attention for the PVs (198 points) and clearly show that the LA body voltage remained unchanged, whereas the PVs are completely
devoid of electrical activity with a sharp demarcation. The electrical silence clearly extends very far into the antrum, especially for the
right-sided PVs. The PVAC was also used to map the local PV and antrum potentials to verify isolation. Figure 3 shows the electrograms
before (pre-PVAC) and after (post-PVAC) ablation in the LSPV. After PVAC ablation, there is only a far-field component during CS pacing, and
isolated ectopy inside the vein. The complete isolation was also confirmed by LASSO recording in all veins. The total procedure time
including 3D imaging and LASSO mapping was 89 min with fluoroscopy time of 21 min. RAO (left) and LAO (right) 45° fluoroscopic image of the
10-polar PVAC (3 mm electrodes, 3 mm spacing) in the right inferior pulmonary vein. Voltage map of the pulmonary veins and left atrium
before (left) and after (right) ablation with the PVAC. A and C show the posterior LA wall, whereas B and D show the anterior aspect. ECG
leads I–III and V1 electrogram recordings from the CS and PVAC. Pre-PVAC shows the five bipolar PVAC recordings with local potentials in the
LSPV before ablation is switched on. Post-PVAC shows the same PVAC recordings after ablation, demonstrating absence of PV capture during CS
pacing, and electrical isolation with inability of ectopy inside the LSPV to capture the atrium. The present case demonstrates that PV
isolation with multi-electrode PVAC ablation is feasible and efficient. The use of 3D imaging and LASSO mapping in this case, elegantly
shows that the ablation effect of the PVAC extends far away from the ostium into the PV antrum. Although voltage analysis can never be 100%
accurate, the reduction after ablation is striking, and the LASSO mapping confirmed isolation in all veins. This seems very similar to the
endpoint of single-tip wide area circumferential ablation and is not merely a segmental, ostial isolation. More elaborate studies are needed
to quantify and compare this effect in larger patient groups. The technique will need more validation in challenging variations of PV
anatomy and may depend on patient selection. Together with long-term follow-up of clinical efficacy such factors will determine the value of
this new ablation system. We would like to thank Harry van Wessel for preparation of Figure 2. Conflict of interest: L.B. was a former
stockholder and consultant of Ablation Frontiers Inc., and is on the speaker bureau and a clinical trainer for Medtronic. L.B. and M.W. have
received grant money for performing research for Ablation Frontiers Inc.
