Gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) is a recently recognized pathology that originates from the interstitial cells of Cajal1 and is the
most common mesenchymal neoplasm of the gastrointestinal tract. Although surgery is the only treatment available, it is only possible in
approximately half of the cases2. This malignancy is characterized by a high risk of metastatic relapse, specifically in the liver and
peritoneum. Imatinib mesylate, a tyrosine kinase inhibitor that inhibits c-kit signal transduction, is often used as a treatment for
metastatic GIST. Neoadjuvant therapy is defined as a treatment administered prior to the main (usually surgical) treatment for a particular
neoplasm. It is used not only to eliminate circulating tumor cells but also to reduce the size of the tumor, thereby facilitating surgery
and perhaps increasing the chance of organ preservation. Since imatinib results in significant tumor shrinkage in at least 50% of treated
patients,3,4 its use as a neoadjuvant treatment is logical. A 32-year-old man, otherwise fit and healthy, underwent medical evaluation for
hematochezia lasting a month. A complete proctological examination revealed a bulge in the anterior rectal wall, approximately 5 cm above
the dentate line. The rectal mucosa was normal upon digital examination and rigid proctoscopy, which confirmed the rectal bulge. A complete
colonoscopy was unremarkable except for the findings described in the proctological examination. Routine laboratory tests and tumor markers
were normal (CEA = 0.6; CA 19-9 = 8.1). An MRI of the abdomen and pelvis demonstrated a well-demarcated solid pelvic mass (9.3 cm x 8.3 cm x
6.5 cm; 257 cc) (Figures 1 and 2) compressing the bladder, prostate and rectum. While the tumor appeared to have infiltrated the muscular
wall of the rectum, no other unusual findings were observed. A chest X-ray was normal, but a transperineal CT-guided biopsy was positive for
a GIST. After a multidisciplinary discussion regarding the known risk of incomplete surgical resection, the patient was treated with 400
mg/d imatinib mesylate for 6 weeks in order to reduce the size of the tumor and increase the likelihood of curative surgery. An MRI after 6
weeks of imatinib mesylate treatment demonstrated a marked reduction in tumor size (6.3 cm x 5.6 cm x 4.7 cm; 86 cc) (Figure 1 and 2). The
patient was maintained on imatinib mesylate for another 4 weeks, after which a second MRI revealed no further decrease in the size of the
lesion, and the patient was referred for surgery. The patient underwent laparoscopic-assisted resection of the rectal GIST with partial
removal of the anterior rectal wall, which was reconstructed using a manual suture. Frozen sections of the margins were negative. Since the
suture was located 3 cm above the dentate line, a temporary loop ileostomy was made. Pathological examination confirmed a GIST (CD117
positive, CD34 positive) that was 6.5 cm x 5.0 cm x 2.0 cm in size with a low mitotic rate. The patient’s recovery was uneventful, and he
was discharged on postoperative day 4. He was advised to continue with imatinib mesylate treatment for another 9 months, completing one year
of treatment. The loop ileostomy was closed 12 weeks after the tumor was removed with no complications. GISTs can be unresectable or, as in
our report, resectable tumors requiring extensive organ disruption in order to achieve complete resection. Therefore, the use of imatinib
prior to surgical resectioning to reduce the tumor size is an attractive approach. Since 2003, several case reports regarding the use of
neoadjuvant treatment for GIST have been published, and one phase II trial has been completed. The usual therapeutic regimen involves a
course of imatinib, commonly administered for 3 to 12 months, with frequent imaging studies and a re-evaluation of the best time for
surgery. The decision regarding the best time to operate, which should take into account both resectability and the maximum therapeutic
effect remains controversial, particularly since tumor progression can occur rapidly even after a substantial tumor shrinkage. Progression
of the tumor establishes a clinical dilemma: if radical salvage surgery is possible, it remains a reasonable therapeutic option as opposed
to performing salvage systemic therapy, which would likely have little chance of achieving a substantial reduction in tumor size.
Unfortunately, the long-term results for surgery performed on refractory tumors are typically worse. The resectioning of progressive disease
appears to benefit only those patients with focal progression and has little to offer to those who experience generalized disease
progression while receiving imatinib.5–9 The preliminary data suggesting the benefits of neoadjuvant treatment with imatinib were obtained
in a phase II trial (RTGO 0132) carried out by the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group (RTOG).12 This study included patients with biopsy-
proven GIST that was classified as either potentially resectable primary disease (≥5 cm) or potentially resectable locally recurrent or
metastatic disease (≥ 2 cm). Between February and June of 2006, 63 patients from 18 institutions were treated with imatinib (600 mg/day) for
8 to 12 weeks prior to surgical resection and two additional years of imatinib treatment. Among the 52 patients analyzed, 30 patients had
locally advanced disease, and 22 patients had recurrent/metastatic disease. Surgery was performed in 45 of the 52 cases, and one patient
died due to an infectious complication. A response to pre-operatory imatinib (RECIST) was observed in 2 patients (7%) with locally advanced
disease and 25 patients (83%) with stable disease. None of these tumors progressed during treatment. Within 2 years of the termination of
treatment, the progression free survival and overall survival for those patients who presented with locally advanced disease were 82% and
93%, respectively. This trial demonstrated that pre-operative treatment with imatinib is safe with minimal drug-related toxicity and
surgical morbidity. The PFS and OS are favorable for this group with high-risk GIST. Despite these promising results, this strategy is
currently not recommended for use outside of a clinical trial. The only reasonable exception would be the use of imatinib mesylate by an
experienced multidisciplinary team when an objective response could result in organ preservation. Pre- and post-treatment MRI (sagittal)
illustrating the reduction in tumor size Pre- and post-treatment MRI illustrating the reduction in tumor size
