To the Editor: Toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans may cause a zoonotic infection similar to diphtheria caused by C. diphtheriae. Previously,
dairy cattle were considered to be the main reservoir for C. ulcerans (1), but recent publications suggest pet dogs and pet cats as carriers
(cats often show bilateral nasal discharge) (2). We report a case of severe C. ulcerans diphtheria-like disease in a person who had had
contact with pigs. In December 2007, a previously healthy 56-year-old female farmer was admitted to the Ear, Nose and Throat Department of
the University Hospital Erlangen with a 1-week history of sore throat and progressive dysphagia. She did not report fever and had not
received prior treatment with antimicrobial drugs. She had thick, whitish pseudomembranes on her uvula, pharynx, and both tonsils.
Endoscopic examination of her larynx and hypopharynx showed that both vocal cords were mobile and the mucosa was erythematous. Enlarged
cervical lymph nodes were palpable on both sides of her neck. She had no signs of cranial nerve palsies. Her temperature was 36.5°C. Because
of the extensive oropharyngeal pseudomembranes, diphtheria was suspected and diphtheria antitoxin (30,000 IU) was administered
intramuscularly. The patient was isolated and received intravenous penicillin (5 million units 4×/day). A pharyngeal swab obtained from
below the whitish pseudomembranes grew toxigenic C. ulcerans. Species identification was achieved by biochemical differentiation (API Coryne
code 0111326), rpoB sequencing (3), and MALDI-TOF analysis (Microflex LT and Biotyper 2.0 Software; Bruker Daltonics, Bremen, Germany).
Toxigenicity of the strain, named KL126, was verified by using a C. diphtheriae tox–PCR (4–6), a C. ulcerans tox–specific PCR (4), and the
Elek test as described previously (4,5). The tox sequence (GenBank accession no. FJ858272) differs from 2 other published C. ulcerans tox
sequences (AB304279.1 and AY703827.1) at only 3 bp. The patient recovered quickly, and the pseudomembranes vanished within 2 days. However,
because an allergic rash had developed after her third day of treatment with penicillin, antimicrobial drug treatment was switched to
intravenous erythromycin (500 mg 4×/d). When 1 day later the standardized antibiogram showed resistance to erythromycin, the patient
received intravenous ceftriaxone (2 g 1×/d) for 12 days. Seven days after initiation of antimicrobial drug therapy, pharyngeal swabs were
taken on 3 consecutive days. Because C. ulcerans no longer grew on culture, the patient was discharged from the hospital. However, 2 days
later she was readmitted to hospital for severe polyneuropathy with neuralgia and weakness of both arms, acute difficulty swallowing, and
hoarseness. Signs of cardiomyopathy, including sinus bradycardia and grade I atrioventricular block, were present. The patient recovered
after symptomatic treatment and returned home after 2 weeks. According to her records, the patient had received a basic vaccination against
diphtheria in 1960 and a booster in 1998. The literature describes the classic animal sources for toxigenic C. ulcerans as dairy cattle with
mastitis (1). Since 2005, toxigenic C. ulcerans carriage in companion animals, e.g., pet cats and dogs, has been reported (2). Two cases of
transmission of a toxigenic C. ulcerans strain from pet dogs to their immunocompromised female owners have been documented in France (7,8).
In 2008, toxigenic C. ulcerans in 2 dead killer whales from a Japanese zoo was reported (9). To determine the source of our patient’s
illness, an outbreak investigation involving her family and their farm animals was conducted. Their medium-sized pig-breeding farm was
located in a remote rural village surrounded by woods; they raised ≈500 pigs in a nonindustrialized manner, and no piglets were purchased
from outside the farm. Pharyngeal swabs of 3 family members, 19 pigs, and the farm dog were analyzed for C. ulcerans. Although all family
members and the dog were negative for C. ulcerans, 1 of the 19 asymptomatic pigs harbored a toxigenic strain of C. ulcerans. Sequencing of
rpoB and tox showed 100% homology between the human and the pig strains. Ribotyping (10) confirmed this result, suggesting the identity of
both strains; the obtained ribotype is similar to the reported U1 ribotype profile found in humans and cats (2). We report proven
transmission of a toxigenic C. ulcerans strain between a livestock animal and a human, as well as harboring of toxigenic C. ulcerans in
pigs. Introduction of C. ulcerans from wild animals seems unlikely because the barn doors were reportedly closed at all times. Because
handling of C. ulcerans–infected pigs may lead to diphtheria-like illnesses, studies of toxigenic C. ulcerans carriage among pigs are
needed. Similar to our case, diphtheria-like disease caused by an erythromycin- and clindamycin-resistant toxigenic C. ulcerans strain in a
US patient has been recently (in 2008) reported (1). Because current recommendations based on C. diphtheriae–caused disease consider
erythromycin as the second-line option for treatment or postexposure prophylaxis, these findings highlight the importance of antimicrobial-
drug susceptibility testing of toxigenic C. ulcerans strains. Suggested citation for this article: Schuhegger R, Schoerner C, Dlugaiczyk J,
Lichtenfeld I, Trouillier A, Zeller-Peronnet V, et al. Pigs as source for toxigenic Corynebacterium ulcerans . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on
the Internet]. 2009 Aug [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/8/1315.htm The authors thank Christian Bogdan for
critical review of the manuscript, Francis Bolt and Chris Dowson for advice with regard to molecular typing, and Angela Huber and Marion
Lindermayer for expert technical assistance. We dedicate this paper to Jürgen Heesemann, the first head of the German Consiliary Laboratory
for Diphtheria, on the occasion of his 60th birthday. The study was partly supported by a grant from the Bavarian State Ministry of the
Environment and Public Health.
