Recommended by Attila Olah Few cases of malignant rhabdoid tumour (MRT) of the liver are reported in literature and always in paediatric
patients. We report the first two cases of young adults submitted to hepatic resection for MRT of the liver. A major liver resection was
performed in both cases. The histology showed round or fusiform, loosely cohesive cells. The cytoplasm contained abundant eosinophilic
inclusions, which caused the nuclei to be located in eccentric locations, giving the characteristic rhabdoid appearance. The
immunohistochemical study was performed, and characteristic lack of nuclear INI1 protein expression was found. In a case surgery was
associated to chemoradiotherapy. One patient died at 48 months followup for tumour recurrence. The other is still alive at 25 months
followup. MRTs are rare tumours of pediatric age with poor prognosis. Hypothetical less malignant behaviour in the young adults could be
supposed. Therefore an aggressive surgical and oncological treatment seems justified. Malignant rhabdoid tumours (MRTs) are highly
aggressive tumours which usually presented in the central nervous system, in the kidneys and soft tissues of children. They were firstly
described in 1978 as an aggressive variant of Wilms' tumour . MRT has now been accepted as a distinctive clinicopathological entity . Since
then identical tumours have been described in a variety of extra-renal organs. The first evidence in literature of a liver tumour with
rhabdoid features was in 1982 by Gonzalez-Crussi et al. . Until now few cases are reported in literature and always in paediatric patients.
We report the first two cases of young adults submitted to hepatic resection for MRT of the liver. The histological and immunohistochemical
findings, the surgical treatment, and the clinical outcome are described. Case 1 A 27-year-old male, in a good overall health, was admitted
at the Emergency Unit for acute epigastric pain since 48 hours. The clinical examination of the abdomen found a mass at the palpation of the
epigastric region. There was no weight loss, jaundice, diarrhoea, or vomiting. Trans-abdominal ultrasound revealed a large heterogeneous
mass with intratumoral arterial vascularization, which occupied the left liver (15 × 7 cm) and the presence of peritoneal liquid in the
Douglas space. The injection of contrast agent (Sonovue) showed a precocious hypervascularisation of the lesion whit hypoechogenic spots and
late wash-out. No alterations of biological examinations and tumoral markers were revealed: alpha fetoprotein = 1.3 ng/mL (Normal <5), CA 19
− 9 = 15.2 U/mL (Normal <37). The CT-scan and the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) confirmed the ultrasound report and moreover showed a
nodule of 1.5 cm on the segment VIII (Figures 1(a) and 1(b)). The signal and the vascular kinetic were in favour of a fibrolamellar
hepatocarcinoma or of a cholangiocarcinome. The preoperative biopsies were inconclusive. A left hepatectomy (segments II-III-IV) with
atypical resection of the lesion on the segment VIII was performed, preserving middle and right hepatic vein. No postoperative complication
was observed. The patient was discharged at day 7. A simple surveillance was decided by the multidisciplinary Cancer Board. A followup
consisting in regular clinical consultations and CT-scan was performed. No sign of recurrence was remarked at 25-month follow-up. A 27-year-
old male, in a good overall health, was admitted at the Emergency Unit for acute epigastric pain since 48 hours. The clinical examination of
the abdomen found a mass at the palpation of the epigastric region. There was no weight loss, jaundice, diarrhoea, or vomiting. Trans-
abdominal ultrasound revealed a large heterogeneous mass with intratumoral arterial vascularization, which occupied the left liver (15 × 7
cm) and the presence of peritoneal liquid in the Douglas space. The injection of contrast agent (Sonovue) showed a precocious
hypervascularisation of the lesion whit hypoechogenic spots and late wash-out. No alterations of biological examinations and tumoral markers
were revealed: alpha fetoprotein = 1.3 ng/mL (Normal <5), CA 19 − 9 = 15.2 U/mL (Normal <37). The CT-scan and the Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) confirmed the ultrasound report and moreover showed a nodule of 1.5 cm on the segment VIII (Figures 1(a) and 1(b)). The signal and the
vascular kinetic were in favour of a fibrolamellar hepatocarcinoma or of a cholangiocarcinome. The preoperative biopsies were inconclusive.
A left hepatectomy (segments II-III-IV) with atypical resection of the lesion on the segment VIII was performed, preserving middle and right
hepatic vein. No postoperative complication was observed. The patient was discharged at day 7. A simple surveillance was decided by the
multidisciplinary Cancer Board. A followup consisting in regular clinical consultations and CT-scan was performed. No sign of recurrence was
remarked at 25-month follow-up. Case 2 A 15-year-old male, in a good overall health, presented acute epigastric pain and an upper abdominal
palpable mass of recent appearances. The ultrasound and the CT-scan revealed a voluminous heterogeneous tumour of 15 cm in the left liver
which compressed the surrounding structures (pancreas-stomach). Considering the high risk of hemorrhagic rupture, a surgical resection was
decided. The surgical exploration showed a huge capsulated hepatic tumour compressing the portal vein without signs of infiltration of
vascular structure. The tumour capsule presented signs of spontaneous rupture without active bleeding. A left hepatectomy (segments II-III-
IV) was performed. There were no postoperative complication, and the patient was discharged at postoperative day 10. Because of capsule
rupture and risk of tumour seeding an adjuvant chemotherapy consisting in 6 cycles of IVA (ifosfamide, vincristine, actinomycin D) was
proposed. At 30 months followup, the CT-scan showed two recurrence nodules involving the hepatic ligament and the peripancreatic region,
measuring 6 and 7 cm, respectively. No others metastatic lesions were found. Chemotherapy consisting in 3 cycles of IVA followed by 3 cycles
of adriamicine-cisplatine allowed an objective response, with mild reduction of the lesions to 4 and 5 cm, respectively. Complementary
resection of the hepatic segment I and pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) with extended lymphadenectomy was performed. The histology confirmed the
recurrence of a rhabdoid tumour without lymphatic involvement. The patient underwent postoperative radiotherapy (40 Gy/20 fractions). At
43-month followup a new recurrence involving the remnant liver and the posterior bladder space was detected. A new chemotherapy with
etoposide (3 cycles) was applied, followed by surgical exploration and resection of a voluminous retroperitoneal recurrence associated with
right colon resection. The patient was discharged at postoperative day 15, but he died 1 month later due to a progressive cardiac failure. A
15-year-old male, in a good overall health, presented acute epigastric pain and an upper abdominal palpable mass of recent appearances. The
ultrasound and the CT-scan revealed a voluminous heterogeneous tumour of 15 cm in the left liver which compressed the surrounding structures
(pancreas-stomach). Considering the high risk of hemorrhagic rupture, a surgical resection was decided. The surgical exploration showed a
huge capsulated hepatic tumour compressing the portal vein without signs of infiltration of vascular structure. The tumour capsule presented
signs of spontaneous rupture without active bleeding. A left hepatectomy (segments II-III-IV) was performed. There were no postoperative
complication, and the patient was discharged at postoperative day 10. Because of capsule rupture and risk of tumour seeding an adjuvant
chemotherapy consisting in 6 cycles of IVA (ifosfamide, vincristine, actinomycin D) was proposed. At 30 months followup, the CT-scan showed
two recurrence nodules involving the hepatic ligament and the peripancreatic region, measuring 6 and 7 cm, respectively. No others
metastatic lesions were found. Chemotherapy consisting in 3 cycles of IVA followed by 3 cycles of adriamicine-cisplatine allowed an
objective response, with mild reduction of the lesions to 4 and 5 cm, respectively. Complementary resection of the hepatic segment I and
pancreaticoduodenectomy (PD) with extended lymphadenectomy was performed. The histology confirmed the recurrence of a rhabdoid tumour
without lymphatic involvement. The patient underwent postoperative radiotherapy (40 Gy/20 fractions). At 43-month followup a new recurrence
involving the remnant liver and the posterior bladder space was detected. A new chemotherapy with etoposide (3 cycles) was applied, followed
by surgical exploration and resection of a voluminous retroperitoneal recurrence associated with right colon resection. The patient was
discharged at postoperative day 15, but he died 1 month later due to a progressive cardiac failure. The surgical specimen measured,
respectively, 17 × 15 × 8 cm/weigh 942 g (Case 1) and 15 × 14 × 14 cm/weigh 1400 g (Case 2). The macroscopic examination revealed a solid
whitish tumour, with necrotic and hemorrhagic areas. The microscopic study showed a lobulated uniform aspect of fibrotic septa and glandular
formations. The neoplastic cells were round or fusiform, loosely cohesive, and were seen within a fibromyxoid stroma. Ovular nucleus and
prominent nucleolus were observed. The number of mitosis was moderate (maximum 8 at Gx400/10 fields). The cytoplasm contained abundant
eosinophilic inclusions, which caused the nuclei to be located in eccentric locations, giving the characteristic rhabdoid appearance
(Figures 2(a) and 2(b)). The cytoplasm stained positive with PAS (periodic acid-Schiff) and was digested after diastase. Necrotic and
hemorrhagic foci were included within the neoplastic mass. The immunohistochemical study was performed. The antivimentin antibody labelled
the cytoplasm of almost neoplastic cells, including the cells with rhabdoid features. The anti-EMA (Epithelial Membrane Antigen) antibody
diffusely marked the cellular cytoplasm with reinforcement of tumoral cells membranes. C-kit antibody significantly marked the cytoplasm of
most neoplastic cells. Conversely the anti-PS-100, CK 22, CK 7, CK 19, CK 20, HMB45, desmin, myogenin, caldesmon, CD34, BCL2, synaptophysin,
monoclonal NSE, and P53 antibodies did not remarkable labelled the neoplastic cells. The researches of specific genetic translocations for
Ewing tumour, alveolar rhabdomyosarcoma, synovial-sarcoma, and myxoid chondrosarcoma were negatives. Finally the immunohistochemistry
demonstrated lack of nuclear INI1 protein expression. MRT was first identified in the kidney of infants and children and was described in
1978 as rhabdomyosarcomatoid variant of Wilms' tumor [1, 5]. However, because of the lack of ultrastructural or immunohistochemical evidence
of myogenic differentiation, the term rhabdoid was later adapted for these neoplasms . With the same morphologic and immunohistochemical
features, identical tumors have been reported in a wide variety of sites including the nervous system, eye, tongue, nasopharynx, neck,
mediastinum, thymus, heart, uterus, urinary bladder, vulva, skin, soft tissue, paravertebral region, and gastrointestinal tract [5, 9].
Extrarenal rhabdoid tumours, although histologically, clinically, and ultrastructurally resembling renal rhabdoid tumours, are less
consistent in presentation. For this particular reason, the existence of extrarenal rhabdoid tumours of childhood as a true
clinicopathologic entity has been questioned. The current consensus is that it is indeed a true but heterogenous entity. As for extrarenal
rhabdoid tumours in adults, some of these tumours are identical to those seen in children, whereas others have focal areas of rhabdoid
differentiation within an otherwise distinctly differentiated tumour such as a carcinoma, sarcoma, or melanoma . Rhabdoid tumours
characteristically are highly cellular neoplasms that show somewhat monotonous noncohesive to poorly cohesive sheets of large polyglonal
cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm that may contain intracytoplasmic inclusions. The nuclei are eccentric, hyperchromatic, vesicular
and pleomorphic and have prominent nucleoli. Ultrastructurally, the most distinctive feature is the presence of cytoplasmic filaments. These
may be of variable diameters and are arranged in bundles or whorls. The globular inclusions seen by light microscopy are composed of
parallel filaments between 6 and 9 nm in diameter, packed in concentric whorls that often have lipid droplets or mitochondria at the center
[5, 9]. Imunohistochemically, the rhabdoid cells express both cytokeratin and vimentin and lack myogenic differentiation [5, 6, 10]. Recent
studies show that rhabdoid differentiation represents a clonal evolution in tumours of differing histogenesis. Cytogenic studies have shown
that classic rhabdoid tumours contain a characteristic chromosomal abnormality involving chromosome 22, leading to mutation of Hsnf5/INII
gene, located on chromosomal band 22q11.2, with lack of expression on INI1 protein at immunohistochemistry [6, 10–14]. Such a way a genetic
diagnosis is possible . In summary, primary malignant rhabdoid tumours of various organs have been described in literature. Only rare cases
are seen in the gastrointestinal tract, in particular, the liver. These poorly differentiated neoplasms may pose a great deal of difficulty
in the diagnosis because there is no glandular, squamous, or any other differentiation. In addition, it is almost impossible to make the
distinction whether the tumour is of primary origin or represents a metastasis from rhabdoid tumour of a different site. In the two cases no
other extrahepatic lesions were found at pre-operative imaging studies and surgical exploration. Liver rhabdoid tumour is a rare
histological finding especially in young adults. In a review article published in 2004, Yuri et al. found 19 cases with a median age of
diagnosis of 16,7 months. Moreover nearly all cases (89%) occurred in the first 2 years of life, with no gender difference. Although one
report showed a 6-year survival , the outcome of the other published cases was uniformly fatal, despite aggressive treatment. The overall
mortality rate was 89% with a mean survival of 15.3 weeks. Furthermore Tekautz et al. analysed a population of 31 patients affected by
teratoid/rhabdoid tumours of the central nervous system (CNS). They noticed a better response to chemotherapy, a better two-years event-free
survival (EFS) and overall-free survival (OS) for patient 3 years or older, compared to patients younger than 3 years (EFS 78% ± 14% versus
11% ± 6%) (OS 89% ± 11 versus 17% ± 8). In our study we reported a followup of 25 months without signs of recurrence for Case 1. Case 2 had
a disease free survival of 31 months and an overall survival of 48 months. Probably a less aggressive behaviour of MRT in later presentation
compared to infant could be supposed. As concern chemoradiotherapy, no consistently effective regimen has yet been established. Ifosfamide,
vincristine, cyclophosfamide, etoposide, epirubicin and actinomycin D based chemotherapies are the treatments of choice. Banzai et al.
reported an effective response to combination of ifosfamide-epirubicin-cisplatine for MRT of the ovary. Tekautz et al. described a regimen
of high-dose alkylator-based chemotherapy associated to radiotherapy, followed by autologous bone marrow transplantation for MRT of CNS.
Satisfactory results were achieved in patients 3 years and older. However a common consensus was not reached, and a standard regimen is not
yet established. In Case 2, an association of surgery and chemoradiotherapy was performed. This aggressive attitude permitted an acceptable
control of the recurrence disease with 48-month survival. The aggressive and incurable nature of rhabdoid tumors corroborates the need to
develop a targeted and effective therapy for these tumors. Rhabdoid tumors and cells are exquisitely dependent on cyclin D1 for genesis and
survival, suggesting that targeting the cyclin/cyclin-dependent kinase (cdk) axis may be an effective therapeutic strategy for these tumors.
Currently, there are several studies regarding the use of a pan-cdk inhibitor, flavopiridol, that both inhibits cdk activity and
transcriptionally down-modulates cyclin D1 which may effectively inhibit rhabdoid tumor growth. Flavopiridol is potentially a novel
chemiotherapeutic agent for rhabdoid tumors . In conclusion MRTs are rare liver tumours. Histological diagnosis is not always easily
achieved, but lack of expression on INI1 protein at immunohistochemistry could be helpful. Usually liver rhabdoid tumours developed in
pediatric patients and in most of the cases the prognosis is very poor. Presentation in young adults is exceptional, and they probably have
a better biological behaviour. As concern chemoradiotherapy no consistently effective regimen has yet been established. Aggressive surgical
conduct seems justified also in case of recurrence disease. CT-scan (a) and the Magnetic Resonance Imaging (b) showed a voluminous
heterogeneous tumour occupying the left liver. The injection of contrast showed a late vascularisation. The microscopic analysis of the
specimen (hemotoxylin, Phloxine, and Safran coloration) with 200 × magnification (a) and 400 × magnification (b).
