*Current affiliation: Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Kangwon National
University, Chuncheon, Korea. Although cabergoline is effective in the treatment of micro- and macro-prolactinoma, little is known about its
efficacy in the treatment of invasive giant prolactinoma. We investigated the efficacy and safety of cabergoline in 10 male patients with
invasive giant prolactinoma. Before treatment, mean serum prolactin level was 11,426 ng/mL (range, 1,450-33,200 ng/mL) and mean maximum
tumor diameter was 51 mm (range, 40-77 mm). Three months after initiation of cabergoline treatment, serum prolactin concentrations decreased
more than 97% in 9 patients; at last follow-up (mean treatment duration, 19 months), the mean decrease in serum prolactin concentrations was
98%, with 5 patients having normal serum prolactin levels. At first MRI follow-up (3-12 months after initiation of cabergoline), the mean
reduction in tumor size was 85±4% (range, 57-98%). Cabergoline treatment for more than 12 months caused a greater reduction in tumor size
compared to the treatment for less than 12 months (97±1% vs. 78±7%, P<0.05). These findings indicate that cabergoline treatment led to a
significant and rapid reduction in serum prolactin concentrations and tumor size in patients with giant prolactinoma. Therefore, cabergoline
represents an effective and well-tolerated treatment for invasive giant prolactinoma. Prolactinoma is the most common functioning pituitary
adenoma with excellent medical response. Invasive giant prolactinoma, an extreme subset of prolactinoma, is characterized by large size (>40
mm in diameter), high aggressiveness, massive extrasellar involvement and very high plasma prolactin levels, usually >1,000 ng/mL (1, 2).
Although microprolactinoma is found predominantly in young female patients, invasive giant prolactinoma is prevalent in young male patients
(3). Patients with giant prolactinoma usually present with symptoms or signs caused by the compression of surrounding structures by large or
invasive tumors, including headache, visual disturbance, and/or diplopia. Many patients also have symptoms or signs of hypopituitarism,
including hypogonadism. Dopamine agonists are used in the first line treatment for prolactinoma. Surgery is indicated for patients non-
responsive or intolerant to dopamine agonists, as well as in patients with invasive macroadenomas and compromised vision who do not rapidly
improve after medical treatment. Although the dopamine agonist bromocriptine has been widely used in patients with prolactinoma, the more
recently developed dopamine agonist cabergoline is longer-acting and more selective for the dopamine type 2 (D2)-receptor. Moreover,
cabergoline has been found to be more effective and better tolerated than bromocriptine in normalizing prolactin levels and shrinking tumors
in both men and women (4). Here we report 10 cases of invasive giant prolactinoma, which were successfully treated with cabergoline alone.
The present study included all patients, who were diagnosed with invasive giant prolactinoma at the pituitary clinic of Asan Medical Center
between April 2003 and June 2007 and treated only with cabergoline. All met the criteria for invasive giant prolactinomas: tumor diameter
>40 mm, serum prolactin concentrations >1,000 ng/mL, and invasive extrasellar tumor growth. None of these patients had undergone surgery or
radiotherapy for prolactinoma and none had a history of treatment with dopamine agonists. This study was performed retrospectively and
approved by the ethical review board of Asan Medical Center. All individuals agreed to participate in the study and gave informed consent.
All patients received oral cabergoline at a starting dose of 0.5 mg once weekly. Based on serum prolactin concentrations, the dose of
cabergoline was increased 0.5 mg/week every 3 to 6 months, to a maximum dose of 1.5 mg twice per week (total 3 mg per week). During
treatment, all patients visited the clinic every 3 months, at which time serum prolactin concentrations were monitored. All patients were
asked to report any side effects. Other pituitary function tests were performed before and during treatment, if warranted. Change in tumor
size was monitored using sellar magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). Serum prolactin levels were measured by an immunoradiometric assay using
commercial kits (TFB, Tokyo, Japan). The lowest detectible level of serum prolactin is 1.0 ng/mL, and its intra- and inter-assay
coefficients of variation for prolactin concentrations were 7.1% and 3.6% respectively. The reference prolactin levels for men are 1.5-9.7
ng/mL. If serum prolactin levels were over 300 ng/mL, serum were serially diluted and subjected to remeasurement. Serum total testosterone
concentrations were determined by radioimmunoassay (Adaltis Italia S.P.A., Italy) and the reference levels for testosterone are 2.8-8.8
ng/mL. Pituitary tumor volume was evaluated using 0.5 or 1.5 T MRI scanners in the sagittal, coronal, and axial planes before and after
gadolinium administration. Pituitary tumor volume was calculated from the major transverse, antero-posterior and cranio-caudal diameters.
Pituitary tumor shrinkage was evaluated by the percentage reduction in tumor volume. Results are expressed as mean±S.E.M. Treatment-
associated changes in tumor-related parameters were statistically analyzed using paired Student's t-test (version 15; SPSS, Chicago, IL,
U.S.A.). P<0.05 was considered statistically significant. During the study period, 10 male patients were diagnosed with invasive giant
prolactinoma; at diagnosis, mean age was 37±4 yr (range, 25-59 yr). Of these 10 patients, 4 had visual field defects and headache and 3 had
only headache. One patient (No. 10) had nasal obstruction and bleeding, which resulted from a tumor growing downward to the infrasellar
area. The remaining two patients had no symptoms; their tumors were accidentally found during routine checkup of brain MRI or CT. Seven
patients had low serum testosterone concentrations (<2.8 ng/mL), and one (No. 2) had panhypopituitarism at diagnosis. Before treatment, mean
serum prolactin concentration was 11,426 ng/mL (range, 1,450-33,200 µg/mL) and mean maximal tumor diameter was 51 mm (range, 40-77 mm).
Seven patients received 0.5-1 mg cabergoline per week with no dose increment throughout the treatment period. The dose of cabergoline was
increased to 2 mg per week in 2 patients (Nos. 7 and 10) and to 3 mg per week in one patient (No. 6). Average treatment duration was 19
months (range, 9-43 months). Cabergoline was well tolerated by all patients. None of the patients required dose reduction or discontinuation
due to side effects. After 3 months of cabergoline treatment, serum prolactin concentrations were decreased dramatically (Table 1, Fig. 1).
In all patients except one (No. 7), serum prolactin concentration was reduced by 97% after 3 months of treatment. At the last follow-up,
average serum prolactin levels were decreased by 98%, with 6 of the 10 patients having serum prolactin concentrations <20 ng/mL. Patient No.
7, who experienced only a 33% decrease at 3 months due to irregular medication, showed an 89% decrease in serum prolactin concentration
after 9 months of treatment. These findings indicate that cabergoline treatment was very effective in reducing serum prolactin levels in all
patients with invasive giant prolactinoma. When we analyzed changes in tumor size during cabergoline treatment, we observed a significant
reduction (mean, 85±4%; range, 57-98%) at first MRI follow-up, performed after 3 to 12 months of treatment (Table 2, Fig. 2). Except for
Patient No. 7, all patients showed a significant decrease in tumor size within 6 months of treatment (mean, 86±3%; range, 70-90%). A further
reduction in tumor size was observed with a longer duration of cabergoline treatment. Cabergoline treatment for >12 months caused a greater
reduction in tumor size compared with the treatment for <12 months (97±1% vs. 78±7%, P<0.05), indicating that long-term cabergoline
treatment was very efficient for reduction of tumor size in giant prolactinoma. During treatment, three patients showed improvements in
visual field defects. Serum testosterone concentrations returned to the normal level in three of seven patients who had initially
hypogonadism (mean testosterone levels; 1.2 to 4.0 ng/mL). There was no further decrease in other pituitary hormones during cabergoline
treatment (data not shown). In the present study, the patients with invasive giant prolactinoma were all males. Prolactinomas in males are
known to be more invasive and growing more rapidly (5), suggesting that male prevalence of large prolactinoma may be due to its aggressive
nature, not merely due to delayed diagnosis (6). The extreme aggressive type of macroprolactinoma is invasive giant prolactinoma. A previous
study reported that long-term cabergoline treatment (mean duration, 15 months) in males and females with macroprolactinoma resulted in a 61%
prolactin normalization rate and a 66% tumor shrinkage rate (7). Similarly, in another study, the rate of prolactin normalization was
approximately 75% in males with macroprolactinoma following 24 months of cabergoline treatment (8). There were two previous studies showing
the outcomes of cabergoline treatment in giant prolactinoma (2, 9). In one study, cabergoline treatment normalized prolactin concentrations
in 5 of 10 men with giant prolactinoma. Furthermore, in the remaining five patients, serum prolactin levels were decreased by 94% of the
pretreatment levels after a mean 39 months of cabergoline therapy (9). In the other study, cabergoline treatment for 1-50 months normalized
prolactin levels in eight out of ten patients with giant prolactinoma (2). Consistent with the previous reports, our study showed that
cabergoline induced a profound reduction (>95%) in serum prolactin levels within 3 months in 7 among 10 patients. At last follow-up (average
treatment duration, 19 months), serum prolactin levels were decreased to 2% of basal levels in all 10 patients and normalized in 5 patients.
Tumor shrinkage was significant (86% reduction) within 6 months although a further decrease (97%) in tumor size was observed after >12
months of cabergoline treatment. Compared to the previous reports (2, 9), our data showed that lower dose (0.5-1 mg/week) of cabergoline
treatment induced more rapid decreases in both serum prolactin levels and tumor volume. The reason for the excellent outcome in our patients
is unclear. However, it may result from that our study included the patients with more aggressive prolactinoma as suggested by larger tumor
size and higher basal prolactin levels. When we reviewed the outcome of bromocriptine treatment in giant prolactinoma, bromocriptine
treatment for more than 5 yr caused an overall 99.8% decrease in prolactin levels and a mean 68% decrease in tumor volume (1). Although
outcomes of bromocriptine treatment are comparable to those of cabergoline, some patients are intolerant to bromocriptine due to side
effects such as nausea, orthostatic dizziness, fatigue and nasal congestion (10). In our study, none of the patients experienced any adverse
effects during cabergoline treatment, and none experienced disturbances in the other pituitary functions or cerebrospinal fluid rhinorrhea,
a rare complication of dopamine agonist treatment (11-13). Thus cabergoline treatment is safe and well-tolerated. Complete surgical removal
of giant prolactinomas via the transsphenoidal approach is very difficult because these tumors invade local surrounding structures,
including the cavernous sinus and optic chiasm. Therefore, the persistence and recurrence of giant prolactinoma after surgery are very high
(14, 15). Biochemical cure is also rare even after extensive tumor removal. Indeed, during the same study period, nine patients were
diagnosed with invasive giant prolactinoma but underwent transsphenoidal tumor resection before a referral to our department. Although serum
prolactin concentrations were significantly decreased by surgery (from 2,655±474 to 381±187 ng/mL), normalization of serum prolactin levels
or complete tumor resection was not achieved by surgery in all patients (unpublished data), requiring additional medical treatment. Our
study has limitations; it was a retrospective and non-controlled study with small number of patients. However, our data indicate that
cabergoline treatment is a safe and effective treatment in male patients with invasive giant prolactinomas. This work was supported by
grants from the Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea Government (A05-0513). Serum prolactin concentrations before and during
cabergoline treatment in 10 men with invasive giant prolactinoma. Serial follow-up of gadolinium-enhanced T1 weighted magnetic resonance
imaging before and during cabergoline treatment. Four patients had giant prolactinoma with cavernous sinus invasion and suprasellar and
infrasellar extension before treatment. Significant tumor shrinkage was induced by cabergoline treatment. Tx, treatment; mo, months. Plasma
prolactin concentrations in patients with invasive giant prolactinoma before and during cabergoline treatment Changes in tumor size in
patients with invasive giant prolactinoma before and during cabergoline treatment
