Microscopic colitis (MC) is a recognized cause of chronic watery diarrhea. It is characterized by subepithelial collagen deposition or
intraepithelial lymphocytic infiltration of the colonic mucosa which, however, appears grossly normal on endoscopy. The term microscopic
enterocolitis is applied when MC is associated with similar microscopic affection of the ileum and/or proximal small intestine. MC is
reported to be associated with a variety of autoimmune conditions. Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) is rarely reported in association with
MC. We report a female patient with microscopic enterocolitis as one of the presenting manifestations of SLE. Gastrointestinal (GI)
manifestations of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) are common; however, they are frequently overlooked in the presence of renal,
pulmonary, and cerebral complications. These manifestations include mouth ulcers, dysphagia, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, hemorrhage, and
abdominal pain. Protein-losing enteropathy in patients with SLE has also been mentioned in a small number of reports and, in most of these
cases, endoscopy and mucosal biopsy were reported to be normal. Microscopic colitis (MC) is a recognized cause of diarrhea with a normal
endoscopic appearance of the colonic mucosa. MC is reported to be associated with a variety of autoimmune diseases, however its occurrence
with SLE is relatively uncommon. We report a female patient who had chronic diarrhea due to microscopic enterocolitis as a presenting
feature of SLE. A 54-year-old lady presented with diarrhea of 3 weeks' duration. She gave history of intermittent watery diarrhea over the
last 2 years. The diarrhea was nonbloody, without nocturnal symptoms, and associated with significant weight loss. Two years earlier, she
had been diagnosed as a case of primary antiphospholipid syndrome after she developed a deep vein thrombosis in her left leg and she had
been advised to take life-long warfarin therapy. Clinically, she was pale and underweight. Examination of the chest showed a left pleural
effusion. Apart from sparse scalp hair, she did not have any other clinical stigmata of autoimmune or collagen disease. Pleural aspirate
showed an exudative effusion with positive antinuclear antibody in the pleural fluid. Stool microscopy and culture were negative. Blood
investigations showed: hemoglobin: 9.6 gm/dl, mean corpuscular volume: 81 fl, total leukocyte count: 4.5 × 109/l, platelets: 130 × 109/l,
24-h urinary protein: 450 mg, serum albumin: 32 gm/l, serum folate: 5.2 ng/ml (normal >2 ng/ml), serum iron: 72 μg/dl (normal: 65–176
μg/dl), serum ferritin: 43 ng/ml (28–201 ng/ml), and serum B12: 378 pg/ml (normal 200–900 pg/ml). Hepatic and renal function tests were
normal. Anticardiolipin, antinuclear, anti-DNA, anti-Ro, anti-RNP, and anti-Sm antibodies were positive. Celiac disease serology, including
antiendomysial, antigliadin, and tissue transglutaminase antibodies, was negative both initially and also when repeated 6 months later for
confirmation. Both esophagogastroduodenoscopy and colonoscopy showed normal mucosal appearance. Small bowel biopsy showed mild blunting of
the villi, with epithelial and subepithelial lymphocytic infiltration [Figure 1]. Biopsies from various parts of the colon and from the
terminal ileum showed intraepithelial and subepithelial lymphocytic infiltration suggestive of lymphocytic colitis [Figure 1]. With the
presence of only mild villous blunting in the duodenal biopsy (and not total villous atrophy), negative celiac disease serology (which is
positive in more than 95% of cases of celiac disease), normal values of serum iron and folate,, and the typical endoscopic and
histopathologic criteria of MC, we arrived at the diagnosis of lymphocytic enterocolitis. A collective diagnosis of SLE, antiphospholipid
syndrome, and microscopic ‘lymphocytic’ enterocolitis was made. Considering the coexistence of MC with other manifestations of SLE, oral
prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day was started; loperamide was prescribed for symptomatic relief. The patient's diarrhea improved with oral
prednisolone. Later, the dose of prednisolone was gradually tapered to a maintenance dose of 15 mg/day and hydroxychloroquine 200 mg twice
daily was added as part of the therapy for SLE. She remained free of diarrhea while on the smaller maintenance dose of steroids. Low- and
high-power (inset) fields of duodenal and ileal biopsies showing intraepithelial and subepithelial lymphocytic infiltrates MC is
characterized by chronic watery (secretory) diarrhea without bleeding. Although the colon appears normal on colonoscopy, there is
histopathological evidence of inflammation. Data regarding the epidemiology of MC are limited. In one of the largest population-based
studies that was conducted in Barcelona, MC was more common in females and was diagnosed at a rate of 9.5 per 100 apparently normal
colonoscopies performed in patients with watery diarrhea. Theories on pathogenesis suggest that abnormal collagen metabolism, use of
nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), bacterial toxins, or diabetes mellitus may be possible etiologic factors. The clinical course
may be chronic intermittent (80%) or chronic continuous (12%), or there may be only a single episode (8 %). The diagnosis is established by
biopsy of the colonic mucosa, which reveals colitis but not mucosal ulcerations. MC is divided into two subsets according to
histopathological appearance: collagenous colitis, with colonic subepithelial collagen deposition, and lymphocytic colitis, with
intraepithelial lymphocytic infiltrates but no collagen deposition. In addition to the colonic affection, other parts of the GI tract,
especially the ileum, are reported to be similarly affected. Sapp et al. studied terminal ileal involvement and concluded that
intraepithelial lymphocytosis occurs in the terminal ileum in patients with MC. DuBois et al, described three patients with lymphocytic
colitis and celiac disease–like changes of the small bowel who failed to respond to a gluten-free diet, and suggested that involvement of
the small bowel in lymphocytic colitis may represent a distinct panintestinal disease for which the term ‘lymphocytic enterocolitis’ was
proposed. Our patient had lymphocytic enterocolitis with affection of the colon and terminal ileum as well as of the proximal small bowel.
An association between MC and celiac disease has been observed. MC has also been reported in association with a variety of autoimmune
diseases, including autoimmune thyroid disease, pernicious anemia, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, ankylosing spondylitis, rheumatoid
arthritis, Sjögren syndrome and, rarely, SLE. In a review by Chande et al., among 104 patients with MC, 30 (29%) had at least one associated
autoimmune disease; SLE was found in only one case. In addition to presenting with a rarely reported association, our patient had
lymphocytic enterocolitis as one of the presenting features of SLE. Treatment options for MC include cholestyramine, sulphasalazine, and
oral budesonide or prednisolone, in addition to stopping the offending drug (e.g., NSAID). Surgery (ileostomy, sigmoidostomy, or colectomy)
has been undertaken occasionally for the treatment of microscopic colitis. In conclusion, MC should be considered in the differential
diagnoses of diarrhea in patients with SLE. The endoscopic appearance is normal in MC, and colonic mucosal biopsy is required to establish
the diagnosis. In cases of MC, similar microscopic involvement of the small bowel makes the term microscopic enterocolitis more appropriate.
The symptoms of MC may respond to steroids given to treat the associated autoimmune disease. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest:
None declared.
