HIV prevention research in resource-limited countries is associated with a variety of ethical dilemmas. Key amongst these is the question of
what constitutes an appropriate standard of health care (SoC) for participants in HIV prevention trials. This paper describes a community-
focused approach to develop a locally-appropriate SoC in the context of a phase III vaginal microbicide trial in Mwanza City, northwest
Tanzania. A mobile community-based sexual and reproductive health service for women working as informal food vendors or in traditional and
modern bars, restaurants, hotels and guesthouses has been established in 10 city wards. Wards were divided into geographical clusters and
community representatives elected at cluster and ward level. A city-level Community Advisory Committee (CAC) with representatives from each
ward has been established. Workshops and community meetings at ward and city-level have explored project-related concerns using tools
adapted from participatory learning and action techniques e.g. chapati diagrams, pair-wise ranking. Secondary stakeholders representing
local public-sector and non-governmental health and social care providers have formed a trial Stakeholders' Advisory Group (SAG), which
includes two CAC representatives. Key recommendations from participatory community workshops, CAC and SAG meetings conducted in the first
year of the trial relate to the quality and range of clinic services provided at study clinics as well as broader standard of care issues.
Recommendations have included streamlining clinic services to reduce waiting times, expanding services to include the children and spouses
of participants and providing care for common local conditions such as malaria. Participants, community representatives and stakeholders
felt there was an ethical obligation to ensure effective access to antiretroviral drugs and to provide supportive community-based care for
women identified as HIV positive during the trial. This obligation includes ensuring sustainable, post-trial access to these services. Post-
trial access to an effective vaginal microbicide was also felt to be a moral imperative. Participatory methodologies enabled effective
partnerships between researchers, participant representatives and community stakeholders to be developed and facilitated local dialogue and
consensus on what constitutes a locally-appropriate standard of care in the context of a vaginal microbicide trial in this setting. Current
Controlled Trials ISRCTN64716212 There has been considerable debate over the last 10-15 years as to what constitutes an appropriate standard
of health care (SoC) in the context of clinical trials conducted in resource-poor countries . HIV prevention trials present a number of
unique ethical dilemmas for researchers . In many developed and developing countries, such trials are feasible only among vulnerable sub-
populations at high-risk of HIV infection and sexually transmitted infections (STIs), where poverty, stigma and social exclusion are
significant barriers to local health care access and decisions regarding SoC provision are therefore paramount . There is currently no
international consensus on researchers' responsibility to meet the health needs of clinical trial participants or their obligations to the
wider community from which participants are drawn. In 2000, the World Medical Association (WMA) revised the Declaration of Helsinki, stating
in paragraph 29 that the "best current prophylactic, diagnostic and therapeutic methods" i.e. the highest possible SoC should be made
available to people participating in clinical research . Guidelines produced subsequently by the UK Nuffield Council on Bioethics , the US
National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC) , the Council for International Organization of Medical Sciences (CIOMS) and UNAIDS contradict
this construct of SoC however and propose that it is ethically justifiable, under certain conditions, to provide less than the worldwide
best standard. For example, both the NBAC and CIOMS guidelines recommend that clinical trial participants be given "established effective"
therapy as a minimum whilst the Nuffield Council on Bioethics recommends: "where it is not appropriate to offer a universal [i.e. 'worldwide
best'] standard of care, the minimum standard of care that should be offered to the control group is the best intervention available for
that disease as part of the national public health system". More recently, international debate has shifted from these narrow definitions of
SoC, in which researchers' obligation to subjects randomised to the placebo or control arms of HIV prevention trials are a particular focus,
to a broader conceptualisation of SoC based on the principles of equity, social justice and beneficence that consider the overall health
needs of trial participants and the community within which research is conducted . This approach is supported by recent community-based
research in East and Southern Africa, India and the United States, which has highlighted the pivotal role of community participation and the
importance of open, effective dialogue between researchers and community stakeholders in the on-going SoC debate . Mwanza is one of six
centres in sub-Saharan Africa participating in the Microbicides Development Programme (MDP), an international partnership for the
development of vaginal microbicides for HIV prevention, funded by the UK Department for International Development and Medical Research
Council (MRC). A feasibility study was carried out among an occupational cohort of women at increased risk of HIV infection and STIs in ten
administrative wards in Mwanza City, northwest Tanzania between July 2002 and March 2005 in preparation for the on-going MDP301 randomized
placebo-controlled efficacy and safety trial of the candidate vaginal microbicide PRO2000/5 Gel (Indevus Pharmaceuticals, USA), which
started in November 2005. Women working in food and recreational facilities, including modern bars, traditional bars (known as vilabu or
pombe shops in Tanzania), restaurants, hotels, guesthouses, groceries and as informal food vendors (known locally as mamalishe), are
eligible to participate. Research conducted at a number of sites in Tanzania suggests that some women in this occupational group
periodically supplement their income through transactional sex and are hence at increased risk of STIs and HIV infection In this paper we
describe how a locally-appropriate SoC package was developed by researchers, study participants and community stakeholders in the context of
the MDP301 vaginal microbicide trial in Mwanza; present case studies to illustrate some of the ethical issues and dilemmas encountered
during implementation; and critically appraise whether the strategies adopted have been successful in this setting. The design of the
microbicide trial feasibility study in Mwanza and the baseline socio-demographic, behavioural and biomedical characteristics of study
participants have previously been described . In brief, following participatory community mapping to identify eligible food and recreational
facilities in ten administrative wards in Mwanza City, a community-based clinic was established in a guesthouse in each ward by October
2002. Study clinics provided free sexual and reproductive health services to participants including voluntary HIV counselling and testing;
STI syndromic management; family planning advice and contraceptive methods; and health education. Participants found to be HIV positive were
referred to a specialist local public health provider for clinical assessment and care which included antiretroviral provision if
appropriate. In addition, a system of referral to a network of local non-governmental and community-based organizations (NGOs and CBOs)
providing care and support for participants and their families living with HIV and AIDS was established. Participants with general medical
or gynaecological problems were referred to established local care providers for further clinical assessment. A total of 1573 women were
enrolled and followed up at three-monthly intervals for a maximum of two years. The feasibility study ended in March 2005 with the
completion of a small pilot study, conducted among 59 participants, to investigate the acceptability of HPTN035 Placebo Gel in this study
population and the feasibility and acceptability of proposed clinical trial procedures . Following the successful completion of the
feasibility and pilot studies in Mwanza, the MDP301 efficacy and safety trial started in November 2005. A total of 1146 HIV sero-negative
subjects have been enrolled into the main trial in Mwanza, with follow-up completed in mid-2009. Trial participants, and women who
participated in the feasibility and/or pilot studies, are all eligible to receive free sexual and reproductive health services through the
community-based study clinics and have access to ancillary care by referral (Table 1). MDP301 Mwanza clinical care package During the Mwanza
feasibility study, a community liaison system (CLS) was established, based on 78 geographical clusters of facilities in ten city wards , and
has used participatory research tools to facilitate open dialogue and partnership working practices between researchers, study participants
and community representatives . The definition of 'community' adopted in Mwanza was conceived and articulated by study participants who
perceived themselves not only as part of an occupational group, but as a discrete community with shared social ties, perspectives and
experiences within a defined geographical location . Cluster, ward and city-level representatives have been elected in a process facilitated
by the site Community Liaison Officer (CLO) and a Community Advisory Committee (CAC) established. In community workshops at ward and city
level, listing, ranking, diagramming and other techniques were used to capture and prioritise project-related concerns, including issues
related to the scope and quality of health services provided by study clinics to participants, their families and the broader community .
With the start of the MDP301 trial in Mwanza, the CLS has been consolidated and expanded with new facility clusters and associated
representatives developed in close consultation with the community. Participatory community workshops have continued every 4-6 months during
the main trial in order to monitor community perceptions of the study and in particular, to ensure that decisions about clinical services
provided by or through the project are taken in consultation with 'primary' stakeholders i.e. potential and actual study participants.
During the feasibility study, researchers established links at all levels with key local public-sector, non-governmental and community-based
stakeholders providing health and social support in Mwanza ('secondary stakeholders'). Senior staff provided six-monthly progress updates to
the Mwanza City HIV/AIDS Management Committee, which provided a useful forum in which to discuss a broad range of issues with
representatives from the local public and non-governmental sector, including SoC and the ethics of trial participation in vulnerable
communities. These meetings led to the formation of a project-specific Stakeholders Advisory Group (SAG) in June 2006, designed to
complement the guidance and advice provided through the CAC. During the MDP301 trial, the SAG has continued to meet routinely every 4-6
months to review progress and to make suggestions as to how clinical care for trial participants could be consolidated, improved or
delivered in alternative ways. The SAG now includes representatives from the City health department, local public health providers, non-
governmental and community-based organisations (NGOs and CBOs) active in HIV care and support and two representatives from the CAC. Ethical
clearance for the feasibility study and the MDP301 clinical trial in Mwanza was obtained from the National Medical Research Coordinating
Committee in Tanzania and the Ethics Committee of the London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine UK. Written informed consent (signature
or witnessed thumbprint) is obtained from all participants prior to enrolment. A SoC statement, encapsulating the clinical care package
described in Table 1 above, was ratified by the Ethics Committees in Tanzania and UK and by the Mwanza Community (CAC) and Stakeholders
(SAG) Advisory Groups prior to the start of the main trial. Community workshops in Mbugani, Pamba, Igoma and Nyamanoro wards conducted
between October and December 2006 highlighted a variety of issues related to the scope and range of clinical services provided during the
first year of the MDP301 trial in Mwanza that were further investigated during two participatory CAC meetings conducted in January and
February 2007. Listing, ranking, diagramming and pairwise matrices were used (Figure 1) to establish a list of priority concerns, many of
which were similar to those highlighted during workshops held as part of the earlier feasibility study (Table 2). For example, the change
from metal vaginal specula in the feasibility study to single-use plastic instruments in the main trial has been associated with a reduction
in rumours and concerns about the safety of genital examination associated with perceptions about the cleanliness of re-useable instruments.
Blood taking remained a concern in the first year of the trial but community perceptions that blood might be collected and sold for
witchcraft purposes were less common, following a variety of initiatives introduced during the feasibility study . This figure is a
photograph titled Using seeds to rank priorities. List of key community concerns related to participation in the Mwanza feasibility study
and MDP301 trial Priority concerns during both the feasibility study and the main trial were primarily related to immediate issues of
current clinical service provision and the need to address timeliness, efficiency and certain specific procedural matters (e.g.
reimbursement levels; venepuncture) rather than broader standard of care issues. Requests to broaden the scope of services provided, in
order that the children and spouses of participants could receive treatment at study clinics (rather than by referral), were raised in the
feasibility study and the main trial. Access to care and support services for women living with HIV and AIDS, including antiretroviral
therapy, was raised during the feasibility study workshops but appeared of less concern in the main trial, when specialist referral services
had already been established for some time. Concerns about ensuring post-trial access to an effective microbicide gel were expressed only in
the later series of workshops. The SAG has considered SoC issues since its inception and in contrast to the community group, has focussed
primarily on broader ethical issues related to clinical service provision for study participants, their families and the wider community
(Figure 2). Stakeholders felt that to provide more than the best care available locally or to attempt to provide the 'worldwide best care'
to trial participants would be coercive and unethical in this setting since it would not be possible to extend such services beyond those
participating in the trial or to sustain such levels of care following trial cessation. In order to support local health systems and human
resource capacity development, researchers were strongly advised to continue working within existing structures and to avoid setting up
parallel systems wherever possible. Stakeholders also stressed concerns that client referrals from research clinics could risk stretching
already overburdened local health services; and the importance of ensuring appropriate resource inputs to offset such risks. The SAG also
debated concerns raised by the CAC and emphasised to the research team the critical importance of maintaining effective community engagement
in the management and implementation of the trial in order to ensure that study health services continue to be delivered in a locally-
appropriate, acceptable and effective manner. Key recommendations of the MDP Mwanza Stakeholders Advisory Group. Having agreed the guiding
principles for a locally-appropriate SoC package for study participants through consultation with the CAC and SAG, the research team
encountered considerable difficulties successfully implementing the clinical care package (Table 1) due to a combination of logistical and
socio-cultural factors, in response to which a variety of corrective actions have been taken (Table 3). Issues and constraints to SoC
package implementation Despite these significant contextual factors, progress has been made in meeting the four SAG recommendations. The
project has established collaborative agreements with local service providers, which have secured funding through government and external
donors in the medium-to-long term ensuring treatment and care services for women living with HIV and AIDS can be sustained beyond the end of
the MDP301 trial in Mwanza. To ensure post-trial access to a successful vaginal microbicide, a register of trial participants is being
collated that will facilitate community tracing and subject enrolment into future named-client phase IV trials. Referral services have been
established for sexual partners of study participants and procedures instituted to monitor STI service uptake and to consolidate partnership
working with designated specialist providers in Mwanza, but there has been less success in child health services (Table 3). Finally, the
project has made a commitment to provide services to women working in food and recreational facilities in Mwanza, irrespective of whether
they are currently trial participants, but does ask they have at least attended a trial screening visit or been involved in the earlier
feasibility or pilot studies. Another area in which the research team, community representatives and stakeholders experienced difficulties
was in trying to decide where researchers' responsibility and obligation to individual participants ended. The following case study
illustrates some of the ethical dilemmas faced. Researchers involved in the management of this case (Figure 3) felt that they had a clear
duty of care to this participant and that it was appropriate to use whatever project resources were required to avert a life threatening
situation. Ethically and morally we believe it would be difficult to argue against this position. There was, however, some debate within the
research team as to whether our actions could be viewed as inappropriate in the context of our working definition of SoC based on access to
the best locally-available care, since the level of assistance provided was clearly in excess of that available to members of the community
outside the study population i.e. women who were not working in eligible food or recreational facilities in Mwanza. Having become involved
in this patient's care, it was also unclear at what point and how we would decide whether or not to continue our assistance, including
financial support. For example, would it still be appropriate for the project to pay for the costs of referral to a regional medical centre
(e.g. in Dar es Salaam or Nairobi) should the patient's condition indicate that this was necessary? Finally, some members of the team were
concerned that our actions could be misunderstood in the community as being part of some sort of 'cover up' to remove a woman experiencing
severe side effects due to her participation in the trial from further public scrutiny. Consultation with community representatives and
members of the CAC and SAG subsequent to these events revealed that the opposite was in fact the case: the prevailing view in the community
was that the project 'truly cared about the women' participating in the trial and was prepared to go to great lengths to assist them should
they encounter problems, even if these problems appeared unrelated to trial participation. Case study: Acute psychosis and multiple vitamin
deficiencies secondary to alcoholism. In another example, a woman with heavy vaginal bleeding received specialist medical care and
confirmation of a provisional diagnosis of ectopic pregnancy within hours of presentation at an MDP Mwanza trial clinic following the urgent
intervention of the research team. Researchers again felt they had a clear moral obligation to this participant and that it was appropriate
to mobilise all resources necessary (including staff time; project vehicles; specialist referral, diagnostic, treatment and in-patient
costs) to ensure access to the best possible care available locally, even if this would have been impossible for her were she not enrolled
in the MDP301 trial. Participatory methodologies enabled effective partnerships between researchers, participant representatives and
community stakeholders to be developed during a vaginal microbicide trial in Mwanza, Tanzania and facilitated open dialogue and consensus on
what constitutes an appropriate standard of clinical care in this setting. By actively seeking input from a combination of primary and
secondary stakeholders we were able to capture a broad range of information from the practical and highly-specific (advising how study
clinics might be more effectively and appropriately implemented) to the conceptual (researchers' moral and ethical obligations to trial
participants, their families and the broader community). The Mwanza experience reflects that of researchers and ethics committees in other
resource-limited settings where locally-available levels of health care have been taken into account when determining what constitutes
appropriate SoC rather than attempting to provide the highest possible SoC as advocated in the Declaration of Helsinki . For example, a
recent systematic review of 73 clinical trials of HIV prevention and treatment (n = 34); malaria prevention (n = 29); and tuberculosis
treatment (n = 13), all conducted in sub-Saharan Africa, found that only 16% provided therapy consistent with the 'best current' standards
of clinical care based on internationally agreed guidelines, such as those produced by the International AIDS Society or the World Health
Organization . Our approach closely follows that advocated by Shapiro and Benatar, who describe a seven step framework (Figure 4) to guide
improved standards of care, based upon the core principles of equity, social justice and beneficence . Seven-Step Framework towards improved
Standards of Care (adapted from Shapiro & Benatar, 2005 ). How well does our research measure up to this framework? The MDP301 Trial in
Mwanza has been conducted in a specific occupational group within a defined geographical area among women vulnerable to HIV/STI infection,
social harm and stigmatisation. By actively involving women who consider themselves part of a community defined by occupation, geography and
research participation; by establishing collaborative partnerships within the broader local community; by defining key elements of SoC; and
by providing evidence-based interventions (such as STI syndromic management; VCT and risk reduction counselling) a locally-appropriate care
package was developed. The feasibility study, pilot study and clinical trial have all been implemented through community-based clinics
allowing women who are typically marginalised within the broader Mwanza community, and who thereby find it difficult to access basic health
services, to receive high-quality, evidence-based care. In such settings, we believe it is a moral imperative to attempt to close gaps in
health care within communities and that researchers should actively seek to 'ratchet up' the standard of care available to the most
vulnerable members of society. The MDP and wider Mwanza research group have attempted to link research and justice by investigating options
for the introduction of cervical cancer screening and colposcopy at population-level in Mwanza and by facilitating specialist training in
genitourinary and HIV medicine to consolidate local quality health care provision. Finally, a significant proportion of the MDP Mwanza
budget is already allocated to health service provision in order to establish and maintain an entirely new community-based health service.
Despite an approach based on the Seven-Step Framework, the realities of trial implementation in a complex resource-poor setting meant that
several key SoC elements were implemented with only partial success, most importantly adequate provision of care for women found to be HIV
seropositive during the trial and STI treatment services for male sexual partners. A recent review by the Global Campaign for Microbicides
(GCM), which mapped SoC at microbicide trial sites in Benin, Ghana, Nigeria, South Africa, Tanzania and Zimbabwe, found such difficulties to
be common across all African trial sites and urged those funding, sponsoring and coordinating HIV prevention research to continue striving
to 'ratchet up' local standards of care in communities hosting clinical trials. Key recommendations of the review include the need for a
greater emphasis on partnership working with communities and local health service providers (co-location, skills sharing and capacity
building); use of referrals as a mechanism for care; identification and reduction of barriers to accessing care; and greater communication
and information sharing within the HIV prevention research field to highlight approaches that appear to work and those that do not. The
limited resources available for clinical trials in developing countries mean that community stakeholders, researchers and sponsors will
continue to face extremely difficult choices when attempting to reconcile the immediate needs of trial participants with the potential for
longer term benefit to the wider community. Can community-level and individual SoC considerations be reconciled in HIV prevention research?
Deciding the extent and limits of researchers' involvement in the management of complex medical problems and emergencies arising in settings
such as Mwanza is problematic. Our obligation and duty of care to participants has been tested by a number of specific case studies, which
suggest that in addition to developing and agreeing broad SoC guidelines and principles in any given developing country research environment
there will always be a need to make case-by-case decisions. We suggest that by establishing effective, open and trusting partnerships with
local communities and stakeholders, researchers will be better equipped to make informed choices in difficult circumstances and to take
decisions that make sense in the specific context in which they work. Whilst individual high-profile clinical cases are important, it is
vital that researchers monitor trial participants' access to and uptake of routine, non-emergency health services and consider operational
research to clarify potential barriers and constraints in order to inform future research program implementation. Participatory
methodologies enabled effective partnerships between researchers, participant representatives and community stakeholders to be developed in
Mwanza, Tanzania and facilitated local dialogue and consensus on what constitutes a locally-appropriate standard of care in the context of a
phase III vaginal microbicide trial in this setting. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors contributed to
the development and revision of draft manuscripts, read and approved the final version of the manuscript. AV, CS, and SL designed and
coordinated participatory research and community liaison activities, coordinated and managed fieldwork, data collection, analysis and
interpretation with support and guidance from JC, SMc and RH. All authors contributed to the design and development of locally-specific
standard of care guidelines. AV conducted the literature review, drafted the manuscript and incorporated revisions into the final version
for publication in an iterative process involving input from all co-authors. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: Our special thanks go to the women of Mwanza who participated in the study and in particular to members of the Community Advisory
Committee and Stakeholders Advisory Group who gave invaluable advice and guidance. We thank our colleagues at the National Institute for
Medical Research, Mwanza, Tanzania and the African Medical and Research Foundation, Mwanza, Tanzania for their support and assistance in
carrying out this research. We also acknowledge the contribution of Dr Richard Mutemwa (Community Liaison Group Coordinator), Microbicides
Development Programme, University of Southampton, UK; Dr Deborah Watson-Jones (African Medical and Research Foundation, Mwanza, Tanzania and
London School of Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, UK); and Professor Solomon R Benatar (Department of Medicine & Bioethics, University of Cape
Town Observatory, Cape Town, South Africa).
