We describe a 32-year-old Bangladeshi male presenting with severe malaria caused by a mono-infection with Plasmodium malariae. Rosetting of
infected and uninfected erythrocytes, a putative virulence factor in falciparum malaria, was observed in the blood slide. Severe disease
caused by P. malariae is extremely rare. The patient made a rapid recovery with intravenous quinine treatment. A 32-year-old previously well
Bangladeshi male labourer from Fatickchari in Chittagong District, Bangladesh, was admitted to Chittagong Medical College Hospital in July
2008 because of a 10-day history of evening fevers, chills, rigors, headache, anorexia, generalised myalgia, dry cough, palpitations,
drowsiness and several generalised convulsions. He complained of abdominal pain and nausea without vomiting or diarrhoea for the preceding 5
days. He was treated initially with paracetamol at his local health complex, which controlled his fever. The day before admission he became
disorientated and had generalized convulsions and was referred to Chittagong Medical College Hospital (CMCH) for further management. On
admission to CMCH, the patient was febrile (temperature 38.9 °C) and disorientated in time and place. His pulse rate was 110 beats per
minute, blood pressure 95/55 mmHg, and respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute. Glasgow Coma Score was 14/15 (eyes 4/4, voice 4/5, movement
6/6). Physical examination was otherwise unremarkable. Haemoglobin, leukocyte count, blood glucose and blood biochemistry, including serum
creatinine, were normal and he had a mild thrombocytopaenia of 93 000 per mm3. A thin blood film showed P. malariae with a parasitaemia of 3
per 1000 red cells (14 017/uL), with typical band form trophozoites, schizonts containing 4-6 merozoites, and occasional gametocytes.
Rosettes were observed in a frequency of 50 per 100 trophozoite-infected red cells (Figure 1). Rapid PfHRP2-based antigen testing was
negative for P. falciparum (Paracheck, Orchid Biomedical Systems, Goa, India). Polymerase chain reaction (nested PCR based on the 18 s rRNA
gene) performed on the same blood sample subsequently confirmed a diagnosis of Plasmodium malariae malaria, whereas the PCRs for P.
falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale and P. knowlesi were negative (Supplementary file 1). As the patient was prostrated and had multiple
convulsions he was treated as having severe malaria with a loading dose of intravenous quinine (parenteral artesunate is not yet registered
in Bangladesh). The patient received a total of 4 doses of intravenous quinine followed by further oral treatment and made a rapid recovery.
He was afebrile after 3 days and discharged himself from hospital. P. malariae malaria has been reported rarely from Bangladesh.1 Early
stages of P. malariae can be difficult to distinguish from other species by microscopy alone and its prevalence may be underestimated. This
is the first PCR-confirmed case of P. malariae infection to be reported from Bangladesh. The patient was remarkable because of his
presentation with neurological features (prostration and multiple convulsions) compatible with a diagnosis of severe malaria in accordance
with World Health Organization criteria.2 Severe malaria is an extremely rare manifestation of a monoinfection with P. malariae.3 The
classic quaternary pattern of fever every 72 h was absent, indicating a lack of synchronicity of the infection. This patient showed rosette
formation in the peripheral blood slide, defined as the binding of two or more infected red cells to an uninfected red cell.4 Although
rosetting has been reported in infections with P. vivax, P. ovale and P. malariae,5 it is usually described only in P. falciparum4 after in-
vitro maturation of the parasites. It has been associated with microcirculatory blood flow obstruction and severe disease, although this is
controversial.6 Rosetting of P. falciparum is thought to be mediated by binding of various erythrocyte surface cell receptors to the surface
expressed variant protein PfEMP1. The mechanism in the other three species is unknown. It is highly uncertain whether in P. malariae
rosettes significantly obstruct microvascular flow, since parasitaemia is invariably low. Further studies will be needed to establish their
resistance to shear forces and the relationship with disease severity in P. malariae. Usual treatment of uncomplicated P. malariae infection
is with chloroquine or an artemisinin-based combination therapy.2 However, because of the disease severity, this patient was treated with
intravenous quinine. In summary, we report a rare case of a PCR-confirmed monoinfection with P. malariae presenting with severe disease and
rosetting in the peripheral blood film. The patient made a quick recovery with intravenous quinine. All authors contributed to the
conception and content of this case report. WR carried out the clinical assessment. RJM took the photographs. NT did the PCR. RJM, WR, KC,
KS, NT, AH, MAF and AMD drafted and revised the manuscript. RJM, NT, KC and KS prepared the figures. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Mahidol-Oxford Tropical Medicine Research Unit is funded by the Wellcome Trust of Great Britain. None declared. Ethical
clearance was obtained from the Oxford Tropical Research Ethics Committee (OXTREC) and the Bangladesh Medical Research Council. The patient
gave informed written consent. AMD is guarantor of the paper Supplementary File 1 Results of agarose gel analysis of nested PCR for species-
specific detection of Plasmodium DNA, based on the 18 s rRNA gene. S = molecular base pair standard, F = falciparum, V = vivax,
M = malariae, O = ovale and K = knowlesi. The diagnostic band for P. malariae is circled in white. Bands for Pm and Pv in a control sample
with mixed infection are indicated by white arrows. Results of agarose gel analysis of nested PCR for species-specific detection of
Plasmodium DNA, based on the 18 s rRNA gene. S = molecular base pair standard, F = falciparum, V = vivax, M = malariae, O = ovale and
K = knowlesi. The diagnostic band for P. malariae is circled in white. Bands for Pm and Pv in a control sample with mixed infection are
indicated by white arrows. The authors would like to thank the staff at Chittagong Medical College Hospital for all their assistance.The
molecular work was conducted in facilities constructed with support from The Wellcome Trust, UK (Grant GR080867) of Dr. Mallika Imwong, a
Wellcome Trust Intermediate Fellowship in Public Health and Tropical Medicine. Light microscopy of P. malariae infection in thin peripheral
blood film, 1000x magnification, photographed through the microscope eyepiece using a Canon IXUS 860IS compact digital camera.7A.
trophozoite B. trophozoite with surrounding rosette C. schizont D. schizont E. trophozoite with surrounding rosette F. two trophozoites
including one band form.
