Complications after central venous catheterization occur in more than 15% of the patients undergoing it . In this report, we present a
remarkable case of acute swelling of the thyroid gland as an unexpected and rare complication after subclavian vein catheterization. A
69-year-old male was admitted to our ICU for epileptic seizure activity and was treated for status epilepticus. Hemodynamic instability
prompted us to insert a central venous catheter. The subclavian vein was the preferred site because the enlarged thyroid gland was
clinically judged to interfere with the internal jugular vein approach. Fifteen minutes after multiple unsuccessful attempts, progressive
diffuse swelling of the neck was noticed. Auscultation revealed bilateral vesicular breathing sounds and chest X-ray revealed clear lung
fields without evidence of pneumo- or hematothorax. Palpation revealed a diffuse swollen thyroid gland without evidence of bleeding or
crepitations, which was confirmed by ultrasound (Figure 1a). Thyroid hormone levels remained in the normal range and the swelling
spontaneously resolved within 4 hours (Figure 1b). Acute generalized thyroid swelling that (a) developed shortly after a subclavian vein
catheterization attempt and (b) spontaneously resolved after a few hours. Acute swelling of the thyroid gland is very rare, but a 1.5- to
3-fold increase in volume has been reported to occur after diagnostic fine-needle aspiration . In these reports, the episode started with
acute thyroid swelling within minutes after puncture and completely resolved after a few hours, similar to our case. We highly suspect that
the thyroid gland had been inadvertently punctured during the attempted catheterization. In the case of normal anatomy, it is unlikely that
the thyroid gland can be reached during subclavian vein puncture . However, the thyroid gland of our patient was enlarged, demonstrated by
computed tomography imaging of the neck (Figure 2), which in combination with a too cephalad needle direction may have contributed to an
advertent needle pass into the thyroid gland. The mechanism of acute thyroid gland swelling remains speculative, but Bruel and colleagues
suggested that acute release of vaso-active substances, such as calcitonin gene-related peptide, leads to acute edema formation through
vasodilation and capillary leak . Previous reports have described thyroid swelling as being terrifying, but airway obstruction was not
reported. We could not establish whether in our case swelling of the thyroid would have led to airway obstruction, as the patient's airway
was secured. Computed tomography imaging of the neck. (a) Transverse and (b) reconstructed coronal computed tomography images of the thyroid
gland showing the anatomical relationship between the enlarged thyroid and the puncture trajectory for subclavian vein catheterization. This
suggests that inadvertent puncture of the thyroid gland could have occurred during subclavian vein catheterization. In summary, we present a
case of acute swelling of the thyroid gland as an unexpected complication after attempted subclavian vein catheterization. The extent of
swelling was impressive, but resolved within hours without intervention. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Written
consent for publication was obtained from the patient's relatives.
