Herein, we report two extremely rare cases of differentiated thyroid carcinoma (DTC) with extended tumor thrombus or mediastinum lymph node
metastasis (LNM) involving the superior vena cava (SVC), causing SVC syndrome. Both of these patients were successfully treated with radical
resection and reconstruction of the SVC using autologous tissue instead of an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft. The left
brachiocephalic vein was used to reconstruct the SVC in a papillary thyroid carcinoma patient with mediastinum LNM and a pericardial patch
was used in a follicular thyroid carcinoma patient with tumor thrombus. Our search of the English-language literature found sporadic reports
of SVC resection with reconstruction by vascular graft (ePTFE), interposed between the brachiocephalic vein and the right atrium. However,
SVC reconstruction using autologous tissue in thyroid carcinoma has not been reported to date. To our knowledge, this is the first report
describing such an unusual technique in DTC patients. Superior vena cava (SVC) syndrome is extremely rare in patients with differentiated
thyroid carcinoma (DTC). Direct primary tumor invasion (T4b tumor in the 6th TNM classification), huge mediastinum lymph node metastasis
(LNM), or extended tumor thrombus can be causes of such exceptionally unusual manifestations . SVC syndrome leads to various clinical
symptoms, such as headache, facial flush and swelling, and varicose veins over the upper body surface, finally resulting in lethal outcomes
if appropriate treatment is not administered . In particular, tumor thrombus in the great vein can also be a cause of sudden death due to
pulmonary embolism. In the past, such advanced DTCs were usually treated with palliative management because of the difficulty of the
surgical approach. Thus, surgery for SVC syndrome has been exceptionally challenging in only selected patients . Recently, aggressive
surgery has been performed occasionally to relieve SVC syndrome. Our search of the English-language literature found only sporadic reports
of SVC resection and reconstruction with an expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft . However, there are some concerns about the
potential for vascular graft obstruction . Our two patients were treated successfully with radical resection and reconstruction using
autologous tissue, the left brachiocephalic vein or a pericardial patch, to reconstruct the interposition between the right brachiocephalic
vein and the SVC. To our knowledge, this is the first report describing SVC reconstruction with autologous tissue to treat SVC syndrome in
advanced DTC patients. A 74-year-old woman was referred to our institution for treatment of neck and mediastinum lymph node recurrence
involving SVC. The patient initially underwent total thyroidectomy with bilateral modified neck dissection (MND) for primary papillary
thyroid carcinoma (PTC) with cervical lymphadenopathy at another institution three years before our surgery. On our physical examination,
only the cervical nodes were palpable. Computed tomography (CT) scan showed critical stenosis of the SVC due to the recurrent mediastinum
LNM (Fig. 1A). This patient also presented with an elevated serum thyroglobulin (Tg) (707 ng/ml) without thyroglobulin antibody (TgAb) under
TSH suppression (0.025 μIU/ml). Since the clinical symptoms from near total occlusion of SVC increased progressively, we subsequently
performed radical resection to remove the recurrent mediastinum LNM and prevent further progression of SVC syndrome. Initially, we attempted
to dissect only the mediastinum LNM with preservation of the great veins but could not remove such advanced lesions because of fixed
invasion to the right brachiocephalic vein and SVC (Fig. 2A). Therefore, we subsequently attempted to perform radical resection followed by
venous reconstruction. Temporary bypass using an ePTFE graft was placed between the distal site of the left brachiocephalic vein and the
right auricle after resection of the left brachiocephalic vein (Fig. 2B). The left brachiocephalic vein was not involved macroscopically.
After confirmation of the stable condition of the venous pathway under temporary bypass, the recurrent mediastinum LNM, right
brachiocephalic vein and SVC were simultaneously resected. Intraluminal venous invasion of the mediastinum LNM was seen in the opened SVC
(Fig. 2C). Next, vascular reconstruction was performed with the use of the already resected left brachiocephalic vein as autologous tissue
(Fig. 2D). This autograft was placed between the distal site of the right brachiocephalic vein and the proximal site of the SVC. Finally,
the ePTFE graft was removed after establishment of revascularization by autograft (Fig. 2E). There were no significant complications after
this surgery. A: Enhanced computed tomography (CT) reveals stenosis of the superior vena cava (SVC) due to invasion of the mediastinum lymph
node metastasis (LNM). B: Postoperative CT scan shows the patency of the venous pathway after resection and reconstruction with the
autograft (left brachiocephalic vein). Two arrows indicate the sites of distal and proximal anastomosis. A: Mediastinum LNM invading the
posterolateral wall of right brachiocephalic vein and superior vena cava (SVC). B: Temporary bypass using an expanded
polytetrafluoroethylene (ePTFE) graft was placed between left subclavian vein and right auricle after resection of the left brachiocephalic
vein, which was not involved. C: Intraluminal invasion of mediastinum LNM in opened SVC. D: The right brachiocephalic vein and SVC were
resected for complete removal of the invasive mediastinum LNM. The isolated left brachiocephalic vein was interposed to reconstruct the
venous pathway between the right brachiocephalic vein and the SVC. E: Finally, the ePTFE graft as a temporary bypass was removed after
confirmation of the flow in the reconstructed venous pathway. Postoperative CT scan revealed that the reconstructed venous system was
functioning well (Fig. 1B). Histopathological examination confirmed that the resected specimens were metastases from PTC and no portions of
undifferentiated carcinoma were found. Unfortunately, lung metastasis with pleural effusion occurred 13 months later. We could not provide
any additional effective treatments to alleviate the symptoms. Her general condition gradually became worse and then she consequently died
of disease 19 months after our surgery. Our surgical intervention was considered to contribute to preventing the development of SVC syndrome
or immediate death by tumor embolism. A 64-year-old man was referred to our institution for the treatment of SVC syndrome caused by extended
tumor thrombus from a follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC). The patient initially underwent total thyroidectomy with ipsilateral MND for
primary FTC with cervical lymphadenopathy at another institution. This patient initially presented with tumor thrombus in the left internal
jugular vein via the brachiocephalic vein to the upper part of the SVC. However, only the left internal jugular vein was simultaneously
resected and the extended tumor thrombus in the left brachiocephalic vein and SVC was not removed during the initial surgery. Three months
later, the patient complained of facial flushing and hypervascularity by varicose veins over the upper body surface, suggesting the
occurrence of SVC syndrome. RI therapy was planned, however the clinical symptoms became worse during the preparation (levothyroxine
withdrawal) for RI therapy. Therefore the preparation was discontinued and levothyroxine was again administered. The patient was
subsequently referred to our institution an additional three months later (i.e., six months after the initial surgery) and additionally
presented with right arm swelling and edema as clinical manifestations, suggesting progression of the SVC syndrome. No local or regional
lesions were palpable on physical examination. Preoperative CT scan showed extended tumor thrombus totally occupying the left
brachiocephalic vein and SVC (Fig. 3A). The patient had an elevated serum Tg (25000 ng/ml) without TgAb under TSH suppression (0.039
μIU/ml). Thus, the tumor thrombus that persisted after the initial surgery led to the progressive development of SVC syndrome. A: Extended
tumor thrombus totally occupying in the left brachiocephalic vein and the SVC was evident. B: Successfully reconstructed venous pathway. We
immediately performed radical resection and reconstruction to entirely relieve the SVC syndrome. In our surgical procedure, the extended
tumor thrombus was successfully removed through resection of the right and left brachiocephalic veins and the SVC (Fig. 4A, 4B). Indeed,
isolated thrombectomy was not possible because of tumor adhesion and invasion to the anterior intraluminal wall of the great veins; however
a part of the posterior wall of these veins could be preserved somewhat (Fig. 4C). An autologous pericardial patch was then used to
reconstruct the venous pathway between both the brachiocephalic veins and the right atrium (Fig. 4D). Macroscopic findings of the resected
tumor thrombus and veins are shown in Fig. 4E. Clinically, the SVC syndrome improved immediately after our surgery. Postoperative CT scan
showed that revascularization was successfully achieved with the reconstructed venous system (Fig. 3B). Histopathological examination and
subsequent immunohistochemical analysis revealed positive staining for Tg in the cells from the tumor thrombus, confirming that the resected
specimens were angio-invasion from the FTC. After the surgery, RI ablation could be safely performed and TSH suppression is currently being
maintained with an appropriate dose of levothyroxine. There has been no disease progression during the eight months of follow-up since our
surgical treatments. A: Extended tumor thrombus in the left brachiocephalic vein and the SVC was apparent. B: Tumor thrombus was
macroscopically observed in the opened great veins. C: Thrombectomy alone was not possible because of the adhesion and invasion to the
anterior intraluminal wall of the great veins; however a part of the posterior wall of these veins was able to be preserved. D: Pericardial
patch was used to reconstruct the venous pathway between both brachiocephalic veins and the right atrium. E: Macroscopic finding of the
resected tumor thrombus. Table 1 summarizes the previous reports that describe the treatments and outcomes in DTC patients who exhibited
extended tumor thrombus in the mediastinum great veins. The prognoses in such cases were principally unsatisfactory. However some treatments
were effective in improving the progression of SVC syndrome and clinical outcomes. Thrombectomy was considered the most valuable surgical
procedure when it was feasible. Our report is the first to use autologous graft as an alternative to the ePTFE graft that has generally been
used for SVC reconstruction in DTC patients. Tumor thrombus from differentiated thyroid caricnomas in the mediastinum great veins. PTC:
papillary thyroid carcinoma, FTC: follicular thyroid carcinoma, ATC: anaplastic thyroid carcinoma, DTC: differentiated thyroid carcinoma,
IJV: internal jugular vein, BCV: brachiocephalic vein, RA: right atrium, ePTFE: extended polytetrafluoroethylene (Gore-Tex) graft, RI:
radioactive iodine, EBRT: external beam radiotherapy. Since SVC syndrome caused by a mediastinum tumor from thyroid carcinoma is
particularly rare, surgical intervention has been considered problematic and its indication remains controversial. Tumor thrombus within the
SVC can be a cause of critical syndrome followed by lethal outcomes . In the management of thyroid carcinoma, Thompson et al. firstly
reported a case with successful resection of extended tumor thrombus in mediastinum great veins . Perez et al. also reported a second case
of successful resection of intraluminal SVC invasion . Thus, the surgical approach to improve SVC syndrome has been challenged and SVC
reconstruction has usually been performed with an ePTFE graft, interposed between the internal jugular vein and the right atrium, to
reconstruct the venous pathway . We performed SVC resection and reconstruction using autologous tissue without the use of an artificial
vascular graft. In general, patients with SVC syndrome die of disease when surgical intervention is not applied. Patel et al. and Wiseman et
al. reported poor prognoses in patients without surgery . Onaran et al. concluded that appropriate initial surgery might result in a
disease-free state despite the residual presence of the tumor thrombus . Niederle et al. reported three patients with SVC syndrome caused by
tumor thrombus . One patient underwent SVC reconstruction with an ePTFE graft, which was unfortunately occluded three months later, and
another two patients were clinically asymptomatic after surgical treatment. Thus, aggressive surgery may be useful to relieve SVC syndrome
and to prevent sudden death due to tumor embolism. Meanwhile, Hasegawa et al. reported immediate occurrence of intrapulmonary spread of the
tumor after surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass, resulting in perioperative mortality due to respiratory failure . Thus, surgical
intervention for SVC syndrome remains controversial because of the treatment dilemma between perioperative morbidity and mortality with
aggressive surgery and the poor prognosis with palliative therapy. ePTFE graft has been used to improve SVC stenosis or occlusion and
provide long relief from SVC syndrome . Sugimoto et al. and Motohashi et al. recommended reconstruction of the SVC using an artificial graft
as the treatment of choice . However, there are some concerns about poor long-term patency of this artificial graft. Occlusion of the
vascular graft has occasionally been reported during the follow up period . Shintani et al. reported poor long-term patency of an ePTFE
graft to reconstruct the left brachiocephalic vein . They preferably advocate isolated reconstruction of the right brachiocephalic vein. The
use of Y grafts was not recommended because of the frequent occlusion of such grafts. Alimi et al. indicated that close observation of the
artificial graft is essential to determine the potential for graft problems earlier, especially during the first year after reconstruction .
A tumor thrombus can sometimes be relatively easily removed by thrombectomy alone without simultaneous resection of the great veins. Koike
et al. reported a young woman with PTC who was successfully treated with thrombectomy from the brachiocephalic vein . Yamagami et al. also
reported a very rare case presenting with huge tumor thrombus extending to the atrium that was effectively treated with tumor thrombectomy
alone, without harvesting all of the associated great veins . Some authors have suggested that positive ring sign, a thin rim of contrast
medium surrounding the tumor thrombus on enhanced CT examination, indicates the feasibility of successful tumor thrombectomy . This sign may
be useful to make a decision regarding the surgical strategy. Unfortunately, our case with extended tumor thrombus did not show this sign
and thrombectomy alone was considered impossible because of the fixed adhesion and invasion of the tumor to the intraluminal wall of the
great veins. In our cases, we used autologous tissue, the brachiocephalic veins or a pericardial patch, to reconstruct the venous pathway.
In fact, similar technique with autologous tissue has been used in the reconstruction of the SVC for other mediastinal malignancies . In the
field of cardiovascular surgery, these autologous tissues are preferably used as conduits, because of their low thrombogenicity, although
the long-term patency of these materials in such patients is still unknown. We believe their long-term patency to be superior if tumor
recurrence does not occur. Endovascular therapy (EVT) may be primarily preferred as an initial treatment for SVC syndrome, because of the
less invasiveness. Rizvi et al. concluded that EVT showed significant efficacy to relief the symptoms from SVC syndrome although surgical
therapy remains for patients who are not eligible for EVT . Charokopos et al. performed secondary EVT due to the thrombosis in a patient who
underwent the SVC reconstruction with an ePTFE graft . Thus, EVT may be considered useful less invasive treatment to improve SVC syndrome.
Table 1 summarizes the clinical results in DTC patients who presented with tumor thrombus in the mediastinum great veins. Both histological
types, FTCs and PTCs, exhibited tumor thrombi and almost half of the patients died of disease. The patient's age and gender did not appear
to affect clinical outcomes. More recently published review articles summarize the results of SVC reconstruction in other benign and
malignant diseases. Lanuti et al. concluded that SVC resection and reconstruction were acceptable in the selected patients with SVC syndrome
. Picquet et al. concluded that SVC reconstruction could be safely performed as an alternative treatment in patients who did not respond to
more conservative therapies . Radiotherapy is effective in the fraction of thyroid carcinomas. Therefore, RI therapy and external beam
radiotherapy (EBRT) are recommended to improve SVC syndrome when feasible. Hyer et al. reviewed the results from previous studies and
recommended the use of various treatment modalities, such as surgery, RI therapy, and EBRT . Taib et al. reported two patients who were
successfully treated with thrombectomy followed by RI therapy . Wilford et al. reported that EBRT contributed remarkably the improvement of
SVC syndrome . However, the elevation of serum TSH levels during the preparation period for RI therapy may adversely affect the growth of
the tumor and may worsen the SVC syndrome. One of our patients experienced such progression of SVC syndrome due to elevated TSH during the
preparation period. The preparation was immediately discontinued and this patient was then referred to our institution and subsequently
underwent radical resection and SVC reconstruction using an autologous pericardial patch. After our surgery, RI treatment could be safely
performed. To our knowledge, the use of autologous tissue has never been reported for SVC reconstruction in advanced DTCs patients. This
approach might become the treatment of choice in surgical intervention for SVC syndrome because of the tolerance against infection and the
anti-thrombogenicity of these materials compared with artificial grafts. Herein, we report the successful treatment of two DTC patients
presenting with SVC syndrome. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of these case reports and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. NW obtained written informed consent from the patients and drafted the manuscript. All authors carried out
at least a part of operation and participated in collection of clinical data. NW and MM participated in the development of manuscript. All
authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
