In autonomic failure (AF), blood pressure (BP) falls upon standing which is commonly ascribed to defective vasoconstriction and excessive
pooling. Observations on the amount of pooling in AF are contradictory. We evaluated pooling using strain-gauge plethysmography (SGP) during
head-up tilt (HUT) with a parachute harness fixed to the tilt table to avoid muscle tension in the lower limbs and thus to maximise pooling.
23 healthy subjects and 12 patients with AF were tilted for 5 min. BP and calf volume changes, as measured by SGP, were measured
continuously. Multiple regression analysis was used to examine the effect of AF on orthostatic fluid shifts after adjustment for potential
confounders. Patients did not differ from controls with respect to the increase of calf volume after 5 min HUT. The acute (0–1 min) and the
prolonged (1–5 min) phases of calf volume responses to HUT were also similar between patients and controls. No correlation was found between
the degree of orthostatic hypotension and the orthostatic calf volume change in AF. In one patient an additional measurement was made before
rising from bed in the early morning demonstrating a greater albeit small increase of calf volume upon HUT. Orthostatic fluid shifts at the
level of the calf in AF are not augmented during the course of the day despite marked hypotension. However, a small increase of pooling may
be expected when the patient first gets out of bed in the morning probably due to the absence of oedema. Upon standing, 300–1,000 ml of
blood may shift to the lower parts of the body [12, 21, 28, 33]. The time course of orthostatic fluid shifts is characterised by a first
fast increase due to filling of veins caused by a rise in hydrostatic pressure and a second slow phase due to fluid filtration through
capillary walls [1, 4, 21, 31]. The gravitationally induced fluid shifts contribute to the marked differences in pressure in the body upon
standing, with a substantial increase in arterial pressure below the heart and a decrease above it . Despite such pressure changes, mean
arterial pressure at neck level is maintained in healthy humans mainly through rapidly acting neural reflex mechanisms causing constriction
of the capacitance vessels . In autonomic failure (AF), these systems fail and orthostatic hypotension (OH) occurs upon standing.
Accordingly, once the gravitational forces are counteracted in AF by standing in water up to the level of the heart or by the inflation of
‘antigravity suits’, the upright position does not evoke hypotension anymore [11, 16, 30]. OH is commonly ascribed to defective arteriolar
vasoconstriction and excessive venous pooling . As increased orthostatic fluid shifts reduce the venous return to the heart and hence may
lower blood pressure (BP), a relationship between the degree of OH and the degree of pooling seems plausible. However, several studies
suggested that the orthostatic fluid shifts to the lower limbs in AF are negligible [2, 6, 30, 34]. In contrast, a modest increase of
orthostatic pooling to the lower limbs was found in healthy controls after ganglionic blockade [5, 18, 24]. Recently, we described a new
method to assess orthostatic fluid shifts with strain-gauge plethysmography (SGP) in the free hanging position , and reported a significant
gender effect on the amount of pooling to the lower limbs: calf volume upon head-up tilt (HUT) increased more in men than in women. As
previous studies on pooling in AF did not control for sex, gender differences may have confounded these results. In addition, it is
conceivable that findings were complicated by the time of measurement, i.e. diurnal variation in venous pooling. Leg veins in AF are exposed
to higher than normal intravenous pressure , causing the development of oedema during the course of the day . Oedema may function as a
“water jacket” around the veins hereby preventing further pooling [19, 32]. Orthostatic fluid shifts are therefore expected to be larger
when there is no oedema, i.e. when the patient first gets out of bed and less during the course of the day. In the present study, we
examined whether OH in AF is associated with excessive orthostatic fluid shifts at the level of the calf. In addition, we evaluated both the
acute and the prolonged phase of orthostatic fluid shifts and in one hospitalised patient we explored the diurnal variation in venous
pooling. Thirteen patients with AF were recruited from the outpatient clinic of our tertiary referral centre. Patients were included if they
had a history of primary AF and symptomatic orthostatic hypotension, and excluded if they had cardiac disease, varicosities or used
antihypertensive medication. One patient with Parkinson’s disease was excluded from analysis because of severe dyskinesias causing problems
with SGP measurements. Causes of AF in the remaining 12 patients included multiple system atrophy (MSA) (n = 5), pure autonomic failure
(n = 3), Parkinson’s disease (n = 1), anti-Hu neuropathy (n = 1), vincistrine-induced polyneuropathy (n = 1) and Sjögren’s disease (n = 1).
One patient used medication for AF (midodrine 30 mg daily) and slept in the 12° HUT position. The other patients were without medication for
AF. Twenty-three healthy volunteers without orthostatic hypotension, recurrent syncope, cardiac disease, varicosities or the use of
antihypertensive medication were recruited through an advertisement. The study protocol was approved by the Leiden University Medical Centre
ethics review committee. All participants gave written informed consent. All studies were performed in the late morning or the early
afternoon. In one hospitalised patient an additional measurement in the early morning was performed to assess the diurnal variation in
orthostatic fluid shifts. The temperature of the room was maintained at 23 ± 1°C. Subjects lay on a motor-driven tilt table (Dewert, GmbH).
For this experiment the foot board was removed from the table. Tilting time, from 0° to 60° head up, was 12 s. While supine, subjects were
fitted with a parachute harness fixed to the tilt table to avoid muscle tension in the lower limbs upon tilting. A cushion was placed under
the buttocks and a net was attached to the tilt table thus forming a seat. The seat was added to prevent the subject from sliding downwards
during HUT and to avoid constriction of the thighs by the leg straps of the harness during HUT. All subjects were tilted with a parachute
harness to 60° head up for 5 min after at least 5 min of supine rest. Both calves were instrumented with mercury-in-silastic strain gauges,
placed 10 cm distally from the tibial tuberosity . The strain gauges were fitted to the measured circumference and connected to a custom-
built plethysmograph using the same principles of the Hokanson EC-2 plethysmograph. To avoid direct contact of the strain gauges with the
tilt table, the heel was kept away from the table with a small cushion. Beat-to-beat finger BP was measured by finger volume-clamp method
(Finometer, Finapres Medical Systems, Arnhem, The Netherlands). Heart rate (HR) was derived from ECG. All signals were routed to a computer
(sampling rate 120 Hz) for off-line analysis using custom-written software. Volume changes were averaged for both calves. In four patients
calf volume measurements of one side were excluded from analysis: two because of previous surgery in that limb and two because of failure to
obtain a valid calibration signal. Our main outcome measure was the average relative change in calf volume of both legs after 5 min of tilt.
Our secondary outcome measures included the calf volume response to the acute phase of tilting (0–1 min HUT), mainly reflecting filling of
veins caused by a rise in hydrostatic pressure, and the prolonged phase of tilting (1–5 min HUT), mainly reflecting the degree of fluid
filtration through capillary walls . The independent sample t test was used to compare the baseline characteristics and the hemodynamic
responses to HUT between patients and controls. Significantly different baseline characteristics were considered potential confounders.
Multiple linear regression was used to analyse the effect of AF on orthostatic calf volume changes both before and after adjustment for sex
and potential confounders. The association between orthostatic calf volume changes and orthostatic BP changes was assessed using Pearson’s
correlation. Data analysis was performed with SPSS software, version 12.0. All tests were performed two-sided. Significance threshold was
set at 5%. As shown in Table 1, patients were significantly older, weighed more and had a greater BMI than controls. Patients and controls
were similar with respect to length, baseline calf circumference and supine and tilted heart rate. As expected, BP was significantly lower
in the HUT position (Table 1). However, patients did not differ from controls with respect to calf volume changes after 5 min HUT both
before and after adjustment for age, sex, weight and BMI (crude 95% CI for the effect of AF: −0.2 to 1.1%, p = 0.2; adjusted 95% CI: −0.8 to
0.7%, p = 0.9; Fig. 1). Calf volume change in the acute (0–1 min) and the prolonged (1–5 min) phase of tilting were also similar between
patients and controls both before and after adjustment for age, sex, weight and BMI (Table 2). No correlation was found between the degree
of orthostatic hypotension and the orthostatic calf volume change in the patients with AF (r = 0.14, p = 0.7; Fig. 2).Table 1Baseline
characteristics and hemodynamic responses to head-up tilt with a parachute harness for patients with autonomic failure (n = 12) and healthy
controls (n = 23)Patients (n = 12)Controls (n = 23)Age (years)60 ± 16*33 ± 13*Length (cm)175 ± 10177 ± 10Weight (kg)78 ± 11*70 ± 9*BMI
(kg/m2)25 ± 4*22 ± 2*Baseline calf circumference (cm)36 ± 336 ± 2Systolic blood pressure
(mmHg) Supine129 ± 21127 ± 17 Tilted101 ± 20*125 ± 18*Diastolic blood pressure (mmHg) Supine65 ± 1668 ± 13 Tilted56 ± 11*75 ± 13*Heart rate
(bpm) Supine76 ± 869 ± 11 Tilted85 ± 1177 ± 14Values are presented as mean ± SD* Significance p < 0.05; independent samples T testFig. 1Time
course of calf volume changes in patients (black line) and controls (grey line) as measured by strain-gauge plethysmography during head-up
tilt with a parachute harness. Because of a significant influence of sex on calf volume changes, males (left panel) and females (right
panel) are depicted separately. Data are presented as mean ± SEMTable 2Change of calf volume during head-up tilt (HUT) with a parachute
harness in patients with autonomic failure (n = 12) and healthy controls (n = 23)Autonomic failureHealthy controlsMen (n = 8)Women
(n = 4)Men (n = 14)Women (n = 9)Change of calf volume during 5 min HUT (%)2.9 ± 0.32.5 ± 0.52.9 ± 0.21.5 ± 0.2Acute phase (0–1 min
HUT)2.0 ± 0.21.9 ± 0.41.8 ± 0.20.6 ± 0.2Prolonged phase (1–5 min HUT)0.9 ± 0.20.7 ± 0.21.2 ± 0.10.9 ± 0.1Data for males and females are
shown separately because of gender differences in orthostatic pooling. Values are presented as mean ± SEMFig. 2Relationship between
orthostatic fluid shifts at the level of the calf and the orthostatic fall of BP in 12 patients with autonomic failure. No significant
correlation was found between the degree of orthostatic hypotension and calf volume changes after 5 min of head-up tilt (r = 0.14, p = 0.7).
Females (open circles) and males (filled circles) Baseline characteristics and hemodynamic responses to head-up tilt with a parachute
harness for patients with autonomic failure (n = 12) and healthy controls (n = 23) Values are presented as mean ± SD * Significance
p < 0.05; independent samples T test Time course of calf volume changes in patients (black line) and controls (grey line) as measured by
strain-gauge plethysmography during head-up tilt with a parachute harness. Because of a significant influence of sex on calf volume changes,
males (left panel) and females (right panel) are depicted separately. Data are presented as mean ± SEM Change of calf volume during head-up
tilt (HUT) with a parachute harness in patients with autonomic failure (n = 12) and healthy controls (n = 23) Data for males and females are
shown separately because of gender differences in orthostatic pooling. Values are presented as mean ± SEM Relationship between orthostatic
fluid shifts at the level of the calf and the orthostatic fall of BP in 12 patients with autonomic failure. No significant correlation was
found between the degree of orthostatic hypotension and calf volume changes after 5 min of head-up tilt (r = 0.14, p = 0.7). Females (open
circles) and males (filled circles) Of all variables entered in the regression model, only gender significantly affected the calf volume
changes induced by 5 min HUT: a greater increase of calf volume upon tilting was seen in men compared to women (95% CI for the difference:
0.4–2.2%, p = 0.005). A 28-year-old patient with young onset Parkinson’s disease was admitted to our hospital because of frequent syncope
owing to severe orthostatic hypotension. 24-h BP recording demonstrated marked diurnal BP variations with lowest values in the early
morning. Nocturnal weight loss averaged 2 kg. During the course of the day she habitually developed marked ankle oedema. After an afternoon
measurement an additional measurement was performed in the early morning. The patient had not been standing upright that morning prior to
the experiment except for micturition during the night. She had slept with elastic stockings to limit the effect of standing on the amount
of pooling. As shown in Fig. 3, BP fall induced by HUT was greatest in the early morning (early morning systolic BP fall 69 mmHg vs.
afternoon 23 mmHg). Calf volume increased more in the early morning (1.7%) than in the afternoon (1.3%). The increase seen in the acute
phase of HUT was comparable in both measurements (early morning: 0.7%; afternoon: 1.0%), whereas the increase during the prolonged phase of
HUT was markedly reduced in the afternoon (early morning 1.0 vs. 0.3% afternoon).Fig. 3Orthostatic fluid shifts at the level of the calf
during 5 min of head-up tilt with a parachute harness in a 28-year-old patient with young onset Parkinson’s disease. Upon tilting in the
afternoon (a) only a small fall of blood pressure (BP) was found (systolic BP fall: 23 mmHg). This orthostatic fall was accompanied by a
1.3% increase of calf volume. By contrast, head-up tilt in the early morning (b) caused severe orthostatic hypotension (systolic BP fall:
69 mmHg), but only a small increase of calf volume (1.7%) was seen compared to the afternoon measurements. The observed diurnal variations
in pooling are best explained by the development of oedema during the course of the day preventing fluid filtration Orthostatic fluid shifts
at the level of the calf during 5 min of head-up tilt with a parachute harness in a 28-year-old patient with young onset Parkinson’s
disease. Upon tilting in the afternoon (a) only a small fall of blood pressure (BP) was found (systolic BP fall: 23 mmHg). This orthostatic
fall was accompanied by a 1.3% increase of calf volume. By contrast, head-up tilt in the early morning (b) caused severe orthostatic
hypotension (systolic BP fall: 69 mmHg), but only a small increase of calf volume (1.7%) was seen compared to the afternoon measurements.
The observed diurnal variations in pooling are best explained by the development of oedema during the course of the day preventing fluid
filtration We found no evidence for excessive pooling at the level of the calf in AF during the course of the day despite marked
hypotension. However, the additional measurement in our hospitalised patient suggests that a small increase in orthostatic fluid shifts to
the calves may be expected when the patient first gets out of bed in the morning. Since oedema may function as a “water jacket” around the
veins [19, 32], the observed diurnal variations in pooling are best explained by the development of oedema during the course of the day
preventing fluid filtration. Before discussing the clinical implications of our findings, several limitations to this study deserve mention.
First, the degree of AF varied considerably between our patients, as three patients did not meet criteria of OH at the day of the study
(Fig. 2) . One might assume that this explains the lack of venous pooling in AF. However, contrary to expectation, no association was found
between the degree of OH and the amount of orthostatic pooling, a matter further discussed below. Second, age differences between patients
and controls may have affected our results. Since venous compliance decreases with age [15, 25] and thus may counteract orthostatic pooling,
age differences may have caused an underestimation of the amount of pooling in the elder patients compared to the younger controls. The
adjustment for age in our regression model cannot completely rule out this bias. However, the amount of OH in AF did not correlate with the
calf volume changes, thus supporting the notion that OH should not be ascribed to excessive pooling at the level of the calf. Third, both
patients with central and peripheral AF were included. Although both conditions cause OH, preganglionic (central) and postganglionic
(peripheral) lesions of the autonomic nervous system cause different types of autonomic dysfunction [7, 36, 37]. The previous finding of a
decreased calf compliance, i.e. stiffer veins, in patients with MSA may indicate that pooling is reduced in central AF , whereas in
peripheral AF the amount of pooling proved to be normal in patients with familial dysautonomia and increased in subjects after ganglionic
blockade [5, 18, 24]. Thus, while our study suggests that OH per se does not cause increased orthostatic fluid shifts to the calves, pooling
might differ between central and peripheral AF, but this should be a subject of further study. Fourth, one patient was studied while using α
adrenergic medication, midodrine. Although this decreases calf venous compliance and may thus reduce orthostatic calf volume changes in
healthy subjects, the administration of midodrine did not alter venous compliance in patients with MSA . It is therefore not likely that the
inclusion of this patient affected our results. Finally, measurements were performed at various times during the day ranging from the late
morning to the early afternoon. Given the observed diurnal variation in pooling in our patient with PD, it is conceivable that owing to the
development of oedema during the course of the day, a lower amount of pooling to the calves may be found at measurements in the afternoon.
Nevertheless, given the relatively small difference between pooling in the early morning and the late afternoon in our patient with PD, the
effects of differences in the development of oedema are probably minimal once the patient has risen in the morning. Calf volume during HUT
increased more in men than in women. Gender differences in venous pooling are best explained by a higher venous compliance in men, i.e. more
flexible veins, together with an increased hydrostatic pressure due to greater height in men [22, 23, 31]. Surprisingly, as seen in Fig. 1,
the difference between both sexes was less in our patients than in healthy subjects. We cannot provide a sufficient explanation for this
discrepancy. One could assume that gender differences in healthy subjects are sympathetically mediated, and are thus reduced in case of
sympathetic denervation. However, the gender difference in calf venous compliance was greater during rest compared to sympathetic
activation, thus pleading against a sympathetically mediated cause . Alternatively, this discrepancy may be confounded by differences in the
amount of OH within the patients. However, as seen in Fig. 2, the orthostatic BP fall was not greater but lower in female patients. Although
we did not directly assess absolute volume shifts, we can roughly estimate the amount of pooling for the lower leg. Given an average calf
volume of 2,077 ml in men , a 3% increase would equal an increase of 62 ml per calf. In confirmation of previous studies, we found no
evidence for excessive pooling at the level of the calf in AF. The lack of increased venous pooling at the level of the calf in patients
with AF may be explained by the scarce sympathetic innervation of the veins in the lower leg in healthy humans . In contrast, the splanchnic
vascular bed is richly innervated and orthostatic pooling in the splanchnic region is probably increased in AF through impaired arterial
vasoconstriction [8, 28, 29]. However, the importance of active capacitance responses in the splanchnic bed is difficult to assess in humans
and remains debated [14, 27, 28]. Diurnal variations in orthostatic fluid shifts have not been noted previously and should be taken into
account in further studies on pooling. The greater amount of pooling when patients rise in the morning may contribute to circadian BP
changes in AF, as patients with AF have their lowest BP recordings in the early morning [20, 26]. Nevertheless, it should be stressed that
the circadian variation of BP in AF cannot be explained by pooling and consequent oedema alone, as confinement to bed did not abolish the
daytime BP changes . In conclusion, orthostatic fluid shifts at the level of the calf in AF are not augmented during the course of the day
despite marked hypotension. However, a small increase of venous pooling may be expected in the early morning upon first rising from bed,
probably due to the absence of oedema. These findings suggest that OH should not be ascribed to excessive pooling at the level of the calf.
Venous pooling in other vascular beds such as the splanchnic region might be of greater importance to OH in AF. We are indebted to R.
Fronczek, S. Ober, and R. H. A. M. Reijntjes for their assistance with the preparation of figures. Open Access This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
