Haemophilus influenzae is a rare cause of necrotizing fasciitis with only a few previously reported cases. We describe the case of a
44-year-old man who had necrotizing fasciitis of the right lower extremity develop after intramuscular injections of paracetamol on his
right buttock. The causative organism isolated was Haemophilus influenzae serotype b. This unusual infection was treated with repeated
débridement and culture-guided antibiotics. There was no recurrence of infection at last followup 1 year after the initial surgery. Wound
coverage was achieved with the use of a full-thickness skin graft after application of platelet-rich plasma and a dermal regeneration
template. This resulted in a cosmetically acceptable appearance of the involved extremity for our patient. Necrotizing fasciitis is a life-
threatening, rapidly progressive infection. A review of the literature showed only two reported cases of lower limb infection caused by
Haemophilus influenzae serotype b, one in an infant and one in an elderly patient with diabetes [3, 11]. We report the case of a healthy
44-year-old man who had H influenzae serotype b necrotizing fasciitis develop after intramuscular paracetamol injections. A 44-year-old man
with good past health was given serial intramuscular injections of paracetamol in his right buttock for fever, cough, and cold in a
community clinic. After three injections, the patient was still febrile and felt severe pain over his right buttock and lateral thigh. The
right gluteal region became dusky with an erythematous margin. Emergency radical débridement was performed in a private hospital with the
patient under general anesthesia. The findings of necrotic dermis, grayish fascia not adherent to underlying muscle, and foul-smelling
“dishwater” pus prompted the operative diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis. Intraoperative specimens sent for culture grew H. influenzae
serotype b. The histology report showed acute necrotizing suppurative inflammation. The débridement resulted in a skin defect over the right
gluteal region that was left open with dressings. The patient was empirically started on intravenous ceftazidime and ciprofloxacin and oral
clarithromycin for broad-spectrum coverage. Susceptibility of the organism to these three antibiotics eventually was confirmed by culture
sensitivity results. Two days after the initial surgery, the patient was still febrile and had severe pain, erythema, and fluctuance over
his right flank. The patient was returned to the operating room and examination of the area of necrosis showed it had progressed to the
patient’s right flank, entire buttock, and lateral thigh. Radical débridement was repeated. Progression of the necrosis and the patient’s
persistently febrile state after undergoing two radical débridements and receiving intravenous antibiotics prompted transfer to our
institution after the second débridement. He was still febrile with leukocyte counts as high as 24.1 × 109/L. Our infectious disease
consultant shifted the patient’s medication to intravenous ceftriaxone and stopped all other antibiotics. The infection eventually was
controlled with a third radical débridement followed by a fourth 48 hours later, but the patient was left with a 23.5-cm-long by 7-cm-wide
full-thickness skin defect over his right lateral hip and thigh (Fig. 1). This was treated by applying platelet rich plasma (PRP) in the
form of autologous platelet gel (APG) after local débridement during the fifth surgery five days after the fourth surgery. Six days later
the patient had application of an Integra® dermal regeneration template (Integra LifeSciences Corp, Plainsboro, NJ). The coverage of the
final 21-cm × 6.5-cm defect (Fig. 2) was achieved with a meshed 10-cm × 5-cm full-thickness skin graft harvested from the groin on the
seventh and final surgery one month later (Fig. 3). The donor site was closed primarily. Donor and recipient sites healed uneventfully in
2 weeks. Eight months after the last surgery, the skin-grafted area had further decreased in size (Fig. 4). There was no recurrence of
infection one year after surgery. The patient was satisfied with the final appearance of his right groin and thigh.Fig. 1A photograph shows
the skin defect (23.5 cm long × 7 cm wide) after repeated débridements.Fig. 2The final defect after application of APG with PRP is
shown.Fig. 3A photograph shows the application of a meshed 10-cm × 5-cm full-thickness skin graft.Fig. 4A photograph taken 8 months after
the full-thickness skin graft shows the healed defect. A photograph shows the skin defect (23.5 cm long × 7 cm wide) after repeated
débridements. The final defect after application of APG with PRP is shown. A photograph shows the application of a meshed 10-cm × 5-cm full-
thickness skin graft. A photograph taken 8 months after the full-thickness skin graft shows the healed defect. H influenzae serotype b was a
well-known cause of invasive disease, such as meningitis and pneumonia with bacteremia in children younger than 2 years during the pre-H
influenzae serotype b vaccination era . A review of the current literature showed only four reported cases of necrotizing fasciitis of the
extremity caused by H influenzae [3, 7, 11, 13]. Two were caused by H influenzae serotype b [3, 11]. The first case was that of a lower limb
necrotizing fasciitis in a 13-month-old infant . The second reported the case of an elderly patient with diabetes presenting with
spontaneous painful swelling of the left leg . There was also one published case of cellulitis and thigh abscess in a 41-year-old man with
high alcohol consumption and chronic pansinusitis caused by H influenzae serotype b . Our Medline search showed no reports of H influenzae
serotype b necrotizing fasciitis in a healthy adult. Reviews of necrotizing fasciitis reported Streptococcal, Staphylococcal species,
Enterococci, and Enterobacteriaceae as the more common organisms isolated [6, 9, 14]. H influenzae was not isolated in any of the reported
cases [6, 9, 14]. Mortality rates ranged from 9.3% to 34%. Amputation was necessary for infection control in 6% to 22.5% of patients [6, 9,
14]. These reviews emphasized the need for early diagnosis and prompt débridement with necrotizing fasciitis. Our patient underwent five
débridements and two additional coverage procedures for disease resolution without amputation. Radical débridement was performed every
48 hours initially to afford a viable full-thickness skin edge with healthy fascia and muscle bed. Persistent infection prompted referral
and transfer of the patient from a private hospital to a tertiary university hospital. Intensive medical support sustained him through his
septic state and multiple surgeries. Antibiotic treatment was susceptibility guided and tailored by the infectious disease expert. Our
patient was not immunocompromised and showed no signs of Varicella infection. Necrotizing fasciitis developed at the patient’s intramuscular
paracetamol injection site. Several reports link intramuscular injections of NSAIDs to the development of necrotizing fasciitis [2, 4, 12,
15]. In a recent case-control study, NSAIDs and paracetamol were associated with necrotizing fasciitis on univariate analysis but only
NSAIDs were an independent risk factor after multivariate analysis . Potential mechanisms peculiar to NSAID injections include NSAID-induced
necrosis of injection sites and secondary colonization, NSAID inhibition of inflammatory reaction and antibacterial defense, or delay in
treatment attributable to masking of symptoms by NSAIDs [2, 12]. The case of H influenzae thigh abscess also developed over an intramuscular
phenylbutazone injection site . We postulate the patient’s cough and cold may have been the focus of H influenzae and the intramuscular
injection site either was infected by contaminated fluid or secondarily colonized. Infection control was achieved in our patient with
susceptibility-guided antibiotics and prompt aggressive débridements. The patient’s concern for cosmesis and donor site morbidity prompted
the use of APG containing PRP and a dermal regeneration template (Integra®). Autologous platelet concentrates contain multiple growth
factors that potentially can accelerate tissue repair mechanisms [5, 8, 10]. APG-treated full-thickness punch biopsy wounds in healthy
volunteers had increased wound closure rates compared with control wounds treated with antibiotic ointment during a 42-day period when
evaluated by visual clinical inspection of digital photographs, and by digital planimetry photographic measurement . APG was used in our
patient as an adjunct in preparing a viable graft bed. Additional comparative studies are needed to determine whether it had any significant
contribution in decreasing wound size. Integra® is an artificial dermal substitute developed in the late 1970s to achieve early wound
coverage after excision of extensive burn injuries . Integra® does not have any antimicrobial activity, thus was susceptible to rapid
degeneration if applied on nonviable tissue that was prone to infection . The use of Integra® did not result in additional infection for our
patient. However, its importance in facilitating wound coverage is unclear. The use of a full-thickness skin defect allowed primary closure
of the donor site from the groin area and satisfied our patient’s concerns about having another visible scar. Aggressive surgical
débridement was crucial in our management of this rare case of H influenzae serotype b necrotizing fasciitis of the lower extremity. There
was no recurrence of infection 1 year after the initial surgery. We thank Dr. Evelyn Kuong for help in documenting this case. Each author
certifies that she has no commercial associations (eg, consultancies, stock ownership, equity interest, patent/licensing arrangements, etc)
that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article. Each author certifies that her institution approved the
reporting of this case report, that all investigations were conducted in conformity with ethical principles of research, and that informed
consent for participation in the study was obtained.
