Perinatal testicular torsion is a relatively rare event that remains unrecognized in many patients or is suspected and treated accordingly
only after an avoidable loss of time. The authors report their own experience with several patients, some of them quite atypical but
instructive. Missed bilateral torsion is an issue, as are partial torsion, possible antenatal signs, and late presentation. These data are
discussed together with the existing literature and may help shed new light on the natural course of testicular torsion and its treatment.
The most important conclusion is that a much higher index of suspicion based on clinical findings is needed for timely detection of
perinatal torsion. It is the authors’ opinion that immediate surgery is mandatory not only in suspected bilateral torsions but also in cases
of possible unilateral torsions. There is no place for a more fatalistic “wait-and-see” approach. Whenever possible, even necrotic testes
should not be removed during surgery because some endocrine function may be retained. Perinatal testicular torsion (PTT), with its variable
clinical presentation or its consequences when diagnosis is made only after several years have elapsed, is a rare but well-known entity in
pediatric urology practice. PTT is—somewhat arbitrarily—defined by some authors to occur either prenatally or in the first 30 days of life
[12, 19]. The mechanism of torsion, the clinical and surgical findings, and—unfortunately—the outcome are very different from the ones seen
in testicular torsions at later ages. It is frustrating how few of these testes are actually salvaged according to literature [12, 14,
17–19, 26, 29]. Roughly 150 antenatal or immediately postnatal torsions have been reported so far with a significant percentage of bilateral
cases. Some cautions are needed when interpreting data because literature pertaining to PTT mainly consists of (compilations of) case
reports, with their inherent likelihood of bias. A testicular salvage rate of 5% or less was suggested in 1988 by Kaplan and Silber . More
recent papers are sometimes more optimistic, citing much higher success rates in small series, but not always clearly stratifying between
prenatal and postnatal PTT [3, 35]. Clear prenatal PTT seems unsalvageable . The controversy surrounding management of these patients was
highlighted as recently as 2008 by a Canadian survey where 26 pediatric urologists were asked about their preferences . A clear need for
more controlled trials to better understand this clinical entity was the main conclusion. Having seen many patients with sequelae of PTT and
one particularly unfortunate case of bilateral torsion diagnosed only at the age of 4, the authors subsequently documented every aspect of
history and clinical findings in an attempt to better understand this condition. This yielded some new and unexpected insights into the
pathogenesis of PTT. These data, combined with the existing case reports and the evolving treatment recommendations in literature, may lead
to a reappraisal of the concepts determining the management of these children. According to the traditional theories, there seem to exist
two distinct mechanisms of testicular torsion: the extravaginal type which is typically found in newborns and the intravaginal type which is
mostly seen in the older age groups. In the former type, the complete spermatic cord with all its contributing structures (vas, vessels,
processus vaginalis, and investing fascias) is thought to undergo torsion (Figs. 1 and 2). A temporarily increased mobility of the involved
tissue layers around the time of birth is generally accepted to lie at the root of this event, but the exact pathogenesis remains largely
unknown . It is generally assumed that about 70% of PTT occur during pregnancy, the rest at or shortly after birth . Fig. 1Normal situation
as opposed to intravaginal torsion of cord structures and extravaginal testicular torsion where tunica vaginalis (and investing outer
layers) are also involvedFig. 2Clear demonstration of the point of torsion in the spermatic cord: Cremasteric tissues, internal spermatic
fascia, and tunica vaginalis all seem involved. The testis is still covered by tunica vaginalis Normal situation as opposed to intravaginal
torsion of cord structures and extravaginal testicular torsion where tunica vaginalis (and investing outer layers) are also involved Clear
demonstration of the point of torsion in the spermatic cord: Cremasteric tissues, internal spermatic fascia, and tunica vaginalis all seem
involved. The testis is still covered by tunica vaginalis In contrast, the intravaginal testicular torsion involves only the testis without
its investing tunica vaginalis. This is due to a congenital variant of the tunica vaginalis where the normally present septum-like
connection between the epididymis and the lamina parietalis of the fascia vaginalis is lacking, in effect creating a “bell clapper”
situation with the testis only suspended at its top and thus relatively free to rotate axially (Fig. 1). Data on testicular torsion in older
children demonstrate that irreversible damage to spermatogenesis occurs after 4 to 6 h of ischemia, and (future) testosterone production is
compromised by damage to Leydig cells after approximately 12 h of ischemia [2, 8, 46]. During a 6-year period between 2002 and 2008, 21
cases of PTT (or its sequelae) were diagnosed in our department. The majority were discovered during scrotal surgery or laparoscopic
exploration for impalpable testes (Figs. 3 and 4). There were six acute testicular torsions (in four patients), four of these six torsions
occurred bilaterally (in two of these four patients). Four were prenatal torsions; two occurred postnatally. The ones with the more salient
features are reported in this text. A total of three boys had bilateral PTT (two acute cases and one delayed diagnosis), leading to
anorchia. Fig. 3A testicular remnant found during scrotal exploration for cryptorchidism, when several years have elapsed after PTT. Note
the highest point of torsion, proximal to which (atrophic) vas and vessels can again be identifiedFig. 4Typical laparoscopic image at the
age of 5 of the internal inguinal rings in a patient with left-sided PTT. The black arrow indicates the vas crossing the iliac vessels and
then ending blindly close to the closed internal inguinal ring (R), the level to which the torsion of the cord was transmitted. The white
arrow shows the atrophic testicular vessels or their fibrotic remnants running toward the internal inguinal ring. Normal contralateral
situation A testicular remnant found during scrotal exploration for cryptorchidism, when several years have elapsed after PTT. Note the
highest point of torsion, proximal to which (atrophic) vas and vessels can again be identified Typical laparoscopic image at the age of 5 of
the internal inguinal rings in a patient with left-sided PTT. The black arrow indicates the vas crossing the iliac vessels and then ending
blindly close to the closed internal inguinal ring (R), the level to which the torsion of the cord was transmitted. The white arrow shows
the atrophic testicular vessels or their fibrotic remnants running toward the internal inguinal ring. Normal contralateral situation On the
fifth day of life, a baby was referred on suspicion of left-sided PTT. Physical examination showed a pronounced swelling of the left
hemiscrotum which was inflamed and seemed tender. The swelling had been present for almost 48 h but gradually had become worse.
Interestingly, the mother stated on admission that immediately after birth, she had actually had the distinct impression that the
contralateral (right) side of the scrotum had been swollen and certainly not the left side. This right-sided swelling had gradually been
replaced by a clinically more marked left-sided swelling. Careful examination of the scrotum showed a right testicle of normal size but
having an almost stone-like firmness. Immediate surgery was performed because bilateral nonsimultaneous PTT was anticipated based on the
clinical findings. The hemorrhagically infarcted and completely necrotic left testis was removed for fear of infection. The right testis was
twisted 720° and was avascular, but no signs of inflammation were noted. The torsion was corrected and the right testicle was left in place.
Four months later, the size of the testis was pea like, suggesting resorption, but testosterone remained above detection limits. The
significance of this finding for later life is unclear at present, but on follow-up 1 year later, the small testicle did remain palpable. A
4-year-old boy was referred for acquired bilateral undescended and impalpable testes, also classified as ascended testes. Both the child’s
parents and the medical records clearly stated that at least during the first months of life, two normal appearing testes had been noted in
the scrotum. Trusting this information, laparoscopy was performed (omitting mandatory hormonal testing). This showed bilateral atrophic
testicular vessels, ending blindly just proximal to the internal inguinal ring, and a vas entering the inguinal canal, the hallmark of PTT.
Subsequent human chorionic gonadotropin (HCG) testing confirmed the diagnosis of anorchia. Testosterone remained below detection limits.
Substitution therapy will be initiated when rising follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone levels announce central puberty. At
the age of 10 weeks, a healthy baby boy was referred to the urology department with the diagnosis of PTT. Apparently, both testicles were
considered normal at birth by the attending gynecologist. The typical red and swollen right hemiscrotum had been recognized on the third day
after birth and diagnosis subsequently was confirmed sonographically. No action was taken by the neonatology department, however, and the
child was not referred for immediate surgery, arguing that it was too late to save the testicle. The child was referred on a purely elective
basis. Further detailed history taking and reconstruction of the events were very instructive. Pregnancy had been uneventful until premature
rupture of membranes with meconium-stained amniotic fluid in week 39. Fetal distress during delivery had led to a cesarean section.
Moreover, ultrasound 2 weeks before birth had clearly shown normal appearing and perfectly symmetrical testes. Hence, it was assumed that
the fetal distress leading to passage of meconium may have been caused by PTT. After careful discussion by the pediatric urologist with the
parents on the theoretical advantages and risks of preventive surgery on the contralateral testicle, it was decided to adopt a wait-and-see
policy. The possible signs and symptoms of testicular torsion were clearly explained. Nothing untoward was reported on further follow-up
1 year later. A 9-month-old boy who had been unwell since the morning and had started vomiting in the afternoon was found to have a painful
red swelling of the left groin area. On ultrasound, an enlarged testicle was seen in the inguinal canal, and the child was referred to the
pediatric urologist. Further history showed that the palpable left testicle had always been retractile or possibly undescended, but a clear
hernia had never been suspected. Immediate surgery was performed through an inguinal incision; almost 4 h after the swelling had first been
noted. Marked edema of both the subcutaneous tissues and the entire spermatic cord was found. The spermatic cord showed vascular congestion
and a torsion of only 180° which was easily corrected once the correct planes of dissection had been identified. After opening the tunica
vaginalis investing the testicle, pronounced adhesions between the testicle and tunica were found, precluding a more classical intravaginal
torsion and highly suggestive of the longer-standing nature of this condition. After detorsion, the cord seemed to regain perfusion but the
testicle remained blue. Orchidopexy was performed. On follow-up 18 months after the operation, the testicle had atrophied but was readily
palpable in the scrotum with a size roughly that of a pea. The diagnosis of bilateral PTT in a term baby was suspected within the first 2 h
after birth in a referring general hospital. The pregnancy had been normal and labor had started at 40 weeks, but conversion to a cesarean
section had become necessary due to failure to progress in labor. Physical examination showed a red and swollen right hemiscrotum with
enlarged testis and a normal appearing left testis feeling very hard, however, on palpation (Fig. 5). Complete absence of flow in both
testes on Doppler ultrasound confirmed the diagnosis, and the baby was urgently referred to the authors’ hospital where bilateral scrotal
exploration was performed approximately 6 h after birth. A hemorrhagic and enlarged completely necrotic right testis was found (Fig. 6). The
left testis of normal size was avascular, and there were pronounced adhesions between the testis and the lamina parietalis at the tunica
vaginalis. Both spermatic cords seemed well vascularized. Interestingly, neither side showed a clear torsion. Every effort was made to
remove any possibly constricting fibrotic tissue from the testes and the spermatic cords, and the testes were bathed for 15 min. The
swelling of the right testicle decreased and the almost black discoloration diminished somewhat. Both testicles were replaced in the
scrotum. Testosterone level at 4 weeks was 2.0 nmol/l and at 6 weeks 1.4 nmol/l. It was assumed that some Leydig cell function had remained.
HCG testing with 1,500 IU, however, did not induce a rise of testosterone levels. At the age of 10 weeks, physical examination showed an
almost complete resorption of the right testis but the left one could easily be palpated, again with the size of a large pea. Fig. 5Scrotal
appearance in asynchronous bilateral PTT as described in patient 5. Marked inflammation on the right side with the more recent torsion, only
hardening of the left testis on palpation. Clinical underestimation of the severity is possibleFig. 6Appearance of both testes in patient 5
immediately after opening the scrotum: The hemorrhagic and necrotic right testis after opening of the tunica vaginalis is demonstrated.
Avascular left testis, tunica vaginalis still intact but strongly adherent to the testis. Normal vascularity and no clear torsion of both
spermatic cords Scrotal appearance in asynchronous bilateral PTT as described in patient 5. Marked inflammation on the right side with the
more recent torsion, only hardening of the left testis on palpation. Clinical underestimation of the severity is possible Appearance of both
testes in patient 5 immediately after opening the scrotum: The hemorrhagic and necrotic right testis after opening of the tunica vaginalis
is demonstrated. Avascular left testis, tunica vaginalis still intact but strongly adherent to the testis. Normal vascularity and no clear
torsion of both spermatic cords Most of the earlier publications on PTT reported only unilateral cases, almost exclusively of the prenatal
type. Even when surgery was performed in an emergency setting, hardly any testes seemed salvable [12, 27, 28]. Hence, PTT was generally seen
as an irreversible intrauterine event. This led to the recommendation to offer surgery in an (early) elective setting with contralateral
fixation of the testis or even to omit surgery altogether when medical attention is sought after several weeks have elapsed, when the risk
of contralateral torsion is considered unlikely [12, 14, 18]. Patient 3 was managed this way. However, bilateral torsion was reported for
the first time in 1967 by Papadatos and Moutsouris, but by 1995, 16 cases of bilateral PTT had been reported and more than 45 cases by 2007
[4, 5, 7, 9, 16, 28, 30, 32–35, 37, 42, 43, 45, 49, 50]. Based on compilations of these reports, it was estimated that approximately 10% to
22% of PTT are bilateral [19, 49]. Two thirds most likely occur synchronously PTT is generally considered to occur before birth or during
the first 30 days of life, although this time frame is arbitrary. The relevant distinction to be made is the one between PTT occurring
before or after birth. Prognosis in the former group is far worse for obvious reasons . It is unclear how early in pregnancy testicular
torsion can occur, but a case of bilateral torsion at 32 weeks of gestation has been reported [2, 40, 45]. As PTT almost always is a scrotal
event, most torsions likely occur in the last trimester of pregnancy [10, 11, 25]. Extravaginal testicular torsion (the PTT type) in babies
of more than a few months of age is rare but has been reported . Interestingly, there are several reports on prenatally detected PTT on
ultrasound, but the implications of this are unclear at present [2, 20, 24, 38, 45]. Urgent extraction of the fetus might be justified in
the last weeks of pregnancy in suspected acute bilateral PTT, on the assumption that diagnosis was made shortly after torsion, but this
intervention has not been reported so far. Intriguingly, a review in 2007 suggested that in the majority of asynchronous bilateral PTT
cases, the first side to undergo torsion was the right . Patient 1 in the present series adds one more to the list, but patient 5 suggests
the inverse sequence. No logical explanation was provided. Patient 4 seems to be the proverbial exception to the rule that PTT occurs before
birth or in the first 30 days of life. The findings at surgery suggest a possible explanation. The adhesions clearly prove that the testis
had been compromised much longer than the few hours’ duration of the acute symptoms (swelling, redness, vomiting). The partial extravaginal
torsion, at first only impeding venous outflow, but gradually causing more edema, vascular congestion, reactive adhesions, and ultimately
arterial obstruction, seems the only logical explanation. Intravaginal partial (or intermittent) torsion is unlikely because the adhesions
would preclude rotation of the testis. The likely mechanism of partial torsion (180°) seems in a way reminiscent of the rare cases of
idiopathic hemorrhagic testicular infarction without apparent torsion at birth where either spontaneous untwisting after infarction or a
vascular incident are thought to lie at the root . Patient 5 clearly is one of these exceptional cases. These data clearly show that PTT
consists of a broad spectrum both in respect to timing and severity of spermatic cord torsion. Unlike the situation in testicular torsion in
older children or adults, PTT often has an insidious presentation. There is a tremendous variation in clinical findings, most likely
depending on the amount of time elapsed between the actual torsion and initial presentation . This is highlighted by patient 1. Diagnosis of
PTT is a clinical one and depends completely on the scrotal examination at birth by an obstetrician or pediatrician. A somewhat hardened
testicle is pathognomonic of PTT. Attention to this fact was drawn by Baptist and Amin in 1996 . In addition, in the acute phase, signs of
inflammation will be more marked with some redness, swelling, and fixation of the overlying skin and sometimes clear tenderness. In children
of darker races, diagnosis may be more difficult because redness of the scrotum is less conspicuous . Hydroceles and edema may mask clinical
presentation of PTT. Differential diagnosis at this point includes incarcerated scrotal hernia, hematoma, abscess, meconium peritonitis,
epididymitis, or tumor (Table 1) [13, 47]. After a few days, the appearance of the testicle involved may normalize, but careful examination
can probably still demonstrate differences between the two testicles. As time goes by, the testicle gradually decreases in size until it
becomes (almost) undetectable. The sonographic appearance and evolution in time of PTT closely mirrors the clinical sequence .
Table 1Differential diagnosis of scrotal swelling in neonatesPTTIncarcerated scrotal herniaScrotal hematoma, hematoceleScrotal
abscessMeconium peritonitisEpididymitisTumor Differential diagnosis of scrotal swelling in neonates At first sight, it seems striking that
many of the PTT cases discovered at a later age during surgical exploration for impalpable testes are reported to have had normal testes at
birth, but when considering the sequence of events just mentioned, this should not surprise too much. Nevertheless, it is the authors’
impression that a detailed physical examination at birth with careful assessment of position, volume, and firmness of the testes can lead to
earlier detection of PTT. In cases of (suspected) bilateral PTT, the stakes are high and hence management is straightforward: The only hope
for salvage of testicular function is immediate surgery. Vaginal delivery, prolonged labor, pre-eclampsia, gestational diabetes, twin
pregnancy, and a higher birth weight all have been linked to a higher risk of PTT [2, 12, 28, 48]. This suggests that fetal stress and/or
mechanical factors during pregnancy or delivery may play a role in the pathogenesis of PTT . None of the babies in this series had any of
the above risk factors. Patient 1 highlights the treacherous combination of prenatal (on the right) and postnatal (on the left) PTT, a clear
case of asynchronous contralateral torsion. Several cases of contralateral torsions in babies waiting for elective scrotal exploration at a
later age have been documented . Expanding on fetal stress, the concept that fetal stress might actually be caused by PTT (and not the other
way round) is a very tempting one. In the third trimester, a fetus probably can experience pain or show reaction to injury . This may
provide a hypothetical explanation for the sequence of events in patient 3. The authors later had an almost identical history in another
patient (not reported on here). In both patients, it seems plausible that PTT was the cause of fetal stress leading to meconium discharge. A
similar assumption can be made when reading the 2001 report by Ricci et al. During an emergency ultrasound study for reduced fetal activity
at 37 weeks of gestation, they observed abnormalities of a testis that revealed itself after birth as a case of PTT . There are two reports
on siblings affected by PTT; the importance of possible hereditary factors remains unclear [15, 22]. There remains some controversy
surrounding management of unilateral torsions . As outlined at the beginning of this paragraph, many authors advocate elective surgery
(aimed mainly at contralateral orchidopexy) and some even prefer to remain conservative. This course of action was chosen in patient 3. In
more recent publications, immediate emergency surgery is increasingly advocated for acute cases in the hope of saving the testis [1, 35].
This certainly applies to bilateral PTT. It is the authors’ opinion that the approach to suspected unilateral cases should be as strict as
in bilateral cases because the risk of both a missed bilateral PTT or the occurrence of a subsequent asynchronous torsion of the
contralateral testis should not be underestimated. As demonstrated by case report 4, even late presentations can occur, in effect rendering
defining a safe age after which contralateral torsion can be considered highly unlikely a hazardous undertaking . In the event, the
consequences are disastrous. It could be very difficult to convince the parents of babies with unrecognized bilateral PTT that every effort
was done to save testicular function when an elective surgical approach was chosen. Patients 1 and 5 and histological data from literature
suggest that there is a chance of some tissue surviving after torsion. Hence, it is a reasonable option to leave in place a testis, even if
perfusion does not seem to resume after detorsion . Especially the Leydig cells seem more resistant (however, it is difficult to interpret
endocrine data in baby boys after bilateral PTT, for lack of validated reference values for this particular type of patient.) When analyzing
literature data, several small series reported some tissue surviving in approximately 5% of testes that were removed or underwent biopsy [5,
10, 43]. Later in life, the atrophied testicular remnants still contain viable germ cells in a small percentage of patients when exploration
and orchiectomy are performed for cryptorchidism . This in turn could be considered reason for resection because of the theoretical risk of
tumor formation, but to the best of the authors’ knowledge, this has not been reported so far. In conclusion: A clear distinction needs to
be made between “old” prenatal or missed cases of PTT, on the one hand, and the acute perinatal PTT cases. Only the latter group stands a
chance of testicular salvage, provided that emergency surgical exploration is done.The risk of bilateral, possibly asynchronous, PTT is
real. Physical examination is too unreliable to guarantee noninvolvement of the contralateral testis. Hence, in each case of suspected
unilateral PTT, every effort should be made to guarantee surgical exploration of both testicles on an emergency basis, even when it is
unlikely to save the affected testis. Limiting the indication for surgery to cases of suspected acute (unilateral) PTT may increase the risk
for the (until then) normal contralateral testis. Referral on an emergency basis is strictly indicated.Mostly due to an important variation
in clinical presentation, diagnosis of this condition in the acute phase requires a high degree of suspicion. A properly executed physical
examination at birth is the mainstay of timely diagnosis. Special attention needs to be paid in the event of fetal distress without obvious
hypoxemia as antenatal testicular torsion may have been the cause of distress. In general, increased awareness by both caregivers and
parents seems mandatory.Minor degrees of extravaginal torsion leading to delayed presentation can occur. The dictum that PTT only presents
during the first weeks of life may be false.Whenever possible and certainly in bilateral cases of PTT, every effort should be made to leave
even necrotic testes in place, as some testicular function may still be possible. A clear distinction needs to be made between “old”
prenatal or missed cases of PTT, on the one hand, and the acute perinatal PTT cases. Only the latter group stands a chance of testicular
salvage, provided that emergency surgical exploration is done. The risk of bilateral, possibly asynchronous, PTT is real. Physical
examination is too unreliable to guarantee noninvolvement of the contralateral testis. Hence, in each case of suspected unilateral PTT,
every effort should be made to guarantee surgical exploration of both testicles on an emergency basis, even when it is unlikely to save the
affected testis. Limiting the indication for surgery to cases of suspected acute (unilateral) PTT may increase the risk for the (until then)
normal contralateral testis. Referral on an emergency basis is strictly indicated. Mostly due to an important variation in clinical
presentation, diagnosis of this condition in the acute phase requires a high degree of suspicion. A properly executed physical examination
at birth is the mainstay of timely diagnosis. Special attention needs to be paid in the event of fetal distress without obvious hypoxemia as
antenatal testicular torsion may have been the cause of distress. In general, increased awareness by both caregivers and parents seems
mandatory. Minor degrees of extravaginal torsion leading to delayed presentation can occur. The dictum that PTT only presents during the
first weeks of life may be false. Whenever possible and certainly in bilateral cases of PTT, every effort should be made to leave even
necrotic testes in place, as some testicular function may still be possible. None declared. Open Access This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Perinatal testicular torsion
