Acquired disruption of motor fusion is a rare condition characterized by intractable diplopia. Management of these patients is extremely
difficult. Prisms in any combination or even surgery may not help relieve their symptoms. We describe a longstanding case of acquired motor
fusion disruption which was managed successfully with botulinum toxin injection. Acquired disruption of motor fusion is characterized by
diplopia in all positions of gaze and is associated with strabismus. It can occur following prolonged sensory deprivation in one eye as can
occur when a previously normal eye has an untreated monocular cataract for a prolonged period or sometimes even after cataract extraction.
It can occur after severe head injury, postviral syndromes or with other central nervous system disorders. Patients with this disorder
experience constant diplopia that cannot be eliminated with prisms. As they have lost central fusional abilities they can neither fuse nor
suppress the images. In this report we describe a patient who developed acquired motor fusion deficiency which was managed by botulinum
toxin injection with a successful outcome. A 30-year-old lady presented to the squint clinic with complaints of constant diplopia and
outward deviation of the right eye following head trauma three years back in a road accident. Prior to the accident, she had never had
diplopia or squinting of the eyes. She had developed bilateral sensorineural hearing loss following the accident. Computed tomography (CT)
scan had revealed a subdural hematoma in the right frontal region which had been managed conservatively and had resolved. On examination her
visual acuity was 20/20 for distance and N6 for near in each eye. Anterior segment and fundus examination was within normal limits. There
was no sign of any macular disease on fundus examination. Cover testing revealed a freely alternating exodeviation of 40 prism dioptres (PD)
for near and distance [Fig. 1]. Convergence could not be demonstrated. Ductions were full in all gazes. Diplopia charting revealed binocular
crossed diplopia with constant separation of images in all gazes. There was no indication of torsional abnormality on diplopia testing.
Humphrey visual field testing did not reveal any field loss. Fusion was not possible in free space with any combination of prisms even after
prolonged prism adaptation in the clinic on two consequent visits. Based on this a diagnosis of acquired motor fusion deficiency was made.
She was administered botulinum toxin injection (Botox, Allergan Inc) 2.5 units into each lateral rectus muscle under electromyographic
guidance. Review at the end of one month revealed a reduction in the exotropia to 10 PD and subjective appreciation of closeness of the two
images. She was subsequently administered a repeat injection of 2.5 units of botulinum toxin into the left lateral rectus muscle. Follow-up
after one month revealed complete resolution of the diplopia. There was no abnormal head posture. Objective examination revealed she was
orthophoric for near and exophoric for distance and extraocular movements were full. Follow-up six months later revealed she was completely
symptom-free. There was no exotropia on cover test [Fig. 2]. The horizontal fusion ranges were 30 PD base out and 16 PD base in for near and
16 PD base out and 8 PD base in for distance. The vertical fusion range was 3 PD base up and 3 PD base down. She demonstrated gross
stereopsis on the Wirt fly test. Clinical photograph pre injection showing the presence of comitant left exotropia in all the nine cardinal
positions of gaze Clinical photograph six months after the final injection of botulinum toxin demonstrating well-aligned eyes in all the
nine cardinal positions of gaze Acquired strabismus occurring after visual maturation results in diplopia. In most cases the ability to fuse
allows the patients to regain binocular single vision when the misalignment is eliminated. However, in patients with central disruption of
fusional amplitude, the ability to superimpose the images may be completely lost. This results in constant diplopia which can be eliminated
only by occluding one eye. A diagnosis of central disruption of fusion should not be made unless all other causes for intractable diplopia
have been excluded, including torsion and aniseikonia. Prolonged prism adaptation or testing on a synoptophore is essential before making
this diagnosis. Strabismus is common after head trauma, even if the brainstem is not obviously affected. The strabismus may be due to
paresis of one or more cranial nerves, diffuse brain damage or due to central disruption of fusional amplitudes because of damage to the
vergence centers of the midbrain. Sometimes the brain may simply lose its ability to fuse because of prolonged deprivation of fusable
images. Pratt-Johnson hypothesized that midbrain damage may be a cause for the disruption of convergence and or divergence, leading to
inability to fuse. Orthoptic treatment has been reported to be effective in patients where there is a diminished fusional range without a
complete loss of fusion. However, this may not happen in cases where there is no demonstrable fusion. Consequently, if the lack of fusable
images can lead to disruption of central fusion as following prolonged occlusion due to cataract, presence of fusable images may aid in
recovery from central fusion disruption. In our patient botulinum toxin injections helped to align the eyes for prolonged periods thereby
presenting continuous fusable images to the brain. This may have facilitated recovery from the diplopia which may or may not have resolved
otherwise. Botulinum toxin is a minimally invasive, quick outpatient procedure and can be repeated. Botulinum toxin may be worth attempting
in patients with intractable diplopia following central fusion disruption.
