Autofluorescence imaging is used widely for diagnostic evaluation of various epithelial malignancies. Cancerous lesions display loss of
autofluorescence due to malignant changes in epithelium and subepithelial stroma. Carcinoma of unknown primary site presents with lymph node
or distant metastasis, for which the site of primary tumour is not detectable. We describe here the use of autofluorescence imaging for
detecting a clinically innocuous appearing occult malignancy of the palate which upon pathological examination was consistent with a
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. A submucosal nodule was noted on the right posterior hard palate of a 59-year-old white female during
clinical examination. Examination of this lesion using a multispectral oral cancer screening device revealed loss of autofluorescence at 405
nm illumination. An excisional biopsy of this nodule, confirmed the presence of a metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. Four years ago, this
patient was diagnosed with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma of the right mid-jugular lymph node of unknown primary. She was treated with
external beam irradiation and remained disease free until current presentation. This case illustrates the important role played by
autofluorescence tissue imaging in diagnosing a metastatic palatal tumour that appeared clinically innocuous and otherwise would not have
been biopsied. Light-induced tissue autofluorescence examination is currently considered as a standard of care for screening and diagnostic
evaluation of early neoplastic changes of the skin, cervix, lung, bladder, gastrointestinal tract and oral cavity . Dysplastic and cancerous
tissues often exhibit decreased blue-green autofluorescence and appear darker compared to uninvolved mucosa. Most of this reduction in
perceived fluorescence is attributed to diminished signal (detectable from the surface) that emanates from collagen crosslink within the
subepithelial stroma . Recently the U.S. Food and Drug Administration has approved autofluorescence-based oral mucosal screening devises
which are marketed as VELscope and Identafi™ 3000 for early detection of potentially malignant oral lesions. Here we report of a case to
highlight the value of tissue autofluorescence visualization in diagnosing a squamous cell carcinoma, metastatic to the palate, which
clinically presented as an innocuous appearing submucosal nodule. A 59-year-old white female was receiving regular dental treatment at the
Special Patient Clinic of the University of Texas Dental Branch at Houston. During her recent clinic visit, we noticed a submucosal nodule
on her posterior hard palate during routine oral examination. The patient was unaware of this lesion. This lesion was covered by intact
mucosa, was non-fluctuant and had the consistency of an irritation fibroma. This submucosal nodule measured 0.8 cm in greatest diameter and
palpation of this nodule elicited no tenderness or blanching. Her medical history is significant for cervical lymph node metastasis of
squamous cell carcinoma from unknown primary, hypertension, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hypothyroidism and depression. The
patient was diagnosed with squamous cell carcinoma of unknown primary, metastatic to the right mid jugular lymph nodes approximately four
years ago. Various imaging studies were performed at the time which failed to identify the primary site of this tumour. The patient was
treated with a course of external beam radiation therapy to the pharyngeal axis and the neck. Her oral mucosa and teeth were shielded from
the direct radiation therapy beams. Patient had no clinical evidence of either primary or metastatic tumour during the last four years. Her
current medications include levothyroxine, enalapril malate and fluoxetine. The patient had a 10-pack-year history of smoking and social
consumption of alcohol. The patient's family history was unremarkable. Our clinical differential diagnosis for this palatal nodule included
traumatic fibroma and epidermoid cyst. However, because of her past medical history of metastatic disease, we examined this nodule using a
multispectral oral cancer screening device (Identafi™ 3000). This submucosal nodule revealed decreased autofluorescence at 405 nm
illumination (Figure 1A-C). On the other hand, a clinically similar appearing benign fibroma (arrow) from a different patient, exhibited
normal tissue autofluorescence (Figure 1D-F). An excisional biopsy of this submucosal nodule was performed which was diagnosed as consistent
with metastatic squamous cell carcinoma because of the overlying benign surface epithelium. Patient was referred to her oncologist for
further evaluation and treatment. The clinical protocol for the detection potentially malignant oral mucosal lesions with Identafi 3000 was
reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston. Written informed
consents were obtained from all participants of this clinical study. An innocuous appearing submucosal nodule (arrow) was noted on the
posterior hard palate of a 59-year-old white female during standard clinical examination which upon examination with a multispectral oral
cancer screening device (Identafi™ 3000), revealed loss of autofluorescence. A: White light image of the metastatic lesion; B: Fluorescence
image at 405 nm illumination; C: Microscopic examination of the biopsy revealed the presence of metastatic squamous carcinoma, Bar = 100 μM
(C). In comparison, a similar appearing benign fibroma (arrow) exhibits normal autofluorescence. D: White light image of a benign fibroma;
E: Fluorescence image at 405 nm illumination; F: Microscopic examination of the biopsy revealed reactive fibrous hyperplasia, Bar = 100 μM.
Increasing need for additional non-invasive tests to augment conventional white light oral examination has driven the development of various
real-time light-induced fluorescence visualization devices for detection and delineation of potentially malignant oral lesions . The U.S.
Food and Drug administration has approved two oral cancer screening devices namely, VELscope® (LED Dental, Inc, White Rock, British
Columbia, Canada) and Identafi 3000™ (Trimira™, Houston, Texas) for light-induced fluorescence visualization of oral mucosa. VELscope uses a
blue/violet light (400-460 nm) to illuminate oral mucosa and a specific filter allows the clinician to visualize tissue autofluorescence.
Identafi 3000 uses multiple illumination settings namely white, amber (560 nm) and violet (405 nm) to visualize the oral mucosal reflectance
(white and amber) and fluorescence (violet). Light-induced tissue fluorescence visualization technologies are being used increasingly as
non-invasive diagnostic aids to characterize biochemical and structural changes associated with neoplastic transformation . These diagnostic
tests vary depending on the type of fluorophores being visualized: 1) endogenous fluorophores (autofluorescence); 2) fluorophores
synthesized in tissue after administration of a precursor drug; 3) fluorophores injected as exogenous drug. Autofluorescence visual imaging
is the most widely used and safest method that has great promise to enhance the visualization and diagnostic predictability of potentially
malignant lesions. When normal mucosa is illuminated by high-intensity violet (405 nm with the Identafi™ 3000 system) or blue light (436 nm
with VELscope system), specific components of this mucosa (fluorophores) emit low-energy light, which is visualized as the autofluorescence
image of the mucosa. The major fluorophores of oral mucosa include flavin adenine dinucleotide (FAD) and nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide
(NADH) of the epithelium and cross-linked collagen and elastin fibers of the underlying lamina propria. Subepithelial stromal collagen
fibers are the predominant source of autofluorescence in oral mucosa . Usually malignant transformation is associated with thickening of the
epithelium, enhanced cellular density due to increased nuclear cytoplasmic ratio which may attenuate the excitation leading to a decrease in
collagen autofluorescence. Although the role of autofluorescence based screening devices such as the Identafi™ 3000 or the VELscope in oral
precancer and cancer diagnosis remains to be determined, recent studies have documented promising applications for these devices. Recently,
Roblyer et al. examined light-induced tissue autofluorescence at multiple excitation wave lengths at 365, 380, 405 and 450 nm and
demonstrated that they could differentiate the dysplastic epithelia and carcinoma from histologically normal mucosa with 95.9% sensitivity
and 96.2% specificity . Moreover, subclinical premalignant and malignant lesions that are not visible on routine white light oral
examination become noticeable with direct autofluorescence visualization . Recent studies reported that autofluorescence tissue imaging is
more sensitive than routine white light examination to determine surgical margins at the primary site that are free of histologic and
molecular features of malignancy or dysplasia . Our patient was diagnosed with carcinoma of unknown primary site (CUP), defined as
metastatic carcinoma present in the lymph nodes with no identifiable primary tumour despite thorough clinical and radiographic evaluations .
The incidence of CUP, which represents up to 7% of all head and neck carcinomas, has reduced in recent years due to the use of multimodal
imaging studies to identify occult primary tumours . Approximately 75% of CUP occurring in the cervical lymph nodes in which the primary
tumours were subsequently identified originated from the head and neck area, most frequently from the peritonsillar area and base of the
tongue . However, in a significant proportion of CUP patients, the primary tumour site may remain undetected for several years as in the
current case . The patient in our case had no clinical evidence of primary tumour or recurrence for 4 years until she presented with the
described palatal tumour. We believe that this tumour represents a second metastasis and not a primary tumour because the surface epithelium
overlying this submucosal tumour was not directly connected to the tumour island and did not exhibit histologic features of dysplasia or
malignancy as noted with primary oral squamous cell carcinomas. To our knowledge, this is the first case to report the use of tissue
autofluorescence imaging to diagnose an occult metastatic squamous cell carcinoma to the palatal mucosa. In the current case, it appears
that metastatic tumour islands within the subepithelial stroma disrupted stromal collagen fibers leading to the loss of stromal
autofluorescence. In contrast, a clinically similar appearing benign fibroma comprised of dense subepithelial fibrous tissue revealed normal
autofluorescence. Certainly, multispectral tissue autofluorescence is a new and powerful technology that can be used for multiple diagnostic
applications. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. NV serve as an investigator in a clinical study
evaluating the oral cancer screening devise "Identafi 3000™" which was sponsored by Trimira, Houston, Texas. AG is a co-owner of patents
that have been licensed to Remicalm LLC, Houston, Texas, Trimira's parent company and serves as an unpaid scientific advisor to Remicalm
LLC. NV, SK and AG participated in the diagnostic evaluation and management of the patient. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript
