We report a rare case of non-communicating large orbital cyst with microphthalmos which was surgically separated from the globe and excised.
Histopathology reported it to be a teratoma. Congenital cystic teratoma should be a part of the differential diagnosis in an infant
presenting with a clinical picture of microphthalmos with orbital cyst, in view of the different management required. A congenital orbital
teratoma is an extremely rare benign tumor which contains a wide diversity of tissues derived from two or three germ cell layers that are
foreign to the orbit. The clinical presentation of primary orbital teratoma is that of an extreme unilateral proptosis with forward
displacement of a developmentally intact globe by a large orbital tumor of variegated consistency in a newborn. We report an unusual case of
congenital orbital cystic teratoma that presented similar to a microphthalmos with cyst, not reported earlier. A seven-month-old female
child presented with history of mass lesion in the left lower lid since birth which was progressively increasing in size. Examination
revealed a swelling in the lateral two-third of left lower lid, bluish in color and measuring 3 × 3 cm. The swelling was soft, fluctuant,
with ill-defined borders and the surface had engorged blood vessels. It was nontender and did not increase in size on crying. The lower
tarsal conjunctiva was everted and mechanical ectropion was visible [Fig. 1a]. The right eye was normal. Systemic examination revealed a
ventricular septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus. Computed tomography (CT) scan revealed an enlarged orbit with no bone erosion [Fig.
1b]. The cystic lesion occupied most of the orbit displacing the microphthalmic globe and extraocular muscles superiorly. Neuroimaging
excluded any communication with the globe or central nervous system. Anterior inferior orbitotomy with total cyst excision was done. the
superior part of the cyst wall was found merged with the inferotemporal aspect of the sclera. Using gentle blunt and sharp dissection under
the microscope, the cyst could be separated from the globe without breaching its integrity. The eye ball was found to be microphthalmic
[Fig. 1c]. Corneal diameter measured 5 × 6 mm. Cystic teratoma presenting with microphthalmos, (a) Clinical photograph, (b) Computed
tomography showing a large cystic lesion occupying the inferior orbit and displacing the globe superiorly, (c) Intraoperative picture
showing microphthalmos, (d) Cyst wall lined by cuboidal to columnar lining epithelium The specimen consisted of a flattened cyst like
structure measuring 2.5 cm in diameter. It had congested outer surface and smooth inner surface. There were large areas containing multiple
cysts. Microscopic examination revealed tissue derived from all three germ layers. The wall of the cyst was lined focally by tall columnar
epithelium [Fig. 1 d]. There was neuroglial tissue which was confirmed by the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) immunostain.
Surrounding areas showed presence of fat, mature smooth muscle and nerve bundles. The tissues were mature, without mitotic activity [Fig.
2a–d]. Histopathology of the cystic teratoma, (a) Neuroglial tissue, (b) GFAP highlighting neuroglial tissue, (c) Adipose tissue with blood
vessels, (d) Bundles of smooth muscle in cyst wall Postoperative evaluation revealed a microphthalmic eye with no light fixation. The ocular
movements were present with some limitation in abduction only. Microcornea was opaque with no view of anterior segment details. Patient's
parents were explained about the poor visual prognosis and the need for ocular prosthesis. One year postoperatively there was no recurrence.
The clinical presentation of primary congenital orbital teratoma is spectacular. Extreme proptosis at birth, coupled with a developmentally
intact globe and an orbital mass having a variegated appearance and consistency, is essentially diagnostic of primary orbital teratoma.
Clinically it is difficult to distinguish other benign and malignant neoplasms from teratoma. The differential diagnoses for cystic
anomalies include microphthalmia with cyst, congenital cystic eye, microphthalmia with cystic teratoma, ectopic brain tissue and
meningoencephalocele. Microphthalmos with cyst is distinguished on the basis of a small globe in conjunction with a communicating channel
between it and an attached cyst. Rarely, the congenital colobomatous microphthalmos with orbital cyst may not communicate with the eye and
or the central nervous system. Our patient presented with an orbital cyst and clinically nonvisible microphthalmic eye simulating the
clinical presentation of a microphthalmos with cyst. Given the above clinical situation, diagnosis of teratoma was least considered.
Intraoperative examination revealed microphthalmic eye along with an orbital cyst. Histopathologically, teratomas are benign growths of
mature and immature tissues characterized by aggregations of well-differentiated tissue of diverse germ cell origin. The predominant germ
cell type observed in orbital teratomas is surface ectoderm, producing squamous epithelial-lined cysts filled with keratin, adnexal
structures such as hair follicles, and sweat glands. Neuroectodermal structures include grey and white matter of the brain, primitive neural
tubes, ocular primorida, choroid plexus, and ganglia. Mesoderm is the next most common germ cell layer, represented by such tissues as
muscle, bone cartilage, and fat. Endoderm is the least common and usually manifests as gastrointestinal tissue or as cysts lined by
respiratory type pseudo-stratified columnar epithelium. Whereas the microphthalmos with cyst is a two-layered structure. The inner layer is
composed of a gliotic neuroretinal tissue that may show retinal architecture, photoreceptor differentiation, or rosette formation. The outer
layer consists of vascularized connective tissue and may occasionally contain cartilage. In our case the cystic lesion had derivatives from
all three germ cell layers and as per Duke-Elder's, one of the five-point classification for orbital teratoma [Table 1], a tumor consisting
of all three germinal layers would be a teratoma. Duke-Elder's classification of teratomata in the orbit A complete fetus implanted in the
orbit A portion of a second fetus in the orbit A tumor consisting of all three germinal layers Tumors containing representatives of two
germinal layers only Tumors containing representatives of one layer only In conclusion, though congenital orbital teratoma is
characteristically associated with a developmentally normal globe, rarely the globe could be microphthalmic. Orbital teratoma must be
considered in the differential diagnosis of a child presenting with an orbital mass and a small or unrecognizable eye. In such cases prompt
surgical excision is the treatment of choice.
