Traumatic anterior dislocation of the hip is rare. Bilateral traumatic anterior dislocation is an even rarer injury; indeed, only 5 cases
have been reported in the English literature. We describe a case of a bilateral traumatic anterior dislocation of the hip and a concomitant
unstable lumbar burst fracture following a mechanism of injury distinctly different from other reports. Hip dislocations are orthopaedic
emergencies because of the possible complications. The usual direction of a hip dislocation is posterior and the rate of posterior
dislocations is 90%.1) Bilateral anterior dislocation of the hip is an extremely rare injury. In fact, there have been no reports of a
bilateral traumatic anterior dislocation of the hip and a concomitant unstable lumbar burst fracture. We therefore describe a case involving
a bilateral traumatic anterior dislocation of the hip and concomitant unstable lumbar burst fracture following a mechanism of injury which
was distinctly diff erent from other reports. A 60-year-old man who was working in a squatting position at a construction site was struck by
a 600 lb H-beam falling from 2 m over his lower back and buttocks area. When he arrived at our hospital 3 hours after the injury, he already
had been diagnosed with a bilateral anterior dislocation of the hip (Fig. 1) and a spine fracture. He was transferred to our hospital from a
private clinic with the right hip reduced, but the left hip remained unreduced. On arrival at our hospital, the patient had severe lower
back pain and bilateral hip pain, but the vital signs were stable and there were no neurologic deficits. Roentgenographic studies were
obtained in the department of emergency medicine and the plain pelvis film showed that the right hip was reduced, but the left femoral head
was displaced over the obturator foramen; a right superior and inferior ramus fracture, and a right acetabulum fracture were noted (Fig. 2).
The lumbar spine film showed disruption of the axial alignment and decreased vertebral body height of L5 (Fig. 3). A pelvic computed
tomography (CT) demonstrated an extra-articular fracture of the right acetabulum, sacral alar, and the anterior portion of the sacroiliac
joint on the left. On lumbar spine CT, there was canal encroachment by the fractured body of L5 (Fig. 4), a greenstick laminar fracture,
bilateral inferior articular process fractures of L4, and a left sacral alar fracture (Fig. 5). Closed reduction was achieved under general
anesthesia by longitudinal traction on the left leg while an assistant applied lateral traction on the upper thigh while simultaneously
pushing the femoral head toward the acetabulum. After reduction, posterior segmental fixation was done from L3 to S1 on the unstable lumbar
burst fracture (Fig. 6). Bilateral Buck's traction was applied for 6 weeks, followed by non-weight bearing for 6 weeks. Three months after
the injury, he gained full range of motion on both hip joints and there were no complications at the 2 year follow-up. Dislocation of the
hip joint represents 2% to 5% of all traumatic dislocations.2) Bilateral hip dislocation rarely occurs; indeed, there have only been five
cases reported in the English literature.3-7) Motor vehicle accidents were the cause of bilateral traumatic anterior dislocations of the hip
in all reported cases.4-7) Unlike posterior dislocations of the hip, several authors have reported that an obturator-type of anterior
dislocation occurs when flexion exists in association with external rotation and abduction.4-8) Our patient was struck over the lumbosacral
and buttocks area by a heavy object weighing 600 lb. We thought that this direct blow made the spinal column unstable and the resultant
direct pressure by the heavy object forced both hip joints to be dislocated anteriorly, while both lower extremities were fixed with both
hips flexed, abducted, and externally rotated. Except for an unreduced bilateral anterior dislocation,3) all cases of bilateral anterior
dislocation were reduced by a closed method. There was a case of asymmetric bilateral dislocation in which open reduction was needed because
the femoral head was button-holed through the anterior capsule.9) A hip joint dislocation is an orthopaedic emergency. Delay in the
reduction of a dislocated hip joint increases the incidence of avascular necrosis, which develops in 26% of hip dislocations.2) When we try
to reduce anterior dislocations of the hip, we have to bear in mind that prompt and gentle reduction under adequate intravenous or general
anesthesia and a stepwise procedure with traction in line with the femur, gentle flexion of the hip joint with continued traction, and
gentle internal rotation and abduction, is key to avoiding possible complications. This case report is without precedent and illustrates
that a rare bilateral anterior dislocation of the hip can occur following unusual mechanisms of injury. Radiograph showed bilateral anterior
dislocation of both hip joints and disruption of the axial alignment at L4/5. Radiograph showed concentric reduction of both hips Radiograph
showed axial malalignment and decreased vertebral body height of L5. Pelvis computed tomography showed extra-articular fracture of the right
acetabulum (A), sacral alar (B), and anterior portion of the sacroiliac joint on the left (C). Computed tomography showed an unstable burst
fracture of L5. Fracture of the L5 body with a greenstick lamina fracture (A) and bilateral inferior articular process fracture of L4 (B).
Postoperative radiographs showed posterior segmental fixation from L3 to S1.
