To the Editor: Hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans is a parasitic dermatosis caused by the penetration of larvae, mostly of a dog or
cat hookworm, into the epidermis of humans (1,2). This eruption is most commonly found in tropical and subtropical areas but was recently
reported from western Europe, including Germany (3,4), England (5,6), Scotland (7), and southern France (8). We report a patient from the
Netherlands who acquired hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans while on a holiday in Brittany, France. A previously healthy 40-year-old
man from the Netherlands traveled to Brittany, France, to visit from September 1 to September 15, 2008. He and his partner slept in tents,
sometimes camping rough (not on designated camping sites or on private property), and they stayed in low-budget hotels. They spent a lot of
time on several beaches along the Atlantic Ocean on the southern shore of Brittany (≈48°N). The weather during their stay was variable. The
patient was frequently bitten by mosquitoes, especially on his feet. He had not traveled to the tropics before and did not own any pets.
After his return to the Netherlands, the area around 2 presumed mosquito bites at the lateral side of his right foot became red, swollen,
and itchy. This area evolved into a 1-cm pustule that later turned into a bulla. On November 10, he visited his general practitioner, who
made a diagnosis of cellulitis and started the patient on amoxicillin/clavulanic acid 625 mg, 3×/day for 10 days. During antimicrobial drug
treatment, skin inflammation improved, but after 2 days the patient noticed that an itching red streak had developed, extending from the
lesions on the lateral side of the right foot to the whole width of the sole of the foot. The tip of the streak proceeded along the sole of
the foot at the rate of 2 cm/day. On the fifth day, he was referred to our Tropical Diseases outpatient clinic. Physical examination showed
2 elevated, ulcerative lesions on the lateral side of the right foot, and from each originated an elevated serpiginous lesion (Figure,
panels B and C). These were typical tortuous lesions 2 cm in width. One of the lesions ran across the whole sole of the right foot and was
14 cm in length (Figure, panels A and C). The medial end of the lesion was fervently erythematous. Based on clinical signs, we diagnosed the
skin lesion as hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans with secondary impetiginization. The patient was subsequently treated with a single
oral dose of 12 mg ivermectin. The itch and the progression of the lesion halted instantly and the lesion disappeared during the following
weeks. The larva was not extirpated and thus not further identified. Right foot of a patient from Brittany, France, with a hookworm-related
cutaneous larva migrans, showing an elevated serpiginous lesion on the sole of the foot (panels A, B) and ulcerative lesions at the origin
of the lesions on the lateral side of the foot (panel C). Hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans is usually caused by Ancylostoma
brasiliense, A. caninum or, rarely, Uncinaria stenocephala. These zoonotic hookworms need a high temperature and a moist environment to
develop from an embryo to filariforme larva (1,2). Hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans is typically a disorder of tropical and
subtropical zones and it is rather common among tourists who visit tropical beaches. This was the first patient we had seen with this
disease who became infected in western Europe. Apart from an exceptionally hot day on August 30 (maximum 26°C), the weather was not
particularly warm during the summer of 2008 in Brittany; during the first 2 weeks of September the average minimum and maximum temperatures
were 11°C and 17°C, respectively. Rainfall was moderate and humidity was ≈86% (9). However, the overall warmer climate, including warmer
winters, might have created the conditions for zoonotic hookworm infections in humans in western Europe (10). Our patient may have been
infected by U. stenocephala, a nematode of dogs that is common in temperate zones but rarely causes hookworm-related cutaneous larva
migrans. An increase in ambient temperature might increase the incidence of these zoonotic infections in northern regions. Only 4 cases of
hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans were previously reported in France, all from southern regions (8). A northern spread of hookworm-
related cutaneous larva migrans could thus point to expansion of the global distribution of the more tropical hookworms or altered
conditions that favor the emergence of infection by a zoonotic hookworm such as U. stenocephala. Either explanation calls for screening of
infection in cats and dogs and preventing pet animals and possibly stray animals from accessing beaches. Clinicians should be aware of the
possibility of hookworm-related cutaneous larva migrans in patients who have traveled to western Europe and, in particular, those who have
stayed on the beaches. Suggested citation for this article: Tamminga N, Bierman WFW, de Vries PJ. Cutaneous larva migrans acquired in
Brittany, France . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Nov [date cited]. Available from
http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/11/1856.htm We thank the Department of Medical Photography and Illustration of the Academic Medical
Center, Amsterdam for providing the photographs.
