A fatal case of enterovirus 71 infection with pulmonary edema and rhombencephalitis occurred in Brest, France, in April 2007. The virus was
identified as subgenogroup C2. This highly neurotropic enterovirus merits specific surveillance outside the Asia-Pacific region. Enterovirus
71 (EV71), like other enteroviruses (family Picornaviridae), induces mostly asymptomatic or clinically benign infections. The virus is a
leading cause of foot and mouth disease and, above all, is an emerging agent of acute central nervous system disease (aseptic meningitis,
flaccid paralysis, encephalitis). Since its identification in 1969, EV71 has been the subject of several studies, particularly over the past
decade in the Asia-Pacific region where several outbreaks have been reported (1–5). Epidemics have also been described in the United States,
Brazil, and Europe (Sweden in 1974, Bulgaria in 1975, and Hungary in 1978) (6). EV71 can be divided into 3 independent genogroups by
molecular typing: A, B, and C (1). Genogroups B and C can be further subdivided into subgenogroups B1–B5 and C1–C5 (6). Subgenogroups can
replace each other within a short period of time, but several genotypes can also cocirculate as seen in Malaysia (2). Death caused by this
virus occurs rarely; young children are especially at risk. This report describes a fatal case of acute pulmonary edema with
rhombencephalitis that occurred within the course of an EV71 infection in France. In April 2007, a 17-month-old boy was referred to the
pediatric emergency ward of the Brest University Hospital. He had hyperthermia, which had begun 48 hours earlier. Upon arrival, he appeared
to be in good general condition, despite mild respiratory discomfort and episodes of vomiting. Nasopharyngitis was diagnosed. He was
discharged with treatment consisting of symptomatic medication and oral rehydration. He was readmitted to the pediatric emergency unit 12
hours later, in severe respiratory distress. Disorders of consciousness and drowsiness were observed. He was immediately given supportive
intravenous corticotherapy in association with aerosol and oxygen therapy. He was subsequently transferred to the pediatric intensive care
unit. Results of his chest radiograph were normal. Laboratory test results were as follows: leukocytosis 23,300/mm3 (67.5% polynuclear
neutrophils), platelets 453,000/mm3, hemoglobin 116 g/L, and hematocrit 34.9%. The C-reactive protein value was elevated (11 mg/L) and liver
function was conserved. Severe dyspnea, hyperglycemia (2.02 g/L), and a decreased blood pressure (38 mm Hg) rapidly developed. After the
onset of this acute respiratory distress syndrome, a second chest radiograph showed marked lung infiltration. The patient was intubated
because of increased oxygen dependence. Cardiorespiratory arrest occurred during the induction of anesthesia. Despite cardiopulmonary
resuscitation, he died <12 hours after his second admission to the pediatric emergency ward. An autopsy was performed with the prior consent
of the parents. Pulmonary edema and multiple foci of polymorph inflammatory infiltrate were present in lung samples. Encephalitic necrotic
lesions were multifocal but predominant in the inferior brainstem and superior cervical medulla. Respiratory centers were affected, as were
vegetative nucleates of the medulla oblongata (Figure 1). No inflammatory or necrotic areas were found in cardiac muscle. A) Horizontal
section of the medulla at the level of the inferior olivari nuclei, showing multiple inflammatory areas (clear areas); original
magnification ×4. B) Severe edematous area with inflammatory cells, macrophages, edema, and perivascular cuffing (arrow); original
magnification x200, hematoxylin-eosin stain. An enterovirus was isolated in the MRC-5 cell culture from a bronchial aspirate taken just
before death. An enterovirus was also isolated in an autopsy nasal swab. Other autopsy samples (lung, spleen, and urine) were positive for
enterovirus by reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) (Enterovirus consensus kit, Argene, Verniolle, France), but no virus was isolated from
these samples. Brain tissue could not be used for virologic studies because of formalin fixation. The enterovirus strain isolated in cell
culture was sent to the French National Reference Centre for Enteroviruses, where it was identified as EV71 by partial viral protein (VP) 1
sequencing (7). A second analysis was performed that targeted the 891 nucleotides of the VP1 gene, as described by Bible et al. (8). This
sequence was compared by phylogenetic analysis with 34 GenBank-selected VP1 enterovirus 71 strains (Table). A phylogenetic tree was
constructed by neighbor-joining, using the Kimura 2-parameter distance method to define relationships between the current isolate and other
EV71 subgenogroups. The VP1 sequence of the French patient who died clustered with VP1 sequences belonging to the C2 subgenogroup (Figure
2). The 2 closest-matching isolates originated from 2 young children admitted to the Brest Hospital emergency ward a few months later, in
June and July 2008, respectively. The first, 13 months of age, was admitted for acute respiratory syndrome, which rapidly resolved.
Enterovirus 71 was isolated from the child’s bronchial secretions. The second child, 31 months of age, had acute gingivostomatitis, fever,
and cerebellar syndrome evocative of meningoencephalitis. Enterovirus was isolated from buccal lesions, but no virus was detected by RT-PCR
in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), even though pleocytosis was present. He recovered quickly. The VP1 full-length sequences of the 3 strains were
deposited in GenBank under the accession nos. FJ824734–FJ824736. The high nucleotide identity among the 3 strains (>98%), and their place
and period of circulation suggest a probable identical ancestral strain, which remains undefined. The origin of the EV71 strain responsible
for the substantial pulmonary edema described here remains unknown. The 3 strains isolated clustered with 3 other European strains, isolated
in 2006 and 2008 in the United Kingdom (8,9), and with 2 Asian strains, isolated in 2007 in Thailand and in 2008 in Singapore and Thailand
(GenBank, unpub. data). *EV, enterovirus; VP, viral protein; HFMD, hand, foot, and mouth disease; NA, not available; UD, unpublished data.
Phylogenetic relationships between 3 French strains and 34 worldwide enterovirus 71 GenBank-selected strains based on alignment of complete
viral protein (VP) 1 coding sequences. The prototype coxsackievirus A16 (CoxA16-G10) was used as the outgroup virus. The phylogenetic tree
was constructed by the neighbor-joining method by using MEGA4 (www.megasoftware.net). Bootstrap values (>70%) derived from 1,000 samplings
are shown at the nodes of the tree. Phylogenetic separation of C2 isolates appear in accordance with time and place of isolation. Isolates
from this study are indicated by black squares (the strain isolated from the 17-month-old boy with fatal pulmonary edema is shown in
boldface with **), and the other European circulating strains by black triangles. Branch lengths are drawn to scale. Scale bar indicates 5%
of nucleotide sequence divergence. Acute pulmonary edema in EV71 infections was rarely reported before the 1998 outbreak in Taiwan (12).
Since then, this disease, which is often fatal, has been more frequently described, with known prognostic factors, including clinical and
biologic features such as central nervous system involvement, leukocytosis, decreased blood pressure, and hyperglycemia (13). The fatal
infection reported here, which ran a biphasic course, featured all of these signs, with death occurring within a few hours of the onset of
respiratory distress. This devastating syndrome is believed to result from the extensive damage of bulbar vasomotor and respiratory centers
(Figure 1). In the study by Kao et al. all 21 patients who had acute pulmonary edema associated with these signs died within 4 hours of the
development of acute respiratory distress syndrome (13). No reports of fatal cases of EV71 infection in Europe have been made since cases
were reported in Hungary in 1978 (9–11,14) with the exception of a fatal case of panencephalitis associated with subgenogroup C2 in the
United Kingdom (8). No single neurovirulent genotype appears to be associated with severe and fatal cases; at least 3 separate genotypes
have been isolated from patients with fatal cases in Malaysia (Sarawak), Japan, and Taiwan (6). A similar subgenogroup such as C1 may be
associated with complicated disease in Sarawak and asymptomatic infection in Norway (2,10). A specific marker for virulence has yet to be
defined. Further studies are required to estimate the prevalence of EV71 infection, and only extensive clinical, virologic, and
anatomopathologic investigation may determine the actual prevalence of EV71 in severe and sometimes fatal neurologic diseases. EV71, like
poliovirus, is not always recovered from CSF during central nervous system infection (15). This fact underscores the importance of virologic
investigations on peripheral samples (throat swabs, urine, stool, and vesicles). Since 2006, centers participating in the French Enterovirus
Surveillance Network have declared a significantly growing number of EV71 infections (D. Antona, pers. comm.). The international spread of
EV71 outside the Asia-Pacific region needs to be vigilantly monitored, because both the possibility of an outbreak and the unpredictability
of virus circulation patterns represent a public health concern. Suggested citation for this article: Vallet S, Legrand-Quillien M-C,
Dailland T, Podeur G, Gouriou S, Schuffenecker I, et al. Fatal case of enterovirus 71 infection, France, 2007. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on
the Internet]. 2009 Nov [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/11/1837.htm We thank Michèle Odermat and Marie-Annick
L’Her for their help with the clinical enterovirus strain cultures in our laboratory. Dr Vallet is a microbiologist involved in the study of
viral genetic diversity and phylogenic analyses. She works in the virological unit of Brest University Hospital, which is a member of the
French Enterovirus Surveillance Network.
