Inactivated polio vaccine was offered, and the index case-patient and household contacts were quarantined. Australia, along with 36 other
countries in the Western Pacific Region, was declared free of poliomyelitis by the World Health Organization in October 2000. Yet, the
persistence of wild poliovirus in the 4 remaining polio-endemic countries—Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and Pakistan—poses a risk for its
importation into all countries declared polio free. We describe the public health response and outcomes resulting from the importation of a
wild poliovirus infection in Melbourne, Australia, in July 2007. This response, based on an assessment of the risk for transmission,
included offering vaccination with inactivated polio vaccine to the contacts and placing the index patient in isolation and the household
contacts in quarantine until consecutive fecal specimens were negative for poliovirus by culture. The experience gained from the polio
importation event in Australia may assist other polio-free countries to prepare for, and respond to, a similar event. No secondary clinical
cases resulted from this importation. Since 2006, wild poliovirus has been endemic in only 4 countries: Afghanistan, India, Nigeria, and
Pakistan. Although many countries have not reported a case of poliomyelitis caused by wild poliovirus for some years, they remain at risk
for importation of the disease. Australia and the other countries of the Western Pacific Region were declared polio free in October 2000
(1). However, the last reported case of wild poliovirus infection in Australia was imported from Turkey in 1977 (2). National departments of
health in this region must remain vigilant for such an event and respond appropriately to reduce the risk for local transmission. The World
Health Organization (WHO) Global Polio Eradication Initiative recommends clinical surveillance for cases of acute flaccid paralysis in
children <15 years of age and suspected paralytic polio in a person of any age as the most sensitive means of detecting a case of imported
poliomyelitis in countries declared polio free (3). The Australian government initiated surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis, following
the WHO guidelines, in 1995. WHO established a global polio laboratory network, which includes a Polio Regional Reference Laboratory in
Australia, to confirm poliovirus infection because other conditions manifesting acute paralysis can mimic polio. Nevertheless, Australia’s
ability to detect and respond effectively to the importation of a wild poliovirus infection has been questioned because gaps have occurred
in surveillance for acute flaccid paralysis surveillance and in the referral of fecal specimens for laboratory testing (4). Australia began
exclusive use of inactivated polio vaccine (IPV) in place of the Sabin oral polio vaccine on November 1, 2005. In Victoria in 2007, the
proportion of children who received at least 3 doses of polio vaccine was 92.8% at 12 months of age and 95.9% at 2 years of age. Coverage
with at least 4 doses of polio vaccine was 91.4% at 6 years of age. No reliable data exist on vaccination coverage with polio vaccine in the
adult population. We describe the public health response to an importation of wild poliovirus infection that occurred in Melbourne,
Australia, in July 2007; the last reported case of polio in Australia was in 1977 (2). The issues addressed as a result of this event would
be similar for other countries, and the lessons learned may be incorporated into national planning for a polio outbreak (which requires only
a single confirmed case). On July 7, 2007, the Department of Human Services (DHS) in Victoria, Australia, was notified of a suspected case
of imported poliomyelitis in a 22-year-old man (a university student). The patient, who was studying in Melbourne, had returned home to
Pakistan on March 13, 2007, and in early June, he visited Islamabad and the North-West Frontier Province. On June 22, 2007, fever, nausea,
and pain in the lower back and legs developed and progressed to lower limb weakness. The symptoms appeared to resolve, and he returned to
Melbourne, arriving on a flight from Bangkok, Thailand, on July 2, 2007. However, he remained at home with back pain and lower limb weakness
and consulted a general practitioner on July 6, 2007. He was advised to go to a hospital, where the emergency department admitted him for
further investigation. The patient reported receiving at least 3 doses of oral poliomyelitis vaccine as a child. A case report describing
the clinical features and treatment of the patient and the initial laboratory investigation was published by Stewardson et al. (5). Briefly,
a magnetic resonance image of the patient’s spine, performed on July 7, indicated increased signal in the anterior horn cells, which is
highly suggestive of poliomyelitis. The patient was placed in a single room with enteric precautions, and DHS was notified of the diagnosis
of poliomyelitis. Although an initial pan-enterovirus reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) performed directly on a fecal specimen collected on
July 7 was reported as negative, the National Polio Reference Laboratory confirmed the diagnosis of poliomyelitis by isolation of non–Sabin-
like poliovirus type 1 on July 13. The virus was subsequently reported to have high nucleic acid sequence identity with wild poliovirus
isolates from Pakistan, which provided an epidemiologic link with the patient’s travel history. The index patient was placed in isolation in
the hospital until 2 successive fecal specimens, collected 1 week apart, were negative for poliovirus by viral culture and RT-PCR (a total
of 34 days). DHS coordinated the public health response in the state of Victoria, while national and international responsibilities were
handled by the Australian government Department of Health and Ageing. At the national level, this included liaising with the Communicable
Diseases Network of Australia, the Australian Health Protection Committee, and the Public Health Laboratory Network. The case was one of the
first reported to WHO under the International Health Regulations (2005), which came into effect in June 2007 and require member countries to
notify WHO of poliomyelitis cases (6). On confirmation of the diagnosis of poliomyelitis, DHS performed a risk assessment for the potential
infection of contacts of the index patient with wild poliovirus. Contacts were grouped as the following: 1) close contacts who resided with
or visited the index patient’s residence, 2) fellow passengers on the airplane from Bangkok to Melbourne, 3) public contacts and staff at
the general practitioner’s clinic, and 4) public contacts and healthcare workers (HCWs) at the hospital (Table 1). *IPV, inactivated polio
vaccine; RT-PCR, reverse transcription–PCR; Ig, immunoglobulin; CSF, cerebrospinal fluid; HCW, healthcare worker. Household contacts were
judged to be at highest risk. Anyone who used the same toilet as the index patient before it had been cleaned was regarded as being at
lesser risk, especially because the patient had not used a toilet to have a bowel movement either on the plane, at the general
practitioner’s clinic, or at the hospital emergency department. In virtually all instances, the vaccination history of contacts was
uncertain. Although the likelihood of transmission was deemed to be low, a cautious approach to the situation led to a comprehensive public
health response. Household contacts of the index patient were identified as his 5 housemates, 1 visitor who had stayed overnight after the
index patient’s return from overseas, and a housekeeper who cleaned the index-patient’s premises, but did not reside there. The household
contacts were placed under a public health order following the state’s health laws to remain in home quarantine until released by DHS. The 5
housemates were quarantined at their principal place of residence, together with the visitor who joined them. The housekeeper was
quarantined in her own house. The contacts were provided with information on poliomyelitis and given booster doses of IPV. Doses of IPV were
administered subcutaneously, according to the Australian immunization guidelines (7), thus avoiding the potential for provocation
poliomyelitis (8). In hindsight, serum collection from close contacts before booster vaccination would have enabled testing for
immunoglobulin M against poliovirus to assess the risk for transmission of wild poliovirus due to asymptomatic infection. All household
contacts remained in quarantine until 2 fecal specimens, collected >24 hours apart, were negative by viral culture and RT-PCR (a total of 16
days) (Table 1). The index patient reported that he had used the toilet on the flight from Bangkok to Melbourne, although only to urinate.
Although the risk to the fellow passengers was deemed to be low, contact tracing was instituted for the passengers on the flight. Two
hundred thirty-five passengers terminated their journey in Melbourne (a few passengers went on to other areas in Australia), and their
incoming passenger cards were obtained by DHS through the Department of Health and Ageing. Upon laboratory confirmation of the diagnosis of
the traveler’s poliomyelitis, a media bulletin was released by DHS on July 14, advising the public of the case and asking passengers from
the flight to contact a national public health telephone line to obtain further information and to receive a booster polio vaccination.
Media interviews were conducted by DHS staff, and a health alert was issued for hospitals in Victoria. DHS also contacted the airplane
passengers directly by telephone, letter, or email to provide information on poliomyelitis and offer a single booster dose of IPV,
regardless of previous poliomyelitis vaccination history. The results of the airplane contact tracing are shown in Table 2. Seven airport
workers responsible for cleaning the plane used by the index patient were also given IPV by DHS, while the Department of Health and Ageing
agreed to undertake follow-up of the flight crew. *IPV, inactivated polio vaccine; DHS, Department of Health Services. On July 6, 2007, the
index patient consulted a general practitioner about the symptoms that recurred after his arrival in Melbourne on July 2. He later informed
DHS that he had used a toilet at the clinic to pass urine only and so the same risk assessment criteria were used as for the airplane
contacts. Nine healthcare staff, 24 patients, and 6 of their friends or relatives were administered IPV. We identified persons who may have
used a toilet at the hospital Emergency Department and on the ward where the index patient stayed before isolation procedures were
instituted, and we recommended that they receive IPV (Table 1). In total, 37 hospital patients or their friends or relatives were
administered IPV by their own doctors, and 3 had recently received their routine childhood vaccinations. HCWs who possibly had contact with
the index patient were regarded as at risk, and a total of 83 hospital staff members each received 1 dose of IPV. Australian-born HCWs were
judged likely to have been fully immunized and therefore less likely to be at risk. Nine overseas-born hospital staff members who could not
provide evidence of vaccination or a booster dose within the last 10 years, per the Australian immunization guidelines (7), were requested
to provide 2 fecal specimens, at least 24 hours apart, for virus culture. Three symptomatic cases that required hospitalization were
identified during contact tracing (Table 1). A teenager on the same flight from Bangkok as the index patient was hospitalized with fever and
diarrhea, and a 7-year-old child who attended the same general practitioner’s clinic as the index patient was admitted with seizures.
Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) collected from both patients was positive for enterovirus RNA by RT-PCR, but fecal specimens were negative by cell
culture and RT-PCR. The enteroviruses detected in the CSF from both patients were not identified. In addition, a man who attended the
general practitioner’s clinic was hospitalized with fever, gastrointestinal illness, and general weakness. Two fecal specimens were
collected from the patient and also from his spouse, who was having a respiratory illness, as a precautionary measure. The couple was asked
to remain at home in voluntary quarantine until laboratory testing of the specimens was completed. All fecal specimens were reported as
negative for enterovirus by cell culture and RT-PCR. One hospital HCW who had contact with the index patient exhibited backache, but a fecal
specimen was negative for enterovirus by RT-PCR and cell culture. Lastly, the issue arose of cleaning and disinfection of toilets used by
the index patient. Survival of poliovirus is favored by lower temperatures and high relative humidity. The virus can survive outside the
human body for weeks at room temperature (9). Effective disinfectants include sodium hypochlorite, glutaraldehyde, or formaldehyde
solutions. The WHO Guide to Hygiene and Sanitation in Aviation (10) indicates that the correct use of sodium hypochlorite is to apply a
solution of 100 mg/L and keep it in contact with surfaces for 30 minutes; then the surfaces should be rinsed with warm water and dried. The
2007 wild poliovirus importation generated widespread media coverage around Australia that assisted with contact tracing. However, tracing
the passengers who disembarked with the index patient in Melbourne was difficult because of poor handwriting and inaccurate information on
many of the arrival cards. This experience has implications for the urgent tracing of persons potentially exposed to other infectious
diseases of public health significance, such as pandemic influenza. Despite extensive contact tracing, 26 (11%) of the 235 passengers could
not be contacted. For the 96 passengers who chose to see their own doctor for vaccination and the 29 passengers who were contacted by letter
or email, outcome is not known. In large part, the laboratory investigation of the index patient and household contacts followed the
procedures recommended by WHO for routine acute flaccid paralysis surveillance with collection of 2 fecal specimens obtained 24–48 hours
apart, due to intermittent virus shedding, for virus culture (11). Virus cell culture was accepted by DHS as the approved standard for the
test procedures, in agreement with the recommendation by WHO. This proved decisive because, for the first fecal specimen, enterovirus was
not detected by RT-PCR performed directly on the specimen (5). RT-PCR is still a powerful tool for enterovirus detection as exemplified by
the test results for the 2 positive CSF specimens. The testing, by cell culture and RT-PCR, of specimens from persons with suspected
poliomyelitis and their contacts is recommended. This ensures that test results are determined by using the most rapid and sensitive methods
available. Household contacts of case-patients are at high risk of infection (12). We recommended that they be quarantined at home and that
stool specimens be collected a minimum of 3 days after the first contact with the index patient to allow sufficient time for an infection to
become established. As excretion of poliovirus in the feces can continue for several weeks (13,14), we sought advice from WHO and the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (Atlanta, GA, USA) regarding when the index patient and the household contacts could be released
from isolation and home quarantine, respectively. The criteria accepted by DHS was for 2 fecal specimens, collected 7 days apart for the
index patient and >24 hours apart for the household contacts, to be negative for poliovirus isolation by cell culture (M. Pallansch, S.
Roesel, pers. comm.). The time taken to determine a negative result by cell culture leads to an inevitable delay in finalizing patient
tests, which, in the circumstances described in this report, had implications for when the index patient and household contacts could be
released from hospital isolation and home quarantine, respectively: 34 days for the index patient and 16 days for the household contacts. It
should be noted that household quarantine of the contacts required substantial logistical support by DHS staff in terms of food and
entertainment. This also has implications for large-scale quarantine as would be required in an influenza pandemic. No published evidence is
available on the role of polio vaccine as postexposure prophylaxis against paralytic disease. However, in persons with some preexisting
immunity, which would include most of the Australian population, boosting the immune response with a single dose of oral polio vaccine or
IPV is likely to reduce both pharyngeal and intestinal excretion of poliovirus in those who have been infected (15). The extent to which one
undertakes tracing of contacts who used the same toilet was extensively debated by the Communicable Diseases Network Australia and the
Australian Health Protection Committee. DHS opted to invite nonhousehold contacts to come to departmental offices or see their own physician
for a booster dose of IPV and to be given information on the disease and its symptoms and signs as a precautionary measure. Booster doses of
IPV have also been recommended for HCWs who have close contact with patients who might be excreting wild poliovirus (15). We followed this
advice with the HCWs involved with the index patient, but issues arose in relation to the lack of immunization records, particularly with
some of the overseas-born HCWs. We now advise that HCWs in close contact with an index patient with poliomyelitis, who have no recorded
immunization history or who are not fully vaccinated, should provide 2 fecal specimens collected 24–48 hours apart and complete a course of
vaccination with IPV, in accordance with the current Australian immunization guidelines (7). Until this imported case, poliomyelitis caused
by wild poliovirus had not been reported in Australia for 30 years. The case necessitated a rapid and extensive public health response. The
age and vaccination history of the index patient highlight the need for public health officials worldwide to prepare for imported cases of
suspected polio in persons of any age and with prior vaccination. The experience gained from the public health response to the importation
in 2007, particularly in relation to tracing of contacts, isolation of cases, and quarantine of close contacts, has been incorporated into
the national outbreak response plan for the investigation of cases of acute flaccid paralysis and suspected polio, published by the
Australian government’s Department of Health and Ageing (16). Suggested citation for this article: Carnie JA, Lester R, Moran R, Brown L,
Meagher J, Roberts JA, et al. Public health response to imported case of poliomyelitis, Australia. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2009 Nov [date cited]. Available from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/11/1733.htm We thank the staff at Burwood Health Care,
Melbourne, and the Box Hill Hospital, Melbourne, for their cooperation. We would also like to thank the laboratory staff of the Victorian
Infectious Diseases Reference Laboratory, DHS staff, and staff at the Australian government Department of Health and Ageing for their
assistance throughout the public health response. Dr Carnie is a public health physician with 20 years’ experience in communicable disease
control. He is chief health officer for the state of Victoria, Australia, with statutory responsibilities in communicable diseases, food
safety, and environmental health.
