Solitary neurofibroma is a rare benign non-odontogenic tumor. Particularly in the oral cavity, neurogenic tumors are rare, especially if
they are malignant. Neurofibromas may present either as solitary lesions or as part of the generalised syndrome of neurofibromatosis or von
Recklinghausen's disease of the skin. Clinically, oral neurofibromas usually appear as pediculated or sessile nodules, with slow growth and
mostly without pain. The diagnosis can be confirmed by histological examination. Neurofibromas are immunopositive for the S-100 protein,
indicating its neural origin. Treatment is surgical and the prognosis is excellent. For illustration a rare case of a solitary neurofibroma
in the mandible is presented. Neurogenic tumors are rare in the oral cavity, particularly so when malignant. Traumatic neuroma, although
usually included with neurogenic tumors, is a reactive process rather than a true neoplasm . In contrast, neurofibroma and schwannoma derive
from nerve fibers, the perineurium, the endoneurium and the neurolemmomal cells . Neurofibromas may present either as solitary lesions or as
part of the generalised syndrome of neurofibromatosis or von Recklinghausen's disease of the skin . Since the first description of solitary
neurofibroma (neurilemmoma, schwannoma) of the oral cavity in 1954 by Bruce only few cases have been reported in the literature . Although
neurofibroma represents one of the most common neurogenic tumors it is an uncommon intraoral tumor like some other intraoral tumours .
Neurofibromas can be multiple or solitary. The tumor's most frequent location is the skin and its multiple appearance is highly associated
with von Recklinghausen's disease and poliglandular syndrome MEN III . It mainly appears in the third decade of life although occurrence
between 10 months and 70 years old has been described. Any preference of sex is reported contradictorily . There are no correlations
reported with immunocompromising diseases . Clinically, oral neurofibromas usually appear as pediculated or sessile nodule, with slow
growth. They are usually painless, but pain or paresthesia may occur due to nervous compression. The most frequent location is the tongue,
although they may occur at any site, especially on the palate, cheek mucosa and floor of the mouth . Even intraosseous location of the
mandible has been described . The definitive diagnosis is due to histological examination. The macroscopic appearance of the oral
neurofibroma is characterized by a whitish consistent mass with shiny surface. Microscopically the tumor is composed of an irregular pattern
of proliferative spindle cells. The stroma is composed of collagen fibers and mucoid masses. Small axons all over the tumoral tissue are
demonstrated with silver staining. Neurofibromas are immunopositive for the S-100 protein in 85 to 100% of the cases, indicating its neural
origin . Treatment of choice is surgical excision of the solitary lesions, trying to conserve the nerve from which the tumor originates .
Malignant transformation of solitary neurofibroma is extremely rare. Recurrence is also rare although some authors suggest higher rate of
recurrence at head and neck location of solitary neurofibromas . Therefore, the prognosis is quite excellent. A 64-year-old male patient
with a history of somewhat alcohol but no nicotine or any other diseases attended the department for Cranio- and Maxillofacial Surgery.
Clinical examination revealed an exophytic tumor in the oral cavity extending all along the lingual aspect of the left mandible (fig. 1).
Panoramic radiographs showed little to moderate interdental loss of bone between teeth 37 and 38 but no other abnormalities. Several
biopsies from the oral cavity revealed a submucous benign mesenchymale proliferation with no signs of malignancy and thus, the tumor was
completely excised under general anaesthesia (fig. 2, fig. 3). Surgical treatment also included extraction of teeth 37 and 38 and a
modelling osteotomie. Immunohistochemical findings showed a solitary submucous neurofibroma with a predominate fibromatous component (fig.
4). Preoperative view: an exophytic tumor extending all along the lingual aspect of the left mandible. Tumor mass after resection.
Histological findings showing a tumor of proliferative spindle cells with a stroma composed of irregular collagen fibers (HE, × 100).
Immunopositive staining for the S-100 protein (×320). In the presenting case the lesion occured at the lingual site of the left mandible
presenting as painless pediculated exophytic tumor with slow growth. The localisation supports the lingual nerve as origin for the
neurofibroma. The patient presented no signs of von Recklinghausen disease or poliglandular syndrome. Preoperative panoramic radiographs
showed no serious abnormalities. Definitive diagnosis was based upon histological and inmunohistochemical findings. A clinical follow-up has
been regularly performed for one year, there was no evidence of recurrence until now. All authors disclaim any financial or non-financial
interests or commercial associations that might pose or create a conflict of interest with information presented in this manuscript. DS, JH,
RD and NK made substantial contribution to the conception and design of the manuscript. PR carried out the pathohistological investigations
and participated in creating this part of the manuscript. All authors were involved in revising the manuscript critically and have given
final approval of the version to be published. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report
and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
