Cerebro-spinal fluid leakage from a spinal stab wound is rare, and usually not a life-threatening injury. Pneumocephalus, a possible rare
complication of traumatic cerebro-spinal fluid leakage, can potentially lead to intracranial hemorrhage and death. We describe two cases of
spinal stab wounds complicated by cerebro-spinal fluid leakage, one of them developing into severe pneumocephalus. Both patients recovered
completely with the following treatment protocol: (a) trendelenburg positioning of the patient, (b) insertion of a continuous-drainage
cerebro-spinal fluid catheter into the lumbar thecal sac, (c) primary suture of the leaking skin wound, (d) IV antibiotic therapy. External
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage from a stab wound to the spine is a rare occurrence. Peacock et al. , in a review of 450 patients with
stab wounds of the spinal cord, found only 18 (4%) to have an external skin CSF leak. They note that in the majority of these patients the
leakage stopped spontaneously, and no surgical intervention was necessary. This corresponds well with the general agreement in the
literature that surgical treatment of penetrating spine injuries is usually unwarranted if there is no retained foreign body, sepsis, or CSF
leakage lasting more than 3–4 days . Neurological injury is typically a Brown–Sequard lesion, which has a relatively good prognosis for
spontaneous recovery. Other cord or root injuries will usually not improve much with or without surgery, so neurological loss per se is not
an indication for surgical treatment either [1, 3]. One potentially life-threatening complication of CSF leakage is pneumocephalus. Entrance
of air into the cranial cavity is thought to be due to one of two possible mechanisms [3, 4]: a drop in intracranial pressure (ICP), causing
a vacuum effect which results in an influx of air with respiration and coughing; or a valve effect at the wound site that allows air to
enter the subarachnoid space but not to exit. We describe two cases of CSF leakage following stab wounds to the spine, one of them
developing into severe pneumocephalus. Both patients gave their consent to the publication of their clinical histories. A 32-year old female
was admitted to the Chest Surgery Unit following a domestic altercation in which she sustained five stab wounds to the posterior thorax,
with a resultant small hemopneumothorax. The skin wounds were superficially sutured. A chest drain was not inserted, and the patient was
hospitalized for observation. On admission, the patient’s chief complaint was headaches. No meningeal irritation or neurological deficit was
noted. On the fourth day of hospitalization, one of the stab wounds, at the T9-10 level, was found to be leaking clear fluid suspected to be
CSF. An intradural continuous drainage (CD) 16G catheter was inserted into the lumbar spine at the L4–5 level, and the leaking skin wound
was re-sutured with through and through sutures (Fig. 1). The patient was remanded to bed in a supine Trendelenburg position with immediate
resolution of the headaches, and intravenous (IV) antibiotics were initiated.).Fig. 1Re-sutured stab wound and continuous drainage catheter
Re-sutured stab wound and continuous drainage catheter After five days, with the stab wound healing with no sign of leak or infection, the
CD catheter was removed and the patient was allowed to ambulate. She was discharged with no sequela on follow-up. A 66-year old male in mild
shock was brought to the ER with two stab wounds to the lower back and posterior thigh, sustained in the process of resolving a criminal
dispute. On admission, the patient was found to be fully conscious, with a Glasgow Coma Score of 15, blood pressure 90/62, pulse 82 (Revised
Trauma Score 12). Arterial bleeding from the thigh wound was noted, originating from a laceration of the profunda femoris artery, which was
embolized. Three units of packed cells were given, with the hemoglobin concentration rising from 7.2 to 9.5 mg%. The patient was admitted to
the respiratory intensive care unit, where he was hemodynamically stable but complained of severe headaches. On the next day, the dressing
over the lower back stab wound was noted to be drenched in clear fluid presumed to be CSF. A brain computed tomography (CT) scan
demonstrated severe pneumocephalus (Fig. 2). An attempt was made to explore and directly suture the dural tear, but this failed. Fig.
2Severe pneumocephalus Severe pneumocephalus A CD catheter was inserted into the lumbar spine at the L4–5 level, and the skin wound was
sutured with through and through sutures. The patient was placed in a supine Trendelenburg position. The headaches resolved gradually over a
three-day period, with follow-up CT demonstrating a significant reduction in the subarachnoid air volume (Fig. 3). After five days, with the
stab wound dry and closed, the CD catheter was removed and the patient began to ambulate. He was discharged from the hospital with no
sequela.Fig. 3Resolving pneumocephalus following treatment described Resolving pneumocephalus following treatment described In both of the
cases we have described here, the CSF leakage responded well to nonsurgical measures. Insertion of a CD catheter reduces the intradural
pressure and consequently decreases the CSF outflow through the traumatic dural laceration, allowing it to close and heal. Placing the
patient in the Trendelenburg position accomplishes two objectives. The first is to reduce the hydrostatic pressure within the dural sac at
the dural laceration site, and the second is to prevent pneumocephalus by having the head lower than the possible air-entry site, thereby
making the air bubbles ascend the raised caudal thecal sac instead of passing into the cranial cavity. Primary closure of the contaminated
skin wound increases the risk of infection, but this consideration is outweighed in our opinion by the importance of preventing air from
being withdrawn into the wound. Pneumocephalus develops in about 78% of patients with traumatic pneumorrhachis (air in the spinal canal) .
In our second case, air bubbles were clearly seen in the initial CT scan done on arrival (Figs. 4, 5). In a trauma setting, the finding of
trapped intrathecal air in the spine should alert the clinician to search for a CSF leak and pneumocephalus. Even if no other measure is
taken, simple tilting of the bed to a Trendelenburg position will stop the leak from becoming a potential neurosurgical emergency.Fig. 4Air
bubbles in spinal canal near skin wound siteFig. 5Air bubbles ascending the spinal canal Air bubbles in spinal canal near skin wound site
Air bubbles ascending the spinal canal Antibiotic therapy should be directed at the prime contaminator of spine wounds—Staphylococcus
aureus. In our hospital, methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is the pathogen in 16% of all staphylococcal infections, so we
prefer vancomycin for at-risk nosocomial infection prophylaxis. Headaches are a common complaint after accidental durotomy during epidural
injections and spinal surgery. Both of our patients complained of severe headaches that resolved when the CSF leak was treated. In summary,
in our experience, penetrating spine stab wounds with CSF leakage can be safely and effectively treated with a combination of continuous CSF
drainage, Trendelenburg positioning, primary closure of the leaking skin wound, and IV antibiotic therapy. The authors declare that they
have no conflict of interest related to the publication of this manuscript.
