Stop codon mutations in the gene encoding the prion protein (PRNP) are very rare and have thus far only been described in two patients with
prion protein cerebral amyloid angiopathy (PrP-CAA). In this report, we describe the clinical, histopathological and pathological prion
protein (PrPSc) characteristics of two Dutch patients carrying novel adjacent stop codon mutations in the C-terminal part of PRNP, resulting
in either case in hereditary prion protein amyloidoses, but with strikingly different clinicopathological phenotypes. The patient with the
shortest disease duration (27 months) carried a Y226X mutation and showed PrP-CAA without any neurofibrillary lesions, whereas the patient
with the longest disease duration (72 months) had a Q227X mutation and showed an unusual Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease phenotype
with numerous cerebral multicentric amyloid plaques and severe neurofibrillary lesions without PrP-CAA. Western blot analysis in the patient
with the Q227X mutation demonstrated the presence of a 7 kDa unglycosylated PrPSc fragment truncated at both the N- and C-terminal ends. Our
observations expand the spectrum of clinicopathological phenotypes associated with PRNP mutations and show that a single tyrosine residue
difference in the PrP C-terminus may significantly affect the site of amyloid deposition and the overall phenotypic expression of the prion
disease. Furthermore, it confirms that the absence of the glycosylphosphatidylinositol anchor in PrP predisposes to amyloid plaque
formation. Transmissible spongiform encephalopathies, or prion diseases, are fatal neurodegenerative disorders that can occur as sporadic,
inherited or acquired disorders. These diseases are pathogenetically characterized by the accumulation of protease-resistant PrPSc, an
abnormal structural conformer of the normal cellular prion protein, PrPC. In humans, prion diseases are classified into three major groups,
showing a wide phenotypic heterogeneity: Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD), Gerstmann-Sträussler-Scheinker disease (GSS) and fatal insomnia
(FI). While in most cases of CJD and in FI PrPSc accumulates in brain parenchyma without significant amyloid deposition, PrP-amyloid
constitutes the dominant type of abnormal PrPSc accumulation in GSS. This striking phenotypic difference has a significant correlate at the
molecular level. Indeed, while in CJD and FI abnormal prion protein deposits include both full-length PrPSc and truncated fragments in the
12–21 kDa range, in GSS the dominant PrPSc forms comprise 7–10 kDa unglycosylated fragments, truncated at both the C-terminal and N-terminal
end, lacking the glycosylphosphatidylinositol (GPI) anchor [11, 24, 28]. To date, GSS has only been described in association with prion
protein gene (PRNP) mutations and is inherited in an autosomal dominant manner. In its classic form, GSS is characterized by a progressive
cerebellar syndrome accompanied by extrapyramidal and pyramidal signs and cognitive decline, which may evolve into severe dementia . There
is considerable heterogeneity, however, in age at onset, disease duration and clinical symptoms, both within and between families with the
same mutation. Thus, in some individuals, marked extrapyramidal signs with Parkinsonism may occur early in the course of the disease,
whereas in others pyramidal signs, pseudobulbar signs or dementia predominate. Neuropathological features associated with GSS vary
substantially, but always include multicentric amyloid plaques, which can be either the only significant lesion or be associated with
neurofibrillary tangles or spongiform changes . About 10-point mutations in PRNP affecting various codons are known to be associated with
GSS. In addition, a GSS-like phenotype has been described in patients with octapeptide repeat insertions of 8 or 9 additional 24 base pair
repeats . Pure prion protein cerebral amyloid angiopathy (PrP-CAA) is another form of hereditary prion protein amyloidosis, albeit with a
disease phenotype different from GSS. In this rare variant, which thus far has only been reported in two patients with nonsense mutations at
codon 145 (Y145X) or 163 (Y163X) of PRNP, PrPSc depositions are found in blood vessels, without co-localization of Aβ [9, 27]. We describe
here two cases of inherited prion disease carrying two novel consecutive stop codon mutations in the PRNP C-terminus, resulting in a PrP-CAA
in one case, and in an unusual GSS phenotype with many neurofibrillary tangles and relative sparing of the cerebellum in the other. In the
Netherlands, all CJD autopsies are performed after informed consent, including explicit permission to use tissues for research. A 55-year-
old woman was referred to the neurologist because of increasing cognitive impairment, forgetfulness and decreased concentration over the
previous 12 months. The last week before admission, the patient had been markedly affected by headaches and both acoustic and visual
hallucinations. On admission, she presented with aphasia, in particular with difficulty in finding words. She was disoriented and showed
impaired memory and visuospatial functioning. There were no pyramidal or extrapyramidal signs, myoclonic jerks or cerebellar symptoms. Brain
magnetic resonance imaging showed hyperintensity of the white matter, but no atrophy or abnormalities in the basal ganglia. The 14-3-3 test
in cerebrospinal fluid was positive. An electroencephalogram (EEG) showed generalized slowing with a typical pattern of periodic synchronous
wave complexes. During admission, she developed hyperactive tendon reflexes and apraxia. After 2 months, she was transferred to a nursing
home, where she remained for 13 consecutive months. During this period, she became increasingly agitated and subsequently developed signs of
Parkinsonism as a result of neuroleptic treatment. She became akinetic and mute with myoclonic jerks towards the end of the disease course.
Death occurred at the age of 57 years, 27 months after onset of symptoms. Of note was the patient’s mother had been diagnosed with “probable
CJD” on the basis of comparable symptoms and signs. Death occurred at the age of 75, 18 months after onset of symptoms. Postmortem
examination was not performed. A 42-year-old woman was referred to the neurologist for the evaluation of a slowly progressive hypokinetic
rigid syndrome with cognitive decline. For the last two-and-a-half years, she had experienced difficulties with finding words and memory
disturbance, and others had also noticed personality changes. Her medical history was otherwise unremarkable. She suffered from a cramping,
stiff feeling in her legs and arms, right more than left. On neurological examination, there was a masked face, a clear dysarthria and
variably raised muscle tone in arms and legs with slight cogwheeling. All reflexes were normal and eye movements were intact. There were
neither hallucinations, nor pyramidal or cerebellar signs. A CT scan of the brain showed moderate atrophy of the left frontal lobe and less
severe atrophy of the left temporal lobe. EEG and 14-3-3 test were not performed. SPECT scan of the brain showed hypoperfusion in the left
frontal and temporal cortex extending into the parietal cortex. She was clinically diagnosed with frontotemporal dementia. Over the
following 3 years her condition gradually deteriorated. She suffered from a tremor in both her right hand and right foot, developed
epileptic seizures and became completely dependent on care. During the last 2 months before death, she became mute and the frequency of
epileptic seizures and spasms increased. She died at the age of 45 years, 72 months after clinical onset. In her family, one of her father’s
sisters had died at the age of 42 years with comparable symptoms. The brains from both patients were removed 24 h after death. Samples of
tissue from several brain regions of patient 2 were frozen at −80°C, whereas the whole brain from patient 1 was fixed in formalin. A
complete neuropathological examination was performed, including gross brain examination and microscopic examination of paraffin-embedded
sections from the grey and white matter of all lobes of the brain, central nuclei (caudate, putamen, pallidum and thalamus), cerebellum and
brainstem. For histological examination, formalin-fixed sections were decontaminated for 1 h in 98% formic acid and embedded in paraffin.
Paraffin-embedded sections were cut at 5 μm and stained routinely with haematoxylin–eosin and combined Luxol-periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)
stains. In addition, sections were stained with methenamine silver for the presence of senile plaques. The monoclonal antibody 3F4 (1:400,
overnight at 4°C, Signet Laboratories, Dedham, MA, USA) was used for PrP immunohistochemistry. Pretreatment protocols for PrP staining
involved antigen retrieval by autoclaving in citric acid buffer pH 6.0 at 121°C for 10 min followed by incubation with Proteinase K
(10 μg/mL, for 5 min at room temperature). Immunolabelling was visualized using PowerVision labelled with horseradish peroxidase
(Immunologic, Duiven, The Netherlands) and diaminobenzidine as chromogen (DAB, Dako, Carpentaria, CA, USA). Other immunohistochemical stains
included antibodies against Aβ (Aβ1–17, 1:400, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark and Aβ17–24 4G8, 1:5,000, Senetek, Napa, CA, USA), phosphorylated tau
(AT8 1:250, Innogenetics, Gent, Belgium), 3R tau (RD3, 1:6,400, Upstate, Temecula, CA, USA) and 4R tau (RD4, 1:200, Upstate, Temecula, CA,
USA). Genomic DNA was extracted from peripheral blood (patient 1) or from frozen brain tissue (patient 2). Full sequence analysis of the
open reading frame (ORF) of PRNP was carried out. The PRNP ORF was initially amplified as previously described . The codon 129 genotype was
then examined by digestion with the restriction endonuclease Xce I (Fermentas). Finally, the fragment encoding the PRNP ORF was purified by
denaturing high pressure liquid chromatography peak captured and run on a ABI 310 Sequencer as previously described . PrPSc was extracted
from the temporal, occipital and cerebellar cortices of patient 2 and characterized as previously described [24, 25]. In particular, PrPSc
typing was performed both on crude homogenates , and after purification of the protein in sarkosyl . The following mouse monoclonal
antibodies recognizing different human PrP epitopes were used as described : 3F4 (residues 108–111), 12B2 (residues 89–93), Sha31 (residues
145–152), and SAF60 (residues 157–161). For PrP deglycosylation, denatured proteins were incubated with peptide N-glycosidase F (PNGase F)
following the instruction from the manufacturer (New England Biolabs Inc., Beverly, MA, USA). DNA analysis (Fig. 1) revealed two novel
mutations (678 C>A in patient 1 and 679 C>T in patient 2), resulting in premature stop codons (Y226X and Q227X). Both patients were
heterozygous for methionine and valine at codon 129 and carried the mutation on the valine allele.Fig. 1Sequence analysis of PRNP of
patients 1 and 2. Short segments of PRNP of patient 1 with the Y226X mutation (upper part of figure) and of patient 2 with the Q227X
mutation (lower part of figure) are shown. The insertion of either adenine (Y226X) or thymine (Q227X) causes a premature stop codon Sequence
analysis of PRNP of patients 1 and 2. Short segments of PRNP of patient 1 with the Y226X mutation (upper part of figure) and of patient 2
with the Q227X mutation (lower part of figure) are shown. The insertion of either adenine (Y226X) or thymine (Q227X) causes a premature stop
codon Gross examination of the brain (weight 1,300 g) was unremarkable. The results of microscopic examination are summarized in Table 1.
The main finding was a diffuse and severe amyloid angiopathy involving small to medium-sized arteries and arterioles of the cerebral and
cerebellar cortex and leptomeninges (Fig. 2a, c). Amyloid deposition also involved the capillaries, as in CAA type 1 , occasionally
extending into the adjacent parenchyma, corresponding to dyshoric angiopathy. Anti-PrP antibodies intensely stained the CAA lesions
(Fig. 2b, d, g). In addition, there was a faint, scattered, synaptic staining in the grey matter of the cerebral cortex and parenchymal
plaques were observed in all brain regions examined. Immunohistochemical stainings with both monoclonal anti-Aβ antibodies (Fig. 2h), Dako
1-17 and 4G8, were negative. Focal, dot-like tau-accumulations were noted around blood vessels with amyloid depositions throughout the
cerebral cortex (Fig. 2f) and the hippocampus. Neurofibrillary tangles were absent.Fig. 2Histopathologic features of PRNP-Y226X. Sections
are stained with haematoxylin–eosin (a, c), Luxol-periodic acid-Schiff reaction (e), 3F4 anti-PrP antibody (b, d, g), anti-phosphorylated
tau (AT8) (f) and anti-Aβ (h). Original magnification ×100 (d), ×200 (a, b, c, h) and ×400 (e, f, g). Amyloid angiopathy involving small to
medium-sized arteries, arterioles (arrow) and capillaries of the cerebral (a, b, g) and cerebellar cortex and leptomeninges (c, d).
Spongiform changes in the parietal cortex with amyloid depositions surrounding blood vessels (e). Focal tau accumulations around blood
vessels with amyloid depositions in the temporal cortex (f). Absence of staining with anti-Aβ antibodies (h)Table 1Regional distribution of
spongiosis, neuronal loss/gliosis, PrP deposits and tau accumulationFCPCTCOCHippSTRThBRSTCEY226XSpongiosis−+/−−−−−−−−Gliosis/neuronal
loss++++++++−Prion protein deposits++++++++++++++++++++Tau accumulationFocal tau accumulation around blood vessels with amyloid
depositsQ227XSpongiosis−−−−−−−−−Gliosis/neuronal loss+++++++++++++Prion protein deposits+++++++++++++++++++Tau
accumulation++++++++++++++++++++−Each lesion was scored as not detectable (−), mild (+), moderate (++) and severe (+++). The number of PrP
deposits were counted per HPF and scored as not detectable (−), 1–10 deposits (+), 11–20 deposits (++) and >20 deposits (+++)FC frontal
cortex, PC parietal cortex, TC temporal cortex, OC occipital cortex, Hipp hippocampal formation, STR striatum, Th thalamus, BRST brainstem,
CE cerebellum Histopathologic features of PRNP-Y226X. Sections are stained with haematoxylin–eosin (a, c), Luxol-periodic acid-Schiff
reaction (e), 3F4 anti-PrP antibody (b, d, g), anti-phosphorylated tau (AT8) (f) and anti-Aβ (h). Original magnification ×100 (d), ×200 (a,
b, c, h) and ×400 (e, f, g). Amyloid angiopathy involving small to medium-sized arteries, arterioles (arrow) and capillaries of the cerebral
(a, b, g) and cerebellar cortex and leptomeninges (c, d). Spongiform changes in the parietal cortex with amyloid depositions surrounding
blood vessels (e). Focal tau accumulations around blood vessels with amyloid depositions in the temporal cortex (f). Absence of staining
with anti-Aβ antibodies (h) Regional distribution of spongiosis, neuronal loss/gliosis, PrP deposits and tau accumulation Each lesion was
scored as not detectable (−), mild (+), moderate (++) and severe (+++). The number of PrP deposits were counted per HPF and scored as not
detectable (−), 1–10 deposits (+), 11–20 deposits (++) and >20 deposits (+++) FC frontal cortex, PC parietal cortex, TC temporal cortex, OC
occipital cortex, Hipp hippocampal formation, STR striatum, Th thalamus, BRST brainstem, CE cerebellum Gross examination of the brain
(weight 990 g) showed atrophy of the frontal lobe and caudate nucleus, with marked ventricular dilation. The substantia nigra was slightly
pale. Microscopic examination revealed scattered status spongiosus in the second layer of the cerebral cortex. Numerous multicentric and
unicentric plaques were present in all layers of the cerebral cortex, with frontotemporal accentuation (Fig. 3a). Plaques were also present
in the subcortical nuclei, hippocampus, entorhinal cortex and focally in the subcortical white matter (Table 1). The cerebellum was
relatively spared and only showed sparse amyloid depositions (Fig. 3c). Several plaques were located alongside capillaries, but no amyloid
angiopathy was seen. The substantia nigra showed marked loss of pigmented neurons. Immunohistochemical staining with anti-tau, anti-RD3 and
RD4 antibodies revealed numerous tangles, neuropil threads and also dystrophic neuritis around the plaques (Fig. 3e). The neurofibrillary
tangles and neuropil threads were seen throughout the cerebral cortex (Fig. 3f), including the occipital lobe and striate area, which in
Alzheimer’s disease would correspond to Braak stage VI . The plaques themselves showed positive staining with mAbs against PrP (Fig. 3b, d),
whereas stainings with anti-Aβ antibodies and methenamine silver were negative (data not shown).Fig. 3Histopathologic features of
PRNP-Q227X. Sections are stained with haematoxylin–eosin (a), Luxol-periodic acid-Schiff reaction (c), 3F4 anti-PrP antibody (b, d) and
anti-tau antibody RD4 (e, f). Original magnification ×200 (a, b, c, d) and ×400 (e, f). Presence of numerous multicentric and unicentric
plaques in the frontal cortex (arrows) (a, b). Relative sparing of the cerebellum with sparse amyloid depositions (arrow) (c, d). Dystrophic
neurites surrounding PrPSc plaques and neuropil threads (e) and neurofibrillary tangles (f) Histopathologic features of PRNP-Q227X. Sections
are stained with haematoxylin–eosin (a), Luxol-periodic acid-Schiff reaction (c), 3F4 anti-PrP antibody (b, d) and anti-tau antibody RD4 (e,
f). Original magnification ×200 (a, b, c, d) and ×400 (e, f). Presence of numerous multicentric and unicentric plaques in the frontal cortex
(arrows) (a, b). Relative sparing of the cerebellum with sparse amyloid depositions (arrow) (c, d). Dystrophic neurites surrounding PrPSc
plaques and neuropil threads (e) and neurofibrillary tangles (f) Western blot analysis of PK-treated brain homogenates from patient 2
demonstrated the presence of a PrPSc fragment with a molecular weight of approximately 7 kDa. The analyses of partially purified (P3) PrP
preparations in sarkosyl showed that the fragment was already visible in the PK-untreated preparations (Fig. 4). Furthermore, there were
neither PrPSc fragments in the 19–21 kDa range (i.e. type 1 or type 2) nor protease-sensitive abnormally insoluble full-length PrPSc (i.e.
full-length PrP, which remains visible in the P3 fraction but disappears completely after PK digestion), as previously described in GSS
P102L (Fig. 4). The 7 kDa fragment was detected by all antibodies directed to epitopes located between PrP residues 89 and 112, while weak
staining was observed with the antibody Sha31 (residues 145–152) and absent with the antibody SAF60 (residues 157 and 161) (data not shown).
Furthermore, the electrophoretic mobility of the fragment did not change after N-linked deglycosylation (Fig. 4). Thus, epitope mapping
combined with relative molecular mass analyses indicated that the fragment is unglycosylated and truncated at both the N- and C-terminal
ends (around residues 145–150), just as the previously described fragment characterized in GSS cases carrying different PRNP mutations
.Fig. 4PrPSc typing and characterization of PRNP-Q227X. Immunoblot analysis of partially purified, detergent insoluble, abnormal PrP
obtained from the frontal cortex of a sCJDVV2 case (lanes 1 and 3) and patient 2 (lanes 2, 4, 5). Samples are without (lanes 1, 2) or with a
Proteinase K (PK) digestion step (lanes 3–5). The sample run in lane 5 was also deglycosylated with PNGaseF. Immunoblot was probed with 3F4.
The smears in lanes 2, 4 and 5 likely represent incompletely solubilized (i.e. not monomeric) PrP-amyloid. Approximate molecular masses are
in kilodaltons PrPSc typing and characterization of PRNP-Q227X. Immunoblot analysis of partially purified, detergent insoluble, abnormal PrP
obtained from the frontal cortex of a sCJDVV2 case (lanes 1 and 3) and patient 2 (lanes 2, 4, 5). Samples are without (lanes 1, 2) or with a
Proteinase K (PK) digestion step (lanes 3–5). The sample run in lane 5 was also deglycosylated with PNGaseF. Immunoblot was probed with 3F4.
The smears in lanes 2, 4 and 5 likely represent incompletely solubilized (i.e. not monomeric) PrP-amyloid. Approximate molecular masses are
in kilodaltons We describe two female Dutch patients with novel and almost identical stop codon mutations in the C-terminal part of PRNP,
resulting in either case in hereditary prion protein amyloidoses, but with strikingly different clinicopathological phenotypes. The Y226X
mutation was associated with pure PrP-CAA, also involving small arterioles and capillaries, without any neurofibrillary tangles, whereas the
Q227X mutation resulted in a GSS disease phenotype with numerous multicentric amyloid plaques and neurofibrillary lesions in the cerebral
grey matter and, remarkably, absence of PrP-CAA. Of note, the latter case showed relative sparing of the cerebellum, a rather unique feature
in GSS, which has been only described before in patients carrying the A117V-129V haplotype . This feature correlated with an atypical
clinical phenotype for GSS characterized by progressive dementia with aphasia and personality changes without any evidence of ataxia or
pyramidal signs. A clinical phenotype resembling frontotemporal dementia has been only reported before in GSS patients carrying the
Q217R-129V genotype , and in familial CJD subjects carrying the T183A-129M haplotype . Neurofibrillary degeneration is not uncommon in GSS
with long disease duration, having been described in patients harbouring the A117V-129V, F198S-129V, D202N-129V, P105L-129V and Q217R-129V
haplotypes [8, 10, 20, 26, 34]. Furthermore, it has been found in association with the Y145X, Y163X and Q227X mutations (Table 2), as well
as in variant CJD, a bovine-derived acquired form of prion disease also characterized by extensive amyloid deposition [12, 17].
Interestingly, our patient with the Y226X mutation only showed focal tau accumulations in the absence of tangles, possibly because of the
relatively short disease duration in this case. The mechanism of neurofibrillary degeneration in prion diseases still remains a largely
unexplained phenomenon, although the pathological features in our patient with the Q227X mutation support previous findings indicating that
tau accumulation and tangle formation almost invariably develop in the presence of parenchymal PrP amyloid formation, paralleling what
occurs in Alzheimer’s disease . These findings suggest a relationship between amyloid fibrils and the formation of abnormal tau deposits,
irrespective of the chemical type of amyloid, possibly contradicting the hypothesis that monomeric molecules, such as Aβ, are the direct
cause of tau accumulations .Table 2Clinical features and neuropathological characteristics of reported patients with nonsense mutations in
PRNPAge at onset (years)Disease duration (months)MutationClinical featuresPathological featuresReference38252Y145X, 129MSlowly progressive
dementiaPrP amyloid deposits, PrP-CAA, neurofibrillary tangles, no spongiosis32–48>72Q160X, 129MSlowly progressive dementiaNo
postmortemn.a.n.a.Y163X, 129 n.dn.a.PrP amyloid deposits, PrP-CAA, neurofibrillary tangles5527Y226X, 129VDementia, visual and acoustic
hallucinationsPrP amyloid deposits, PrP-CAA, focal tau accumulations, mild focal spongiosisPresent report3972Q227X, 129VDementia,
extrapyramidal signsPrP amyloid deposits, neurofibrillary tangles, no spongiosisPresent reportn.a. not available, n.d. not determined
Clinical features and neuropathological characteristics of reported patients with nonsense mutations in PRNP n.a. not available, n.d. not
determined The term CAA is used to describe the pathological process during which an amyloid protein is progressively deposited in blood
vessel walls with subsequent degenerative vascular changes . Deposition of Aβ in blood vessels, by far the most common cause of CAA in
humans, has been also documented in CJD and GSS [13, 16, 18, 29]. In contrast, vascular deposits of PrP-amyloid are very rare and usually
co-localize with Aβ [23, 32]. PrP-CAA, without co-localization of Aβ, has thus far only been described in a single Japanese patient carrying
a Y145X stop codon PRNP mutation and more recently in a patient carrying a Y163X mutation (Table 2). Although this observation strongly
suggests a link between the formation of truncated PrPSc on one hand and PrP-CAA on the other, its interpretation is difficult being limited
to single cases only. A third patient with a similar stop-codon (Q160X) also presented with early onset dementia but, unfortunately,
information on the pathological phenotype in this case is still lacking . The Y226X and Q227X mutations differ from the previously reported
truncating mutations since they result in two C-terminally truncated proteins lacking almost only the GPI anchor. Strikingly, the two
proteins only differ in a single tyrosine residue at the C-terminus. Data obtained from cell culture models indicate that glycosylated
anchorless full-length PrPC has a longer half-life than normal PrPC, is predominantly secreted and does not localize to the plasma membrane,
although it may remain associated to some intracellular membranes without a transmembrane topology . Chesebro and colleagues have recently
generated transgenic mice expressing full-length prion protein lacking the GPI anchor. Interestingly, when infected with scrapie these mice
show extensive PrPSc depositions in the form of amyloid plaques, rather than the usual non-amyloid form of PrPSc, but lack clinical signs .
In contrast, scrapie-infected transgenic mice heterozygous for both wild-type and anchorless PrP, developed clinical signs and died faster
than the wild-type mice, reflecting a situation similar to that in our patients. Our observations confirm that the absence of a GPI-anchor
in PrPC predisposes to amyloid plaque formation also in humans and therefore validate this animal model. Interestingly, the “GPI-anchorless”
transgenic mice also showed perivascular depositions of PrP, similar to the Y145X, Y163X and Y226X mutations in familial prion disease. Why,
in contrast, the Q227X PrP does not result in a prion CAA in the patient described here remains obscure, although it could be hypothesized
that the two C-terminal tyrosines somehow prevent or influence the passage of the protein through the vessel wall. Further studies are
required to elucidate these pathogenetic mechanisms in patients with pure PrP-CAA and stop codon mutations in PRNP. The tissue was obtained
with help from The Netherlands Brain Bank (NBB), the Netherlands. We are indebted to Dr. W. Kamphorst of the NBB for his expertise and
excellent support. The monoclonal antibodies Sha31 and SAF60 were a generous gift from Dr. Jacques Grassi (Service de Pharmacologie et
d′Immunologie, CEA/Saclay, France). This work was supported in part by the Gino Galletti Foundation, the Rijksinstituut voor Volksgezondheid
en Milieu and the Koninklijke Nederlandse Akademie van Wetenschappen. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited. C. Jansen and P. Parchi contributed equally to this article.
