To examine after gastric bypass the effect of peroral versus gastroduodenal feeding on glucose metabolism. A type 2 diabetic patient was
examined on 2 consecutive days 5 weeks after gastric bypass. A standard liquid meal was given on the first day into the bypassed gastric
remnant and on the second day perorally. Plasma glucose, insulin, C-peptide, glucagon, incretin hormones, peptide YY, and free fatty acids
were measured. Peroral feeding reduced 2-h postprandial plasma glucose (7.8 vs. 11.1 mmol/l) and incremental area under the glucose curve
(iAUC) (0.33 vs. 0.49 mmol · l−1 · min−1) compared with gastroduodenal feeding. β-Cell function (iAUCCpeptide/Glu) was more than twofold
improved during peroral feeding, and the glucagon-like peptide (GLP)-1 response increased nearly fivefold. Improvement in postprandial
glucose metabolism after gastric bypass is an immediate and direct consequence of the gastrointestinal rearrangement, associated with
exaggerated GLP-1 release and independent of changes in insulin sensitivity, weight loss, and caloric restriction. Resolution of type 2
diabetes after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) has been observed in several studies and involves mechanisms associated with the surgical
rearrangement of the gastrointestinal tract in addition to the effect of weight loss (1). The mechanisms have not been established, but
changed gut hormone levels after surgery may play a role (2). Recently, we had the unique opportunity to examine the effects of feeding
either perorally (and thereby bypassing the stomach, duodenum, and proximal jejunum) or through a gastric tube inserted into the bypassed
gastric remnant on the glucose metabolism in a single patient. A 51-year-old male patient with type 2 diabetes (BMI 50.2 kg/m2, A1C 8.0%)
treated with metformin, sulfonylurea, and insulin underwent a laparoscopic RYGB for morbid obesity. On the second postoperative day, a
leakage from the gastro-jejunostomy was suspected because of fever and abdominal pain. Acute reoperation showed no firm signs of leakage,
but nevertheless a percutaneous gastric tube was inserted into the bypassed gastric remnant. The tube served as the only route of nutrition
during the following 3 weeks, after which the patient again was allowed peroral feeding through the gastric pouch according to a standard
nutrition protocol (1,200 kcal/day). Treatment with insulin and metformin was temporarily required after the reoperation but could be
discontinued 3 weeks postoperatively. We examined the patient 5 weeks postoperatively, at which time the patient was fed perorally but still
had the gastric tube. The patient had lost 14 kg (BMI 45.2 kg/m2). Informed consent was obtained prior to examination. On 2 consecutive days
at 8.30 a.m. after an overnight fast (8 h), a standard 200-ml liquid meal (Nutridrink; Nutricia) containing 300 kcal, with 16% protein, 49%
carbohydrate, and 36% fat, was given over a period of 10 min, on the first day through the gastric tube and on the second day perorally.
Blood samples were drawn from an antecubital vein at 15- to 30-min intervals (Fig. 1). Plasma concentrations of glucose (A), insulin (B),
C-peptide (C), glucagon (D), GLP-1 (E), intact GIP (F), PYY (G), and FFAs (H) after peroral or gastroduodenal feeding in a RYGB-operated
patient. Figure includes iAUC estimations. Triangles and dotted lines, peroral feeding; circles and solid lines, gastroduodenal feeding.
Plasma glucose was measured by a glucose oxidase method (ABL800Flex; Radiometer, Br⊘nsh⊘j, Denmark), peptide YY3–36 (PYY) with a
radioimmunoassay kit (Linco Research), and free fatty acids (FFAs) by an enzymatic colorimetric method (Wako, Düsseldorf, Germany). Plasma
insulin, C-peptide, glucagon, and incretin hormone were quantified as earlier described (3). Incremental area under the curve (iAUC) was
calculated using the trapezoidal model. β-Cell function was evaluated by iAUCinsulin, iAUCCpeptide, and insulinogenic index (IGI) and
calculated as (insulin30 − insulinfasting)/(Glu30 − Glufasting) and iAUCCpeptide/Glu ratio. Homeostasis model assessment of insulin
resistance (HOMA-IR) was calculated as (insulinfasting × Glufasting)/22.5. Plasma concentrations and iAUC for glucose, insulin, C-peptide,
glucagon, total glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1), intact glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), PYY, and FFAs after peroral and
gastroduodenal feeding are shown in Fig. 1. Plasma glucose concentration peaked earlier and returned more rapidly to fasting values after
peroral than gastroduodenal feeding, as illustrated by a markedly reduced 2-h plasma glucose concentration (7.8 vs. 11.1 mmol/l). iAUCGlu
was noticeably lower after peroral feeding. The peak values of plasma insulin and C-peptide were higher after peroral than gastroduodenal
feeding (fourfold and twofold, respectively) and iAUCinsulin and iAUCCpeptide were also clearly elevated. IGI was improved after peroral
feeding (115 vs. 72 pmol/mmol), and the iAUCCpeptide/Glu ratio was more than twofold increased (0.90 vs. 0.40 nmol/mmol). HOMA-IR remained
unchanged on the 2 examination days (3.3 vs. 3.5). GLP-1 plasma concentration peaked simultaneously after peroral and gastroduodenal
feeding, but the peak value was more than threefold increased (87 vs. 28 pmol/l), and iAUCGLP-1 was nearly fivefold increased after peroral
feeding. Insulin and GLP-1 correlated strongly after peroral (r = 0.92, P < 0.001) but not gastroduodenal (r = 0.55, P = 0.08) feeding.
Plasma concentrations of glucagon and intact GIP were similar on both days. Responses of PYY and FFAs are depicted in the figure. Rapid
improvement in glucose tolerance after RYGB surgery is a clinical reality (2). Here, we report important differences in β-cell function and
glucose metabolism after peroral compared with gastroduodenal feeding in a patient with RYGB and a gastrostomy, where differences in insulin
sensitivity, weight loss, and caloric restriction can be ruled out as explanations for the improved glucose tolerance. Our results show
marked improvement in glucose tolerance with near normalization of 2-h postprandial plasma glucose value and a 33% reduction in iAUCGlu
after peroral feeding compared with gastroduodenal feeding. In contrast, during gastroduodenal feeding glucose tolerance was diabetic with a
2-h postprandial plasma glucose value ∼11 mmol/l. The improvement was accompanied by a twofold increase in β-cell secretory response
(AUCCpeptide/Glu), which was associated with a fivefold increase in iAUCGLP-1. Insulin and GLP-1 concentrations during peroral feeding were
strongly correlated, which is suggestive of a causal relationship. Interestingly, the insulin and C-peptide response curves found after
gastroduodenal feeding resemble the responses found in type 2 diabetic patients, whereas the response curves after peroral feeding are
similar to those found in healthy control subjects (4). The emptying time is likely to be slower after feeding into the bypassed gastric
remnant, which could explain the slower peak in plasma glucose observed after gastroduodenal feeding but would also, per se, be expected to
result in decreased postprandial glucose excursions. The observed improvements in glucose tolerance and GLP-1 secretion are in concordance
with earlier findings from patients examined before and after RYGB surgery (5–13). Regarding GIP, some studies have demonstrated increased
(7,10) and others decreased (9,13) responses after RYGB. In our patient, GIP responses were similar on the 2 days, suggesting that changes
in GIP were not responsible for the differences in insulin secretion and glucose tolerance. Also glucagon responses were similar. In
conclusion, our results suggest that RYGB has a direct beneficial effect on postprandial glucose metabolism, most likely due to an increased
insulin secretion caused by the massive increase in GLP-1 that is probably due to the rapid exposure of l-cells in the distal small
intestine to nutrients (14). It has been suggested that duodenal exclusion inherent in the RYGB somehow might be responsible for the
improvement in glucose tolerance (15). In this respect, it is of interest that the secretion of the upper jejunal hormone, GIP, was similar
during peroral or gastroduodenal feeding. The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the payment of page charges.
This article must therefore be hereby marked “advertisement” in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate this fact. No
potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.
