Incidental or intentional durotomy causing cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, leading to the formation of a pseudomeningocele is a known
complication in spinal surgery. Herniation of nerve roots into such a pseudomeningocele is very rare, but can occur up to years after
initial durotomy and has been described to cause permanent neurologic deficit. However, cauda equina fiber herniation and entrapment into a
pseudomeningocele has not been reported before. Here, we present a case of symptomatic transdural cauda equina herniation and incarceration
into a pseudomeningocele, 3 months after extirpation of a lumbar Schwannoma. A 59-year-old man, who previously underwent intradural
Schwannoma extirpation presented 3 months after surgery with back pain, sciatica and loss of bladder filling sensation caused by cauda
equina fiber entrapment into a defect in the wall of a pseudomeningocele, diagnosed with magnetic resonance imaging. On re-operation, the
pseudomeningocele was resected and the herniated and entrapped cauda fibers were released and replaced intradurally. The dura defect was
closed and the patient recovered completely. In conclusion, CSF leakage can cause neurological deficit up to years after durotomy by
transdural nerve root herniation and subsequent entrapment. Clinicians should be aware of the possibility of this potentially devastating
complication. The present case also underlines the importance of meticulous dura closure in spinal surgery. A 59-year-old man presented with
a 3-month history of bilateral dorsal leg pain, which aggravated with coughing, sneezing and straining. Because of these complaints, he
needed a crutch for walking. Besides from diffuse loss of pin prick sensation in both lower legs, there were no deficits on neurological
examination. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an intradural tumor at L3–L4 level, occupying the spinal canal (Fig. 1) and
compressing the cauda equina fibers. Through a L3–L4 laminectomy and a midline durotomy, the tumor was removed completely. Dura was closed
using a non-resorbable running suture and was sealed with fibrin glue. After 5 days following surgery, the patient was discharged from the
neurosurgical department, without neurological deficit and without pain. Histological examination revealed a Schwannoma.Fig. 1Preoperative
sagittal T2-weighted MRI scan of the lumbar spine showing a hyper-intense intradural tumor (indicated by black arrowheads) at L3–L4 level
occupying the complete spinal canal, with the characteristics of a Schwannoma Preoperative sagittal T2-weighted MRI scan of the lumbar spine
showing a hyper-intense intradural tumor (indicated by black arrowheads) at L3–L4 level occupying the complete spinal canal, with the
characteristics of a Schwannoma Three months after discharge, the patient was readmitted because of progressive low back and excruciating
leg pain, radiating from the right buttock to the foot. Also the patient experienced progressive pain in the tailbone area. Furthermore,
there was a loss of bladder filling sensation. On examination, a subcutaneous fluctuating swelling was present at the site of previous
lumbar surgery. Compression of this swelling provoked right sided leg pain and pain in the tailbone area. As a consequence, the patient was
unable to sleep on his back. MRI revealed a large pseudomeningocele at L4 level. Furthermore, one or more cauda equina fibers appeared to
herniate through a small dura defect (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Postoperative T2-weighted MRI of the lumbar spine in the sagittal plane (a) and the
transversal plane (b) showing a large pseudomeningocele (white arrowheads) at L3–L4 level, containing herniated cauda equina fibers (black
arrowhead). White arrows indicate dura and white asterisk indicates spinal canal Postoperative T2-weighted MRI of the lumbar spine in the
sagittal plane (a) and the transversal plane (b) showing a large pseudomeningocele (white arrowheads) at L3–L4 level, containing herniated
cauda equina fibers (black arrowhead). White arrows indicate dura and white asterisk indicates spinal canal On re-operation, a
pseudomeningocele-containing multiple cauda equina fibers, herniating through a small defect in the thecal sac was identified (Fig. 3).
After enlargement of the dura defect, cauda equina fibers were released and replaced intradurally. The dura was primarily closed and the
pseudomeningocele was resected. After 5 days of bed rest, the patient was discharged. At present, 6 years after re-operation, the
neurological condition of the patient is excellent.Fig. 3Intra-operative photograph showing opened pseudomeningocele with transdural
herniation of a cluster of edematous cauda equina fibers. The most eccentric fiber shows venous congestion and thrombosis due to
incarceration Intra-operative photograph showing opened pseudomeningocele with transdural herniation of a cluster of edematous cauda equina
fibers. The most eccentric fiber shows venous congestion and thrombosis due to incarceration Complications of extirpation of intradural
extramedullary tumors are usually related to problems with wound healing and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leakage, although spinal epidural
hematomas, intracranial hemorrhage due to acute reduction of CSF pressure, and spinal cord injury have been described [1, 12, 13, 15].
Postoperative or posttraumatic (lumbar puncture) CSF leakage can result in pseudomeningocele formation. A pseudomeningocele is defined as an
extradural CSF collection that results from a tear of the dura and subsequent CSF leakage . The majority of pseudomeningoceles result from
incidental durotomy during spinal surgery, which in some cases remains unnoticed to the surgeon at the time of operation. Reported
incidences vary from 0.3 to 13% in frequently performed procedures like laminectomy and lumbar disc surgery . Incidence of pseudomeningocele
formation after intended durotomy for extirpation of intradural tumors is unknown. Chiou et al. reported four cases of CSF leakage in 256
patients (2%) operated for intradural tumors. More recently, Safavi-Abbasi et al. reported eight cases of CSF leakage (6%) and six (5%)
pseudomeningocele formations in 128 patients operated for spinal Schwannoma. However, true incidences may be higher, because many cases may
remain asymptomatic. Management of iatrogenic pseudomeningoceles and CSF fistulas usually begins with bed rest, followed by external lumbar
drainage for several days . Drainage for 3–5 days has a success rate over 90% in the treatment of CSF leakage, but harbors a risk of
infection . Ultimately, re-operation for primary closure of the defect may be necessary . A rare, but potentially devastating complication
of iatrogenic CSF leakage is entrapment and incarceration of nerve roots at the site of the dura defect [3, 5, 7–9, 13]. This can cause
irreversible nerve damage through strangulation and may lead to permanent neurological deficit . So far, only nine cases of nerve root
entrapment into an iatrogenic pseudomeningocele have been described. In only one of these cases, MRI was available to preoperatively
establish the diagnosis . All cases were re-operated, which resulted in complete recovery in six cases. In three patients, transdural nerve
root herniation resulted in permanent neurological deficit. Typically, on re-operation herniated nerve roots were replaced intradurally and
the dura was closed, either primarily or with a dura graft (Table 1 for details).Table 1Data of nine cases of nerve root herniation into
iatrogenic pseudomeningoceleNumberAuthorAge/sexInitial operationIntervalSymptomsSurgical findingsOperative result1Hadani 55/MLam L4,
L514 dL5 painDorsal dura defect, nerve root herniation and strangulationRecovered2Hadani 41/MDisc L5–S15 yL5 painDorsal dura defect, nerve
root herniationRecovered3Hadani 41/MLam L3–L53 yL4–S1 SM and painDorsal dura defect, nerve root herniation and strangulationL5 M4Kothbauer
60/FDisc L4–L51 dL5 SM and painVentral dura defect, cauda equina herniationRecovered5Nishi 63/MDisc L3–L4, Lam L4, L59 dS1 painUnspecified
dura defect, nerve root herniationRecovered6O’Connor 16/FDisc L4–L58 yL5 S and painDorsal dura defect, nerve root herniationRecovered7Pavlou
59/FDisc L4–L57 yBilat L5 M and painDorsal dura defect, nerve root herniationRecovered8Töppich 62/FDisc L4–L55 dS1 painVentral dura defect,
nerve root herniationS1 SM9Töppich 78/MDisc L4–L54 dL5 S and painVentral dura defect, nerve root herniationL5 MM male, Lam laminectomy, L
lumbar, d day, Disc discectomy, S sacral, y year, SM sensory and motor deficit, F female, Bilat bilateral, M motor deficit, S sensory
deficit Data of nine cases of nerve root herniation into iatrogenic pseudomeningocele M male, Lam laminectomy, L lumbar, d day, Disc
discectomy, S sacral, y year, SM sensory and motor deficit, F female, Bilat bilateral, M motor deficit, S sensory deficit Transdural
herniation and entrapment of cauda equina fibers into a pseudomeningocele has not been reported before in the literature. In our present
case, incarceration of the cauda equina fibers developed 3 months after operation. Eight weeks postoperative, this patient noticed a
subcutaneous swelling. Four weeks later, during an episode of coughing and sneezing, sudden radicular pain occurred in the right leg and
progressive pain in his tailbone. The pain became worse, and also problems with micturition occurred. It is most likely that the dura defect
initially was plugged with cauda equine fibers. A sudden increase of intrathecal pressure during coughing and sneezing caused herniation of
the cauda fibers and entrapment into the relatively small dura defect. Entrapment resulted in venous congestion of (part of) the nerve roots
and caused incarceration (Fig. 3). This case underlines the importance of meticulous dura closure, especially in the light of potentially
permanent neurological deficit that can be caused by strangulation of neural tissue in the dura defect. As the literature shows, this
serious complication can occur many years after the initial surgery. Fortunately, our patient made an excellent recovery after reduction of
cauda equina herniation and repair of the dura defect. In case of (acute) new nerve root or cauda equina signs and/or symptoms after spinal
(intradural) exploration, the clinician should be aware of the possible existence of transdural nerve fiber entrapment. MR imaging is the
technique of first choice to detect this rare, treatable, but potentially devastating complication of incomplete spinal dura closure. None
of the authors has any potential conflict of interest. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and source are credited.
