To investigate the contribution of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs) to recurrent corneal melting in keratoconjunctivitis sicca associated
with primary Sjörgen’s syndrome (pSS). One native melted cornea and ten melted corneal grafts from two patients with severe pSS were used.
The presence of MMPs (1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, and 13) was detected using indirect enzyme immunohistochemistry. The active forms of MMP 2 and 9 and
MMP 3 and 7 were examined by gelatin and casein zymography, respectively. The concentrations of active MMP 1 were measured using an activity
assay. Eleven unaffected corneas served as controls. The average values of the staining intensity revealed very intense MMP 1, intense MMP
2, 7, and 9 and moderate MMP 3 and 8 positivity, in the corneal epithelium of melted corneas. Intense MMP 1 and 9 staining, moderate MMP 2,
3, and 8 staining, and weak MMP 7 staining were found in the anterior stroma. The posterior stroma revealed intense MMP 1, moderate MMP 3
and 9, and weak MMP 2, 7, and 8 positivity. Immunostaining of the endothelium was moderate for MMP 9 and weak for MMP 1, 2, 3, 7, and 8. MMP
13 was negative in all but four melted specimens, where weak-to-moderate staining was found in the epithelium and stroma. Control corneas
revealed moderate MMP 1 and 2 and weak MMP 8 staining in the epithelium, weak MMP 2 staining in the anterior stroma, and weak MMP 1 and 8
staining in the endothelium. Significantly elevated MMP 1 activity and extremely elevated MMP 9 activity were found in most of the tested
pathological specimens, compared to healthy controls, where no activity of the two enzymes was present. Markedly elevated MMP 2 activity was
found in 2 of 11 specimens, compared to normal tissue. The inactive form of MMP 3 was detected in half of the tested specimens, and inactive
MMP 7 in all melted corneas. Active MMP 3 and 7 were found in one melted sample. Neither of these MMPs was found in any of the control
specimens. The increased expression and elevated activity of a wide range of MMPs in melted cornea samples from two patients diagnosed with
pSS confirm that these enzymes contribute to the tissue destruction, leading to serious consequences such as corneal perforation and loss of
vision. Primary Sjögren’s syndrome (pSS) is a systemic autoimmune disease with an estimated prevalence of only about 0.5%. It is
characterized by the destruction of the lachrymal and salivary glands, resulting in keratoconjunctivitis sicca syndrome (KCS) and xerostomia
. There is lymphocytic infiltration in the exocrine glands and the production of various autoantibodies . Extraglandular systemic
manifestations may involve several tissues and organs . The ethiopathogenesis of pSS is complex; environmental factors are thought to
trigger inflammation in individuals with a genetic predisposition, but the exact underlying cause remains unknown . Most patients do not
exhibit severe ocular complications. Those that need to attend ophthalmology clinics have been found to suffer, in addition to dry eye, from
bacterial keratitis, pannus formation, and sterile corneal melting . Corneal melting (keratolysis) is a rare, occasionally recurrent
condition. It is characterized by the development of epithelial defects and the gradual reduction of stromal components, which may lead to
descemetocele formation and subsequent perforation of the cornea . Less than 20 cases of sterile corneal melting or corneal ulcers in
association with pSS have been described in the literature . Although the exact mechanism of corneal melting has not been elucidated, it is
often linked to the overexpression of matrix metalloproteinases (MMPs), which are considered mainly responsible for the destruction and
consequent loss of the extracellular matrix (ECM) . Most of these endopeptidases are synthesized as inactive proenzymes that are activated
by proteolytic cleavage . On the basis of substrate specificity, sequence similarity, and domain organization, MMPs are classified into six
groups: collagenases, gelatinases, stromelysins, matrilysins, membrane type MMPs, and others. In the cornea, MMPs can be produced by
keratocytes, epithelial cells, monocytes, and macrophages . In this study, seven MMPs representing four main groups of these endopeptidases
were investigated in extremely severe cases of KCS associated with pSS. These included collagenases (MMPs 1, 8, 13) capable of cleaving
collagen types I, II, and III ; gelatinases (MMP 2 and 9) capable of degrading collagen types IV, V, and VI, as well as decorin,
fibronectin, and laminin ; and stromelysins (MMP 3) and matrilysins (MMP 7), which have similar substrates—type IV collagen, procollagens,
collagen cross-links, fibronectin, and laminin . We report recurrent corneal melting in two patients with severe pSS and its relation to the
activity of major MMPs. The study adhered to the tenets set out in the Declaration of Helsinki. Local Ethics Committee approval was granted.
All melted explants were obtained from the Department of Ophthalmology, General Teaching Hospital and the 1st Faculty of Medicine, Charles
University, in Prague. A 77-year-old patient was diagnosed with pSS elsewhere at the age of 71. She tested positive for anti-SS-A/Ro, anti-
SS-B/La, and antinuclear antibodies. No extraglandular manifestations were noted. Systemic immunosuppression administered to the patient
included various combinations of cyclophosphamide, prednisolon, azathioprin, methylprednisolon, cyclosporine A, and mycophenolate mofetil.
Upon first examination in our Department of Ophthalmology in 2002 at age 74, the patient presented with bilateral severe dry eye syndrome.
In the course of three years, she suffered from numerous episodes of corneal melting, requiring a number of surgical procedures. In the
right eye, seven penetrating keratoplasties were performed (6 grafts were used as specimens S2, S3, S4, S6, S7, and S8), along with a number
of amniotic membrane transplants, tarsorrhaphies, and other surgeries aimed at improving the condition of the ocular surface and preventing
progressive tissue melting. In the left eye, the patient underwent four penetrating keratoplasties (her native cornea was used as specimen
S1 and one graft as specimen S5), as well as other, similar, surgeries to the right eye. Despite all the measures undertaken, her condition
could not be controlled, and it led to bilateral blindness. In case 2, the symptoms related to pSS started at the age of 46 when swollen
salivary glands, xerostomia, and severe dry eye symptoms were noted by the patient. Histopathology from a labial salivary gland biopsy
sample showed focal sialadenitis that was consistent with a diagnosis of pSS. The patient tested positive for rheumatoid factor, antinuclear
antibodies, and Scl70 antibodies. Subsequently she also developed arthralgias. Systemic immunosuppression therapy was started at the age of
50. Initially, the patient was treated with oral prednisolon; later, various combinations of methotrexate, cyclophosphamide, and
methylprednisolon were added. Upon first ocular examination at age 46, she had signs of moderate dry eye syndrome in both eyes. She
gradually developed severe dry eye syndrome bilaterally. When the patient reached the age of 58, the first signs of peripheral ulcerative
keratitis were observed in the right eye, followed three years later in the left eye. She rapidly developed corneal thinning, and underwent
her first keratoplasty in the right eye at the age of 59 (specimen S9), followed by numerous other procedures due to complications related
to melting of the graft, including two penetrating keratoplasties (specimens S10 and S11). At the last follow up visit, her visual acuity
was full light projection in the right eye and hand movements with full projection of light in the left eye. Eleven melted corneal specimens
of the two patients were processed within three h after surgery. Eleven unaffected donor corneal buttons (mean age 59.8±16.9 years) that
were unsuitable for transplantation, due to their low endothelial cell density, served as controls (obtained from the Ocular Tissue Bank,
General Teaching Hospital, Prague). The mean time from the donor’s deaths to enucleation was 15 h, and the mean time from death to tissue
freezing was 17 h. All specimens were dissected into two halves, snap-frozen in liquid nitrogen, and stored at 70 ºC. Prior to freezing,
one-half was embedded in Optimal Cutting Temperature Compound (Christine Gröpl, Tulln, Austria). Before the activity assessment, the
specimens were thawed, were homogenized in cacodylate buffer (0.1 M cacodylic acid, 0.15 M NaCl, 0.01 M CaCl2, 1.5 mM NaN3, 0.005% Triton
X-100, and 0.1 nM ZnCl2), and underwent protein extraction for 2 days at 4 °C. Next, they were centrifuged for 30 min at 10,000× g; the
supernatants were removed and frozen at -20 °C. Cryosections (7 μm thick) from each of the control and melted specimens were placed on
gelatin-coated glass slides (four per slide), fixed with cold acetone for 10 min, rinsed in phosphate-buffered saline (PBS), and incubated
for 30 min in 3% hydrogen peroxide in PBS. After washing in PBS, the specimens were blocked for 30 min with 2.5% bovine serum albumin in
PBS. Then the slides were incubated for 1 h at room temperature with the primary antibodies listed in Table 1. Subsequently, the slides were
washed in PBS, and the secondary antibodies (polyclonal rabbit anti-mouse IgG and swine anti-rabbit IgG conjugated with biotin, 1:200;
DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) were applied for 1 h. After rinsing in PBS (three times for 5 min each), streptavidin/HRP (1:250;
DakoCytomation, Glostrup, Denmark) was added for 30 min. Finally, the slides were developed with 0.06% 3,3'-diaminobenzidine
tetrahydrochloride (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) in PBS, counterstained with Harris hematoxylin, and mounted with Eukit (Fluka, Buchs,
Switzerland). Negative control specimens (primary antibody omitted) were included on each slide. Samples of human placenta (MMP 1, 2, 3, and
7) and breast carcinoma (MMP 7, 8, 9, and 13) were used as positive controls . The intensity of the signal was assessed separately in the
epithelium, anterior stroma, posterior stroma, and endothelium using five grades of positivity: 0 (negative), 1 (weak), 2 (moderate), 3
(intense), 4 (very intense). The mean average positivity was calculated from at least three sections of two independent experiments. All
specimens (native cellular protein quantity, 8.5 μg) were treated with sample buffer (1.5% sodium dodecyl sulfate , 15% glycerol, and 0.005%
bromphenol blue). Gelatin and casein zymography were performed for the detection of MMP 2 and 9, and MMP 3 and 7, respectively, using 10%
polyacrylamide gel containing 0.1% gelatin (AppliChem GmbH, Darmstadt, Germany) and 12% gel copolymerized with 0.09% β-casein (Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO). In brief, 20 μl of each specimen were loaded onto the gels, and SDS-polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (SDS-PAGE)
was performed at 200 V at 4 °C for gelatin zymography, and at 20 mA at 4 °C for casein zymography. After electrophoresis, the gels were
twice rinsed in 2.5% Triton X-100 for 30 min at room temperature to remove the SDS, then incubated in reaction buffer (50 mM Tris-HCl, pH
7.5; 200 mM NaCl,; 5 mM CaCl2; and 0.02% 23 lauryl ether) at 37 °C overnight to allow the proteinases to digest their substrates. The gels
were stained for 1 h at room temperature in 0.5% Coomassie brilliant blue R-250 (Serva Electrophoresis, Heidelberg, Germany) in 40% methanol
and 10% acetic acid, then destained with a mixture of 40% methanol and 10% acetic acid. Proteolytic activities appeared as clear bands of
lysis against a dark background of stained gelatin or casein. The concentrations of the active forms of MMP 1 were determined using a
commercial kit (Amersham matrix metalloproteinase-1 Biotrak Activity assay system, Amersham Biosciences, Amersham, UK) according to the
manufacturer’s protocol. The values of the color reaction of the assays were read at 405 nm in a SUNRISE ELISA Reader (Tecan Trading AG,
Männedorf, Switzerland). The activity of MMP 1 in ten samples was determined by interpolation from the standard curve. The activity assay
could not be performed in S3, due to the lack of sufficient specimens. The Mann-Whitney U test was used to analyze the differences between
the control and the experimental groups. A p value <0.05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. All control corneas exhibited
regular morphology, with a five- to six-layered epithelium. Severe damage was observed in most of the pathological specimens, ranging up to
the complete absence of the epithelial layers and, in some specimens, a partly dissolved Bowmann’s layer and a partly dissolved edge of the
anterior stroma in the area of the lesions. The levels of staining of antibodies against particular MMPs in control samples were averaged.
No prominent differences in MMP staining were found among the individual control specimens for any of the MMPs tested. Moderate staining for
MMP 1 and 2, and weak staining for MMP 8, were detected in the epithelium. A weak signal for MMP 2 was observed adjacent to Bowman’s layer,
in approximately one-sixth of the anterior stroma. Weak staining was also found for MMP 1 and 8 in the endothelium of the control specimens.
Immunostaining for MMP 3, 7, 9, and 13 was completely negative in all layers of all control corneas (Figure 1). Immunohistochemical
localization of matrix metalloproteinases in melted and control corneas. Immunohistochemical localization of MMP 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, 9, and 13 in
representative images of melted corneal specimens obtained from patients with pSS (cases 1 and 2) and from control corneas. Original
magnification, 100×. Ep = epithelium, AS = anterior stroma, PS = posterior stroma, En = endothelium. The staining intensity of different
MMPs in melted specimens is summarized in Table 2. Immunohistochemical staining of both the control and melted specimens is shown in Figure
1. In the melted specimens, stronger staining for MMP 9 was found in the epithelial fragments of all tested corneas, if they were not
destroyed. It was also found for MMP 1, 2, 3, and 7 in almost all melted corneas, compared to the controls. Increased staining for MMP 1 and
9 was found in the whole stroma in all tested corneas, and for MMP 2, 3, 7, and 8 in almost all melted grafts, compared to the controls.
Positivity staining for MMP 2, 3, and 7 was detected in the endothelium of a few melted specimens, while staining for MMP 9 was observed in
all melted grafts. MMP 13 revealed only a weak-to-moderate staining pattern in the epithelial fragments and in the stroma of four specimens
and in the endothelium of one specimen. The scale used for the intensity of the signal: 0 - negative, 1 - weak, 2 - moderate, 3 - intense, 4
- very intense positivity. D = destroyed tissue. Ep = epithelium, AS = anterior stroma, PS = posterior stroma and En = endothelium. Using
gelatin zymography, 2 of the 11 melted specimens (S1 and S2) displayed extremely high levels of both the proenzyme and active form of MMP 2,
compared to the control corneas. Levels of MMP 9 proenzyme and the active form were extremely high in seven (S4, S6-S11) melted specimens
and prominent in one (S5). Three melted specimens (S1-S3) revealed faint bands for both forms of MMP 9, and two controls did so for MMP 9
proenzyme only (Figure 2A). Gelatin zymography of matrix metalloproteinases 2 and 9 in melted and control corneas. Melted specimens (A) S1
and S2 showed extremely high levels, and specimens S7, S9, and S11 considerable levels, of both the proenzyme (67 KDa band) and the active
form of MMP 2 (62 kDa band). Levels of MMP 9 proenzyme (95 kDa band) and the active form (82 kDa band) were extremely high in S4 and S6-S11,
and prominent in S5. Weak bands for both MMP 9 forms were found in specimens S1-S3. In control samples (B), a moderate level of the MMP 2
proenzyme was present in all specimens, whereas the active form of MMP 2 was either not present or very faint, except in samples C1, C3, and
C11. As for MMP 9 proenzyme, only C3 and C7 showed faint bands. Casein zymography revealed neither the proenzyme nor the active enzyme of
MMP 3 or 7 in any of the control specimens. Negligible levels of the proform of MMP 3 were found in five melted specimens (S1, S2, S6, S7,
and S9). Both forms, the proform and active MMP 3, were detected in one sample (S5) only. Nine melted corneas (S2-S10) revealed high levels
of MMP 7 proenzyme and its intermediate cleavage product. Two samples (S1 and S11) revealed low levels. Very low levels of active MMP 7 were
found in one specimen (S7) only (Figure 3). Casein zymography of matrix metalloproteinases 3 and 7 in melted specimens. Very slight bands of
only the MMP 3 proform (59 kDa) were detected in five melted specimens (S1, S2, S6, S7, and S9) and of both the proform and active MMP 3 (47
kDa) in one specimen (S5). High levels of MMP 7 proenzyme (30 kDa) and its intermediate cleavage product (28 kDa) were detected in nine
melted corneas, S2-S10, and weak bands of these two MMP 7 inactive forms were found in two melted specimens (S1 and S11). A very slight band
of active MMP 7 (20 kDa) was found in one specimen only (S7). The active form of MMP 1 was found in eight of ten melted corneas at
concentrations ranging from 0.08 to 3.03 ng/ml (p=0.0011). No activity was detected in the control specimens (Table 3). In this study, we
present two cases with pSS undergoing rapidly progressive recurrent corneal melting despite all available treatment, including
immunosuppression. We obtained two series of tissue specimens from the eyes of one repeatedly grafted patient: six consecutive ones from the
right eye, and two from the left . We also obtained one series of three consecutive tissue samples from the right eye of another patient
with pSS. Our findings clearly demonstrated the increased presence of MMP 1, 2, 3, 7, 8, and 9, as well as higher activity of MMP 1, 2, 3,
7, and 9, in the pathological pSS specimens, compared to the control tissue. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that these
enzymes have been studied in corneal melting associated with pSS. Previously, differences in corneal MMP expression were detected in
patients with keratolysis associated with rheumatoid arthritis , an autoimmune disorder that has some overlapping clinical features with
pSS, and in patients with melted corneas after cataract surgery and photorefractive keratectomy, both of which are treated with diclophenac
. Our study demonstrated a statistically significant higher activity of MMP 1 and a high expression of MMP 9 in the corneal epithelium and
stroma. Both these results conform to the immunostaining results of others . As for MMP 2, its overexpression in both the epithelium and
stroma, as well as its higher activity, have been reported in other investigations . However, one study showed only a weak presence of MMP 2
in the stroma of a patient who had undergone cataract surgery and had been treated with diclophenac . Our results also demonstrated
variability in the MMP 2 expression in melted corneas, since only 2 of the 11 specimens revealed a considerable increase in its activity,
compared to the controls. One possible explanation for this phenomenon is that MMP 2 activity is limited to a short period in the melting
process, unlike the other MMPs. This hypothesis is supported by delays in the activity increase of this enzyme in corneas after alkali burn,
suggesting its role to be in the regeneration and remodeling of the corneal ECM, rather than in the degradation process . A marked increase
of MMP 3 in the epithelium and stroma of melted grafts has been detected previously, in the stroma of a patient after photorefractive
keratectomy treated with topical diclofenac . Although we confirmed the presence of MMP 3 in melted corneas as well, we were not able to
detect a prominent increase in its activity. This may be due to the low sensitivity of casein zymography . Unfortunately, there was not
enough material available to perform other, more sensitive methods of MMP 3 detection. Our study is the first to demonstrate the presence
and activity of MMP 7 in melted corneas. Additionally, casein zymography showed a large quantity of inactive MMP 7 in all tested specimens
and active MMP 7 in one specimen. We suggest that MMP 7 is an important element in the degradation of the corneal basement membrane in
corneal melting, as it was abundant in the corneal epithelium, especially in its basal layer. Up to now, MMP 8 has been studied only in one
melted cornea following cataract surgery, where it was found to be considerably increased in both the epithelium and stroma . In our study,
we found a weak-to-moderate presence of this enzyme in both the epithelium and stroma. We attribute such differences to the fact that the
occurrence of MMP 8 in the stroma depends on the presence of neutrophils , the distribution of which may vary among melted corneas . We also
found a weak increase in the presence of MMP 13 in the stroma of three samples. To the best of our knowledge, no other study has previously
evaluated MMP 13 in melted corneas. The expression of MMP 13 has only been described in the epithelium of wounded corneas and in the
epithelium and stroma of corneas with keratoconus . We did not observe any trend towards an increase or decrease of individual MMP
expression over time, or of disease progression, in any of the consecutive patient samples. Instead, the combination of MMPs detected seemed
to be completely different in each specimen. This could have a number of causes, such as the different stages of melting at which the
explants were obtained. It may also be that the expression of MMPs showed local variations within individual specimens, depending on the
distance from the central melting point. It should be noted, however, that the staining and activity of individual MMPs were similar for
consecutive sections obtained from each specimen. MMPs in patients suffering from primary SS have previously been studied in tears , saliva
, and salivary glands . It has been suggested that the activation of these enzymes is the key factor responsible for the corneal barrier
disruption, as well as for the destruction of the salivary glands . Given the characteristic features of pSS, there may be more than one
mechanism leading to the induction of different MMPs. For example, lymphocytic infiltrates secrete pro-inflammatory cytokines that are known
to initiate MMP expression in various tissues via different pathways . Up-regulated IL-1β, found in the tears of pSS patients , could also
play a role in the expression of MMPs, especially MMP 9, via mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathways . Finally, a mouse model of
dry eye has shown that desiccation and hyperosmolar stress may lead to the induction of MMPs via the stimulation of proinflammatory
cytokines . We hypothesize that in advanced cases of pSS, such as in our patients, MMPs may be upregulated to such an extent that the
epithelial barrier is substantially degraded, followed by the dissolution of its basement membrane (caused mainly by MMP 3, 7, and 9) and
the gradual degradation of the stroma, involving MMP 1, 3, 7, 8, and 9. After the stroma is completely lost, a descemetocele is formed, and
finally the integrity of the whole cornea is disrupted. The fact that none of the disease-modifying therapies used in these patients was
effective in decreasing MMP production and keratolysis suggests that different treatment strategies with anti-MMP therapies should be
considered in similar cases, such as using recombinant tissue inhibitors of MMPs or chemical inhibitors of MMPs. For example, the TNF-α
antagonist infliximab has been shown to inhibit one of the activators of MMP production . Direct inhibition of MMPs can be achieved by
tetracyclines, medroxyprogesteron, or ion-chelating agents such as cysteine or thylenediaminetetraacetic acid . Finally, an alternative
approach in keratolysis treatment could be focused on the recovery and strengthening of the collagen structure by collagen cross-linking .
Our study examined extremely severe cases of corneal melting associated with pSS, and has elucidated the participation of some MMPs in this
destructive process. It confirmed that these enzymes play an important role in the severe degradation of corneal tissue leading to corneal
perforation and loss of vision. Their involvement suggests that MMP inhibitors may play an important role in the treatment of this
condition. This study was supported by the research project of the Czech Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports MSM0021620806/20610011.
