Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans (DFSP) is a rare, low-grade, cutaneous neoplasm with pronounced tendency for local recurrence. A case of
DFSP that showed direct infiltration into the underlying bone marrow is described. To the best of our knowledge, such direct bony
involvement by dermatofibrosarcoma has not been reported in the English literature to date. The role of imaging is also discussed for
planning adequate initial treatment, which will result in a lower recurrence rate and improved clinical outcome. Dermatofibrosarcoma
protuberans (DFSP) is an uncommon, low-grade cutaneous malignancy that originates from the dermis. It can occur in any part of the body, but
has predilection for the trunk, head and neck region, and the proximal extremities . The tumor begins as a small bump on the skin surface
and then grows in the dermis to form a larger mass that swells and bulges outwards, hence the name ‘protuberans’. Distant metastasis of DFSP
is extremely rare; however, it is a locally aggressive tumor and shows marked tendency to recur even after wide local excision.3,4 We
emphasize the role of imaging in the preoperative evaluation of these tumors so that more accurate treatment plans can be instituted,
leading to decreased recurrence rates. A 20-year-old male presented to our hospital with a progressively increasing swelling on the right
leg for the previous 9 months. It was painless and non-tender to start with, but showed rapid growth over the last few weeks with onset of
pain that was continuous and mild to moderate in intensity. There was no history of any fever, loss of weight or any trauma to the local
site. Complete blood cell counts and biochemical laboratory parameters were within normal limits. The physical examination revealed an
irregular, protuberant swelling with a large indurated, non-ulcerated plaque on the right leg. The swelling appeared to be fixed to the
underlying bone. No regional lymphadenopathy was noted. Radiography of the right leg revealed a rounded soft tissue mass approximately
5 × 3 cm in size along the anteromedial aspect of the right tibia with associated cortical erosions in the tibia (Fig. 1A,B). No soft tissue
calcification or periosteal reaction was noted. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to further characterize the mass and
delineate the extent of bone marrow involvement. The bone marrow of proximal metadiaphysis of the right tibia over a segment of
approximately 7 cm revealed an abnormal hypointense signal on T1-weighted images and hyperintense signal on inversion recovery and
T2-weighted images (Fig. 2A,B). There was evidence of cortical breach along the anterior aspect of the tibia with a large associated soft
tissue mass that was infiltrating the subcutaneous tissues and bulging anteriorly. The soft tissue was predominantly hypointense on
T1-weighted images and hyperintense on T2-weighted images depicting florid enhancement after contrast administration. The underlying bone
marrow also showed heterogenous post-contrast enhancement (Fig. 3A,B). These findings were suggestive of an unresectable malignant
sarcomatous tumor. Figure 1Radiographs of the right leg, anteroposterior (A) and lateral projection (B) showing a well-defined soft tissue
mass along the anteromedial aspect of the right tibia (arrowhead, A) with suggestion of cortical breach (arrow, B). Figure 2MRI sagittal
T1-weighted (A) and fat suppressed coronal T2-weighted images (B) demonstrating abnormal marrow signal of the proximal metadiaphysis of the
right tibia with sharp zone of transition. Also note the large soft tissue seen anteriorly (arrowhead, A). Figure 3MRI axial T1-weighted
pre-contrast (A) and post-contrast (B) images depicting large soft tissue bulging anteromedial to the right tibia and showing florid
enhancement after contrast administration. Mild heterogeneous enhancement is also noted in the underlying bone marrow. The soft tissue is
seen to infiltrate the subcutaneous planes associated with cortical breach in the tibia anteriorly (arrow, B). Radiographs of the right leg,
anteroposterior (A) and lateral projection (B) showing a well-defined soft tissue mass along the anteromedial aspect of the right tibia
(arrowhead, A) with suggestion of cortical breach (arrow, B). MRI sagittal T1-weighted (A) and fat suppressed coronal T2-weighted images (B)
demonstrating abnormal marrow signal of the proximal metadiaphysis of the right tibia with sharp zone of transition. Also note the large
soft tissue seen anteriorly (arrowhead, A). MRI axial T1-weighted pre-contrast (A) and post-contrast (B) images depicting large soft tissue
bulging anteromedial to the right tibia and showing florid enhancement after contrast administration. Mild heterogeneous enhancement is also
noted in the underlying bone marrow. The soft tissue is seen to infiltrate the subcutaneous planes associated with cortical breach in the
tibia anteriorly (arrow, B). The patient underwent core-needle biopsy under local anaesthesia from swelling on the right leg which showed
highly cellular smears with clusters of spindle-shaped cells in a fibromyxoid background. The cells showed moderate pleomorphism and
storiform pattern in places (Fig. 4A). These features were suggestive of DFSP. The stains for CD34 were positive on immunohistochemistry
(Fig. 4B). The patient is scheduled for neoadjuvant therapy with imatinib mesylate to be followed by surgical excision of the tumor. Figure
4Biopsy smear showing highly cellular tumor with fibroblastic spindle cells producing storiform pattern (A) and immunohistochemical stain
for CD34 (B) showing strong membranous positivity around the tumor cells. Biopsy smear showing highly cellular tumor with fibroblastic
spindle cells producing storiform pattern (A) and immunohistochemical stain for CD34 (B) showing strong membranous positivity around the
tumor cells. Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans is a rare, painless, monoclonal, cutaneous soft tissue sarcoma of unknown cause that was first
described by Taylor in 1890. It constitutes approximately 1% of all soft tissue sarcomas, shows slight male preponderance and generally
presents in the third and fourth decades of life. Its clinical manifestations are non-specific. It often masquerades as a benign, indolent
tumor on the trunk and proximal extremities. The surface of the tumor is characterized by irregular protuberant swellings, and a hard
indurated plaque of irregular outline forms the base. It is a slow-growing neoplasm; however in the later stages, it may show rapid growth
and the lesion may become painful, ulcerated and can discharge. Surgery with wide local excision or Mohs micrographic surgery remains the
treatment of choice in these patients. Radiation therapy, hitherto with a limited role, is recently being used as an adjunct to surgical
excision, primarily in cases in which the tumor is unresectable, there are positive resection margins on histology and when the surgery is
going to leave major cosmetic or functional deficits. Chemotherapy has rarely been used in the treatment of DFSP. Recently, a very promising
neoadjuvant molecular therapy with imatinib mesylate, a potent and selective inhibitor of several protein-tyrosine kinases, is advocated in
adult patients with unresectable, recurrent or metastatic DFSP. DFSP is a locally invasive fibrohistiocytic tumor with a recurrence rate of
up to 25% even after wide local excision with a safety margin of 3–5 cm. This is attributed to the fact that DFSP extends far beyond the
assessed clinical margins, spreading locally in the dermis, subcutaneous tissues and muscles. Our index case illustrates that it can extend
even deeper to directly involve the bone with cortical erosions and bone marrow infiltration. To the best of our knowledge such deep
invasion of the tumor with infiltration into the underlying bone has not been described in the literature to date except in one case of DFSP
of the scalp where the calvarium was also infiltrated. This could partly be due to the fact that imaging is rarely a part of the
preoperative workup in these patients. DFSP is a low-grade malignancy with only a few sporadic cases of distant metastases. The diagnosis of
DFSP generally comes from core-needle or incisional biopsy. Histologically, it consists of uniform but atypical spindle cells placed in a
fibrotic stroma in the dermis and subcutaneous tissues exhibiting characteristic ‘cartwheel’ or ‘storiform’ appearance. Immunohistochemistry
studies have shown that DFSP stains positive for CD34 and negative for factor XIIIa, which are very useful markers to differentiate DFSP
from dermatofibroma.9 The poor prognostic indicators of DFSP include advanced age, high mitotic index, increased cellularity, DNA aneuploidy
and fibrosarcomatous changes within the tumor. Multiple local recurrences can also predispose to distant metastasis, thus highlighting the
significance of adequate initial treatment. The extent of the tumor and the degree of invasion of underlying tissues is usually assessed by
physical examination and not much importance has been given to the role of imaging except to rule out metastasis. Mendenhall et al. and
McArthur discussed the role of MRI in determining deep tumor invasion. Because DFSP is a locally invasive tumor with a high rate of post-
operative recurrence, we advocate that imaging (preferably MRI) should be done in all such cases especially those involving the extremities.
MRI will ascertain the exact depth of invasion by showing the tumor margins, and will guide the clinician to institute an adequate initial
treatment by choosing an appropriate surgical plan with or without adjunctive chemo-/radiotherapy. This in turn will lead to a reduced rate
of local recurrence and improved clinical outcome. However, the cost/benefit ratio needs to be further substantiated by larger prospective
studies. This paper is available online at http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL address, please use the DOI
provided to locate the paper.
