Schwannoma originating from the vagus nerve within the mediastinum is a rare, usually benign tumor. A 44-year old male was presented with
chest pain. Chest radiography, CT scan and MRI showed a well circumscribed mass, 5 × 4 cm located in the aortopulmonary window. The mass was
found at surgery to be in close proximity with the aortic arch and the left pulmonary hilum, alongside the left vagus nerve. The
encapsulated tumor was completely resected through a left thoracotomy incision and it was found to be a benign schwannoma in pathology. The
patient is free of recurrence 6 years after surgery. Neurogenic tumors represent approximately 20% of all adult and 25% of all pediatric
primary mediastinal neoplasms. They are divided into nerve sheath, ganglion cell and paraganglionic cell neoplasms . Neurogenic tumors are
benign mediastinal tumors with rare exceptions . Schwannomas or neurilemmomas originating from the vagus nerve are rare mediastinal tumors,
accounting for 2% of all mediastinal neurogenic tumors, arising typically from the nerve sheath and extrinsically compressing the nerve
fibers . Scwannomas are lobulated, encapsulated spherical masses, different from neurofibromas in that matter. Men and women are equally
affected in their third and fourth decades . Usually, they are asymptomatic and benign, and very rarely malignant or multiple . Shwannomas
usually arise from a spinal nerve root, indeed they may arise from any other intrathoracic nerve . Radiologically they are sharply
demarcated with rare calcifications. CT contrast enhanced scan of the chest shows in accordance, a sharply demarcated mass with low
densities and mild enrichment, rarely with calcifications and no fat. On MRI the schwannomas have low - to intermediate signal intensity on
T1-weighted images and may have intermediate - to high - signal intensity on T2-weighted sequences . A 44-years old male presented with a
sense of heaviness and pain in the left anterior chest wall. Preoperative chest radiography showed a sharply demarcated extrapulmonary mass
withour calcifications in the middle mediastinal compartment, between aortic arch and left hilum. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of the chest
showed a 5.1 × 4 cm mass in the aortopulmonary window, with smooth and clear margins, low densities (HU: 9-15) and light enrichment after
administration of contrast material (HU: 22-37), without calcifications and fat (Figure 1). On MRI, the tumor showed the characteristics as
previously described (Figure 2). CT contrast enhanced scan of the chest showing the smooth and clear margins of the mass and its location
inthe aortopulmonary window. MRI of the chest showing an encapsulated mass in theaortopulmonary window, suggesting a benign lesion. He
underwent a left anterolateral thoracotomy in the 4th intercostal space preserving the latissimus dorsi instead of VATS procedure because of
the proximity of the tumor to the aortic arch and the left main pulmonary artery. Complete resection, as is the case for benign schwannomas,
was performed of this 5 × 4 cm tumor, located in close proximity to the vascular structures of the aortopulmonary window, alongside the left
vagus nerve which was left intact. The tumor was removed with its entire capsule and was found to be benign at histology, because there were
no atypia, mitoses, increased cellularity and necrosis. (Figure 3 and Figure 4) Spindle cells which are arranged in fasicles in a
loosestroma (HEx200). Strong positivity for S-100 protein of the tumor cells (×200) suggesting schwannoma. The patient had no postoperative
complications and he is free of recurrence 73 months later. Benign schwannomas of the vagus nerve are very rare middle mediastinal
neurogenic tumors of nerve sheath origin . Schwannomas of the vagus nerve occur usually on the left hemithorax while they may reach huge
dimensions in rare instances . Thoracotomy instead of VATS was preferred in the presented case because of the location of the tumor in the
middle mediastinal compartment, close to the aortic arch and the hilum of the left lung. VATS resection is an alternative option for
resection of mediastinal neurogenic tumors however the location of the tumor in the middle mediastinum and especially in the aortopulmonary
window may necessitate thoracotomy for safe isolation of the tumor from the vital mediastinal structures and further, in order to avoid
damage to the recurrent nerve during dissection of the tumor within the aortopulmonary window . The tumor was confirmed to be a schwannoma
because microscopically it showed spindle cells in fascicles in a loose stroma. Strong positivity of the tumor cells for S-100 protein
confirmed the diagnosis of schwannoma . Malignant schwannomas are rare and they are distinguished from benign schwannomas on microscopic
examination because they show atypia, mitoses, pleomorphism and necrosis . More than fifty percent of malignant schwannomas are found in
patients with neurofibromatosis . The long-term survival after complete resection of the extremely rare malignant scwhannomas of the vagus
nerve seems to be satisfactory in sporadically reported cases . Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case-report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. KSR performed the
operation, has been involved in drafting the manuscript and has given the final approval to publish the manuscript. SKR has been involved in
critically revising the manuscript. CNF has made contribution to design of the manuscript and has been involved in drafting and critically
revising the manuscript. TKZ did the histology and immunohistochemistry of the tumor and has been involved in drafting the manuscript
