To the Editor: Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) is emerging as an important cause of illness and death in animals and has
been found in an impressive variety of species. However, to date, only 2 studies have reported the isolation of MRSA from marine mammals, 1
seal (1) and 3 bottlenose dolphins (2). We describe an investigation that was conducted after MRSA was isolated from a dolphin at a marine
park in North America. In November 2006, a 20-year-old, male, captive, bottlenose dolphin, suspected of having pneumonia, was treated
empirically with ciprofloxacin and itraconazole. Despite treatment, the dolphin died in December 2006. A necropsy was performed, and a
culture swab specimen of the blowhole was submitted for bacteriologic examination; MRSA was then isolated. The clinical relevance of this
finding was unclear. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (PFGE) was conducted (3), and results indicated that the MRSA strain isolated was the
Canadian epidemic MRSA (CMRSA)2 (USA100) strain, the predominant hospital- and community-associated MRSA strain found in persons in Canada
(4). To determine the extent of MRSA colonization in this marine park, blowhole swab specimens were collected from dolphins, orcas, and
beluga whales, and nasal swab specimens were collected from walruses, sea lions, harbor seals, gray seals, and park personnel, excluding 4
employees in January 2007. Selective culture for MRSA was performed, and strains were typed with PFGE (3) and spa typing (5). All MRSA
strains were investigated for the Panton-Valentine leukocidin (PVL) toxin genes (6). In January 2007, MRSA was not isolated from personnel
(0/22), sea lions (0/12), harbor seals (0/2), gray seals (0/2), orcas (0/4), or beluga whales (0/23); it was isolated from dolphins (2/6,
33.3%) and a walrus (1/6, 16.7%). To reduce the risk for MRSA transmission among the marine mammals and to personnel, the following steps
were recommended: colonized animals were isolated, contact with colonized animals was restricted, all park personnel were required to wear
gloves and masks when handling colonized animals, and routine hand hygiene was emphasized. Colonized walruses were isolated in a separate
facility until May 2007. Because of space limitations, colonized dolphins could not be isolated. Although the park instituted a strict
policy that required personnel to wear gloves and masks, this policy ceased during the summer months due to the park’s exhibition schedule.
Because we knew from our observations of other animal species that natural decolonization with MRSA is common, as well as lacking
information about antimicrobial drug efficacy for MRSA decolonization in marine mammals, and had concerns regarding the emergence of further
antimicrobial drug resistance, we recommended that no attempt be made to decolonize the animals with antimicrobial agents. After these
recommendations were made and implemented, follow-up testing for MRSA colonization was performed on the dolphins and walruses throughout
2007 and 2008 (Table). In October 2007, testing conducted on all sea lions, harbor seals, gray seals, orcas, and beluga whales showed that
none of these animals were colonized with MRSA. Overall, MRSA was isolated on >1 occasions from 5 dolphins (n = 6, 83.3%) and 3 walruses (n
= 6, 50%) (Table). All strains were indistinguishable on PFGE and were consistent with the CMRSA2 (USA100) strain. They were also spa type
t002 and did not possess the PVL toxin genes. *MRSA, methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus; NA, not applicable; NT, not
tested. †Dolphin 2 died due to unknown circumstances. This report of MRSA shows colonization in several dolphins and walruses, with apparent
transmission between species. The direction of transmission cannot be determined because of the sampling method; however, a human origin is
suspected because the clone that was isolated is a predominant human clone. The failure to identify a concurrently colonized person does not
preclude a human source. Since the time MRSA was introduced into the facility is unknown, the source of infection may have been decolonized
by the time of sampling or was not sampled. Furthermore, park visitors occasionally have contact with these animals so the origin could have
been from the general public. Whether colonization of multiple animals was due to repeated instances of human-to-animal transmission or
whether animal-to-animal transmission may have occurred is not clear. For the dolphins, the second scenario is most likely, considering the
social nature of these animals and the inability to isolate colonized dolphins. These factors may have resulted in the circulation of MRSA
among these animals. Although no water samples were obtained for testing, waterborne transmission cannot be dismissed. Colonization was
eliminated without antimicrobial agents; however, long-term (15 months) MRSA colonization was found in 1 dolphin. With patience and
continued use of infection control measures, MRSA was apparently eradicated from this facility without the need for active decolonization.
This study shows the impressive ability of MRSA to colonize diverse animal species and provides further evidence suggesting that
interspecies transmission of human epidemic clones can occur between persons and animals. This study also provides evidence suggesting that
MRSA colonization in many animal species can be transient and that application of appropriate infection control and hygiene measures may be
critical control tools for the management of MRSA in animals. Suggested citation for this article: Faires MC, Gehring E, Mergl J, Weese JS.
Methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus in marine mammals. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2009 Dec [date cited]. Available
from http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/15/12/2071.htm We thank Joyce Rousseau for typing all MRSA strains.
