Radiation-induced midbrain fibrosarcoma is a rare, highly aggressive tumor, which is associated with poor prognosis. We present the case of
a 48-year old man with brainstem fibrosarcoma 20 years following radiation therapy received for a pituitary tumor. We discuss this case in
the context of the diagnostic criteria for these tumors, and previous reports of secondary and primary sarcomas of the central nervous
system. Secondary fibrosarcoma of the brain is an exceedingly rare tumor, occurring almost exclusively as a complication of therapeutic
radiation to a preexisting intracranial tumor . Fibrosarcomas are aggressive tumors, with poor prognosis . These tumors tend to spread
rapidly with extensive involvement of the optic nerves, hypothalamus, and the brain stem, which makes total surgical resection impossible.
No clinical trial for brain fibrosarcoma has been conducted to date, and current treatment options based on case reports encompass subtotal
resection attempts , Glia-Site brachytherapy system , or chemotherapy . We report a case of a 48 year old man who presented with a brainstem
lesion 20 years after he received radiation therapy for a pituitary tumor. Upon further investigation, the new tumor was diagnosed as
fibrosarcoma secondary to radiation therapy. A subtotal resection of the tumor was performed followed by chemotherapy. We chose to treat the
patient with cyclophosphamide and Gleevec chemotherapy and to follow him with serial imaging, which showed evidence of tumor stability for
6 months. A 48-year old Caucasian man presented to clinic for evaluation of his options for the treatment of brainstem fibrosarcoma. In
1977, 26 years prior to this presentation, the patient was diagnosed with a large pituitary adenoma based on a head computer tomography.
Biopsy was not performed at the time. However, he received conformal fractionated radiotherapy of unknown dose. He also had concurrent
hydrocephalus and a ventriculo–peritoneal shunt was placed. The patient was asymptomatic until 2003 when he started to develop eye left
eyelid drooping and diplopia. A magnetic resonance study performed in February of 2004 showed a right brainstem lesion. Stereotactic needle
brain biopsy was performed but the results were inconclusive. The patient was followed with serial neuroimaging until August of 2006 when
the tumor experienced significant growth associated with progressive neurologic impairment. At that time a second stereotactic biopsy was
performed, which also failed to show the pathology of the tumor. In May of 2007, the patient underwent subtotal resection of his large right
pontine enhancing mass. Pathology results revealed that the tissue was most consisted with grade 2 fibrosarcoma. Post operatively the
patient suffered a pseudomeningocele at the incision site, which required a VP shunt revision. Subsequently he presented to our clinic for
reevaluation of this therapeutic options. After careful consideration of the different options available we decided to use a combination of
metronomic cyclophosphamide at 50 mg a day and Imatinib 400 mg a day. The choice of Imatinib was based on the newest published data on the
soft-tissue sarcoma and gastrointestinal stromal tumors sensitivity to Imatinib and the recent clinical trials showing that this
chemotherapy agent is a potential option for primary malignant gliomas . Cyclophosphamide is very commonly used in the treatment of multiple
CNS malignancies such as malignant glioma and meningioma , and also shows good activity in the treatment of systemic fibrosarcoma which
motivates our decision to include this drug in this patient’s regimen. The patient tolerated the treatment well, with slow improvement in
his neurologic function and with minimal (grade II) chemotherapy-related hematologic toxicities. No treatment discontinuation was needed.
Serial magnetic resonance studies of the brain showed that the tumor did not grow over the course of 6 month of chemotherapy, measures being
stable at 30.2 mm × 35 mm (November 2007) and 30.4 mm × 35 mm (May 2008) (Fig. 1c–f). Unfortunately, the patient expired due to bacterial
pneumonia with subsequent Gram negative sepsis while continuing to experience neurologic improvement, 6 months after the onset of
chemotherapy. At the wish of the family, no autopsy was performed.Fig. 1Axial and coronal MRI T1 images with contrast. a, b May 2007 showing
tumor in the midbrain region. c, d November 2007 showing tumor progression. e, f May 2008 showing tumor stability following chemotherapy
Axial and coronal MRI T1 images with contrast. a, b May 2007 showing tumor in the midbrain region. c, d November 2007 showing tumor
progression. e, f May 2008 showing tumor stability following chemotherapy The pathology report indicated that the subtotal resection
specimen was most consistent with brainstem tissue (Fig. 2c, d). Microscopical analysis if the specimen revealed spindle cell proliferation,
with mild to moderate pleomorphism (Fig. 2a, b). These cells were also negative for EMA, GFAP, Keratin, Melan-A and S 100 (Fig. 2d). In some
areas, ten to fifteen percent of these cells reacted with Ki-67 (Fig. 2h). These areas were also positive for Vimentin (Fig. 2f) and showed
a delicate reticulin network (Fig. 2e). Faint to moderate positivity for p53 was demonstrated in some areas. A desmin stain was also
positive. Within the brain tissue there were some areas of necrosis in which macrophages could be seen.Fig. 2Pathology slides fibrosarcoma:
a Spindled pleomorphic cells of fibrosarcoma, mitosis in upper left corner. b Mitotic figure and spindle pleomorphic cells of fibrosarcoma.
c H&E stains of individual malignant cells infiltrating pons. d S-100 immunohistochemical stain, negative. e Reticulin stain showing
delicate reticulin fibers between malignant cells. f Vimentin immunohistochemical stain, strongly positive. g GFAP immunohistochemical
stain, negative. h Ki-67 immunohistochemical stain, positive, indicating proliferative activity Pathology slides fibrosarcoma: a Spindled
pleomorphic cells of fibrosarcoma, mitosis in upper left corner. b Mitotic figure and spindle pleomorphic cells of fibrosarcoma. c H&E
stains of individual malignant cells infiltrating pons. d S-100 immunohistochemical stain, negative. e Reticulin stain showing delicate
reticulin fibers between malignant cells. f Vimentin immunohistochemical stain, strongly positive. g GFAP immunohistochemical stain,
negative. h Ki-67 immunohistochemical stain, positive, indicating proliferative activity T1 weighted axial and sagittal images delineated a
gadolinium enhancing midbrain mass with lesional edema. T2 weighted axial images demonstrated a heterogenous hyperintensity corresponding to
the gadolinium-enhancing areas (Fig. 1). Compared o the MRI from May 2007 the MRI from November 2007 showed rapidly expanding tumor
(Fig. 1). The follow-up MRIs obtained at 6 months showed stability of the tumor over a period of 6 month (Fig. 1). Sarcomas of the central
nervous system are exceedingly rare tumors, accounting for only 1.5% of the total intracranial tumors [14, 15]. They can be classified in
four categories. First category includes primary brain sarcomas arising from the mesenchymal tissues. Second category encompasses
sarcomatous transformation of a preexisting brain tumor, such as meningioma or glioma. Third category includes radiation induced sarcomas
and fourth category is composed of systemic metastatic sarcomas to the central nervous system [1–4, 6–8, 15–17]. Post irradiation
fibrosarcoma of the central nervous system is characterized by quick and extensive local invasion of the tissues [1, 3]. Literature
indicates that these tumors are associated with rapid clinical decline [1, 2, 8]. In our patient, the histopathologic diagnosis of sarcoma
was based on the hematoxylin and eosin sections which showed a highly malignant tumor with sheets of spindle shaped cells, and oval-shaped
nuclei with atypia and pleomorphism. The positive Vimentin stain also supported the diagnosis of sarcoma, since Vimentin is the major
subunit protein in the intermediate filaments of mesenchymal cells. The delicate reticulin pattern surrounding the tumor cells with
extensive areas of collagen deposition as well as the positive desmin stain was also consistent with the diagnosis of fibrosarcoma (Fig. 2).
Similar to other literature reports, there was no histogenic relationship of the sarcoma to the pituitary adenoma: immunostaining failed to
show evidence of endocrine function in the fibrosarcoma specimen. At the same time, the GFAP stain was negative indicating that the tumor
was not a gliosarcoma. This fibrosarcoma most likely appeared from the adjacent mesenchymal tissues in the sella turcica, dura, the optic
sheath and the basal meninges which received radiation therapy along with the original pituitary tumor. Literature reports indicate that
fibrosarcoma can convert to glioblastoma in the setting of continued radiation received by brain parenchyma . This malignant transformation
of the primary mesenchymal tumor may be due to the effect radiation has on the adjacent glial tissues and reactive astrocytes, as well as on
the pluripotent mesenchymal cells in the tumor bed to undergo further malignant transformation . This process is certainly possible in our
patient, although the GFAP stain indicated that the tumor did not have a glial component. Since no autopsy was performed to analyze the
entire tumor mass, it is uncertain if areas of the tumor underwent transformation to gliosarcoma. Radiation-induced fibrosarcoma has become
more common in the recent years as the number of long-term survivors consistently increased with new methods of treatment. We have
identified 25 cases in the literature (Table 1), where patients received radiation therapy for a pituitary adenoma. Subsequently these
patients developed fibrosarcomas with a latent period of 2.5–20 years, with most of the patients developing the secondary tumor
approximately 10–12 years after receiving radiation therapy for the initial tumor. From analyzing these cases, we also inferred a clinical
picture of fibrosarcoma as a highly aggressive tumor, with extensive infiltration in the surrounding tissue and quick
progression.Table 1Literature review of post irradiation fibrosarcoma casesStudyAgeSexTotal radiation to tumorLatent periodDuration of tumor
after radiation (months)Terry et al. Case 147F7,5006.53Terry et al. Case 244M6,4002.58.5Terry et al. Case 326F6,500122Newton et al.
28F3,910106Goldberg et al. Case 128F3,94010.51Goldberg et al. Case 231F6,000201Greenhouse 24F8,0007.31 1/3Waltz and Brownell Case
138M3,50081Waltz and Brownell Case 242M4,00056Ahmad and Fayos 46M4,09210UnknownPowell et al. 52M5,000136Pieterse et al. 48M4,5001812Shi et
al. 54M5,00085Chang and Pool UnknownUnknownUnknown27UnknownWright UnknownUnknownUnknown15UnknownAmine and Sugar
16Unknown5,10010UnknownGerlach and Janisch 26Unknown6,00020UnknownCoppeto and Roberts 46Unknown10,0007UnknownShin et al.
33Unknown5,00011UnknownVikhert and Kasumova Case 143Unknown10,10012UnknownVikhert and Kasumova Case 258Unknown12,00013UnknownVikhert and
Kasumova Case 350UnknownUnknown8UnknownPages and Broquerie 23Unknown5,40027UnknownNagatani et al. 55Unknown5,0002UnknownMartin et al.
18Unknown4,5005Unknown Literature review of post irradiation fibrosarcoma cases The surgical treatment for these tumors is highly
limited—the areas the tumor extends into are not easily accessible by traditional or modern neurosurgical techniques, and the resection is
limited due to the highly eloquent areas the tumor invades. Chemotherapy or additional radiation are the best options for treating these
highly malignant tumors affecting the brain . Presently no clinical trials have been conducted to define the optimal chemotherapy regimen
appropriate to treat these tumors. We were able to identify in our extensive literature search only four case reports which have used
chemotherapy for the treatment of secondary fibrosarcomas of the brain (see Table 2). The overall survival of the adult patients described
in the case reports were similar to the one described by us . However, none of the older chemotherapy regimens contained pathway-selective
drugs. The drugs used had the potential for severe side-effects and impact on the patient quality of life [2, 9, 14].Table 2Literature cases
regarding chemotherapy treatment of fibrosarcomaFibrosarcoma therapyOverall survivalPatient 11 High dose chemotherapy (unspecified) and stem
cell rescue7 yearsPatient 22 Procarbazine, lomustine, vincristine10 monthsPatient 3 DiaziquoneUnknownPatient 4 Semustine and
doxorubicinUnknown Literature cases regarding chemotherapy treatment of fibrosarcoma With recent advances in molecularly targeted treatments
for cancers, new agents are emerging to treat different types of sarcomas. Imatinib is one molecule which is gaining acceptance in the
treatment of other types of fibrosarcoma, such as dermatofibrosarcoma and soft-tissue sarcomas. Cyclophosphamide is another agent that is
valuable in the treatment of brain neoplasms and has been used to treat sarcomas with some success. As the two chemotherapy agents have
different targets in the neoplastic cells, their combination has a potential synergistic activity. In our case, this regimen was also very
well tolerated, with no limiting toxicities. Post radiation fibrosarcomas most likely arise from the adjacent tissues which have been
exposed to radiation in the process of treating the primary tumor. The treatment of these tumors is not well defined, and this severely
impacts their prognosis. New research on the molecular pathology of radiation-induced brain fibrosarcoma and more targeted therapies is
currently needed. Aggressive therapeutic approaches are required to maintain tumor control. We found metronomic cyclophosphamide and
Imatinib to be appropriate therapeutic options for maintaining local tumor control in a patient with a very aggressive tumor. Our treatment
regimen provided progression free survival for 6 months. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
