Infection of the central nervous system with Nocardia sp. usually manifests as supratentorial abscesses. Supratentorial and cerebellar
abscesses from infection with Nocardia sp. following immunosuppression with long-term corticosteroids for idiopathic thrombocytopenia (ITP)
have not been reported. An 83 years-old, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative, polymorbid male with ITP for which he required
corticosteroids since age 53 years developed tiredness, dyspnoea, hemoptysis, abdominal pain, and progressive gait disturbance. Imaging
studies of the lung revealed an enhancing tumour in the right upper lobe with central and peripheral necrosis, multiple irregularly
contoured hyperdensities over both lungs, and right-sided pleural effusions. Sputum culture grew Nocardia sp. Neurological diagnostic work-
up revealed dysarthria, dysphagia, ptosis, hypoacusis, tremor, dysdiadochokinesia, proximal weakness of the lower limbs, diffuse wasting,
and stocking-type sensory disturbances. The neurological deficits were attributed to an abscess in the upper cerebellar vermis, myopathy
from corticosteroids, and polyneuropathy. Meropenem for 37 days and trimethoprime-sulfamethoxazole for 3 months resulted in a reduction of
the pulmonary, but not the cerebral lesions. Therefore, sultamicillin was begun, but without success. Long-term therapy with corticosteroids
for ITP may induce not only steroid myopathy but also immune-incompetence with the development of pulmonary and cerebral nocardiosis.
Cerebral nocardiosis may not sufficiently respond to long-term antibiotic therapy why switching to alternative antibiotics or surgery may be
necessary. Central nervous system (CNS) affection taking the form of supratentorial, cerebellar, or spinal cord abscesses from hematogenic
dissemination of a pulmonary infection with Nocardia sp. is a rare finding,1,2 and the induction of nocardiosis due to long-term therapy
with corticosteroids for idiopathic thrombocytopenia (ITP) is more rarely found.3-5 Two of these cases developed supratentorial abscesses.
However, both cerebellar and supratentorial abscesses from Nocardia sp. in a patient under corticosteroids for ITP, have not been reported.
The patient is an 83 years-old, human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative, Caucasian male, with a history of recurrent nasal bleedings
since childhood, recurrent gingival bleedings, frequent cutaneous hematoma after minor traumata, which were attributed to ITP diagnosed at
age 52 years, splenectomy at age 52 years for the ITP, coronary heart disease resulting in two myocardial infarctions at age 52 years,
corticosteroids for ITP since age 53 years, steroid-induced diabetes mellitus since age 53 years, requiring insulin since age 78 years,
arterial hypertension since years, hyperlipidemia since age 53 years, percutaneous transluminal coronary angioplasty at age 62 years,
aortocoronary bypass grafting at ages 64 and 75 years, atrial fibrillation since age 68 years, cataract surgery at ages 71 and 74 years,
bilateral carotid artery stenosis requiring stent implantation at age 72 years, a 6-fold stent placing for coronary stenoses at age 75
years, bilateral hypoacusis since age 78 years requiring hearing devices bilaterally and sensori-motor polyneuropathy since age 78 years.
Since age 82 years, he also noted a mild cognitive decline and non-specific visual impairment and started to use a stick for walking and a
walker since two weeks prior to admission. His family history was positive for diabetes mellitus and short stature in his mother. From age
68 years until admission, he was taking phenprocoumon. He was admitted at age 83 years because of chronic tiredness, dyspnea, hemoptysis,
and abdominal pain. Blood chemical findings showed leucocytosis with a maximum value of 38.8/nL (n, 4.0-9.0/nL) on hospital day (hd) 3,
thrombocytopenia with a minimum value of 4/nL (n, 150-450/nL) on hd 15 and hd 18, renal insufficiency, and elevated C-reactive protein with
a maximum value of 34.7 mg/dL (n, ≤ 0.6 mg/dL) at hd 3 (Table 1). There were also elevated glutamate-oxalate transaminase, glutamate
pyruvate transaminase, and lactate dehydrogenase (Table 1). Creatine-kinase was normal throughout hospitalization. There was slight
hypocalcemia (Table 1) and elevation of ferritin to 3817 ng/mL (n, 30-400 ng/mL). Thyroid function parameters were indicative of
hyperthyroidism. The HbA1c was 7.4% (n, ≤ 6%). X-ray of the lung revealed multiple reticulonodular infiltrates up to one cm in diameter over
both lungs with predominance in the left lower lobe, a pleural effusion in the horizontal interlobar fissure, and an encapsulated effusion
in the right-sided diagonal interlobar fissure. X-ray of the lung five weeks earlier had been normal. A CT-scan of the thorax showed an 11×7
cm, enhancing mass lesion in the right upper lobe with central and peripheral necrosis and multiple irregularly contoured hyperdensities
over both lungs (Fig. 1). Sputum cultures grew Nocardia sp. Clinical neurologic examination revealed slight dysarthria, dysphagia, bilateral
ptosis, bilateral hypoacusis, postural tremor, left-sided dysdiadochokinesia, weakness for hip extension bilaterally (M5-), reduced tendon
reflexes on the upper limbs and absent tendon reflexes on the lower limbs, diffuse wasting, stocking-type sensory disturbances bilaterally,
and ataxic stance. He was able to walk with a walker. MRI of the cerebrum showed a hyperintense, enhancing lesion of 4 mm in diameter in the
cranial part of the cerebellar vermis (Fig. 2). Additionally, there were small hyperintense lesions in the occipital deep white matter and
subcortically bilaterally (Fig. 2). Lumbar puncture was recommended, but contraindicated due to ITP. No manifestations of nocardiosis other
than in the lung and cerebrum were detected. For ITP, the patient received prednisolone 50 mg/d until hd 9. For the general infection, he
initially received amoxicillin between hd 2 and hd 4. From hd 4 to hd 7, he received caspofungin and between hd 5 and hd 7 piperazillin.
Meropenem was started on hd 8 and maintained until hd 45. He had never developed fever during the entire hospitalization. After dismissal,
the patient was switched to a long-term therapy with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazol. Shortly after admission, oral anticoagulation was stopped
because of severe thrombocytopenia of 4,000/nL (Table 1). Since hd 23, corticosteroids had to be restarted because of deteriorating ITP
(Table 1). His therapy at dismissal included danazol, furosemide, pantoprazole, atorvastatin, metoprolol, enalapril, amiodarone,
prednisolone, folic acid, and insulin in addition to the antibiotic. At the three month follow-up, dimension of the pulmonary lesions had
regressed. On the contrary, the cerebral lesions had progressed despite trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazol, promting a switch to sultamicillin and
then to meropenem. Unexpectedly, the patient died from acute myocardial infarction shortly thereafter. Autopsy excluded a pulmonary
malignancy as the underlying cause of nocardiosis and confirmed that antibiotic therapy was not effective in eradicating the cerebral
infection, although cerebral tissue cultures were negative for Nocardia sp. Nocardiosis is an opportunistic local infection with consecutive
hematogenic spread in half of the cases from the Gram-positive, filamentous, eosinophilic organism Nocardia sp. The most frequently found
species is N. farcinica,6,7 followed by N. asteroides,8-10 N. paucivorans,11 N. otitidiscaviarum,12 N. brasiliensis,13 N.
cyriacigeorgica,14,15 or N. transvalensis.14,16,17 Nocardiosis is an uncommon disease, but its frequency has increased due to the high
number of immunosuppressive treatments, improved diagnostic facilities, and increasing survival times of patients with malignancy.18
Patients become infected by inhalation, direct traumatic cutaneous inoculation, or by eating contaminated food.19 The most common primary
site of nocardiosis is the respiratory tract, being the origin of hematogenic dissemination with a high incidence to the skin, subcutaneous
tissue, or CNS.6,19,20 Extra-pulmonary manifestations of nocardiosis include CNS abscesses or meningitis,6 chorioiditis,6 intraocular
vasculitis,21 or renal abscesses.22 Most patients have an underlying chronic diseases or suffer from endogenous or drug-induced
immunosuppression with for instance TNF-alpha blockers, but Nocardia can also infect healthy subjects.23 Culture or biopsy followed by
identification of the infectious species by PCR is recommended because of the specific therapeutic strategies associated with each species
and their different sensitivity to antibiotics.6 Because of the high relapse rates, treatment is recommended to be continued for 12
months.24 CNS nocardiosis usually manifests as cerebral abscesses or rarely as meningitis or chorioiditis. The abscesses usually develop
supratentorially but cerebellar abscesses have been also reported (Table 2).2,25-27 Though the preference of Nocardia sp. for the CNS is
well known, CNS abscesses from Nocardia sp. are rare and account for only 1-2% of brain abscesses.1,28 In almost half of the patients with
pulmonary nocardiosis, dissemination is associated with brain abscesses.10 Early detection and treatment is important because the mortality
is three times higher than that of other bacterial cerebral abscesses.28 Since the literature about CNS nocardiosis takes the form of
anecdotal reports, small case series, or retrospective studies (Table 2), an optimal treatment approach has not yet been established.
Abscesses with Nocardia sp. represent a diagnostic and therapeutic challenge, since they are associated with high mortality rates,
particularly in immunocompromised patients. Cerebral abscesses are managed either conservatively with stereotactic aspiration, or by open
craniotomy and enucleation.29 Surgical treatment is indicated if the lesions are large and readily accessible or in case of progression of
the lesions within two weeks after initiation of the antibiotic treatment. There is growing evidence that the size of the cerebral lesion
and clinical and immune status of the patient are relevant to surgical decision making. In spite of the existing controversy with regard to
the surgical management of these lesions, an early diagnosis through stereotactic aspiration and the beginning of an antibiotic therapy are
essential for a favorable outcome.19 In most cases of cerebral nocardiosis the overall prognosis is favorable upon adequate antibiotic or
surgical therapy.30 However, there are several cases with poor outcome (Table 2).18,25,31 The patient presented herein is interesting
because of severe side-effects to long-term corticosteroid treatment for ITP, including pulmonary and cerebral nocardiosis, induction of
diabetes shortly after initiating corticosteroids at age 53 years, cataract, and possibly steroid myopathy. Whether corticosteroids could be
responsible also for arterial hypertension, dermal atrophy, or dermal bleedings remains speculative. Since arterial hypertension had
occurred already prior to the administration of steroids, a causal relationship is rather unlikely. It also remains elusive if myopathy was
due to the side-effects of corticosteroids alone or due to other causes. The combination of thrombocytopenia, diabetes, and hypoacusis has
been reported together with the thiamine-responsive megaloblastic anemia syndrome,32 but anemia was not a dominant feature in the present
patient. The combination of diabetes, hyperlipidemia, arterial hypertension, atrial fibrillation, thrombocytopenia, sensorineural hearing
loss, the renal cyst, myopathy, and cataract could also be attributed to a systemic metabolic defect as the underlying pathology.
Unfortunately, however, further diagnostic work-up into this direction was limited due to the ITP. The cause of the markedly elevated
ferritin levels remains elusive, but could be explained with the chronic infection. Pulmonary malignancy was definitively excluded at
autopsy. The slightly reduced calcium levels were attributed to hypoalbuminemia. That the antibiotic therapy definitively eradicated the
infection with Nocardia sp. remains speculative since negative culture results cannot be reliably interpreted as evidence that the infection
was eradicated. Whether the patient was resistent to the applied antibiotics and would have profited from linezolid, as has recently been
reported,33 is unknown. The present case shows that long-term therapy with corticosteroids for ITP may induce immune-incompetence, resulting
in the development of pulmonary and cerebral nocardiosis. Cerebral nocardiosis may not sufficiently respond to long-term antibiotic therapy
and may necessitate switching to alternative antibiotics or surgery. Long-term corticosteroid therapy may induce secondary steroid myopathy
or enhance primary metabolic myopathy. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. CT-scan of the thorax showing an enhancing mass
lesion in the right upper lobe with central and peripheral necrosis and multiple irregularly contoured hyperdensities over both lungs.
T1-weighted MRI images of the brain show a slightly enhancing mass lesion in the cerebellar vermis (A) and a hyperintense lesion in the
right occipital lobe (B). Hematological and Blood Chemical Values of the Described Patient during Hospitalisation for Nocardiosis RL,
reference limit; hd, hospital day; Leuko, leukocyte count; Ery, erythrocyte count; Thrombo, thrombocyte count; BUN, blood urea nitrogen;
Krea, creatinine; CRP, C-reactive protein; GOT, glutamate-oxalate-transaminase; GPT, glutamate-pyruvate-transaminase; LDH, lactate-
dehydrogenase; CPK, creatine-phosphokinase; nd, not done. Previous Reports during the Last 10 Years about Cerebral Nocardiosis N, number of
patients; Ni, not indicated.
