Rhabdoid tumor, first described in kidneys of infants and children, is an aggressive tumor that has been reported in several extrarenal
locations. In this report, we describe the case of a 40-year-old patient with gastric adenocarcinoma composed of histologically well-
differentiated glandular areas and focal rhabdoid zones. The rhabdoid component showed typical features such as abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm, eccentric nuclei, prominent nucleoli and intense focal positive immunohistochemical cytoplasmic reaction for vimentin.
Recognition of the rhabdoid phenotype in gastrointestinal tract neoplasms is important because this feature is associated with poor
prognosis and unresponsiveness to conventional therapy. Rhabdoid tumors were first described as a variant of Wilms tumor carrying an
unfavorable prognosis, but soon it became clear that this tumor was a distinct entity. Rhabdoid tumors have now been reported in nearly all
organs of the body, both renal and extrarenal including esophagus, stomach, small and large intestine, central nervous system, lung and
mediastinum, skin and soft tissue. These tumors are more common in childhood. Further, composite tumors having areas typical of
adenocarcinoma and focal Rhabdoid differentiation have also been described, the Rhabdoid differentiation being associated with a poorer
prognosis. We describe a rare case of gastric adenocarcinoma in a 40-year-old woman with focal rhabdoid differentiation. A 40-year-old woman
presented with complaints of lump in the abdomen since two months, which was rapidly increasing in size and was associated with decreased
appetite and weight loss. On examination, the patient was found in poor general condition with severe pallor and pedal edema. On palpation,
a 10 Χ 8 cm lump was noted in the epigastrium, which was firm, mobile and nontender. CT scan showed concentric thickening of the stomach
wall in the region of the distal body and pylorus, along with multiple hypoechoic shadows in the liver parenchyma [Figure 1]. On upper GI
endoscopy, large ulcer was seen in the distal part of the stomach, reaching up to the pylorus. The pylorus could not be negotiated by scope.
A biopsy taken simultaneously from the pylorus was however noncontributory. CT scan revealing growth in the stomach wall (white arrow)
infiltrating into the pancreas (black arrow) A provisional clinical diagnosis of carcinoma was made and a distal gastrectomy with
gastrojejunostomy performed. A large circumferential growth arising from the pylorus, adherent to the pancreatic capsule with mesocolon was
found. Multiple local gastric lymph nodes were also found enlarged. The liver showed multiple deposits. We received a distal gastrectomy
specimen measuring 12 × 7 × 4 cm with attached omentum measuring 14 × 12 × 3 cm. There was a circumferential ulceroproliferative growth in
the region of the body and antrum with maximum tumor diameter of 9 cm [Figure 2]. The tumor was close to the distal margin. A tumor
perforation was present in the posterior wall of stomach in antral region along the lesser curvature. Multiple lymph nodes were dissected
from along the lesser curvature. Gross appearance of the stomach showing a large ulcerative growth in the distal region, reaching almost up
to the resected margin (marker) On microscopy, the tumor was found to be predominantly composed of large lakes of mucin with clusters as
well as singly lying atypical cells with high N:C ratio, pleomorphic nuclei and prominent nucleoli. Many signet ring cells were also seen
[Figure 3]. There was an adjacent area with tumor cells lying in solid sheets, with dyscohesive round-to-oval cells having moderate amount
of eosinophilic cytoplasm, eccentric nuclei and prominent nucleoli [Figure 4]. Occasional cells showed hyaline (PAS positive) inclusions.
There was evidence of lymphatic permeation with metastatic deposits in lymph nodes. Immunochemistry revealed cytokeratin and EMA positivity
in both well-differentiated mucinous areas as well as solid areas and CEA negative in both. The solid area was also focally positive for
vimentin and negative for smooth muscle antigen and ckit. On the basis of morphological and immunochemical findings, a diagnosis of mucinous
adenocarcinoma (signet ring type) with foci of rhabdoid differentiation was made. Section from the stomach showing well-differentiated
adenocarcinoma with pools of mucin and floating small glands and signet ring cells. H and E, ×100 High-power view of solid area showing
dyscohesive cells with intracytoplasmic eosinophilic inclusions (arrows), eccentric nuclei and prominent nucleoli. H and E, ×400 Malignant
rhabdoid tumor was originally described in 1978 as a renal malignant tumor of infancy and childhood . Tumors of similar clinicopathological
features have been cited in a variety of extrarenal sites and are known to carry a poor prognosis. Also composite extrarenal rhabdoid tumors
(CERTs), in which recognizable parent neoplasms are admixed with rhabdoid areas, have been recognized in several topographic sites including
CNS, subcutaneous tissue and GIT. Though the pure rhabdoid tumors are more common in infancy and childhood, the composite tumors show a wide
range of age distribution. However, this type of morphological combination remains rare and only a few cases of gastric adenocarcinoma with
rhabdoid areas have been reported in the literature till date. One case of gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) with rhabdoid areas has
also been reported. Most of the gastric adenocarcinomas with rhabdoid areas are poorly differentiated and show widespread metastases to the
surrounding organs and liver at the time of diagnosis, similar to the findings in our case. This is probably due to a high rate of lymphatic
and vascular permeation at the time of diagnosis. The tumor calls show positive immunoreactivity for both vimentin and cytokeratin in their
cytoplasm. Utsunomiya et al. studied 239 poorly differentiated adenocarcinomas of the stomach with solid components after reviewing 3578
cases, for the expression of vimentin. Of these, 15 cases (0.4%) were vimentin positive and 12 (0.3%) were associated with varying amount of
rhabdoid phenotype and prominent lymphatic permeation. The authors suggested that the dyscohesive nature of the cells maybe responsible for
the rapid metastases and vimentin may affect cell-to-cell interaction. They also found prognosis of vimentin positive solid tumors poorer
than vimentin-negative poorly differentiated tumors with solid areas. Coexpression of vimentin and cytokeratin along with the rhabdoid
phenotype is thus considered to be a marker of poorer prognosis. In our case also, the tumor was widespread at the time of diagnosis and the
patient died within four months despite treatment, thus confirming an aggressive biological behavior of such tumors. Recognition of the
rhabdoid phenotype in gastrointestinal tract neoplasms is important because this feature is associated with poor prognosis and
unresponsiveness to conventional therapy. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
