Approximately 15 patients with partial trisomy 9p involving de novo duplications have been previously described. Here, we present clinical,
cytogenetic, FISH and aCGH findings in a patient with a de novo complex rearrangement in the short arm of chromosome 9 involving an inverted
duplication at 9p24→p21.3 and a deletion at 9pter→p24.2. FISH probes generated from BACs selected from the UCSC genome browser were utilized
to verify this rearrangement. It is likely that some previously described duplications of 9p may also be products of complex chromosomal
aberrations. This report in which FISH and aCGH were used to more comprehensively characterize the genomic rearrangement in a patient with
clinical manifestations of 9p duplication syndrome underscores the importance of further characterizing cytogenetically detected
rearrangements. Duplication of short-arm material from chromosome 9 (or partial trisomy 9p) was first described by Rethore et al. and is now
a well-described syndrome that has been documented in more than 150 patients [Rethore et al., 1970; Centerwall and Beatty-DeSana, 1975]. In
most of these patients, the duplication 9p is a result of an abnormal chromosome segregation of a balanced translocation in one of the
parents [Baccichetti and Tenconi, 1973; Wajntal et al., 1985]. De novo duplications of this chromosomal region have been previously
described in approximately 15 patients [Chiyo et al., 1976; Baccichetti et al., 1979; Fryns et al., 1979; Motegi et al., 1985; Mattina et
al., 1987; Haddad et al., 1996; Fujimoto et al., 1998; Tsezou et al., 2000; Krepischi-Santos and Vianna-Morgante, 2003]. Patients with
partial trisomy of the short arm of chromosome 9 often display a wide spectrum of clinical symptoms including developmental delay,
craniofacial abnormalities (bulbous nose, hypertelorism, downward-slanting palpebral fissures), limb abnormalities (short fingers and toes
with small nails, fifth-finger clinodactyly) and skeletal malformations. Here, we describe a patient with a de novo complex rearrangement of
the short arm of chromosome 9, involving duplication and deletion of chromosomal material detected by GTG banding, characterized and
delineated further by FISH and array CGH. A 4-month-old female infant was evaluated in the craniofacial clinic for a complete cleft of the
soft palate. She had difficulty in feeding with aspirations and related poor weight gain. She was born to a 25-year-old gravida III para II
mother of mixed European descent and 21-year-old father of English descent. Her mother presented late for prenatal care due to insurance
issues. There were no reported exposures to medications, alcohol or tobacco. Prenatal ultrasound monitoring at an outside institution during
the third trimester was notable for decreased growth, however, prenatal chromosome analysis was not performed. Vaginal delivery was induced
9 days prior to the due date without complications. Apgar scores were 9 and 10 after 1 and 5 min. Birth weight was 2.414 kg (3rd percentile
for gestational age), head circumference was 33 cm (25th percentile for gestational age), and length was 45.7 cm (<3rd percentile for
gestational age). Family history was unremarkable for cleft lip/palate or other birth defects, known chromosomal abnormalities and recurrent
miscarriages. There was no known consanguinity. On examination, the patient was alert and active with a normal body habitus. Length, weight,
and head circumference at 4 months were 55.5 cm (2nd percentile), 4.83 kg (3rd percentile), and 39.4 cm (21st percentile), respectively.
Notable findings included the appearance of large, prominent deep set eyes with an interpupillary distance of 4.5 cm (50th–75th percentile)
and an intercanthal distance of 2.6 cm (75th–97th percentile). Formal ophthalmology evaluation did not reveal macrocornea or other
significant structural abnormalities. Additional findings included complete cleft of the soft palate, cupped but not low-set ears, bulbous
nose, thin upper lip, small mouth and mild micrognathia. The remaining physical examination was notable for normal palmar creases,
significant fifth-digit clinodactyly bilaterally, with only one 5th digital crease, dimpling of the elbows, and sacral dimples bilaterally.
No murmurs were appreciated on the cardiac exam and the rest of the physical examination was unremarkable (fig. 1A and B). At the initial
encounter (age of 4 months), appropriate developmental milestones had been achieved. The combination of the intrauterine growth retardation,
dysmorphic facial features and cleft of the soft palate raised the possibility of a syndrome diagnosis. Blood was sent for chromosome
analysis. The patient was seen at follow-up at 15 months of age. Interim history was notable for surgical repair of her cleft approximately
3 months prior to examination. At 15 months, her development was delayed, as she was not able to sit unsupported for long periods of time.
She was crawling but could not pull to a stand or cruise, and had limited vocalization. Further evaluation revealed a normal echocardiogram
at 22 months, normal ophthalmology examination and moderate right-sided renal pelviectasis. New family history revealed a maternal second
cousin with a cleft lip, but further details were not available. Length, weight, and head circumference were 73.5 cm (8th percentile), 9.4
kg (8th percentile), and 45.1 cm (12th percentile). In addition to the previously described features, her ears had developed a more cupped
and floppy appearance, her big toes appeared broadened with dystrophic nails bilaterally, and there was mild hypotonia. Metaphase spread
preparations from the patient and her parents’ peripheral blood lymphocyte cultures and GTG-banding were performed according to standard
methods. FISH was initially performed on the patient's metaphase chromosomes using a whole chromosome 9 painting probe (Rainbow Scientific
Inc., Windsor, Conn., USA) according to the manufacturer's protocol. Additional FISH experiments were performed using BAC clones RP11-399M15
and RP11-32D4 (BACPAC Resources, Children's Hospital Oakland Research Institute, Oakland, Calif., USA) and the TelVysion 9p probe (Abbott
Molecular/Vysis, Inc., Downers Grove, Ill., USA). BAC DNA was isolated by standard procedures and direct-labeled with Spectrum Green and
Spectrum Orange by nick translation (Abbott Molecular/Vysis, Inc.). Chromosomes were counterstained with 4’,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole
(DAPI) and images were captured using the CytoVysion Imaging System (Applied Imaging, Pittsburg, Pa., USA). A human genome CGH Microarray
244K (Agilent Technologies, Inc., Santa Clara, Calif., USA) was used to define more precisely the duplicated and deleted chromosomal regions
[Iafrate et al., 2004]. This array platform contains 236,000 60-mer oligonucleotide probes spanning coding and noncoding genomic sequences
with a median spacing of 7.4 kb and 16.5 kb, respectively. More than 99% of the genes on this array contain 3 or more probes and therefore a
minimum of 3 consecutive probes was used as a cutoff for calling a genomic imbalance. The CGH analytics software was used for aberration
analysis and visualization, using the Aberration Detection Method algorithm, ADM2, to make the genomic imbalance calls. Probe sequence
annotation was based on NCBI Build 36.1 (hg18) of the human genome. ‘Benign’ copy number variants were identified via the Database of
Genomic Variants (http://projects.tcag.ca/variation/) based on information deposited as of November 20, 2008. Based on GTG-banding analysis,
an inverted duplication was detected between bands p21 and p23 on chromosome 9, and since parental karyotypes were both normal, the
patient's karyotype was designated as 46,XX,dup(9)(p23p21)dn (fig. 2A). FISH analysis using a whole chromosome 9 painting probe confirmed
that the extrachromosomal material was of chromosome 9 origin. The suspected inversion of the duplicated segment and the deletion revealed
by aCGH were confirmed by FISH using RP11-399M15 and RP11-32D4 BAC clones and a TelVysion 9p probe as shown in fig. 2B and C. FISH performed
on parental chromosomes revealed a normal hybridization pattern with no evidence of cryptic inversion. Oligonucleotide-based array CGH
confirmed and precisely delineated the observed duplication and additionally revealed a deletion on the short arm of chromosome 9 (fig. 3).
The deleted region begins at the 9pter-most informative probe on the array (at nucleotide position 194,193; 9p24.3) and extends proximally
to nucleotide 3,745,031 (9p24.2). The duplicated region begins at nucleotide 3,761,025 (9p24.2) and continues proximally to nucleotide
20,111,633 (9p21.3). This corresponds to a deletion of at least 3.55 Mb in size and a duplication of at least 16.35 Mb in size. No known
genes were identified at the breakpoints and no significant duplications (i.e., >1000 bp) were observed within 1 Mb upstream and downstream
of the duplication breakpoints. A list of genes mapped to the duplicated and deleted regions is included in online supplementary table 1
(www.karger.com?doi=10.1159/000251966). Duplication of 9p is well described in the scientific literature with more than 150 patients
reported. However, most of these reported duplications are due to malsegregation of chromosomes inherited from a parent with a reciprocal
translocation involving chromosome 9, with relatively few pure 9p duplications arising de novo [Chiyo et al., 1976; Baccichetti et al.,
1979; Fryns et al., 1979; Motegi et al., 1985; Mattina et al., 1987; Haddad et al., 1996; Fujimoto et al., 1998; Tsezou et al., 2000;
Bonaglia et al., 2002; Krepischi-Santos and Vianna-Morgante, 2003; Swinkels et al., 2008]. Despite varying sizes of duplicated chromosomal
segments, there is a significant overlap in clinical features in duplication 9p syndrome, which is attributed to the terminal segment of 9p.
The characteristic facial features include microcephaly, enophthalmos, hypertelorism, antimongoloid slant of palpebral fissures,
micrognathia, broad nasal root with bulbous nasal tip, downturned corners of the mouth, and anomalous ears [Haddad et al., 1996; Fujimoto et
al., 1998]. Other distinctive trisomy 9p manifestations reported are psychomotor retardation, growth retardation, hypotonia, strabismus,
myopia, short neck, brachymesophalangy, and small hands and feet. We reviewed the findings of patients with de novo 9p duplication (no other
cytogenetic abnormalities), and compared the findings with our patient (table 1). The phenotype of our patient is similar to the
malformation spectrum frequently described in other patients with partial trisomy 9p (fig. 1A and B). However, some features noted in our
patient differed from previously described patients with duplication 9p, such as the cleft palate and large eyes. Therefore to better
characterize the chromosome 9 abnormality, conventional cytogenetics was supplemented with FISH on metaphase chromosomes and
oligonucleotide-based aCGH. The aCGH-based analysis defined more precisely the location and size of the duplication and revealed an
unexpected 3.55-Mb terminal 9p deletion. Patients with deletion 9p have been characterized both clinically and cytogenetically. Alfi et al.
described the first series of patients and others have further characterized the distinctive features of trigonocephaly, midface hypoplasia,
upward-slanting palpebral fissures, and a long philtrum. Our patient did not have all of these characteristic features (table 2), and this
could be due to the fact that her deletion does not include what is thought to be the critical region at 9p22 responsible for the classical
9p deletion phenotype [Alfi et al., 1973, 1976; Huret et al., 1988; Christ et al., 1999; Kawara et al., 2006; Swinkels et al., 2008]. A
complex de novo rearrangement of 9p involving duplication and deletion has been characterized by GTG banding and FISH in 1 patient [Teebi et
al., 1993]. A similar rearrangement has been recently investigated by routine cytogenetics and FISH as well as aCGH in 2 other patients
[Swinkels et al., 2008]. These 3 patients and our case shown in table 3 clearly illustrate that rearrangements in this area of 9p may be
more complex than originally assessed by routine cytogenetics. The phenotype of these 2 patients for whom the breakpoints and size of the
dup/del have been precisely defined by aCGH differs from that of our patient and was more similar to the 9p deletion phenotype [Swinkels et
al., 2008]. This is most likely because they carry larger deletions involving 9p22 and duplications with more proximal breakpoints (at p12
and p13.3). The region of overlap between the former 2 patients and our patient appears to be limited to 9p22.3→p21.3. Since the structural
configuration of the abnormal chromosome could not be determined from the aCGH results, FISH on metaphase chromosomes with selected BAC
clones was utilized to establish the orientation of the rearranged segment and to evaluate the parental chromosomes to rule out the
possibility of a cryptic inversion. Precise characterization of any structural chromosome abnormality is important because the nature of it
may affect a clinical manifestation in the carrier due to possible gene disruption, creation of a chimeric transcript and/or position
effect. It also may shed light on the mechanism of the rearrangement as well as to aid genetic counseling and possible recurrence risk
evaluation. Our proband's parental karyotypes were apparently normal based on both GTG and FISH analysis. Therefore, the rearrangement in
our patient is considered a de novo event, and given that there is no evidence for the presence of low-copy repeats known to lead to
recurrent structural rearrangements by nonallelic homologous recombination, there is no increase in recurrence risk for this couple [Lupski
and Stankiewicz, 2005]. Nonhomologous end joining mechanism has been considered as a mechanism for 9p dup/del as previously described
[Chabchoub et al., 2007]. It was postulated that this rearrangement was facilitated by homologous LINE sequences identified at breakpoints
on the short arms of chromosome 9 and chromosome 5 with a subsequent end healing by neo-telomere formation and chromosome 5 telomere capture
on the der(9) chromosomes. Based on our aCGH and FISH results there is no evidence of exchange of material between the abnormal chromosome 9
and any other chromosome in our patient. 9p rearrangements with scattered breakpoints have been described previously [Christ et al., 1999;
Jehee et al., 2005], and rearrangements involving inverted dup/del have been reported for other chromosomes. Several mechanisms leading to
such rearrangements were hypothesized, however the causes still remain unclear [Bonaglia et al., 2000; Krepischi-Santos and Vianna-Morgante,
2003]. Elucidation of the mechanism involved in our patient's rearrangement would require extensive molecular workup which is beyond the
scope of this report. Based on the UCSC database there are 45 genes annotated to the deleted and duplicated regions in our patient (online
suppl. table 1). From the deleted region, the DMRT1, 2, and 3 genes are known to be critical for sexual determination and development. There
is evidence for haploinsufficiency of these genes, as a result of distal 9p monosomy, resulting in a dosage-dependent mechanism for abnormal
testicular and ovarian development in otherwise karyotypically normal males and females [Muroya et al., 2000; Shan et al., 2000; Livadas et
al., 2003]. Although at least two 46,XX,del(9p) females reportedly had normal pubertal development [Ounap et al., 2004], close monitoring
for impaired pubertal development and ovarian dysfunction is reasonable. Disruption of the DOCK8 gene was reported in 2 unrelated patients
with mental retardation and developmental disabilities [Griggs et al., 2008]. Loss of ANKRD15 gene resulting from a common 225-kb deletion
at 9p24.3 was identified in 9 children with congenital cerebral palsy. Based on evidence that ANKRD15 is maternally imprinted, deletion of
the paternal copy could have clinical implications [Lerer et al., 2005]. We do not know the relevance of this gene to our patient as the
parental origin of her abnormal chromosome 9 is unknown. Although we are not able to define any specific contribution of the duplicated
genes to the phenotype of our patient or to predict potential future complications, it is plausible to assume that altered copy number of
genes mapped to the duplicated region (e.g. JAK2 gene) whose role is well documented in many signaling/regulation pathways (i.e. fat
metabolism, body growth) may affect the phenotype and contribute to future complications in our patient [Kaushansky, 2005]. To our
knowledge, de novo duplication/deletion of 9p has been precisely characterized by employing routine cytogenetics, FISH, BAC aCGH [Swinkels
et al., 2008] and oligonucleotide aCGH (our case) in only 3 patients. It is quite conceivable that some of the previously reported patients
with rearrangements of 9p have more complex aberrations with concomitant deletions and duplications undetected by conventional chromosome
banding and FISH. Fully characterizing these complex rearrangements may provide clues to the clinical manifestations of the genes in the
affected region, as in our patient, the genes in the region of duplication/deletion have not been associated with cleft palate. Such studies
with full molecular characterization of cytogenetic findings in patients with duplication/deletions are important to better understand
phenotype-karyotype correlations and to define critical regions for identification of candidate genes. The authors would like to thank Dr.
Charles Lee at Brigham and Women's Hospital, Harvard Medical School for his assistance and advice on the array CGH aspects of our patient's
evaluation. In addition, we thank our patient's parents who willingly provided the necessary information and samples for this report. We are
grateful for their contribution and allowing us to participate in their daughter's care. Patient at 4 months of age. A Front view: note the
large-appearing eyes, hypertelorism, bulbous nose, thin vermilion, small-appearing mouth and subtle micrognathia. B Clinodactyly of the 5th
digit. Partial karyotype of the patient showing the normal (left) and the abnormal (right) chromosome 9. A GTG banding. B FISH with the
RP11-399M15 probe (spectrum green) and the RP11-32D4 probe (spectrum orange). Note the duplication and reverse orientation of the
hybridization signals on the abnormal chromosome 9. C FISH with the Tel9p probe (spectrum green) and the CEP9 probe (spectrum orange)
demonstrating deletion on the abnormal chromosome 9. Oligonucleotide aCGH results of chromosome 9 in a patient with 9p duplication and
deletion. The deletion is shown with red arrows on the upper side and duplication is shown with blue arrows on the lower side. Clinical
features and chromosome breakpoints in patients with de novo pure 9p duplication. Patient 1 – brachycephaly, high forehead, hypertelorism,
epicanthus, deep-set eyes, bulbous nose, thin upper lip, downturned corners of the mouth, cup-shaped ears, micro-/retrognathia, short broad
neck, widely spaced nipples, single palmar crease, syndactyly of the 3rd–4th fingers and 2nd– 4th toes’ hypoplastic nails, developmental
delay Patient 2 – developmental delay, brachycephaly, frontal bossing,hypertelorism, epicanthus, deep-set eyes, strabismus, bulbous nose,
short upper lip, downturned corners of the mouth, cup-shaped ears, short broad neck, widely spaced nipples, short thumbs, single palmar
creases Bolding represents features in common with our patient. Clinical features and chromosome breakpoints in patients with 9p deletion
Bolding represents features in common with our patient. Clinical features and chromosome breakpoints in patients with pure de novo 9p
deletion and duplication Bolding represents features in common with our patient.
