A 70-year-old-man was evaluated as an outpatient for chronic abdominal pain for the last two years. The pain was intermittent and not severe
enough for him to seek immediate medical attention. There was no history of vomiting, abdomen distension, or of similar episodes in the
past. He gave no history of any change in his bowel habits. There was no significant past medical history. On examination, his vital signs
were stable. Abdominal examination was normal. An upper gastrointestinal series with small-bowel follow-through and a double contrast barium
enema was performed, which clinched the diagnosis [Figures 1 and 2]. Barium meal follow-through in the 70-year-old patient with chronic
abdominal pain Double contrast barium enema in the 70-year-old patient with chronic abdominal pain The upper gastrointestinal series with
small-bowel follow- through [Figure 1] shows a normal stomach. The small bowel is located in the right abdomen. Double contrast barium enema
[Figure 2] reveals a highly placed cecum in the left upper quadrant. The diagnosis is type I midgut malrotation without obstruction. During
the first 2 months of embryonic development, the growth of the intestinal tract exceeds the capacity of the abdominal cavity, and the bowel
develops outside the abdomen. At 10-12 weeks' gestation, the intestinal tract returns to its intra-abdominal location. During its return to
the abdominal cavity, the intestine undergoes a rotation to assume its normal anatomic relationships. Midgut malrotation can be classified
into three types according to the three stages of normal rotation: Types I, II, and III. Type I malrotation or nonrotation is an error in
rotation before 6 weeks of gestational age. The duodenum and the large bowel stop rotating after their first 90° counter-clockwise rotation
so that the proximal small bowel, including the duodenojejunal junction, lies on the right and the cecum lies on the left. It is usually
associated with good fixation so the chances of volvulus are low. A rare type II malrotation occurs between 6 and 10 weeks of gestational
age, which affects primarily the duodenum. In type IIA, there is nonrotation of the duodenum only, and in type IIB there is reverse rotation
of the duodenum and the colon. An error after 10 weeks of gestational age results in type III malrotation, where the duodenum has 90° of
rotation remaining to complete and the large bowel has 180° left. In Type III A, on barium study, there is either a complete or incomplete
obstruction due to Ladd's bands or due to volvulus. The duodenojejunal junction and the cecum are malpositioned, often lying in the
midline.In type III B there is incomplete fixation of the hepatic flexure, in type III C incomplete fixation of the cecum, and in type III D
there is an internal hernia at the ligament of Trietz. Duodenal bands arise from the posterior abdominal peritoneum and extend from the
liver to the colon, passing anterior to the duodenum. Usually, the distal descending duodenum or the third and fourth parts of the duodenum
are obstructed by these bands, which are usually referred to as Ladd's bands. Children and neonates with malrotation of the midgut normally
present with bilious vomiting. Adults, however, present with vague symptoms such as vomiting, weight loss, and recurrent, colicky abdominal
pain. Intestinal obstruction, diarrhea, malabsorption, peritonitis, and septic shock have also been reported. Plain x-ray of the abdomen is
useful in diagnosing intestinal obstruction. Barium studies like barium meal follow-through (BMFT) and barium enema are useful in
identifying the position of the duodenojejunal flexure and the cecum. Barium study shows typical signs of volvulus like the corkscrew sign
or a twisted ribbon appearance. On CT scan, the whirlpool sign can be seen.Ultrasound examination shows the superior mesenteric vein lying
to the left of the artery, which suggests malrotation in almost all cases. Both adults and children found to have symptomatic malrotation
should undergo surgery expeditiously. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
