There are several non-neoplastic lesions which mimick intramedullary spinal cord neoplasm in their radiographic and clinical presentation.
These can be classified as either infectious (TB, fungal, bacterial, parasytic, syphilis, CMV, HSV) and non-infectious (sarcoid, MS,
myelitis, ADEM, SLE) inflammatory lesions, idiopathic necrotizing myelopathy, unusual vascular lesions and radiation myelopathy. Although
biopsy may be indicated in many cases, an erroneous diagnosis of intramedullary neoplasm can often be eliminated pre-operatively. the
authors report a very rare case of intramedullary non-specific inflammatory lesion of unknown origin, without signs of infection or
demyelinization, in a woman who showed no other evidence of systemic disease. Intramedullary lesions that mimick a tumor can be various and
difficult to interpret. Preoperative MRI does not allow a certain diagnosis because these lesions have a very similar signal intensity
pattern. Specific tests for infective pathologies are useful for diagnosis, but histological examination is essential for establishing a
certain diagnosis. In our case the final histological examination and the specific tests that we performed have not cleared our doubts
regarding the nature of the lesion that remains controversial. There are several non-neoplastic lesions which mimick intramedullary spinal
cord neoplasm. These can be classified as either infectious (TB, fungal, bacterial, parasytic, syphilis, CMV, HSV) and non-infectious
(sarcoid, MS, myelitis, ADEM, SLE) inflammatory lesions, idiopathic necrotizing myelopathy, unusual vascular lesions and radiation
myelopathy. Although biopsy may be indicated in many cases, an erroneous diagnosis of intramedullary neoplasm can often be eliminated pre-
operatively. A 71-year-old Italian woman presented a 2-month history of numbness and pain involving the left leg. She underwent orthopedic
evaluation and articular ankle echography for the diagnostic suspicion of Baker cyst, that were negative. She also underwent lumbosacral MRI
that did not show any signs of degenerative or traumatic injuries. One month later she developed radicular pain in both legs with
hypoesthesia. She underwent cervico-dorsal MRI with contrast that showed a gadolinium-enhancing lesion within the spinal cord at T5-6 with
maximum diameter of 11 mm. In the axial sequences the lesion seemed to be completely intramedullary without any signs of bulging. The
neuroradiological aspects of the lesion were interpreted as an intramedullary astrocytoma or ependymoma. Neurologically, she had symmetric
tendon reflexes, exaggerated in the legs, Babinsky sign on both legs, moderate paraparesis, hypoesthesia and dysesthesia of the entire left
leg and left thorax below the T5 metamer. One month after the first MRI, during recovery, she underwent another dorsal MRI with contrast,
which confirmed the presence of this intramedullary gadolinium-enhancing lesion at level T5-T6: this was interpreted as hemangioblastoma or
ependymoma but, according to the neuroradiologist, it was impossibile to exclude other diagnostic hypothese (fig.1). As a matter of fact,
the worsening of neurological symptomatology, expecially the progression of paraparesis, persuaded us to adopt a decompressive surgical
strategy and so the patient underwent surgical treatment. A T5-T6-T7 laminectomy was performed, and the dura was opened. There was no
evidence of extramedullary abnormality. Posterior longitudinal myelotomy was performed and a well-circumscribed grayish-red lesion was
exposed. A histological sample for the extemporary and definitive examination was taken, which showed a histological pattern of small-cell
tumoral lesion. For this reason a complete removal with CUSA was performed. Preoperative MRI: sagittal (a) and axial (b/c) T1 weighted image
with contrast showing the intramedullary gadolinium-enhancing lesion at level T5-T6. The definitive histological examination of the specimen
revealed an inflammatory lesion which was composed of a mixed infiltration of mature B and T lymphocytes, with plasma cells and macrophages.
Abundant vascular channels, often with hyperplastic endothelium, and focal fibroblastic reaction were observed. The macrophages were
occasionally organized to form granulomas. This mass of non-neoplastic inflammatory cells of unknown origin was also studied using
histochemical technique (PAS and Ziehl Neelsen), but no fungal or bacteria were found. Also the non-neoplastic nature of the lesion was
demonstrated by immunohistochemical studies, which confirmed the mixed nature of lymphocytes, and by the polyclonality of plasma cells with
positivity for kappa and lambda light chains of immunoglobulins (fig 2, 3). Postoperatively, there was a complete regression of radicular
pain and paresthesia in the left thorax and leg. Postoperative dorsal MRI with contrast was performed 10 days after surgery and confirmed
complete removal of the lesion without any signs of residual disease (fig.4a). Postoperative laboratory and radiological exams was
performed, such as Toxotest, BK test and Chest RX for the diagnostic hypothesis of toxoplasmosis, TBC, histiocitosys X, or sarcoidosis, that
were all negative. We also performed the liquor level of cerebrospinal fluid angiotensinconverting enzyme (ACE) in suspected
neurosarcoidosi, which showed a value of 3.2 nmol/mL/min, non discriminatory. The patient was discharged on the seventh postoperative day.
At follow up thoracic MRI with contrast was performed 3 (fig.4b) and 10 months (fig.4c) after surgery, and did not show any signs of
disease. 1a/b Cytoplasmic immunoreactivity for CD68 is evident. 2a/b -The lesion is composed of a mixture of lymphocytes with plasmacells
and macrophages. In figure b a granulomatous reaction is evident. A CD 68 reactivity - 3b Surface immunoreactivity for CD3. 4/5 ziehl-
Neelsen reactivity and Surface immunoreactivity for CD20 Postoperative MRI: Sagittal T1 weighted image with gadolinium 10 days (a), 3 months
(b), and 10 months (c) after surgery. We will discuss in detail the differential diagnosis we considered: Intramedullary tumours of the
spinal cord are rare. The most common are astrocytomas and ependymomas which together account for 90%. These lesions can cause significant
difficulties in the differential diagnosis between inflammatory diseases such as multiple sclerosis (MS) and acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM), and vascular abnormalities and neoplasms. Because the clinical characteristics of neoplastic and non-neoplastic
spinal cord lesions may be very similar, we rely on MRI for making a correct diagnosis. The MRI makes it possible to locate tumours in the
extradural, intradural or extramedullary spaces, or within the cord itself; the tumour's location and its MRI characteristics may actually
identify its specific type. In some instances, however, it is quite difficult to identify the exact nature of the pathological changes
without a complete and detailed history and clinical examination . In addition, due to the extreme heterogenity of the symptoms and
radiological aspects of these lesions, which causes many difficulties in differential diagnosis, it's very important to perform a
histological examination, and an extemporary histological finding during surgery. In our case the extemporary histological finding oriented
us towards a small cell tumoral lesion, guiding our surgical strategy towards a total removal instead of a biopsy. The most common
intramedullary tumors are astrocytomas and ependymomas. Cytological analysis of our lesion did not show the presence of glial-type tumoral
cells. In addition, the non-neoplastic nature of the lesion was confirmed by isolation, using immunohistochemical techniques, of T and B
lynphoid cells, with the individuation of a polyclonality of plasma cells and with the evidence of slight kappa and lambda chains of
immunoglobulins. This histological pattern indicated the possibility of a granulomatous inflammatory intramedullary lesion. Granulomatous
lesions affecting the spinal cord are principally tubercolosis, sarcoidosis, brucellosis and histocytosis X . In our case the postoperative
performance of a BK test and toxotest excluded the possibility of TBC and toxoplasmosis . Postoperative radiological investigations like
chest X-ray, excluded presence of extramedullary localizations of histiocytosis X and sarcoidosis . As a matter of fact, our first
diagnostic hypothesis, was sarcoidosis, that is characterized by the formation of non-caseating multiple granulomas and is similar in
appearance to lesions from tuberculosis, although sarcoid lesions do not contain caseation, typical necrosis or TB bacilli. Giant
epithelioid cells, otherwise called Langhan cells, may be numerous or infrequent, but contain intracytoplasmatic inclusions that are not
present in tubercolosis and are called Schaumann bodies. These inclusions, however, are not specific for sarcoidosis . Diagnosis of
neurosarcoidosis depends upon demonstration of a systemic sarcoidosis and the exclusion of other causes for the neurological status. If the
lesions of the nervous system do not appear to involve other tissues, as in our case, the diagnosis is misinterpretable and requires
histological confirmation . This histological evaluation, in our case, did not show any specific aspects of neurosarcoidosis. Several
authors consider the specificity of cerebrospinal fluid angiotensinconverting enzyme (ACE) high enough to warrant inclusion in the
diagnostic evaluation of patients in whom CNS neurosarcoidosis is being considered. However the diagnostic accuracy of cerebrospinal fluid
ACE is not clearly defined and can not replace the biopsy. ACE was first reported to be increased in CSF in patient with CNS sarcoidosis in
the mid-1980s. Currently the discriminator value of 8 nmol/mL/min was associated with the best combination of sensitivity (55%) and
specificity (94%) In our case the cerebrospinal fluid ACE activity was 3.2 nmol/mL/min. Futhermore the Kveim test, a specific skin test used
to establish the diagnosis of sarcoidosis, wich is usually positive from 60% to 90% depending on the stadium of the desease, in this case
was impossible to execute because in our country is not legal. In addition, non-tumoral intamedullary lesions generally originate from
bacterial, fungal or parasytic localizations, but is unusual for an intramedullary abscess to be present so soon in the absence of systemic
disease, as in our case. In these cases the most frequent etiopathology of infection depends on intravenous drug use and immune deficiency
disorders, aspects that were not present in our patient . The lesion was studied with histochemical techniques, like PAS and Ziehl Neelsen,
that excluded the possibility of a bacterial or fungal nature. Another intamedullary lesion that mimicks a tumor can be an MS localization.
Isolated spinal cord involvement has been rare and can be the initial manifestation of MS . MS is characterized by numerous areas of
demyelination and sclerosis in CNS. Generally, in cases without periferical demyelinating lesions, spinal cord biopsy may be a necessary
course of action. The histological specific aspects of MS are demyelinating lesions with aggregates of foamy histiocytes . In our case the
possibility of MS lesion was excluded because the lesion did not present these histological aspects and there was no evidence of
demyelinating lesions in other districts . Another aspect that has to be analysed is the possibility that this lesion may be an
intramedullary localization of a demyelinating disease such as SNM (subacute necrotizing myelopathy) . The intramedullary pathological
changes that accompany this disease have been well characterized and consist of demyelination, myelomalacia and necrosis, associated with a
proliferation of hyalinized capillary-sized vessels and occasional intraluminal thrombosis and endoluminal calcifications , aspects which
were not present in our case. Another lesion which may mimick an intramedullary tumor is radiation melyopathy . The most common type of this
disease is called Chronic Progressive Radiation Myelopathy CPRM, that usually appears 15-20 months after radiation therapy. The histological
pattern is very similar to SNM, with plasmacytic infiltration, necrosis and venous teleangectasias. In our case the patient didn't show
these aspects and moreover had never undergone radiation therapy. Furthermore degenerative diseases can mimick intramedullary tumors caused
by contrast uptake of the myelopathy; In our case imaging excluded such an origin of the disease. In our experience it is considered
appropriate strategy decompression surgery to be performed as soon as the symptoms given by compression of cord manifested by worsening
paraparesis or paraplegia. All of that is supported later by histological analysis that can guide intraoperative tank towards the complete
removal or to a simple biopsy then integrated with medical therapy. In our case, the therapeutic strategy "wait and see" was based
exclusively on the aggravation of the clinical, especially neurological symptoms, radiological outcome and appearance of the extemporaneous
histological lesions that favored an injury repetitive small cell lung cancer. All these aspects justified up to us the complete removal of
the lesion, then the result is justified by the complete regression of symptoms. Intramedullary lesions that mimick a tumor can be various
and difficult to interpret. Preoperative MRI does not allow a certain diagnosis because these lesions have a very similar signal intensity
pattern. Specific tests for infective pathologies such as toxoplasmosis and TBC, besides specific tests for sarcoidosis, are useful for
diagnosis. Histological examination is often essential for establishing a certain diagnosis. In our case the worsening of symptoms oriented
us to a decompressive surgical strategy and total removal of the lesion, also in relation to the extemporary histological examination: this
proved correct because of the drastic improvement observed in symptomatology and the total regression, without recrudescence, of symptoms
and disease at 12 months follow-up. The final histological examination and the specific tests that we performed have not cleared our doubts
regarding the nature of the lesion that remains controversial. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
The authors have not been influenced by any financial or personal relationship with people or organizations in preparation of this study.
All authors have made substantial contributions to in the design of the article: AL was responsible for editing, English editing,
correction, search of the literature, conception and design, and has contributed in surgical technique. VDN was responsible for editorship
of the manuscript. DED was responsible for the search of the literature. MC was responsible for the search of the literature. RT was
responsible for the English editing. MA was responsible for the histology consulting and pathology examination. AS is the principal surgeon
and was responsible for editing RD is the principal surgeon and was responsible for editing.
