Introduction: Renovascular hypertension in children is a very rare illness. It occurs as a result of the imbalance between hypotensive and
hypertensive systems. Renal ischaemia (95% of the cases) and the shortening of hipotensive factors (5% of the cases) are responsible for the
production mechanism of renovascular hypertension in children. In order to make an early diagnosis regarding the renovascular hypertension
in all children suffering from renovascular illnesses, blood pressure must be taken correctly and repeatedly. Materials and methods: This
paper is a case study on 19 children with renovascular hypertension, aged between 2 and 15 years old. Most cases were divided into two
groups: subjects aged 4-7 years old and subjects aged 8-12 years old. Each group represents 34,2% of all cases. The diagnosis of
renovascular hypertension in those 19 children was established after correctly taking the blood pressure and comparing it with the normal
values for each age. Hypertension was diagnosed before knowing its cause in 8 neglected cases. The blood pressure was repeatedly taken in
the other 11 children suffering from renovascular illnesses and the diagnosis of hypertension was early established when blood pressure
values increased. Previously, blood pressure was normal in these 11 cases. Results : The etiopathogenical diagnosis showed parenchymal
diseases in 12 cases - 63,1%. Seven patients suffered from renovascular lesions - 36,9%. Laboratory exams, radiology, imagistic exams,
arteriography and scintigraphy were steps taken in order to establish the etiopathogenical diagnosis. These exams showed the next direct
causes of renovascular hypertension: bilateral chronic pyelonephritis in 4 cases - 21,4%, hydronephrosis in 3 cases - 16,2%, congenital
renal hypoplasia in 2 cases - 10,4% and doubled kidney in 2 cases - 10,4%. The other 8 cases presented acute glomerulonephritis, unilateral
renal agenesis, horseshoe kidney, unilateral pyelonephritis, renal artery agenesis, renal trauma, renal abcess and Wilms tumor, one case of
each illness - 5,2%. The major complications were: retinopathy, chronic renal failure and stroke. Conclusions : Laboratory data are just a
hint in diagnosing renovascular hypertension. However, radiology, imagistic exams, arteriography and scintigraphy are compulsory in the
renourinary status and etiopathogenical diagnosis. The diagnosis of renovascular hypertension is established by correctly taking the blood
pressure and comparing the results with normal values for each age. Normal values of blood pressure in children according to age are showed
below: In order to avoid stressing the child and obtain values close to normal, blood pressure is taken after lying in bed for 15 minutes.
Blood pressure is taken three times at 10 minutes intervals after the 15 minutes repose. The value close to one of the other two values is
considered the real blood pressure value. Hypertension in adults is often idiopatic. However, hypertension in children and adolescents is a
hint for a renal illness like acute glomerulonephritis, chronic glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis, renal malformation or, rarely,
coarctation of the aorta, pheocromocitoma, primary hyperaldosteronism, Cushing syndrome. The cause of hypertension is established after
gathering data from: - Anamnesis: the presence of a renal illness or malformation. - Clinical exam: signs of renal injury and hypertension.
- Laboratory and paraclinical exams: ecography, intravenous urography, cystoscopy, retrograde pyelography, mictional cystography, renal
scintigraphy, arteriography and renal biopsy. Among the patients of our study (Table 1) we have found four cases of aberant renal arteries,
four cases of pyelonephritis, two cases of renopyeloureteral duplication with congenital megaureter and one case of transversal renal
rupture, renal agenesis, horseshoe kidney, glomerulonephritis and Wilms tumor. The diagnoses and blood pressure values for 19 children with
renal hypertension Among our patients, the direct causes of renal hypertension are showed in the table below: The renal diseases which
caused hypertension in our 19 children In our study, the parenchymal diseases predominated (12 cases of 19 – 63,1%) having only 7 cases with
renovascular lesions – 36,9%. Among the parenchymal diseases seven are unilateral, six renoureteral malformations and a pyelonephritis, five
are bilateral, four pyelonephritis and a glomerulonephritis (Table 2).Those seven cases of renovascular lesions include six indirect lesions
(three hydronephrosis, one Wilms tumor, one renal abcess, one renal trauma) and one case of congenital vascular anomaly without stenosis
(renal agenesis). Laboratory data. The illnesses producing renovascular hypertension may also induce the urinary syndrome. In our study the
following laboratory data were observed: Congenital renoureteral malformations induced many cases of urinary infection – 9 patients (47,4%).
Five cases of urinary infection also presented renal lesions and only 3 patients had leucocytury - 15,8%. The proteinury - 21,1% - was
moderate under 1-2 grams ‰. Studying 300 cases of idiopatic hypertension and 34 of renovascular hypertension, Bedos et al. conclude that the
presence of proteinury is worthless. In 2 cases - 10,5% - the laboratory data were missing and paraclinical exams showed right renal
agenesis or horseshoe kidney, explaining the hypertension. The hematury was observed in one case - 5,2% - with dark urine and focal
glomerulonephritis. The poor symtomatology made the diagnosis in horseshoe kidney case difficult. Dajani observes three types of horseshoe
kidney: a) patients without clinical and laboratory signs; b) cases with nausea and abdominal pain; c) horseshoe kidney with secondary
lesions (complications like infections, lithiasis, hypertension). Radiological and imagistical exams The evolution of radiological exams
made the complex investigation of the entire reno-urinary tract possible. The radiological investigation became the most important step in
diagnosing urinary illnesses in children. The radiological exams used in diagnosing renovascular hypertension are: ecography, urography,
cystoscopy, retrograde pyelography, mictional cystography and renal arteriography. a) The duplex color Doppler ultrasonography is the less
invasive and the less expensive screening method. The advantages of this method include gathering data about renal artery and its intrarenal
branches blood flow and the possibility of calculating the resistivity index (R.I.). This index correlates to the fibrous and atrophic
lesions induced by renal artery stenosis, the main cause of renovascular hypertension in children. The ultrasonography is an efficient
method in determining the renal size. The susceptibility of renal artery stenosis is suggested by any difference between the kidneys over
one centimeter in the absence of a known renal pathology. The disadvantages of the method are: the prolonged examining time - over an hour,
the dependence of the results on examiner’s skills and on patient’s characteristics (young child unable to cooperate with the examiner,
gaseous distension of the bowels, obesity). The sensitivity and specificity of the method as its predictive value are different from one
case to another. This screening method of the renal artery stenosis is available mostly in specialized centers. b) The urography shows
parenchymal and pyelocaliceal alterations consecutive to renal vascular anomalies or congenital malformations. We noticed the following
urographic aspects among our cases: Most frequent - 31,8%, the urography showed secretion and concentration alterations determined by
urinary infection that involved renal parenchyma (Fig. 1 and 2). In 4 cases - 21,1%, the urography suggested an aberrant renal vessel due to
the vascular print on lumbar ureter. The doubled kidney found in 10,5% of the cases was revealed by a bilateral doubled renal shadow on
urography. All the other urographic aspects in the table counted for 5,2% of all cases. Studying 334 patients with hypertension, Bedos et
al. found other signs besides intravenous urography in 82% of the cases: abdominal murmur, albuminuria or isotopic renogram alteration.
Intravenous urography. Renal asymmetry in a child with atrophic pyelonephritis of the left kidney and 140/100 mm Hg blood pressure. Severe
bilateral secretion and concentration alterations. c) The cystoscopy is performed when we suspect a vesicoureteral reflux. This exam,
performed either on full or empty bladder, provides important data about the size of the ureteral orifice, the development of trigonal
muscle fibers, the number of vesical wall trabecles and the laterally movement of ureteral orifices when bladder is filling. Besides
inflammatory lesions, vesical trabeculisation or a diverticle close to meatus, the cystoscopy can evaluate: - ureteral meatus position; -
ureteral meatus morphology; - submucous ureteral route lenght. d) When renal function is poor, the retrograde pyelography is performed in
order to observe the whole excretive tract. The retrograde pyelography was used in 2 cases of all 19 children - 10,5%. Observation 1 The
patient C.G., aged 14, had secretion and concentration alterations that led to the impossibility of excretive tract visualisation.
Retrograde pyelography was performed and we observed hydronephrosis due to an aberrant renal vessel on a right hypoplasic kidney (Fig. 3).
The retrograde pyelography occured during the second admission when concentration and secretion alterations were evolved. Retrograde
pyelography. Right hydronephrotic dilatation due to an aberrant polar vessel. The urography and descendent cystography suggested 12 cases of
vesico-ureteral reflux. For confirmation, mictional cystography was performed using contrast into bladder and producing three pictures:
after filling the bladder, mictional and postmictional. The mictional cystography is a benign radiological exam. If performed correctly,
using the probes only once, it would not determine uretral trauma, or infections. The exam slightly irradiates the gonads so it is better
not to use it very often. In our study, the vesicoureteral reflux was confirmed in 6 cases. Three were normal cases, 2 patients had
inflammatory collum and one child had vesical residuum. We noted below the described aspects: Mictional uretrocystography in 12 children
with renal hypertension. e) The arteriography is the method of choice in diagnosing hypertension due to renal artery stenosis. This exam was
performed when the urography revealed a print on the lumbar ureter - 4 cases and in other 3 cases when isotopic renogram showed renal
function alterations. The arteriography did not show any sign of renal artery stenosis but only 5 cases of aberrant polar vessels. Studying
data from three authors (676 cases), Pison found renal anomalies in 26,6% of the cases. The arteriography is always to be done in
hypertension due to renal illnesseses (Bedos şi colab. 1975) because clinical data cannot orientate the diagnosis. This exam is not
performed in order to confirm the diagnosis (Fig. 4). However, the arteriography is not used in all cases of renovascular hypertension
because it can be followed by complications (renal artery thrombosis, posttrauma aneurism, fever, lumbar pain, rash). Normal arteriography
in a child with chronic nephritis. Isotopic nefroscintigram and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor test Renal scintigraphy was used
until the sixties. Modern tests consist in doing a series of scintigraphies: one simple scintigraphy at the begining and another
scintigraphy 60 minutes after the administration of an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor – captopril. The marker used in glomerular
ultrafiltration is 99Tc-m-DTPA (dietil triamino-penta-acetic acid). If renal artery stenosis is unilateral, the angiotensin-converting
enzyme inhibitor administration will diminish the glomerular ultrafiltration of homolateral kidney and increase ultrafiltration of the
contralateral kidney. The angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor test just intensifies the existent modifications on the standard
nefroscintigram. The disadvantages of this exam are: low sensitivity in renal failure, the difficulty of interpreting the results in renal
artery bilateral stenosis, the fake positive results in renal failure of any etiology. The sensitivity of the method varies between 75% and
85%. Among our patients, the scintigraphy was performed in one case after the urography revealed a silent kidney. The scintigraphy showed a
non-functional kidney and indicated the nephrectomy. Observation 2 A child aged 5, male, is admitted with a urinary infection on a renal
malformation (left hypoplasic kidney). The urography showed the renal shadows asymmetry. The renal scintigraphy revealed lack of isotopic
captation in the base of the right kidney. Preoperative, the uroculture was negative. Left nephrectomy is performed. Histopathological exam
diagnosed scleroatrophic chronic pyelonephritis. A. Diagnosis of hypertension in bilateral renal illnesses Most of the renal parenchymal
illnesses can lead to hypertension. Some of them, like glomerulonephritis, renal amyloidosis, and collagenoses are bilateral, other, like
chronic pyelonephritis (most of the cases) and congenital parenchymal nephropathies are unilateral. Our study includes 12 cases - 63,1% of
parechymal illnesses. In order to apply the proper treatment the diagnosis was established first, weather the nephropathy was unilateral or
bilateral. This way, the cases which needed to be treated surgically by nephrectomy were selected. In order to diagnose chronic
pyelonephritis it is necessary to reveal the renal infection and its result on kidney. Next tests are performed to show the renal infection:
1. cytobacteriologic exam– definitive - leucocytury over 2000/minute or over 10/mm3 urine; - bacteriuria over 100.000 germs/ml urine. 2.
Addis-Hamburger test, fractioned, provides the spot of the infection. The following are important in order to appreciate the renal
consequences of the infection: 1. instalation of hypo-, iso- or underisostenuria; 2. presence of Sternheimer-Malbin cells; 3. leucocytes
cylinders; 4. renal biopsy – definitive test; 5. urography reveals pyelonephritis through: renal shadows asymmetry, silent kidney and
basinetal hypotonia; 6. cystography – may show vesicoureteral reflux; 7. nephroscintigram. Observation 3 Child aged 14, female, is admitted
with fever, polakiuria, cephalea and asteny. Laboratory exams discovered an unusual amount of leucocytes and haematies in the urinary
sediment, moderately increased urea and uric acid, but the uroculture revealed over 100.000 E. coli/ml urine. The urography illustrates the
pyelocaliceal nephrotic dilatation. The retrograd pyelography shows a double obstruction on lumbar ureter and arteriography, a right
inferior polar artery. The frequency of hypertension in pyelonephritis varies from an author to another. Friedman concludes that
histological aspects of chronic pyelonephritis were found in 13,5% to 51,5% of patients with renovascular hypertension. After studying 1325
renal biopsies, Casado found chronic pyelonephritis in 150 cases - 11,3%. The diagnosis of glomerulonephritic hypertension is set while
being based on distinctive elements for this illness: hydropigen syndrome, urinary syndrome, cardiovascular syndrome and renal failure
manifestations. In our study we had one case of focal glomerulonephritis - 5,2%. Diagnosis is made on hematury, eritrocytes cylinders and
moderate proteinury (0,5-1 g‰). These laboratory data frequently appear during a renal infection. The patient has no edema and the
hypertension appears episodically in this illness. During the relapses, urinary alterations become permanent and lead to hypertension. There
are many types of histopatologic lesions: focused and segmented, endo- mixed proliferative, intra- and exocapillary. Observation 4 The
patient P.M., aged 4, is admitted with fever, dark urine, lack of appetite and oliguria. Laboratory exams showed: ASLO - 1250U, ESR -
110/140, urea - 1,25g‰ (after treatment – 0,26g‰), uric acid – 0,075g‰ (after treatment – 0,043g‰), urine summary – some albumin, many
leucocytes grouped in conglomerates, many haematies. The blood pressure oscillated between 120/70mmHg and 110/60mmHg. Clinical aspect and
the repeated acute amygdalites in antecedents suggested a focal glomerulonephritis developed on a urinary malformation: meatum stenosis with
hypospadias. Studying 72 adults with renovascular hypertension Ursea identifies 33 patients with glomerulonephritic hypertension: 24 chronic
glomerulonephritis, 5 focal glomerulonephritis, 2 proliferative glomerulonephritis and 2 membranous glomerulonephritis. The
glomerulonephritis and pyelonephritis are both medical illnesses. The frequency of these illnesses in paediatric surgery is determined by
the association with renal malformations in the same children: vesico-ureteral reflux due to an improper implantation of ureters into
urinary bladder, aberrant renal vessels or renopyeloureteral duplication. B. Diagnosis of hypertension in unilateral renal illnesses 1)
Renal malformations do not lead to hypertension in all cases. The ectopies, horseshoe kidney and doubled kidney lead to the development of
hypertension in most of the cases. a) Congenital renal hypoplasia was diagnosed in 2 cases - 10,5%. In the first case it was associated with
a bilateral congenital megaureter and in the second case with renal artery agenesis. Observation 5 After multiple admissions, the patient,
aged 14, is transffered from an ophtalmological clinic to establish the diagnosis. The patient is admitted with retinopathy and hypertension
- 240/160mmHg. Clinical exam showed discreet renal edema. The laboratory exams excluded pyelonephritis and pheocromocitoma: urine
cytobacteriologic exam was negative and vanilmandelic acid dosage in urine was normal (2,52mg‰). Renal functional exams were also normal. We
thought of a renal malformation and performed a urography that showed a unique right kidney and suggested a left polar vessel, based on a
tonus alteration of the left ureter, without dilatation. Aortography and renal arteriography. Right hypoplasic kidney The aortography and
renal arteriography show a very small, ratatinated kidney on the right side during the nephrographic phase (Fig. 5). On the left, two large
renal arteries vascularise a big kidney. The cystoscopy reveals increased and prolonged ureteral orifices. The cystography leads to
bilateral vesicoureteral reflux as diagnosis. Important bilateral vesicoureteral reflux. Surgery is performed for hypoplasic kidney and
bilateral vesico-ureteral reflux (Fig. 6). The volume of the right kidney is significantly diminished but its architecture is normal. We
practiced right nephrectomy. The histopatological exam on the removed kidney indicated an aglomerular segmental hypoplasia. The hypertension
became moderate from severe after surgery. The cytobacteriological exam revealed a renal infection after 30 days. The vesico-ureteral reflux
and especially the urinary infection with reflux on unique kidney imposed the ureter reimplantation through Leadbetter – Politano method.
Subsequently, the blood pressure became normal. b) The doubled kidney is different from the supernumerary kidney. This malformation consists
of a big, unilateral or bilateral kidney with two basinets and distinctive vascularisation for the two segments of its construction. This
kidney has a symphysis at the adjacent poles. Sometimes the borderline between the two segments is difficult to trace. The diagnosis is
establised on urography that shows the volume of the kidney and its doubled basinet and ureter with ureterohydronephrosis. Our study noted
two cases - 10,5% of bilateral doubled kidney with pyeloureteral bifidity. Niculescu did not find hypertension in any of the three cases of
doubled kidney studied. Tcherdokoff si Milliez found this anomaly in one of 21 hypertensive patients and in one of 152 normotensive
patients. c) Renal agenesis represents the lack of any renal tissue. The excretive function is performed by the controlateral kidney if it
is normal. In such cases, renal agenesis is discovered at routine investigations for local and general illness or at necropsy. In our case,
the renal agenesis was associated with an ectopic cystic dilatation of the right ureter. The patient was admitted for enuresis. The
urography revealed a normal left kidney and lack of opacity of the right kidney. Multiple radiotransparent images were contoured over the
bladder. The renal scintigraphy showed the absence of the right kidney. The hypertension and the right ectopic ureter suggested a hypoplasic
kidney although the scintigraphy showed the lack of any renal tissue on the right side. Literature data did not signalize any case of an
ectopic cystic dilatated ureter on the same side with the missing kidney. The discussions over the case revealed the fact that some
physicians consider it impossible for hypertension to appear in a case with an absent kidney, the contralateral kidney is healthy and a
ureter malformation is present. The exploratory laparatomy elucidated the case and demonstrated in the same time that the presence of a
ureteral malformation can trigger the hypertensive system even on a healthy functional kidney. This anomaly is found between 1,3 and 1,6‰ at
necropsy. d) The horseshoe kidney rarely determines hypertension. The diagnosis is easily established because the urography is
characteristic. Nicanor Coban described one case of horseshoe kidney accompanied by hypertension. Dajani noticed a sign that can be
patognomonical in an astenic child with minimal elevated blood pressure: the hyperextension of the rahis produces a pain that ceases when
the column comes to normal. 2) Unilateral chronic pyelonephritis was present in the case of a single patient - 5,2%. The diagnosis was
paraclinical: Congenital hypoplasic kidney. Histopatological exam showed a sclero-atrophic pyelonephritis after nephrectomy. In this case,
the hypoplasic aspect of the left kidney on urography was determined by the renal parenchyma atrophy. Vexler considered renal hypoplasia to
be a parenchymal atrophy. C. Diagnosis of hypertension in renovascular illnesses In order to diagnose direct vascular lesions some steps
must be followed: clinical examination, case selection for arteriography, arteriography and the determination of stenosis functional
significance. 33,6% of 104 arteriographies are found abnormal by Chamberlin , but only 4 - 3,8% of these benefit from surgical treatment.
Indirect vascular lesions were present in 6 of the 19 cases, but only 3 of the 6 cases had hydronephrosis. The laboratory exams have the
privilege to diagnose hydronephrosis: plain radiography and urography. These investigations establish the diagnosis of hydronephrosis. The
type of hydronephrosis, primary or secondary, is revealed by ecography, scintigraphy and arteriography. The obstructive urologic illnesses
with acute manifestations may induce hypertension to one patient of ten. Studying 252 patients with obstructive uropathy, Schwartz found an
increased incidence of hypertension in acute illnesses (30% of 30 cases). The diagnosis of Wilms tumor and renal abcess was obviously after
urography. After studying all 19 cases we have found the following complications: retinopathy (4 cases), chronic renal failure (2 cases) and
stroke (one case). Most authors include retinopathy in hypertension symptomatology. We consider it a late manifestation of the renovascular
hypertension in children and include it among the complications. A precocious diagnosis of renovascular hypertension followed by an adequate
treatment avoids this severe complication. The chronic renal failure is caused by progressive renal parenchyma alteration due to bilateral
chronic pyelonephritis. In the end, those patients need renal transplant. The stroke was determined by the increased blood pressure. Astasia
and pyramidal syndrome occured at the hospital discharge. During subsequent admissions for medical check-ups, the neurological
manifestations disappeared. Laboratory data (urinary infection, proteinury, leucocytury, hematury) are just a hint in diagnosing
renovascular hypertension. Urinary infections were observed in 9 patients -47,4%. The proteinury and leucocytury occured in 4 patients -
21,1% and respectively in 3 patients - 15,8%. The radiological and imagistical investigation became the most important step in diagnosing
urinary illnesses in children. The ultrasonography, intravenous urography, retrograde pyelography and mictional cystography revealed
indirect signs of vascular malformations and showed urinary tract malformations. As urographic signs, the most frequently found were
secretion and concentration alterations in 6 patients - 31,8% and vascular print on lumbar ureter in 4 patients - 21,1%. Mictional
cystography confirmed vesicoureteral reflux in 50% of cases. The arteriography is the best method to diagnose renal artery stenosis as a
cause of hypertension. In our study, the arteriography did not show any renal artery stenosis but only five cases - 31,7% - of aberrant
renal vessels. The scintigraphy shows the functional remaining parenchyma in case of silent urographic kidney. This situation was noted in
one case - 5,2%. Renovascular hypertension caused major ophtalmological complications (retinopathy - 21,1%), renal complications (chronic
renal failure - 10,5%) and neurological complications (stroke - 5,2%).
