Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is responsible for many incidents of occupational toxic exposure, especially in the petroleum industry. The clinical
effects of H2S depend on its concentration and the duration of exposure. H2S is immediately fatal when concentrations are over 500-1000
parts per million (ppm) but exposure to lower concentrations, such as 10-500 ppm, can cause various respiratory symptoms that range from
rhinitis to acute respiratory failure. H2S may also affect multiple organs, causing temporary or permanent derangements in the nervous,
cardiovascular, renal, hepatic, and hematological systems. We present a case of occupational exposure to H2S leading to multi-organ
involvement, acute respiratory failure, organizing pneumonia, and shock resembling acute sepsis. The patient also developed mild obstructive
and restrictive pulmonary disease and peripheral neuropathy. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is responsible for many incidents of occupational toxic
exposure, especially in the petroleum industry. The clinical effects of H2S depend on its concentration and the duration of exposure. H2S is
immediately fatal when concentrations are over 500-1000 parts per million (ppm). Hence, H2S has been referred to as the “knock down gas”
because inhalation of high concentrations can cause immediate loss of consciousness and death.23 However, prolonged exposure to lower
concentrations, such as 10-500 ppm, can cause various respiratory symptoms that range from rhinitis to acute respiratory failure. There are
many cases of H2S exposure in the agricultural industry4 and their prevalence has increased markedly with the development of porcine
confinement facilities.15 H2S is the primary chemical hazard of natural gas production.6 We report a severe case of hydrogen sulfide (H2S)
intoxication. The patient survived long enough to observe the sequelae of this entity, which can include neuropsychiatric morbidity. The
patient was a 31-year-old male who worked in an oil refinery. He was brought to the emergency department with fever (a temperature of
39.3°C) and respiratory symptoms. He was hypotensive with a blood pressure of 68/40 mm Hg. He reported that he had been welding in a large
container used for the storage of sulfur compounds in an open space before the onset of symptoms. No other chemical compounds were used and
the container was clean at that time, but there were some unknown fluid residues on the floor. At the beginning of the welding process,
white fumes with a “rotten egg” odor emanating from the container. The patient immediately felt dizzy and developed rhinorrhea, teary eyes,
nausea, and shortness of breath, chest tightness and cough. These symptoms increased over the following hours followed by hemoptysis. He was
seen by first aid providers and was removed from the scene, given oxygen, and was transported to the emergency room. There were no other
workers in the same place during the event of the poisoning. He was using his personal protective equipment, including gowns and a mask.
Subsequently, the patient was admitted to the intensive care unit. On examination, he was found to be hypotensive (BP 68/40 mm Hg) and
tachypneic (respiratory rate of 26/min). The neck was supple without any lymphadenopathy. A chest examination revealed bilateral rhonchi,
but examination of the heart and abdomen found no abnormalities. Neurologically, he was combative and confused initially and became
lethargic and obtunded later. There were no skin lesions. Shortly after admission, the patient developed acute respiratory failure requiring
mechanical ventilation. Chest radiography (CXR) showed right pleural effusion and consolidation (Figure 1). Initial and subsequent
laboratory (Table 1) revealed signs of ischemic cardiac injury, abnormal coagulation profile, renal insufficiency, and slight leukocytosis.
Arterial blood gas showed a pH of 7.34; PCO2: 44 mm Hg; PO2: 77 mm Hg; and oxygen saturation: 95% on an inspired oxygen of 35%. Other
laboratory data were as follows: BUN 43 mEq/L, creatinine 2.6 mg/dL, Na 135 mEq/L, K 4.8 mEq/L, Cl− 105 mEq/L, and CO2 19 mEq/L. Chest x-ray
on admission to ICU, showing right consolidation and pleural effusion. The patient's laboratory data over the hospital course. BUN=Blood
urea nitrogen; INR=International ratio; PTT=Partial thrombin time; EKG=Electrocardiogram As the patient was hypotensive, he was resuscitated
with intravenous fluid and vasopressors. Intravenous hydrocortisone was started for chemical pneumonitis, but it was stopped after four days
because there were no signs of improvement. Infections were ruled out and empirical broad-spectrum antibiotics were subsequently
discontinued. All serological studies were negative, including Mycoplasma, Legionella, and HIV. A thoracentesis revealed an exudative
pleural fluid. The gram stain showed many cells, 90% neutrophils, no organisms, and the cultures were negative. Cytology on bronchoalveolar
lavage showed a few cells consistent with herpes simplex infection, thought to be a contamination from an upper airway and nasal infection.
After several days of supportive care, the patient became hemodynamically stable with improved cardiac function and was extubated
successfully. However, he continued to have a right lower lobe consolidation (Figures 2a and 2b) despite appropriate antimicrobial therapy,
including acyclovir. Lung biopsy via video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery was performed and showed diffuse alveolar damage with organizing
pneumonia. Special stains for herpes viruses were negative. Sections of the lung showed the presence of numerous alveolar spaces lined by
reactive pneumocytes type II. Many of the alveolar spaces were filled with an admixture of macrophages, scattered eosinophils, and
neutrophils. In addition, several alveoli showed clumps of proliferating fibroblasts admixed with histiocytes and other inflammatory cells,
denoting the presence of organizing pneumonia. He was restarted on intravenous hydrocortisone and showed a remarkable response with
significant improvement in respiratory symptoms and radiographic findings (Figure 3). Chest x-ray three weeks after presentation, showing
persistent right lower lobe consolidation. Chest CT scan, three weeks after presentation, showing persistent right lower lobe consolidation.
CXR, two days after initiating high dose steroids following lung biopsy, showing significant improvement in right lower lobe consolidation.
About 40 days after the incident, spirometery revealed a mild obstruction with an insignificant response to bronchodilators. Lung volume
showed mild restriction and the diffusion capacity was at low-normal levels after correction for alveolar volume. The findings were
consistent with mixed restrictive and obstructive pulmonary disease. He developed grayish nail-bed discoloration, suggestive of an exposure
to a sulfur compound. Neurological evaluation, including an electromyography, revealed evidence of peripheral neuropathy. A follow-up chest
x-ray after discharge showed complete resolution of his pulmonary infiltrate. Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) is the primary chemical hazard of
natural gas production.67 In a retrospective review from oil and gas industry in Canada revealed 221 cases of H2S exposure from 1969 to
1973, and 173 patients were transported to the hospital; 14 victims (6%) were dead on arrival.8 The findings in this case are consistent
with exposure to H2S. There was a history of an odor of rotten eggs emanating from residues in the work site that was suggestive of H2S with
related symptoms and clinical findings, as described previously.9–11 H2S is a colorless gas with a characteristic odor.12 However,
persistent exposure to air concentrations above 100 ppm produces olfactory fatigue, which impairs the ability to detect the characteristic
odor of rotten eggs.12 Following the inhalation accident, the patient developed multi-organ involvement simulating sepsis: acute respiratory
failure, obtundation, leucopenia, neutrophilia, abnormal coagulation profile, renal insufficiency, shock, cardiac injury, and reduced
cardiac output (an ejection fraction of 30%).913 A persistent pulmonary infiltrate proved to be an organizing pneumonia. Organizing
pneumonia is characterized by the presence of granulation tissue in the distal air spaces consisting of fibroblasts–myofibroblasts embedded
in connective tissue.14 When organizing pneumonia is an associated feature, the term, “bronchiolitis obliterans” is added. Bronchiolitis
obliterans organizing pneumonia (BOOP) may follow pulmonary infection, drug toxicity, or may appear in the context of connective tissue
diseases or after lung or bone marrow transplantation.15 Cryptogenic organizing pneumonia (COP), the idiopathic form of organizing pneumonia
(also known as idiopathic BOOP), is a distinct clinical entity. COP has the predominant features of pneumonia, rather than a primary airway
disorder.14 The mainstay of treatment of BOOP is with a corticosteroid resulting in a rapid clinical improvement and clearing of the
opacities on chest imaging without significant sequelae.1416 Injury due to H2S exposure occurs primarily by inhalation. Once absorbed, the
compound is distributed in the blood and taken up by the brain, liver, kidney, pancreas, and small intestines. Sulfur compounds are severely
irritating to the respiratory tract, leading to rhinorrhea, sneezing, sore throat, wheezing, shortness of breath, chest tightness,
hemoptysis, and a feeling of suffocation.1 Sulfur compounds can cause leucopenia and neutropenia,913 as well as cardiac injury with
elevation of troponin I and creatine kinase.910 The mechanism of H2S toxicity is related to inhibition of oxidative phosphorylation, which
causes a decrease in the available cellular energy. A phenomenon referred to as “knockdown” was reported in oil field workers to describe a
sudden, brief loss of consciousness associated with amnesia, followed by immediate full recovery. This phenomenon usually occurs after
short-term exposure to very high concentrations of H2S.17 Various pulmonary complications may follow inhalation injury. In a study of 203
patients with first- to third-degree burns, lung complications developed in 7.8%, leading to adult respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) in
5.4%.18 Organizing pneumonia may occur following inhalation of toxic fumes and chemicals. These pathological changes are relatively well-
known for patients who have been exposed to relatively high concentrations of any slightly water-soluble, toxic, inhaled compound (not
unique to H2S) and may represent a spectrum of inhalation concentrations and severity. It is interesting to note that unilateral pulmonary
abnormalities occurred in the present case. Similarly, in the study cited above, 36% of the patients had only right lung involvement.18 The
presence of leucopenia and neutropenia in the present case is also interesting. In a study of chronic exposure to H2S, the absolute mean
numbers of white blood cells, lymphocytes, and neutrophils were seen to be significantly decreased in the exposed group compared with the
control.19 The patient showed evidence of neuropathy on follow-up visits. Annual neurological and neuropsychological testing for at least
five years is recommended for patients with H2S exposure because of the potential chronic neurological sequelae.20 Other reports suggest
that temporary memory loss, attention deficits, blunted affect, permanent retrograde amnesia, executive function deficits, slowing in
central information processing, and planning deficits may occur in such patients.17 The mainstay of therapy is supportive care. There are
reports that suggest early administration of hyperbaric oxygen, amyl nitrite, and sodium nitrite may be beneficial.221 Amyl nitrite-induced
methemoglobinemia is due to competitive binding of the hydrosulfide anion. This effect presumably reactivates and protects cytochrome
oxidase.22 However, one of the toxic effects of H2S is the inhibition of cytochrome oxidase. Nitrites produce methemoglobin which has a
higher affinity for H2S than for cytochrome oxidase. The resulting sulfmethemoglobin eventually returns to hemoglobin. Hyperbaric oxygen in
a few case reports and animal studies may work as an adjuvant treatment in patients with persistent neurological injury or oxygenation
defects.23 Therapeutic red cell exchange may also be used to treat H2S toxicity similar to the treatment of aniline, arsine, chloramines,
carbon monoxide, cyanide, and, methemoglobinemia.24 As H2S is a potential problem in the transport and storage of crude oil, preventive
measures are extremely important in preventing lethal exposure to hydrogen sulfide toxicity. Personal protective equipment should include
safety glasses, respiratory protection or equipment, and long-sleeved shirts.25 In addition, limiting exposure at the work place and the use
of a personal safety gas detector may aid in the protection of employees working with potential gas exposure. In a retrospective analysis,
77 of the 80 deaths were thought to be potentially preventable with the use of an H2S alarm or portable meters.26 In conclusion, we report a
case of an occupational exposure to H2S leading to acute respiratory failure, multi-organ involvement simulating sepsis, and organizing
pneumonia. The diagnosis of hydrogen sulfide poisoning relies mainly on the clinical presentation and exposure. H2S poisoning may lead to
persistent neuropsychiatric morbidity. The treatment remains generally supportive and amyl nitrites may be beneficial. The authors wish to
acknowledge the use of Saudi Aramco Medical Services Organization (SAMSO) facilities for the data and study, which resulted in this paper.
Opinions expressed in this article are those of the authors and not necessarily of SAMSO.
