To the Editor: Neisseria meningitidis serogroup X was first described in the 1960s and has been found to be responsible of rare cases of
invasive meningococcal diseases, in particular, meningitis, in North America, Europe, Australia, Africa, and the People’s Republic of China
(1–3). This serogroup has recently emerged in Africa as an increasing cause of meningitis; unfortunately, it is not covered by current
vaccine programs. Serogroup X outbreaks have been reported in Niger, Ghana, and Kenya (4–6). In particular, in Niger during January–June
2006, N. meningitidis serogroup X represented 51% of confirmed cases of meningitis (4). To investigate the population structure of serogroup
X meningococci isolated during recent decades in Africa, Europe, and North America, Gagneux et al. (1) compared the molecular
characteristics among them. That study highlighted a low genetic variability between African serogroup X strains, which contrasts with
higher genetic variability among isolates from Europe and the United States (1). We describe a case of invasive meningococcal disease caused
by a serogroup X N. meningitidis strain isolated in Italy. The patient was a 55-year-old Italian woman with no immune deficiency. The onset
of disease started quickly with high fever (39°C) on June 1, 2009. No contacts with persons coming from abroad were reported. This case was
diagnosed on the basis of clinical signs and symptoms and results of laboratory confirmatory tests, including blood culture. The patient
received ceftriaxone (2 g/day) for 7 days with a favorable outcome. The strain was susceptible to penicillin G, rifampin, ciprofloxacin, and
ceftriaxone, as determined by Etest method (bioMérieux, Florence, Italy). The breakpoints were those recommended by the Clinical and
Laboratory Standards Institute (7). Serogroup was determined by serum agglutination, and serotype/subtype, NT:P1.15, 19 were determined by
standard whole-cell ELISA with monoclonal antibodies (obtained from the National Institute for Biological Standards and Control, South
Mimms, UK) (8). PorA variable regions, FetA, and multilocus sequence typing analyses were performed according to standard procedures from
the Neisseria Multi Locus Sequence Typing Web site (http://pubmlst.org/neisseria). The isolate from Italy had the pattern PorA VR1–19,
VR2–15, and VR3–36; F5–5 and sequence type (ST)-2888. The same ST was already described in Greece in 2002 but in a noninvasive strain
(http://pubmlst.org/neisseria). The pattern obtained by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis (9), using the rare-cutting enzyme NheI, (data not
shown), was identical to patterns found among meningococci X strains isolated in United Kingdom and belonging to ST-750, clonal group X-II
(1). In particular, ST-2888 resembles, except for gdh gene sequence, ST-2317, which was found among the X meningococci isolated in the
United Kingdom in 2002 with phenotype X:4:P1.7 (http://pubmlst.org/neisseria). Our data document a rare case of invasive meningococcal
meningitis in Italy, caused by N. meningitidis serogroup X ST-2888. Future surveillance data may be able to determine epidemiologic
influences, likely emanating from nearby countries, on the spread of such a strain into Italy. Suggested citation for this article: Fazio C,
Starnino S, Dal Soldà M, Sofia T, Neri A, Mastrantonio P, et al. Neisseria meningitidis serogroup X sequence type 2888, Italy. Emerg Infect
Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2010 Feb [date cited]. http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/16/2/359.htm We thank Anna Pavan, Maria Gramegna, and
Luigi Macchi for the collaboration in the Italian Surveillance System for Invasive Bacterial Diseases. This work was partially funded by the
Ministry of Health-CCM Project 116 “Surveillance of invasive bacterial diseases,” 2007–2009.
