To the Editor: In the late 1990s, triple-reassortant influenza A viruses containing genes from avian, human, and swine influenza viruses
emerged and became enzootic in swine herds in North America (1). The first 11 human cases of novel influenza A virus infection were reported
to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; Atlanta, GA, USA) from December 2005 through February 2009 (1). In response to those
reports, surveillance for human infection with nonsubtypeable influenza A viruses was implemented. In the spring of 2009, outbreaks of
febrile respiratory infections caused by a novel influenza A virus (H1N1) were reported among persons in Mexico, the United States, and
Canada (2). Patient specimens were sent to CDC for real-time reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) testing, and from April 15 through May 5,
2009, a total of 642 infections with the virus, now called pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus, were confirmed. Of those 642 patients, 60% were <18
years of age, indicating that children may be particularly susceptible to pandemic (H1N1) 2009 (2). Children and adults with preexisting
underlying respiratory conditions, such as asthma, are at increased risk for complications from infection with pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus.
One possible complication is plastic bronchitis, a rare respiratory illness characterized by formation of large gelatinous or rigid
branching airway casts (3). Plastic bronchitis is a potentially fatal condition induced by bronchial obstruction from mucus accumulation
resulting from infection, inflammation, or vascular stasis (4). We report a case of bronchial casts that caused atelectasis of the right
lung of a child infected with influenza A pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus. A 6-year-old boy with asthma and a 1-day history of fever and cough
was referred to a hospital pediatrics department because of dyspnea. Clinical examination at hospital admission found respiratory distress,
as shown by tachypnea (respiratory rate 66 breaths/min) and inspiratory retraction, deficient vesicular sounds over the right lung field,
elevated blood levels of immunoglobulin E (1,770 IU/mL) and a reduced number of lymphocytes (483 cells/μL), and radiographic evidence of
atelectasis of the right lung and hyperinflation of the left lung without air leakage (Figure, panel A). Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus
infection was confirmed by real-time RT-PCR, as described (5), of an endotracheal aspirate. Real-time PCR ruled out Streptococcus
pneumoniae, Haemophilus influenzae, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Legionella pneumophila, Chlamydophila pneumoniae, S. pyogenes, respiratory
syncytial viruses A and B, seasonal influenza viruses A and B, parainfluenza viruses 1–3, rhinovirus, enterovirus, human metapneumovirus,
human bocavirus, and adenovirus (6). While the patient was breathing room air, his percutaneously monitored oxygen saturation was 86%;
respiratory support by mechanical ventilation was then initiated. Mucus casts were extracted by intratracheal suction (Figure, panel B). The
patient was treated with an inhaled bronchodilator, intravenous methylprednisolone (20–60 mg/day for 7 days), and antiviral (oseltamivir)
and antimicrobial (ampicillin/sulbactam) drugs. A) Chest radiograph obtained at hospital admission from a child infected with influenza
subtype H1N1 virus. The image shows atelectasis of the right lung and hyperinflation of the left lung; arrows indicate obstruction of the
right main bronchus. B) Macroscopic bronchial casts extracted by intratracheal suction. C) Chest radiograph obtained on hospital day 2,
indicating partial resolution of atelectasis of the right lower lobe. D) Light micrograph of casts, characterized by predominant eosinophil
infiltration (>90% of cells) (May-Giemsa stain, original magnification ×1,000). Arrows indicate typical eosinophil granules. On hospital day
2, chest radiographs showed that atelectasis of the right lower lobe had partially resolved (Figure, panel C). A histologic examination of
casts (May-Giemsa stain; Figure, panel D) indicated a mucoid substance containing a predominantly eosinophilic infiltrate (>90% of cells).
The patient’s respiratory condition during 11 days of oxygen supplementation gradually improved, and he was discharged on hospital day 18.
Plastic bronchitis is related mainly to respiratory, cyanotic cardiac (post-Fontan), and hematologic (sickle cell anemia) diseases. A
diagnosis of plastic bronchitis is determined on the basis of clinical findings (pointing to allergic and asthmatic, cardiac, or idiopathic
etiologies) and pathologic findings (inflammatory vs. noninflammatory) on examination of casts (3). Inflammatory casts contain fibrin,
eosinophils, and Charcot-Leyden crystals; noninflammatory casts contain mucin and exhibit vascular hydrostatic changes. The case presented
here was the allergic-inflammatory type of plastic bronchitis. Various treatments for plastic bronchitis have been described and vary from
cast removal by expectoration or by bronchoscopy (7,8). Other interventions involve cast disruption by tissue plasminogen activator or
urokinase and prevention of cast formation by use of mucolytic agents, steroids, or anticoagulants. However, evidence remains anecdotal
because too few plastic bronchitis patients are available for clinical trials. Details of steroid dosage will need to be clarified for
pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus–infected children with respiratory distress from bronchitis and pneumonia. In Iran during 1998–2001, avian
influenza (H9N2) infection among broiler chickens resulted in 20%–60% mortality rates on affected farms (9). Macroscopic examination of
specimens from infected chickens showed extensive hyperemia of the respiratory tract, followed by exudate and casts extending from the
tracheal bifurcation to the secondary bronchi. Light microscopy indicated severe necrotizing tracheitis. Pandemic (H1N1) 2009 can produce
similar airway cast formation in humans; severe respiratory distress reflects extensive obstruction of the respiratory system. Healthcare
providers should be aware of the possibility of bronchial casts when examining children with influenza (H1N1) infection accompanied by
atelectasis. Steroids can be administered early in infection to avoid cast formation, and antiviral drug therapy and respiratory support can
be used for influenza (H1N1)–infected children in whom airway casts have developed. Suggested citation for this article: Hasegawa M, Inamo
Y, Fuchigami T, Hashimoto K, Morozumi M, Ubukata K, et al. Bronchial casts and pandemic (H1N1) 2009 virus infection . Emerg Infect Dis.
[serial on the Internet]. 2010 Feb [date cited]. http://www.cdc.gov/EID/content/16/2/344.htm We thank Naoko Chiba and Akiko Ono for
assistance with manuscript preparation. This work was supported in part by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of
Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (no. 21390306) to T.T.
