The inability to appropriately ventilate neonates shortly after their birth could be related in rare cases to chest-wall rigidity caused by
the placental transfer of fentanyl. Although this adverse effect is recognized when fentanyl is administered to neonates after their birth,
the prenatal phenomenon is less known. Treatment with either naloxone or muscle relaxants reverses the fentanyl effect and may prevent
unnecessary excessive ventilatory settings. Fentanyl is used as a sedative and an analgesic in the care of critically ill infants. Its most
known side effect is respiratory depression. A recognized uncommon side effect of fentanyl is muscle and chest wall rigidity. Reports on
this phenomenon caused by prenatal fentanyl exposure are rare, when used in critically ill mothers. We report a case of a preterm infant
born with chest-wall rigidity caused by intrauterine exposure to a high dose of fentanyl that resolved after naloxone treatment. This infant
was delivered by an emergent cesarean section at 28 weeks' gestation by an 18-year-old woman who was admitted 12 h earlier to the
respiratory intensive care unit with pyelonephritis and adult respiratory distress syndrome. Despite treatment with broad-spectrum
antibiotics, intravenous fluids and inotropes, her hemodynamic and respiratory condition continued to deteriorate. To control her
respiratory function better, she was ventilated and treated with a high dose of fentanyl (20 mcg−1 kg−1 h−1); however, no respiratory
improvement was achieved, and it was decided to perform a cesarean section. The female infant (birth weight 1220 g) was born apneic and
hypotonic, and needed immediate intubation and ventilation. Surfactant (Curosurf-100 mg kg−1) was administered via the endotracheal tube,
which was placed at 7.2 cm attached to the upper lip. Clinical evaluation upon arrival to the neonatal intensive care unit at 15 min after
birth showed normal heart rate, peripheral pulses and blood pressure, normal fontanelle, and equal air entry to both lungs upon ventilation.
No spontaneous respirations were detected and the chest moved only with response to high pressure (positive inspiratory pressure 25 cm H2O,
positive end expiratory pressure 6 cm H2O) via Neopuff. Chest X-ray performed at 30 min of age showed respiratory distress syndrome without
air leaks and correct position of the endotracheal tube. On connecting to the ventilator, she developed recurrent de-saturation episodes and
periodic cessations in the chest-wall elevation requiring frequent bag-assisted ventilation. Mean airway pressure was gradually increased to
16 cm H2O via different ventilation modes (conventional mechanical ventilation and high-frequency ventilation) without achieving adequate
chest expansion. Arterial blood gases showed worsening respiratory acidosis. The infant remained hypotonic. No seizure activity was
observed. At age 2 h, in view of chest-wall rigidity combined with generalized hypotonia, we postulated adverse effects of placental
transfer of fentanyl. Accordingly, 0.1 mg kg−1 naloxone was administered. Within minutes the infant started to breathe and move her limbs.
From this point onwards, ventilation and oxygenation were easily accomplished and it was possible to rapidly decrease the ventilation
parameters to a minimum with no episodes of de-saturation or difficulties in chest expansion. The infant was extubated 2 days after birth
and was discharged from the neonatal intensive care unit 56 days after birth. Cranial ultrasound evaluations on day 3, at 1 week of age and
before discharge were normal. Subsequent developmental course and neurological examination at 6 months after birth were normal. Fentanyl,
one of the potent systemic opioids used for maternal analgesia during labor, readily crosses the placenta,1, 2 and may induce adverse
effects in the fetus and the neonate.3 When administered to the neonate, potential adverse effects are respiratory depression, de-saturation
episodes, lower heart rate and sleep-state disturbances.3 Less frequently seen are the neuromuscular adverse effects of fentanyl, including
abnormal muscle movements, such as sucking or tonic–clonic movements, but also laryngeal spasm and chest-wall rigidity in up to 4% of the
treated term and preterm infants even when low doses of fentanyl are given.4 The exact mechanism of muscle rigidity induced by fentanyl is
still unknown.5 Information on the neonatal pharmacokinetics of placentally-transferred fentanyl shortly after birth is limited.1, 6
Moreover, it has been recently shown that there is a positive correlation between a higher rate of fentanyl clearance after birth, and
advanced gestational age and birth weight, whereas in preterm infants the clearance spectrum is very wide mainly because of hepatic
immaturity.7 Therefore, extremely preterm infants are at an increased risk of chest-wall rigidity induced by the placental fentanyl
transfer. To our knowledge this is the third reported case of chest-wall rigidity described in a preterm infant after maternal
administration of fentanyl before (as in our case) or during cesarean section. In the case described by Lindemann,8 extremely high
ventilation pressures (positive inspiratory pressures of 60 to 70 cm H2O) were required to inflate the lungs of a 31 weeks' gestation
neonate, while increase in chest wall compliance was achieved only after the infusion of naloxone and pancoronium. By a similar placental
fentanyl transfer mechanism, Bolisetty et al.9 reported the occurrence of chest-wall rigidity in a term infant after maternal intrathecal
administration of fentanyl before elective cesarean section. The cases reporting the possibility of neonatal chest-wall rigidity after
prenatal fentanyl administration emphasize the importance of recognition and diagnosis of this phenomenon that may prevent unnecessary
barotrauma. Thus, in all cases of chest-wall rigidity shortly after birth, the possibility of placental transfer of fentanyl may be raised
and treatment may be considered. The authors have no conflict of interest.
