Head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) is an aggressive and lethal malignancy. Publically available cell lines are mostly of lingual
origin, or have not been carefully characterized. Detailed characterization of novel HNSCC cell lines is needed in order to provide
researchers a concrete keystone on which to build their investigations. The USC-HN1 cell line was established from a primary maxillary HNSCC
biopsy explant in tissue culture. The immortalized cells were then further characterized by heterotransplantation in Nude mice;
immunohistochemical staining for relevant HNSCC biomarkers; flow cytometry for surface markers; cytogenetic karyotypic analysis; human
papillomavirus and Epstein-Barr virus screening; qRT-PCR for oncogene and cytokine analysis; investigation of activated, cleaved Notch1
levels; and detailed 35,000 gene microarray analysis. Characterization experiments confirmed the human HNSCC origin of USC-HN1, including a
phenotype similar to the original tumor. Viral screening revealed no HPV or EBV infection, while western blotting displayed significant
upregulation of activated, cleaved Notch1. USC-HN1, a novel immortalized cell line has been derived from a maxillary HNSCC. Characterization
studies have shown that the cell line is of HNSCC origin and displays many of the same markers previously reported in the literature. USC-
HN1 is available for public research and will further the investigation of HNSCC and the development of new therapeutic modalities. Head and
neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC) represents a cancer of increasing incidence worldwide with more than 45,000 head and neck malignancies
diagnosed each year, of which greater than 90% are of squamous cell origin. This particularly lethal cancer, the sixth most common world-
wide, has not seen an improvement in overall survival in more than four decades . Standard-of-care treatment for the disease has been
limited to surgical resection or combination chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Despite these treatments, the high rates of primary-site
recurrence and common metastases to loco-regional lymph nodes are responsible for the dismal prognosis of HNSCC. Clinically, more than one
half of patients with loco-regional advanced disease treated with chemoradiation, surgery or both experience recurrence within two years .
The presence of lymph node metastases alone decreases the chances of long-term survival by 50% . Bio-molecular research into the cause of
HNSCC has had some success; however, without the ongoing development of newly-established HNSCC cell lines, researchers are limited in these
pursuits. At the present time, most of the currently available HNSCC cell lines deposited at the American Type Tissue Collection (ATCC) are
derived from lingual tumors despite the fact that there are multiple anatomically-exclusive locations from which HNSCC can develop. As shown
in Figure 1, HNSCC tumors can arise from any location of the upper aerodigestive tract, including the nasal cavity, sinus cavities, oral
cavity, pharynx, or larynx. The various locations associated with malignant transformation implore the need for a wide-ranging database of
tumor cell lines representative of all of the anatomic locations. Secondly, distinct biomodels of HNSCC have been established based on the
viral infectivity and carcinogenic exposure of the patient. By establishing cell lines representative of the entire upper aerodigestive
tract, a comprehensive database would be available to elucidate the development and progression of HNSCC. Moreover, these types of studies
could lead to the discovery and advancement of targeted therapies that might alter the clinical outcome of these tumors. Schematic of the
upper aerodigestive tract and locations of various head and neck malignancies. Current research has delineated many generalized and specific
markers to characterize HNSCC cell lines. Histologically, HNSCC is a squamous epithelial carcinoma with variable degrees of keratinization.
Well-differentiated cell lines may display keratin pearls, whereas poorly differentiated, anaplastic cell lines may have little-to-no
keratin production. HNSCC is typically characterized by a malignant phenotype including large, pleomorphic nuclei and large or multiple
nucleoli; cytoplasmic vacuolation with abundant cytoplasm; intercellular bridging; and high numbers of mitotic figures, both typical and
atypical. Beside these morphologic features, surface and intracellular markers are also used to identify the cell line lineage. Along with
traditional markers such as FABP5, epidermal growth factor receptor, E-cadherin, CD74, and CD24, newly published biomarkers for the staining
of HNSCC primary tumor biopsies include IL13Rα2, CD44v6, and the stem cell marker CD133 . The population of cancer stem cells (CSC) within
the tumor biopsy represented by CD44+CD133+ cells has been shown to have a high incidence of metastasis and invasion. These cells, however,
have been found to be a rare subset of cells (2-10%) in the overall tumor cell population . Karyotypic analysis of HNSCC typically reveals
an aberrant chromosome set with various deletions, translocations, and double chromosomes, including a deletion of the small arm of
chromosome 3 found in many epithelial cancers . Human papilloma virus (HPV), specifically HPV subtype-16 is associated with HNSCC in about
30% of cases and is most commonly associated with tumors arising from the oropharynx. HPV-positive HNSCC is now considered a distinct
biomodel from HPV-negative HNSCC, occurring in patients without the usual history of alcohol and/or tobacco use . Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)
is a commonly-associated Herpes virus linked with nasopharyngeal carcinoma not found in HNSCC. Bergmann et al. have reported extensive
evidence of the immunomodulatory effects of HNSCC, including the local and regional suppression of the immune system by interleukins, TGF-β,
and other cytokines. Oncogenes such as c-myc, and c-Kit and mutations in tumor suppressor genes p53 and Rb are also characteristically found
in HNSCC . Lastly, it has been reported that Notch1, an embryonically-associated receptor for inhibition of differentiation, may play a role
in the oncogenesis of multiple types of cancers including leukemias, lung, melanoma, breast, and neurological tumors but its role in HNSCC
has not been studied extensively to date. In this report, we now describe the establishment and characterization of a unique HNSCC cell line
designated USC-HN1. The cell line was derived from an invasive primary right superior alveolar ridge squamous cell carcinoma in a nonsmoking
patient (Stage IVa, T4aN0M0, based on the American Joint Commission on Cancer Staging, 6th Ed.) and has been found to recapitulate the
phenotype of the original tumor biopsy. Heterotransplantation and cytogenetic studies demonstrate its oncogenic derivation and
monoclonality, respectively. This cell line has been made available for others in the scientific community through the American Tissue-type
Cell Collection (ATCC, http://www.atcc.org) and represents an important model for further studies of HNSCC. HeLa, HUT102, Raji, FaDu, and
SW579 cell lines were obtained from the ATCC. All cell lines were maintained in complete medium in humidified incubators at 37°C with 5%
CO2. IRB approval from the USC Keck School of Medicine (HS-09-00048) has been obtained for the collection and use of HNSCC tumor biopsies.
Tumor biopsies were surgically resected and placed into 50 mL collection tubes containing approximately 30 mL of RPMI-1640 medium with 20%
FCS, 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic Solution (Mediatech, Inc., Manassas, VA), 10 ug/ml Ciprofloxacin-HCl (Mediatech, Inc.), and 10 ug/ml
Gentamicin Sulfate (Irvine Scientific, Santa Ana, CA). The tubes were immediately put on ice and transported to the laboratory for tissue
dissociation. Tumor biopsies were mechanically dissociated into small tissue fragments using scissors and forceps. Fragments were then
further dissociated enzymatically in 20 ml of RPMI-1640 medium containing 10% FCS, and 0.2 micron membrane filtered 0.01% hyaluronidase,
0.1% collagenase, and 0.01% DNase (Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO) for 40 min in a 37°C water bath with intermittent mixing. After
digestion, the cells and fragments were washed once in complete medium (RPMI-1640 medium containing 20% FCS, 1% Antibiotic-Antimycotic
Solution, 10 ug/ml ciprofloxacin HCl, and 10 μg/ml Gentamicin Sulfate), treated for 30 seconds in 30 ml sterile filtered RBC lysis buffer
(8.3 g NH4Cl, 1 g KHCO3, and 0.037 g EDTA/L dH2O), washed again in complete medium, and seeded in two T-75 flasks. After 2-3 days of
incubation in a humidified 5% CO2 37°C incubator, the fragments were repeatedly pipetted with a 2 ml glass pipette for further dissociation.
After centrifugation, the cells and residual small fragments were resuspended in freezing medium (RPMI-1640 medium with 30% FCS, 1%
Penicillin/Streptomycin, and 10% DMSO), aliquoted into four-six 1.8 ml cryotubes (Nunc, Denmark), and placed in liquid nitrogen for long-
term storage. Cells and fragments that adhered to the T-75 flasks were grown in complete medium for 2 weeks before being trypsinized and
passaged weekly to new flasks. When the malignant cells were seen to grow, the normal fibroblastic cells were removed by differential
trypsinization to enrich the malignant cell population. Finally, malignant cells were cloned in petri dishes using cloning rings to isolate
a pure population of HNSCC cells to establish the cell line. The doubling time was determined by cell count measurements at 24 hr intervals
for one week from cells in culture after trypsinization. After establishment of the cell line, interval screening for Mycoplasma was
performed using the MycoAlert Mycoplasma Detection Kit (Lonza, Rockland, ME). Six-week-old female Nude mice were purchased from Harlan
Sprague Dawley (Indianapolis, IN). Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee-approved protocols and institutional guidelines for the
proper humane care and use of animals in research were followed. Mice (n = 5) were injected s.c. in the flank with a 0.2 mL inoculum of 5 ×
106 viable USC-HN1 cells. Three weeks after implantation, tumors were removed and the tissue was either flash frozen in liquid nitrogen or
fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin overnight at room temperature for paraffin-embedded procedures. For immunohistochemistry (IHC)
studies, cytospin preparations of USC-HN1 cells and tissue sections of USC-HN1 tumors grown in Nude mice were used and compared to stained,
fixed slides of the original tumor. USC-HN1 cells grown for 24 hr directly on sterile printed 25 × 75 mm glass slides (Bellco Glass, Inc.,
Vineland, NJ) were fixed sequentially with 2% parafolmaldehyde (Polysciences, Inc., Warrington, PA) for 10 min at room temperature and
acetone for 5 min at -20°C. For tissue sections, excised heterotransplanted USC-HN1 tumors from Nude mice were fixed overnight in 10%
neutral buffered formalin and embedded in paraffin blocks. For cell culture and tissue morphology studies, Wright-Giemsa and hematoxilin &
eosin stains were used, respectively on air-dried cytospin preparations. In addition, USC-HN1 cytospin preparations and 5 micron tissue
sections were stained with monoclonal antibodies against human CD44 (clone DF1485 Dako Corp., Carpinteria, CA), E-cadherin (clone 4A2C7
Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFr) (clone E30 Biogenex, San Ramon, CA), keratin (clone AE1/AE-3 Covance,
Berkeley, CA), p53 (clone 1801 CalBiochem, San Diego, CA), and Rb (clone RbG3-245 BD Biosciences, San Diego, CA). Observation, evaluation
and image acquisition were made using Leica DM2500 microscope (Leica Microsystems, http://www.leica-microsystems.com) connected to an
automated, digital SPOT RTke camera and SPOT Advanced Software (SPOT Diagnostic Instrument Inc., http://www.diaginc.com). Images were
further resized and brightened for publication using Adobe Photoshop software (Adobe, http://www.adobe.com). Single cell suspensions (1 ×
106 cells in 100 μl) in FACS buffer (1% FCS in PBS) were stained with FITC, PE, PerCPCy5.5, and APC conjugated antibodies. For intracellular
staining, cell surface staining was performed first, followed by buffer fixation/permeabilization (eBioscience, San Diego, CA) and
intracellular staining. Antibodies used were: CD24 (ML5), CD74 (M-B741), E-cadherin (36/E-cadherin) (BD Biosciences); IL-13Rα (B-D13), c-Kit
(104D2) (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA); CD44v6 (VFF-7) (Abcam, Cambridge, MA); CD133 (TMP4) (eBioscience); FABP5 (311215) (R&D
Systems, Minneapolis, MN); and anti-human Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor (CTL-R2) (Cancer Therapeutics Laboratories, Inc., Los Angeles,
CA). Staining with isotype controls antibodies (eBioscience) was performed in parallel, and all samples were done in duplicate. Samples were
run on a FACS Calibur flow cytometer (BD) and data acquisition and analysis were performed using Cell Quest Pro software (BD) at the USC
Flow Cytometry core facility. Karyotype analysis was performed by the Division of Anatomic Pathology, City of Hope (Duarte, CA) using
cultured USC-HN1 cells. Genomic DNA was isolated from USC-HN1, HeLa, HUT102, Raji, FaDu, and SW579 cells using TRIreagent (Sigma) per
manufacturer's instructions. For PCR, 50-100 ng of DNA was amplified with specified primers (300 nM final concentration) using REDTaq
ReadyMix PCR Master Mix (Sigma) in a 25 μl reaction and run on an iCycler (BioRad, Hercules, CA). HPV infectivity was screened using
previously reported consensus primers MY09/MY11 (expected product ~450 bp) and GP5+/GP6+ (expected product ~150 bp) . Consensus primers for
the EBV gene EBNA2 (expected product ~600 bp) was used to screen for the presence of EBV as previously reported . Total RNA was isolated
from USC-HN1 and FaDu human pharyngeal carcinoma cell lines by RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA) per manufacturer's instructions. RNA
was DNase treated using Turbo DNase (Applied Biosciences, Foster City, CA) per manufacturer's instructions. For qRT-PCR, 100-200 ng of
DNase-treated RNA was amplified with Power SYBR Green RNA-to-CT 1-Step Kit (Applied Biosciences). Primer sequences for cytokines and
oncogenes were from the NIH qRT-PCR database , http://primerdepot.nci.nih.gov] and were synthesized by the USC Core Facility (Table 1).
Specific markers analyzed included p53, Rb, c-myc, c-Kit, VEGF-A, VEGF-C, Cox2, TGFβ1, TGFβ2, IL-1β, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10. For
amplification, samples were run on a Stratagene Mx3000P cycler with MxP QPCR software (Strategene, La Jolla, CA). Gene-specific
amplification was normalized to GAPDH and fold change in gene expression calculated relative to Universal Human Reference RNA (Stratagene).
For statistical analysis, the student's t-test for independent samples was used with a significance level α = 0.05 to compare gene
expression between samples. Statistical tests were performed using GraphPad Prism software (La Jolla, CA). Cytokine and Oncogene Primers for
qRT-PCR For western blots, 50 μg of protein from sonicated whole cell lysates were fractionated in a 10% Tris-glycine polyacrylamide gel,
electrotransferred to PDVF membranes, and probed overnight with primary antibody for activated Notch1 (clone Val1744) (Cell Signaling,
Danvers, MA). Blots were stripped and reprobed for GAPDH (clone FL-335) (Santa Cruz Biotech), to normalize the amount of sample loaded.
Horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies (Caltag, Burlingame, CA) were then applied, followed by signal detection using
Immobilon Western Chemiluminescent HRP Substrate (Millipore, Billerica, MA). Total RNA from USC-HN1 was collected and analyzed by microarray
as previously described . Briefly, 5 μg of total RNA was reverse-transcribed using 5'-amino-modified primers with amino-allyl-dUTP. cDNA
synthesized from USC-HN1 cells was labeled with Cy5 dye, and cDNA from universal RNA (uRNA) labelled with Cy3 dye. Labeled and combined cDNA
probes were denatured, mixed in SlideHyb #1 hybridization buffer (Ambion, Austin, TX), and placed onto microarray slides. Thirty five
thousand oligonucleotide arrays were hybridized at 42°C in MAUI hybridization system (BioMicro Systems) for overnight, washed with 1 × SSC
with 0.05% SDS and 0.1 × SSC buffers, and then were quickly spin-dried. Microarray slides were scanned on a GenePix 4000B scanner (Axon
Instruments, Inc., Foster City, CA) with a 5 μm resolution. Scanned raw images were analyzed and data files were generated with GenePix Pro
5.1 (Axon) software. For analysis, data files were uploaded into mAdb (microarray database), and analyzed by the software tools provided by
the Center for Information Technology (CIT), NIH. A standard global normalization approach was used for each experiment. All of the
extracted data was normalized using a 50th percentile (median) normalization method. Statistical analyses and t-test were performed to
identify differentially expressed genes. Patient NR is a 57-year-old Hispanic female with a past medical history of hypothyroidism and
dyslipidemia. Of note, she does not have a family history of head and neck cancer nor does she have a history of tobacco or alcohol use. In
February, 2009 she presented to her primary care physician with a three-month history of fatigue, weight loss, right-sided facial pain, oral
ulcers, loose teeth, and bleeding gingiva. A right anterior maxillary gingival biopsy subsequently revealed a well-differentiated squamous
cell carcinoma. A series of CTs, including the sinuses and neck, were performed which showed an extensive mass of the right hard and soft
palates extending into the right maxillary sinus with significant bone destruction without noted nodal metastases (Stage IVa, T4aN0M0). In
May, 2009 the patient underwent a complex resection and reconstruction procedure including a complete right maxillectomy and ethmoidectomy
with a split-thickness skin graft repair. Intraoperative frozen section margins of the maxillary crest, pterygoid plates, palate, ethmoid
air cells, and buccal cavity were all clear and free of tumor. Final pathological diagnosis of the resected right maxilla indicated an
invasive, well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, keratinizing type with perineural invasion (Figure 2). Hematoxilin and eosin stained
histologic sections from the original tumor. An invasive well-differentiated squamous cell carcinoma, the tumor is arranged as cohesive
islands of cells showing nuclear pleomorphism with occasionally prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity is present including atypical forms. In
areas, abundant keratin production is present including whirling "keratin pearl" configurations. Intercellular bridges are visible at high
power magnification. Surrounding the invasive tumor, a dense lymphoplasmacytic inflammatory infiltrate is present (A ×200, B ×400 original
magnification). A cell line, designated USC-HN1, was established from the primary tumor biopsy specimen after approximately 4 weeks in
culture. Initially, explants were seen attaching to the flask and tumor cells grew centrifugally from these small tissue fragments (Figure
3). By ten days the explants were trypsinized and re-plated as single cells along with growing stromal cells. At this time, explants were
grown only in Pen/Strep antibiotic solution (Gibco, Carlsbad, CA) and were not affected by the early use of anti-mycotic or other
antibacterial reagents that were added to the early cultures. By 3 weeks, tumor cells were seen rounding up and growing throughout the T-75
flask amongst the normal stromal fibroblasts that grew in parallel. Differential trypsinization was used to remove the majority of the
fibroblasts which detached sooner than the tumor cells. To isolate a pure population of tumor cells, 100 detached cells were plated in 100
mm petri dishes and colonies were removed by trypsinization using cloning rings. These isolated colonies were used to establish the cell
line which typically grows rapidly forming tight monolayers in flasks. The cells are easily detached with pre-warmed 0.05% trypsin/EDTA
(Gibco) and were found to have a rapid doubling time of 18 hr. A search of the literature shows that other head and neck squamous cell lines
have doubling times between 17-240 hrs with a median time of 26.5 hr . In culture, the USC-HN1 cell line has numerous mitotic figures, is
tightly adherent, and demonstrates typical squamous cell morphology (Figure 4A) that has remained constant since the establishment of the
cell line. Wright-Giemsa staining of cell-cultured slide preparations shows malignant cells with large nucleoli, some cytoplasmic vacuoles,
and an abundance of cytoplasm typical of squamous cells (Figure 4B). Mycoplasma testing on multiple passages was found to be negative.
Morphologic appearance of early tumor explants from HNSCC biopsy samples. Phase-contrast photomicrograph of tumor explants isolated from
HNSCC biopsies in culture after 2-4 weeks with cells growing directly from the explants in a monolayer (A ×100, B ×200 original
magnification). Establishment of the USC-HN1 cell line. (A) Phase contrast microphotograph of growing USC-HN1 cells showing numerous mitotic
cells (rounded, luminescent cells) with a tightly, adherent squamous cell morphology. (B) Cytology of the USC-HN1 cell line shows malignant
cells with large nuclei and nucleoli and an abundance of cytoplasm typical of squamous cells (Cytospin, Wright-Giemsa stain, ×100 original
magnification). Cultured USC-HN1 cells were heterotransplanted subcutaneously in Nude mice to produce expanding tumors in 5/5 mice that
displayed the cell line's malignancy (Figure 5). At 3 weeks, the tumors were excised. Histologic sections of the heterotransplanted tumor
stained with hematoxilin and eosin show a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma arranged as a sheet with areas of tumor necrosis and
bluntly infiltrative borders. The tumor cells are tightly cohesive featuring from moderate to abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclear
to cytoplasmic ratio is markedly increased with nuclei showing frequent, prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity is abundant including atypical
forms such as ring and tripolar configurations. Intercellular bridges are focally present but faint. Heterotransplantation of USC-HN1 cell
line into Nude mice. (A) Appearance of subcutaneous USC-HN1 tumor in Nude mouse. (B and C) Low and high magnification of USC-HN1 Nude mouse
heterotransplant showing a poorly differentiated squamous cell carcinoma arranged as a sheet with areas of tumor necrosis and bluntly
infiltrative borders. The tumor cells are tightly cohesive featuring from moderate to abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm. The nuclear to
cytoplasmic ratio is markedly increased with nuclei showing frequent, prominent nucleoli. Mitotic activity is abundant including atypical
forms such as ring and tripolar configurations. Intercellular bridges are focally present but faint (H&E ×200 and ×400 original
magnification). Immunophenotypic characterization of USC-HN1 cells in culture and from tumors grown in Nude mice demonstrated similarity to
the original tumor and confirmed a keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma (Figure 6). USC-HN1 cells demonstrate strong, uniform nuclear p53
and Rb expression, as well as positive expression of keratin, E-cadherin, EGFr, and CD44 in situ consistent with HNSCC as well as the
original tumor biopsy . There is decreased staining of E-cadherin and CD44 in situ compared with cultured cells. Conversely, EGFr staining
is stronger in those cells grown as heterotransplants. CD44 staining is decreased in the heterotransplant and cytospin in comparison with
the original tumor biopsy. Immunoperoxidase staining of USC-HN1 cells in Nude mouse heterotransplant and in cytospin preparations for HNSCC
classification markers. Photomicrograph of immunoperoxidase staining of original tumor biopsy (top), IHC stained formalin-fixed paraffin-
embedded tissue sections of USC-HN1 Nude mouse heterotransplant (middle), and USC-HN1 cells from culture in a cytospin preparation (bottom)
for keratin, E-cadherin, EGFr, CD44, p53 and Rb (×200 original magnification). Karyotype of USC-HN1. Karyotype of USC-HN1 cell line showing
a near-triploid clone (modal 71) demonstrating features characteristic of head and neck cancer including multiple deletions (chromosomes X,
3, 4, 6, and 7), isochromosome formation, and many breakpoints around centromeres. The phenotype of USC-HN1 cell line was further
characterized by surface and intracellular staining for common HNSCC biomarkers by fluorescently-labeled monoclonal antibodies and analysis
by flow cytometry (Table 2). Compared to isotype controls, USC-HN1 displays significantly increased staining of FABP5, E-cadherin, and CD24.
EGFr, c-Kit, and CD74 staining also showed an increased mean fluorescence intensity, whereas IL-13Rα, CD44v6 and CD133 did not show a
significant increase. Analysis of USC-HN1 cytokines and surface markers by FACS. *** > 1000% Control MFI ** 100-1000% Control MFI * < 100%
Control MFI USC-HN1 cells in culture were stained for HNSCC-related cytokines and surface markers (left column) using monoclonal antibodies
and analyzed by flow cytometry. Samples were run in duplicate. Percent of positive staining cells (middle columns) and mean fluorescence
intensity (right columns) is shown for each antibody target and its isotype control. Cytogenetic analysis of the USC-HN1 cell line was
performed in collaboration with the City of Hope (Duarte, CA) (Figure 7). All mitotic cells analyzed from the USC-HN1 cell line were
clonally abnormal. The complex near-triploid clone was characterized by a modal number of chromosomes of 71 and by deletions involving
chromosomes X, 3, 4, 6, and 7, additional material of unknown origin on chromosomes 8, 13, 17, and 19, a derivative chromosome 6 resulting
from an unbalanced translocation with the long arm of chromosome 14, gains of chromosomes X, 7, 11, 15, and 19, losses of chromosomes 9, 14,
18, 21, and 22, as well as gain of a large marker chromosome and a small suspected ring chromosome. Since HPV and EBV are associated with
malignancies of the head and neck, the USC-HN1 cell line was screened for these oncogenic viruses by PCR using consensus primers for HPV L1
and EBV EBNA2 genes as described previously . The results showed that the USC-HN1 did not have specific amplifications for either the HPV L1
sequence or for the EBV sequence (Figure 8). HeLa cells (known HPV-positive cervical carcinoma) and SW579 (known HPV-negative thyroid
carcinoma) were run in parallel as controls for both HPV consensus primer sets (MY09/MY11 and GP5+/GP6+). For the EBV screen, EBV+ Raji and
EBV- T-cell lymphoma TLBR-1 cell lines were run in parallel as controls. PCR studies for the presence of oncogeneic viruses. (A) HPV
detection using consensus primers GP5+/GP6+ (1a-4a) and MY09/MY11 (1b-4b) demonstrating USC-HN1 (3a, 3b) is negative for HPV infection.
Positive (HeLa 4a, 4b), negative (SW579 2a, 2b), and water (1a, 1b) controls were run in parallel. (B) PCR study for detection of EBV with
consensus primer showing USC-HN1 negative (3). Positive (Raji, 2), negative (HUT102, 4), and water (1) controls were run in parallel. The
cell line was also tested by qRT-PCR for its expression levels of pertinent oncogenes and cytokines. Run in parallel with RNA extracted from
the human pharyngeal carcinoma FaDu cell line and compared to Universal Human Reference RNA, the overall expression levels of USC-HN1
closely paralleled that of FaDu, a documented HNSCC cell line (Table 3). Statistical analysis revealed significant differences between the
expression levels of c-myc, VEGFa, TGF-β1, and IL-1β produced by USC-HN1 and the FaDu cell line, and no significant differences between p53,
Rb, c-Kit, VEGFc, COX2, TGF-β2, IL-4, IL-6, IL-8, and IL-10. Oncogene and cytokine analysis of HNSCC cell lines by qRT-PCR. RNA was
extracted from USC-HN1 and FaDu cell lines, treated with DNase, and analyzed against Universal Human Reference RNA. Gene amplification was
normalized to GAPDH. Analysis of oncogenes and cytokines depict an overall similar profile for both USC-HN1 and FaDu. C-myc, c-Kit, VEGFa,
and TGF-B1 are significantly upregulated in USC-HN1 compared to FaDu; IL-1B was significantly down-regulated. Notch1 protein levels were
determined by Western blot for the USC-HN1 cell line in comparison to expression levels seen in positive (Karpas 299) and negative (Siha)
cell line controls. Based upon these studies, USC-HN1 demonstrated an increased level of activated Notch1 protein at levels equal to or
higher than the Karpas 299 positive control (Figure 9). Western Blot: Notch1. Western blot analysis of the active, cleaved portion of Notch1
run in parallel with confirmatory GAPDH. (lane A) Karpas 299 positive control; (lane B) Siha low expression control; and (lane C) USC-HN1
shows high expression levels of Notch1 protein. Microarray gene expression analysis was performed on isolated total RNA from USC-HN1 cells
and compared to the results previously reported in HNSCC tumor biopsy samples . To compare the similarities of gene expression profile
between the USC-HN1 cells and HNSCC tumor biopsy samples, we focused on the up-regulated genes in USC-HN1 cells. A total of 328 genes with p
< 0.05 and log2 fold ≥ 1 in USC-HN1 cells compared with previous results from normal tonsils were identified. Many up-regulated genes
identified in USC-HN1 cells were also present in HNSCC biopsies (Table 4). These common genes were classified into various categories of
biological functions including those related to immune response such as MIF and CD24, which were currently identified in HNSCC . Other
signatures of up-regulated genes in USC-HN1 cells include ATP5H, HSP27, FABP5, E-cadherin, EIF4G2, KRT18 and KRT8, RPLP0 and RPS18, which
are associated with various biological processes such as cell growth and maintenance, cell cycle regulation, metabolism, and protein
translation and synthesis (Table 4). Selected up-regulated genes identified in USC-HN1 cells by microarray analysis also present in HNSCC
tumor biopsies.* *All selected genes with p-value < 0.05. **Log2 ratio fold-differences between USC-HN1 cells and normal tonsil tissues were
determined by subtracting the ratio of genes in normal tonsil tissue versus uRNA from the ratio of genes in USC-HN1 cells versus uRNA. (Log2
ratio of 1 equals to 2-fold difference between USC-HN1 cells and normal tissue; Log2 ratio of 2 equals to 4-fold difference between USC-HN1
and normal tissue, and so on). We describe the clinical presentation of an invasive well-differentiated maxillary HNSCC and the
establishment of the USC-HN1 cell line from the primary tumor biopsy. Of note, patient NR was a non-smoker and did not receive preoperative
radiotherapy or chemotherapy. Her tumor was consistent with a diagnosis of primary HNSCC on presentation by tissue histology and
immunostaining for HNSCC markers. The USC-HN1 cell line was established in culture approximately 4 weeks after seeding by isolation from co-
existing fibroblastic monolayers which grew from the explanted cultures. USC-HN1 shares many characteristics with the primary tumor and has
a phenotype typical of an advanced HNSCC. The doubling time of the cell line is extremely rapid (18 hr) compared to other human tumor cell
lines from HNSCC or those from other tumor types. To demonstrate its malignant potential, the cell line was successfully heterotransplanted
into Nude mice where it was found to produce invasive tumors. In comparison to the original tumor, the heterotransplant most prominently
shows a higher nuclear to cytoplasmic ratio, markedly increased mitotic activity, prominent necrosis and less conspicuous intercellular
bridging. Marked keratinization is also absent. The difference between the original tumor histology and the subsequently developed cell
line's heterotransplant is likely due to the outgrowth of a more aggressive, less differentiated cell sub-population during establishment of
the cell line in culture. In addition, sections of the heterotransplanted tumors stained for HNSCC markers were mostly consistent with
previously reported primary tumor biopsies including strong EGFr, p53, and Rb staining, as is seen in many epithelial malignancies .
Furthermore, fixed sections of the original tumor biopsy and cytospin cell preparations were also stained for these biomarkers. Noted
differences of the cytospin preparations relative to the heterotransplanted tumors were a decrease in keratin and EFGr staining and an
increase in E-cadherin and CD44 positivity. The moderate staining of keratin found in the heterotransplant tumor sections is similar with
the original tumor, described as a keratinizing squamous cell carcinoma. The light staining of E-cadherin in the heterotransplanted tumor
may indicate the malignant potential of the cells as they begin to undergo epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition and consequently lose cell-
cell adhesive and interactive molecules . When the malignant cells are placed in a murine host, they are subjected to a myriad of
microenvironmental factors different from that of cell culture medium or a human host. The loss of CD44 in the heterotransplanted tumor
sections may be explained by the presence of factors that increase the differentiation of USC-HN1 in situ in contrast to its stem cell-like
phenotype that predominates in cell culture or in vivo . Analysis of the flow cytometry data supports a comparable picture to the IHC in
which almost all USC-HN1 cells were positive for FABP5 and half were E-cadherin positive (97.5% and 49.7%, respectively). Furthermore, USC-
HN1 showed a significant increase in EGFr staining as is to be expected in an epithelial malignancy . Interestingly, stem cell markers were
not uniformly expressed in the sample of cultured HNSCC although CD24 and CD74 showed increased staining unlike CD133. USC-HN1 is grown in a
serum-containing medium, which may irreversibly differentiate any stem cells in the population and therefore alter the surface marker
expression in the remaining pluripotent cells . Conversely, these cells may represent only a subpopulation of tumor stem cells found
previously to display various combinations of CD24, CD74, and CD133 . Our results did not show a significant amount of surface staining for
the recently published markers IL-13Rα or CD44v6. However, these published studies were performed on primary tumor biopsies and not on
established cell lines . The karyotype analysis of USC-HN1 did show a highly abnormal chromosome content consistent with other known HNSCC
cell lines and solid tumors. Aneusomy is a recurrent finding in cytogenetically abnormal head and neck tumor specimens . Deletions are the
most common structural rearrangement observed, particularly involving the short arms of chromosomes 3 and 8, as well as the short arm
regions of the acrocentric chromosomes. Many structural breakpoints in HNSCC involve centromeric or pericentromeric regions of the
chromosomes, often resulting in isochromosome formation or derivative whole-arm translocations involving the acrocentric chromosomes
[Personal communication with Dr. Joyce L. Murata-Collins, Division of Anatomic Pathology, City of Hope, Duarte, CA]. Most notably, the
partial deletion of chromosome 3 and the near-triploid karyotype of the clonal population are consistent with the HNSCC-derived nature of
this cell line . Viral oncogene investigation detected no infection with either HPV or EBV. In this regard, 80-90% of nasopharyngeal
carcinomas have been shown to be infected with EBV but very few (<1%) of HNSCC are positive. An extensive literature report revealed only
two cases of EBV+ HNSCC and both cases were co-infected with HPV . The EBV-negative characteristic of USC-HN1 further supports the origin of
the tumor as a squamous and not a nasopharyngeal carcinoma. By contrast, 30% of HNSCC are infected with a subtype of HPV . USC-HN1
represents a unique HPV-negative HNSCC cell line in that it was derived from a patient who did not smoke tobacco or drink alcohol and does
not have a family history of head and neck malignancies. Further characterization of the USC-HN1 cell line revealed a similar pattern of
cytokine and chemokine expression compared to the pharyngeal carcinoma FaDu, a widely used HNSCC cell line. As previously reported HNSCC are
highly immunomodulatory and alter their tumor microenvironment by the production of various cytokines . The production of VEGFc has been
correlated with increased metastatic potential in HNSCC , and USC-HN1 has shown a statistically increased production of VEGFc compared with
FaDu. Importantly, with the exception of c-myc, the USC-HN1 cell line reveals statistically equivalent expression of proto-oncogenes and
tumor-suppressor genes as FaDu and a cytokine expression profile different from FaDu, which will offer researchers yet another biomodel to
study the microenvironment of HNSCC. Finally, the increased levels of activated, cleaved Notch1 found in USC-HN1 are indicative of its
malignant potential, and although published reports imply various levels of Notch1 activity among HNSCC cell lines , it may serve as a
future avenue for a new therapeutic approach since multiple trials of Notch1 inhibitors are in progress in patients with other tumor types .
Microarray analysis of USC-HN1 revealed a pattern of gene expression similar to HNSCC tumor samples previously reported . In addition,
specific up-regulated genes including CD24, E-cadherin, FABP5, keratins, heat shock protein (27 kDa), and others identified by microarray
analysis were also identified by flow cytometry and immunostaining. These results support the origin of the cell line and further confirm
the pathology as HNSCC. In conclusion, we have established a novel HPV-negative HNSCC cell line from a non-smoking elderly patient. USC-HN1,
one of only a few cell lines derived from the upper alveolar ridge, recapitulates the primary tumor's malignant behavior. It also displays
surface and intracytoplasmic biomarkers consistent with HNSCC. This cell line will provide researchers with a well-delineated model to
investigate the oncogenesis of HNSCC and may provide a source of material to develop new therapeutic reagents capable of treating these
deep-seated and highly resistant tumors. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Contribution: DJL characterized the USC-
HN1 cell line, analyzed the data and wrote the paper; MGL assisted with the heterotransplantation studies, flow cytometry, and western
blots; RM assisted with transfer of the cell line and provided cell culture expertise; UKS identified the patient and excised the original
tumor biopsy; JH and RKP performed the microarray experiments, data analysis and interpreted results and composed the corresponding
sections; AJC reviewed the histological slides and provided pathology expertise; ALE designed the study, established the cell line, and
supervised the studies. All authors reviewed the paper. The authors wish to acknowledge the expert technical assistance of the City of Hope
Cytogenetic Core Facility (Duarte, CA) in performing the cytogenetic studies on the USC-HN1 cell line, Ms. Lillian Young for her help with
the IHC studies, Dr. Clive Taylor for his assistance with microphotography, Dr. Dixon Gray for his help with the flow cytometry studies, and
Mr. James Pang for performing the animal investigations. This work was supported in part by a grant from the American Type Tissue Collection
and from funds provided by Cancer Therapeutics Laboratories, Los Angeles, CA.
