The incidence of methanol (CH3OH) intoxication differs enormously from country to country. Methanol intoxication is extremely rare in the
Dutch population. Even a low dose can already be potentially lethal. Patients are conventionally treated with hemodialysis. Therefore we'd
like to present a report of a foreign sailor in Rotterdam who accidentally caused himself severe methanol intoxication, with a maximum
measured concentration of 4.4 g/L. The patient presented with hemodynamic instability and severe metabolic acidosis with pH 6.69. The anion
gap was 39 mmol/L and the osmol gap 73 mosmol/kg. Treatment with ethanol and continuous venovenous hemodiafiltration (CVVH-DF) was
initiated. Despite the hemodynamic instability it is was possible to achieve rapid correction of pH and methanol concentration with CVVH-DF
while maintaining a stable and therapeutic ethanol serum concentration. Despite hemodynamic and acid-base improvement, our patient developed
massive cerebral edema leading to brain death. Permission for organ donation was unfortunately not ascertained. We conclude that in a
hemodynamic instable situation high methanol concentrations and methanol-induced derangements of homeostasis are safely and effectively
treated with CVVH-DF and that severe cerebral edema is another possible cause of death rather than the classical bleeding in the putamen
area. The nature and incidence of alcohol intoxications are race, sex, culture and geographical localization dependent in a lot of cases .
Since methanol is not readily available and since there's no culture of distilling alcohol at home, severe methanol intoxications are
extremely rare in the Netherlands. A foreign sailor visiting the Netherlands accidentally caused himself severe methanol intoxication by
drinking unregistered illegally bought industrial alcohol. The background of the patient combined with the particular chemical derangements
was indicative of potential methanol intoxication . Hemodialysis in combination with ethanol or fomipezole, a costly but powerful alcohol
dehydrogenase (ADH) blocker is the first choice treatment in case of a severe intoxication . Due to severe hemodynamical instability
hemodialysis was not an option and fomipezole was not available. Therefore the patient was treated with CVVH-DF and ethanol infusions to
block the ADH. In the literature just a few cases using CVVH-DF for the treatment of methanol intoxication have been published so far .
Despite the fact that CVVH-DF is a second choice treatment, the metabolic derangements and the hemodynamic parameters improved rapidly after
fluid resuscitation and initiation of CVVH-DF. Unfortunately the patient developed signs of cerebral herniation after all parameters had
normalized. The CT scan showed instead of bleeding in the putamen massive cerebral edema followed by brain death of the patient. In case of
hemodynamical instability in a patient with methanol induced metabolic derangements, CVVH-DF in combination with ethanol infusion is a
relatively cheap, save and effective alternative for hemodialysis and fomipezole. A 26-year-old foreign sailor was admitted to our emergency
department because of hypothermia and low Glascow Coma Scale (GCS). The patient was found unconscious in his cabin by the ship's captain,
after not appearing on deck for his shift. One of his colleagues confessed they had been celebrating together about 8-12 hours ago at the
end of their shift, with alcohol they bought illegally in a small harbor store the day before. On the emergency department we saw an
unconscious Caucasian male, bodyweight 68 kg's with a maximum GCS of 3 and a body temperature of 35°Celsius. Pupils were reactive to light
on both sides. Initial blood pressure was 80/40 mm/Hg with a regular heartbeat of 126 beats/min. Respiration rate was 30, but shallow.
Auscultation of the lung was normal. The heart sounds showed no abnormalities, except for a mild systolic (grade II/VI) murmur. The
remaining physical examination was normal. Laboratory results showed a severe metabolic acidosis with a HCO3- of 4.2 mmol/L and pH of 6.69.
The serum osmolality was 379 mosmol/kg, Na+ 146 mmol/L, K+ 7.7 mmol/L, Urea 5.8 mmol/L, Glucose 4.6 mmol/L, Cl- 111 mmol/L and Lactate 11.2
mmol/L. Immediately after arrival the patient was intubated and central venous access was obtained. Because of the suspicious circumstances,
the severity of disease, the depth of acidosis and the osmol, anion an bicarbonate gap of respectively 73 mosmol/kg, 39 mmol/L and 6,
methanol or ethylene glycol intoxication was suspected, even though the patient carried a document with a negative toxicology screen, as
proof of a life without drugs, ethanol and even methanol, that was signed for his contractor only a few weeks ago (Figure 1). Official proof
of negative alcohol screening. (+ ) - (+ ) = (146+7.7) - (111+4.2) = 39 mmol/L Serum osmol - (1.86 (Na+K) + glucose + urea + 10) = 379-306 =
73 mOsm/kg . (AG-Normal AG) - (Normal bicarbonate- ) = (38-12) - (24-4) = 6 indicating an almost pure anion gap acidosis . The patient was
transferred to the ICU where CVVH-DF was promptly initiated combined with a continuous infusion of 22 grams ethanol per hour over a central
venous catheter, after an i.v. loading dose of 62 grams. The hypotension was successfully treated with volume suppletion and norepinefrine
with a maximum dose in the first hours of 1.57 microgram/kg/min. Folate and thiamine were also administered. Following these measures the
hemodynamic condition of the patient improved markedly. The pH and lactate levels normalized, as did the methanol concentration (Figure 2).
pH, methanol and ethanol in g/L versus time. During the CVVH-DF we were able to maintain a stable serum ethanol concentration between 1-1.5
g/L. Although the hemodynamic parameters improved, the patient remained unresponsive and unconscious. Because of the initial high level of
methanol and the severity of the acidosis, severe neurological damage was to be expected. Neurological examination showed signs of severe
neurological damage like apnea, a negative vestibular caloric test and absence of the corneal and oculocephalic reflex. Our patient
developed also diabetes insipidus at that time. A CT scan was made to visualize the nature and severity of the damage. This scan showed
massive edema with diminishing grey- and white matter differentiation both supra and infra tentorial. The third and fourth ventricle as well
as the basal cisterns were not identifiable anymore (Figure 3). Severe cerebral edema with compression of the ventricles. On the third day
(48 hours after admission) 30 hours after the ethanol infusion and hemodialysis were discontinued, brain death was officially diagnosed.
Ethical approval was obtained from the Medical Ethics Committee of the Erasmus MC for publication of this report. Methanol (CH3OH)
intoxication has been a rare intoxication in the Dutch population over the years . On the other hand, outbreaks of methanol intoxication,
caused by illegally produced alcohol, have been reported extensively in some other countries. Due to progressive open market policy and the
increase of free traffic of workers within and outside Europe, the incidence of alcohol intoxications could increase in countries that are
not yet familiar with this problem. Severe methanol intoxication is a rare but life-threatening event, even ingestion of a small amount of
methanol can be potentially lethal . Prompt action should therefore be taken when methanol intoxication is suspected, because delay can have
deleterious consequences. Awareness of even the rare possibility of methanol ingestion is thus very important in emergency medicine. The
symptoms of methanol intoxication are not very specific except for the visual disturbances and specially the so called "snowstorm vision" .
On the other hand, the presence of a high anion gap acidosis combined with a high osmol gap and normal Delta gap should raise the level of
suspicion. The normal delta- or bicarbonate gap in this case ruled out the presence of another, not directly detectable metabolic
derangement, beside the already existing methanol-induced acidosis . Though methanol itself is not very poisonous, the degradation products
are extremely harmful. Methanol is easily and rapidly absorbed in the digestive tract and even through inhalation and skin absorption.
Methanol is transported to the liver where it is rapidly metabolized by ADH to formaldehyde, which is further converted into the toxic
formic acid, by formaldehyde dehydrogenase (FDH). Eventually formic acid is converted into CO2 and H2O. Especially this last step is very
important, because this is a slow, enzyme depended pathway, which causes accumulation of formic acid in already intoxicated humans. This
last step is considered to be folate dependent, therefore administration of folate in formic acid intoxication has been advocated . The
first roughly estimated maximum methanol concentration in our patient, calculated with the use of serum osmolality in the presumed absence
of ethanol was 2.5 g/L. The lower limit for methanol intoxication treatment is by tradition 0.2 g/L, although there's no clear empirical
support for this value . Calculated osmol gap × 10-3 × methanol molar mass = methanol concentration in g/kg = 73 × 10-3 × 34.02 = 2.5 g/kg
Nevertheless the concentration was high enough to initiate CVVH-DF immediately. The, by gas chromatography measured methanol concentration,
that was obtained later, was unfortunately much higher (4.4 g/L) and confirmed the absence of ethanol. The discrepancy between the
calculated and measured methanol concentrations is retrospectively probably best explained by accidental dilution of the serum sample used.
This sample, as became clear later, was drawn solely and separately for osmolality testing. Most likely it was drawn from an arterial line
that was flushed or from an i.v. tube, which had been running with resuscitation fluids. Since no other tests were performed with this
sample the possibility of a dilution error was not recognized. Although hemodialysis is considered much more effective in clearing methanol,
CVVH-DF was chosen because of the hemodynamic instability. The scarce literature available about the use of CVVH-DF in methanol intoxication
suggests that it accelerates methanol elimination usefully, shortens the time to target serum methanol concentrations and likely shortens
the period of metabolic derangement . Classical hemodialysis, with an estimated clearance of 250 ml/min, is about 5 times more effective in
clearing methanol than CVVH-DF with a clearance of maximal 50 ml/min . The methanol elimination halve time (T1/2) using CVVH-DF as described
by Kan et all is 10-12 hours following first order kinetics . In our patient the methanol T1/2 in the presence of an adequate ethanol level
was about 3.5 hours, and also followed first order kinetics. This remarkable short halve time can be explained by the aggressive fluid
resuscitation that took place in the first hours, the well preserved kidney function of the patient and the much larger filter surface area:
we used a 1.9 m2 filter in contrast with he 0.6 m2 filter described by Kan et all. Because the same ADH competitively breaks down both
ethanol and methanol, the administration of ethanol during methanol intoxication reduces the velocity of formic acid production. A
concentration of 1 g/L ethanol is sufficient to fully block the degradation of methanol . Since the elimination of methanol is otherwise
slow, a steady ethanol concentration for a longer period of time is essential. The maintenance of a stable ethanol concentration especially
in hemodynamic instable patients on dialysis is considered a challenge ! Despite the unstable situation we were able to gain and maintain a
stable and therapeutical ethanol concentration until the methanol was fully washed out 16 hours after initiation of CVVH-DF. Fomipezole a
safe and highly effective ADH blocking drug, and an alternative for ethanol therapy, was not available . Although the clinical parameters
improved in our patient the neurologic signs deteriorated even after the alcohol concentrations were normalized. Initially the patient was
comatose (GCS = 3) without signs of brainstem damage, but 44 hours later, he developed signs of cerebral herniation like: apnea, diminishing
brainstem reflexes and diabetes insipidus. The CT scan of the brain showed predominately signs of high intra cerebral pressure with
occlusion of the third and fourth ventricle rather than bleeding and necrosis of the putamen and subcortical regions that has been described
in severe cases . Although organ donation after methanol intoxication was considered a serious option , family authorization, necessary
because there was no donor declaration or written will available, could unfortunately not be obtained. Ventilation- en vaso-active support
was actively withdrawn thereafter. The 81-year-old shopkeeper and reseller of the "alcohol" was, 8 months later charged and found guilty of
involuntary manslaughter, because he had been unaware of the fact that he had been selling a potentially lethal alcohol like methanol.
Taking into account his age, health status, the loss of his shop and the fact that he felt guilty, he was sentenced to a suspended term in
jail and to community service in an old men's home for several weeks. ◦ In the differential diagnosis of an emergency medicine accident,
cultural background and behavior should always be taken into account. ◦ Methanol intoxication induced derangements of homeostasis are
successfully treated with CVVH-DF and intravenous ethanol even in a hemodynamic instable patient. ◦ Methanol is safely and effectively
cleared with CVVH-DF ◦ Metabolic improvements do not equal to healing the patient ◦ Signs of brain damage in methanol intoxication are not
always based on necrosis and bleeding, but may also reflect severe brain edema. ◦ Do not sell what you don't' know yourself. GCS: Glascow
Coma Score; CVVH-DF: Continuous VenoVenous Haemo-DiaFiltration; ADH: Alcohol Dehydrogenase; FDH: Formaldehyde Dehydrogenase. In this case
the patient was unable to give consent and no family or proxy was available to give consent for publication. Since in this case only
retrospective data of an already deceased patient were used, who was treated according standards of normal care, no informed consent or
ethical approval was necessary for publication according to Dutch law. To make sure that no ethical or legal rules were violated we
additionally asked the Medical Ethics Committee of the Erasmus MC as an independent surrogate proxy for the patient. After a few adjustments
in the text to secure privacy, the consent for publication was granted. A copy of this proxy consent is available for review by the Editor-
in-Chief of this Journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JLE treated the patient and wrote the case report, JB
supervised the writing and made some major changes in manuscript after reviewing the first versions. Both authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-227X/10/3/prepub
