Myasthenia gravis (MG) is often complicated by respiratory failure, known as a myasthenic crisis. However, most of the patients who develop
respiratory symptoms do so during the late course of disease and have other neurological signs and symptoms. However, in some patients
respiratory failure is the initial presenting symptom. We report the case of a 68-year-old woman with MG who presented with isolated
respiratory failure as her first presenting symptom. As illustrated by this case, it is important to consider neuromuscular disorders in
cases of unexplained respiratory failure. Myasthenia gravis (MG) is a chronic autoimmune neuromuscular disease. MG is characterized by
autoantibody attack of acetylcholine receptors at the motor end plate of striated muscles, which results in variable muscle weakness made
worse by exercise . Patients with MG commonly experience respiratory failure. However, most patients have respiratory failure during the
late course of MG and usually have additional neurological symptoms. We treated a woman with MG who presented with isolated respiratory
failure as the first symptom of MG. Here we report this case. A 68-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with dyspnea for one
week. She denied a cough, sputum, chest pain or other respiratory symptoms. She also denied symptoms of upper and lower extremity weakness,
blurred vision or swallowing difficulty. Sixteen years previously, she was diagnosed with diabetes mellitus, hypertension and depression.
Eleven years ago, she underwent total thyroidectomy for a papillary thyroid carcinoma. The patient was taking selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitor, zolpidem, alprazolam and methylphenidate for insomnia and depression, levothyroxin and alfacalcidol for thyroid disease, a
calcium channel blocker for hyper-tension, and sulfonylurea and metformin for type 2 diabetes mellitus. On the initial physical examination,
the patient was not in acute respiratory distress. The vital signs were normal: blood pressure was 170/90 mmHg, pulse rate was 92 beats/min,
respiratory rate was 24 breaths/min, and body temperature was 36℃. The mental status was intact, the patient was alert and the neurological
examinations of cerebral function, cerebellar function and both extremities were normal. Pretibial pitting edema and neck vein engorgement
were absent. On the chest auscultation, there were mild crackles at both lower lung fields. The body mass index was 24.2 kg/m2. The
laboratory evaluation showed a white blood cell count of 6,580/µL, hemoglobin of 12.0 g/dL and platelet count of 325,000/µL. Other blood
chemistries were within normal limits: BUN/Cr 12.2/0.9 mg/dL, AST/ALT 25/25 units/L, NT-proBNP 107.2 pg/mL, and glucose 92 mg/dL. Thyroid
function testing showed: T3 0.73 ng/mL, FT4 1.71 ng/dL and TSH < 0.003 µIU/mL. The arterial blood gas analysis, on room air, was pH 7.441,
PaCO2 39.9 mmHg, PaO2 64.7 mmHg, oxygen saturation 93.2%, and D(A-a)O2 36. The initial chest X-ray showed a slightly reduced lung volume
(Fig. 1A). The chest computed tomography (CT) scan showed no evidence of pulmonary thromboembolism, but there was bibasilar atelectasis
(Fig. 2). Echocardiography revealed normal systolic and diastolic heart function. During the next five days, her dyspnea became more severe.
On the sixth day of hospitalization, the patient had severe respiratory distress with labored breathing. The respiratory rate was 40
breaths/min and the mental status was confused. The arterial blood gas analysis on an O2 mask with 10 L was pH 7.324, PaCO2 54.9 mmHg, PaO2
94.4 mmHg, and oxygen saturation 96.6%. The chest X-ray revealed no definite infiltration but the lung volume was reduced (Fig. 1B). The
patient was transferred to the intensive care unit and mechanically ventilated. We considered other causes of respiratory failure such as
neuromuscular disorders, Guillain-Barre syndrome or myasthenia gravis. The physical and neurological examination and cerebrospinal fluid
analysis were normal. A diagnosis of MG was made based on the neurophysiological studies. The electromyography showed a decrement in
response to repetitive nerve stimulation in various muscles (Fig. 3). The pharmacological Jolly test revealed incremental responses of tidal
volume of ventilation (Fig. 4). The repeated acetylcholine antibody titers were 8.9 nmol/L and 12.4 nmol/L. Pyridostigmine bromide, 720
mg/day and prednisolone, 30 mg/day was prescribed and intravenous gamma-globulin, 27 g/day for 5 days were administered. Weaning from the
ventilator failed over the next 2 weeks; therefore, a tracheostomy was performed. However, the patient was eventually successfully weaned
from the ventilator and 2 months later, she was discharged. MG is an autoimmune disorder. In about two thirds of patients, extrinsic ocular
muscle abnormalities present as the initial symptoms or bulbar weakness may also be the initial symptoms. The symptoms usually progress to
include the limb muscles . Respiratory failure can be a complication during the late course of MG in about 3 to 8% of cases, known as a
myasthenic crisis . However, isolated respiratory failure as the presenting symptom, as in the present case, is very unusual and this
patient is the first case reported in Korea. Recently, several cases of MG with respiratory failure as a first manifestation have been
reported . In these studies, respiratory failure as an initial symptom was observed in 14 to 18% of the patients. Most of the patients
presented with ocular and bulbar muscle involvement . However, our patient showed no other neurological symptoms associated with MG.
Therefore, we did not suspect MG initially. We tried to determine the cause of the respiratory failure. We did not find any evidence of a
hypoxemic respiratory failure; there were no definite infiltrations, edema, effusion or pneumothorax on chest X-ray. There was no evidence
of pulmonary thromboembolism on the chest CT scan and no evidence of intracardiac shunting or congestive heart failure on the
echocardiography. Therefore, we suspected an acute ventilatory failure. Drugs or trauma that could cause ventilatory failure was ruled out.
The electrolyte levels were within normal limits. Based on these results, we investigated the possibility of a neuromuscular disease,
especially Guillain-Barre syndrome and myasthenia gravis, the most common and the second most common cause of neuromuscular disease,
respectively. However, the cerebrospinal fluid was normal, and the neurophysiological studies showed evidence of myasthenia gravis.
Generally patients with neuromuscular disease present with hypoxia and a normal D(A-a)O2 due to hypoventilation, but in the present patient
there was an increased D(A-a) O2. Patients with MG occasionally have atelectasis , which could result in this finding. The patient had
negative results on multiple tests for the evaluation of respiratory failure. It is difficult to consider a neuromuscular disorder,
especially myasthenia gravis, unless there are other neurological symptoms such as ocular or bulbar symptoms. Unlike previous cases, our
patient presented with only respiratory symptoms, the patient had no other symptoms generally associated with MG during her 6-month follow-
up visits. We report the case of a 68-year-old woman who presented with respiratory failure as the only symptom of myasthenia gravis. As
seen in this case, MG can manifest as isolated respiratory failure. Therefore, one should consider neuromuscular disorders in cases of
unexplained respiratory failure. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Plain chest radiography. (A) On
the first day of the hospital admission, the chest X-ray revealed normal findings except for a focal atelectasis in the right middle lung
field. (B) On the sixth day, the chest X-ray showed reduced lung volume. Spiral computed tomography (CT) scan of the chest. (A) CT scan
shows multifocal atelectasis in both lungs. (B) There was no definite evidence of an acute pulmonary thromboembolism. Electromyography of
abductor digiti minimi and orbicularis oculi muscle. (A) These findings demonstrate a decrement in the compound muscle action potential
amplitude of about 20% at 2 Hz stimulation at the abductor digiti minimi muscle and (B) more than 70% at 5 Hz stimulation at orbicularis
oculi muscle. The neostigmine test. The patient was on mechanical ventilation; we evaluated the tidal volume after the intramuscular
injection of neostigmine. After the neostigmine 10 mg injection, the tidal volume increased from 200 mL/min to 280 mL/min (Servo I, Maquet
Medical, Solna, Sweden).
