Primary pulmonary T-cell lymphoma is an extremely rare malady, and we diagnosed this in a 52-year-old male who was admitted to our hospital
with cough for the previous two weeks. The chest CT demonstrated multiple variable sized mass-like consolidations with low density central
necrosis in the peripheral portion of both the upper and lower lobes. Positron emission tomography (PET) showed multiple areas of
hypermetabolic fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in both lungs with central metabolic defects, which correlated with central necrosis seen on
CT. The histological sample showed peripheral T-cell lymphoma of the not otherwise specified form. The follow-up CT scan showed an increased
extent of the multifocal consolidative lesions despite that the patient had undergone chemotherapy. Primary lymphoma of the lung is a rare
disorder, and primary pulmonary lymphoma represents only 0.5-1% of all primary pulmonary malignancies, less than 1% of all the cases of non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma (NHL) and 3-4% of all the extranodal manifestations of NHL (1). Most of the cases of the primary lymphoma of the lung
originate from the B-cell lineage, and the disease is frequently located in the bronchus-associated lymphoid tissue. Very few cases of
pulmonary T-cell lymphoma have been reported and the imaging features of this rare cancer have not been well characterized. We report here
on an extremely rare case of primary pulmonary peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCLN), and we present the CT and
positron emission tomography (PET) images. A 52-year-old male was admitted to our hospital suffering with cough, fever and sweating for the
previous two weeks. There was no history of treatment or medication for diabetes mellitus and hypertension. The patient was a smoker (45
pack-years) and he drank alcohol. On the posteroanterior chest radiograph, variable sized nodules and masses were seen in both lower lobes
and the right upper lobe (Fig. 1A). The contrast enhanced chest CT scan revealed variable sized masses in the right upper lobe and both
lower lobes, and the masses displayed central necrosis (Fig. 1B-D). A small fluid collection was seen in the left hemithorax. No
endobronchial lesion was visualized on bronchoscopy. A CT-guided percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy (PTNB) was done for the mass in
the left lower lobe. The histologic examination of the percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy specimen showed diffuse infiltrates of large
lymphoid cells (Fig. 1E). The tumor cells had pleomorphic, irregular nuclei and prominent nucleoli (Fig. 1F). Mitoses were easily observed,
including some atypical forms. Immunohistochemical staining demonstrated that the tumor cells were positive for CD3 (Fig. 1G) and they were
negative for CD20, CD30 (Ki-1) and CD56. The Ki-67 labeling index was more than 70%. The pathologic diagnosis was peripheral T-cell lymphoma
not otherwise specified. We evaluated the patient for the presence of lymphoma involvement of other organs. Bone marrow aspiration and
biopsy were both performed. The specimen showed nearly normal, fully matured myeloids and an adequate number of megakaryocytes without
lymphomatous involvement. 18F-fluoro-2-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) showed multiple hypermetabolic masses with
photopenic defects (maxSUV 8.9) in both lungs (Fig. 1H). There was no evidence of mediastinal lymph node uptake or extrapulmonary uptake.
Finally, we diagnosed the patient as suffering with primary pulmonary peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified. After
chemotherapy, the B symptoms that included fever and sweating subsided. The follow-up contrast enhanced chest CT scan obtained two months
after the initial diagnosis showed aggravated T-cell lymphoma involvement in the lungs (Fig. 1I-K). We observed multifocal irregular
enhancing lesions in both parietal cortical areas on the brain CT and MRI obtained four months after the initial diagnosis and this all
suggested multiple parenchymal and meningeal metastases. Sadly, the patient eventually expired from pneumonia during ICU care after multiple
episodes of neutropenic fever. Primary pulmonary lymphoma is diagnosed according to the following strict criteria: 1) the lung, bronchus or
both are involved without evidence of mediastinal adenopathy or a mass on the chest radiographs, 2) extrathoracic lymphoma was not
previously diagnosed and 3) there was no evidence of extrathoracic lymphoma or lymphatic leukemia at the time that primary lymphoma of the
lung was diagnosed. Further, for making the diagnosis of primary pulmonary lymphoma, the disease is not present outside of the thorax for
least three months after the initial diagnosis (2). Low-grade B-cell lymphoma is the most frequent form of primary pulmonary lymphoma;
however, primary pulmonary peripheral T-cell lymphoma is extremely rare. Peripheral T-cell lymphoma (PTCL) comprises a group of rare,
aggressive cancers that develop from T-cells that are at different stages of maturity. The World Health Organization (WHO) has divided the
various types of PTCL into two main categories: 1) precursor T-cell neoplasms, which include precursor T-lymphoblastic lymphoma/leukemia;
and 2) peripheral T-cell neoplasms, which are subcategorized as predominantly leukemic disease, predominantly disseminated disease,
predominantly extranodal disease and predominantly nodal disease. The cases that do not match one of the defined entities of PTCL are best
categorized as 'not otherwise specified', reflecting the fact that we do not yet understand everything about lymphomas or the immune system
(3). The incidence of PTCL tends to be higher in Korea (25% of the cases of NHL) than in Europe (10-15% of the cases of NHL), as well as the
incidence of peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCLN) is higher in Korea (11% of the cases of NHL) that in Europe (4% of
the cases of NHL) (3, 4). Patients with PTCLN are usually adults with generalized disease; the lymph nodes, liver and spleen may be
involved. Most of the cases present with cough and dyspnea. The most common radiologic finding of PTCLN is generalized lymphadenopathy (3,
5). In patients with disseminated conditions, the imaging features are not distinguishable from those of the other subtypes of lymphoma in
the disseminated state. Our case shows a very unique feature of primary pulmonary PTCLN as the disease presented as multiple lung masses
with central necrosis and there was no disease involvement at any other site on the detailed work up. The radiologic appearance of central
necrosis in the consolidation or mass can also present in such benign conditions as abscess, lung infarction, c-ANCA (anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody)-associated granulomatous vasculitis and carcinomas. The thick wall and irregular inner margin are more frequently seen
in malignant lesions, as was noted in our case. The cavitation in lymphoma is probably due to central ischemic necrosis. This may be due to
the rapid tumor growth and it tends to occur in large nodules and masses. A cavity with air-fluid levels may be apparent when there is
communication between an adjacent bronchus and a necrotic tumor mass. There has been a report about extranodal PTCL showing a pattern of
photopenic defect on PET scanning, like was seen in our case (6). This photopenic defect correlates well with central necrosis, yet necrosis
is an uncommon PET scan finding for lymphoma. Tumor necrosis generally correlates with hypoxia and it is a predictor of a poor prognosis for
patients with malignant tumor. Tumor hypoxia plays a major role in tumor progression and resistance to treatment, like what happened in our
case (6). For most of the subtypes of PTCL, the treatment regimen is typically CHOP-based chemotherapy (cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin,
vincristine and prednisone), or EPOCH (etoposide added to CHOP) in the frontline setting (7). Adult T-cell leukemia or lymphoma has a poor
prognosis due to the life-threatening complications that include infections and hypercalcemia (8). The clinical course is usually
aggressive, and relapses are more common for T-cell leukemia or lymphoma than for the B-cell lymphomas of a similar histologic grade (9,
10). We report herein on a rare case of PTCL and we present the CT and PET images of this often fatal neoplasm. 52-year-old male patient. A.
On posteroanterior chest radiograph, variable sized large, round increased opacities are seen in both lower lobes and right upper lobe
(arrow). Well defined linear increased opacity with architectural distortion is seen at posterior segment of left upper lobe. B-D. Contrast
enhanced chest CT scan reveals variable sized masses in right upper lobe (B) and in both lower lobes (C, D) with portion of central
necrosis. Small fluid collection is seen in left hemithorax (C, D). E. Percutaneous transthoracic needle biopsy specimen shows diffuse
infiltrates of large atypical lymphoid cells (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, ×100). F. Tumor cells are large with pleomorphic, irregular
nuclei and prominent nucleoli (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, ×400). G. Immunohistochemical staining of tumor cells revealed diffuse and
strong positivity for cytoplasmic CD3 (Hematoxylin & Eosin staining, ×200). H. Staging whole torso PET scan revealed intensely
hypermetabolic lung mass with central metabolic defects. There was no evidence of mediastinal lymph node uptake or extrapulmonary uptake.
I-K. Contrast enhanced chest CT scan obtained two months after initial diagnosis shows that large mass in left lower lobe has increased in
size with large areas of necrosis and multiple air spots (J). Multiple nodules with necrosis have increased in extent in right upper lobe
and right lower lobe. Fluid collection in left hemithorax has increased in amount (I, K).
