This the case of a 63 year-old man with end-stage renal disease (on chronic hemodialysis), unstable angina and significantly impaired
myocardial contractility with low left ventricular ejection fraction, who underwent off-pump one vessel coronary bypass surgery. Combined
continuous levosimendan and norepinephrine infusion (at 0.07 μg/kg/min and 0.05 μg/kg/min respectively) started immediately after anesthesia
induction and continued for 24 hours. The levosimendan/norepinephrine combination helped maintain an appropriate hemodynamic profile,
thereby contributing to uneventful completion of surgery and postoperative hemodynamic stability. Although levosimendan is considered
contraindicated in ESRD patients, this case report suggests that combined perioperative levosimendan/norepinephrine administration can be
useful in carefully selected hemodialysis patients with impaired myocardial contractility and ongoing myocardial ischemia, who undergo off-
pump myocardial revascularization surgery. Levosimendan (OR 1259), the levo-isomer of racemic simendan is a pharmacologic agent indicated
for treatment of non-compensated heart failure. Levosimendan enhances myocardial contractility without increasing myocardial oxygen
consumption through two different mechanisms: (A) calcium-dependent binding to cardiac troponin C, thereby enhancing the calcium sensitivity
of cardiac contractile proteins and improving myocardial contractility, and (B) opening of ATP-dependent potassium channels in vascular
smooth muscle, resulting in venous, arterial and coronary vasodilation , thereby reducing myocardial preload and afterload. Levosimendan is
98% albumin-bound, its volume of distribution is 0.4 L/kg, plasma half life is 1 hour , and plasma clearance is 3 ml/kg/min . Peak plasma
concentrations occur 12 minutes after a bolus dose or 4 hours after starting a continuous infusion without a bolus. Levosimendan is
extensively metabolized in the liver, is eliminated mainly by conjugation and excretion in urine and feces, and its elimination half-life is
1 hour . After IV levosimendan administration, 5% of the drug is reduced in the small bowel to OR-1855, which is reabsorbed to the systemic
circulation, and is then metabolized to OR-1896, which is pharmacologically active and produces a hemodynamic profile comparable to the
parent-drug. OR-1896 is only 40% protein-bound, its peak plasma concentration is observed 1-4 days after levosimendan infusion ends , its
half life is 80 hours, and it is responsible for the extended (7-9 days) duration of levosimendan clinical action . Levosimendan is not
dialyzable. In contrast, OR-1855 and OR-1896 are dialyzable, but their dialysis clearance is very slow (8-23 ml/minute). Consequently, the
net effect of a 4-hour hemodialysis session on exposure to active metabolites is limited , and the AUCs for OR-1855 and OR-1896 are
increased by 170% in hemodialysis patients. Although the Levosimendan package insert states that levosimendan should not be used in ESRD
patients, there is one case report of postoperative use , but no reports of intraoperative levosimendan use in hemodialysis patients. In
this case report we describe a hemodialysis patient with severe CAD, ongoing myocardial ischemia despite maximal medical therapy, low LVEF
and severe bilateral ICA stenosis. The patient received a 24-hour continuous IV levosimendan/norepinephrine infusion during and after OPCAB
surgery, with very satisfactory results: myocardial contractility, CO, CI, SvO2 and INVOS markedly improved, and there was no hypotension or
exacerbation of myocardial ischemia. A 63 year-old Caucasian man with unstable angina and chronic renal failure underwent one vessel OPCAB.
Past medical history included smoking 2 packs per day for 40 years, hypertension, IDDM treated with insulin for 15 years, PVD with
claudication and bilateral ICA stenosis, ESRD (Cr: 8.4 mg/dL, BUN: 199 mg/dL) which had been attributed to long-standing poorly controlled
hypertension, and was treated with periodic (every other day) hemodialysis for 6 years, and sick sinus syndrome. He had a pacemaker
(programmed in DDD mode with baseline HR set at 60/minute) inserted three years before this myocardial revascularization procedure, but the
pacemaker was turned off immediately after anesthesia induction. He also had intermittent claudication, with preoperative angiography
revealing significant right iliac and left femoral artery stenosis, extensive abdominal aorta calcification and 80% bilateral ICA stenosis.
Coronary angiography revealed 3-vessel disease, with 80% mid-LAD stenosis, complete proximal and distal LCX occlusion with retrograde
filling from the LAD, and complete ostial RCA occlusion. Transthoracic echocardiography revealed LV dilatation with akinetic basal inferior
and basal posterior LV wall, hypokinetic medial posterior LV wall, LVEF estimated at 25-30%, moderate mitral regurgitation and pulmonary
hypertension (estimated peak PA pressure 58 mmHg). In the last week before surgery, the patient had difficulty completing hemodialysis
sessions due to serious hypotension, and experienced unstable angina, while under maximal medical therapy with nitrates (transdermal
glyceryl trinitrate 10 mg per 24 hours), ACE inhibitors (p.o. enalapril 10 mg per day) and aspirin (p.o. 325 mg per day). Because of his
unstable condition, we decided to proceed with myocardial revascularization only, and consider surgical treatment of bilateral ICA stenosis
later. Furthermore, we chose the OPCAB technique, in order to lower the risk of adverse cerebral events and avoid the undesirable
consequences of cardiopulmonary bypass. Monitoring included, in addition to the standard monitors mandated by the American Society of
Anesthesiologists, invasive blood pressure through a right radial arterial line, CVP, PA and PAOP pressures through a PA catheter, which was
inserted immediately after induction of anesthesia and was removed on the 2nd postoperative day. We also used INVOS (Cerebral Oximeter
System, Somanetics), with sensors attached to the patient's forehead, to monitor adequacy of cerebral perfusion, and TEE to monitor
myocardial contractility. Anesthesia induction was uneventful, without any hemodynamic derangement. Mean arterial pressure was maintained at
60 mmHg or higher, while the PA catheter revealed pulmonary hypertension (SPAP: 56 mmHg, PAOP: 18 mmHg, CVP: 18 mmHg, CO: 2.8 L/min, CI: 1.6
L/m2/min SvO2 49%, SVR 1114). As direct visualization of the heart confirmed severely impaired myocardial contractility with abnormal
distension of both ventricles, we decided to start inotropic support using a combined levosimendan/norepinephrine infusion in an attempt to
improve myocardial function and increase cardiac output, while avoiding myocardial ischemia and hypotension. The decision to use a
levosimendan/norepinephrine combination was based on the need to (A) improve myocardial contractility and cardiac output without increasing
myocardial oxygen consumption, and (B) avoid hypotension, which could aggravate myocardial and brain ischemia. Because of hypoalbuminemia,
we started IV levosimendan infusion at only 0.07 μg/kg/min, while IV norepinephrine infusion started at 0.05 μg/kg/min and was titrated to
effect. Baseline INVOS values were very low before anesthesia induction (42 on the left, 37 on the right side) and increased only slightly
after anesthesia induction (45 on the left, 43 on the right side). However, thirty minutes after levosimendan infusion started, CO, CI and
SvO2 improved significantly (to 3.6 L/min, 2.1 L/m2/min and 70% respectively), LVEF increased to 50% and INVOS also increased significantly
(to 59 on the left, 53 on the right). Despite the need to gradually increase norepinephrine dose to 0.15 μg/kg/min, in order to maintain MAP
>60 mmHg, CI and SvO2 continued to rise, while CVP, PA and PAOP declined slightly over the ensuing 3 hours (while surgery was still
underway), and this improvement persisted during the entire postoperative period (table 1). Accidental intraoperative rupture of the very
thin anterior RV wall resulted in hemodynamic collapse, requiring prompt, rapid administration of 5 units of red blood cells, 2 units of FFP
and addition of epinephrine infusion at 0.07 μg/kg/min. Hypotension lasted approximately 30 minutes, until the RV wall rupture was securely
corrected (without requiring extracorporeal circulation). Postoperatively, the patient was transferred to the ICU, where levosimendan
infusion continued for 24 hours and norepinephrine continued for 40 hours. The patient was extubated on POD 1, and had uneventful
hemodialysis a few hours after extubation. Detailed postoperative neurologic examination did not reveal any neurologic deficits. Vital signs
remained stable postoperatively, except for an episode of hypotension shortly after hemodialysis on POD 5. This hypotensive event resolved
with volume loading, and was attributed to pericardial effusion, which delayed discharge from the hospital until POD 12. Three months later,
the patient was in good condition, had a normal life and continued hemodialysis three times/week without any problems. Follow-up
echocardiography 4 months after the operation showed somewhat improved myocardial contractility, with LVEF estimated at 40%, mild mitral
regurgitation and estimated peak pulmonary artery pressure at 35 mmHg. Now, three years later, he is still alive and doing remarkably well.
Hemodynamic and INVOS data * Dose in μg/kg/min HR in beats/minute Psyst, Pdiast, P mean, CVP, PAPsyst, PAPdiast, PAPmean, PCWP, all measured
in mmHg CO = L/min, CI = L/m2/min SVO2 = %, INVOS = % T1 before levosimendan/norepinephrine infusion started T2 1 h after levosimendan
infusion started T3, T4 2 and 3 hours after levosimendan infusion started T5 at end of surgery T6 T7 6 and 12 hours after surgery T8, T9,
T10 18, 24, 36 hours after surgery Levosimendan is a newer therapeutic agent for treatment of cardiac failure , is generally well tolerated,
and its main side effects are usually due to vasodilation. Although levosimendan has been administered to patients with mild to moderate
renal disease without serious adverse consequences , we could find only one published case of postoperative (but not intraoperative)
levosimendan administration in a hemodialysis patient . Despite the absence of published data, we decided to use levosimendan in our
patient, because he had significantly impaired LV function, low CO, CI and SvO2, and evidence of impaired cerebral oxygenation, as measured
by INVOS. We therefore needed to improve myocardial contractility, CO, CI and SvO2 without increasing myocardial oxygen consumption and
without hypotension, which could be detrimental, due to severe bilateral ICA stenosis. Under the circumstances, combined
levosimendan/norepinephrine use was a reasonable choice: levosimendan improves myocardial contractility without increasing myocardial oxygen
consumption , while norepinephrine has desirable inotropic and vasopressor properties. Use of IABP could also be a reasonable option, but
insertion of IABP in this particular patient would be problematic due to extensive peripheral arterial (aortic, iliac and femoral)
calcification and stenosis, and could further compromise lower extremity circulation. Dobutamine, milrinone and/or epinephrine could also
improve myocardial contractility, but would likely increase myocardial oxygen consumption, and thereby exacerbate myocardial ischemia. In
our case, the levosimendan/norepineprhine combination worked as predicted, conferred significant hemodynamic improvement (despite unexpected
surgical complications necessitating rapid intraoperative RBC and FFP transfusion) and facilitated completion of the OPCAB procedure without
need for extracorporeal circulation. Thus the patient benefitted from improved myocardial contractility, increased CO, CI and SvO2 and
reduced CVP and PAOP, and these beneficial changes lasted for several days after levosimendan infusion stopped. We believe that the
effectiveness of levosimendan at this low dose (0.07 μg/kg/min) was due to reduced protein binding because of hypoalbuminemia (albumin
plasma level was 3.1 mg/dL in this case). In addition, the use of a low levosimendan dose, the combination with norepinephrine and close
monitoring, in an attempt to avoid or promptly treat hypotension, all likely contributed to hemodynamic stability in this case. In
conclusion, this case report suggests that combined levosimedan/norepinephrine IV infusion is a reasonable inotropic support option in
patients with heart failure and ongoing myocardial ischemia, even in the presence of end-stage renal disease and severe bilateral internal
carotid artery stenosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ACE inhibitors: Angiotensin-Converting Enzyme Inhibitors; ATP:
Adenosine Tri-Phospate; CABG: Coronary Artery Bypass Grafting; CAD: Coronary Artery Disease; CI: Cardiac Index; CO: Cardiac Output; CRF:
Chronic Renal Failure; CVP: Central Venous Pressure; ESRD: End-Stage Renal Disease; FFP: Fresh Frozen Plasma; HR: Heart Rate; IABP: Intra-
Aortic Balloon Pump; ICA: Internal Carotid Artery; IDDM: Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus; INVOS: IN Vivo Optical Spectroscopy; IV:
Intravenous; LAD: Left Anterior Descending; LCX: Left Circumflex Coronary Artery; LV: Left Ventricle; LVEF: Left-ventricular ejection
fraction; MAP: Mean Arterial Pressure; OPCAB: Off pump coronary artery by-pass; PA: Pulmonary Artery; PAOP: Pulmonary Artery Occlusion
Pressure; POD: Postoperative Day; PVD: Peripheral Vascular Disease; RBC: Red Blood Cells; RCA: Right Coronary Artery; RV: Right Ventricle;
SvO2: Mixed Venous Oxygen Saturation; TEE: Trans-Esophageal Echocardiography. This work was supported solely by department funds. All
authors declare that they have no competing interests. GP supervised intraoperative and postoperative anesthesia care, conceived the study
and revised manuscript, NB assisted with the operation, participated in postoperative patient care and collected data, PT provided
intraoperative and postoperative anesthesia care and collected data, SN performed the operation, directed postoperative care and revised
manuscript, MK did data interpretation, wrote and revised manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
