Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection is usually subclinical in immunocompetent individuals, however it can be life threatening in an elderly
immunocompetent individual. We report a case of CMV enteritis causing ileal perforation in a physically active elderly man. An 88-year-old
healthy man presented with abdominal pain and diarrhea. After initial conservative treatment, emergency laparotomy was performed for ileal
perforation. The diagnosis of CMV enteritis was based on histological findings revealing many large cells with CMV inclusion bodies in the
surgical specimen. In elderly individuals, even though they are immunocompetent, CMV enteritis may result in major complications such as
bowel perforation, and it should be included in the differential diagnosis of diarrhea if it is resistant to conventional treatment.
Cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection can cause organ-specific damage or severe complications such as bowel perforation in immunocompromised
patients.1 On the other hand, CMV infection in an immunocompetent individual is very rare, and only anecdotal reports have described CMV-
associated bowel perforation in these patients.2,3 In the present report, we describe a healthy human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-negative
elderly man with CMV enteritis resulting in ileal perforation, and have reviewed the relevant English literature with specific reference to
different ages at diagnosis. An 88-year-old healthy man was admitted with six days history of diarrhea with diffuse abdominal pain. He had
no noteworthy past history or any conditions of immunosuppression, including diabetes. He denied any weight loss or fever at admission. His
physical examination revealed mild distension and tenderness in the right lower abdomen without rebound tenderness. Laboratory investigation
showed leukocytosis of 14.3×106/µL (normal range, 4.0-10.0) and elevated C-reactive protein of 26 mg/dL (normal range, 0.0-5.0). Electrolyte
disturbances and azotemia were attributed to dehydration and were easily corrected after rehydration. Blood and stool cultures were
negative, and Clostridium difficile toxin was not detected. Widal test and HIV serology were also negative. Colonoscopy revealed no specific
lesions from the rectum to the cecum, but intubation into the terminal ileum was failed due to technical difficulty caused by the tortuous
course of the colon. The patient began empirical antibiotic therapy for the most probable diagnosis of microbial enteritis. During the first
18 days of hospital stay, his clinical conditions were thought to have improved because his abdominal pain disappeared, white cell count was
normalized to 4.7×106/µL and C-reactive protein level was lowered to 1.9 mg/dL. On the nineteenth hospital day, his general conditions were
suddenly aggravated. He had a newly developed fever (38℃), and appeared to be suffering from localized abdominal pain. Palpation of the
abdomen revealed tenderness and muscular spasm in the right lower abdomen. Computed tomography of the abdomen revealed wall thickening of
the distal ileum and extraluminal air in the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 1). Emergency laparotomy was performed for the presumed diagnosis of
peritonitis due to ileal perforation. A segment of ileum, about 25 cm in size, was hyperemic and edematous. One site of bowel perforation
was found at the proximal 15 cm from the ileocecal valve. A segment of the ileum including the perforation site was resected and an
anastomosis was performed. The surgical specimen grossly demonstrated reddish ileal mucosa with ulcerations and perforation (Fig. 2).
Histopathological examination revealed ulcerations with acute and chronic inflammatory reactions, transmural inflammation around the
perforation site, and large cells containing cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions in the ulcer bed, suggestive of certain viral infections
(Fig. 3A). Immunohistochemical staining for CMV showed a positive reaction to the large cells (Fig. 3B). Serologic studies of the CMV
infection were negative for CMV IgM, but CMV IgG was 203 AU/mL (upper normal value, < 6 AU/mL). The diagnosis was confirmed as an ileal
perforation due to CMV enteritis. The patient recovered without any complications, even though antiviral drugs were not administered after
surgical resection. During 15 months follow-up, he has been well without disease recurrence. The whole gastrointestinal tract can be
affected by CMV, however, small bowel was rarely the only site of disease in all reported cases of CMV infection, therefore, this case is
unusual in that there was CMV-associated ileal perforation without evidence of colonic lesions. In contrast to CMV infection in
immunocompromised hosts,1 only a few reports have described clinically evident CMV infection and their prognosis in immunocompetent
individuals. We reviewed reports of CMV enterocolitis in immunocompetent adults, identified using a computerized search of PubMed database
(articles in English between 1992 and 2007) and their references. As there is no consensus on how to define the immunocompetent individuals,
the immunocompetence in this analysis was defined with the same definition reported by Galiatsatos, et al.4 as the absence of congenital
immune deficiency, acquired immune deficiency syndrom (AIDS), transplantation, prior chemotherapy, or immunosuppressive medication
(including corticosteroids). Patients with malignancies or chronic renal failure undergoing hemodialysis were also excluded. Under this
definition, 27 of the cases identified by the computerized search were reviewed (Table 1).2,3,5-27 They are composed of 13 men and 14 women
with a median age of 60 years. The clinical spectrum ranged from a mild self-limiting colitis to severe complications and death. Surgery was
performed in 9 (33%) of 27 patients, who suffered from severe complications including profuse bleeding,19,20 toxic megacolon12 or
perforation.2,3,16,18,22,24 Among eight patients more than 70 years old, four (50%) patients underwent laparotomy and 3 (38%) patients were
died from severe bacterial sepsis18,20 or multiple organ failure.3 In contrast, overall prognosis in 19 patients less than 70 years old was
rather good, as only five (26%) of them underwent laparotomy and none of them was died. In this regard, the prognosis of CMV enterocolitis
in immunocompetent individuals morer than 70 years old may be worse and depend mainly on their comorbidities. The diagnosis of CMV infection
has been considered probable by histology of biopsies or detection of more than 4-fold increase in anti-CMV antibody titer and/or CMV-
specific IgM. In the meta-analysis of CMV colitis in immunocompetent hosts, only 38.6% had supporting serology.4 Klauber, et al.18 also
reported that CMV-IgM antibody was detected in 6 of 13 immunocompetent hosts with CMV colitis. In the cases reviewed here, CMV-IgM antibody
was not detected in 6 cases including our patient.3,16,19-21 Therefore, serology is not sufficient to make a timely diagnosis of CMV
infection, and the absence of CMV-IgM antibody may not exclude CMV infection. There is no consensus on the use of antiviral drugs, such as
ganciclovir, in the treatment of immunocompetent individuals with CMV infection, and CMV enterocolitis resolves spontaneously after surgical
resection without antiviral drugs in some immunocompetent cases.2,16,21,24 In this regard, no antiviral drugs were administered to our
patient. However, the administration standard requires further discussion in immunocompetent individuals, especially elderly patients. In
elderly individuals, even though they are immunocompetent, CMV enteritis may result in major complications such as bowel perforation, and it
should be included in the differential diagnosis of diarrhea if it is resistant to conventional treatment. Serology is not sufficient to
make a timely diagnosis of CMV infection, and the absence of CMV-IgM antibody may not exclude acute CMV infection as in our case. The
authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Abdominal CT scan revealed extraluminal air in the peritoneal cavity (white arrows),
reactive fluid collection, and wall thickening of the distal ileum. Grossly, the specimen revealed one site of bowel perforation (white
arrow), measuring about 3×2 cm, at the proximal 15 cm from the ileocecal valve. Histological examination revealed ulcerations with acute and
chronic inflammatory reaction, and large cells (white arrows) containing cytoplasmic and nuclear inclusions at the perforation site (H&E
stain, ×400) (A). These large cells showed strong immunoreactivity to CMV antibody (B). CMV, Cytomegalovirus. Clinical Characteristics of 27
Cases of CMV Enterocolitis in Immunocompetent Individuals Reported in English Literature M, male; F, female; SC, sigmoid colon; HF, hepatic
flexure; DC, descending colon; AC, ascending colon, IHD, ischemic heart disease; TI, terminal ileum; MI, myocardial infarction; TC,
transverse colon; HF, hepatic flexure; DM, diabetes mellitus; SF, splenic flexure.
