Ulnar nerve palsy subsequent to a fracture of the distal radius is extremely rare compared to a median nerve injury. The lesion tends to
occur in younger patents with a high-energy mechanism of injury and a severe injury pattern consisting of wide displacement, comminution,
combined distal ulnar fracture and open fracture. The mechanism of injury can contribute to a direct contusion and traction, compression
secondary to prolonged edema and tissue fibrosis, intraneural fibrosis and laceration. We report 2 cases of progressive ulnar nerve palsy
subsequent to closed fractures of the distal radius. The neurological symptoms recovered in all cases who underwent nerve decompression and
neurolysis at 2 or 3 months after the trauma. It is recommended that cases with high-energy, widely displaced or comminuted fractures of the
distal radius be evaluated carefully for ulnar nerve as well as median nerve injury. Ulnar nerve injury subsequent to a fracture of the
distal radius is extremely rare compared to a median nerve injury, which has an incidence of 2-7%.1-3) Bacorn and Kurtzke4) reported only 1
case of ulnar nerve injury (0.05%) in 2,000 patients with a fracture of the distal radius. Ulnar nerve injuries following a fracture of the
distal radius can be caused by traction or contusion by bone fragment, compression by fibsosis or swelling of the adjacent tissues,
intraneural fibrosis, and laceration.3,5-7) This case report presents two cases of ulnar nerve palsy after a closed fracture of the distal
radius. Their neurological symptoms sustained after fixation of the fracture recovered with nerve decompression and neurolysis at 2 or 3
months after the trauma. A 19-year-old male motorcycle rider was hit by a car and complained of pain in the left wrist. A physical
examination revealed tenderness of the left wrist and hypesthesia of the 4th and 5th finger. The plain radiographs revealed an
intraarticular comminuted fracture of the distal radius with posterolateral displacement of the distal fragment and an ulnar styloid process
fracture (Fig. 1). A closed reduction and percutaneous K-wires fixation with an external fixator were performed on the 2nd day after the
trauma. Postoperatively, the patient complained of a continuous tingling sensation at the medial 1/2 of the 4th and 5th fingers and the
progressively development of a clawing deformity. At 6 weeks after surgery, the external fixator was removed and the range of motion
exercise was started. At 8 weeks postoperatively, ultrasonography and electrophysiologic study were performed due to the continuous ulnar
nerve palsy. The ultrasonographic findings showed that the continuity of the ulnar nerve was maintained but there was swelling of the ulnar
nerve in the Guyon's canal and fibrosis of the tissues around the nerve. The electrophysiologic study revealed a decrease in the sensory and
motor conduction velocity of the ulnar nerve and denervation potential in the intrinsic muscle of the hand. At 12 weeks postoperatively,
ulnar nerve exploration, decompression and neurolysis was performed due to the lack of improvement in the neurological symptoms. The
intraoperative findings revealed swelling of the ulnar nerve and compression by the adjacent fibrous tissues and adhesion in the Guyon's
canal (Fig. 2). At the 3rd month since the nerve exploration, the ulnar nerve palsy had recovered completely. A 27-year-old male complained
of pain in his left wrist after a fall from a height. A physical examination revealed severe swelling and tenderness in the left wrist and
hypesthesia in the 4th and 5th finger were observed. The plain radiographs revealed a severe intraarticular comminuted fracture of the left
distal radius with an ulnar styloid process fracture (Fig. 3). An open reduction was performed on the day of the trauma. A small 2 cm-
incision was made on the voloradial side to expose the fracture site. A reduction of the articular surface was attempted using a periosteal
elevator. The bone deficiency in the metaphysis was treated with an allogeneous cancellous bone graft, and an external fixator was applied.
Postoperatively, the patient complained of a tingling sensation in the medial 1/2 of the 4th and 5th finger and clawhand deformity. The
ulnar nerve palsy was still present 6 weeks after surgery, which required ultrasonography and an electrophysiologic study. The
ultrasonographic findings showed that the continuity of the ulnar nerve was maintained but there was swelling of the nerve in the Guyon's
canal. The electrophysiologic study revealed a decrease in the sensory and motor conduction velocity of the ulnar nerve and the denervation
potential in the intrinsic muscle of the hand. At 8 weeks postoperatively, ulner nerve exploration, decompression and neurolysis was
performed due to the lack of improvement in the neurological symptoms. The intraoperative findings revealed swelling of the ulnar nerve and
adhesion by the adjacent fibrous tissues (Fig. 4). The neurological symptoms began to improve at the 4th week since the nerve exploration.
At 1 year postoperatively, minor numbness was felt in the 4th finger and 5th finger but the clawhand deformity had disappeared. A median
nerve injury following a fracture of the distal radius is a relatively common neurological complication that is found in 2-7% of cases and
is associated with high energy trauma. Carpal tunnel syndrome after a fracture of the distal radius is caused by an increase in pressure on
the carpal tunnel due to swelling or bleeding into the carpal tunnel in most cases.1-3) In contrast, ulnar nerve injury is an extremely rare
event with only 30 cases reported worldwide.2-10) According to Bacorn and Kurtzke4) an ulnar nerve injury was found in only 1 out of 2,000
patients (0.05%) with a fracture of the distal radius. However, Soong and Ring3) suggested a higher frequency of ulnar nerve injuries,
showing that 5 of their study population treated for a distal radial fracture within a 2 year period presented with an ulnar nerve injury.
In our experience, the incidence of ulnar nerve injury was similar to that reported by Soong and Ring3). We encountered 4 cases of ulnar
nerve injury subsequent to a fracture of the distal radius. Two of them were combined with a closed fracture and 2 of them were accompanied
with open fracture involving severe soft tissue damage, such as a degloving injury. We postulate that the higher incidence of severe
displacement, comminuted fractures, intra-articular fractures and open fractures are due to an increase in the number of high-energy
injuries caused by motor vehicle accidents and industrial accidents. The cases reported thus far have also shown that an ulnar nerve injury
mostly affects young people as a result of a high-energy injury caused by traffic accidents, falls from a height and sports injuries, and is
common in patients with severe displacement and comminution, combined a distal ulnar fracture and open fracture. The 2 young patients in
this study resulted from a high-energy injury caused by a motorcycle accident and a fall from a height. In them, the displacement or intra-
articular comminution was severe and combined with an ulnar styloid process fracture. An ulnar nerve injury is caused primarily by direct
contusion, traction and nerve compression due to fibrosis of the adjacent tissues or swelling, intraneural fibrosis, and rarely by
laceration in a distal radial fracture.3,5-7) Zoega7) reported from their intraoperative findings and a cadaver study that an ulnar nerve
injury can occur as a result of contusion caused by a posterior and radial displacement of the distal radius fragment. Clark and Spencer5)
reported that compression by thick fibrous tissues around the ulnar nerve resulted in progressive ulnar nerve palsy and demonstrated that a
permanent ulnar nerve injury could be avoided even when it was displaced or extended in a fracture of the distal radius because it has a
higher mobility and extensibility than the median nerve. According to Soong and Ring3) the ulnar nerve is more vulnerable to traction and
contusion than to compression because the ulnar nerve is located outside the carpal tunnel and is fixed in the Guyon's canal. Considering
that our cases presented with swelling as a result of a contusion of the ulnar nerve as well as compression and adhesion by the adjacent
tissues, it is believed that traction, contusion and compression by the adjacent fibrous tissues are the main causes of an ulnar nerve
injury in a closed fracture with laceration being a rare cause. However, it is not believed that an ulnar nerve injury is caused by an open
fracture involving extensive damage to the soft tissues. With regard to the treatment of an ulnar nerve injury after a distal radial
fracture, there is no disagreement regarding the need for early nerve exploration when combined with an open fracture or acute carpal tunnel
syndrome. However, there is some controversy regarding the treatment of an ulnar nerve injury in a closed fracture. Some authors reported
that careful observation can lead to recovery,3,7) while Vance and Gelberman6) reported that rapid recovery could be obtained with early
decompression. In addition, Bourrel and Ferro1) suggested that neurolysis should be performed when there are no signs of neural recovery in
the 6 months after the trauma. In our cases, the neurological symptoms did not disappear after reduction and fixation of the fracture, and
no recovery was observed after 2-3 months of trauma. Ultrasonography and an electrophysiologic study were performed, and the location and
pattern of the ulnar nerve injury were observed. Nerve decompression and neurolysis led to successful outcomes. In conclusion, an ulnar
nerve injury following a fracture of the distal radius is rare. However, median and ulnar nerve injuries should be considered when a high-
energy injury, wide displacement, or comminution is accompanied. Considering that an ulnar nerve injury combined with a closed fracture of
the distal radius results from a contusion or compression by the adjacent tissues in most cases, the treatment options should be chosen
depending on the degree of recovery after an anatomical reduction and fixation of the fracture. When signs of recovery are not observed
during the observations, nerve exploration after ultrasonography and an electrophysiologic study is recommended to identify the pattern,
location and cause of the injury as well as the possibility of regeneration. Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs show an intra-articular
fracture of the distal radius with a fracture of the ulnar styloid process. The distal fragment of the radius was displaced dorsoradially.
Photograph shows swelling, compression and adhesion by the surrounding tissue fibrosis of the ulnar nerve at the level of Guyon's canal.
Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs show a severe intra-articular comminuted fracture of the distal radius with a fracture of the ulnar
styloid process. Photograph shows swelling and compression by the surrounding tissue fibrosis of the ulnar nerve at the level of Guyon's
canal.
