We report a rare presentation of brucellosis as bilateral optic nerve and right abducent nerve involvement, and endocarditis complicated by
right premacular hemorrhage in a 28-year-old white female. The patient showed improvement with both medical and surgical therapy.
Brucellosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of papillitis, gaze palsy and endocarditis complicated with premacular
hemorrhage in endemic regions. Brucellosis, which is endemic in Turkey, is a systemic infection that can affect any organ or system in the
body. The most common ocular manifestations of brucellosis are considered as anterior uveitis and choroiditis. We report a rare case of
brucellosis with bilateral involvement of optic nerve, involvement of right abducent nerve, and endocarditis complicated by premacular
hemorrhage. To our knowledge, premacular hemorrhage secondary to brucella endocarditis is the first to be reported. A 28-year-old white
female with a history of acute rheumatic fever and aortic valve insufficiency presented with poor physical condition associated with
headache, fever, sweating and neck stiffness. She also showed sudden onset of painless blurred vision in the right eye associated with
diplopia. Best corrected visual acuity of the right eye was 20/400 and the left eye was 20/50. She had right afferent pupillary defect and
sluggish response to light on the left side. She had 30-45 prism diopters of right esotropia. The patient had reduced sensitivity to color
vision higher in the red-green direction than in the blue-yellow direction in both eyes. The right fundus revealed 1½ disc diameter of
premacular hemorrhage [Fig. 1]. Right and left optic disc showed marked swelling and hyperemia associated with peripapillary vascular
changes and flame-shaped hemorrhages [Figs. 1 and 2]. Cranial CT and MRI scans were normal. Echocardiography disclosed vegetation on the
aortic valve. Seroagglutination test for brucella was positive over 1/320 dilution. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) agglutination titer for
brucella was positive over 1/32 dilution. CSF opening pressure was 150 mm H2O. She had normal CSF biochemistry without pleocytosis. Blood
and CSF cultures for brucella were negative. She was diagnosed as having neurobrucellosis with right abducent nerve and bilateral optic
nerve involvement, and endocarditis complicated by right premacular hemorrhage. She underwent removal of the vegetation and aortic valve
replacement surgery followed by medical treatment with rifampicin 600 mg/day and doxycycline 200 mg/day for six months. Premacular
hemorrhage, bilateral papillitis and right abducent nerve palsy regressed within a month of treatment [Fig. 3]. Visual acuity in both eyes
returned to 20/20 after treatment. Color vision in both eyes also returned to normal. Color photo of the right eye at presentation. Note 1½
disc diameter of premacular hemorrhage, marked optic disc swelling and hyperemia, peripapillary vascular changes and flame-shaped
hemorrhages Color photo of the left eye at presentation. Note marked optic disc swelling and hyperemia Color photo of the right eye one
month after treatment. Note the resorption of the premacular hemorrhage and normal looking optic disc High index of clinical suspicion
coupled with seroagglutination tests have been recommended for diagnosis of brucellosis in endemic areas. The most adequate cut-off point
for seroagglutination has been considered as 1/160 with a sensitivity of 93% and specificity of 97%. Seroagglutination test for brucella was
positive over 1/320 dilution in our case. The incidence of neurobrucellosis has been reported to be high in endemic areas. Detection of any
titers of antibodies in CSF has been considered to provide evidence of neurobrucellosis. However, CSF titer higher than 1/160 associated
with increased CSF opening pressure which is greater than 200 mm H2O, pleocytosis, elevated protein, and reduced glucose concentrations have
been considered for the diagnosis of brucella meningitis. In addition, abnormal cranial CT and MRI findings have been reported for cases
with brucella meningitis. Our case showed CSF agglutination titers for brucella over 1/32 dilution. She had an opening pressure of 150 mm
H2O associated with normal CSF biochemistry without pleocytosis. Her cranial CT and MRI scans were normal. She had mild meningeal signs
associated with right esotropia and bilateral papillitis. She was diagnosed as having neurobrucellosis with right abducent nerve and
bilateral optic nerve involvement. Cardiac involvement has been considered to be rare but potentially lethal complication of brucellosis.
Brucella endocarditis is repoted to be mostly associated with acute rheumatic fever involving the aortic valve. Past medical history of our
patient was significant for acute rheumatic fever and aortic valve insufficiency. Echocardiography disclosed vegetation on the aortic valve.
Premacular hemorrhage has been reported as a complication of subacute bacterial endocarditis. Premacular hemorrhage detected in the right
eye of our patient was considered to be related to an embolic process from the vegetation on the aortic valve. Cranial nerve involvement in
neurobrucellosis has been reported previously, however, neurobrucellosis and endocarditis complicated by premacular hemorrhage in our case
from an endemic region was considered as a rare condition. Our patient showed dramatic clinical improvement after surgical removal of
vegetation and replacement of aortic valve followed by specific treatment with rifampin and doxycycline for brucella. In summary,
brucellosis should be considered in the differential diagnosis of optic neuritis, gaze palsy and endocarditis complicated by
subhyaloid/preretinal hemorrhage in endemic areas.
