We describe the novel association in a girl of nephrotic syndrome due to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, bilateral sensorineural
deafness, basal ganglia calcification, bilateral retinopathy similar to that seen in Coats’ disease, with de novo duplication of a
subtelomeric region of chromosome 4q35. The chromosomal duplication was identified during investigation of a possible association with
features of fascio-scapulo-humeral dystrophy (FSHD). This duplication has not previously been reported with FSGS and adds to the expanding
number of genetic associations with steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome. We describe a 5-½-year-old girl with a prior background of
sensorineural deafness, Coat’s-like retinopathy, basal ganglia calcification and reflex myoclonus who developed renal impairment secondary
to advanced glomerulosclerosis. We identified a duplication of a subtelomeric region of chromosome 4q35 including the D4Z4 repeat array of
which contractions are associated with the muscular dystrophy FSHD. We discuss the known genetic implications of D4Z4 and briefly review the
genetic basis for nephrotic syndrome. We highlight how D4Z4 duplication could theoretically be associated with nephrotic syndrome, and
further discuss the extra-renal manifestations and their associations. A 5½-year-old girl with a complex medical background was referred
with a 12-month history of intermittent peri-orbital and subsequently pretibial oedema. She was hypertensive at 130/80 mmHg (95th centile
111/73) with significant microscopic haematuria and heavy proteinuria (protein:creatinine ratio 1.876 g/mmol creatinine, normal <0.020).
Plasma biochemistry suggested chronic renal impairment with urea 10.6 mmol/l, creatinine 111 μmol/l, calcium 1.76 mmol/l, phosphate
1.99 mmol/l, albumin 12 g/l, parathormone 25.2 pmol/l. Urinary catecholamines, plasma renin and aldosterone were normal. Anti-neutrophil
cytoplasmic antibody (ANCA) and anti-nuclear factor antibody (ANA) were negative. Complement studies showed normal C3, mildly elevated C4
(0.44 g/l, normal 0.12–0.4 g/l). There was also hypertriglyceridaemia (21.65 mmol/l, normal 0.4–1.5 mmol/l). Renal ultrasound showed mildly
echogenic large kidneys (right 9.2 cm, left 9 cm, both just above 95th centile) . Percutaneous renal biopsy demonstrated obsolescent
sclerosed glomeruli and glomeruli showing variable degrees of segmental sclerosis, increasing mesangial matrix and capillary loop
thickening. No normal glomeruli were present. Hyaline droplets and hyalinosis were visualised in capillary loops. There was tubular atrophy
with foci of interstitial chronic inflammatory cell infiltrate. Arterial vessels were normal. Immunofluorescence showed segmental IgM and
capillary loop C3 deposition. Electron microscopy, restricted to sclerosed glomeruli demonstrated electron dense material in both capillary
loops and mesangium. Appearances were in keeping with advanced focal and segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) of the “not otherwise
specified” pattern (Fig. 1). Fig. 1Haematoxylin and eosin stain demonstrating glomerulosclerosis and mesangial thickening Haematoxylin and
eosin stain demonstrating glomerulosclerosis and mesangial thickening A 4-week trial of prednisolone (60 mg/m2/day) for her nephrotic
syndrome was unsuccessful in reducing her proteinuria. Angiotensin-converting-enzyme inhibition (ACEI) was introduced in the form of
enalapril (2.5 mg) to improve blood pressure control and reduce proteinuria. Nephrotic proteinuria persisted and her function deteriorated
so this was removed after several months. Renal function rapidly deteriorated over a course of 7 months so she was commenced on nocturnal
automated peritoneal dialysis. Blood pressure is controlled on amlodipine alone. She is currently undergoing transplantation preparation.
The patient originally presented to paediatric services at 8 months of age with left leukocoria and retinal detachment. A pattern of
extensive subretinal exudate, dilated tortuous vessels and telangiectasia was consistent with Coats’ disease except that the patient was
female. She was also identified as having bilateral profound sensorineural deafness. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the brain was
normal. Computed tomography (CT) assessment for cochlear implantation identified basal ganglia calcification. The cochleae appeared normal.
The patient was also known to the Neurology service with reflex myoclonic jerks triggered by touch only, and three previous tonic–clonic
seizures associated with fever. She did not require any anti-epileptic medication. Developmentally, she was identified as delayed, primarily
in speech and social functioning, attributed partly to her sensorineural deafness. Cochlear implantation markedly improved this, and she
currently attends mainstream education. The association between Coats’-like retinopathy and sensorineural deafness had been described in
fascio-scapulo-humeral dystrophy (FSHD). This prompted genetic analysis despite the absence of muscle weakness and a normal muscle biopsy.
Initial standard genetic testing for FSHD by linear gel electrophoresis, Southern blotting and hybridisation with probe p13E-11 suggested a
de novo contraction of the D4Z4 repeat array at the subtelomere of chromosome 4q, which is well described in FSHD . Subsequently, more
detailed genetic analysis of the D4Z4 region was performed by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis and the use of several hybridisation probes
(p13E11, D4Z4, A and B) and also by a newly identified simple sequence length polymorphism (SSLP), 3.5 kb proximal to D4Z4. Hybridisation
probes A and B recognise the region immediately distal to D4Z4 on chromosomes 4q and 10q. Previously, multiple subtelomeric chromosome 4q
and 10q variants have been identified, mainly based on the SSLP marker proximal to D4Z4 and probes A and B distal to D4Z4. Interestingly,
only one of the 4qA variants, namely 4A161 seems to be permissive to FSHD by D4Z4 contractions, while similar contractions on chromosomes
4qB and 10q do not result in FSHD. Detailed genetic analysis showed that both parents carry one non-permissive 4qB chromosome and one
permissive 4A161 chromosome, both with a normal sized D4Z4 repeat array. The patient inherited the 4qB chromosome from her father and the
4A161 chromosome from her mother, but in addition an extra 15-kb fragment is visible upon hybridisation with p13E-11 and D4Z4. This
additional short D4Z4 repeat array, did not hybridise to probe A or B, but the SSLP analysis showed that it is derived from the permissive
maternal 4A161 chromosome. More extensive Southern blot analysis of NotI-digested DNA fragments confirmed the D4Z4 duplication along with a
subtelomeric fragment of at least 100 kb proximal to D4Z4 . Further investigations, including karyotype and podocin 1 mutation, were normal.
We have described a novel association of Coats’-like retinopathy, sensorineural deafness, basal ganglia calcification, and steroid-resistant
nephrotic syndrome with histological appearances of FSGS. We have identified duplication of the D4Z4 repeat on chromosome 4q35, which may
account for some, or all, of these features. Contraction of the D4Z4 repeat is associated with FSHD and is often used as a confirmatory
genetic test . The D4Z4 array is located in the subtelomeric area of chromosome 4q and chromosome 10q, and consists of a number of highly
conserved repeat units that are 3.3 kb in size. Normal individuals have 10–100 copies, whereas the presence of 1–10 copies is highly
associated with FSHD, though only on a specific haplotype of chromosome 4qA . Similar D4Z4 repeat contractions on chromosome 4qB and 10q are
non-pathogenic. Intriguingly, the absence of copies on chromosome 4 (as in monosomy for 4q) has no FSHD correlate. The D4Z4 repeat unit
encodes for a double homeobox protein DUX4, a transcription activator with a role in cellular apoptosis . It has been suggested that stable
DUX4 transcription can only emerge from the most distal D4Z4 unit. Recently, it has been shown that several sense and antisense transcripts
emerge from FSHD and control myoblast, and therefore the role of these transcripts in FSHD remains unclear. Various hypotheses exist as to
how contraction of the array causes disease, including dysregulation of the normal transcription mechanisms. One such hypothesis involves
signalling via CTCF (CCCTC-binding factor) and A-type lamins . CTCF is a highly conserved protein with multiple regulatory roles, including
within chromatin modelling . CTCF binding at D4Z4 appears enriched in the FSHD disease model , though again the mechanism and effects are
uncertain. Much current research focus within nephrotic syndrome centres around the podocyte actin cytoskeleton, and this may provide
another cellular target for research. The constellation of symptoms including retinopathy, deafness, nephrosis, and cerebral calcification
may also suggest a defect within cilial physiology. The recognition of the pathological importance of ciliopathies is an expanding field .
The existence of a genetic duplication in an area highlighted as important in chromatin regulation could be theorised to lead to cilial
dysfunction. In our case, the association among FSHD, retinopathy and sensorineural deafness triggered the genetic analysis, despite the
lack of muscle weakness. The more detailed analysis demonstrated duplication rather than contraction of D4Z4. The duplicated short D4Z4
repeat array shows all characteristics of a locus that would otherwise cause FSHD. There are no previous reports of renal disease associated
with either FSHD or Coats’-like retinopathy (S. van der Maarel (2010), personal communication). Duplication of D4Z4 has not previously been
associated with clinical symptomatology. Duplication within chromosome 4q35 has been identified in hereditary benign intraepithelial
dyskeratosis by Allingham et al. , but no other associations are reported. No clinical correlation between our patient and that described by
Allingham et al. is apparent. Genetic aetiologies are increasingly recognised in steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome . Congenital nephrotic
syndrome of the Finnish type and mutations in nephrin (NPHS1) have been well characterised. The role of podocin (NPHS2) mutations is well
recognised in its association with FSGS-related nephrotic syndrome . Several mutations within NPHS2 have now been consistently identified.
Mutation within the WT1 gene is identified in both Frasier and Denys–Drash syndromes. Other genes with established roles in steroid-
resistant nephrotic syndrome include LAMB2, PLCE1, ACTN4, CD2AP and TRPC6 . The increasing recognition of these genes, and the proteins
encoded, are elucidating the molecular pathophysiology of FSGS. The advances here have been reviewed recently [10, 12]. None of the
candidate genes or structural components of the podocyte is known to localise to 4q35. The pathogenesis of the nephrotic syndrome in our
patient is therefore impossible to predict. Unfortunately, the original biopsy demonstrated advanced sclerosed glomeruli preventing definite
clarification of the initial histology. This case may highlight another area of interrogation for mutational analysis in children presenting
with steroid-resistant FSGS, and offers a further site for investigation in nephrotic syndrome models. It is plausible that characterisation
of these gene products may further elucidate the pathological process within nephrotic syndrome. The extra-renal manifestations also fail to
fit a single association. The presence of basal ganglia calcification has been reported with Coats’-like retinopathy in a number of families
[13, 14]. Although other features have been recognised in combination, none has included renal disease. The intracranial calcification was
identified in our patient, as part of pre-operative assessment for artificial cochlear implantation. It is plausible that there may be other
patients with “normal” MR imaging, intracranial calcification and FSGS. Other patients previously described with intracerebral calcification
and Coats’-like retinopathy have also been tested for the duplication, but this has not been identified. Eye abnormalities are associated
with LAMB2 mutations in Pierson syndrome , though these are distinctly different from our case. Retinal changes are also seen in
Tetraspanin-22 mutation, whilst TSPAN7 is associated with developmental delay, and TSPAN24 with glomerulosclerosis and deafness . It could
be theorised that the genetic defect in our patient affects multiple transpanin function, leading to this combination of features.
Correlation between FSGS and sensorineural deafness is seen in several conditions, and may be related to a shared structural anomaly . This
correlation has been further highlighted in mutations affecting mitochondrial genes. The multisystemic involvement of seemingly disparate
organs could suggest mitochondrial involvement, though the ocular changes in this case are again notably different. Mitochondrial mutations
leading to nephrotic syndromes have now been described by several authorities . No prior associations between cortical reflex myoclonus and
FSGS have been reported. We have described a previously unreported association between duplication of D4Z4 region on chromosome 4q35 and
several clinical features, including the development of steroid-resistant nephrotic syndrome with histological appearances of FSGS. This may
indicate a further area of interest in the increasing list of genetic factors influencing the development of FSGS. Professor Silvere Van der
Maarel, Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Centre, The Netherlands. Barbara Young, Consultant Pathologist, Western
Infirmary Glasgow, UK. Sameer Zuberi, Consultant Paediatric Neurologist, Royal Hospital for Sick Children, Glasgow, UK. Open Access This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
