We will discuss the clinical and genetic diagnosis of a child with severe psychomotor delay, who at 3 years of age presented with paroxysms
of hyperpnea-apnea and seizures unrelated to breathing anomalies. The child underwent genetic (karyotype, FISH telomeres) and
neuroradiological (cranial CT and MRI) tests, which proved to be normal. He came under our clinical observation at 3 years and 5 months of
age. Due to severe psychomotor delay and facial dysmorphisms we completed the genetic investigations based on his clinical feature and
analysis of the available literature. The presence of severe mental retardation associated with anomalous breathing pattern may suggest the
Joubert and Rett syndrome, however these were excluded on the basis of clinical and genetic examination. Angelman syndrome, suspected for
facial dysmorphisms and absent language, was also excluded because of the presence of a normal pattern of methylation at SNRPN locus.
Another possible diagnosis was the Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome (PHS), characterized by severe mental retardation, breathing anomalies (paroxisms
of hyperpnea-apnea), dysmorphisms and sometimes epilepsy. Haploinsufficiency of TCF4 gene located at 18q21.2 region has been recently
identified as causative of this syndrome. In our patient the research of TCF4 mutation by the Institute of Human Genetics, University
Hospital Erlangen (Germany), showed a de novo mutation. The diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome, an underdiagnosed cause of mental
retardation, was based on clinical and genetic findings. Searching for TCF4 mutations is highly recommended when others overlapping
syndromes was excluded. At our knowledge our patient is the first italian case of PHS diagnosed at molecular level. Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome
(PHS) is a rare cause of severe mental retardation. First detected in 1978 in two patients , at present there are 52 cases reported .
Typical facial dysmorphisms include a broad and beaked nose, flared nostrils, a wide mouth with a "Cupid's bow" shaped upper lip, cupped
ears, broad helices, a broad palate and clubbed fingertips (due to chronic hypossiemia). The patients have severe psychomotor delay and
language impairment, postnatal growth retardation and microcephaly. This syndrome is characterized by a particular breathing pattern which
appears in mid-childhood and manifests as paroxysms of hypernea followed by apnea and occasionally cyanosis. This pattern occurs during
wakefulness and is not associated with epileptic changes, but is increased by emotions or fatigue. Epileptic seizures occur frequently and
can be severe; electroencephalographic pattern is often characterized by frontal slow and sharp wave discharges. Cerebral MRI may shows
brain anomalies such as bulging caudate nuclei, hypoplastic corpus callosum, small hippocampus and cerebellar vermis hypoplasia. Another
frequent symptom is constipation . In 2007 Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome's gene was identified by three unrelated groups at 18q21.2 by comparative
genomic hybridization (CGH) array. In particular the haploinsufficiency of the TCF4 (transcription cell factor 4) gene, due to an autosomal
dominant de novo mutation, is considered to be causative . We report a 3 1/2 year old child with severe psychomotor delay, absence of
language development, breathing anomalies and facial dysmorphisms, suggestive for diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome. The child was
thoroughly examined with anamnestic investigation, clinical evaluation, electroencephalographic profiling. The patient, previously tested
for karyotype and FISH telomeres, was reassessed for high resolution chromosome analysis and molecular investigations on Rett (MECP2 gene)
and Angelman (methylation test at the SNRPN locus) syndromes. Subsequently DNA samples of patient and his parents were submitted to
Institute of Human Genetics, University of Erlangen, Germany, to perform mutational analysis of TCF4 gene by direct sequencing . The boy,
first son of healthy, unrelated parents, was born at full term after a normal pregnancy. Birth weight was 2950 g (<10%), height 48 cm (10%),
head circumference 31 cm (< 2 standard deviations). The neonatal course was regular. During the first year of his life, severe psychomotor
delay became evident. The ability to sit was acquired after 10 months, walking at 24 months and is still unstable. Language development is
absent. The child exhibits stereotypical hand movements, cheerful behavior, and constipation. At 3 years and 2 months, he began to
experience daily episodes of tachypnea followed by transitory breathing arrest and cyanosis. Not long after, the child presented with short
seizures characterized by loss of axial tone, perioral cyanosis, staring and a fixed smile. Sometimes seizures followed the breathing
anomalies. Previously executed metabolic screening and genetic tests (karyotype, FISH telomeres), proved to be normal. The ocular
examination, abdominal and cardiac ultrasounds, and rachis radiogram were normal as well. At 2 years and 2 months of age, neuroradiological
tests (cranial CT and MRI) showed no abnormality, and an authoritative genetic counseling came to this conclusion: "probable autosomal
recessive psychomotor retardation in patient with microcephaly and dysmorphic features". The child was 3 years and 5 months old when he came
under our clinical observation. Dysmorphic features were evident: microcephaly (head circumference 47 cm, < 3%), weight 13 kg (<10%), height
94 cm (10%), wide mouth with a "Cupid's bow" shaped upper lip, narrow biparietal diameter, epicanthic fold and prognathism (Figures 1, 2).
The sleeping EEG shows anomalies in the frontocentral regions with left prevalence and tendency toward contralateral diffusion (Figure 3).
The child underwent anti-epileptic therapy (carbamazepine), resulting in a rapid and dramatic reduction of the seizures. Further genetic
tests were carried out: MECP2 analysis and SNRPN methylation pattern produced normal results. Attention then was paid to PHS and patient's
DNA was sent to the Institute of Human Genetics in Erlangen (Germany): analysis of the TCF4 gene showed the presence of a de novo
heterozygous mutation in the last exon 19: c.1952-1957delCT,p.S661fs, which has not been previously reported (patient eight of the paper of
Zweier et al, 2008) . The original stop codon at amino-acid position 672 is altered and the protein associated is elongated by 37 amino-
acids. Note facial dysmorphisms: mycrocephalia, wide mouth with Cupid bow shaped upper lip, narrow biparietal diameter, epicanthus,
prognathism. note facial dysmorphisms: mycrocephalia, wide mouth with Cupid bow shaped upper lip, narrow biparietal diameter, prognathism.
Sleeping EEG: epileptic anomalies in the frontocentral regions with left prevalence and tendence to the controlateral diffusion. The
presence of severe mental retardation associated with a particular breathing pattern can suggest some genetic syndromes. Joubert Syndrome
was excluded because the breathing anomalies begin during neonatal period and later show improvement. Moreover, cerebellar vermis agenesis,
ataxy and abnormal eye movements in our patient are absent. Severe mental retardation, breathing anomalies, characteristic hand movements,
epilepsy, microcephaly and dysmorphic features all could also suggest Rett Syndrome. This syndrome was excluded because of the different
clinical course, facial phenotype and the absence of characteristic hand movements (hand-washing) and MECP2 gene mutations. The presence of
epilepsy associated with mental retardation, absent language, occasional laughter, microcephaly, and facial dysmorphisms could also suggest
Angelman Syndrome; however this was excluded due to the presence of a normal pattern of methylation at SNRPN locus (region 15q11-q12). Once
these syndromes were ruled out, we have considered as a possible diagnostic hypothesis the Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome, for which our patient
presents evocatives findings: mental retardation with absent language, typical facial dysmorphic features, breathing pattern which appeared
in midchildhood, postnatal growth retardation, microcephaly, epilepsy, electroencephalographic frontal anomalies, manual stereotipies and
constipation. Analysis of the TCF4 gene confirmed the diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome. Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome's identification in our case
allows to change risk recurrence from likely 25% to a negligible one. The TCF4 gene, 360 kb in size, encodes for two isoforms of a protein
belonging to the class I basic helix-loop-helix (bHLH) protein family, also known as the "E-protein family", which function as
transcriptional regulators. This gene is widely expressed in the fetal and adult brain, therefore a TCF4 dysfunction should play a role in
the development of mental retardation and epilepsy. TCF4 is also expressed in skeletal muscle, cardiac muscle and lungs. Therefore a TCF4
mutation is consistent with post-natal growth retardation and microcephaly. Autonomic dysfunctions such as hyperventilation and constipation
could be ascribed to TCF4 dysregulation, since this gene is involved in the development of the noradrenergic system neurons . From the
analysis of the literature, until today 219 cases were tested for TCF4 mutations for clinical suspicion of Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome; the two
original cases published by Pitt and Hopkins and the case described by Sigh were not tested because not available . In 52/219 (24%) the
diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome was molecularly confirmed (table 1). So it is possible that other genes or mutations in regulatory
regions of TCF4 could be involved in this syndrome. Cases of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome reported in the literature and TCF4 gene mutations. A
significative segnalation is the case of a girl with mental retardation and TCF4 mutation but without the classical picture of Pitt-Hopkins
Syndrome; however in this case the genetic impairment is due to balanced translocation and that could not result in a complete
haploinsufficiency . This report suggests that TCF4 gene may be involved also in milder clinical phenotype and that further genotypic-
phenotypic correlation is necessary in patient with TCF4 mutation. In conclusion this syndrome should be suspected on the basis of clinical
findings even before the occurrence of characteristic breathing patterns and epilepsy . In this regard, the breathing pattern, although
highly specific for the syndrome, is reported in 32 out of 52 cases with molecular diagnosis of Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome, about 62%, very
similar to the percentage reported by Zweier et al . We agree with general impression that Pitt-Hopkins Syndrome is widely underdiagnosed.
TCF4 mutation analysis results highly recommended in patients with severe development delay, absent or very limited speech, breathing
anomalies and typical facial gestalt, after the exclusion of the other overlapping, more common syndromes (Angelman, Rett, Joubert). At our
knowledge this is the first italian case of PHS diagnosed at molecular level. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's
parents for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. GT has definied the clinical picture of the patient
(severe psychomotor delay, breathing anomalies and facial dysmorphisms) and formulated the diagnostic suspicion of the Pitt-Hopkins
syndrome. AB has been involved in the collection of clinical data of the patient and in drafting the manuscript. IM has been involved in the
collection of clinical data of the patient and in drafting the manuscript. AO has been involved in the collection of clinical data of the
patient and in drafting the manuscript. ET has definied the genetic hypothesis of Pitt-Hopkins syndrome and sent the blood sample of the
patient to University Hospital Erlangen, Germany, for the genetic diagnosis. We gratefully thank Dr. Christiane Zweier, Anita Rauch et al of
the Institute of Human Genetics, and University Hospital Erlangen, Germany, for the molecular genetic examination.
