A 32 year-old white man, on his return from working in Nigeria, came for an examination of 3 weeks dry cough associated with fever and
asthenia. He used to swim in fresh water in the Niger River valley for 6 months. There was no evidence of malaria. Hypereosinophilia at
18.8% was found in the blood (white blood cell = 8,399/mm3, eosinophils cells = 1,579/mm3) and in broncho-alveolar lavage fluid (15%). Chest
computed tomography (CT) showed bilateral micro- and macronodules with ground-glass halos (Figure 1). Strongly positive enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay (ELISA) confirmed schistosiomasis diagnosis without histological confirmation. Urine analysis discovered an unknown
microscopic hematuria and ultrasonography revealed thickening of the bladder's wall (Figure 2). These anomalies suggest the diagnostic of
schistosomiasis hematobium. Computed tomography: macro nodules with ground-glass halo. Ultrasonography shows thickening of the wall of the
urinary bladder. Schistosomiasis is a helminthic infection endemic to tropical and subtropical regions, acquired through direct contact with
contaminated fresh water. Early schistosomiasis can occur 14 days after primary infection or heavy re-infection and reflects immunogenic
response to migrating schistosomae cercariae before egg laying.1 This pulmonary phase is common even in the absence of clinical symptoms,
regardless of the schistosomasis species (most often in S. mansoni and S. japonicum) and concerned almost always with non-immune travelers
in schistosomiasis hematobium and mansoni.1 Computed tomography is the most sensitive exploration and shows typically pulmonary micro- or
macronodules surround by ground glass halo. This ground-glass halo may be correlated with eosinophilic lung parenchyma infiltration or
immune complex deposition.2 Authors' addresses: Gabrielle Weber-Donat, Service de Radiology, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées Percy, CLAMART
Cedex, France, E-mail: weberdonatgabrielle@yahoo.fr. Nicolas Donat, Service d'Anesthésie-Réanimation, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées
Percy, CLAMART Cedex, France, E-mail: donatnicolas@yahoo.fr. Jacques Margery, Service de Pneumologie, Hôpital d'Instruction des Armées
Percy, CLAMART Cedex, France, E-mail: j.margery@wanadoo.fr.
