Neurofibromatosis Type 1(NF-1) has autosomal dominant inheritance with complete penetrance, variable expression and a high rate of new
mutation. Pheochromocytoma occurs in 0.1%-5.7% of patients with NF-1. We present the case of a 37-year-old patient with laparoscopically
resected pheochromocytoma. He was investigated for hypertension, flushing and ectopic heart beat. Abdominal CT and MRI revealed a mass
measuring 8 × 4 cm in the right adrenal gland. The diagnosis of pheochromocytoma was confirmed by elevated 24-hour urine levels of VMA,
metanephrines and catecholamines as well as positive MIBG scan. The patient presented with classic clinical features of NF-1, which was
confirmed by pathologic evaluation of an excised skin nodule. The patient underwent laparoscopic right adrenalectomy through a
transabdominal approach and was discharged on the second postoperative day, being normotensive. The patient is normotensive without
antihypertensive therapy 11 years after the procedure. Nowadays in the era of laparoscopy, patients with pheochromocytoma reach the
operating theatre easier than in the past. Despite, the feasibility and oncological efficacy of the laparoscopic approach to the adrenals,
continued long term follow-up is needed to establish the minimally invasive technique as the preferred approach. Furthermore, these patients
should be further investigated for other neoplasias and stigmata of other neurocutaneous syndromes, taking into account the association of
the familial pheochromo-cytoma with other familial basis inherited diseases. Pheochromocytomas are tumors of the adrenal medulla and extra-
adrenal chromaffin tissue that secrete catecholamines, resulting in hypertension, whether sustained or paroxysmal, and other symptoms of
increased production of catecholamines . They may be classified as sporadic or familial. Most of the pheochromocytomas are sporadic .
Familial predisposition is seen mainly in patients with multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2, neurofibromatosis Type 1 (NF-1), von Hippel-
Lindau disease and familial carotid body tumors . NF-1 affects approximately 1 in 3500 individuals worldwide and it has autosomal dominant
inheritance with complete penetrance . Pheochromocytoma occurs in 0.1%-5.7% of patients with NF-1 . The only treatment of pheochromocytoma
is surgical removal . The traditional open approach (either transabdominal, or retroperitoneal) has been replaced by the laparoscopic
transabdominal and the endoscopic retroperitoneal procedure. Despite the feasibility and oncological efficacy of the laparoscopic approach
to the adrenals, continued long-term follow-up is needed to establish the minimally invasive technique as the preferred approach . Herein,
we present a case of a patient with NF-1 and pheochromocytoma, who was successfully treated with laparoscopic right adrenalectomy 11 years
ago. A 37-year-old patient in good general condition (height: 175 cm, weight: 70 kg), was admitted to our hospital for surgical treatment of
a diagnosed pheochromocytoma. The patient reported that during last year the family physician had repeatedly diagnosed hypertensive
episodes, accompanied by intermittent attacks of severe flushing, perspiration and ectopic heart beat. During the hospital stay blood
pressure was closely monitored, fluctuating between 125/80 and 190/110 mmHg. The ECG revealed sinus arrhythmia. Clinical examination
revealed liver enlargement, café-au-lait spots and skin nodules. NF-1 was confirmed by pathologic evaluation of an excised skin nodule which
revealed a neurofibroma. The medical history revealed pulmonary tuberculosis during childhood, which was treated with six month multiple
drug therapy. Computerized tomography of the abdomen showed a round tumor, 8 × 4 cm in diameter, which could be clearly delineated from the
right kidney. The I131 MIBG scan revealed the presence of chromafinic tissue only in the right adrenal. Laboratory tests revealed elevated
catecholamine, metanephrine and vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) levels in the 24-h urine collection (Table 1). The plasma level of adrenaline
and cortisone were within normal limits. Thyroid and parathyroid ultrasonography was normal. Serum calcitonin levels were 8.5 pg|ml (normal
range: 8-10 pg/ml), whereas serum parathormone levels were 18.3 pg|ml (range: 8-76 pg/ml). Pituitary CT scan was normal. 24 hour urinary
metabolites level The patient preparation for the operative procedure with alpha-blocking agents started ten days before the procedure and
with beta-blockers three days before it. A pacemaker was inserted to control the heart rate during the procedure. Laparoscopic adrenalectomy
was performed with transabdominal approach. The patient was placed in a left lateral position. The intraoperative monitoring included
continuous ECG control, invasive blood pressure recording, pulse oximetry and capnography. During the mobilization of the tumor and prior to
the adrenal vein ligation, arterial blood pressure rose to 250/130 mmHg, whereas blood gases remained normal. The hypertension was treated
with continuous intravenous infusion of nitroglycerine (0.1-0.5 mg/min) and hydralazine 5 mg increments. The patient was extubated
immediately after the operation and transferred to a surgical ward monitored with noninvasive blood pressure monitor. He was discharged a
day after. The pathological evaluation of the tumor confirmed the diagnosis of pheochromocytoma. Urine catecholamines, metanephrines and VMA
returned to normal on the 7th postoperative day. The patient is normotensive without antihypertensive therapy 11 years after the procedure.
Pheochromocytoma is found in 0.1% among those tested because of hypertension and in 4% of patients with adrenal incidentaloma . The
incidence in the general population is estimated to be 1 per 100,000 persons per year or less and approximately 10% of patients have
bilateral pheochromocytomas . Moreover, approximately 10% of pheochromocytomas are malignant at diagnosis; however this is not determined at
the time of diagnosis . Many malignant pheochromocytomas are found to be malignant only by the fact that they recur after a complete gross
resection . Most of them are sporadic. Approximately 10-15% of the cases have been thought to be due to hereditary causes . Familial
predisposition is seen mainly in patients with Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia (MEN) type 2, NF-1, von Hippel-Lindau disease and familial
carotid body tumors (Table 2) . Hereditary Forms of Pheochromocytoma. Unilateral or bilateral pheochromocytomas are found in 50% of patients
with MEN 2 syndrome . Pheochromocytomas associated with MEN 2A are diagnosed concurrently with MTC in 35-73% of the cases and as the first
manifestation of MEN 2A in 9-27% of them . MEN 2A patients are statistically significantly younger at age of pheochromocytoma diagnosis than
patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma (mean ages of 38 and 47 years, respectively) . NF-1 was described by Smith in 1849 and von
Recklinghausen in 1882 . It affects approximately 1 in 3500 individuals worldwide and it has autosomal dominant inheritance with complete
penetrance, variable expression and a high rate of new mutation, approximately 50%, which is the highest rate of new mutation of any known
single-gene disorder . The NF-1 gene is a tumor suppressor gene mapping to chromosome 17q11.2. Because of the large gene size (11 kb of
coding sequence extending over 300 kb of genomic DNA), mutation analysis has been difficult (in only about 15% of patients mutations are
identified) . The diagnosis of NF-1 is based on criteria developed by National Institutes of Health Consensus Conference in 1987 .
Pheochromocytoma occurs in 0.1%-5.7% of patients with NF-1, and in 20%-50% of NF-1 patients with hypertension, compared to 0.1% of all
hypertensive individuals . The mean age at diagnosis of pheochrocytoma in patients with NF-1 is 42 years . Persons with NF-1 are at
increased risk for malignant conditions, especially malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor (MPNST), leukemia and rhabdomyosarcoma . Von
Hippel-Lindau (VHL) disease, an autosomal dominant syndrome , is clinically subdivided into two types: those without Pheo (VHL type 1) and
those with Pheo (VHL type 2). Type 2 VHL disease, where pheochromocytoma develops, accounts for 10% of VHL disease cases . The largest
series of VHL patients with pheochromocytomas was described by Walther et al . The mean age at diagnosis was 29.9 year, which was
statistically significantly younger than the mean age at diagnosis in a control group of patients with sporadic pheochromocytoma (39.7
years). However, there may be bias due to routine screening in the VHL group . The treatment of functioning adrenal tumors is surgical
removal of the affected gland first described by Sargent in 1914 . Since 1992 laparoscopic adrenalectomy (LA) has gained field in the
surgery of the adrenals and nowadays it is the procedure of choice . Modern indications for LA have been expanded to large tumors, bilateral
pathology and metastatic malignancies . The feasibility and oncological efficacy of the laparoscopic approach to the adrenals have been
reported in cases of malignancy; however, continued long-term follow-up is needed to establish the minimally invasive technique as the
preferred approach . The only absolute contraindication to LA currently remains large neoplastic lesions with involvement of the surrounding
anatomical structures, a condition that should be treated using an open approach . In this case, the tumor had intact contour, was
homogeneous and based on CT scan was considered benign. Early ligation of the central adrenal vein to facilitate pharmacologic control in
pheochromocytoma has been emphasized in reports and textbooks. However, our experience and that of others indicate that early ligation of
the adrenal vein is not always feasible because of the posterior entrance to the cava on the right and the medial entrance to the renal vein
on the left. Our patient developed intraoperative hypertension, successfully treated. An extensive search of the literature showed that
hemodynamic instability was routinely successfully treated . From a technical standpoint, large adrenal masses are difficult to dissect
laparoscopically. In our series the largest tumor laparoscopically resected was a 14 cm myelolipoma. Laparoscopic approach to large adrenal
tumors, less than 15 cm in size, is feasible but necessitates experience in laparoscopic and adrenal surgery. Conversion can always be an
option, and it is not considered to be a complication. In the era of laparoscopy, approach to patients with pheochromocytoma is easier than
in the past. These patients should be further investigated for other neoplasias (such as thyroid carcinoma, parathyroid hyperplasia, central
and peripheral nervous tumors) and stigmata of other neurocutaneous syndromes (v. Hippel Lindau disease), taking into account the
association of the familial pheochromo-cytoma with other familial basis inherited diseases. Written informed consent was taken from the
patient for publication of this case report. A copy of consent is available with editorial office. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. GNZ: conception and designed. GKV: manuscript preparation. CAA: data collection and manuscript preparation. MKD: data
collection and manuscript preparation. GIP: data collection and manuscript preparation. DKG: data collection and manuscript preparation.
MKP: data collection and manuscript preparation and review. All authors read and approved the final version.
