Central venous line insertion is a routine procedure in the intensive care unit. But intensivists should be aware of the possibility of rare
anatomic variants. We report an 84-year-old patient who was admitted to the intensive care unit for respiratory distress due to Guillain-
Barré syndrome. After intubation of the trachea, a central venous catheter was inserted via the left subclavian vein. This was accomplished
uneventfully with only one puncture. However, the post-procedural chest x-ray showed an unusual left-sided paramediastinal course of the
catheter (Figure 1). We evocated an arterial placement first, but the transduced waveform and the blood gas samples were compatible with an
intrathoracic vein placement. So we hypothesized that the patient could present with a persistent left superior vena cava (LSVC). This
diagnosis was confirmed by transoesophageal echography: the injection of agitated saline via the right cubital vein resulted in
opacification of the dilated coronary sinus prior to reaching the right atrium and right ventricle, and this confirmed the anatomic variant
of LSVC associated with the absence of a right superior vena cava. There were no other abnormalities concerning heart or great vessels.
Post-procedural chest x-ray showing a central venous catheter taking a left paramediastinal course (arrows). Persistent LSVC occurs in 0.5%
of the population and 5% to 10% of patients with congenital heart diseases. It usually drains into the right atrium through the coronary
sinus, and it is associated with an absent right superior vena cava in 20% of cases . The diagnosis can be made by bedside transthoracic or
transesophageal echocardiography . Computed tomography can also be useful . Persistent LSVC is not a contraindication to subclavian vein
catheterization but can make difficult the attempt to place a central venous line, pulmonary artery catheter, or pacemaker. Some authors
described the uneventful use of a catheter placed in the LSVC for several days, after checking that the catheter tip was not in the coronary
sinus . The use of a pulmonary artery catheter has also been reported . But manipulation of a catheter through the coronary sinus may result
in hypotension, angina, or cardiac rhythm trouble. LSVC: left superior vena cava. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
Written consent for publication was obtained from the patient's relative.
