Retinal cavernous hemangiomas are rare vascular anomalies, and can be associated with cerebral cavernous malformations (CCM). Distinct
mutations have been reported in patients who have both CCMs and retinal cavernous hemangiomas. Fluorescein angiography, spectral domain
optical coherence tomography, and genetic testing were performed on a patient with a retinal cavernous hemangioma and a CCM. Our patient was
heterozygous in the KRIT1/CCM1 gene for a frameshift mutation, c.1088delC. This would be predicted to result in premature protein
termination. We have identified a novel mutation in the KRIT1/CCM1 gene in a patient with both CCM and retinal cavernous hemangioma. We
hypothesize that the occurrence of retinal cavernous hemangiomas and CCMs is underlaid by a common mechanism present in the KRIT1/CCM1 gene.
Cerebral cavernous malformations (CCMs) are congenital vascular anomalies of the brain that can cause significant neurological disabilities.
Similar vascular anomalies can also occur in the retina, and are referred to as retinal cavernous hemangiomas. Retinal cavernous hemangiomas
are rare, and are associated with CCMs in approximately 5% of familial cases . Distinct mutations have been reported in patients who have
both CCMs and retinal cavernous hemangiomas . We report what is, to our knowledge, a novel frameshift mutation in KRIT1(Krev interaction
trapped-1)/CCM1) gene which was associated with a retinal cavernous hemangioma and a CCM. An asymptomatic 30-year-old woman was referred for
evaluation of a retinal mass in her right eye. Visual acuity was 20/20 in her right eye and 20/15 in her left eye. External, pupil, motility
and anterior segment examinations were unremarkable. Fundus examination of the right eye revealed an elevated, dark red macular lesion with
multiple saccular aneurysms (Fig. 1a). Fluorescein angiography showed a mass with hyperfluorescent areas and inferior blockage
hypofluorescence consistent with a retinal cavernous hemangioma (Fig. 1b). Fundus examination of the left eye was unremarkable. A CCM was
present on cerebral imaging. Family history, based on self-reporting and medical records, revealed CCMs in seven of her family members,
which included most of her mother’ brothers and sister. Her mother and grandmother also had a retinal cavernous hemangioma in association
with a CCM (Fig. 2). Genetic evaluation of our patient, using genomic DNA extracted from our patient’s blood cells, involved sequencing of
the full coding regions of all coding exons (1–16) of the KRIT1/CCM1gene as well as approximately 50 flanking bases. The patient was
heterozygous in the KRIT1/CCM1 gene for a frameshift mutation, c.1088delC. This would be predicted to result in premature protein
termination. The other family members were not accessible for clinical evaluation and DNA sampling for confirmation. Fig. 1a Color
photograph of the right eye illustrating a retinal cavernous hemangioma. b Fluorescein angiography of the right eye illustrating
hyperfluorescent lesions with inferior blockage hypofluorescenceFig. 2A family tree illustrating which family members were affected by
either a cerebral cavernous hemangioma, a retinal cavernous hemangioma, or both tumors. (The arrow designates the patient in our report) a
Color photograph of the right eye illustrating a retinal cavernous hemangioma. b Fluorescein angiography of the right eye illustrating
hyperfluorescent lesions with inferior blockage hypofluorescence A family tree illustrating which family members were affected by either a
cerebral cavernous hemangioma, a retinal cavernous hemangioma, or both tumors. (The arrow designates the patient in our report) CCM can
occur in either a sporadic or familial form. Familial CCMs show autosomal dominant inheritance, and may be associated with retinal cavernous
hemangiomas . A large deletion of the MGC4607 gene, a de novo deletion of the PDCD10 gene and three different mutations in the KRIT1/CCM1
gene have been identified in patients with both CCM and retinal cavernous hemangioma . We have identified a novel mutation in the KRIT1/CCM1
gene in this patient with both CCM and retinal cavernous hemangioma. The KRIT1/CCM1 gene encodes a protein that affects endothelial cell
structure and function, and strong labeling of KRIT1 expression has been detected in both the brain and retina [5, 6]. Given our results in
conjunction with three previously reported and different mutations in the KRIT1/CCM1 region, it is reasonable to hypothesize that the
occurrence of retinal cavernous hemangiomas and CCMs are underlaid by a common mechanism present in this gene. All patients with a retinal
cavernous hemangioma should undergo some type of cerebral imaging, (e.g. MRI or CT scan) to determine the presence of a CCM. If a patient is
found to have both lesions, it is reasonable to perform a genetic evaluation from patient’s blood cells to sequence the KRIT1/CCM1 gene.
However, genetic diagnostics alone in a patient who presents with a retinal cavernous hemangioma is not a substitute for the neurologic and
systemic workup that is required, since the condition is genetically heterogeneous. Though genetic results to date have no implication with
regard to health or prognosis, the demonstration of a causative mutation in the KRIT1/CCM1 gene does provide greater certainty of the
diagnosis, allows us to better justify future screening for the development of new lesions, and contributes to the genetic counseling and
preventive care of at-risk family members. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited. The authors have no financial interest in the material presented in this manuscript.
