The patient, a 20-year-old obese male, complained of epigastric pain of two years duration with no associated nausea or vomiting. He
underwent upper gastrointestinal endoscopy in a local hospital and received treatment for H. pylori infection, with no significant
improvement. He was referred to King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Centre (KFSHRC) for further evaluation. Laboratory
investigations showed: WBCs: 7.3×109/L. Hb: 133 g/L. MCV: 69.6 fL. Platelets: 500×109/L. ESR: 45 mm/hour. CRP: 10.8 mg/L. Urea: 4.0 mmol/L.
Creatinine: 72 umol/L. K+: 3.9 mmol/L. Na+: 140 mmol/L. Cl-:103 mmol/L. CO2: 22 mmol/L. Albumin: 44 g/L. Bilirubin: 8 umol/L. LD: 177 U/L.
ALT: 108 U/L. AST: 61 U/L. ALP: 64 U/L. GGT: 161 IU/L. Negative antinuclear antibody screen as well as celiac disease serology. Follow-up
endoscopy after six months showed normal esophageal mucosa, nodular congested gastric mucosa and nodular duodenal mucosa with variable-sized
polypoid lesions [Figures 1a and b], which were biopsied and sent for pathological examination [Figure 2 a–c]. (a, b) (a, b, c) Q1. What is
the diagnosis? Q2. What are the histopathological findings of duodenal polypoidal lesions? Q3. What other sites can be affected by this
pathology? Q4. What is the clinical significance of this abnormality? A1. The diagnosis: Reactive follicular lymphoid hyperplasia (FLH). A2.
Histopathological examination of the first part of duodenum polypoidal lesions biopsies showed focal villous atrophy with prominent reactive
FLH in the lamina propria with flattened overlying mucosa, and no evidence of intraepithelial lymphocytes, dysplasia, or neoplasia [Figures
2a–c]. Gastric antral biopsy showed moderate chronic active gastritis, and Giemsa stain showed the presence of H. pylori organism. A3. FLH
can develop wherever lymphoid tissue is present. The mostly reported sites of FLH include hard palate and oral cavity, entire
gastrointestinal tract, nasopharynx, larynx, bronchi, parotid gland, breasts, skin, spleen, peripheral nerves, and the thymus gland. A4. FLH
is an uncommon benign proliferation of lymphoid follicles, a poorly understood entity, which may be confused clinically and histologically
with malignant lymphoma. It has been alternatively named benign lymphoid hyperplasia, reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, and pseudolymphoma. The
cause of FLH is unknown, but may be associated with common variable hypogammaglobulinemia, primary immunodeficiency states and Epistein Barr
virus infection. The course of FLH in children is benign, but the outcome in adults is controversial. Histopathologic examination,
immunohistochemical analysis and molecular studies are essential to achieve accurate diagnosis and to implement appropriate management. The
patient under study was given H. pylori eradication therapy, and reassured. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
