Oxaliplatin is a platinum compound used in the treatment of gastrointestinal malignancies, including colorectal cancer. The incidence of
hypersensitivity reaction in patients receiving oxaliplatin is approximately 15%, with severe reaction (grade 3 and 4) occurring in 2% of
patients. We report two patients with metastatic colorectal cancer who developed de novo hypersensitivity reaction and acute
thrombocytopenia after oxaliplatin infusion. Both patients had oxaliplatin treatment several years before and exhibited hypersensitivity on
the third dose of oxaliplatin in recent treatment. Oxaliplatin was discontinued when clinical reaction was identified. Both patients were
confirmed to have strong oxaliplatin-induced IgG platelet-reactive antibodies. Both patients' thrombocytopenia resolved within two weeks
after discontinuation of oxaliplatin. One patient had disease stabilization lasting for three months without chemotherapy. Both patients
subsequently received other chemotherapeutic agents without evidence of hypersensitivity reaction or immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. We
recommend vigilant monitoring of complete blood count and signs and symptoms of bleeding after the occurrence of oxaliplatin-induced
hypersensitivity to avoid serious complications of immune-mediated thrombocytopenia. Oxaliplatin is a third-generation platinum derivative
that has been widely used in patients with gastrointestinal malignancies including colorectal cancer (CRC). The combination of
5-fluorouracil, leucovorin and oxaliplatin (FOLFOX) has been demonstrated in several studies to increase survival rate and reduce the risk
of disease progression in patients with metastatic CRC and stage III colon cancer . Thrombocytopenia has been noted in more than 70% of
patients receiving FOLFOX., and is usually self-limited and related to myelosuppression from oxaliplatin . The isolated and acute decline in
platelets after FOLFOX treatment is thought to be immune-mediated, and is referred as drug-induced immune thrombocytopenia (DIIT).
Oxaliplatin-dependent antibody against platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa complex has been identified in patients with oxaliplatin-induced
immune thrombocytopenia . The hypersensitivity reaction associated with oxaliplatin typically consists of rigors, fever, rash, tachycardia,
and dyspnea. The incidence in patients with CRC was reported as high as 15% and mainly occurred shortly after infusion in patients who had
prior exposure to oxaliplatin . The mild hypersensitivity reaction (grade 1 or 2) usually responds to discontinuation of oxaliplatin and
supportive treatment with antihistamine agents and steroid. Frequently, patients with mild hypersensitivity reaction can be re-treated with
oxaliplatin by adding appropriate pre-medications such as antihistamine agents and steroid, and increasing infusion time with more diluted
concentration . Severe and potentially fatal hypersensitivity reaction with symptomatic bronchospasm, angioedema, hypotension and
anaphylaxis, occurred in about 2% of patients receiving oxaliplatin treatment . Although the manufacturer recommends not to re-treat with
oxaliplatin after the incidence of severe hypersensitivity reaction, a desensitization protocol has been successfully implemented in
patients with grade 3 hypersensitivity . Here, we describe two cases of acute thrombocytopenia with concurrent oxaliplatin-induced
hypersensitivity reaction in patients with metastatic CRC. Both patients had prior oxaliplatin treatment without occurrence of
hypersensitivity, or acute thrombocytopenia and received oxaliplatin several years later due to disease progression with non-responsiveness
to other chemotherapeutic regimens. A 60-year-old African-American male was diagnosed with stage IV rectosigmoid colon cancer with liver
metastasis in 2004. He underwent abdominoperineal resection of rectosigmoid cancer followed by six months of FOLFOX chemotherapy with
partial response in liver metastasis. Subsequently, he received pelvic chemoradiation with capecitabine. However, the liver metastasis
progressed while waiting for surgical evaluation. He received FOLFOX and bevacizumab, 10 months after the last dose of FOLFOX. After three
cycles of treatment, oxaliplatin was replaced by irinotecan because of persistent grade 2 neuropathy. Due to disease progression, he was
given additional treatment with bevacizumab, irinotecan and panitumumab with disease stabilization lasting for more than 12 months.
Subsequently, radiofrequency ablation of the two hepatic metastatic lesions was performed. He developed congestive heart failure requiring
warfarin treatment, and bevacizumab was discontinued. In December 2008, due to disease progression and improvement of neuropathy, he was
restarted on dose-reduced FOLFOX, with oxaliplatin 70 mg/m2 plus leucovorin (LV) 400 mg/m2 intravenous infusion over two hours followed by
5-fluorouracil (5-FU) 2400 mg/m2 infusion over 46 hours every two weeks. In mid-January 2009, during the third cycle of chemotherapy, one
hour into a planned two-hour infusion of oxaliplatin and LV, he developed hypersensitivity reaction with rigors, chills, bronchospasm and
decreased oxygen saturation. Chemotherapy infusion was immediately discontinued. The symptoms resolved after the patient received oxygen
supplementation, antihistamine agents and steroid. Infusion of oxaliplatin and LV was resumed and was completed with a slower infusion rate.
However, he experienced mild gingival bleeding at the end of infusion and was instructed to return to clinic if the condition worsened. In
the evening, he developed epistaxis with persistent gingival bleeding and had bright red blood emanating from the colostomy site. He was
found to have prominent skin petechiae, bruises and tongue hematoma the next day (Fig. 1A and 1B). Complete blood count (CBC) showed an
abrupt and marked decrease in platelet count from 226 × 109/L (measured one day prior to chemotherapy) to 4 × 109/L about 24 hours after the
oxaliplatin infusion. Leukocyte and erythrocyte counts, hemoglobin and hematocrit levels were within the normal reference range. Peripheral
blood smear revealed severe decrease in platelets, with minimal schistocytosis. No blasts or atypical cells were observed (Fig. 2A). The
prothrombin time was mildly prolonged with an International Normalized Ratio (INR) of 1.9 due to warfarin prophylaxis for congestive heart
failure. Warfarin was discontinued to help control hemorrhage. Identification of platelet antibody was performed at the BloodCenter of
Wisconsin (Milwaukee, WI) and revealed presence of both non-specific Immunoglobulin G (IgG) and oxaliplatin-induced, IgG platelet
antibodies. Additional studies such as human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) testing, hepatitis B and C screening, and antinuclear antibody
(ANA) analysis have been performed to exclude other causes of thrombocytopenia. Each yielded a negative result. Photographs form patient one
taken 24 hours after oxaliplatin infusion. A. Intense epistaxis with placement of nasal packing, and tongue-hematoma formation. B. Upper
extremity petechiae, bruises and accumulation of blood in the colostomy. Peripheral blood smears. A. Patient one: markedly decreased
platelets without significant schistocytosis. (Wright's stain, 1,000×) B. Patient two: moderate decline in platelets. (Wright's stain,
1,000×) He was admitted for prompt management and received two consecutive apheresis platelet transfusions, and one adult unit of plasma.
The platelet count increased to 51 × 109/L with resolution of bleeding overnight. He was sent home after two days of observation without
requiring additional platelet infusions. Follow-up CBC measurements showed increasing platelet counts, ultimately reaching a normal level
within twelve days after the incident (Fig. 3A). His warfarin treatment was resumed after resolution of thrombocytopenia. His cancer-related
symptoms remained stable, with decreasing CEA levels for three months, even without the use of chemotherapy. An abdominal CT scan performed
one month after the hypersensitivity reaction indicated stable disease. However, three months after, he experienced mild cancer-related
symptom, requiring resumption of chemotherapy with 5-FU and LV. Bevacizumab was later added due to disease progression. He did not
experience any hypersensitivity reaction or acute thrombocytopenia with these drugs. Plots displaying the trend of platelet counts. A.
Patient one: the steep platelet decline occurring 24 hours after completion of oxaliplatin infusion, with concurrent bleeding diathesis. Two
units of apheresis platelets were provided. B: Patient two: moderate decrease in platelet count without evidence of bleeding. Platelet drop
was not as drastic as patient one due to discontinuation of the rest of oxaliplatin treatment. A 66-year-old Hispanic female with type 2
diabetes mellitus, degenerative arthritis, and diverticulitis was diagnosed with stage IV colon cancer with lung and liver metastases in
2006 after surgical resection of sigmoid colon cancer. She was treated with first-line chemotherapy including bevacizumab, capecitabine and
oxaliplatin from March 2007. Oxaliplatin was discontinued after four months of treatment due to severe neuropathy. At that time, she
achieved disease stabilization with gradual decline of CEA levels. She continued to receive bevacizumab and capecitabine for eight months
until disease progression. Subsequently, she was enrolled in a clinical study and received cetuximab, bevacizumab and irinotecan for four
months with good control of disease. She was withdrawn from the clinical trial due to significant toxicities. Afterwards, she developed
progressive disease on single-agent cetuximab. In January 2009, with improvement of neuropathy secondary to prior oxaliplatin use,
chemotherapy with bevacizumab, oxaliplatin and 5-FU every two weeks was initiated. She tolerated the first two cycles without major side
effects. In early March 2009, during her third cycle of chemotherapy, she experienced upper body skin rash and pruritis shortly (5-10
minutes) after starting oxaliplatin treatment. Oxaliplatin infusion was discontinued immediately. The hypersensitivity symptoms resolved
after steroid and antihistamine treatment. No petechiae or mucosal bleeding was noted. Due to our prior experience with patient one, a CBC
was immediately obtained after the onset of hypersensitivity symptoms. A drop in platelet count from 87 × 109/L to 66 × 109/L was noted
despite only receiving a small fraction (less than 1/10) of planned oxaliplatin treatment. Her platelet count was 99 × 109/L fifteen days
prior to this event (Fig 3B). A peripheral blood smear confirmed moderate decrease in platelets with normal morphology (Fig. 2B). No
schistocytes were identified. Oxaliplatin treatment was not resumed because of hypersensitivity reaction with concomitant mild
thrombocytopenia; a presentation similar to patient 1. A serum sample for platelet antibody analysis was also sent to the BloodCenter of
Wisconsin (Milwaukee, WI), which later demonstrated the presence of IgG oxaliplatin-induced platelet antibody. The other CBC parameters
revealed mild decrease in WBC count, with normal hemoglobin and hematocrit levels. Coagulation panel and bilirubin were also within the
normal reference range. HIV, hepatitis B and C screening, and ANA analysis were all negative. The possibility of a platelet transfusion was
offered and discussed in case of aggravation of the thrombocytopenia. However, the patient declined infusion of blood products due to
religious background. Oral prednisone (20 mg, three times a day, for two days) was prescribed. Her subsequent platelet counts gradually
increased within two weeks (Fig. 3B). She resumed chemotherapy with bevacizumab, 5-FU and LV without significant thrombocytopenia or
hypersensitivity reaction. Nonetheless, she developed progressive disease several weeks later. She was consequently treated with
bevacizumab, irinotecan and 5-FU without any evidence of hypersensitivity reaction or acute thrombocytopenia. We describe two cases of
immune-mediated thrombocytopenia immediately following the onset of the hypersensitivity reaction in patients with metastatic CRC receiving
oxaliplatin treatment. To our knowledge, this is the first report demonstrating the association between de novo oxaliplatin-induced
hypersensitivity reaction and immune-mediated thrombocytopenia from oxaliplatin. Both patients received FOLFOX chemotherapy several years
prior without hypersensitivity symptoms or evidence of acute thrombocytopenia. However, both patients experienced hypersensitivity reaction
on retreatment with oxaliplatin. In both cases, acute thrombocytopenia transpired immediately after the occurrence of hypersensitivity
symptoms. Our first patient developed severe thrombocytopenia with mucocutaneous bleeding after completing the rest of oxaliplatin
treatment, and was hospitalized for platelet transfusion and close observation. For our second patient, a Jehovah's Witness, oxaliplatin
infusion was not resumed after the occurrence of hypersensitivity reaction with moderate thrombocytopenia. Both patients had oxaliplatin
appended to their drug allergy list to prevent re-exposure. In order to verify that the isolated, precipitous drop in platelet counts was
due to oxaliplatin, serum samples from our two patients were collected and sent for drug-induced platelet antibody analyses to the
BloodCenter of Wisconsin (Milwaukee, WI). Detection of oxaliplatin-dependent antibodies in patients' sera was performed via flow cytometry .
Normal group O platelets were incubated with test serum in the presence and absence of oxaliplatin and were washed twice in buffer
containing oxaliplatin at the same concentration as in the primary incubation mixture. Platelet-associated immunoglobulins were then
detected by flow cytometry using fluorescein isothiocyanate-tagged anti-human IgG (Fcg-specific) and phycoerythrin-tagged anti-human IgM
(Fcm-specific). Sera from normal, healthy donors, and sera containing previously identified quinine-dependent platelet antibodies served as
negative and positive controls, respectively. A positive reaction was defined as a mean platelet fluorescence intensity at least twice that
of platelets processed identically except for the absence of oxaliplatin. As shown in Fig. 4, patients' sera were incubated with normal
group O platelets in the absence and presence of oxaliplatin. Both patients were confirmed to have oxaliplatin-dependent IgG platelet
antibodies. In patient 1, a weak non-drug-dependent antibody was also present, and the significance of which is uncertain. Detection of
oxaliplatin-dependent platelet antibodies. The assay was performed by flow cytometry in patient one (A) and patient two (B). Both patients
had IgG antibodies that reacted strongly with normal platelets in the presence of 0.1 mg/ml oxaliplatin, but not in the absence of drug. No
reaction was obtained with normal serum in the presence of drug. Drug-induced immune-mediated thrombocytopenia (DIIT) is diagnosed by
demonstrating an antibody in the patient's serum that reacts with normal platelets in the presence of soluble drug . Fewer than 10
chemotherapeutic agents have been shown to cause DIIT . In patients receiving chemotherapy, thrombocytopenia is usually due to
myelosuppression; however, acute thrombocytopenia of unknown cause should prompt suspicion for this entity. For DIIT, discontinuation of the
offending drug is the most important treatment. Platelet transfusion is frequently needed when severe thrombocytopenia occurs with
consequent mucocutaneous bleeding as in Patient 1. Whether corticosteroids are helpful is uncertain. Both our patients developed DIIT
despite receiving dexamethasone as part of antiemetic regimen prior to oxaliplatin treatment. Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia has been
recognized as a rare adverse outcome of oxaliplatin infusion and has been identified in approximately 7% of allergic-type reactions to
oxaliplatin in a retrospective analysis . We have summarized all published case reports related to oxaliplatin-induced acute
thrombocytopenia in table S1 (see additional file 1) and table S2 (see additional file 2) , with table S2 reflecting reports without
documentation of oxaliplatin-induced platelet antibodies. Each patient received prior oxaliplatin treatment, and all except one had
metastatic CRC. Affected patients were predominately female. As shown in table S2 (additional file 2), acute thrombocytopenia with hemolysis
(Evan's syndrome) has also been described in patients with hypersensitivity reaction from oxaliplatin. Furthermore, most patients with
Evan's syndrome or hemolytic uremic syndrome likely from multiple exposures to oxaliplatin, presented with back pain during oxaliplatin
infusion. Taleghani et al. described oxaliplatin-induced immune pancytopenia four hours after the 15th oxaliplatin treatment in a patient
with advanced CRC . They identified oxaliplatin-dependent antibodies to platelets, red blood cells and neutrophils. The patient developed
significant pancytopenia upon re-treatment with oxaliplatin 30 minutes after infusion, with inception of hypersensitivity reaction. Curtis
et al. reported two patients with metastatic CRC who developed acute thrombocytopenia one to two days after repeated (more than 10 times)
oxaliplatin treatment . Oxaliplatin-dependent antibodies specific for the platelet glycoprotein IIb/IIIa complex were identified in both
patients' sera. As summarized in table S1 (additional file 1), primarily female patients were more likely to develop immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia after repeated oxaliplatin treatment. Recovery from thrombocytopenia was observed in all cases after discontinuation of
oxaliplatin. The majority of patients received platelet transfusion. Moreover, as shown in tables S1 and S2 (additional files 1 and 2), some
patients had received other chemotherapeutic agents such as irinotecan, cetuximab, bevacizumab and 5-FU after recovery from oxaliplatin-
induced acute thrombocytopenia, and none of them had recurrent acute thrombocytopenia. This observation indicates that oxaliplatin-induced
platelet antibodies do not cross-react with other chemotherapeutic agents. In our report, patient 1 resumed treatment three months later
with 5-FU and LV, with later addition of bevacizumab. Patient 2 received bevacizumab and 5-FU, with addition of irinotecan. Neither patient
experienced recurrent hypersensitivity reaction or recurrent episode of acute thrombocytopenia. Bozec et al. reported a case of a 53-year-
old male with metastatic CRC, previously treated with FOLFOX, who presented with irinotecan-induced immune thrombocytopenia 18 hours after
the onset of hypersensitivity reaction during the first irinotecan treatment . The patient experienced another episode of hypersensitivity
reaction followed by acute thrombocytopenia during the second irinotecan infusion. IgG platelet antibody in the presence of irinotecan was
identified in the serum. Since the patient developed immune thrombocytopenia during the first irinotecan infusion, the authors speculated
that this patient's drug-dependent platelet antibody could have been prompted by the previously administered chemotherapeutic agent which
appeared to possess the ability to cross-react with irinotecan. It is likely that oxaliplatin might have been the culprit in their case;
however, analysis for the presence of oxaliplatin-dependent platelet antibody was not performed to support this hypothesis. Our report
highlights the importance of promptly recognizing the association between oxaliplatin-induced hypersensitivity reaction and immune-mediated
thrombocytopenia. Female patients with advanced CRC and prior oxaliplatin exposure are more likely to develop this consequence, although it
may also occur in male patients. Therefore, it is imperative that patients should be thoroughly examined for signs and symptoms of bleeding,
with concurrent CBC evaluation even after recovery from the hypersensitivity symptoms. Heightened vigilance and prompt testing may be
helpful in recognizing development of antibody in patients with religious objections to transfusion before the onset of severe
thrombocytopenia. Patients usually respond to discontinuation of oxaliplatin, with concurrent platelet transfusion if indicated. Additional
tests such as peripheral blood smear examination and direct antiglobulin test are also helpful in assessing Evan's syndrome or hemolytic-
uremic syndrome if worsening anemia or hemolysis is noted. Patients with documented oxaliplatin-induced acute thrombocytopenia should not be
re-challenged with oxaliplatin and should have oxaliplatin listed as a drug allergy. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. The two case reports were originated by MAB, WTS, CSC and CTH. BRC and RHA carried out the assays for oxaliplatin-dependent
platelet antibody. All authors participated in drafting and editing the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Written informed consent was obtained from each patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Table S1. Oxaliplatin-induced immune-mediated thrombocytopenia.
Summary of all published case reports related to oxaliplatin-induced acute thrombocytopenia with documentation of oxaliplatin-induced
platelet antibodies. Click here for file Table S2. Other oxaliplatin-related acute thrombocytopenia reports. Summary of all published case
reports related to oxaliplatin-induced acute thrombocytopenia without documentation of oxaliplatin-induced platelet antibodies. Click here
for file
