Familial trigeminal neuralgia has been reported in 1–2% of cases consistent with an autosomal dominant inheritance. We present a Swiss
family with several members suffering from occipital and nervus intermedius neuralgia alone or in combination. We suggest that peripheral
sensory anastomoses or central convergence of afferent pathways could explain neuralgia affecting two cranial nerves. The pedigree has two
main characteristics: (1) affected individuals in two generations and (2) in the first generation the father is affected, in the second
generation all women are affected, and none of the men. This is suggestive of an X-linked dominant or an autosomal dominant mode of
inheritance. Most cranial neuralgias occur sporadically, although familial cases have been described. Familial trigeminal neuralgia (TN) has
been reported in 1–2% of cases consistent with an autosomal dominant inheritance [1, 2]. In some of the affected families an association
with autosomal dominant Charcot–Marie-Tooth disease (hereditary sensorimotor polyneuropathy type 1 with demyelination) has been described
[3, 4]. Co-occurrence of familial TN and other cranial nerve disorders have been reported, for instance with contralateral hemifacial spasm
. In 1979 Knuckey and Gubbay published a family where the grandfather suffered from trigeminal neuralgia, his son from trigeminal and
glossopharyngeal neuralgia and his granddaughter from glossopharyngeal neuralgia. We present a Swiss family of which several members
experienced occipital and nervus intermedius neuralgia (alone or in combination). Some additionally suffered from somnambulism, or migraine.
To the best of our knowledge no cases of familial occipital or nervus intermedius neuralgia have been published. Case 1 is the index patient
presenting for cranial and ear pain at the Pain Clinic of the Center for Dental and Oral Medicine, University of Zurich. Two of her sisters
(cases 2 and 3) were seen during a pain-free interval. All agreed to a neurological exam at the Neurological Outpatient Clinic, University
Hospital, Zurich. The pedigree of this family is shown in Fig. 1.Fig. 1Pedigree of a Swiss family with cranial neuralgia (vertical lines),
somnambulism (grey background) and migraine (horizontal lines). One or more of these conditions are overlaid on circles (females, F) and
squares (males, M). F1947 means: female, born in 1947. Clinical details are given in the text Pedigree of a Swiss family with cranial
neuralgia (vertical lines), somnambulism (grey background) and migraine (horizontal lines). One or more of these conditions are overlaid on
circles (females, F) and squares (males, M). F1947 means: female, born in 1947. Clinical details are given in the text A 61-year-old woman
was seen in our pain clinic for recurrent lancinating pain deep in her right ear and parieto-occipital region. She dated the first bout of
deep lancinating right ear pain back to when she was 22 years old. An ear–nose–throat exam revealed no abnormalities. After a few days this
initial pain radiated to the right parieto-occipital region and jaw consisting of a series of stabs, lasting typically a few seconds and
occurring several times per day. After a few weeks the pain disappeared and the patient did not experience a similar episode until the age
of 37. Since then she has been suffering from recurrent pain episodes deep in her right ear and the parieto-occipital region which typically
last for several weeks, with an average of two to eight attacks per day. Pain-free intervals last between 3 and 12 months. Attacks can be
triggered by light touch and cold stimuli to the right cheek and parieto-occipital region. They are not accompanied by trigemino-autonomic
signs such as conjunctival injection, tearing, nasal congestion and no circadian pattern has been observed. The neurological exam was normal
apart from tenderness over the right occipital region. No abnormality of the cervical spine was found. An MRI of the brain with contrast
agent including MR-angiography showed hypoplastic vertebral and basilar arteries with dominant collateralisation of the posterior
territories from the carotid arteries as a normal variant. Carbamazepine 400–600 mg/day did not relieve symptoms sufficiently; clonazepam
and metamizole were ineffective. The patient and both, her father and her son suffered from somnambulism during childhood. In addition, for
several years the patient had suffered from migraine without aura fulfilling ICHD-II (International Classification of Headache Disorders,
second edition) criteria occurring two to three times per month. Other noteworthy morbidities include diverticulitis, duodenal ulcer and
nephrolithiasis. The 57-year-old sister of cases 1 and 3 first suffered from a right cranial neuralgia about one year ago. Shortly after
recovery from a common cold, she experienced a sudden lancinating pain deep in her right ear that recurred several times, with pain-free
intervals. After two more days, this ear pain was followed by recurrent “shock-like” pains in the right occipital region, temple and frontal
region radiating into the right jaw. These very painful “shocks” were accompanied by ipsilateral facial tics and occurred several times a
day without circadian pattern. There were no evident mechanical triggers and no trigemino-autonomous symptoms were reported. Mefenamic acid
500 mg every 6 h did not result in significant relief. By the end of three more days all her pains subsided spontaneously without recurring
ever since. The patient also suffered from occasional moderate headaches, yet without accompanying symptoms except for a single headache
with unilateral pulsating pain associated with nausea that occurred several years ago. During childhood she had suffered from somnambulism.
Otherwise her medical history was unremarkable and the neurological exam was normal. The 55-year-old sister of cases 1 and 2 had been
suffering from recurrent facial neuralgia for 10 years. Bouts usually lasting for several days or weeks had been occurring once or twice per
year, particularly in autumn. She then suffered from severe shock-like pain in the right occipito-parietal region that she compares to
“labour-pain”. At symptom onset she also suffered from stabbing pain in her right ear. These attacks occurred every few minutes without any
identifiable trigger. Between attacks she was pain-free but anticipation of the next attack made her feel anxious. The patient occasionally
took paracetamol 500 mg/day without significant improvement. Application of “Chinese oil” to the right occipital region caused a local
burning, but also relieved the pain to some extent. The patient suffered from moderate holocranial headache without accompanying symptoms
about once a year. She was treated for osteoporosis (alendronic acid, calcium carbonate and vitamin D3); otherwise her medical history was
unremarkable and the neurological exam was normal. Family history was reported by cases 1–3. The patients’ father (M1917) had suffered from
somnambulism until young adulthood and from migraine until the age of 55. When he was 60 years old, post-herpetic neuralgia developed after
left-sided ophthalmic herpes zoster infection. He also suffered from recurrent lancinating occipital and temporal pain. Apart from mild
diabetes he was healthy until old age. He died from an intracranial bleeding at the age of 75. The patients’ mother (F1924) was free of any
pain disorders. One other sister (F1944) suffered from recurrent lancinating occipital pain since the age of 40 and had a history of
somnambulism during childhood. She died from breast cancer at the age of 63. According to information from cases 1–3 she was very likely to
have suffered from occipital neuralgia. One brother alive (M1953) also had suffered from a moderate headache without accompanying symptoms
for migraine only in recent years probably related to arterial hypertension. On treatment with beta-blockers for hypertension he had been
free of headaches for more than one year. This patient was interviewed on the phone by one of the authors (F.R.). Three brothers of our
index patient did not suffer from any pain disorders, or somnambulism. Cases 1–3 were considered suffering from occipital neuralgia and
nervus intermedius neuralgia, although not always simultaneously. In the ICHD-II classification the following diagnostic criteria are
required for occipital neuralgia: (a) paroxysmal stabbing pain, with or without persistent aching between paroxysms, in the distribution(s)
of the greater, lesser and/or third occipital nerves, (b) tenderness over the affected nerve and (c) pain is eased temporarily by local
anaesthetic block of the nerve. Our index case clearly fulfils criteria a and b. A local anaesthetic block of the greater occipital nerve
has not been performed yet. However, success of this intervention might not be specific for occipital neuralgia, since infiltration of the
greater occipital nerve is effective in primary headache disorders, such as cluster headache , too. Cases 2 and 3 are also very likely to
suffer from occipital neuralgia, although they are less severely affected. Radiation of pain into frontal, temporal and orofacial regions,
as observed in cases 1 and 2, deserves further comment. As there is evidence of more widespread headaches , frontal and orofacial pain in
occipital neuralgia, our observations are consistent with this diagnosis. In this context it is noteworthy that prolonged hypaesthesia has
been described after greater occipital nerve block, which exemplifies convergence between cervical roots—the origin of the greater occipital
nerve—and trigeminal afferents. The ICHD-II criteria for nervus intermedius neuralgia are the following: (a) pain paroxysms of intermittent
occurrence, lasting for seconds or minutes, in the depth of the ear, (b) presence of a trigger area in the posterior wall of the auditory
canal and (c) not attributed to another disorder. The existence of nervus intermedius neuralgia or geniculate neuralgia as clinical entity
has long been a matter of debate, since otalgia does not always originate in the nervus intermedius or the geniculate ganglion . Sensory
supply of the ear involves other cranial nerves, such as for instance, the glossopharyngeal nerve. A trigger zone in the auditory canal is
apparent only in a minority of patients . In our patients with neuralgiform pain deep in the ear, we assume that nervus intermedius
neuralgia is the most accurate explanation. Familial cranial neuralgias with involvement of two cranial nerves have been previously
described, e.g., trigeminal and glossopharyngeal nerves . Sensory anastomoses between cranial nerves have been described, e.g., between the
facial and trigeminal nerves . In addition, convergence between afferents from the intermediate nerve, descending trigeminal tracts and C2
roots—the origin of the greater occipital nerve—has been proposed [13, 15]. Animal findings point towards extensive convergence of afferents
from the face, teeth, neck and oral mucosa on the trigeminal nucleus caudalis . Therefore peripheral sensory anastomoses or central
convergence of afferent pathways could explain co-occurrence of cranial neuralgia in two nerves. Cases of familial SUNCT (short-lasting
unilateral neuralgiform headache attacks with conjunctival injection and tearing) have been described recently . SUNCT can clinically
resemble TN but has trigemino-autonomic signs such as conjunctival injection and tearing. None of our patients reported any of these signs.
Considering that the father M1917 of our index patient and all his daughters (F1952, F1954 and F1944) were affected from cranial neuralgia
but none of his sons (Fig. 1), an X-linked dominant inheritance can be postulated. Alternatively, an autosomal dominant inheritance, as
described in TN could be assumed. M1917 had also suffered from post-herpetic neuralgia. Recently a case report with occipital neuralgia
evoked by facial herpes zoster infection was described suggesting a similar trigger mechanism in this patient. Increasing age and immune
suppression are well-recognised risk factors for reactivation of varicella zoster virus , which causes herpes zoster. About 20% of patients
with herpes zoster develop post-herpetic neuralgia and genetic susceptibility is assumed . Therefore transmission of genetic vulnerability
to a spectrum of neuralgic pain disorders could be postulated in our family. Some individuals of the present family suffer from cranial
neuralgia and somnambulism, or migraine. The prevalence of somnambulism in childhood was found to be elevated in patients with migraine
yielding speculations that both disorders might have common predisposition factors. Although no gene for sleep-walking has been found yet,
substantial genetic effects are assumed based on population studies. Given the comorbidity of facial neuralgia and somnambulism in this
family, linkage between responsible gene loci could be postulated. Except for autosomal dominant familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) where
several gene loci have been found, genetics of migraine is complex. The majority of genetic association studies with candidate migraine
genes could not be replicated . Since there is no evidence of FHM in our family, no clear hypothesis can be developed. These cases present
the first description of familial occipital and nervus intermedius neuralgia in a Swiss family. In some cases genetic susceptibility for
cranial neuralgias seems to be important. None.
