To the Editor: Buruli ulcer, the third most common mycobacterial disease of humans after tuberculosis and leprosy, is an important
disfiguring and disabling cutaneous infection disease caused by Mycobacterium ulcerans. Buruli ulcer was declared an emerging skin disease
of public health concern by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1998. Although the disease is known to be associated with swampy areas
and environmental changes, the mode of transmission is not yet clearly understood. A possible role for water bugs in the transmission has
been postulated in the last 10 years. In this direction, several researchers have proposed that biting water bugs could be vectors for M.
ulcerans (1). M. ulcerans produces a potent toxin known as mycolactone (2), which lyses dermal cells, leading to the development of
continuously expanding ulcers with undermined edges. Surgery is the only treatment for late lesions, which involves excision of necrotic
tissues, followed by skin grafting. After such treatment, patients suffer from functional limitations, social stigmatization, and the loss
of livelihood (3). Antimicrobial drug treatment is available (a combination of rifampin and streptomycin), but it is effective only for
early lesions (4). The disease is endemic in rural wetlands of tropical countries of Africa, the Americas, and Asia. Over the past decade,
the prevalence of Buruli ulcer was highest in western Africa (3,5), with an alarming increase in detected cases. In central Africa, foci of
Buruli ulcer have been reported in Gabon, Equatorial Guinea, Cameroon, Congo, the Democratic Republic of Congo, and Sudan (6), which are all
neighboring countries of the Central African Republic (CAR). Surprisingly, in CAR, no cases of Buruli ulcer have been reported so far, even
though its presence in this country was suspected in 2006, although not confirmed. This situation motivated us to begin a passive survey in
the hospitals of Bangui, the capital of CAR. We report here 2 confirmed cases of Buruli ulcer that were found through this survey. The 2
patients were admitted in April 2007 to Hôpital de l’Amitié, Bangui, CAR, with extensive skin ulcers, which might correspond to Buruli ulcer
according to WHO guidelines (7). Both patients were farmers from the Ombella M’poko region. They lived on the border of the M’poko River and
carried out daily activities in an aquatic environment. The first patient was a 62-year-old man who had a large ulceration of the right limb
(Figure, panel A). Differential diagnosis eliminated other ulcerative diseases such as drepanocytosis, and the patient was HIV negative. For
bacteriologic diagnosis, 4 samples were taken with sterile cotton swabs from beneath the undermined edges of the ulcer. Proteus mirabilis
was isolated from the lesion, and a few acid-fast bacilli were shown by Ziehl-Neelsen (ZN) staining. Unfortunately, 1 week later, the
patient died of an unknown cause. Patient 1: extensive ulcer of the right limb (A). Patient 2: ulcer of the left ankle before treatment (B)
and 8 weeks after specific antimicrobial drug therapy (C). Scale bars = 12 cm (A), 5 cm (B), and 2 cm (C). The second patient was a man of
the same age who had an ulceration 6.5 cm in diameter on the left ankle (Figure, panel B). His condition had been treated with various
antimicrobial agents without any result. Blood testing showed minor anemia (hemoglobin 12.4 g/dL) and that the patient was HIV negative.
Bacteriologic analysis found no gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, and ZN staining showed the presence of acid-fast bacilli. He
received the specific recommended treatment for M. ulcerans infection (antimicrobial drug regimen: rifampin, 10 mg/kg, and streptomycin, 15
mg/kg), and the lesions had receded 2 months later (Figure, panel C). The identification of M. ulcerans was confirmed by PCR on the basis of
the IS2404 repeated insertion sequences of M. ulcerans as described by Stinear et al. (8). The positive results were confirmed by
quantitative real-time PCR, in the Laboratory of Bacteriology at Central Hospitalier Universistaire, Angers, France, on 2 specific
sequences: IS2404 sequence and ketoreductase B domain of the mycolactone polyketide synthase gene from the plasmid pMUM001 (9). According to
WHO criteria, 2 confirmative test results should be obtained of 4 laboratory tests (ZN staining, positive culture of M.ulcerans, specific
gene amplification, pathognomonic histopathologic features) to establish a definitive diagnosis (7). Concerning the 2 patients in this
study, results of ZN staining and PCR were positive, thus confirming the diagnosis of Buruli ulcer. Samples were inoculated on Löwenstein-
Jensen (LJ) media and incubated at 30°C for 2 months, but the culture did not grow the organism. This result could be accounted for by the
paucity of bacilli in the samples. In conclusion, our study confirms that, although infrequently diagnosed, Buruli ulcer is an endemic
disease in CAR. Identification and control of Buruli ulcer remain difficult in CAR, where this disease is often not considered. Even with
evocative clinical signs, confirmation of diagnosis by biological analysis is still not easy. It is therefore of high importance that the
public health authorities are fully informed and properly trained to identify this neglected disease in the early stages so patients can be
cured before the onset of functional impairment and the appearance of extensive lesions. Further investigation to isolate strains present in
CAR is also essential. Suggested citation for this article: Minime-Lingoupou F, Beyam N, Zandanga G, Manirakiza A, N’Domackrah A, Juimo S,
et al. Buruli ulcer, Central African Republic . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2010 Apr [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1604.090195 We thank N. Komas, E. Nakoune, and M. Huerre for their technical assistance. Also, we are grateful
to those involved in the recruitment of patients. This work was supported by Pasteur Institute, Paris, Association Aide aux Lépreux Emmaüs
Switzerland, the Fondation Française Raoul Follereau, the Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale, and WHO.
