Epstein-Barr virus (EBV)-associated B-cell post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD) is a severe complication following stem
cell transplantation. This is believed to occur as a result of iatrogenic immunosuppression leading to a relaxation of T-cell control of EBV
infection and thus allowing viral reactivation and proliferation of EBV-infected B-lymphocytes. In support of this notion, reduction of
immunosuppressive therapy may lead to regression of PTLD. We present a case of an 18-year-old male developing a monomorphic B-cell PTLD 2
months after receiving an allogenic stem cell transplant for acute lymphoblastic leukemia. Reduction of immunosuppressive therapy led to
regression of lymphadenopathy. Nevertheless, the patient died 3 months afterwards due to extensive graft-vs.-host-disease and sepsis. As a
diagnostic lymph node biopsy was performed only after reduction of immunosuppressive therapy, we are able to study the histopathological
changes characterizing PTLD regression. We observed extensive apoptosis of blast cells, accompanied by an abundant infiltrate comprising
predominantly CD8-positive, Granzyme B-positive T-cells. This observation supports the idea that regression of PTLD is mediated by cytotoxic
T-cells and is in keeping with the observation that T-cell depletion, represents a major risk factor for the development of PTLD. The
Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), a human herpes virus, was first discovered in 1964 in cultured tumour cells from Burkitt lymphoma . Subsequently,
EBV was shown to be ubiquitously distributed, infecting over 90% of the adult human population world wilde. Upon primary infection, B-cells
are immortalized and driven into proliferation. Viral infection in B-cells usually remains latent, i.e., infectious virus is not produced,
and is characterised by the expression of several viral proteins, notably EBV-encoded nuclear antigen (EBNA) 2 and latent membrane protein
(LMP) 1, which are thought to orchestrate virus-induced immortalisation and proliferation of B-cells. As a consequence, EBV-specific
cytotoxic (CD8-positive) T-cells are generated which control EBV infection and lead to the establishment of an asymptomatic life-long virus
persistence in memory B-cells with minimal viral gene expression. This, however, can change in transplant recipients in whom iatrogenic
immunosuppression leads to a relaxation of T-cell control of EBV infection allowing the re-emergence of proliferating EBV-infected B-cells
and leading to post-transplantation lymphoproliferative disorders (PTLDs) (for review see Hsieh 1999 and Loren 2003 ). According to the WHO
classification PTLD comprise five subtypes, i.e., early lesions (plasmacytic hyperplasia and infectious mononucleosis-like PTLD),
polymorphic PTLD, monomorphic B-cell PTLD, monomorphic T/NK-cell PTLD and classical Hodgkin lymphoma-like PTLD with the first two
representing EBV-driven B-cell proliferations of poly- and monoclonal origin. Risk factors for the development of a PTLD after HSCT (human
stem cell transplantation) include T-cell depletion, age, HLA-mismatch, specific antilymphocyte anti-graft-versus-host disease therapies,
splenectomy and HSCT for primary immunodeficiency disorders . The treatment options for B-cell PTLDs include reduction of immunosuppression,
antiviral therapy, interferon alpha therapy, CD20 antibody therapy and chemotherapy. In this report, we present a case of EBV-associated
PTLD following allogenic stem cell transplantation for acute lymphoblastic leukemia with evidence of tumor regression subsequent to
reduction of immunosuppression, showing for the first time the histopathological changes within lymph nodes after reduction of
immunosuppression. An 18-year-old male patient presented with tiredness, night sweats, dyspnoea at exercise and shivering. The blood count
showed anemia (Hb 3,1 mmol/l and thrombocythopenia (thrombocytes 143/nl). The white blood cell count and the differential blood smear were
normal (leukocytes 6800/μl: granulocytes 60%; lymphocytes 36%; monocytes 2%; eosinophils 2%; blasts not detectable). A diagnosis of acute
lymphoblastic leukemia (L2 according to the FAB classification) was made based on bone marrow trephine biopsy showing dense lymphoblastic
infiltrates (about 90%) with a severely reduced residual haematopoiesis. The tumor cells were positive for CD19 and cytoplasmatic IgM as
well as CD10, CD34 and TdT consistent with ALL. The myeloid marker CD13 was aberrantly coexpressed. No expression was observed for CD3. FACS
analysis showed predominantly immature B-lymphocytes, strongly positive for CD34 and CD10 confirming the diagnosis of a common-B-ALL. PCR-
analysis revealed no evidence of BCR-ABL fusion transcripts. Immediately after diagnosis, primary chemotherapy was started with
dexamethasone, cyclophosphamide and methotrexate 15 mg intrathecally for 5 days. Subsequently, an induction chemotherapy phase I according
to the GMALL 07/2003 protocol (German Multicenter Study Group for Adult ALL) was performed with dexamethasone, vincristine, daunorubicine
and asparaginase. During the induction therapy a prophylactic irradiation of the central nervous system was performed (24 Gy). Complete
remission was achieved. However, since FACS analysis of the bone marrow showed a residual common-B-ALL population of 2%, consolidation
therapy (according to GMALL) was completed and an unrelated allogenic stem cell donor was identified (HLA-status: A, B, DRB1, DQB1
identical, C: mismatch). Eight months after the initial diagnosis, allogenic peripheral stem cell transplantation was performed: the
conditioning regimen consisted of 12Gy total body irritation in 6 fractions with shielding of the lungs (10Gy), cyclophosphamide dose 60
mg/kg/d at 2 days and ATG (rabbit) 1000 mg/d = 14,7 mg/kg/d at day -4 to -1 before first PSCT. Graft-versus-host prophylaxis consisted of
cyclosporin A, MTX and prednisolon. Whereas no early complications were noted, mucositis later required parenteral alimentation. Because of
fever of unknown origin the patient was treated with antibiotics for 28 days after transplantation, when the patient was referred to a
rehabilitation center. Seven weeks post-transplantation, the patient developed fever (up to 39°C) and a rapidly progressing painful
lymphadenopathy at multiple sites (submandibular, axillar and inguinal). CrP and creatinine increased and he developed leuko- and
thrombocytopenia: He was therefore was referred to the hospital for further diagnosis. Medication at transferral included diflucane® 200
(fluconazol 200 mg) twice a day i.v. and ceftriaxone 2 g i.v. per day. The dose of sandimmune® optoral was reduced from 150 mg to 100 mg
upon arrival at the hospital. An infection with EBV and a reactivation of CMV could be confirmed with PCR-analysis of peripheral blood and
after medication with zovirax® (acyclovir), cymevene® (gancyclovir) was used for therapy for 9 days (was heißt das genau?). Subsequently,
the CMV and EBV-PCR was negative again. Atypical lymphocytes were found in the peripheral blood. FACS- analysis showed no evidence of
recurrent pre-B-ALL suggesting virus-induced alterations. A high percentage of activated T-cells and a marked shift of T-cell subpopulations
(CD4/CD8: 0,03) were conspicuous. Histopathological examination of bone marrow trephine biopsy showed a moderately hypocellular bone marrow
with borderline maturation abnormalities of erythro- and megakaryopoesis, reactive eosinophilia and increased siderin in histiocytic cells.
No lymphocytic or lymphoblastic infiltrates were detectable. Overall, the histological picture was considered to be consistent with drug-
induced bone marrow toxicity. CT-scan showed splenic enlargement and cervical, axillary, inguinal and abdominal lymphadenopathy. The brain
was normal with no evidence of tumor infiltration. Cervical lymph node biopsy was performed 1 week after transferral to the hospital and 1
week subsequent to the reduction of immunosuppressive therapy. This revealed complete effacement of lymph node architecture (fig. 1a-c) due
to infiltration by CD20-positive lymphoid blasts (Fig. 1d) with high proliferative activity (Mib-1 80-90%: fig. 1l). The vast majority of
infiltrating cells were EBV-positive as demonstrated by EBER-specific in situ hybridisation (not shown). Scattered blast cells were positive
for EBNA2 (fig. 1g) as well as LMP1 (fig. 1h), indicating a type III of EBV latency. PCR analysis showed a monoclonal rearrangement of the
immunoglobulin heavy chain gene locus. Thus, the diagnosis of a monoclonal, monomorphic EBV-associated B-cell PTLD was made. Of note, focal
areas of necrosis (fig. 1a: arrow head) and extensive apoptotic activity with many macrophages engulfing apoptotic nuclear bodies (fig. 1b,
c, e, f) were found. The B-cell proliferation was accompanied by an extensive CD3-positive T-cell infiltrate (fig. 1j) consisting
predominantly of CD8/perforin/granzymeB-positive cytotoxic T-cells (fig. 1k-m) with only very few CD4 positive cells present (fig. 1n).
Chimerism testing showed that T-and B-cells, found in the lymph node, were 100% of donor origin. On conventional HE staining a lymph node
with vanished lymph node structure and focal necrosis and perinodal lymphatic infiltrates were seen (a). At higher magnification (b, c), a
blastic infiltrate with strong apoptotic activity and many macrophages engulfing apoptotic nuclear bodes were visible. Immunolabeling
confirmed the B-cellular lineage of most blastic cells (d: CD20) with macrophages cells lying in between (e+f: CD68). Part of the blastic
cells was positive for EBNA2 (g) and EBV late membrane antigen (h: LMP). Overall, there was a high proliferative activity (i: Mib-1
positivity in about 80-90% of B-blasts). Additionally, a lot of CD3 (j)/CD8 (k) positive T-cells were interspersed, with hardly any
CD4-positive T-helper cells identifiable (l). The T-cells were positive for perforin (m) and granzyme B (n). (a-c: hematoxylin eosin
stainings; d-n: immunostainings with the antibodies indicated above) (magnification bars: a: 500 μm; b: 100 μm; c: 22 μm; d, e, g, i-n: 50
μm; f, h, l: 40 μm). CT-scans taken 1 week after biopsy showed regression of lymphadenopathy. Virological testing was finally negative for
EBV and CMV. The patient achieved complete remission and was discharged 1 month after initial development of lymphadenopathy. Two months
later the patient was referred again to the hospital with diarrhoea and emesis, fever and shivering due to severe GvHD grade II. Despite
intensive therapy the general condition of the patient worsened. He developed septicaemia and he became somnolent due to encephalopathy. He
developed severe pulmonary oedema and died 12 months after initial diagnosis of ALL and 3 months after initial diagnosis of PTLD due to
multi-organ failure. At post-mortem examination, no residues of ALL or PTLD were found. The bone marrow was significantly hypocellular with
a dramatic reduction of all three hematopoietic cell lines. Evidence of GvHD was found in stomach, small intestine and colon, and there were
disseminated hyaline micro-thrombi in lungs and myocardium. Petechial bleeding was seen in small intestine, ileum and colon and there was
extensive hemorrhage in the spleen. In addition, there was biventricular cardiac hypertrophy and evidence of congestive heart failure. EBV-
associated PTLD is an important complication of stem cell transplantation. In healthy individuals, primary EBV infection induces a virus-
driven B-cell proliferation which may manifest clinically as infectious mononucleosis and which eventually is controlled by the development
of a virus-specific T-cell immunity. This is directed against virus-encoded lytic and latent proteins and allows the establishment of life-
long virus persistence in memory B-cells. While virus persistence remains asymptomatic in the vast majority of individuals, occasionally
EBV-associated tumours may develop, mostly of lymphoid origin. It is generally assumed that some degree of failure of the immune system to
control EBV infection is involved in the pathogenesis of these neoplasms . This failure may be in the microenvironment of the tumour cells.
E.g., it is assumed that modulation of local immune reactions by cytokines produced in the tumour cells contributes to the development of
EBV-associated Hodgkin lymphoma. On the other hand, failure of EBV-specific immunity may be systemic, as in transplant recipients subjected
to iatrogenic immunosuppression . The notion that failure of T-cell control of EBV infection is a crucial factor in the pathogenesis of PTLD
is supported by several observations. PTLD cells frequently express EBV-encoded latent proteins, including EBNA2, which are recognised by
EBV-specific T-cells in immunocompetent individuals . Moreover it has long been known that PTLDs may regress upon reduction or withdrawal of
immunosuppressive therapy . Also, EBV-specific cytotoxic T-cells may induce regression of the outgrowth of EBV-transformed B-cells in vitro
and this effect is abolished by cyclosporine A . Finally, adoptive transfer of EBV-specific T-cells has proved successful in the treatment
and prevention of PTLD . Here we present, to our knowledge, the first description of the histopathological features of PTLD regression
following reduction of immunosuppressive therapy. These were characterised by two main features. We demonstrate an intense infiltration of
the affected lymph node by cytotoxic T-cells expressing CD8, perforin, and granzymeB. In addition, we observed extensive apoptosis of blast
cells. The resulting apoptotic nuclear bodies were phagocytosed by macrophages. The latter feature is reminiscent of, e. g., Burkitt
lymphoma and in germinal centre reactions, where a a high cellular turnover is accompanied by intense apoptotic activity. Although we cannot
prove this directly, in the context of previous studies cited above, our results strongly suggest that apoptotic regression of the
neoplastic EBV-positive B-cells was triggered by the re-emergence of EBV-specific T-cells in this case. This notion is well in line with
current understanding of EBV-specific T-cell immunity . In contrast, e. g. in Burkitt lymphoma a high spontaneous apoptotic rate is observed
in the absence of cytotoxic T-cells. This might be related to the absence of antiapopotic factors such as bcl-2, which typically is not
expressed in Burkitt lymphoma. Similarly, in physiological germinal centre reactions, in the absence of bcl-2 expression apoptosis is
triggered by a lack of survival signals rather than cytotoxic activity of T-cells. This role of cytotoxic T-cells in the control of EBV
infection explains, why T-cell depletion via antithymocyte globulin or anti-CD3 monoclonal antibodies represents a major risk factor for the
development of EBV-associated PTLD . As the use of HLA-mismatched donor transplants usually requires more intensive immunosuppression, this
additionally increases the risk for developing PTLD. Also, children and teenagers are at high risk of developing PTLD , most likely because
an adequate primary immune response to EBV infection cannot be mounted under immunosuppressive therapy and because patients of this age
group are frequently EBV seronegative before transplantation . Although regression of PTLD following reduction or withdrawal of
immunosuppressive therapy has been reported previously, the prognosis generally remains poor and treatment now includes rituximab and
chemotherapy . In our case, reduction of immunosuppression without further treatment led to a reduction of lymphadenopathy with full
clinical remission accompanied by the development of GvHD. Patients with PTLD following stem cell transplantation usually die from
progressive EBV-associated lymphoproliferation, sepsis, severe GvHD or relapse of the underlying haematological malignancy . In our case,
combined sepsis and GvHD were the leading causes of death and post mortem examination confirmed complete remission of PTLD. In summary, we
present a case of a case of PTLD after stem cell transplantation with complete remission following reduction of immunosuppressive therapy.
We were able to show for the first time to our knowledge the histomorphological features occurring in PTLD lymph nodes in this scenario
which are characterised by apoptotic cell death of EBV-infected B-blasts triggered by cytotoxic-T-cells. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. AK collected the data and was the main author of the manuscript. AM helped with evaluting the data. WP and DN were
the treating oncologist. NS contributed to writing up the manuscript. GN was the consiliary pathologist. TA was the senior supervisor of the
work performed. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
