I.C. Moura and O. Hermine contributed equally to this paper. C. Callens’ present address is Laboratoire d’Hématologie, Hôpital Necker-
Enfants Malades, AP-HP, Paris, 75015 France. Differentiating agents have been proposed to overcome the impaired cellular differentiation in
acute myeloid leukemia (AML). However, only the combinations of all-trans retinoic acid or arsenic trioxide with chemotherapy have been
successful, and only in treating acute promyelocytic leukemia (also called AML3). We show that iron homeostasis is an effective target in
the treatment of AML. Iron chelating therapy induces the differentiation of leukemia blasts and normal bone marrow precursors into
monocytes/macrophages in a manner involving modulation of reactive oxygen species expression and the activation of mitogen-activated protein
kinases (MAPKs). 30% of the genes most strongly induced by iron deprivation are also targeted by vitamin D3 (VD), a well known
differentiating agent. Iron chelating agents induce expression and phosphorylation of the VD receptor (VDR), and iron deprivation and VD act
synergistically. VD magnifies activation of MAPK JNK and the induction of VDR target genes. When used to treat one AML patient refractory to
chemotherapy, the combination of iron-chelating agents and VD resulted in reversal of pancytopenia and in blast differentiation. We propose
that iron availability modulates myeloid cell commitment and that targeting this cellular differentiation pathway together with conventional
differentiating agents provides new therapeutic modalities for AML. Acute myeloid leukemia (AML) is a heterogeneous malignant disorder
originating from mutations in progenitor cells that lead to the unrestrained proliferation of undifferentiated myeloblasts (Löwenberg et
al., 1999). There is a general consensus that the molecular events leading to AML leukemogenesis occur as a multistep process (Kelly and
Gilliland, 2002; Gilliland et al., 2004). Those events are broadly classified into two groups: gene alterations that confer a proliferative
and/or survival advantage to hematopoietic progenitors (e.g., RAS, FLT3, or KIT mutations) and gene alterations/point mutations in
transcription factors or transcriptional coactivators (e.g., CEBPα and NPM1) that affect differentiation (Fröhling et al., 2005; Roumier et
al., 2006; Renneville et al., 2008). The most important transcription factors that have been implicated in the myelomonocytic development
are PU-1 for early myeloid commitment, C/EBP for granulocyte maturation, and vitamin D3 (VD) receptor (VDR) and MafB for monocyte-macrophage
differentiation (Sieweke and Graf, 1998; Friedman, 2002; Mueller et al., 2002; Gemelli et al., 2008). The potential of the currently
available cytotoxic chemotherapies to treat AML might have reached its limit (Löwenberg et al., 1999; Ravandi et al., 2007). Moreover, the
majority of patients with AML are 60 yr of age or older and, in this population, high-dose chemotherapy is associated with a high rate of
morbidity and mortality. Although results of new therapeutic strategies have improved steadily in younger adults over the last 20 yr, there
have been fewer improvements in outcome among elderly patients (Löwenberg et al., 2009). Based on the emerging knowledge of the biology of
AML, new targeted therapeutic approaches need to be developed to interrupt proliferation, induce apoptosis, and/or override the
differentiation block. The current treatment modality for the induction of a terminal differentiation program in AML has only been achieved
in acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL or AML3) by the use of differentiating agents combined with chemotherapy (Chen et al., 1994; Zhu et
al., 2001; Wang and Chen, 2008). In most of the cases, APLs are characterized by the translocation t(15;17), which encodes a fusion of the
promyelocytic leukemia and retinoic acid receptor α proteins. The use of all-trans retinoic acid (ATRA) with chemotherapy was a major
breakthrough in APL therapy. It has dramatically improved the prognosis from poor to a high cure rate (∼90% of patients; Wang and Chen,
2008). The use of arsenic trioxide (ATO) since the early 1990s further improved the clinical outcome of refractory or relapsed as well as
newly diagnosed APL (Wang and Chen, 2008). Current evidences are now available to show that differentiation is not the only mechanism
explaining the therapeutic efficacy of ATRA or ATO in clearing APL, as retinoic acid also triggers growth arrest of leukemia initiating
cells (Nasr et al., 2008). Like ATRA, VD belongs to the steroid superfamily and plays a critical role in regulating numerous cellular and
physiological responses. VD associates with its cognate receptor (VDR) to form a heterodimer with the retinoid X receptor. This complex then
binds to the VD responsive element, which is present in the promoter region of target genes, thereby inducing changes in gene transcription
(Hughes et al., 2009). VD also activates a variety of protein kinases, such as the three families of mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK;
ERK, JNK, and p38), protein kinase C, or Src family kinases by alternative signaling pathways which are not fully characterized (Wang et
al., 2003). The active metabolite of VD, 1α,25(OH)2D3, which is known as calcitriol, has antiproliferative effects, can activate apoptotic
pathways, and can inhibit angiogenesis (Deeb et al., 2007). In the hematopoietic system, numerous studies on AML blasts, leukemic cell
lines, and primary myeloid precursors showed that VD induces cell differentiation into monocytes (Abe et al., 1981; Koeffler et al., 1984;
Hmama et al., 1999; Bastie et al., 2004; Ji and Studzinski, 2004; Gemelli et al., 2008; Hughes et al., 2009). Encouraging clinical trials
have suggested that VD could be effective as a differentiating agent in the treatment of AML and myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS), but
hypercalcemia has limited its use (Ferrero et al., 2004; Srivastava and Ambrus, 2004; Deeb et al., 2007). Iron (Fe) is required as a
cofactor for several critical cellular enzymes involved in energy metabolism and cell proliferation and is therefore essential for all
living cells. Iron exists in two oxidation states, the ferrous (Fe2+) and the ferric (Fe3+) forms, which participate to the generation of
reactive oxygen species (ROS) through the Fenton reaction. In this process, free cytosolic iron generates hydroxide anions and hydroxyl
radicals from hydrogen peroxide (Fe2+ + H202↔Fe3+ + OH− + OH•; Fenton et al., 1964) which can lead to cellular damages (Davies, 2005).
Therefore, iron chelators have been proposed to be anti-oxidant agents (Kalyanaraman, 2007). However, iron chelators have also been shown to
induce the generation of ROS under specific conditions (Chaston et al., 2004). The transferrin receptor (CD71/TfR1) is an evolutionarily
conserved receptor that is essential for the uptake of iron in mammalian cells (Trowbridge and Shackelford, 1986; Lim et al., 1987; Daniels
et al., 2006b). Cancer cells overexpress TfR1 and are more sensitive to iron depletion than their normal counterparts, most probably because
of their high proliferative capacities (Faulk et al., 1980; Gatter et al., 1983). TfR1 is a validated target for anti-cancer therapy using
both mAbs and drug-conjugated transferrin (Trowbridge and Domingo, 1981; Daniels et al., 2006a). We have previously characterized an anti-
TfR1 antibody (A24) that exhibits potential activity as a therapeutic anti-cancer agent (Moura et al., 2001). A24 specifically binds to
TfR1high cells, competes with iron-loaded transferrin (Fe-Tf) for receptor binding, and impairs receptor recycling, thereby drastically
impairing iron uptake (Moura et al., 2004; Lepelletier et al., 2007; Callens et al., 2008). Iron chelators have also been proposed for
several years as an alternative anti-cancer therapy and effectively induce cell growth arrest and apoptosis in cancer cells in vitro and in
vivo (Richardson et al., 1994, 2009; Le and Richardson, 2004; Whitnall et al., 2006). The molecular mechanisms underlying the anti-tumor
effect of iron-chelating therapeutic approaches still need to be fully elucidated (Napier et al., 2005; Fu and Richardson, 2007). We aimed
to characterize these mechanisms and to validate their potential value in AML therapy. In this paper, we show in vivo, in vitro, and ex vivo
that targeting iron homeostasis induces blast differentiation toward the monocyte lineage, which is dependent on the modulation of ROS
levels and the activation of the MAPK pathway. Importantly, iron deprivation induces VDR gene expression and VDR phosphorylation, providing
the rationale for the combination of iron chelation and VD therapies. The synergistic effect of this association amplified the activation of
the MAPK–JNK pathway and VDR-targeted genes. Finally, we provide data, in the form of a case report, showing the efficacy of this
combination in the induction of tumor cell differentiation in an AML patient. This study provides the proof of concept for the use of
combination of iron chelators and VD in AML therapy. To gain new insights in the molecular mechanisms involved in the anti-tumor activity of
iron-chelating therapeutic approaches, we sought to identify genes that are affected both by iron chelators (deferoxamine and deferasirox )
and by impairment of Fe-Tf uptake (using the anti-TfR1 mAb A24 [Moura et al., 2004; Lepelletier et al., 2007; Callens et al., 2008]).
Indeed, A24 targets TfR1 (the major receptor involved in the iron entry in the cells), whereas iron chelators can also capture other
bivalent ions (e.g. Mn2+, Cu2+, or Zn2+) which could modulate genes irrelevant to iron homeostasis. Thus, identification of overlapping
genes allows us to avoid selecting off-target genes. We focused our first studies in a cell line (HL60) to avoid heterogeneity in the data
related to the multiple genetic events that have been implicated in AML oncogenesis. An analysis of the collected data revealed that 105
genes were similarly modulated by the three iron deprivation agents (Fig. 1 a and Table S1). Among these genes, several were related to cell
differentiation. Markers of monocytes or activated macrophages were up-regulated, whereas granulocyte markers were down-regulated (Fig. 1
b). These results were confirmed by real-time quantitative PCR and extended to other AML cell lines from different AML subtypes (Fig. S1 a).
Iron deprivation induces monocyte differentiation of AML cells. (a) Unsupervised microarray analysis of HL60 cells after a 48-h exposure to
10 µg/ml of anti-TfR1 antibody (mAb A24), 5 µM DFO, or 3 µM DFX. The color intensity represents the ratio of expression in drug-treated
compared with control cells. The relative overexpression and underexpression compared with controls are shown in red and green, respectively
(top). A Venn diagram of genes induced by iron deprivation (bottom) shows that only a subset of genes (105) have a shared altered expression
between the different iron deprivation treatments, in contrast to many genes (1,094) that are altered by the iron chelators DFO and DFX.
Genes with an intensity >50 and a p-value <0.001 were considered relevant. (b) Fold change variations of gene expression in differentiated
cells relative to untreated cells. A24 and the iron chelators up-regulated monocyte/macrophage-specific genes and down-regulated myelocyte-
specific genes. Up-regulation is represented on the positive scale, and down-regulation is indicated on the negative scale. (c) Fold
increase of CD14 and CD11b expression after flow cytometry (mean fluorescence intensity relative to untreated cells) in HL60 cell line
treated with 10 µg/ml A24, 5 µM DFO, or 3 µM DFX for 72 h (mean ± SEM, n = 3). (d) Fold increase of CD14 and CD11b expression evaluated by
flow cytometry (MFI relative to untreated cells) in U937 (white), THP1 (dark gray), OCI-AML3 (black), and NB4 (light gray) cell lines
treated with 10 µg/ml A24, 5 µM DFO, or 3 µM DFX for 72 h (mean ± SEM, n = 3). (e) MGG-stained cytospins of HL60 cells treated with 250 nM
VD, 10 µg/ml A24, 5 µM DFO, or 3 µM DFX for 72 h. The control cells show an immature myeloblastic phenotype: a high nucleus-to-cytoplasm
ratio, a hyperbasophilic cytoplasm, and numerous azurophilic granules. The A24- or iron chelator–treated cells show a decrease in the
nucleus-to-cytoplasm ratio, the loss of granules, and cytoplasmic basophilia and irregular cytoplasmic contours, all typical of mature
monocytes. Bars, 10 µm. Representative photos of three independent experiments are shown. (f) FACS analysis of CD14 expression in HL60 cells
treated with A24 (green line), DFO, and DFX (blue lines) in the presence or absence of 5 µM FeCl3 (gray line) for 72 h. The filled
histograms represent staining with the isotype control antibody. One representative experiment of three experiments is shown. *, P < 0.05;
**, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. We further tested the ability of iron deprivation to override the block of cell differentiation observed in
AML cells. We followed the expression of CD14 and CD11b monocyte cell surface markers (Kansas et al., 1990) after iron deprivation induced
by treatment with A24, DFO, or DFX. Expression of both markers was induced by iron deprivation, suggesting that cells underwent
differentiation (Fig. 1 c) similar to VD-treated cells (Fig. S1 b). Up-regulation of monocyte cell surface markers, initially detected in
myeloblastic cells (HL60), was also observed in cell lines from myelo/monoblastic (OCI AML-3), monoblastic (U937 and THP1), and
promyelocytic (NB4) origin (Fig. 1 d). Induction of cell surface markers in treated cells was accompanied by the characteristic cytological
modifications of monocytes, i.e., cytoplasm enlargement and loss of both cytoplasmic basophilia and azurophilic granules (Fig. 1 e and Fig.
S1 c). Moreover, HL60 differentiated cells acquired functional properties of monocytes such as esterase activity (Fig. S1 d).
Supplementation of cultures with an excess of soluble iron abrogated expression of differentiation markers induced by iron deprivation (Fig.
1 f) but not by ATRA and VD (Fig. S2), confirming the role of iron availability in AML cell differentiation. We next investigated whether
primary cells from AML patients could also be sensitive to iron deprivation therapy. Fresh AML blasts from different AML subtypes
(categorized according to the French-American-British classification system [Bennett et al., 1976]) were isolated at the time of diagnosis
(Table S2, complete list of AML subtypes and biological parameters for the patients used in this study) and were cultured in the presence of
A24 and DFO. An arrest of cell proliferation (Fig. 2 a) and induction of apoptosis (Fig. 2 b) were observed concomitantly to CD14 and CD11b
expression (Fig. 2 c), indicating that, similar to cell lines, blasts from different AML subtypes, even if heterogeneous in the oncogenic
events leading to their arrest in differentiation (Löwenberg et al., 1999), are susceptible to differentiation therapy based on iron
deprivation. Iron deprivation inhibits proliferation and induces differentiation of AML blasts. (a) Fresh AML blasts or HL60 cells were
cultured with increasing concentrations of A24 (0–20 µg/ml), DFO (0–50 µM), DFX (0–10 µM), or VP16 (0–100 ng/ml) for 72 h, followed by a
16-h period of -thymidine incorporation. Thymidine incorporation (percentage over the control) was plotted as the mean ± SEM of grouped
M0/M1/M2 (n = 6) or M4/M5 (n = 9) subtypes patients. Cell proliferation for each patient was measured in triplicate. (b) HL60 cells were
cultured in the presence or absence of 10 µg/ml A24 or 5 µM DFO for 72 h. Early and late apoptosis was evaluated by flow cytometry using
annexin V–FITC/PI labeling (mean ± SEM, n = 3). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. (c) CD14 and CD11b expression in blasts from AML
patients treated with A24 and DFO for 72 h. The expression of the differentiation markers was normalized by calculating the fold increase of
the MFI relative to the control cells. The filled symbols represent the M0/M1/M2 AML subtypes, and the M4/M5 subtypes are empty symbols. One
representative experiment of three is presented for each patient. The mean (horizontal bars) of the eight patients is shown. To verify if
iron homeostasis plays a role in the differentiation of primary granulocytes and monocytes, we tested the effect of iron deprivation on
hematopoietic cord blood progenitors. Iron deprivation agents did not change the total number of colonies derived from CD34+ cells in
methylcellulose plates (unpublished data). However, treatment with the iron chelators resulted in an increased number of bipotent CFU-GM
colonies (Fig. 3 a) and enhanced the ratio of CFU-M to the detriment of CFU-G colonies (Fig. 3 b), suggesting that chelating iron from
hematopoietic precursors induces commitment toward the monocyte over the granulocyte lineage. As expected, because iron is necessary for
hemoglobin synthesis (Adamson, 1994) the number of CFU-E colonies was reduced by all the iron deprivation agents (Fig. 3 c). Iron
deprivation induces the differentiation of primary progenitors into monocytes. CD34+ cord blood progenitors were plated in methylcellulose
containing a cocktail of cytokines (Epo, SCF, IL-3, G-CSF, and GM-CSF) in the presence or absence of 10 µg/ml A24, 5 µM DFO, or 3 µM DFX.
After 14 d, colonies of each lineage were counted (mean ± SEM, n = 3). (a and b) Variations of colonies are represented as the fold increase
of CFU-GM (a) or the ratio of CFU-M/CFU-G (b). (c) Fold decrease of CFU-E. (d) Cell numbers and viability measured by Trypan blue dye
exclusion during culture. One representative experiment of three is shown. All counts were performed in triplicates. (e) After 48 h of
culture, the mRNA expression of HOXA10, EGR1, and MAFB was quantified by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to the expression of GAPDH (mean
± SEM, n = 3). (f) Representative photos taken at the end of culture (day 18) are shown. Polymorphonuclear neutrophils are present in the
majority of the control cultures, whereas monocytes and macrophages are predominantly present under iron deprivation conditions. The
histograms represent the percentage of each leukocyte population from MGG-colored cytospins at day 18 (mean ± SEM, three independent counts
of 100 cells each). Bars, 10 µm. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. When differentiation of CD34+ cord blood progenitors into
granulocytes was induced in liquid cultures (Fig. S3), >65% of cells were polymorphonuclear cells after 18 d. We therefore added A24 or iron
chelators to these granulocyte-oriented cell cultures every 3 d, at concentrations which did not induce cell toxicity (unpublished data).
Under these conditions, iron deprivation did not affect cord blood cell proliferation (Fig. 3 d) but rather enhanced their commitment toward
the monocyte lineage because there was a consistent up-regulation of genes coding for transcription factors specific for the monocyte
lineage, such as HOXA10, EGR1, and MafB (Sieweke et al., 1996; Kelly and Gilliland, 2002; Taghon et al., 2002; Friedman, 2007; Fig. 3 e).
Cytological examination confirmed that the monocyte cell number was higher in iron-poor cultures (Fig. 3 f). Therefore, in hematopoiesis,
iron availability could be an important factor in determining whether a hematopoietic progenitor cell differentiates toward a monocyte or a
granulocyte. ROS production is highly dependent on the intracellular labile iron pool (LIP). Therefore, to investigate whether iron-
chelating agents modulate ROS levels in AML cells, we used a metallo-sensor fluorescent probe (calcein) for LIP measurements (Espósito et
al., 2002) and dihydrorhodamine 123 (DHR123) as an indicator of the degree of general oxidative stress or dihydroethidium (DHE) to monitor
cellular superoxide production (Owusu-Ansah et al., 2008). As expected, previous addition of iron deprivation agents decreased LIP levels in
AML cells and DFX was the fastest and most efficient compound (Fig. S4, a–c). Iron deprivation of cells by DFX (the most permeant chelators)
was readily accompanied by ROS formation (Fig. 4 a), which was found to be concentration (Fig. 4 b) and time (Fig. 4 c) dependent. We
further confirmed the specificity of ROS detection by preincubating iron-deprived cells with the anti-oxidant N-acetyl-l-cysteine (NAC; Fig.
4 d). Modulation of ROS levels controls monocyte differentiation in AML cells. (a) Representative flow cytometry analysis showing ROS
production by NB4 cells. Cells were stained for 30 min at 37°C with 0.5 µM DHR123 or 1 µM DHE and further treated with 3 µM DFX (continuous
line) or not (filled histograms) for 90 min. One representative experiment of three is presented. (b) ROS production in AML cell lines (HL60
and OCI-AML3 cells) is dose dependent. Cells were labeled with DHR123 (as described in a) and treated with 3 µM DFX (continuous line) or 0.3
µM DFX (dashed line) for 90 min or not (filled histograms). One representative experiment of three is presented. (c) Time-dependent
production of ROS. NB4 cells were treated with 3 µM DFX for 90 min (continuous line) or 150 min (dashed line). ROS production was evaluated
by flow cytometry. One representative experiment of three is presented. (d) Representative flow cytometry data showing specificity of the
ROS production by NB4 cells. Cells were stained for 30 min at 37°C with 0.5 µM DHR123 and further treated with 3 µM DFO. Abrogated ROS
detection is shown in cell cultures where DFO was added in the presence of the anti-oxidant NAC (dashed line) as compared with control
untreated cells (filled histogram). One representative experiment of three is presented. (e) CD14 expression (fold change) in HL60 cells
treated with 10 µg/ml A24 and 5 µM DFO in the presence or absence of the anti-oxidant agents (NAC and PDTC) for 72 h (mean ± SEM, n = 3).
(f) CD14 expression in OCI-AML3 and NB4 cells treated with DFO in the presence or in the absence of the anti-oxidant agent NAC for 72 h
(mean ± SEM, n = 3). ***, P < 0.001. Iron chelators had opposite effects depending on whether AML cells were treated during short (1–3 h;
Fig. 4, a–d) or long (16–18 h; Fig. S4, d–f) periods of time. In addition, in HL60-cultured cells treated for 16–18 h with iron chelators,
the H2O2-mediated generation of ROS was abrogated in a dose-dependent manner (Fig. S4, d and e), whereas ATO induced a sustained production
of ROS in NB4 cells (Fig. S4 f). To further clarify which of the pro- or anti-oxidant effects of iron chelators was implicated in monocyte
differentiation, iron-deprived AML cells were treated with or without the anti-oxidants NAC or pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate (PDTC). Anti-
oxidant prevented the increase in CD14 mediated by iron deprivation differentiation, suggesting that cell differentiation is dependent on
the increased ROS levels induced during the early course of cellular iron deprivation (Fig. 4, e and f). Thus, iron-depriving agents control
cell differentiation through modulation of ROS levels. MAPKs are serine/threonine protein kinases crucial to several biological responses
including stress responses to ROS (Whitmarsh and Davis, 1999). The addition of the specific inhibitors of ERK, JNK, and p38 MAPK signaling
pathways (which characterize the three MAPK families) abrogated cell differentiation induced by iron deprivation agents (Fig. 5 a). The
iron-chelating agents induced the phosphorylation of ERK, p38, and JNK (Fig. 5 b). However, only inhibitors of JNK and p38, but not of ERK,
prevented iron deprivation–induced apoptosis (Fig. 5 c). Cell differentiation and apoptosis are controlled by MAPK activation. (a) CD14
expression on HL60 cells cultured in the presence or absence of A24 (green) or DFO (blue) and treated with a JNK inhibitor (SP600125) at 2.4
or 12 µM, with a p38 inhibitor (SB203580) or an ERK inhibitor (PD98059) at 3 or 10 µM, or mock treated for 72 h. Filled histograms represent
staining with the isotype control antibody. One representative experiment of three experiments is shown. (b) Serum-starved HL60 cells were
incubated with 10 µg/ml A24 or 3 µM DFO for 30 min at 37°C. Whole cell extracts were analyzed by immunoblotting, demonstrating the
phosphorylation of JNK (p-JNK), ERK (p-ERK), and p38 (p-p38). One representative experiment of three experiments is shown. HSC70 and ERK
were used as equal loading controls. (c) Histograms representing early and late apoptosis/necrosis using flow cytometry with annexin
V–FITC/PI labeling. HL60 cells were cultured for 72 h in the presence or absence of 10 µg/ml A24 or 5 µM DFO and treated with 2 or 6 µM JNK
inhibitor (SP600125 ), 0.5 or 1 µM p38 inhibitor (SB203580 ), 3 or 10 µM ERK inhibitor (PD98059 ), or mock treated (mean ± SEM, n = 3). *, P
< 0.05; ***, P < 0.001. VD can induce monocyte/macrophage differentiation of both primary cells and myeloid leukemia cell lines (Abe et al.,
1981; Koeffler et al., 1984; Hmama et al., 1999; Bastie et al., 2004; Ji and Studzinski, 2004; Gemelli et al., 2008; Hughes et al., 2009).
By comparing the pattern of genes induced by VD and by iron-chelating agents in a nonsupervised transcriptome analysis, we found a high
similarity between the differentially expressed genes; of the 105 genes that were modulated by iron deprivation, 30 were also modulated by
treatment with VD (Fig. 6 a and Table S3). Both VD and the iron-chelating agents up-regulated monocyte markers and down-regulated neutrophil
markers (Fig. 6 b). Moreover, in gene chips (Fig. 6 c) and real-time quantitative PCR (Fig. 6 d) analysis, transcription of the c-Jun gene
was induced by both VD and iron deprivation. Transcripts coding for c-Fos were also up-regulated by both treatments (Fig. 6 d), suggesting
the involvement of the JNK pathway. Similar results were observed in cell lines from different AML subtypes (Fig. 6 e). To further address
the role of JNK, cells were transfected with micro RNA (miRNA) constructs specific for different members of the JNK pathway (namely JNK1,
JNK2, and c-Jun; Fig. S5, a–c). miRNA–mediated silencing of c-Jun, JNK1, and JNK2 markedly abrogated cell differentiation induced by iron
deprivation agents (Fig. 6 f). Overexpression of each one of the two JNK proteins revealed that JNK1 was the most effective to induce cell
differentiation of AML cells (Fig. 6 g). Cellular differentiation induced by iron deprivation is dependent on the activation of the JNK and
VDR signaling pathways. (a) Hierarchical gene clustering by unsupervised microarray analysis in HL60 cells treated with 250 nM VD or iron
chelating agents (A24, 10 µg/ml; DFO, 5 µM or DFX, 3 µM). Only genes with a fold change >4 and a p-value <10−15 are shown (left). A Venn
diagram is shown, demonstrating that among the 105 genes that were specifically induced by iron deprivation, 30 were modified by treatment
with VD (right). (b) Histograms representing the variation of expression (fold change relative to untreated cells) of genes found in mature
monocytes (up-regulated) or neutrophils (down-regulated) that were previously modified by A24 and the iron chelators. These genes are
similarly regulated by VD treatment. Up-regulation of gene transcription is represented on the positive scale, and down-regulation is shown
on the negative scale. (c) Genechip fold change in c-Jun expression after treatment with VD or iron deprivation. (d) c-Fos and c-Jun mRNA
levels evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH mRNA in HL60 cells treated for 48 h with the indicated agents (VD, 250 nM;
A24, 10 µg/ml; DFO, 5 µM or DFX, 3 µM; mean ± SEM, n = 4). (e) c-Jun mRNA level evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH
mRNA in U937, OCI-AML3, NB4, and THP1 cell lines treated for 48 h with the indicated agents (VD, 250 nM; A24 10 µg/ml; DFO, 5 µM or DFX, 3
µM; mean ± SEM, n = 4). (f) Fold increase of CD14 expression in HL60 cells transfected with the indicated miRNA constructs: scrambled
control miRNA, miRNA-C-Jun, miRNA-JNK1, or miRNA-JNK2. 48 h later, each transfected cells were treated with 5 µM DFO to induce cell
differentiation. CD14 expression was evaluated by flow cytometry gating on cells on the basis of their GFP expression 72 h after
transfection (mean ± SEM, n = 3). (g) Percentage of differentiated cells induced in HL60 treated for 72 h with DFO or transfected with
JNK1-GFP and JNK2-GFP expression plasmids or mock electroporated. CD14 expression was evaluated 72 h after treatments (mean ± SEM, n = 3).
(h) VDR mRNA level evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH mRNA in HL60 cells treated for 48 h with the indicated agents
(A24, 10 µg/ml or DFO, 5 µM; mean ± SEM, n = 4). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. (i) Serum-starved HL60 and U937 cells were
incubated with 0.5 µM H2O2, 10 µg/ml A24, or 3 µM DFO for 10 min at 37°C. Phosphorylation of VDR (P-VDR) in whole cell extracts was analyzed
by immunoblotting. VDR was used as loading control. One representative experiment of three is shown. Given the high similarities shared
between VD and iron deprivation agents to induce cell differentiation, we investigated whether iron deprivation of cells could induce VDR
signaling (Wang et al., 2003; Himes et al., 2006). As observed for its cognate ligand VD, VDR expression was induced in cells treated by
iron-chelating agents (Fig. 6 h). The addition of iron chelators to cells starved of growth factors readily induced the VDR phosphorylation
(Fig. 6 i) involved in the control of VDR activity (Jurutka et al., 1996). Altogether, these results indicate that iron-chelating agents are
able to induce cell differentiation through the activation of JNK pathway. Iron deprivation also potentiates VDR signaling pathway through
VDR expression and VDR phosphorylation. Treatment of cells with both iron chelators and VD drastically increased the up-regulation of
monocyte markers CD11b and CD14 (Fig. 7 a). We consequently investigated whether the combination of iron-chelating agents (as the iron
chelator DFO and the anti-TfR1 A24) and VD had a synergistic effect. Applying the combination index (CI) isobologram method (Chou and
Talalay, 1984), we evaluated interactions between DFO and VD, or A24 and VD (Figs. S6, a–d). At the concentration inducing 50% of CD14+
cells, CI values for the combination of DFO and VD, or A24 and VD, were <1 (0.87 and 0.89, respectively), indicating a synergistic
interaction. Both combinations were accompanied by morphological changes in the treated cells (Fig. 7 b) and by higher expression of VDR
(Fig. 7 c). The physiological relevance of increased VDR gene expression was demonstrated by the robust increase in the transcription of its
downstream target genes, cathelicidin (1,000-fold increase) and CYP24A (6,000-fold increase; Fig. 7 d), and c-Fos and c-Jun (Fig. 7 e).
Moreover, the phosphorylation of JNK increased in response to treatment with both VD and iron deprivation (Fig. 7 f). The combined effect of
VD and iron chelators was specific to VDR signaling because iron chelators did not potentiate the ability of ATRA to promote cell
differentiation in HL60 cells (Fig. S7). Finally, the efficacy of the combined therapy was validated ex vivo in primary cells from AML
patients (Fig. 7 g). VD synergizes with iron deprivation agents to activate the Jun pathway and induce cellular differentiation. (a) Flow
cytometric analysis of CD14 and CD11b expression on HL60 cells treated with 10 µg/ml A24 (green line) or 5 µM DFO (blue line), with 250 nM
VD (gray lines) or a combination of VD and iron-chelating agents (black lines) for 72 h. The filled histograms represent staining with the
isotype control antibody. One representative experiment of three is shown. (b) HL60 cells were incubated with 10 µg/ml A24 or 3 µM DFO and
treated with 250 nM VD or mock treated for 72 h. Cytospins for the treated cells were stained with MGG. Monocyte differentiation is observed
with the loss of granulation and basophilia, vacuole appearance, and cytoplasm enlargement. Bars, 10 µM. Representative photos of three
independent experiments are shown. (c) The VDR mRNA level, evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH in HL60 cells treated
for 6 h with the indicated agents (A24, 10 µg/ml; DFO, 5 µM; or VD, 250 nM; mean ± SEM, n = 4). (d) The mRNA level of Cathelicidin and
CYP24A, evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized to GAPDH, in HL60 cells treated for 6 h with the indicated agents (A24, 10 µg/ml;
DFO, 5 µM; or VD, 250 nM; mean ± SEM, n = 4). (e) The mRNA level of c-Fos and c-Jun genes, evaluated by quantitative RT-PCR and normalized
to GAPDH, in HL60 cells treated for 16 h with A24, DFO, and VD as described in c (mean ± SEM, n = 4). (f) Serum-starved HL60 cells were
incubated with 10 µg/ml A24 or 3 µM DFO and treated with 250 nM VD or mock treated for 30 min at 37°C. Whole cell extracts from the treated
cells were analyzed by immunoblotting, demonstrating the increased phosphorylation of JNK when VD is combined with A24 or DFO. HSC70 and
total ERK were used as loading controls. One representative experiment of three is shown. (g) Fold increase of CD14 and CD11b expression
analyzed by flow cytometry (MFI relative to untreated cells) in primary blasts from two AML patients, identified as SL4 (AML2 FAB subtype)
and SL12 (AML0 FAB subtype). Cells were treated with 10 µg/ml A24, 5 µM DFO, 3 µM DFX, or 250 nM VD or their association as indicated for 72
h (mean ± SEM, n = 3). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. Based on these observations, we postulated that the combination of iron
deprivation and VD could intensify their anti-leukemic properties. Therefore, the efficacy of differentiation therapy was further evaluated
in vivo in a mouse tumor xenograft model. A single dose of A24 completely inhibited the growth of HL60 transplanted tumors, whereas
treatment with DFO increased survival and decreased the tumor size (Fig. 8, a and b). Using this model, we did not observe a significant
reduction in tumor growth for mice treated with VD alone (Fig. 8 c). However, the combination of VD with DFO significantly reduced tumor
growth (Fig. 8 d). The parameters of serum iron homeostasis, such as serum transferrin and ferritin levels, were significantly modified in
the treated mice, which is an indication of effective iron deprivation (Fig. 8 e). The reduced tumor growth was associated with tumor cell
apoptosis, which are features of cellular differentiation and MAPK phosphorylation (ERK and JNK; Fig. 8 f). In mice xenografted with OCI-
AML3 cells, DFO greatly improved event-free survival (Fig. S8 a). There was no significant difference in event-free survival between mice
treated with DFO and DFO + VD. However, a significant reduction in tumor growth was observed only in mice that received the DFO + VD
association, although the DFO-treated mice presented reduction in tumor growth compared with control which did not reach significance (Fig.
S8 b). Anti-tumor effect of iron deprivation combined with VD in Nude mice. (a) Kaplan-Meier plot of the percentage of tumor-free mice among
mice treated with vehicle (control), A24 (single intravenous dose of 40 mg/kg), and DF0 (20 mg 5×/wk) after subcutaneous xenograft with HL60
cells (n = 4 in each group). The p-value was determined using the log-rank test. One representative experiment of three is shown. (b)
Representative photographs of xenografted tumors from Fig. 5 a. Bars, 10 mm. (c) Tumor size (measured at day 25) in HL60 cells xenografted
in Nude mice. Individual tumor sizes are plotted. The horizontal bars represent the mean of each group (n = 12 in the control group, n = 12
in VD group). One representative experiment of three is shown. (d) Tumor size measured at day 25 in xenografted mice. Individual tumor sizes
are plotted. The horizontal bars represent the mean of each group (n = 14 in the control group, n = 14 in the DFO group, and n = 12 in the
DFO + VD group). (e) Serum ferritin and transferrin levels in xenografted mice. 25 d after the engraftment, the mice were euthanized, and
serum was collected for biochemical analysis (mean ± SEM). (f) Sections of tumors from mice injected with vehicle, DFO, and DFO + VD were
stained by HE, TUNEL, or labeled with CD11b-, p-ERK– or p-JNK–specific antibodies. The arrows indicate apoptosis. Representative photos of
one experiment are shown. Data were quantified using Image J software. Bar, 50 µm. Histograms represent quantification of at least four
different fields. One representative experiment is shown (mean ± SEM). *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.01; ***, P < 0.001. Because both iron
chelators and VD analogues are safe drugs currently used as therapies in the treatment of diseases other than leukemia, their effectiveness
in one AML patient was evaluated. A 69-yr-old man had a recent transformation of MDS into AML. After high-dose chemotherapy, the patient
remained in non-blastic aplasia. 7 mo after the diagnosis, blasts reappeared in the blood. High-dose chemotherapy was denied, and treatment
with an iron chelator (1 g/d DFX) and 25-hydroxycholecalciferol (4,000 IU/d) was initiated. Blast counts, although progressing before
therapy, were decreased upon iron chelation and vitamin D therapy, and pancytopenia was partially reversed, accompanied by an increase in
monocyte numbers (Fig. 9 a) without inducing hypercalcemia (Fig. 9 b). Importantly, May Grünwald Giemsa (MGG) blood smears revealed an
increased number of differentiating cells toward the monocyte lineage, suggesting that they were derived from the blast pool (Fig. 9 c).
Cell sorting (Fig. 9 d), followed by fluorescent in situ hybridization analysis, showed that the original trisomy 8 found in the blasts of
the patient (Fig. 9 e) was segregated with the sorted mature monocyte population but not with lymphocytes or NK cells (Fig. 9 f), confirming
that the circulating monocytes were derived from the blast pool. In addition, the patient’s quality of life was improved because red cell
and platelet transfusion needs were decreased. Furthermore, the patient could control several microbial infections that otherwise would have
been life threatening, suggesting that the patient’s immune status was partially restored. These data underscore the differentiating
efficiency of combined therapy in human AML. Iron chelation therapy in combination with VD treatment induced blast differentiation in a
refractory AML/MDS patient. (a) Curves representing the blood counts during treatment. The diagnosis and the beginning of the combination
therapy are represented with arrows. (b) Plasma calcium concentration during the treatment. Horizontal bars represent minimal and maximal
physiological levels of calcemia. (c) MGG-stained blood cytosmears during treatment. At diagnosis, undifferentiated blasts were
predominantly observed in MGG-stained blood cytosmears. 1 mo after beginning treatment, the blasts started to present signs of monocyte
differentiation, such as nuclear deformation, cytoplasm enlargement, and the presence of vacuoles. After 3 mo of treatment, undifferentiated
blasts were replaced by monocytoid blasts and pro-monocytes. After 4 mo, some monoblasts were still detected, but mature monocytes were
predominantly observed. Representative photos of each blood cytosmears are shown. (d) The differentiation potential of blasts treated with
combination therapy was evaluated in circulating cells after 3 mo of treatment. PBMCs were isolated, and the cell populations were sorted as
follows: blasts (CD34+CD117+); monocytes (CD34−CD117−CD4lowCD14+); and lymphocytes and NK cells (CD34−CD117−CD14−). The cells were further
processed for cytogenetic analysis. (e) FISH analysis. Representative images of chromosomes 8 (green) and 12 (red) probed by fluorescent in
situ hybridization demonstrating the trisomy 8 present in the monocytes. (f) Percentage of trisomy 8–positive cells in sorted fractions from
d, demonstrating that the monocytes, but not the lymphocytes and NK cells, originated from the blast pool. We show in this paper that iron
homeostasis plays a key role in the control of myeloid differentiation in both normal and pathological situations. Iron deprivation of
undifferentiated myeloid cells, either through iron chelation or through blocking of iron uptake, induced transcription of several markers
of the monocyte/macrophage lineage. At the same time, iron deprivation shunted progenitors away from the granulocytic lineage by dampening
the transcription of granulocyte-specific markers. Morphological, phenotypic, and functional analyses confirmed and extended these
observations. Not only did iron deprivation induce primary progenitor commitment toward the monocyte lineage, it also reestablished
differentiation in AML blasts/cell lines. Recent cumulated data in the literature have shown that ROS can modulate the activation of signal
transduction pathways involved in several cellular functions such as cell proliferation and differentiation (Sattler et al., 1999).
Specifically, in the mammalian hematopoietic system, it has been recently reported that hematopoietic stem cells produce low levels of ROS,
which are increased in common myeloid progenitors. Modulation in ROS levels seems to be important in the control of myeloid precursor
differentiation (Tothova et al., 2007). This process seems to be conserved throughout evolution because Drosophila melanogaster multipotent
hematopoietic progenitors display increased levels of ROS which are down-regulated during differentiation (Owusu-Ansah and Banerjee, 2009).
However, factors controlling ROS production in myeloid progenitors are not well known. We show in this paper that intracellular LIP could be
one of these factors playing a critical role in controlling ROS levels and, thus, cell differentiation in the hematopoietic system.
Scavenging ROS from Drosophila melanogaster hematopoietic progenitors delays mature blood cell differentiation, which is dependent on the
MAPK JNK (Owusu-Ansah and Banerjee, 2009). In this paper, we show that both genetic and pharmacological inactivation of the MAPK–JNK pathway
inhibited iron deprivation-induced cell differentiation. Furthermore, pharmacological blocking of ROS abrogated iron deprivation–induced
cell differentiation, suggesting that ROS and MAPK pathways are linked, most probably by the direct effect of ROS on MAPK activation
(Martindale and Holbrook, 2002). Signal transduction cascades of MAPK pathways frequently converge to amplify signaling (Johnson and
Lapadat, 2002; Lopez-Bergami et al., 2007). Inhibition of ERK and p38 pathways prevented cell differentiation induced by iron deprivation.
Blocking of the ERK pathway did not block apoptosis induced by iron chelators, suggesting that redundant and nonredundant MAPK signaling
pathways are involved in the control of AML cell differentiation and apoptosis. In agreement, it has been previously shown that the MAPK–ERK
pathway is constitutively active in AML cells and in G-CSF–mobilized CD34+ precursors and inhibition of ERK pathway promotes growth arrest
rather than apoptosis (Ricciardi et al., 2005). Combining iron chelation therapy with other MAPK/ERK activators, such as G-CSF, remains to
be evaluated. Altogether those data suggest that cross talk between MAPK pathways could cooperate to regulate AML cell differentiation and
its sensitivity to cytotoxic agents. In the majority of the experiments presented in this paper, TfR1 targeting by A24 mimicked the effect
of iron chelators at least in in vitro and ex vivo settings. Because each of the iron-chelating agents has its own chemical/biochemical
characteristics (such as the structure or cell-permeant properties of the different iron chelators and cell targeting specificity of the
monoclonal antibody) and pharmacological properties (such as the kinetics and half-life), the intensity of the response varied among them.
For example, in tumor xenograft experiments, A24 mAb totally inhibited tumor engraftment, whereas iron chelators delayed the tumor growth, a
difference probably involving additional effects of A24 such as antibody-dependent cellular cytotoxicity or complement-dependent
cytotoxicity. In addition, A24 could exert a specific target effect by inducing TfR1 down-regulation specifically on TfRhigh tumor cells
(Moura et al., 2004; Lepelletier et al., 2007; Callens et al., 2008), whereas iron chelators are more likely to induce TfR1 messenger RNA
(mRNA) stability by posttranscriptional mechanisms. The principal molecular mechanism drawn from the experiments reported in this paper
links the signaling pathways activated by iron deprivation and by VD. Gene expression studies showed a high similarity (30% common genes)
between genes modulated by VD and the set of 105 genes targeted by iron deprivation. In addition, iron deprivation induced both VDR gene
expression and VDR phosphorylation. The phosphorylation of VDR on serine 208 by casein kinase II has been shown to control activation of VDR
gene transcription and VDR target genes expression (Jurutka et al., 1996). Therefore, iron deprivation could induce, by itself, the
activation of VDR signaling pathway. Furthermore, the combination of iron deprivation agents and differentiating therapies acted
synergistically, increasing AML cell differentiation. Altogether, our data identified a mechanism involving sequentially iron-deprivation,
ROS production, and activation of MAPK pathways, further amplified by induction of VDR expression and phosphorylation, culminating in
monocyte/macrophage differentiation. Recent studies showed an unexpected constitutive activation of Syk tyrosine kinase in AML blasts (Hahn
et al., 2009). Gefitinib has been identified as a Syk tyrosine kinase inhibitor (Hahn et al., 2009) and reported to be a potent inducer of
AML cell differentiation in preclinical settings (Boehrer et al., 2008). These studies unveiled Syk as a previously unsuspected regulator of
AML differentiation. Although the molecular pathways regulating the activation of Syk in AML cells remain unknown, a study by Agramonte-
Hevia et al. (2003) reported that VD-induced cell differentiation down-regulated the high Syk activation observed in undifferentiated THP-1
cells. Therefore, down-modulation of Syk activity downstream VDR activation could participate in cell differentiation induced by iron
deprivation agents and it remains to be evaluated. VD is known to induce myeloid progenitors to differentiate into monocytes. In vitro and
ex vivo experiments were promising, but in the first clinical trials in AML and MDS, only partial differentiation was obtained and clinical
improvements were modest (Deeb et al., 2007). In addition, symptomatic hypercalcemia limited VD clinical application. Clinical trials using
VD analogues, which do not promote hypercalcemia, did not improve patients’ prognosis (Koeffler et al., 2005), suggesting that VDR
stimulation alone is not sufficient to promote clinical benefit. We show in this paper that iron deprivation could be a new therapeutic
approach in AML, and likely in MDS, because it synergizes with VD (low dose). The combination of iron chelators and VD induced both pro-
differentiating and antiproliferative effects in leukemia cells from one AML patient, as described in this paper in the form of a case
report. This association reduced the rate of blast proliferation and promoted blast differentiation toward monocytes without emergence of
hypercalcemia. The patient developed multiple infectious episodes, which were greatly reduced after the initiation of VD and iron chelation
combined therapy. In vitro experiments showed that, in addition to its role in monocyte differentiation, the associated therapy promoted
expression of genes related to antimicrobial defense such as cathelicidin. Therefore, the early use of iron chelators in AML therapy, in
addition to preventing relapses and enhancing time to progression, could act at multiple levels: by preventing red cell transfusion-derived
secondary iron overload, by avoiding defective bone marrow reconstitution after allogeneic HSCT, and also by improving patients’ immune
status (Pullarkat et al., 2008; Pullarkat, 2009). Because AML incidence increases with age and because the world population is growing
older, we propose that the combined therapy would be particularly useful in elderly patients who are not eligible for high dose chemotherapy
and bone marrow transplantation. This combined therapy could be also relevant in other diseases involving a deregulation of BM
differentiation, such as MDS. Additional clinical studies are needed to validate its efficacy and determine in which patients it will be
more beneficial. Peripheral blood cells were obtained from AML patients and healthy donors after obtaining their written informed consent
(Table S2, additional information) and approval obtained by the Necker and Saint-Louis Hospitals Institutional ethic committees. Peripheral
blood was collected at the initial diagnosis before the administration of treatment. Mononuclear cells were separated by Ficoll-hypaque (PAA
laboratories) density centrifugation and resuspended in IMDM (Invitrogen) supplemented with 15% FCS (Hyclone), 100 ng/ml stem cell factor
(SCF), 10 ng/ml IL-3, and 25 ng/ml FLT3-L (all purchased from R&D Systems). Myelocytic (HL60 and OCI-AML3), monoblastic (THP1 and U937), and
promyelocytic (NB4) leukemia cell lines used in the present study were provided by J.M. Cayuela (Hôpital Saint-Louis, Paris, France) and P.
Villarese (Hôpital Necker, Paris, France). Cells were cultured in RPMI-1640 medium (Invitrogen) supplemented with 5% FCS and antibiotics.
DFX was provided by Novartis. Etoposide (VP16), ATRA, DFO, 25-OH-VD, H2O2, FeCl3, NAC, and PDTC were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Calcein-
AM, DHR123, and DHE were purchased from Invitrogen. The mAb A24 was produced and purified as described previously (Moura et al., 2001). The
inhibitors of JNK (SP600125), ERK (PD98059), and p38 (SB203580) were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc. For proliferation assays,
the HL60 cell line was resuspended in RPMI-1640 medium with 5% FCS, whereas the patient blasts were resuspended in IMDM with 15% BIT 9500
(STEMCELL Technologies Inc.). The cells were plated in triplicate at 2.5 × 104 cells per well in 96-well tissue culture plates (Falcon) in
200 µl of culture medium. Proliferation was measured as described previously (Lepelletier et al., 2007). LIP was evaluated according to a
previously described method (Espósito et al., 2002) with some modifications. In brief, cells were treated with 0.5 µM calcein-AM for 30 min
at 37°C. Before being subjected to flow cytometry analysis, cells were treated or not with an excess of cell-permeant iron chelators. The
fluorescein channel was used to detect calcein fluorescence. The difference between calcein fluorescence before and after adding cell-
permeant iron chelators indicated the relative amount of LIP (Espósito et al., 2002). Fluorescence analysis was used to determine the
relative levels of ROS in response to various stimuli. ROS levels were detected by FACS analysis. Labeling with cell-permeant redox-
sensitive fluorochromes was performed for 30 min at 37°C in the presence of 1 µM DHE or 0.5 µM DHR123, both diluted in 0.5% BSA in HBSS
solution (Invitrogen). For overexpression, pEGFP-C3 (Takara Bio Inc.) expression vectors containing cDNA encoding JNK1 or JNK2 between the
HindIII/BamHI sites (provided by T. Herdegen, Institute of Pharmacology, University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany) were used.
These proteins were expressed as a GFP fusion protein under the control of human CMV immediate early promoter. For C-Jun, JNK1, and JNK2
gene silencing, artificial miRNA constructs were generated. Four sets of predesigned miR RNAi sequence oligonucleotides for each gene were
obtained using BLOCK-iT miR RNAi Select (Invitrogen) and checked to ensure the designed sequences would not target other gene transcripts to
avoid any off-target effects. These oligonucleotides were annealed and ligated into the pcDNA6.2-GW/EmGFP-miR vector according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Invitrogen) to express the pre-miRNA as an EmGFP fusion under the control of human CMV immediate early
promoter. The pcDNA 6.2-GW/EmGFP-miR–negative control plasmid contains a scrambled miRNA insert, which is predicted not to target any known
vertebrate gene. HL60 cells were transfected with the plasmids using a nucleofector (Lonza) as described according to the manufacturer’s
instructions (usually 40% cells were transfected). 5 µM DFO was added in culture medium 48 h after transfection and flow cytometry analysis
was realized 24 h later on the basis of the EmGFP (for miRNA) or EGFP (for protein constructs) expression. Validation of miRNA constructs
was performed on CHO cells electroporated with each miRNA-containing plasmid using the nucleofector and analyzed in Western blotting after
24 h to validate the constructs. FISH was performed using standard protocols with specific centromeric probes for chromosome 8 (pZ8.4) and
chromosome 12 (pBR12; provided by M. Rocchi, University of Bari, Bari, Italy) used as control. Total RNA from time-matched controls and
treated samples was extracted using NucleoSpin RNA II (Macherey-Nagel). After DNase treatment, first-strand cDNA was synthesized using
SuperScript II reverse transcription (Invitrogen). Quantitative real-time PCR was performed using a Chromo-IV PCR System (MJ Research), and
the PCR products were quantified using Sybr Green Technology (Jumpstart MasterMix; Sigma-Aldrich). The results of the real-time quantitative
PCR were analyzed using the delta-delta Ct method (Livak and Schmittgen, 2001). The complete list of primer sequences is available in Table
S4. For the microarrays, the Agilent 44 K Whole Human Genome (G4112A) long (60 bp) oligonucleotide microarray and the dual-color analysis
method were used with probes from the treated samples and from reference RNA that were differentially labeled with cyanine 5 and cyanine 3.
These microarrays have 44,290 features with 41,000 distinct oligonucleotides belonging to 33,715 sequences defined by their accession
number. cRNA from each treated sample was labeled with Cy3-cytidine triphosphate (CTP) and the untreated HL60 RNA reference pool with
Cy5-CTP for direct comparison. Reverse transcription, linear amplification, cRNA labeling, and cRNA purification were performed with the
linear amplification kit (Agilent Technologies). The microarray data were mainly analyzed with the Resolver software (Merck). All data were
filtered to eliminate low-intensity values <50 arbitrary units for both colors. The microarray data analyzed in this paper have been
submitted to the Array Express data repository at the European Bioinformatics Institute (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/) under accession
no. E-TABM-925. For tumor establishment, 5 × 106 HL60 or 2.5 × 106 OCI-AML3 cells were mixed with Matrigel (1:1, vol/vol) and injected
subcutaneously into 8–10-wk-old female athymic Nude mice. The mice were then injected i.p. with A24 (40 mg/kg on day 1), DFO (20 mg/day,
5–7×/wk), VD (1 µg, 2×/wk), and the combination of DFO and VD or PBS as a vehicle control. The tumor growth was measured as previously
described (Lepelletier et al., 2007). Serial sections (3 µm) in paraffin blocks were deparaffinized in xylene and hydrated in a graded
series of alcohol. Staining was performed using the Immunohistochemical Autostainer (Laboratory Vision Corporation) with primary antibodies
against CD11b (Sigma-Aldrich, 1:200), p-ERK, and p-JNK (Cell Signaling Technology, 1:200), biotinylated anti-Ig, and streptavidin-
peroxidase. The antibody binding was developed in PBS with 0.05% DAB and 0.003% H2O2. Hematoxylin-eosin (HE)–stained sections were used to
evaluate cytomorphology and to detect apoptotic cells with condensed nuclei. Apoptosis was assessed by the TUNEL technique according to the
manufacturer’s instructions (Roche). The images were obtained using a microscope (DM-2000; Leica) equipped with a digital camera (DFC320;
Leica) and IM50 software. Data were quantified using Image J software (National Institutes of Health). CD34+ cord blood cells were isolated
by immunomagnetic separation (Miltenyi Biotec) and cultured in IMDM supplemented with 15% BIT 9500 (Stem Cell Technologies), 100 ng/ml SCF,
10 ng/ml IL-3, 25 ng/ml G-CSF, and 10 ng/ml GM-CSF for myelomonocytic differentiation (all cytokines were purchased from R&D Systems). 10
µg/ml A24, 5 µM DFO, or 3 µM DFX was added iteratively every 3 d in the culture medium. For colony-forming assays, 103 CD34+ cells were
plated in quadruplicate in semisolid methylcellulose medium (H4434; Stem Cell Technologies) in the presence or absence of 10 µg/ml A24, 5 µM
DFO, or 3 µM DFX. At day 14, colonies containing >50 cells were counted and classified as granulocyte colony (CFU-G), monocyte-macrophage
colony (CFU-M), mixed granulocyte-monocyte colony (CFU-GM), or erythroid colony (CFU-E). The colonies were counted by standard criteria in
60-mm gridded scoring dishes with cross marks (Stem Cell Technologies) under an inverted microscope. To verify if iron deprivation leads to
an altered formation of myelomonocytic colonies, we represented the ratio between CFU-G and CFU-M in both nontreated and treated groups.
Cell differentiation was determined by the following criteria: cell morphology was evaluated after MGG staining. Esterase activity was
detected using the LEUCOGNOST EST kit (Merck). The expression of CD11b (IM2581U; Beckman Coulter) and CD14 (A07765; Beckman Coulter) was
evaluated by flow cytometry (FACSCalibur; BD). Cell death was evaluated using the annexin-V/propidium iodide (PI) double staining kit (BD)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. All experiments were made with serum-starved cells (12–16 h) to avoid detection of
constitutive phosphorylation induced by growth factors (Wang and Proud, 2007). Whole cell extracts were prepared as described previously
(Amir-Moazami et al., 2008). In brief, cell pellets (107 cells) were washed twice with PBS and then resuspended in 1 ml of lysis buffer (20
mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1 mM EGTA, 1% Triton X-100, 2.5 mM sodium pyrophosphate, 1 mM h-glycerophosphate, 1 mM Na3VO4,
1 mM phenylmethylsulfonyl fluoride, 1 µg/ml leupeptin, and 1 µg/ml aprotinin). The protein concentration was determined using the BCA method
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) and an equal amount of SDS sample buffer containing 150 mM Tris-HCl, pH 6.8, 30% glycerol, 3% SDS, 1.5 mg/ml
bromophenol blue, and 100 mM DTT was then added to each sample. For immunoblotting, 40 µg of protein was separated in 4–12% or 7% SDS-PAGE
and transferred onto a PVDF membrane. The blots were first probed with an anti-phospho protein, p-ERK (Thr202/Tyr204), p-JNK, p-p38 (all
from Cell Signaling Technology), or p-VDR (Ab63572; Abcam) antibody. The membranes were stripped, dried, and probed with an antibody against
total ERK (Cell Signaling Technology), VDR (Ab39990; Abcam), or HSC70 (sc-71270; Sants Cruz Biotechnology, Inc.). The protein bands were
visualized using a chemiluminescence system. CD14 expression was used to evaluate the combined efficacy of DFO, vitamin D, and mAb A24. In
each experiment, HL60 cells were treated with serial dilutions of each agent individually and with a fixed ratio of two agents
simultaneously. The results were analyzed using the median effect/CI isobologram method of Chou and Talalay (1984). F(a) is the fraction of
cells affected (i.e., CD14+) and f(u) is the fraction of cells unaffected (i.e., CD14−). F is the ratio f(a)/f(u) and D is the drug
concentration. Log(F) was plotted against log(D). The dose response is displayed as a linear regression line and the x-intercept correspond
to the log(IC50). The CI was defined as follows: CI = (D)1/(Dx)1 + (D)2/(Dx)2, where (Dx)1 and (Dx)2 are the doses required to achieve a
given effect level for each drug, i.e., a specified value of f(a). (D)1 and (D)2 are the doses of each drug in a given mixture which gives
the same f(a). When CI values are 1, <1, or >1, it may be concluded that summation, synergism, or antagonism, respectively have been
observed at the particular level examined. The CI was calculated based on the conservation assumption of mutually nonexclusive drug
interactions. The data are expressed as the mean ± SEM. Statistical analyses were performed using Prism 5 software (GraphPad Software,
Inc.). We used the Student’s t test or the Mann-Whitney test to compare two groups, and multigroup comparisons were made using a one-way
ANOVA followed by a post-hoc Bonferroni test. We used the Kruskal-Wallis test followed by a post-hoc Dunn test for nonparametric
comparisons, where indicated. To compare tumor-free animal curves, the Log-rank test was used. The results were considered statistically
significant at a p-value <0.05 (*), <0.01 (**), or <0.001 (***). Fig. S1 shows that iron deprivation induces morphological and phenotypical
modifications of monocytic cells related to cellular differentiation. Fig S2 shows that iron deprivation inhibits proliferation and induces
differentiation of AML blasts. Fig. S3 shows the in vitro granulocytic cord blood progenitor differentiation system. Fig. S4 shows detection
of intracellular LIP and ROS in AML cells. Fig. S5 shows the efficacy of miRNA constructs targeting c-JUN, JNK1, and JNK2. Fig. S6 shows
determination of the synergic versus additive effect of the combined DFO/VD and A24/VD therapies on cell differentiation. Fig. S7 shows that
A24 and iron chelators do not synergize with ATRA to induce differentiation. Fig. S8 shows the anti-tumor effect of iron deprivation and
iron deprivation combined with VD in Nude mice xenografted with AML cell lines. Online supplemental material is available at
http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20091488/DC1. The authors would like to thank the members of the hematology and obstetric units
(Necker Hospital and St. Louis Hospital, Paris, France) for collecting patient samples and Dr. T. Herdegen (Institute of Pharmacology,
University Hospital Schleswig-Holstein, Kiel, Germany) for JNK1 and JNK2 expression plasmids. This work is supported by the Fondation pour
la Recherche Médicale, Fondation de France, Association Laurette Fugain, Association de la recherche contre le cancer, Institut National de
la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale (INSERM)/PNRNU2007, and Novartis grants. This work was also supported by a donation from Cyril Mangin’s
family and Friends. C. Callens was a recipient of an INSERM Poste d’accueil fellowship. The authors have no conflicting financial interests.
Abbreviations used: AML acute myeloid leukemia APL acute promyelocytic leukemia ATO arsenic trioxide ATRA all-trans retinoic acid CI
combination index DFO deferoxamine DFX deferasirox DHE dihydroethidium DHR123 dihydrorhodamine 123 FAB French-American-British LIP labile
iron pool MAPK mitogen-activated protein kinase MDS myelodysplastic syndrome MFI mean fluorescence intensity MGG May Grünwald Giemsa miRNA
micro RNA mRNA messenger RNA NAC N-acetyl-l-cysteine PDTC pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate PI propidium iodide ROS reactive oxygen species SCF
stem cell factor VD vitamin D3 VDR VD receptor acute myeloid leukemia acute promyelocytic leukemia arsenic trioxide all-trans retinoic acid
combination index deferoxamine deferasirox dihydroethidium dihydrorhodamine 123 French-American-British labile iron pool mitogen-activated
protein kinase myelodysplastic syndrome mean fluorescence intensity May Grünwald Giemsa micro RNA messenger RNA N-acetyl-l-cysteine
pyrrolidine dithiocarbamate propidium iodide reactive oxygen species stem cell factor vitamin D3 VD receptor
