Laura W. J. Baijens MD Renée Speyer MS, SLP, PhD Nel Roodenburg SLP Frans J. M. Hilgers MD, PhD The case of a 68-year-old woman with
postoperative speech and swallowing problems following a circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy and neopharyngeal reconstruction with a
jejunal free flap is presented. The primary tumor was an extended papillary thyroid carcinoma (pT4N0M0). For vocal restoration, an
indwelling Provox® 1 voice prosthesis was inserted secondarily. The patient received speech and swallowing therapy, including digital
maneuvers at the level of the proximal (cervical) part of the jejunal graft to improve speech and swallowing function. Pre- and/ or post-
treatment data on speech and swallowing function were gathered using the following assessment methods: esophageal insufflation test, Voice
Handicap Index (VHI), videofluoroscopy of phonation (VFSph), digital high-speed endoscopy of jejunal vibration during voice production,
fiber-optic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES), and videofluoroscopy of swallowing (VFSs). This case clearly demonstrates that even
after extensive laryngopharyngectomy with jejunal free flap reconstruction, a tailored rehabilitation program can improve both voice and
swallowing function, and that these results clearly can be objectified/visualized, underlining the validity of this approach. Rehabilitation
of speech and swallowing following circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy with free jejunal flap repair remains a challenge. Tracheoesophageal
puncture and insertion of a voice prosthesis has become the standard treatment protocol for voice restoration [1, 2]. Most frequently, a
secondary voice restoration is performed several months following surgery . Probably the jejunal convolutions and hypotonicity are major
reasons leading to disordered prosthetic tracheojejunal voice production . The vibration capacities of the jejunal tissue are very different
compared to the pharyngoesophageal segment. Frequently, this leads to insufficient voice restoration. Ward et al. describe disordered
swallowing as a common complication following pharyngolaryngectomy. Stenosis of the jejunoesophageal anastomosis, absence of a functional
muscular layer in the jejunal graft, and the major difference in diameter between the jejunal graft and the cervical esophagus are important
causal factors of dysphagia. Futura et al. suggest that placement of the voice prosthesis close to the jejunoesophageal anastomosis may
cause scar formation resulting in deterioration of the prosthetic tracheojejunal voice production and swallowing function. In the
literature, most of the studies handling prosthetic tracheojejunal voice production or swallowing function following circumferential
pharyngolaryngectomy with free jejunal flap repair include rather small patient populations or do not report diagnostic imaging assessments
or therapy programs for swallowing disorders or speech disorders [6, 7]. A 68-year-old woman was referred to the Department of
Otorhinolaryngology, Head and Neck Surgery because of speech and swallowing problems following a circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy with
free jejunal repair because of an extended papillary thyroid carcinoma (pT4N0M0). Postoperatively, the patient was treated with radioactive
iodide (75, 150 mCi). At this moment, 2 years after the circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy, the patient is still in complete remission.
Four months following the pharyngolaryngectomy, surgical voice restoration with an indwelling Provox® 1 voice prosthesis (ATOS Medical AB,
Hörby, Sweden) was carried out. Due to anatomical limitations, it was possible to insert the prosthesis only in the distal part of the
jejunal graft instead of in the esophageal wall. During the first 2 months after the prosthesis was placed, the patient received standard
speech rehabilitation for laryngectomees without improvement of tracheojejunal voice and swallowing function. During the next 7 months, the
patient underwent training with an experienced speech-language pathologist (30 min per session three times per week). The major treatment
goals of the tailored rehabilitation program (Table 1) included improvement of quality and comfort of the tracheojejunal voice function as
well as improvement in the swallowing function by strengthening the musculature, using postural techniques, and using digital maneuvers
(Fig. 1a-c). Speech therapy included respiratory exercises (optimization of head and body positioning) and digital maneuvers to constrict
the proximal part of the jejunal graft during tracheojejunal voice production. Dysphagia treatment included tongue base exercises combined
with bolus modification like changing bolus volume and/or consistency [8, 9]. Tongue base exercises included the tongue-holding maneuver and
stretch and push against resistance tasks. Bolus modification was started by using smaller bolus volumes during the exercises. Gradually,
bolus volumes were increased up to 10 cc of thin liquid. Furthermore, food consistency was extended to thick liquids and pureed foods.
During food intake, digital pressure was used at the level of the proximal (cervical) part of the jejunal graft to minimize jejunal
convolutions by stretching the graft. A postural technique consisting of extending the neck in order to facilitate bolus transport in the
jejunal graft was part of the exercise program.Table 1Tailored voice and swallowing rehabilitation programRehabilitation program (30 min per
session, three times per week)TherapyEffectTracheojejunal voiceDigital pressure on the jejunal graft at the level of the fifth cervical
vertebraConstriction of the jejunal graft improving vibration capacities (neoglottis)Respiratory exercises (optimization of head and body
positioning)Improvement of the airflow through jejunal constrictionSwallowTongue base exercises (tongue-holding maneuver, stretch and push
against resistance tasks)Strengthening the musculature improving bolus transport into the entrance of the jejunal graftBolus modification
like changing bolus volume and/or consistency (increasing bolus volumes, thin-thick liquids, pureed food)Facilitation of bolus transport
through the jejunal graftDigital pressure at the level of the proximal (cervical) part of the jejunal graftMinimization of the jejunal
convolutions by stretching the graftPostural technique consisting of extending the neckFacilitation of bolus transport through the jejunal
graftFig. 1Pictures of the patient performing, a digital pressure maneuver during phonation, b postural maneuver extension of the neck
during swallowing, c digital maneuver to stretch the jejunal graft during swallowing (arrow indicates direction of the maneuver) Tailored
voice and swallowing rehabilitation program Pictures of the patient performing, a digital pressure maneuver during phonation, b postural
maneuver extension of the neck during swallowing, c digital maneuver to stretch the jejunal graft during swallowing (arrow indicates
direction of the maneuver) In order to assess the validity of this tailored approach, speech and swallowing functions were
analyzed/visualized pre- and/or post-treatment using the following assessment and imaging tools (Table 2): esophageal insufflation test,
Voice Handicap Index (VHI), videofluoroscopy of phonation (VFSph), digital high-speed endoscopy of jejunal vibration during voice
production, fiber-optic endoscopic evaluation of swallowing (FEES), and videofluoroscopy of swallowing (VFSs). The pretreatment
videofluoroscopic studies of phonation and swallowing were used to determine the treatment strategies.Table 2Pre- and post-therapy
measurements of tracheojejunal voice production and swallowingTracheojejunal voiceEsophageal insufflation test (exclusively pre-
therapy)Voice Handicap Index VFSph High-speed kymograph recording (exclusively post-therapy)SwallowFEES VFSs Pre- and post-therapy
measurements of tracheojejunal voice production and swallowing At the moment of referral the tracheojejunal voice quality was wet and
gravelly. The voice was produced by airflow through a jejunal constriction, independent of intestinal peristalsis . Before speech therapy,
an esophageal insufflation test (Blom-Singer®, InHealth Technologies, Carpinteria, CA, USA) was applied to evaluate the vibration capacities
of the jejunal segment by means of a transnasal catheter. This test simulates the presence of a voice prosthesis by diverting expired air
from the trachea into the jejunal graft . The position of the catheter tip inferior to the vibrating segment was ensured by fiber-optic
endoscopy. The quality of the tracheojejunal voice did not differ between the esophageal insufflation test and the application of the Provox
voice prosthesis, indicating that the function of the voice prosthesis was optimal. The VHI developed by Jacobson et al. was applied as a
quality-of-life questionnaire. Before treatment, the patient felt extremely handicapped by the restricted communicative capacities, whereas
after treatment, the score significantly improved (from 80 to 59 points out of a maximum score of 120 points). Videofluoroscopy of phonation
(VFSph) recordings were performed in lateral view before and after treatment according to a standardized protocol: three trials of
vocalization at comfortable pitch and loudness level with and without a digital maneuver to constrict the jejunal graft after coating the
wall by swallowing high-density barium suspension (250% w/v). Visuoperceptual analysis was performed by two independent experienced raters
blinded for therapy. The tonicity of the jejunal graft was judged during phonation . Before treatment, the tonicity of the jejunal wall
seemed hypotonic because there was no constriction of the vibrating segment during phonation. Instead, severe dilatation of the jejunal
graft was observed (Fig. 2a). Also, pooling of barium suspension at the jejunoesophageal anastomosis was seen.Fig. 2VFSph. a Voicing without
maneuver showed extreme ballooning of the jejunal graft during voluntary phonation. b Voicing with digital pressure maneuver at the level of
the fifth vertebra showed an improvement of constriction of the vibrating jejunal segment VFSph. a Voicing without maneuver showed extreme
ballooning of the jejunal graft during voluntary phonation. b Voicing with digital pressure maneuver at the level of the fifth vertebra
showed an improvement of constriction of the vibrating jejunal segment After treatment, the tracheojejunal speech sounded more fluent, with
increased intelligibility during digital pressure, which causes a jejunal constriction independent of intestinal peristalsis . VFSph showed
that the vibration capacities of the jejunal wall had improved significantly without digital pressure. The vibration capacities improved
even more during the digital pressure maneuver, resulting in increased constriction and tonicity of the jejunal segment. The digital
pressure could be identified at the level of the second and third cervical vertebra. The vibration capacities of the jejunal tissue improved
even more during the application of digital pressure on the jejunal segment at the level of the fifth cervical vertebra (Fig. 2b). After
treatment the irregular jejunal vibrations also were visualized with high-speed digital endoscopy (Fig. 3a).Fig. 3High-speed kymography
(arrow indicates mucosal wave). a Recording of the neoglottis without digital pressure maneuver (1,000 frames). b Recording of the
neoglottis with digital pressure maneuver (2,000 frames) High-speed kymography (arrow indicates mucosal wave). a Recording of the neoglottis
without digital pressure maneuver (1,000 frames). b Recording of the neoglottis with digital pressure maneuver (2,000 frames) Recordings
were made with and without the digital pressure maneuver using a digital high-speed camera system (HreS Endocam 5562, R. Wolf, Knittlingen,
Germany) in combination with a flexible nasoendoscope. The recording rate was 2,000 frames per second. The patient was asked to produce a
number of sustained /a:/ vowels . The starting point of the irregular jejunal vibration could not be identified exactly. However, the final
part of the traveling vibration was situated all over the walls of the entire jejunal segment. The shape of the vibrating jejunal segment
varied from a circular to an elliptical appearance. The open phase of vibration was longer than the closed phase of vibration. During
digital pressure on the jejunal segment, the mucosal wave even improved (Fig. 3b). The fundamental frequency calculated from the high-speed
recording was 40 Hz during the application of digital pressure. Before and after treatment, a standardized FEES examination was performed by
an experienced laryngologist . Both recordings were made using a fiber-optic nasoendoscope in combination with an endoscopic digital camera
(stroboview ACLS, Alphatron Medical Systems, Rotterdam, The Netherlands). Before and after therapy, the patient was offered trials of thin
or thick liquid by means of a syringe. Each trial contained 10 ml of water or apple sauce, which was dyed by methylene blue. The VFSs
protocol consisted of four trials of thick liquid (4 × 10 ml high-density barium boluses, 250% w/v) with the patient in the laterolateral
position, seated upright . During pre- and post-therapy FEES and VFSs, several trials of liquid, as described before, were performed while
applying a suprastoma-located digital maneuver in an attempt to stretch the jejunal graft. Furthermore, a postural maneuver extension of the
neck was used to facilitate the act of swallowing. The oral phase before and after treatment was normal. The FEES and VFSs were judged
independently by a speech-language pathologist and a laryngologist using visuoperceptual parameters: pooling in the jejunal convolutions and
at the level of the jejunoesophageal anastomosis after swallowing, and jejunal reflux. During the evaluation of FEES and VFSs, the raters
were blinded during assessment, before versus after therapy. During post-treatment FEES and VFSs without maneuvers, moderate symmetrical
pooling in the jejunal convolutions and at the jejunoesophageal anastomosis was observed, in contrast with severe pretreatment pooling
(Figs. 4a, 5a). During post-therapy measurement, the digital maneuver to stretch the jejunal graft and the postural maneuver to extend the
neck did decrease pooling resulting in minor traces of bolus contrast in the jejunal convolutions and at the jejunoesophageal anastomosis
after swallowing, in contrast with moderate to severe pre-therapy pooling using these maneuvers (Fig. 4b, c, 5b, c). Before treatment the
maneuvers were less skillfully applied by the patient and thereby were less efficient with respect to postswallow pooling. Jejunal reflux
was not observed after therapy in contrast with severe jejunal reflux before treatment.Fig. 4FEES. a Swallowing without the digital
stretching maneuver showed severe pooling in the jejunal convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (pre-therapy). b Swallowing with the
digital stretching maneuver showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy). c
Swallowing with postural maneuver extension of the neck during swallowing showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal convolutions after
swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy)Fig. 5VFSs. a Swallowing without maneuver showed severe pooling in the jejunal convolutions after
swallowing thick liquid (pre-therapy). b Swallowing with digital stretching of the jejunal graft showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal
convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy). c Swallowing with postural maneuver extension of the neck during swallowing
showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy) FEES. a Swallowing without the digital
stretching maneuver showed severe pooling in the jejunal convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (pre-therapy). b Swallowing with the
digital stretching maneuver showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy). c
Swallowing with postural maneuver extension of the neck during swallowing showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal convolutions after
swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy) VFSs. a Swallowing without maneuver showed severe pooling in the jejunal convolutions after
swallowing thick liquid (pre-therapy). b Swallowing with digital stretching of the jejunal graft showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal
convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy). c Swallowing with postural maneuver extension of the neck during swallowing
showed minor traces of bolus in the jejunal convolutions after swallowing thick liquid (post-therapy) Overall, the patient reported to be
very satisfied with her progress in oral communication and swallowing function. Following circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy with free
jejunal repair, the tracheojejunal voice and swallowing functions were disappointing for the patient. Initially, the prosthetic
tracheojejunal voice was very weak, with extremely inadequate intelligibility. An esophageal insufflation test confirmed this finding. A
second digital maneuver to constrict the graft was applied simultaneously with training of the prosthetic tracheojejunal voice. Digital
pressure at a specific location of the graft prevented ballooning and induced a vibration of the wall, creating a neoglottis. The neoglottis
led to an improvement in the tracheojejunal voice and thereby an improvement in the fluency and intelligibility of speech in this patient .
This improved tracheojejunal voice became more socially acceptable for the patient, as shown by the VHI score. VFSph identified the location
of best vocal performance. The digital and postural maneuvers were gone over several times per week during a longer period of time. After
several weeks of therapy the patient was able to apply these maneuvers skillfully at the exact locations of best performance. The results
showed that these techniques may provide a long-term facilitation of the swallowing and speech functions in this case of prosthetic
tracheojejunal voice following circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy and neopharyngeal reconstruction with a jejunal free flap. Digital high-
speed endoscopy could provide useful images of the irregular vibration of the jejunal graft in prosthetic tracheojejunal voice production
and may indicate the presence of a neoglottis as was observed in this patient. In the future, high-speed digital endoscopy recordings may
serve as a biofeedback tool during rehabilitation of tracheojejunal voice. This information could be helpful in the multidimensional
assessment and the treatment program of the tracheojejunal voice in patients following a circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy and
neopharyngeal reconstruction with a jejunal free flap. In our patient, a digital maneuver to stretch the jejunal graft was applied
simultaneously with dysphagia treatment by a speech-language pathologist to facilitate swallowing. Manually stretching the jejunal graft led
to a decrease in convolutions which resulted in more efficient bolus transport and less pooling after swallowing, as seen during FEES and
VFSs. A postural maneuver consisting of extension of the neck was taught. This postural maneuver also caused an improvement in postswallow
pooling in the convolutions during FEES and VFSs, similar to the effect of digital stretching. This maneuver was even more convenient for
the patient because it could be performed hands free. These techniques supported the ability to increase the oral intake and increase the
level of comfort during feeding. There currently is no universal protocol for rehabilitation of swallowing or tracheojejunal voice function
following circumferential pharyngolaryngectomy and neopharyngeal reconstruction with a jejunal free flap. Rehabilitation of prosthetic voice
and swallowing function following such extensive surgery remains a challenge. This case report describes useful diagnostic
assessment/imaging tools to use for performing an evidence-based evaluation of speech and swallowing functions and of the rehabilitative
options in such a patient population. Positive therapy outcomes in this case seem to be mainly due to the application of digital and
postural maneuvers that facilitate swallowing and the tracheojejunal voice. The offered treatment protocol in this case could be used in
other motivated patients with difficulties in rehabilitation of the tracheojejunal voice and swallowing function following jejunal transfer.
The application of the above-mentioned assessment/imaging tools before and after therapy is necessary in order to evaluate the effects of
treatment. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any
noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
