A 38-year-old man presented to a rural hospital in Northwest Cameroon with a one-month history of dyspnea that worsened upon exertion. He
reported occasional cough, which was nonproductive. Review of systems revealed a fall in weight from 81 kg to 71 kg over the last year, but
no other problems were noted. The patient initially sought care at a health center in Douala (10 hours away by public transport), where he
was treated for typhoid with no improvement. On physical examination, temperature was 37.8°C, blood pressure 110/70 mmHg, pulse 88 beats per
minute, and respiratory rate 28 breaths per minute. He was noncachectic without thrush or lymphadenopathy. Lung auscultation revealed no
bronchial breath sounds or wheezes, but decreased breath sounds and dullness to percussion were noted at both lung bases, and a chest
radiograph showed dense bibasilar opacities (Figure 1). Diagnostic thoracentesis confirmed the presence of exudative pleural effusion;
cytological examination yielded 435 white blood cells/mm3 (84% lymphocytes, 10% neutrophils, and 6% eosinophils), 240 red blood cells/mm3,
and numerous motile microfilariae (mff) throughout the specimen (see Video S1). A smear was made of the pleural aspirate and the filarial
species identified as Loa loa based on morphological features (Figure 2). Other laboratory investigations included hemoglobin of 9.3 mg/dl,
white blood cells 9,800/mm3, a thick blood film negative for malaria parasites, and a positive HIV serology test. His CD4 count was 954
cells/µl. Peripheral blood was not examined for microfilariae. Chest radiographs showing bilateral basilar densities at the time of
admission (left) and complete resolution at 3-week follow-up after one dose of ivermectin (right). Microfilaria of Loa loa seen in Giemsa-
stained preparation of pleural fluid showing morphological characteristics including sheath and terminal nuclei (×1,000). Note that Giemsa
does not specifically stain the sheath, but its outline is clearly visible in this preparation. Several lymphocytes can also be seen. After
discussing these results with his physician, the patient received a single dose of ivermectin (150 µg/kg body weight) and all other
medications that had been ordered by the admitting team—including multiple broad-spectrum antibiotics, ventolin, and amodiaquine—were
stopped. A short course of prednisone was initiated to reduce potential reaction to parasite antigens. The next day, he left the hospital in
stable condition. Follow-up examination three weeks later showed normalization of his vital signs and total resolution of the pleural
effusions on repeat radiography (Figure 1). The patient was encouraged to participate in the annual ivermectin campaigns common in the area
and to monitor his HIV infection at his local medical center. Loa loa is a filarial nematode transmitted by Chrysops tabanid flies and is
limited to West and Central Africa. Most infected people remain asymptomatic, but after a latency period from 6 months to several years,
clinical symptoms may develop, most often intermittent edematous lesions in the extremities (Calabar swellings) or passage of the adult worm
under the conjunctiva . It is estimated that between 2 and 13 million people are infected with Loa loa, and a recent survey in the Eastern
Province of Cameroon showed a microfilarial prevalence of over 20% in most villages and over 45% in several areas, with twice that level of
clinical manifestations . There have been rare reports of pulmonary involvement manifested as eosinophilic infiltrates , in Cameroon and one
case of pleural effusion that contained microfilariae of Loa loa in a Ghanaian patient who had traveled extensively in West Africa , but
this case is the first to describe pulmonary loiasis in a known HIV-positive patient. Effective treatment of loiasis includes
diethylcarbamazine (DEC) administered over 2–4 weeks or a single dose of ivermectin, but DEC is the only drug with both micro- and
macrofilaricidal activity . Definitive cure sometimes requires repeated courses of DEC as some adult worms survive the first treatment, and
side effects such as itching, rash, headache, and fever are common. The microfilaricidal effect of ivermectin lasts for over a year. Both
treatments can cause an often fatal encephalopathy, especially in people with high (30–50,000 mff/ml) microfilaremias, characterized by
aphasia, extrapyramidal signs, incontinence, and retinal hemorrhage. In heavily infected patients, the mff load can be reduced by a 3-week
course of albendazole, three sessions of apheresis, or ivermectin prior to administering curative DEC more safely . When used for
onchocerciasis control in Cameroon, ivermectin caused functional impairment in ∼0.1% of cases and serious neurological events in 1 per
10,000 patients, and it is estimated that microfilaremias above 8,000 mff/ml confer a risk of postivermectin impairment . This patient was
counseled about available therapies as well as their risks, and he chose ivermectin so as not to remain in the hospital or on prolonged
drugs. Loa loa does not harbor symbiotic Wolbachia like some nematodes, so doxycycline plays no role in treatment of loiasis . The high
prevalence of loiasis in Cameroon mentioned above coexists with an HIV prevalence estimated at 5.1% in 2007 . The hypothesis that helminth
infections not only adversely affect the progression of HIV disease but also increase susceptibility to HIV infection in the first place is
garnering increasing attention . Normal immune responses to HIV may be hampered by chronic immune activation (of the T helper cell 2 type)
and anergy. Indeed, peripheral blood mononuclear cells from people with filarial infections are more susceptible to HIV infection in vitro .
Several prospective cohort studies suggest helminth eradication in HIV-positive patients is associated with reduced viral loads , and a
recent randomized control trial in Tanzania showed significant beneficial effect on HIV viral load after a course of DEC . The case
described here illustrates several important points for clinicians in the tropics. The initial management of the patient was not as tailored
as it could have been, with intravenous antibiotics, antimalarials, and beta-agonists given all at once in a kind of “shotgun” approach.
While empiric treatment for both malaria and pneumonia is common in such settings, admitting nurses and attending doctors often rely upon
algorithmic treatment protocols not necessarily based on clinical data. In this case, accurate initial physical exam findings would have
steered the diagnosis in a more specific direction if the pleural fluid had been promptly analyzed. In sub-Saharan Africa, most cases of
lymphocytic hemorrhagic exudative pleural effusion are tubercular, and, pending pleural fluid analysis, the ward physician was planning to
initiate therapy for extrapulmonary tuberculosis (TB). Differential diagnosis of such effusions includes mainly malignancy—from primary
bronchogenic to metastatic processes—and, more rarely, fungal or resolving bacterial infection. HIV-positive patients who worsen on TB
treatment with ongoing hemorrhage often have pulmonary Kaposi's sarcoma. The unexpected finding of Loa loa microfilariae in this effusion
reminds us that other explanations are possible, especially in HIV-positive patients who do not improve with initial therapy or whose CD4
count implies a relatively recent seroconversion. Most often the causes of exudative lymphocytic effusions discussed above produce
unilateral disease, and this patient had bilateral findings, which may be an indicator of atypical etiology. Another possibility is that
pleural microfilariae are incidental findings in endemic areas, but the patient's recovery without other treatment regimes supports a single
diagnosis, and antifilarial therapy led to rapid clinical improvement in several prior cases of pulmonary loiasis , . Pulmonary
manifestations of Loa loa infection include pulmonary infiltrates and eosinophilic pleural effusion . Once the diagnosis was established,
the physician suggested a course of DEC, but the patient no longer wished to remain in the hospital, despite being made aware of potential
severe adverse drug reactions such as encephalitis. He agreed to stay for 24 hours after receiving the ivermectin for monitoring as a
compromise. Although loiasis is the second or third most common cause for consultation in parts of Central Africa, it has received
relatively less attention than even other filarial neglected tropical diseases . The case presented here serves as a reminder of the high
prevalence of Loa loa in Cameroon and that it can generate serious yet atypical clinical manifestations. In this HIV–Loa loa coinfected
patient, it is impossible to ascertain which infection came first, but the high CD4 count and early clinical stage suggests that the HIV
infection was relatively recent. Concerns raised by the literature regarding immune activation during helminth infection and the resulting
possibility that people infected with helminths are more susceptible to HIV infection make it that much more imperative for clinicians in
the tropics to be vigilant in their search for accurate diagnoses, to be aware of locally prevalent diseases and their treatment, and to say
“yes” to the question “should we deworm?” when these helminths are encountered. Not all lymphocytic pleural effusions in sub-Saharan Africa
are due to tuberculosis or malignancy. Eosinophilic effusions must be examined for microfilariae, and high CD4 counts in HIV-positive
patients with pleural effusion mandate broader differential diagnosis and evaluation in areas where filariae are prevalent. There is
increasing attention in the literature to the interaction between HIV and helminths, and recent studies suggest helminth eradication may
reduce plasma viral load in coinfected patients. Caution must be exercised when using ivermectin in areas endemic for Loa loa, as severe
reactions including encephalopathy have been reported in patients with very high microfilaria loads. Although more geographically restricted
than other filarial diseases, loiasis remains highly prevalent in parts of Central Africa and is the second or third most common cause of
medical consultation in some areas. Live Loa loa in fresh pleural fluid. Motile microfilaria seen in fresh preparation of pleural aspirate
seen under low power prompted further investigation of disease etiology. (5.59 MB AVI) Click here for additional data file. The patient
whose case is presented here gave informed written consent for use of his history and findings to be published for educational purposes.
Thanks to Elvis Fon Tata for laboratory support and preparation of specimens for microscopic examination. The author has declared that no
competing interests exist. The author received no funding for this work.
