In this paper, we report on a 5-year-old girl who developed a renal stone while following the ketogenic diet to treat refractory seizure
disorder. Three months after initiating the ketogenic diet, she developed severe abdominal pain and vomiting. The spot urine calcium-to-
creatinine (Ca/Cr) ratio and 24-hour urine evaluation showed hypercalciuria. Computed tomography (CT) imaging revealed a stone in the right
ureteropelvic junction, resulting in hydronephrosis of the right kidney. The renal stone disappeared 5 days after conservative treatment;
the patien's microscopic hematuria resolved concurrently. In light of this case report, we recommend regularly monitoring the urine Ca/Cr
ratio with ultrasonography for further development of renal stones in patients following the ketogenic diet. If these patients exhibit
evidence of symptomatic hypercalciuria or cyristalluria, liberalization of fluid restriction and urine alkalization using oral potassium
citrate should be considered. The ketogenic diet was introduced by Wilder in 1921 to treat medically intractable childhood epilepsy.1
Recently published studies have demonstrated the diet's antiepileptic effects.2-6 Several hypotheses have been put forward to explain the
mechanism behind its efficacy.7,8 Kalapos8 proposed that ketone bodies might result in reduced neuronal excitability, resulting in a direct
anticonvulsant effect. Janigro7 suggested that the diet's efficacy may be related to increased availability of beta-hydroxybutyrate, a
ketone body readily transported through the blood-brain barrier. However, the mechanisms underlying the protective effect of these compounds
are not completely understood. There have been several reports about renal calculi developing in children on the ketogenic diet since the
first report more than 30 years ago.9-11 The prevalence of renal caculi in people on the ketogenic diet is 3-10%, compared with 1 in several
thousand in the general population.12 Chronic acidosis, dehydration, low urine pH, and fat malabsorption all contribute to the formation of
uric acid and calcium oxalate stones.9,10 In this paper, we describe the case of a 5-year-old girl who developed a renal stone after
beginning a ketogenic diet to control refractory complex partial seizures. A 5-year-old girl presented with severe abdominal pain, nausea,
and vomiting for one day. Her past medical history was significant for eyelid fluttering with or without facial paresis, at least 50-100
times per day. Complex partial seizures were diagnosed at 4-years-old; therapy included 2 months of antiepileptic drugs such as zonisamide,
valproate, vigabatrin, and clonazepam at an outside hospital. Despite this treatment, her seizures did not improve, so she was subsequently
referred to our hospital's Epilepsy Center. A subtotal right frontal lobectomy preserving the motor cortex was performed 4 months after
localizing the epileptogenic focus using a brain magnetic resonance image, single photon emission computed tomography, and positron emission
tomography studies. The initial electroencephalogram pattern was focal slowings and a frequent sharp wave discharged from the right frontal
area and focal slowings on the centro-temporal areas. Its pattern changed to a rhythmic sharp wave discharged from the right temporal areas
after a right subtotal frontal lobectomy. Despite the epileptic surgery, seizure frequency remained at 50-100 times per day as well as
similar seizure patterns and intensity. Ten days after surgery, she was started on a 1,300 kcal ketogenic diet with a non-lipid: lipid ratio
of 4 : 1. Although seizure frequency decreased 5 times per day, she developed severe abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting after 3 months. On
a physical examination, she had direct tenderness without rebound tenderness in the right lower abdominal quadrant. Her blood pressure was
107/72 mmHg; chest and abdomen X-rays were unremarkable. Laboratory findings showed a white blood cell count of 12,420/µL, hemoglobin 13.8
g/dL and platelets 395×103/µL. Serum total protein was 7.0 g/dL, albumin 4.6 g/dL, blood urea nitrogen 7.7 mg/dL, creatinine 0.3 mg/dL,
calcium 9.3 mg/dL, uric acid 3.9 mg/dL, sodium 142 mmol/L, potassium 3.9 mmol/L, chloride 102 mmol/L, and total CO2 12 mmol/L. Urinalysis
showed a specific gravity of 1.030, pH 5.0, hematuria (3-5/high power field), and 3-plus ketones. The spot urine calciumto-creatinine ratio
was 1.0 mg/mg (reference level: < 0.2) and 24-hour urine calcium excretion was 5.9 mg/kg (reference level: < 4 mg/kg), suggesting
hypercalciuria. Twenty-four hour uric acid excretion was within normal limits. In order to evaluate acute appendicitis, abdominal CT was
initially performed. It revealed a stone in the right ureteropelvic junction, resulting in hydronephrosis (Fig. 1). The patient was treated
with aggressive hydration and she spontaneously passed the stone, so we could not check the calculus composition. An intravenous pyelogram
demonstrated no definite intrinsic abnormalities in the kidneys, Ureters, or bladder; renal ultrasonography indicated the complete
resolution of previously noted right side abnormalities. After 1 month, a follow-up ultrasonography showed no abnormal findings. Because
seizure frequency increased by over 40 times per day, she received a right frontal lobectomy and cortisectomy of the periinsular and
superior temporal gyri, finally attaining seizure-free status. The ketogenic diet has been increasingly used by neurologists over the past
20 years for children with medically intractable epilepsy. Recent studies have reported that 23% to 44% of patients show a reduction in
seizure frequency of > 50%, including 7% to 22% who become seizure-free after 12 months on the classic ketogenic diet.3,4,13,14 However,
side effects have previously been reported in patients following a ketogenic diet.9,10 Renal stones are a significant complication of the
ketogenic diet. Calculus composition has been reported as uric acid, calcium oxalate, or a mixture of calcium oxalate and calcium
phosphate/uric acid.10,15 There are several reasons underlying the elevated risk of developing renal calculi in patients on the ketogenic
diet. First, hypercalciuria can develop due to chronic metabolic acidosis. This metabolic acidosis not only decreases calcium reabsorption
in the renal tubules, thus increasing urinary calcium excretion,10 but also increases bone demineralization because bone phosphate acts as
an acid buffer.16 Second, children on a ketogenic diet show hypocitraturia. Citrate normally binds urine calcium, lowering its
concentration, acting as an inhibitor of calcium crystallization.16 Acidosis induces proximal tubules to both increase citrate absorption
and decreases its excretion. As a result, acidosis not only reduces urinary citrate excretion but also increases urinary calcium excretion,
aggravating renal stone formation. Third, chronic acidosis persistently causes low urinary pH, which facilitates uric acid crystal formation
due to lowered uric acid solubility. These crystals can act as a nidus for calcium stone formation.16 Lastly, dehydration may be the most
significant factor in calculus formation in children on the ketogenic diet,15 primarily because ketosis has been shown to interfere with the
normal thirst mechanism.10 In light of these complications, fluid liberalization and urine alkalization using oral potassium citrate should
be considered as prophylaxis to prevent renal stone formation in children beginning this diet.10,15,17 Potassium citrate increases urine pH
and solublizes calcium, thereby decreasing the concentration of free calcium available to crystallize. One of our authors has suggested that
initial fasting and fluid restriction are not essential to the ketogenic diet.18 Because an increase in fluid intake does not diminish the
efficacy of the ketogenic diet in controlling seizures and blood ketone levels,11 these preventive measures may be useful in reducing the
formation of renal stones. In conclusion, the ketogenic diet is a risk factor for kidney stones, and hypercalciuria was more common in those
with kidney stones. We recommend maximizing fluid intake and alkalinizing the urine to prevent the development of renal stones. Regular
urinary studies including calcium-to-creatinine ratio and ultrasonography are highly recommended to detect this possible complication in
children receiving the ketogenic diet.9,10 Any evidence of hematuria, dysuria, or crystalluria should be evaluated with both a renal
ultrasonography and a nephrology referral. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Abdominal CT scan showing a stone in the
ureteropelvic junction of the right kidney which caused hydronephrosis.
