Isolated pancreatic metastases from a non-pancreatic primary malignancy are very rare. Studies have shown that resection of metastases is of
proven benefit in some types of tumors. We report a case of 76-year-old Taiwanese woman with rectal adenocarcinoma treated with neoadjuvant
chemoradiotherapy and abdominoperineal resection 2 years ago presenting with an asymptomatic mass at the pancreatic tail on a routine follow
up abdominal computed tomography scan. The patient underwent distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy under the preoperative impression of a
primary pancreatic malignancy. Histological examination of the surgical specimen showed metastatic adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical
studies confirmed the diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis from rectal adenocarcinoma. Postoperative chemotherapy in the form of oral
capecitabine was given. The patient is alive and disease free 12 months after the surgery. In a patient presenting with a pancreatic mass
with history of a non-pancreatic malignancy, a differential diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis should be considered. Surgical resection of a
solitary pancreatic mass is justified not only to get the definitive diagnosis but also to improve the survival. The common sites of
metastasis from colorectal adenocarcinoma are the liver, lung, and regional lymph nodes . Colorectal adenocarcinoma, however, rarely
metastasize to the pancreas. Isolated pancreatic metastases from non-pancreatic primary tumors are very rare, accounting for approximately
2% of all pancreatic neoplasms . Renal cell carcinoma is the most common primary malignancy to metastasize to the pancreas . Studies have
shown that surgical resections of hepatic or lung metastases for colorectal malignancy patients provide survival benefit . However, the role
of surgery for a solitary pancreatic metastasis from colorectal adenocarcinoma has not yet been defined because of the rarity of the
condition. To the best of our knowledge, very few colorectal malignancy cases with pancreatic metastases are reported in the literature .
Herein, we report a case with primary rectal adenocarcinoma with metachronous pancreatic metastasis undergoing surgical resection and also
conduct a substantial review of the literature relevant to pancreatic metastases from colorectal malignancy. A 76-year-old Taiwanese woman
had undergone neoadjuvant chemotherapy/radiotherapy and abdominoperineal resection for rectal adenocarcinoma (stage IIIa; pT3N0 M0 according
to the 6th edition AJCC; Figure 1) 2 years ago. No post-operative adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy was administered to the patient. She
was relatively well postoperatively, without any evidence of disease recurrence or associated symptoms until she was incidentally found to
have a mass in the pancreatic tail on a routine follow up abdominal computed tomography scan. Histological specimen of primary rectal cancer
demonstrates a moderately-differentiated adenocarcinoma with invading through the muscularis propria into the subserosa (hematoxylin and
eosin staining, 20×). On admission, physical examination, hematogram and biochemistry tests were unremarkable, except for a midline
operative scar and an end-colostomy. The carcinoembryonic antigen level (2.16 ng/ml) was within normal range. Abdominal computed tomography
revealed an ill-defined hypodense mass measuring 3.0 × 1.6 cm in diameter at the pancreatic tail (Figure 2). There was no evidence of local
recurrence of rectal cancer, lymphadenopathy or distant metastasis. A primary pancreatic malignancy was suspected, and the patient underwent
distal pancreatectomy with splenectomy. Abdominal computed tomography reveals an ill-defined hypodense mass approximately 3.0 × 1.6 cm in
diameter in the pancreatic tail. Macroscopically, the cut surface of the pancreatic mass demonstrated a whitish, firm, and infiltrating
tumor with ill-defined margins. Histopathological exam showed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with marked necrosis (Figure 3A)
which was morphologically the same as the primary rectal adenocarcinoma. Immunohistochemical studies showed the tumor cells positive for
CK-20 (Figure 3B) and CDX-2 (Figure 3C), markers for colorectal adenocarcinoma, confirming the final diagnosis of pancreatic metastasis from
rectal adenocarcinoma. Photomicrography of the pancreatic mass depicts a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma with marked necrosis
(hematoxylin and eosin staining, 20×; A). Immunohistochemial stain studies of the pancreatic tumor shows positive for CK-20 (B) and CDX2
(C), further confirming the diagnosis of metastasis from rectal adenocarninoma. The postoperative course was uneventful except for fever
which developed 3 weeks after surgery. Abdominal computed tomography revealed a fluid collection, 3 cm in size near the pancreatic stump
suggestive of intraabdominal abscess and the patient recovered with antibiotic treatment. Post operative chemotherapy in form of oral
capecitabine was given and the patient is alive and disease free 12 months after surgery. The incidence of pancreatic metastases in autopsy
series performed in patients with malignant neoplasms ranged from 1.6-11% . Renal cell carcinoma is the most common primary tumor, followed
by lung cancer (adenocarcinoma and non-small cell lung carcinoma), lobular breast carcinoma, and more rarely, gastric cancer, melanoma, and
soft-tissue sarcoma . Solitary metastases to the pancreas occur even less frequently. Roland et al reported that 27 out of 1,357 (2%) non-
pancreatic tumor patients had solitary pancreatic metastases, and resections were performed in only 4 patients . Nakeeb at al showed that
among 363 pancreatoduodenectomies (239 performed for malignant periampullary diseases), metastatic pancreatic tumors were identified in 6
cases (1.65%) . Faure et al examined 269 pancreatic resections and found solitary pancreatic metastases in 8 cases (2.97%) . In another
study by Sperti et al, isolated pancreatic metastases were noted in 8 of 259 pancreatectomies (3%) . Colorectal adenocarcinoma, however, was
rarely identified to metastasize to the pancreas in those studies. Table 1 summarizes the details of colorectal adenocarcinoma cases with
isolated metastasis to the pancreas in the literature and only 8 rectal adenocarcinoma cases including our patient were identified. Clinical
data of colorectal cancer patients with isolated pancreatic metastases undergoing pancreatic resection in the literature -, not available;
*, two cases with colon cancer; **, median cumulative survival of two cases; †, alive; ††; alive with disease; †††, dead; DP, distal
pancreatectomy; PPPD, pylorus-preserving pancreatoduodenectomy Clinical presentations of colorectal tumor patients with isolated pancreatic
metastases are quite different from that of primary pancreatic malignancy patients who frequently have abdominal pain, body weight loss, and
jaundice . As shown in table 1, only 4 patients (4/20, 20%) with pancreatic metastases presented abdominal pain and 1 had body weight loss
(1/20, 5%). Six of 20 patients (30%) manifested jaundice which might be related to tumor location at the pancreatic head with mass effects .
Interestingly, 6 of 11 patients (54.5%) with tumor location at the pancreatic head did not present jaundice. However, it was remarkable that
up to 45% of patients (9/20) were asymptomatic upon presentation. It was also reported that imaging studies are unable to differentiate
primary pancreatic lesions from metastases by any specific manners . These observations and findings suggested that if one had history of a
non-pancreatic primary malignancy presenting a pancreatic mass with unusual manifestations during follow-up, solitary pancreatic metastasis,
in addition to primary pancreatic malignancy, should be considered. In regard of treatment of cancer patients with an isolated distant organ
metastasis and the absence of widespread diseases, a number of studies have shown that resection of metastases has been proven beneficial
for some types of tumors. For example, metastases to the liver, brain, and lung from tumors such as sarcoma, renal cell carcinoma,
colorectal cancer, and gastrointestinal stromal tumors, metastasectomy have been reported to have salutary effects on patient survival .
However the role of surgery for solitary pancreatic metastases from colorectal carcinoma has not yet been well-defined. Given the fact that
metastasectomies for colorectal cancer patients with hepatic and pulmonary metastases are beneficial , it seems to be reasonable to perform
pancreatic resections for those patients with isolated pancreatic metastases. Table 1 demonstrated outcomes of patients after pancreatic
resections for metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma with median survival of 16.5 months. Notably, Reddy et al reported that a cumulative
median survival of patients after pancreatic resection was more than 3 years . In the current case, surgical resection is reasonable to
treat and get the definite diagnosis as well as to improve patient survival. Our patient is alive with disease free more than 12 months
after distal pancreatectomy and splenectomy. From a review of surgical outcomes of previously reported cases including our patient and less
than 5% of surgical mortality rate in pancreatic surgery , we suggest that pancreatic resection for a solitary pancreatic metastasis from
colorectal carcinoma is safe and feasible in a center with high volume of pancreatic surgery. The role of postoperative adjuvant therapy
still remains controversial, and further studies are needed to clarify this issue. Pancreatic metastases should be kept in mind when a
patient with history of a non-pancreatic malignancy, such as colorectal adenocarcinoma presenting a pancreatic mass. Long-term follow-up
with appropriate imaging studies is mandatory to detect the distant metastasis including the pancreas. Pancreatic resection for an isolated
pancreatic metastasis from colorectal adenocarcinoma is feasible in selected cases. Surgical resection of a solitary pancreatic mass is
justified not only to get the definitive diagnosis but also to improve the survival. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. IRB approval was also obtained for collecting the data. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. LCW: data collection and analysis, drafting the manuscript. WRC: pathological review of surgical
specimens, preparing histopathological figures. HJT: drafting and revising the manuscript, surgical management of the patient. YCN: revising
the manuscript. YTS: revising the manuscript. HTL: revising the manuscript. JYY: revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved
final manuscript.
