Air insufflation of the stomach during laparoscopic pyloromyotomy does not reliably rule-out perforation. Undetected perforation during
laparoscopic pyloromyotomy can be fatal. Detecting a perforation at the time of laparoscopic pyloromyotomy is difficult. The purpose of this
study was to determine whether air insufflation of the stomach reliably detects perforation during laparoscopic pyloromyotomy. Between 2007
and 2008, 71 patients underwent laparoscopic pyloromyotomy and 2 patients (3.3%) had perforation. Insufflating the stomach with air did not
demonstrate the perforation in either case. Both perforations were detected by careful inspection of the myotomy; a small amount of mucus
was seen at the perforation site. Both patients underwent open suture repair with an omental patch and had unremarkable postoperative
courses. Air insufflation of the stomach during laparoscopic pyloromyotomy does not reliably rule out perforation. As with all procedures
with potential complications, a high index of suspicion and careful inspection of the entire myotomy may help detect perforation.
Laparoscopic pyloromyotomy was first introduced in 1991.1 Over the last decade, laparoscopic pyloromyotomy has gained increasing popularity
and has been shown to be safe and effective.2–5 However, some surgeons continue to perform open pyloromyotomy due to concerns over an
undetected perforation and its associated morbidity and even mortality. Currently, the most common method to detect a perforation is by
insufflating air into the stomach and checking for bubbles at the myotomy site.2–5 We report on 2 patients in whom air insufflation into the
stomach did not detect a perforation during laparoscopic pyloromyotomy. Between January 2007 and December 2008, 71 patients underwent
laparoscopic pyloromyotomy by a single surgeon. During this time, 2 patients experienced perforation. The first patient was a 5-week-old,
3.2kg, male infant and the second was a 4-week-old 3.3kg, male infant. Briefly, laparoscopic pyloromyotomy was performed with a 2.7-mm,
30-degree laparoscope through the infraumbilical area. Two additional stab incisions (left upper quadrant and right upper quadrant) were
made. The pylorus was stabilized, incised, and pyloromyotomy completed. Air was then insufflated into the stomach through a previously
placed orogastric tube while the duodenum was occluded with a laparoscopic grasper. In all cases, the orogastric tube was an 8 French red
rubber catheter. Air was insufflated using a 60-mL catheter tip syringe until the stomach was clearly distended and the myotomy site was
observed for bubbles. Typically, a thin layer of blood overlies the myotomy site in which the bubbles are created. In both cases,
insufflating air into the stomach did not demonstrate the perforation. In both cases, the stomach was distended multiple times, and there
was no evidence of a leak. Both leaks were detected after suctioning the overlying blood to allow close visual inspection of the myotomy
site. In both instances, there was a small amount of mucus seen at the perforation site. The first perforation occurred at the gastric end
of the myotomy, and the second occurred at the middle of the inferior aspect of the myotomy. Both patients underwent open suture repair with
an omental patch. Neither required closure of the pyloromyotomy and a myotomy at another site. Both patients had unremarkable postoperative
courses. Prospective, randomized studies have shown that laparoscopic pyloromyotomy is as safe and effective as open pyloromyotomy is.2–5
However, an undetected perforation can lead to sepsis, multi-organ failure, and even death.6 Fear of such a complication has led some
pediatric surgeons to continue to perform open pyloromyotomy. Currently, the most common method for detecting a perforation during
laparoscopic pyloromyotomy is by insufflating air into the stomach while visualizing the myotomy site for any air bubbles.2–4 Despite this
technique, undetected perforations have occurred and although not reported, undetected perforations have led to significant morbidity and
even mortality. In this report, we have demonstrated 2 perforations in which insufflating air into the stomach did not detect a leak. As
with many complications in surgery, both perforations were detected due to a high index of suspicion. In both cases, the pyloromyotomy did
not go as smoothly as others; thus, in addition to air insufflation of the stomach to detect a perforation, both underwent careful
inspection of the myotomy site. In nearly all instances, blood is covering the myotomy site to help detect the bubbles with during
insufflation; however, this layer of blood may also obscure adequate visual inspection. As with open pyloromyotomy, it has not been our
practice to remove this blood to carefully inspect the myotomy site. Based on these 2, we have now abandoned insufflating air into the
stomach as a method for detecting a leak, but rather, rely on close visual inspection of the pyloromyotomy. As minimally invasive techniques
continue to develop and gain popularity, the ability to avoid and detect intraoperative complications is vital. With respect to laparoscopic
pyloromyotomy, the ability to detect perforation at the time of surgery remains the most crucial aspect of the procedure. However, the
current method of detecting a perforation with insufflation of air into the stomach is unreliable. Rather, a high index of suspicion and
careful visualization of the entire myotomy is required.
