A high incidence of de novo chromosomal aberrations in a population of persons with autism suggests a causal relationship between certain
chromosomal aberrations and the occurrence of autism. A previous study on a Tunisian boy carrying a t(7;16) translocation identified the
7p22.1 as a positional candidate region for autism on chromosome 7. The characterization of the chromosomal breakpoints helped us to
identify new candidate regions on chromosome 16p11.2 which contain no known genes and the other one on 7p22.1 containing a portion of genes
(NP 976327.1, RBAK, Q6NUR6 also called RNF216L and MMD2). We proposed Q6NUR6 (RNF216L) as a candidate gene for autism due to its vicinity to
the translocation breakpoint on the chromosome derivative 7. Q6NUR6 is predicted to be an E3ubiquitin-ligase. Quantitative PCR demonstrates
that Q6NUR6 gene has an ubiquitous expression and that it is strongly expressed in fetal and adult brain. The Q6NUR6 expression is increased
in the patient blood cells in comparison to controls. This is the first report of Q6NUR6 gene (E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIAD3 EC 6.3.2)
increasing blood levels in a patient with autism. It's probably caused by a position effect involving this gene and modifying its
expression. A wide range of numerical and structural chromosome abnormalities including translocations, deletions, and duplications, visible
in banding cytogenetic techniques, has been reported in autistic patients . The high incidence of de novo chromosomal aberrations in a
population of persons with autism suggests a causal relationship between certain chromosomal aberrations and the occurrence of autism . We
have studied a boy patient with autism and no dysmorphic features. Cytogenetic and molecular investigations revealed a de novo balanced
translocation 46, XY, t(7;16)(p22.1;p11.2) in the patient. The karyotypes of the parents are normal. We mapped the breakpoints of the
translocation on chromosomes 7 and 16 by fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH). The characterization of the chromosomal breakpoints
helped us to identify new candidate regions on chromosome 16p11.2 which contains no known genes and the other one on 7p22.1 containing a
portion of genes (NP_976327.1, RBAK, Q6NUR6 also called RNF216L and MMD2) . Metaphase spreads from the patient, her parents, and controls
were obtained using standard protocols either from short-term blood lymphocyte cultures or from EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell
cultures. Whole chromosome paints screen confirmed the presence of the t(7;16) translocation, showed that the chromosomal rearrangement
implicates the chromosomes 7 and 16 only, and established that the translocation is reciprocal and apparently balanced (Figure 1(a)). In
order to finemap the breakpoint on 7p22.1, we performed FISH using BAC End clones from this chromosomal region as probes. BAC DNAs (RPCI-11
library) were biotinylated with biotin-11-dUTP (Sigma) by nick translation using the Bio Nick Labelling System (Invitrogen Life
Technologies) according to the instructions of the manufacturers. Hybridization was performed using the standard procedures. After several
rounds of hybridization, we identified one genomic BAC End clone (RP11-152I5) specific of band 7p22.1 and which is spanning the breakpoint
on chromosome 7. We analyzed 50 metaphases and noticed that the signal on chromosome derivative 16 was repeatedly larger than the signal of
chromosome derivative 7. These results suggest that the breakpoint on chromosome 7 is in the region corresponding to the centromeric half of
BAC RP11-152I5 (Figure 1(b)). Based on our results and according to the UCSC genome database (http://genome.ucsc.edu/), we proposed Q6NUR6
(RNF216L) as a candidate gene for autism due to its vicinity to the translocation breakpoint on the chromosome derivative 7. The Q6NUR6 gene
(GeneID: 441191) maps to chromosome 7p22.1 and contains 8 exons (only exons 4, 5 and 6 are coding), encompassing 24,183 Kb of genomic DNA.
The gene transcribes an mRNA (BC068459) of 2,427 Kb that encodes a 75-amino-acid protein. The protein shows great homology with TRIAD3 gene.
Its function is currently unknown but Q6NUR6 is predicted to be an E3 ubiquitin-ligase. Approximately 23 kb of Q6NUR6 (including the
promoter region) are located in the region corresponding to BAC RP11-152I5 (spanning the 7p22.1 breakpoint) (Figure 1(b)). To test whether
this part of the gene was interrupted by the translocation breakpoint we performed Southern blot experiments to explore the genomic region
containing the Q6NUR6 gene and its promoter on the patient's and a control DNA. All Southern blots gave normal results with restriction
fragments at the expected sizes (data not shown), indicating that the Q6NUR6 gene or its promoter is not interrupted by the translocation
breakpoint on chromosome 7. Because Q6NUR6 gene is close to, but not interrupted by, the 7p22.1 breakpoint, we wanted to determine if its
expression is altered by the presence of the translocation breakpoint. Total RNA was isolated and purified using the RNAgents Total RNA
Isolation System (Promega) from peripheral white blood cells and EBV cell lines of the patient and controls. DNAse treatment was performed
for 30 minutes with 1 mg of RNA, 1 U of RNAse-free DNAse I (Qiagen GmbH, Germany). Total RNA was used in conjunction with AMV reverse
transcriptase and random hexamers (Promega) to generate first strand cDNA. For the PCR step, 1 μg of total RNA converted to cDNA was used in
25 μL reactions with TaqMan Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). For the Q6NUR6 gene the corresponding
sequence-specific primers/probes assay mix (Hs00415445_m1) was used. Fluorescence detection was measured utilizing an ABI Prism 7500
platform (Applied Biosystems). After an initial step at 50°C for 2 minutes, there was an activation step at 95°C for 10 minutes. Thermal
cycling proceeded with 50 cycles at 95°C for 15 seconds and 1 minute at 60°C. Normalization to the ribosomal18s and to the
beta-2-microglobulin (B2M) control genes was performed to account for variability in the initial concentration and quality of total RNA and
in the conversion efficiency of the reverse transcription reaction. All PCR reactions were performed in triplicate and changes in gene
expression between the control (or calibrator) and treated samples after normalisation to the gene reference was calculated using the
comparative threshold cycle (CT) method where relative amount is equal to 2−∆∆CT, and where ∆∆CT is the ∆CT of the target gene (threshold
cycle test gene—threshold cycle endogenous control) minus the ∆CT of the calibrator sample (threshold cycle calibrator gene—threshold cycle
endogenous control). Quantitative PCR demonstrates that Q6NUR6 gene has an ubiquitous expression and that it is strongly expressed in foetal
and adult brain (Figure 2(a)). The Q6NUR6 expression is increased in the patient blood cells in comparison to controls (the control RNA
originates from individuals without disease phenotype or chromosomal aberration). As shown in Figure 2(b), Q6NUR6 is overexpressed in the
patient rather than in healthy control blood cells. The relative quantification of Q6NUR6 gene expression was established to 29.33. The
average of the expression on normal control individuals was calculated as 0.9687 excluding a possible duplication of this gene. The
threshold for overexpression was established as about 30-fold the value for the normal controls in EBV-cell lines. To determine if this
increase is caused by the translocation, we quantified the expression of Q6NUR6 in the patient's cell line and in four autistic patients
without chromosomal aberrations (Figure 2(c)). The overexpression is the same that seen previously. This result means that the variation of
Q6NUR6 gene expression seen in the patient cell line is probably caused by the translocation. Quantitative RT-PCR was also used to verify if
the remaining chromosome 7 candidate genes were differentially expressed in the patient and the control cases. NP_976327.1 gene was not
expressed in blood and fibroblasts. RBAK and MMD2 genes were expressed at the same level in patient and controls (data available upon
request). The Q6NUR6 gene has been localized to 7p22.1 by the Mammalian Gene Collection . This gene has been described as a pseudogene in
Gene at NCBI database (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). However, it has been considered to be a protein coding gene by Ensembl Genome Browser
(http://www.ensembl.org/). The Bgee database (http://bgee.unil.ch/) demonstrates that Q6NUR6 gene is expressed in a variety oh human tissues
(like brain and hippocampus) at all developmental stages. Our data demonstrate the ubiquitous expression of this gene and its overexpression
in an autistic patient carrying a t(7;16)(22.1;p11.2) reciprocal translocation. Chromosomal aberrations, when they do not interrupt a gene,
sometime lead to the modification of the expression of a gene due to the alteration of its environment, the so-called “position effect.” The
rearrangement may juxtapose the gene with an enhancer element from another gene leading to inappropriate gene expression . This is the first
report of Q6NUR6 gene (E3 ubiquitin ligase TRIAD3 EC_6.3.2) increasing blood levels in a patient with autism probably caused by a position
effect involving this gene and modifying its expression. Q6NUR6 is predicted as an E3 ubiquitin ligase from protein sequence homology with
the TRIAD3 protein. Abnormalities in other E3 ubiquitin ligases have been described earlier in number of psychiatric diseases . Mutations in
E3 ligases were identified as causative for Angelman syndrome [MIM : 105830] (UBE3A gene) and recessive juvenile Parkinson disease
[MIM : 600116] (PARK2 gene) . In conclusion, all the data collected during the course of this study suggest that the Q6NUR6 gene may be
implicated in the autistic phenotype of the reported patient, and that this phenotype is possibly caused by the presence of the
translocation. The exact functions of Q6NUR6 gene in mammalian cells are still unclear and final genetic evidence linking this gene to
autism will be obtained by the detection of mutations in this gene in other patients with autism, or the association of polymorphisms in
this candidate gene with autism. Physical mapping of the breakpoint on chromosome 7. (a) Dual color painting using directly FITC labelled
(green) chromosome 7 paint and Rhodamine labelled (red) chromosome 16 paint. Both derivatives 7 and 16 (arrow) show clear evidence of a
reciprocal exchange of chromatin from distal 7p and distal 16p, respectively. (b) Physical map of the genomic region 7p22.1 derived from the
October 2009 version of the UCSC Genome Browser (http://genome.ucsc.edu/). The genomic clones covering the region flanking the translocation
breakpoint are indicated by black lines (S: spanning, NT: non-translocated). The breakpoint (Bp) region is represented by an arrow. The
genomic location of candidate genes is represented by rectangles. Quantitative expression of Q6NUR6 gene. (a) The expression pattern of the
Q6NUR6 gene in various human tissues, fB: fœtal brain; Br: brain; Bl: blood; Li: liver; T: testis; Lu: lung. (b, c) Quantitative Expression
of Q6NUR6 gene in the patient and controls. QRT-PCR was done on RNA extracted from blood cell lines. A significantly higher expression level
was detected in the patient compared with normal control individuals (b) and with autistic patients without chromosomal anomalies (c). The
expression normalization was done using the ribosomal 18S gene. (AR: Patient; NTC: No Template Control; T2, T3, T4, T6, T7: Healthy control
individuals; P1, P2, P3, P4: autistic patients without chromosomal anomalies).
