A rare case of abdominal trauma, a handlebar hernia, is described, as well as a review of the pertinent literature. A 7-year-old boy
presented to our emergency room after sustaining blunt force to the abdomen; he fell on the handlebar of his bicycle. Immediately after the
accident, a bulge was noticeable at the point of impact. Handlebar hernia is a diagnosis that is easily missed, which can lead to
strangulation and incarceration of the bowel. With this case report, we hope to augment the knowledge on traumatic abdominal wall hernia,
hopefully leading to early diagnosis and treatment. Trauma to the abdomen, involving blunt or cavitating force, often results in damage to
the intestines. However, when the directed force is too frail to cause intra-abdominal damage and too blunt to penetrate the abdominal wall,
there still is a chance of injury: traumatic abdominal wall hernia. Although its pathogenesis remains unclear, it seems to involve a sudden
increase in intra-abdominal pressure in combination with tangential shearing stress, leading to interruption of the abdominal muscle and
fascia layers. We describe a rare case of traumatic abdominal wall hernia in a 7-year-old boy who endured blunt force to the abdomen. The
literature involving handlebar hernia is reviewed. A nearly 7-year-old boy, with no relevant past history, visited our emergency department
with abdominal pain and swelling after a fall from his bike. Whilst riding his bike, he had fallen and his abdomen had landed on the
handlebar. Immediately after the accident, his mother noticed a swelling where the handlebar had hit his abdomen. They visited the general
practitioner on call who subsequently sent him to our emergency department. Apart from pain, he had no other complaints. On physical
examination, he seemed to be not ill and he was haemodynamically stable. Examination of the abdomen showed a circular contusion of the skin
several centimetres below the umbilicus just on the right of the midline (Fig. 1). On palpation, a clear defect of the rectus fascia could
be felt. There were no signs of peritonitis suggesting an enteral lesion. He was admitted for observation and discharged the following
morning. He was scheduled for surgery 1 week later. During the operation, a skin-line incision was performed over the fascia defect,
revealing a rupture of the musculus rectus abdominis, as well as a total rupture of the right rectus fascia (Fig. 2). The rectus sheath was
closed with a continuous Vicryl suture. The muscle defect was approximated with interrupted Vicryl sutures. The skin was closed
intracutaneously. He was discharged the following day and recovered uneventfully.Fig. 1Circular contusion on the place of
impactFig. 2Rupture of the musculus rectus abdominis, as well as a total rupture of the right rectus fascia Circular contusion on the place
of impact Rupture of the musculus rectus abdominis, as well as a total rupture of the right rectus fascia A traumatic abdominal wall hernia
occurs after trauma in which a small focal point, such as a handlebar, seat belt or any other obdurate object, localises blunt force to the
abdomen. This force, being blunt in nature, does not penetrate the abdomen; however, due to the aforementioned focal point, the transferred
energy dissipates throughout the abdominal wall. In combination with the increased abdominal pressure, due to direct impact, this leads to
the shearing of muscle and fascia layers. This shearing is thought to occur at anatomic weak points, such as the inguinal region or the
lower abdomen lateral to the rectus muscle. The elastic qualities of the skin keep it from tearing apart, resulting in an abdominal wall
hernia . Although there are several classification systems, the one most often used in traumatic abdominal wall hernia is based on the
amount of blunt force involved in the accident. This is the main determent used to categorise traumatic abdominal wall hernias. With a large
force, such as that caused by a motorcycle accident or resulting from a fall, there tends to be larger and more diffuse defects.
Simultaneous rupture of the diaphragm may also occur with this increase in force. When the injury involves decelerating force, as in the
case of a car accident involving seat belts, another category can be seen; traumatic abdominal wall hernia involving intra-abdominal bowel
herniation. The last category, named handlebar hernia, involves a small force which is localised through an adamant object, such as the
handlebar of a bicycle [2, 3]. Traumatic abdominal wall hernia should be considered in any patient who presents to the emergency room after
sustaining blunt trauma to the abdomen. The following clinical signs can help establish the diagnosis. On inspection, there may be an
imprint present on the abdomen through which the force was channelled. This imprint is usually accompanied by ecchymosis. Around the
imprint, a tender mass may be palpated, reminiscent of a normal hernia. Apart from these findings, the abdominal examination is usually
normal. In severe cases where the impact has also caused damage to the intestines, there can be signs of peritonitis. All of the above-
mentioned symptoms may, however, also be absent, as there are case reports of patients in which symptoms presented 48 h after the accident .
Additional research, in the form of an ultrasound, Fig. 3, or computed tomography (CT) scan, Fig. 4, greatly helps to establish the
diagnosis [5, 6].Fig. 3Ultrasonography showing abdominal wall hernia after traumaFig. 4Computed tomography (CT) scan showing abdominal wall
hernia after trauma Ultrasonography showing abdominal wall hernia after trauma Computed tomography (CT) scan showing abdominal wall hernia
after trauma The differential diagnosis for traumatic abdominal wall hernia includes other causes for bulges in the inguinal or lower
abdomen region. After trauma, a haematoma of the rectus sheath may mimic traumatic abdominal wall hernia. While usually seen before the
accident by the patient or his family, a pre-existing inguinal hernia should not be ruled out. Although rare, abdominal neoplasms, such as
nephroblastoma and lymphoma, are occasionally unveiled for the first time after trauma occurs to the abdomen . The treatment of traumatic
abdominal wall hernia consists of surgical exploration with closure of the defect. When the defect is small and localised, which is the case
in handlebar hernia, closure can be achieved with non-absorbable suture. However, the condition of the muscle and fascia layer should be
taken into account; primary closure of sheared layers should not be considered to be as strong as closure with a prosthetic graft. With
larger defects, seen after high-energy impacts, prosthetic materials are often used to achieve closure. Accompanying damage to the
intestines requires tailored intervention. If there are signs of intra-abdominal damage on presentation, generalised peritonitis or evidence
of perforation on CT, primary surgical intervention should be carried out promptly. Smaller defects, in which intra-abdominal injury is
absent, may also be corrected on a delayed basis. A case report with conservative treatment has been described; however, due to the risk of
strangulation and incarceration, surgical intervention is favoured [8, 9]. Table 1 lists 23 previously published cases of handlebar hernia,
with our case being the 24th. The ages of the patients ranged from 4 to 14 years. The most common traumatising agent was a bicycle
handlebar. The location of injuries were equally divided between the right middle and left lower quadrant of the abdomen. In none of the
cases were prosthetic materials used; primary closure was achieved through layered closure. In all cases, recovery was
uneventful.Table 1Previously published cases on handlebar herniaAge/sexReferenceTraumatising agentInjury locationSurgical
management14/MLandry (1956) Motorcycle handlebarLLQLaparotomy and layered closure9/MRoberts (1964) Bicycle handlebarLLQLayered
closure9/FMaunola and Kekomaki (1965) Bicycle handlebarLLQExploratory laparotomy, repair of muscle and sheath8/FPendl (1970) Bicycle
handlebarRLQLayered closure7/MHerbert and Turner (1973) Bicycle handlebarLLQLayered closure6/MAtiemo and Goswami (1974) Gored by a
cowLLQLayered closure4/FHollwarth (1977) Scooter handlebarRLQLayered closure6/MHollwarth (1977) Bicycle handlebarRLQClosure7/MHollwarth
(1977) Bicycle handlebarLUQClosure13/MHollwarth (1977) Bicycle handlebarSymphysis pubisClosure11/MDreyfuss et al. (1986) Bicycle
handlebarRectus abdominisDebridement and layered closure8/MSchneegans (1988) Bicycle handlebarRLQAppendectomy, layered closure7/MMitchiner
(1990) Bicycle handlebarLUQReduction of bowel and layered closure5/MDamschen et al. (1994) Bicycle handlebarRLQReduction of bowel and
layered closure6/MKubalak (1994) Gored by a cowRLQClosure8/MKubalak (1994) Bicycle handlebarRLQLayered closure9/FKubalak (1994) Bicycle
handlebarRLQClosure7/MIuchtman et al. (1997) Bicycle handlebarRLQClosure11/MPerez et al. (1998) Bicycle handlebarLLQLaparotomy and layered
closure9/MKubota et al. (1999) Bicycle handlebarRLQReduction of bowel and layered closure11/MFraser et al. (2002) Bicycle
handlebarRLQLayered closure7/MMancel and Aslam (2003) Bicycle handlebarLLQLayered closure11/MGoliath et al. (2004) Bicycle
handlebarRLQLayered closure7/Mvan Bemmel et al. (2009)Bicycle handlebarRectus abdominisLayered closure Previously published cases on
handlebar hernia Traumatic abdominal wall hernia is a rare diagnosis. Lack of knowledge and the possibility of the absence of apparent
clinical signs on presentation make this an injury which is easily missed. The mechanism of trauma to the abdomen and the recognition of
sometimes subtle signs should prompt high suspicion to the presence of a traumatic abdominal wall hernia. When in doubt, additional
ultrasound or computed tomography (CT) scanning greatly helps to establish the diagnosis. Early recognition, and treatment when needed, may
lead to a significant reduction of morbidity associated with strangulation and incarceration. Although the aetiology of the trauma
predisposes to the use of prosthetic materials, in children, primary closure seems to achieve an excellent result . This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
