Situs inversus totalis is a rare anomaly in which the abdominal and thoracic cavity structures are opposite their usual positions. A 41-yr-
old woman, who had an ulcerating cancer on the rectum, was found as a case of situs inversus totalis. We present an overview of the
operative technique for the first documented laparoscopic total mesorectal excision of a rectal cancer in the patient with situs inversus
totalis. Careful consideration of the mirror-image anatomy permitted a safe operation using techniques not otherwise different from those
used for the general population. Therefore, curative laparoscopic surgery for rectal cancer in this patient is feasible and safe. Situs
inversus totalis (SIT) is a rare congenital anomaly with an incidence of 1 in 5,000-20,000 (1). Several reports on surgical procedures in
SIT patients have documented greater technical difficulties, as the anatomy is abnormal (2-8). Laparoscopy can prove to be an even greater
technical challenge (2, 6). Although laparoscopic colorectal surgery has recently become a standard procedure, there are only four reports
on laparoscopic surgery for colonic disease in patients with SIT (2-5). The majority of reported cases are laparoscopic sigmoidectomy for
diverticular disease, while there is one case of a hemicolectomy with lymphadenectomy. To our knowledge, this is the first report on the
feasibility of laparoscopic total mesorectal excision (TME) for a rectal cancer patient with SIT. A 41-yr-old woman visited a local
hospital, reporting bloody stool for 3 months. Colonoscopy revealed an ulcerative tumor in the lower rectum, 5 cm from the anal verge;
biopsy confirmed that it was a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma. She was referred to our hospital in June 2008 for further evaluation and
surgical treatment. She underwent an appendectomy at the age of 12 yr. She was an unmarried woman. She was 159.5 cm tall and weighed 58.5
kg. The abdominal examination revealed a low midline appendectomy scar. Regarding the laboratory findings, she had no anemia (red blood cell
count, 441×104 µL; hemoglobin, 14.3 g/dL; hematocrit, 42.3%) and no hepatic, renal, or electrolyte dysfunction. The serum carcinoembryonic
antigen was not elevated (0.8 ng/mL; reference range, 0 to 4.7 ng/mL). A chest radiography showed dextrocardia and a right subphrenic
gastric bubble (Fig. 1). Abdominopelvic computed tomography showed complete transposition of the abdominal viscera, confirming situs
inversus totalis (Fig. 2). In July 2008, a laparoscopic low anterior resection with a radical lymphadenectomy was performed by a right-
handed surgeon, who had performed more than 500 laparoscopic colectomies at the time. After general anesthesia was induced, the patient was
placed in a modified lithotomy position, with both arms tucked at her sides. The operator and endoscopist were situated on the left, and the
first assistant was on the right, the reverse of the locations for orthotopic patients. A 12-mm supraumbilical port was placed, and a 30°
telescope was introduced into the peritoneal cavity. There were severe adhesions between the omentum and peritoneal surface resulting from
the previous operation. As expected, the sigmoid colon was observed on the right side, along with the spleen. The liver was in the left
upper quadrant. Additional trocars included a 12-mm trocar in the left flank and a 5-mm trocar in the left iliac fossa as working ports for
the operator, and a 12-mm trocar in the right iliac fossa and 5-mm trocar in the right flank for traction. The sigmoid colon was mobilized
using ultrasonic dissection. The right ureter was clearly identified and was avoided during dissection (Fig. 3). The inferior mesenteric
artery was isolated and divided at its origin (Fig. 4), and the inferior mesenteric vein and colic artery were divided using LigaSure™,
(Valleylab, Boulder, CO, USA) (Fig. 5). The sigmoid and descending colons were mobilized up to the level of the inferior border of the
pancreas using a medial-to-lateral dissection technique (Fig. 6). And then the operator and endoscopist positioned themselves on the right
with the first assistant on the left to mobilize the rectum and make the anastomosis, because the operator was right-handed. The TME was
performed, and the distal rectum was divided using articulating endoscopic linear stapler (Endopath Endo-Cutter®; Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc.,
Cincinnati, OH, USA). Using an extension (about 5 cm) to a trocar site in the right iliac fossa, the specimen was extracted and amputated
(Fig. 7). A pursestring suture was used to hold the anvil of a circular stapling device in the proximal colon. The colon was returned to the
abdomen, and the abdominal incision was closed. After restoring the pneumoperitoneum, a 29-mm end-to-end anastomotic stapling device
(CDH29®; Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA) was inserted anally, and the anastomosis was completed (Fig. 8). The operating time
was 250 min, and the blood loss was 120 mL; that differed from the typical findings in orthotopic patients because of either the severe
intra-abdominal adhesions or the position change by the surgeons. Macroscopically, the tumor was a 45×40-mm ulcerated lesion in the rectum
(Fig. 9). Histological examination of the resected specimen disclosed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma with pericolic fat tissue
invasion, but no lymph node metastasis (pT3N0, LN 0/9); the proximal, distal, and circumferential resection margins were 7, 0.7, and 0.2 cm,
respectively. After an uneventful postoperative course, she was started on a clear liquid diet on postoperative day 3 and was discharged
home on postoperative day 8. Laparoscopic surgery in patients with SIT remains a technical challenge for the surgeon and is relatively rare,
with few reported cases. Most of these are laparoscopic cholecystectomies (6-8), and only six advanced laparoscopic procedures have been
described, including three sigmoidectomies for diverticulitis, a hemicolectomy for colon cancer, a gastrectomy for gastric cancer, and a
gastric bypass for morbid obesity (2-5, 9, 10). These procedures are extremely uncommon as a result of the small patient population and a
reluctance to attempt laparoscopy due to the altered anastomotic orientation (4). Iwamura et al. (11) reported rectal cancer surgery using
an open procedure in a patient with SIT, but no cases of laparoscopic TME in this population have been reported. A laparoscopic colectomy is
a good option for patients with SIT (2-4), but it requires thorough preoperative planning, including assessment of the anastomosis and the
positions of surgeons and instruments. Clearly, the surgeon's experience with advanced laparoscopic surgery is a crucial factor affecting
the choice of the operating method. Oms and Badia (6) reported a potential advantage for left-handed surgeons during laparoscopic surgery in
patients with SIT, although Jobanputra et al. (4) suggested that right-handed surgeons should not hesitate to perform this procedure because
of the challenging anastomosis. We agree with this because, after carefully recognizing the mirror-image anatomy, the surgical technique
itself did not differ from the typical situation. In rectal cancer patients with SIT, despite the unfamiliar anatomy, the laparoscopic TME
may be an acceptable alternative to open surgery. These patients should not be denied the benefits of minimal-invasive surgery, assuming
that it can be performed safely. Laparoscopic TME is a safe and feasible option for patients with SIT. Chest X-ray showing dextrocardia and
a right subphrenic gastric bubble. Computed tomography disclosing complete transposition of the abdominal viscera: (A) coronal view and (B)
axial view. Origin of the inferior mesenteric artery (IMA) from the right side of the abdominal aorta. CIA, common iliac artery. Division of
the inferior mesenteric artery at its origin. Division of the inferior mesenteric vein and left (actually right side) colic artery. Full
mobilization of the splenic flexure. Extracorporeal extraction of the specimen through a 12-mm port in the right lower quadrant of the
abdomen. Intracorporeal anastomosis using the EEA stapler (CDH29®; Ethicon Endo-Surgery Inc., Cincinnati, OH, USA). The rectal cancer
specimen.
