We describe a case of duodenal gangliocytic paraganglioma showing lymph node metastasis. A 61-year-old Japanese man underwent pylorus
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy to remove a tumor at the papilla of Vater. The section of the tumor extending from the mucosa to
submucosa of the duodenum was sharply demarcated, solid, and white-yellowish. Neither necrosis nor hemorrhage was present. Histological
examination confirmed the immunohistochemical identification of three components comprising epithelioid cells, spindle-shaped cells, and
ganglion-like cells. Epithelioid cells showed positive reactivity for synaptophysin, somatostatin, and CD56. In contrast, spindle-shaped
cells showed positive reactivity for S-100 protein, but not for synaptophysin, somatostatin or CD56. Furthermore, we found lymph node
metastasis despite lack of bcl-2 and p53 expression. In addition to the rarity of the tumor, we are describing here the present case
suggests the malignant potency of the tumor despite lack of acceptable prognostic indicators for neuroendocrine tumor. Gangliocytic
paraganglioma is a rare neuroendocrine tumor that usually occurs at the second portion of the duodenum, and its ultimate diagnosis requires
a histopathological identification of three identical components comprising epithelioid cells, spindle-shaped cells, and ganglion-like cells
. This tumor has been regarded as benign in general, but a few cases with lymph node metastasis have been reported which required extensive
surgical removal [Table 1]. In addition to the rarity of the tumor, the present case suggests the malignant potency of the tumor despite
lack of bcl-2 and p53 expression, which has been known as a marker for malignancy of neuroendocrine tumors . Gangliocytic paraganglioma
showing lymph node metastasis NR: not reported, PD: pancreatoduodenectomy, PPPD: pylorus-preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy NED: no evidence
of disease There are ten cases of gangliocytic paraganglioma showing lymph node metastasis including the present case. A 61-year-old
Japanese man presented with epigastralgia and tarry stool a month before admission. He had history of neither habitual smoking nor
irradiation. A gastrointestinal endoscopy revealed a tumor with central ulceration at the papilla of Vater. He was referred to our hospital
after an endoscopic procedure for the bleeding. Subsequent examinations in our hospital included upper gastrointestinal endoscopy, magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography, and endoscopic ultrasonography, which led to the
detection of a tumor at the papilla of Vater that suggested regional lymph node metastasis. A biopsy before the operation suggested a
duodenal carcinoid following histological findings and the results of immunohistochemical examination. The tumor cells showed positive
reactivity for synaptophysin, somatostatin, and CD56. The patient underwent pylorus preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy with lymph nodes
dissection. The surgical specimen, an en-bloc comprising duodenum, bile duct, gallbladder, and head of pancreas, was fixed with 10% buffered
formalin. A solid tumor 25 × 30 × 25 mm in size was found at the papilla of Vater whose surface was lobulated and covered by attenuated
mucosa showing ulcer formation at the center of elevation (Fig. 1A). The section of the tumor extending from the mucosa to submucosa of the
duodenum was sharply demarcated, solid and white-yellowish (Fig. 1B). Neither necrosis nor hemorrhage was present. Sections of paraffin-
embedded tissue were prepared and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) double stain for light microscopic observation. Histological
examination showed that a large body of the tumor was present in the submucosa and invaded a part of the muscularis propria, but the bile
duct and pancreas were not involved. Histological observation also revealed that the tumor consisted of three identical cellular components:
epithelioid cells, spindle-shaped cells, and ganglion-like cells. Tumor cells of an epithelioid cell type usually nested and had a round to
oval-shaped nucleus with an inconspicuous nucleolus, as well as a clear and eosinophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 2A). Tumor cells of a spindle-
shaped cell type encompassed the nests of epithelioid cells with alignment of a single cell layer and had an elongated and plump nucleus,
including an attenuated eosinophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 2A). Tumor cells of a ganglion-like cell type were rarely seen and had a round nucleus
with conspicuous nucleolus, as well as a polyhedral amphophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 2B). In addition to the absence of mitosis among these
cells, neither necrosis nor hemorrhage was found. However, tumor cells of an epithelioid cell type showed regional lymph node metastasis
(Fig. 2C and 2D). The surgical specimen. (A) A solid tumor measuring 25 × 30 × 25 mm in size was found at the papilla of Vater which was
lobulated and covered by attenuated mucosa with ulcer formation at the center of elevation. (B) The section of the tumor extending from the
mucosa to submucosa of the duodenum was sharply demarcated, solid, and white-yellowish. Photomicrographs showing different types of tumor
cells. (A) Tumor cells of epithelioid cell type are usually nested which are encompassed by those of spindle-shaped cell type with alignment
of a single cell layer (HE double stain, × 400). (B) Ganglion-like cells; third type of the tumor cell had a large and oval nucleus with
conspicuous nucleolus, as well as a polyhedral amphophilic cytoplasm (HE double stain, × 1000). (C and D) The metastasizing component of the
tumor at the lymph node comprised the epithelioid cell type alone (HE double stain, × 100, × 400, respectively). Several kinds of antibodies
were used to evaluate and identify tumor cells immunohistochemically. Tumor cells of both epithelioid and ganglion-like cell types showed
positive reactivity for synaptophysin, somatostatin, and CD56 (Fig. 3A, B, and 3C). In contrast, the spindle-shaped cell type showed
positive reactivity for S-100 protein (Fig. 3D), but not for synaptophysin, somatostatin or CD56. Neither cell type was positive for
chromogranin A (Fig. 3E), cytokeratin AE1/AE3 or epithelial membrane antigen (EMA). MIB-1 (Ki-67) labeling index estimated less than 1% in
both primary and metastatic foci. Tumor cells invade into the lymphatic lumen which can be recognized by an enclose of podoplanin
(D2-40)-positive endothelial cell (Fig. 3F). Tumor cells of the epithelioid cell type metastasizing at the lymph node showed positive
reactivity for synaptophysin (Fig. 3G). No tumor cells of the spindle-shaped cell type were found in the metastatic focus as confirmed by
the lack of S-100 protein-positive cells (Fig. 3H). Furthermore, tumor cells of the epithelioid cell type in both primary and metastatic
foci showed negative reactivity for both bcl-2 and p53 in the present case (Fig. 4A, B, C, and 4D). Photomicrographs showing representative
immunohistochemistry. (A, B, and C) Epithelioid cells showed positive reactivity for synaptophysin, somatostatin, and CD56 (× 400). (D)
Spindle-shaped cells showed positive reactivity for S-100 protein (× 400). (E) Tumor cells of both types showed negative reactivity for
chromogranin A (× 400). (F) Tumor cells invade into the lymphatic lumen (immunohistochemistry with podoplanin (D2-40) antibody, × 400). (G)
Epithelioid cells metastasizing at the lymph node showed positive reactivity for synaptophysin (× 400). (H) No spindle-shaped cells were
found in the metastatic focus as confirmed by the lack of S-100 protein-positive cells (× 400). Photomicrographs showing
immunohistochemistry for bcl-2 and p53. (A and B) Tumor cells in primary focus showed negative reactivity for both bcl-2 and p53 (× 400). (C
and D) Tumor cells in metastatic focus showed negative reactivity for both bcl-2 and p53 (× 400). Gangliocytic paraganglioma has been known
as a rare and benign neuroendocrine tumor. This condition occurs at the gastrointestinal tract, especially at the second portion of the
duodenum . Major clinical symptoms of the disease include abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting, and gastrointestinal bleeding. Biliary
obstruction has rarely been reported as a devastating complication . Histopathological diagnosis of the disease should require a
confirmation of three identical components comprising epithelioid cells, spindle-shaped cells, and ganglion-like cells . Carcinoid tumor,
paraganglioma, ganglioneuroma or spindle cell tumors (including nerve sheath tumors, smooth muscle tumors and gastrointestinal stromal
tumors) should be referred as diseases for differential diagnosis in cases of histopathological investigation . To identify the three
cellular components, in addition to the detailed microscopic examination of hematoxylin and eosin double stained sections, phenotypical
expression analysis by immunohistochemical examination has been regarded as an important diagnostic clue . Although gangliocytic
paraganglioma has been regarded as a benign tumor, we found nine cases showing lymph node metastasis among the literature [Table 1]. The
table surmises major clinical data of ten cases of gangliocytic paraganglioma with lymph node metastasis including the present case were
analyzed. Patient age ranged from 17 to 74 (mean: 46.4). Male-to-female ratio was 3:7. Tumor sizes ranged from 14 to 65 mm (mean: 32.9).
Nine cases occurred at duodenum, but one occurred at pancreas. Although present patient was older, its location and size follows
characteristic manner of the disease. One case had irradiation as an adjuvant therapy , no recurrence or distant metastasis, however, was
described in all patients who we had extracted from the previously reported cases. Therefore, we decided to avoid any adjuvant therapy from
the present case. The results of immunohistochemical examinations are summarized in Table 2 with those of previously reported cases of
gangliocytic paraganglioma with lymph node metastasis. In the present case, three identical components were clearly identified by
phenotypical expression analysis, which correspond to those previously reported with the exception of positive reactivity for chromogranin
A. In addition, the present case also showed lymphatic involvement of tumor cells of an epithelioid cell type at the primary focus and
regional lymph node metastasis. Furthermore, there was a study suggesting approximately 5% of gangliocytic paraganglioma demonstrate
malignant behavior , an importance of imaging examinations before an operation should be emphasize to determine the most suitable method of
surgical intervention . On the other hand, several studies conducting to neuroendocrine tumor have reported that bcl-2 and/or p53 expression
might be correlated with malignant behavior of them , whereas no studies were found of which investigation was limited in gangliocytic
paraganglioma. Summary of phenotypical expression analysis by immunohistochemical examination CK: Cytokeratin, NF: Neurofilament, NSE:
Neuron-specific enolase, PP: Pancreatic polypeptide NR: Not reported, ND: Not done in the present case. *: Based on referenced , and . In
the present case, three identical components have been clearly identified by phenotypical expression analysis, which corresponds to those
previously reported with the exception for chromogranin A. Furthermore, we found lymph node metastasis despite lack of bcl-2 and p53
expression. Therefore, we unfortunately have to conclude an immunohistochemical evaluation using bcl-2 or p53 in gangliocytic paraganglioma
has a limited prognostic value mostly due to its rarity. In fact, some studies indicated that bcl-2 and/or p53 expression was not correlated
with malignant behavior in gastrointestinal neuroendocrine tumors . In addition, MIB-1 (Ki-67) has been known as a prognostic indicator in
neuroendocrine tumor . However, none of previously reported cases of gangliocytic paraganglioma with lymph node metastasis described the
MIB-1 (Ki-67) labeling index and that of the present case estimated less than 1% in both primary and metastatic foci. These finding suggests
that immunohistochemical evaluation using MIB-1 (Ki-67) has also a limited prognostic value in gangliocytic paraganglioma. In the meantime,
Hagemeyer et al. reported the case of pulmonary paraganglioma with p53 expression after Tschernobyl radiation . They suggested that the
irradiation had little influence on development of pulmonary paraganglioma, but smoking or irradiation could be associated with p53
expression. A part of their notion may be supported because our patient showed no p53 expression who had history of neither smoking nor
irradiation. However, it should be unripe that smoking or irradiation has a relationship to p53 expression of tumor cell in gangliocytic
paraganglioma. We wish to emphasize the importance of imaging examinations to monitor for recurrence or metastasis after the operation,
because appropriate prognostic indicators have not been accepted using immunohistochemical evaluation. The operation of our patient resulted
in success, and he still maintains a high quality of life six months after that. Neither chemotherapy nor radiation has started because
consensus on the adjuvant therapy for this tumor has not been reached at present. We describe a case of duodenal gangliocytic paraganglioma
showing lymph node metastasis, of which histological and immunohistochemical examinations revealed the tumor comprised three identical
cellular components; epithelioid cells, spindle-shaped cells, and ganglion-like cells. Furthermore, the case showed node metastasis despite
lack of bcl-2 and p53 expression. In addition to the rarity of the tumor, we wish to emphasize that the malignant potency of the tumor
despite lack of acceptable prognostic indicators for neuroendocrine tumor. HE: hematoxylin and eosin; EMA: epithelial membrane antigen. Dr.
Shibuya reports receiving research grants from Pfizer Inc., Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., and Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma Co. All authors
declare that they have no competing interests. YO conceptualized the case report, integrated the data, and wrote the manuscript as a major
contributor; TY carried out the histopathology evaluation and revised histopathological description; MT performed operation and contributed
to management of the patient; AM, MW, CH, DS, and TN carried out the histopathologic evaluation; KS gave final approval to the manuscript as
a corresponding author. All authors contributed to conceptualizing and writing this case report. Furthermore, all authors read and approved
the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. This work was supported by the Health
Science Research Grants for Research on Emerging and Re-emerging Infectious Diseases (H16-Shinko-6 and H19-Shinko-8), Measures for
Intractable Diseases (H20 nannchi ippann 35) from the Ministry of Health, Labor and Welfare of Japan, by a Grant of the Strategic Basis on
Research Grounds for Non-governmental Schools at Heisei 20th from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology Japan
to K. S, and Toho University project grant #21-24 to Y. O. The authors thank Minoru Shinozaki for his excellent technical support and
Tsutomu Hatori, Takayuki Hirano, and Kayoko Shimodaira for their pathological advice.
