Nephrolithiasis is a known side effect of indinavir sulfate, a protease inhibitor used in the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV). The duration of its side effects, however, has not been well defined. We present a case where a patient presented with symptomatic
indinavir-induced nephrolithiasis 3.5 years after discontinuing indinavir. We use this case to illustrate the pathophysiology of indinavir
stones and hypothesize how they can occur years after discontinuation by discussing the pharmacokinetics of the drug. Indinavir sulfate is a
protease inhibitor used in the treatment of HIV by inhibiting the cleavage of precursor polyproteins into functional infectious proteins.
Indinavir-induced nephrolithiasis is a well-reported side effect of the medication, with an incidence of approximately 12.4% necessitating
discontinuation of the drug and altering the antiretroviral regimen in a considerable number of individuals . However, little is known
regarding the occurrence of indinavir-induced nephrolithiasis after cessation of indinavir therapy. Case reports have suggested that
indinavir nephrolithiasis can occur up to 11 months after discontinuation of the drug . We describe a patient who presents with gross
hematuria where eventual workup revealed indinavir-induced nephrolithiasis 3.5 years after the cessation of indinavir. A 49-year-old man
with HIV presented with gross hematuria and powdery penile discharge with urination for the past 1 year. The patient also complained of mild
lower back/flank pain but denied a history of dysuria, fevers, or chills. He attributed these symptoms to fatigue and long-distance air
flights. The patient was diagnosed with HIV in 1989 and treated with a highly active anti-retroviral therapy (HAART) regimen that included
indinavir at a dose of 800 mg PO TID for 8 years. The indinavir was discontinued in February 2005 when he developed nephrolithiasis
presumably due to indinavir stones (no stones were retained for analysis). At the time, he presented with gross hematuria and flank pain. He
underwent a computed tomography imaging of kidney ureter bladder (CT KUB) which demonstrated mild bilateral hydronephrosis and right
hydroureter consistent with obstruction although no radioopaque calculi were seen. Indinavir was subsequently discontinued and the patient’s
symptoms resolved with conservative management. A follow-up renal furosemide washout scan showed no evidence of stone or obstruction
suggesting that the patient had passed the stones resulting in resolution of symptoms. In September 2006, the patient underwent a kidney
biopsy for a persistently elevated creatinine of 1.6 mg/dl. The biopsy revealed crystal-induced tubular injury with rupture, acute tubular
necrosis, and arterial and arteriolar nephrosclerosis (Fig. 1). On electron microscopy, granulamatous giant cell reaction with indinavir
crystals within the lumen was seen (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Kidney biopsy showing crystal-induced tubular injury with ruptureFig. 2Electron microscopy
showing granulomatous giant cell reaction with crystals within the lumen Kidney biopsy showing crystal-induced tubular injury with rupture
Electron microscopy showing granulomatous giant cell reaction with crystals within the lumen The patient again presented with gross
hematuria and right flank pain in September 2008. A urine analysis revealed pH 6.5, 3+ hemoglobin, 1+ protein, positive leukocyte esterase,
and a negative urine culture. Serum creatinine was 2.3 mg/dl. A CT KUB showed complete resolution of the previously mentioned left
hydronephrosis but moderate dilatation of the right intrarenal collecting system and right ureter and again no evidence of calculi. The
patient eventually passed multiple stones with resolution of symptoms and improvement of serum creatinine to 1.8 mg/dl. Stone analysis
performed this time revealed indinavir as the primary composition. The patient had last taken indinavir 3.5 years ago. Indinavir is
primarily metabolized by the liver with 20% eliminated through urine, approximately half of which is unchanged . Indinavir crystallization
occurs at a urine concentration of 100 mg/l which corresponds to a plasma concentration of 6.4 mg/l . The peak plasma concentration of
indinavir in patients at the recommended dose of 400–800 mg is already 8–10 mg/l . Within 3 h after a typical indinavir dosage of 800 mg
orally in a patient averaging 1.5 l urine output daily, the urine concentration already exceeds the limits of solubility at 200–300 mg/l
making crystal formation likely common . Current recommendations to prevent nephrolithiasis include hydration with at least 1.5 l of fluids
daily to increase the clearance of indinavir . In the clinical setting, many factors may increase the risk of indinavir crystallization in
urine with the most important being volume depletion leading to higher urine drug concentration. Other cited risk factors include variations
in individual pharmacokinetics of indinavir, hepatic insufficiency leading to greater dependence on renal clearance, differences in plasma
protein binding of indinavir, low urinary pH decreasing indinavir solubility, renal insufficiency, renal tubular cell injury as a
predisposition for crystal adherence and agglomeration, and low lean body mass [3, 4]. It is important to note that the effect of renal
insufficiency on the pharmacokinetics of indinavir has not been studied well. In the patient presented, a kidney biopsy demonstrated
crystal-induced tubular injury with rupture and electron microscopy revealed granulomatous giant cell reaction with crystals within the
lumen. Even though the patient had discontinued indinavir for 1.5 years by the time of renal biopsy, the crystals remained in the renal
tubules. One hypothesis of stone formation long after discontinuation of indinavir is that the soft, gelatinous nature of indinavir crystals
allows it to gradually collect and build up within the renal tubules with time and when a critical mass of indinavir crystals develops, it
precipitates into an obstructing stone . A second hypothesis for stone formation centers on low lean body mass that results in a low
distribution volume of indinavir and hence a higher plasma concentration of indinavir . Since dosing of indinavir is independent of body
mass, plasma concentrations of indinavir may vary greatly among patients on the same dose. The higher plasma concentration leads to a higher
urinary concentration of indinavir that increases the risk of crystal and stone formation. The detection of indinavir itself poses another
challenge as no single imaging modality proves superior in definitively diagnosing indinavir stones. One study found that no abdominal
imaging study is diagnostic, intravenous pyelogram detects less than 8% of indinavir stones, renal ultrasounds demonstrated obstruction in
82% of cases, and CT imaging revealed obstruction with no stones in over 50% of the cases . Stones that were visible on CT were more likely
of mixed composition, containing indinavir with radioopaque substances such as calcium or uric acid . Accurate diagnosis is important as
conservative management is often effective, but some cases may require ureteral stenting to relieve obstruction . This case is an important
illustration of how indinavir-induced nephrolithiasis can present many years after the discontinuation of therapy. Nephrolithiasis is an
important differential diagnosis for any patient with a history of indinavir use presenting with symptoms of flank pain and/or hematuria.
Typical means of imaging may not be diagnostic and failure to visualize a stone insufficient to rule out nephrolithiasis. Since urinary
concentrations may vary from patient to patient on similar dosages of indinavir, future management may require titrating dosages to yield
urinary concentrations below the maximum solubility of indinavir to minimize risk of nephrolithiasis. This article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
