Non-pituitary tumors have been reported in a subset of patients harboring germline mutations in the aryl hydrocarbon receptor-interacting
protein (AIP) gene. However, no detailed investigations of non-pituitary tumors of AIP-mutated patients have been reported so far. We
examined a MEN1- and p53-negative mother-daughter pair with acromegaly due to somatotropinoma. Subsequently, the mother developed a large
virilizing adrenocortical carcinoma and a grade II B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Mutational analysis was performed by automated sequencing.
Loss-of-heterozygosity (LOH) analysis was carried out by sequencing and microsatellite analysis. AIP expression was assessed through
quantitative PCR (qPCR) and immunohistochemistry. The functional inactivating mutation c.241C>T (R81X), which blocks the AIP protein from
interacting with phosphodiesterase 4A (PDE4A), was identified in the heterozygous state in the leukocyte DNA of both patients. Analyzing the
tumoral DNA revealed that the AIP wild-type allele was lost in the daughter’s somatotropinoma and the mother’s adrenocortical carcinoma.
Both tumors displayed low AIP protein expression levels. Low AIP gene expression was confirmed by qPCR in the adrenocortical carcinoma. No
evidence of LOH was observed in the DNA sample from the mother’s B-cell lymphoma, and this tumor displayed normal AIP immunostaining. Our
study presents the first molecular analysis of non-pituitary tumors in AIP-mutated patients. The finding of AIP inactivation in the
adrenocortical tumor suggests that further investigation of the potential role of this recently identified tumor suppressor gene in non-
pituitary tumors, mainly in those tumors in which the cAMP and the 11q13 locus are implicated, is likely to be worthwhile.
Acromegaly/gigantism is characterized by excess of growth hormone (GH) largely due to GH-secreting pituitary adenomas.1 Although most cases
are sporadic, familial forms may occur in association with inherited syndromes such as Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia type 1 (MEN1), Carney
complex (CNC), pituitary adenoma predisposition (PAP) and familial isolated pituitary adenoma (FIPA), which includes isolated familial
somatotropinoma (IFS).2–4 Germline mutations and somatic inactivation of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor- interacting protein (AIP) gene have
been recently identified in patients with PAP.2 The role of AIP in FIPA patients has been confirmed, and more than thirty different AIP
inactivating mutations have been identified throughout the gene.5 GH-, GH/PRL- and PRL-secreting pituitary adenomas are the most common
clinical features of AIP mutation carriers, although ACTH-secreting and non-functioning pituitary adenomas have also been reported.5,6 AIP
mutations account for approximately 15% of families with FIPA and 50% of IFS families.3,5 While AIP mutations appear to be very rare in
cases with sporadic pituitary disease,7,8,9 they are more frequently found in children and adolescents with GH-secreting tumors, even in the
absence of family history.10 Although no systematic clinical surveys of non-pituitary neoplasia have been reported, concomitant non-
pituitary tumors, including thyroid, adrenal and MEN1-related tumors were reported in a subset of AIP mutation-positive PAP and FIPA
families10,11 and Prof. Albert Beckers, FIPA Meeting, Liège 2009 (unpublished data). The fact that AIP interacts with phosphodiesterases
type 4A (PDE4A) and type 2A (PDE2A) implicates this gene in the cyclic AMP (cAMP) signaling cascade,12,13 a cellular pathway known to be
disrupted in pituitary, but also in thyroid and adrenal tumorigenesis.14,15 Furthermore, AIP is widely expressed, which may argue in favor
of a potential involvement of this gene also in non-pituitary tumors. Thus, one may hypothesize that mutations in AIP may also predispose
patients to a broader spectrum of endocrine tumors. However, no genetic investigations of non-pituitary tumors in AIP-mutated patients have
been performed to date. In this study, we investigated tumoral samples from a somatotropinoma, an adrenocortical carcinoma and a grade II
B-cell non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma from a mother-daughter pair with IFS who harbor a functional AIP germline mutation. We investigated the
germline and somatic status of AIP in a previously reported Brazilian family (mother-daughter pair)16 with early-onset acromegaly (at 25
years and at 14 years, respectively) due to invasive pituitary macroadenomas who have been followed in our institution for the last decade.
This family has been recently included in the ongoing genetic screening program for Multiple Endocrine Neoplasia at the Endocrine Genetics
Unit laboratory at the University of São Paulo School of Medicine.17–24 Since the initial report of a GH-secreting pituitary adenoma, the
index case (mother) subsequently developed a virilizing adrenocortical carcinoma and a grade II B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. Because MEN1
and p53 mutations had been previously excluded in this case,16,25 we hypothesized that loss of the AIP gene could be implicated. The index
patient was diagnosed with acromegaly due to a pituitary macroadenoma at 25 years of age (1986). MEN1 and CNC syndromes were ruled out given
the absence of the characteristic biochemical and clinical features of these syndromes (such as hyperparathyroidism and enteropancreatic
tumors for MEN1 and spotty skin pigmentation, cutaneous myxomas and Cushing’s syndrome for CNC). She underwent transsphenoidal surgery
followed by radiotherapy and exhibited persistently normal basal serum levels of GH and insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1) after surgery.
At present (48 years old), GH and IGF-1 levels remain within the normal range, and the pituitary MRI was normal, indicating that she had
been cured of her pituitary disease. Thirteen years after pituitary surgery (1999), she presented with virilization and secondary amenorrhea
associated with high serum levels of total testosterone (538 ng/dL; normal range, 15–80 ng/dL) and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S)
(>10,000 ng/mL; normal range, 350–4300 ng/mL). An abdominal CT scan revealed a large heterogeneous mass (9.0 cm x 8.9 cm) in the right
adrenal gland compressing the vena cava and the lower portion of the liver. The tumor was surgically excised en bloc without rupturing the
organ capsule through a classic lobotomy, and right nephrectomy and extensive resection of local lymph nodes were performed. The
histopathological analysis ruled out the invasion of local lymph nodes, liver or vena cava, and the tumor was staged as MacFarlane-II and
Weiss-III (high nuclear grade, absence of clear cells and diffuse architecture), indicating adrenocortical carcinoma. There has been no
biochemical or imaging evidence of tumor recurrence during 10 years of post-surgical follow-up (1999–2009). At the age of 42 (2001), the
patient developed an apparently indolent grade 2 (WHO classification) slow-growing follicular B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma. The
immunophenotype was ascertained by immunohistochemical studies of lymph node biopsy samples. The samples were positive for anti-BCL-2, CD10,
CD20 and CD68 antibodies and negative for CD3 (in the follicles). The patient also presented two solid thyroid nodules of 7 mm and 11 mm in
size, without adenomegaly, that had been identified in previous cervical ultrasonograms (1999). Pelvic imaging studies (2001) showed ovaries
of 5.1 cm and 7.8 cm, respectively, two ovarian cysts (4.7 cm and 5.5 cm) and periaortic, cava-aortic and iliac lymph nodes that were
enlarged by up to 2 cm. She underwent a hysterectomy due to adenomyosis and an oophorectomy (right ovary) due to enlarged follicle cysts.
The index patient has two daughters (dizygotic twins) and one son (Figure 1A). One of the female twins was evaluated at 14 years of age. She
was 167 cm tall and presented with mild acromegaloid features but no signs of gigantism. The GH and IGF-1 serum levels were high, whereas
prolactin was normal. An MRI revealed a large pituitary adenoma with suprasellar extension, as well as an invasion of the cavernous and
sphenoid sinuses. The tumor was resistant to somatostatin analog therapy. The patient subsequently underwent two transcranial surgeries, one
of which involved a transcavernous approach. Histopathological immunohistochemistry analyses indicated that the pituitary adenoma was
positive for GH. No clinical and biochemical features of the MEN1 and CNC syndromes were observed in this patient. She has been followed up
periodically since 2000, and any adrenal involvement has been ruled out by clinical assessment, determination of adrenal steroid levels and
imaging studies (abdominal CT scans). The other female twin and the son were clinically and biochemically normal. The index patient reported
that one of her sisters also exhibited thyroid nodules and that her mother and another sister had ovarian cysts. These individuals were not
available for clinical assessment. As previously reported, the index patient did not harbor a germline MEN1 mutation; however, she and her
acromegalic daughter share 13 microsatellite loci at chromosomal region 11q13.16 Furthermore, the index patient did not have a germline or
somatic R337H TP53 mutation, which is commonly identified in children but less frequently identified in adult patients with adrenocortical
neoplasia in southern Brazil.25 Both paraffin blocks and frozen tissue samples of the daughter’s GH-secreting pituitary adenoma and the
mother’s adrenocortical tumor and B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma were available for study. Samples from the thyroid and ovarian tissues and the
mother’s somatotropinoma were not available. The present study was approved by the local ethics committee (Cappesq) of our institution
(protocol 0437/08). All patients and control subjects gave written informed consent. Genomic DNA was isolated from the peripheral blood
using a standard salting-out protocol, and PCR reactions were performed as previously described.2 Both DNA strands were sequenced from
purified PCR products using Big Dye Terminator v3.1 (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) and an automated sequencer (ABI Prism 3130xl DNA
Analyser, Applied Biosystems). Two different approaches (intragenic and extragenic) were used to verify whether the AIP wild-type allele was
lost in the tumors. The mother’s somatotropinoma and thyroid neoplasm were not available for study. We performed PCR amplification,
automated sequencing and haplotyping analysis using the D11S1258-11q13 microsatellite marker located close (67,069,747–67,069,958 bp,
Ensembl) to the AIP gene 11q13.3 locus (67,007,097–67,015,150 bp, Ensembl). A commercially available RNA/cDNA pool of normal adrenals
(n=61), normal pituitary and normal adrenal tissues obtained from autopsies (Clontech, Palo Alto, CA) were used as controls. Quantitative
PCR (qPCR) was performed with an ABI Prism 7700 Sequence Detector using the TaqMan Gene Expression Assays (Hs00610222_m1 for AIP and 43263
for β-actin) following the manufacturer’s instructions (Applied Biosystems). A cycle threshold (CT) value in the linear range of
amplification was selected for each sample in triplicate and normalized to the β-actin expression levels. The relative expression levels
were analyzed using the 2-δ δCT method,26 where δ δCT is the difference between the selected δCT value of a particular sample and the δCT of
a pool of normal adrenals. The slides were deparaffinized, hydrated and subsequently incubated in a 10 mM citrate buffer (pH 6.0) on a
steamer for 40 min at 95 ºC. After several washes, each set of slides was incubated overnight with an anti-ARA9/ AIP monoclonal primary
antibody (clone 35-2, Novus Biologicals, Littleton, CO), and then with the Novolink (Vision Biosystems™, Victoria, Au) secondary peroxidase
short polymer system. Detailed information on qPCR and immunohistochemistry protocols can be obtained upon request. A heterozygous
nucleotide change c.241C>T (R81X) in exon 2 of AIP was identified in genomic DNA samples from the two acromegaly patients (mother and
daughter) (Figure 1). The R81X is a known functional mutation that codes for a truncated protein lacking the tetratricopeptide repeat (TPR)
carboxy terminal domains, which are essential for AIP to bind to the aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AHR) and heat shock 90 (HSP90).12,27
Previous in vitro studies of the R81X mutation have shown that it blocks the interaction of wild type AIP and phosphodiesterase type 4A
(PDE4A), potentially disrupting the cAMP cascade.28 Sequencing the AIP gene in the tumoral DNA samples revealed a complete loss of the
remaining wild-type allele “C” in both the pituitary and adrenocortical tumors (Figures 2B, 3B). Samples from the adrenocortical tumor and
B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma were analyzed with the AIP-flanking microsatellite marker D11S1258, and LOH was confirmed in the adrenocortical
tumor (Figure 3B). However, the lymphoma maintained heterozygosity at the AIP locus (Figure 4). The mean Ct values of AIP and β-actin in the
pool of normal adrenal samples were 25.42 and 22.49, respectively, while in the adrenocortical carcinoma of the IFS AIP-mutated case, the
values were 31.53 and 27.28, respectively. Using the 2-δ δCT method to determine relative expression, we observed decreased AIP expression
in the adrenocortical carcinoma in comparison to the pooled normal adrenals (2-δ δCT = 0.48) (Figure 3C). This finding is in accordance with
our analysis of the somatic status of AIP, which showed LOH in this non-pituitary (adrenocortical) tumor, as shown in Figure 3B. Decreased
AIP immunostaining was observed in the pituitary adenoma from the daughter harboring the R81X germline mutation, while intense cytoplasmic
AIP positivity was observed in the normal pituitary glands obtained from autopsy samples and in a somatotropinoma from a patient with
sporadic acromegaly without the AIP germline mutation (Figure 2C). The mother’s adrenocortical carcinoma showed positive staining for Melan
A and 35betaH11 (data not shown), which are two markers of adrenal cortical differentiation used as positive controls, and complete loss of
AIP immunoreactivity (Figure 3D). Moderate and strong staining of AIP-positive cells was observed in normal adult (Figure 3D) and infant
adrenal tissue, respectively. Normal AIP protein expression was observed in the index patient’s B-cell lymphoma when compared to the
amygdala lymphoid tissue, which was used as a control (Figure 4). Rare extra-pituitary tumors have been identified in PAP/ FIPA patients
harboring AIP mutations. Mutant AIP cannot interact with cAMP-specific PDE4A and therefore is likely to disrupt the cAMP signaling
pathway.12,27,28 This pathway has been previously implicated in both pituitary and non-pituitary tumorigenesis through defects in the
PRKAR1A,29 GNAS1,30 PDE11A31 and PDE8B32 genes. Thus, further investigation of the role of AIP in these concomitant non-pituitary tumors is
warranted. Here, we present the first somatic investigations of pituitary and non-pituitary tumors (somatotropinoma, adrenocortical and
grade II B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma) in a family harboring an AIP germline mutation. We initially found that both the mother and daughter
with acromegaly harbored a functional cAMP pathway-disrupting germline mutation in AIP (c.241C>T; R81X). Through sequence analysis of
tumoral samples, we showed that the remaining wild-type allele C was lost in the daughter’s GH-secreting pituitary adenoma and the mother’s
adrenocortical carcinoma. LOH was confirmed by analyzing the D11S1258 repeat marker located at the AIP locus (11q13.3). In addition, we
observed decreased AIP mRNA and protein expression in the adrenocortical tissue when compared to normal controls (Figure 3C and 3D). In
contrast, normal AIP protein expression and no LOH for 11q13.3 locus were verified in the B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma from the same patient
(Figure 4). According to the Knudson two-hit model, these findings confirm that AIP plays a tumor suppressor role in the pituitary, as
previously reported,2,3,4,8 and suggest for the first time that AIP may also be implicated in non-pituitary tumorigenesis. Interestingly,
previous genetic studies have strongly suggested the existence of an as-yet-unidentified tumor suppressor gene at 11q13 that is implicated
in adrenocortical tumorigenesis.33–35 We are expanding the analysis of AIP to a large cohort of Brazilian sporadic adrenocortical tumors. Of
note, a reported female patient harboring a germline nonsense AIP mutation, L210X, developed a broad panel of neoplasias involving the
pituitary, adrenocortical and thyroid glands;10 this previous report suggests that the tumor susceptibility was similar to that observed in
our index case. The L201X-mutated patient presented with secondary amenorrhea at the age of 25 and was diagnosed with acromegaly at 27 years
of age. Subsequently, she developed a 19-mm non-secretory adrenocortical adenoma and a 4-cm thyroid adenoma. Georgitsi et al. studied 91
cases of “MEN1-related” tumors without MEN1 mutation, and they detected 2 cases (2.2 %) with AIP germline mutations.11 However, no details
of the clinical manifestation of the mutated patients were provided, and it is not clear if they were FIPA/IFS patients. Recently, patients
with AIP mutations and thyroid disorders, including nodular goiters, follicular adenomas and follicular and papillary thyroid carcinomas,
have been described (Prof. Beckers, FIPA Workshop 2009, Liège, unpublished data; Drs. Outi Vierimaa and Pasi Salmela, University of
Helsinki, Marianthi Georgitsi’s PhD Thesis). In these cases, it is not known whether the non-pituitary tumors occurring in the FIPA cases
harboring an AIP mutation were related to the primary germline event. Further molecular investigations in FIPA/IFS patients with non-
pituitary tumors would improve our knowledge of the tumoral susceptibility caused by AIP germline defects. In conclusion, our study presents
the first molecular analysis of non-pituitary tumors in patients harboring the AIP germline mutation. The finding of somatic AIP
inactivation in the adrenocortical tumor of a AIP-mutated patient suggests that we should further investigate the role of this recently
identified tumor suppressor gene in non-pituitary tumors, especially those tumors in which cAMP and the 11q13 locus are implicated.
Genealogy: identification of a functional AIP mutation that may disrupt the cAMP signaling pathway. A - The index patient developed
acromegaly, adrenocortical carcinoma and B-cell lymphoma. One of her daughters had acromegaly due to a large and invasive somatotropinoma. B
- The known AIP functional mutation c.241C>T (R81X)28 was identified in genomic DNA samples from both patients (mother and daughter) with
acromegaly but not in the three unaffected family members. Loss of AIP in the familial somatotropinoma. A - The MRI of the index patient’s
daughter revealed a large and invasive pituitary adenoma (so-matotropinoma) that was resistant to treatment with a somatostatin analog. She
inherited the heterozygous R81X AIP germline mutation (Fig. 1B) from the index case. B - The sequence analysis of AIP in tumoral DNA samples
revealed that only the R81X-mutated allele (t) was present in the somatotropinoma, indicating somatic loss and inactivation of wild-type
AIP. C - The immunohistochemical analysis showed AIP protein expression in the normal pituitary and a GH-secreting pituitary adenoma of a
patient with sporadic acromegaly without AIP mutation. The somatotropinoma of the patient harboring the R81X germline mutation and the
somatic loss of the gene presented low AIP protein expression. Loss of AIP in the adrenocortical tumor. A - An abdominal imaging scan of the
index case when she presented with virilization and high serum levels of adrenal steroids. The scan revealed a large heterogeneous mass (9.0
cm x 8.9 cm) in the right adrenal gland, which was surgically excised and histopathologically classified as adrenocortical carcinoma. B -
Sequence and microsatellite (D11S1258 AIP-flanking marker) analyses of DNA samples from the tumor revealed loss of the wild-type AIP allele.
C - The 2-δ δ CT method was used to compare AIP mRNA expression in pooled normal pituitary glands (Ct AIP=25.66, Ct β-actin=24.24), pooled
normal adrenal glands (Ct AIP=25.42; Ct β-actin=22.49) and the adrenocortical carcinoma from the index case, in whom the AIP wild-type
allele was lost (Ct AIP=31.53, Ct β-actin=27.28). The mean Ct value of the normal adrenal pool was used as a reference (1.0), by comparison,
there was decreased AIP expression in the adrenocortical carcinoma (0.48). D - Immunohistochemistry using the AIP antibody showed low/
moderate staining in a normal adrenal gland obtained from autopsy. A complete loss of AIP immunoreactivity was observed in the
adrenocortical carcinoma from the index patient, which stained positive for Melan A and 35betaH11, which were used as positive controls.
Maintenance of heterozygosity and positive AIP immunostaining in the B-cell non-Hodgkin lymphoma of the R81X AIP mutated IFS patient.
