Coronary artery anomalies are usually incidentally diagnosed at the time of coronary angiography or autopsy. In a large series of 70,850
patients undergoing coronary angiography, the incidence of coronary anomalies was found to be 0.24–1.3%. The majority of these were reported
to be anomalies of origin or distribution, with separate ostia of the left anterior descending artery and left circumflex artery being the
most common.1 Although many of the primary congenital coronary anomalies are hemodynamically insignificant, it is important to know the
anatomic variants in patients with coronary artery disease who are undergoing either surgical myocardial revascularization or coronary
angioplasty.2 Double right coronary artery is a very rare coronary abnormality that is generally considered benign. In this report, we
present two cases of double right coronary artery (RCA). A 40-year-old woman was admitted to our center with dyspnea. She had been
experiencing shortness of breath and dyspnea on exertion for two months. Her risk factors for coronary artery disease included a history of
diabetes mellitus and a family history of premature atherosclerotic heart disease. Her physical examination was unremarkable; cardiac and
lung auscultations were normal. Her blood pressure was 125/80 mmHg and pulse was 64 beats/min. The chest X-ray was normal. Routine blood and
biochemical laboratory tests were nonspecific and nondiagnostic. The electrocardiogram showed a sinus rhythm with clearly negative T waves
in D2–D3 and aVF. An exercise stress test showed ST-segment depression in the inferior leads at peak exercise, which was asymptomatic. The
patient underwent selective left and right coronary artery angiography. The left coronary angiography revealed a normal origin and course of
the left main artery (LM), the left circumflex artery (LCx) and the left anterior descending (LAD) arteries. The LCx and LAD arteries were
normal. The right coronary angiography revealed two different right coronary arteries arising from a common ostium in the right coronary
sinus. Both coursed along the atrioventricular groove and terminated via individual posterior descending arteries (PDA) (Figure 1). Both
arteries were free of any angiographically identifiable atherosclerotic lesion. A 66-year-old woman was admitted to our center with chest
pain. She was complaining of angina and dyspnea on exertion lasting one week. Her risk factors for coronary artery disease included a
history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension. The physical examination was completely normal. Cardiac enzymes and troponin–T were also
found to be normal. The patient underwent selective left and right coronary artery angiography. The left coronary arteries were of normal
origin and distribution. The right coronary angiography revealed two separate RCAs originating from a single ostium in the right sinus of
Valsalva. Both RCAs gave off branches with typical courses and in parallel distribution (Figure 2). Both arteries were free of any
angiographically identifiable atherosclerotic lesion. Coronary anomalies are incidentally detected during routine coronary angiography.
Congenital coronary anomalies are seen in approximately 1% of adult patients.3 Double RCA is a very rare type of coronary abnormality. There
was no mention of this anomaly in a series of 126,595 patients who underwent coronary angiography.3 The first report about double RCA
anomaly in the literature was by Barthe et al.4 They observed double RCA originated from one ostium. The vessels were within the right
atrioventricular groove. After the origin of a conus artery and a ventricular branch, the most anterior RCA descended toward the acute
margin of the heart and terminated in a small posterior descending artery. The second RCA terminated in a small posterior descending and
posterolateral branches. In our cases, both right coronary arteries were almost identical in size and both gave rise to a PDA. The correct
diagnosis of double RCA is not easily made based on conventional coronary angiography because it is difficult to distinguish this variation
from that of a high takeoff of a large right ventricular branch. This alternative diagnostic possibility creates uncertainty in making the
correct diagnosis of double RCA.5 Though double RCA is a relatively rare entity, it is not necessarily benign, as it has been associated
with atherosclerosis, life-threatening arrhythmia and myocardial infarction.6,7,8 However, our patients’ coronary arteries were free of
atherosclerotic lesions. In the absence of atherosclerotic stenosis, ischemia can be a result of anatomical malformations, including an
acute takeoff angle of the anomalous vessel, myocardial squeezing, vasospasm and a small artery.1 In these cases, double RCAs were
identified as isolated coronary anomalies. Two previous studies have reported double RCA in combination with other anomalies.9,10 Double RCA
has been reported 18 studies and in 20 cases.11 Interestingly, 12 of these cases were identified in the Turkish population. This suggests
that certain coronary artery anomalies may be associated with a particular genetic background. The double RCA anomaly is seen mostly in
males, as are other congenital coronary anomalies, though our patients were both female.12 In conclusion, although double right coronary
artery is a rare anomaly, every operator should be familiar with it in order to perform an adequate examination. Left anterior oblique view
showing a double right coronary artery. Selective right coronary angiography (left anterior oblique projection).
