Presented in part at the 30th Annual Meeting of the American Society for Bone and Mineral Research, Montreal, Canada, September 12–16, 2008
(J Bone Miner Res. 2008;23:S242). Dysosteosclerosis (DSS), an extremely rare dense bone disease, features short stature and fractures and
sometimes optic atrophy, cranial nerve palsy, developmental delay, and failure of tooth eruption in infancy or early childhood consistent
with osteopetrosis (OPT). Bone histology during childhood shows unresorbed primary spongiosa from deficient osteoclast action. Additionally,
there is remarkable progressive flattening of all vertebrae and, by adolescence, paradoxical metaphyseal osteopenia with thin cortical bone.
Reports of consanguinity indicate autosomal recessive inheritance, yet more affected males than females suggest X-linked recessive
inheritance. We investigated a nonconsanguineous girl with DSS. Osteosclerosis was discovered at age 7 months. Our studies, spanning ages 11
to 44 months, showed weight at approximately 50th percentile, and length diminishing from approximately 30th percentile to –2.3 SD. Head
circumference was +4 SD. The patient had frontal bossing, blue sclera, normal teeth, genu valgum, and unremarkable joints. Radiographs
showed orbital and facial sclerosis, basilar thickening, bone-in-bone appearance of the pelvis, sclerotic long bone ends, and fractures of
ribs and extremities. Progressive metaphyseal widening occurred as vertebrae changed from ovoid to flattened and became beaked anteriorly. A
hemogram was normal. Consistent with OPT, serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) concentrations reflected dietary calcium levels. Serum bone
alkaline phosphatase, osteocalcin, and TRACP-5b were subnormal. The iliac crest contained excessive primary spongiosa and no osteoclasts. No
mutations were identified in the splice sites or exons for the genes encoding chloride channel 7, T-cell immune regulator 1, OPT-associated
transmembrane protein 1, and monocyte colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and its receptor C-FMS, ANKH, OPG, RANK, and RANKL. Genomic copy-
number microarray was unrevealing. Hence, DSS is a distinctive OPT of unknown etiology featuring osteoclast deficiency during early
childhood. How osteopenia follows is an enigma of human skeletal pathobiology. © 2010 American Society for Bone and Mineral Research.
Dysosteosclerosis (DSS; OMIM % 224300)(1) refers to an extremely rare disorder characterized in 1968 by Spranger and colleagues(2) that
presents in infancy or early childhood and features diffuse osteosclerosis with expanded ends of the tubular bones and platyspondyly. In
keeping with a type of osteopetrosis (OPT),(3) bone histology during childhood shows unresorbed primary spongiosa and therefore deficient
osteoclast action.(4,5) The skeleton is dense but brittle. Patients develop short stature and fractures and can suffer optic atrophy and
sometimes cranial nerve palsy, developmental delay, and failure of tooth eruption,(1,6–9) in keeping with “marble bone disease.”(3) MRI has
suggested delayed myelination in the brain,(10) seizures have occurred,(11) and various skin lesions have been reported.(11–14)
Consanguinity(2,6,12,13,15) and a greater number of affected males (including in two generations) than females(11) suggest that DSS can be
either an autosomal recessive trait(1,15) or an X-linked recessive trait,(11) but the genetic defect(s) is not known.(1) The clinical course
and prognosis of DSS are not well understood. In 1978, Houston and colleagues(6) reported a 15-year-old boy whose iliac crest histology at
20 months of age revealed unresorbed primary spongiosa consistent with OPT. Subsequently, however, metaphyseal widening and sclerosis of
early childhood changed to greater metaphyseal expansion (extending into the diaphysis) with remarkable osteopenia and cortical thinning by
adolescence. In 2008, his follow-up at age 44 years was reported by Lemire and Wiebe,(16) who documented persistence of the widened proximal
and distal ends of the long tubular bones with central diaphyses that were not expanded and showed cortical thickening. Here, we describe
our clinical, biochemical, radiologic, histopathologic, and genetic investigation of a young girl with DSS and review the pertinent
literature. Informed written consent for all studies was obtained as approved by the Human Research Protection Office, Washington University
School of Medicine (St Louis, MO, USA). This 44-month-old American girl was admitted to our research center at ages 11, 23, 25, and 35
months. Additional outpatient serum and urine specimens were obtained at ages 27, 30, and 44 months. The patient was born vaginally at 38
weeks' gestation to a 37-year-old G3, P3, A0 woman. Birth weight was low for gestational age at 5 pounds, 14 ounces, but length 19½ inches.
At 5 months of age, computed tomography (CT) for rapidly increasing head circumference (25th percentile at birth, 97th percentile at age 5
months, despite growth at 50th percentile for both length and weight) reportedly showed prominent ventricles, sulci, and subarachnoid spaces
but no space-occupying lesion or hemorrhage. At 7 months of age, a radiograph (see below) for posttraumatic arm pain prompted a skeletal
survey showing metaphyseal sclerosis that was attributed to “rickets.” Vitamin D was prescribed but not taken. From birth to 8 months of
age, the patient had recurrent ear and skin infections and abdominal discomfort believed from colic. Between 8 and 11 months of age, several
episodes of joint-centered limb pain were thought to be from dislocations. On referral to us at age 11 months, psychomotor development was
on time. Tooth eruption was not delayed. At age 20 months, the patient fractured her distal left femur during a fall. Healing was delayed in
a full splint. Ophthalmologic exam was normal at age 28 months. Audiometry had not been performed, but she seemed to hear well, had clear
speech, and was bilingual. At age 30 months, she fractured through dense metaphyseal bone in her right radius and ulna during a fall.
Reportedly, healing was slow (casted for 3 months). Parental recollection of further breaks was negative, but radiographs showed previous
fractures. Morning stiffness in her lower limbs lasted 2 to 3 hours each day. She had chronic nasal “stuffiness.” Several episodes of
erythematous papules involved her lower abdomen and were always on at least one area of her body but usually her belly, legs, or arms.
Episodes lasted 3 to 4 days, were not associated with fever, and did not hurt or itch. At 36 months, she fell and fractured her distal right
femur, where dense metaphyseal and more normal-appearing diaphyseal bone joined. Healing was delayed in a long-leg cast for 3 months. She
received acetaminophen for nighttime fussiness but no multivitamins or supplements. She drank filtered municipal tap water. There were no
factories near her home, but lead paint had been removed from a nearby house. At age 44 months (3⅔ years), interval history revealed a
fractured left femur from a fall onto a carpeted floor with delayed healing while casted. Subsequently, however, the patient could run.
There was generalized morning stiffness and painful ribs. Her healthy brothers were 6 and 8 years old. The family history was negative for
skeletal disease or parental consanguinity. The father was of Turkish descent. The mother's family emigrated to Turkey from Greece 70 years
previously. When examined for diagnosis at age 11 months, the patient had a high forehead, frontal bossing, blue sclerae, a flattened nasal
bridge, downturned mouth (Fig. 1A), a narrow and high-arched palate, and a wide palatine ridge with nine normal-appearing teeth, indicating
no delay in tooth eruption. Joint range of motion was full. A dermatosis involved her lower abdomen (Fig. 1B). Patient. (A) At age 44
months, there is frontal bossing, a small midface, low-set ears, and blue sclerae. (B) At age 3 years, the recurring dermatosis (arrow) is
present on the lower abdomen. At age 22 months, she had no palpable cranial sutures, bony tenderness, or genu valgum. Although 50th
percentile for weight and length at age 5 months, between 11 and 35 months of age she maintained her weight at approximately 30th percentile
of normal, but length decreased from approximately 30th percentile to below the growth curve (Z-score = –2.5). The upper/lower body segment
Z-score increased to greater than 2.0. Arm span was less than 5th percentile. Head circumference Z-score decreased from +4.3 to +3.6. Genu
valgum was present radiographically as early as 22 months of age. At age 44 months, weight was approximately 59th percentile, and length was
–2.3 SD. Arm span versus height had progressed initially along the 50th percentile, but arm span measurements now showed that her arms were
disproportionately short.(23) Fasting blood was used for all in-patient studies. Biochemical profiles were obtained from our Dade Behring
Dimension Xpand instrument (Siemens Health Care Diagnostics, Inc., Los Angeles, CA, USA) using the reference ranges provided by the
manufacturer. However, for all key findings, results were contrasted with values from fasting sera obtained in 2006 and 2007 from 34 healthy
children and 24 healthy adults.(17) At age 11 months, the patient was given a diet containing approximately 400 mg of calcium per day to
match her home intake estimated from a 7-day food record [Recommended Daily Allowance (RDA) for age = 270 mg]. At age 23 months, intake was
approximately 950 mg. At age 35 months, we reduced her calcium intake to 775 mg daily (RDA of 500 mg recommended) to prevent suppressed
serum parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels (see “Results”). To explore whether DSS is an OPT, we assayed serum levels of the brain isoenzyme of
creatine kinase, BB-CK (Kit K20, Sebia, Norcorss, GA, USA),(18) tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase (TRACP-5b, Kit 8033, Quidel, Los
Angeles, CA, USA),(17) and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) and aspartate aminotransferase (AST).(17) Skeletal remodeling was assessed by
quantitating serum bone-specific alkaline phosphatase (BAP) using ELISA (Quidel Corp., San Diego, CA, USA) and osteocalcin (Kit LKON1,
Siemens Health Care Diagnostics, Inc.) and urine free deoxypyridinoline (DPD, Immulite 1000 Pyrilinks, D Kit, Siemens Medical Solutions
Diagnostics, Ltd., Lianberis, Gwynedd, UK). All radiologic studies, including images obtained elsewhere, were reviewed to assess the nature
and evolution of the patient's skeletal disease, including fractures and their rate of healing. Dual-energy X-ray absorptiometry (DXA) of
the patient and her parents involved a Hologic QDR 4500-A instrument (Hologic Corp., Waltham, MA, USA). At 2 years of age, two 3-day oral
courses of demeclocycline separated by 10 days were ingested. Two days after the last dose, a transapophyseal iliac crest biopsy was
performed using a Trap-Lok needle (Medical Device Technologies; Gainesville, FL, USA). The specimen was fixed in 70% ethanol and 30% water,
embedded without decalcification in methyl methacrylate, and cut into 5-µm sections for staining via the hematoxylin and eosin (H&E),
toluidine blue, and von Kossa methods. Unstained 10-µm sections were used for fluorescence microscopy. Three genes (exons and mRNA splice
sites) associated with OPT [chloride channel 7 (CLCN7), T-cell immune regulator 1 (TCIRG1), and OPT-associated transmembrane protein 1
(OSTM1)] had been studied at Connective Tissue Gene Tests (Allentown, PA, USA). We purified genomic DNA from blood leukocytes using the
Gentra Puregene DNA extraction kit (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and examined all coding exons and adjacent mRNA splice sites of TNFRSF11A
encoding RANK, TNFRSF11B encoding OPG, and TNFSF11 encoding RANK ligand (RANKL) by PCR and sequencing in both directions using published
methods and primers.(19–21) Because few osteoclasts were noted on our patient's iliac crest biopsy, the CSF1 and CSF1R genes encoding
monocyte colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) and its receptor C-FMS, respectively, were examined using primers and conditions that we
developed (available on request). Furthermore, her bone modeling disturbances and the literature report of resolution of long bone
osteosclerosis in DSS(6,16) led us to study the ANKH gene deactivated in craniometaphyseal dysplasia.(22) DNA sequences were evaluated using
AlignX software (Vector NTI, Invitrogen) and by inspecting electropherograms. Genomic DNA copy-number microarray analysis of the proband and
parents was performed using the Affymetrix SNP 6.0 chip at the Laboratory for Clinical Genomics, Washington University School of Medicine
(St Louis, MO, USA) and the Partek Genomics Suite (Partek, St Louis, MO, USA). We assessed all previous reports of DSS using original
publications obtained from the Becker Library of Medicine, Washington University School of Medicine (St Louis, MO, USA), especially the
radiographic reproductions. Serum ionized calcium was highest, 5.3 mg/dL (normal 4.7 to 5.3 mg/dL), during the first admission at age 11
months (Table 1), when her estimated dietary intake of calcium significantly exceeded the RDA. With less dietary calcium, serum generally
contained lower total and ionized calcium concentrations, but PTH levels fluctuated considerably over ages 11 to 44 months, ranging from 7
to 120 pg/mL (normal 4 to 52 pg/mL; Table 1). Calcium in timed urine collections ranged from 196 to 241 mg/g of creatinine (Cr).
Longitudinal Biochemical Findings — = not done. = non-fasting outpatient serum. Serum 25-hydroxyvitamin D was 28 ng/mL (normal 32 to 100
ng/mL) (Lab Corp., Burlington, NC, USA), with normal levels of magnesium and inorganic phosphate. Serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP) decreased
to as low as 125 IU/L (normal 157 to 477 IU/L) and was intermittently subnormal for age, especially in view of recurrent fractures. Serum
BAP, osteocalcin, and TRACP-5b levels all were consistently low (Table 1). Urine free DPD was 18 nmol/mmol of Cr (23 months) and 14
nmol/mmol of Cr (44 months) (normal 7 to 34 nmol/mmol). Serum BB-CK, LDH, and AST levels were unremarkable, unlike in some OPTs, where
elevated values can occur.(17,18) Urine did not contain heavy metals. Serum was negative for lead (Legacy Laboratory Services, Portland, OR,
USA). At ages 23, 35, and 44 months, complete blood counts were normal, including monocytes. Erythrocyte sedimentation rate seemed elevated
for a child at 18, 15, and 24 mm/h, respectively (normal 0 to 20 mm/h for young adults), and serum C-reactive protein was consistently
normal. Serum contained elevated IgG of 1416 mg/dL (normal 453 to 916 mg/dL) and slightly high IgA of 111 mg/dL (normal 20 to 100 mg/dL)
(Lab Corp.). Radiographic skeletal surveys were available from ages 7, 11, 22, and 33 months. Right hand and wrist films were available at
30 months, left knee at 42 months, and right knee at 47 months. A generalized skeletal disorder was revealed, where every imaged bone was
abnormal (Figs. 2 through 5). Prominent findings included basilar sclerosis of the skull and modeling abnormalities (expansion) in the major
long bones resembling OPT but also ovoid vertebral bodies characteristic of DSS. The sclerosis must have occurred postnatally because
relatively normal iliac bones had formed in utero that subsequently became sclerotic peripherally. The changes per anatomic site are
described below. Skull. (A) At age 22 months, anteroposterior view of the skull shows sclerosis that affects the periorbital region and
skull base. The sinuses are opacified. (B) At age 33 months, the neurocranium appears large on lateral view, with diffuse sclerosis greatest
at the base. The midface is small, and the mandibular angle is obtuse. Spine. This anteroposterior projection (A) at 22 months shows
sclerotic vertebrae, dense ribs with healing fractures, sclerotic medial clavicles, and bone-in-bone appearance in the ilium as seen in some
forms of OPT. Between 7 (B) and 33 (C) months of age, the lateral spine shows sclerosis and flattening of vertebral bodies that increased
with age. The vertebral bodies have a pointed configuration anteriorly (greatest at 7 months). Sclerosis affects the entire vertebra.
Appendicular skeleton. At 22 (A) and 33 (B) months of age the lower extremities, and at 7 (C) and 33 (D) months of age the left upper
extremity, show sclerosis greatest at the proximal and distal ends of the bones and metaphyseal expansion from tubulation failure greatest
in the distal femurs. (E) There are transverse metaphyseal bands of osteosclerosis, as seen in some forms of OPT (arrows). A healing
fracture featuring focal bone expansion and periosteal new bone formation is present in the distal left femur at the junction of the
sclerotic and nonsclerotic bone (arrows) (A). There is a slight irregularity of the physeal plates and adjacent provisional zones of
calcification (C, D, E). Sclerosis in the upper extremities has increased at the ends of the bones between 7 (C) and 33 (D) months of age.
In the leg bones and distal right femur, the junction between the sclerotic and nonsclerotic bone is sharp, but not well defined in the
proximal femurs or distal left femur. The junction between the sclerotic and nonsclerotic bone can have a transverse or oblique shape. Hand
and foot radiographs. At 22 (A) and 33 (B) months of age the left hand and at 22 (C) months of age the left foot show diffuse sclerosis
greatest in the metaphyses of the metacarpals and metatarsals and distal radius and ulna. The amount of sclerosis in the proximal phalanges
varies from much to little and is greatest in the metaphyseal regions. The tarsals have some sclerosis greatest in the cuboids. Pathologic
fractures are shown through sclerotic bone in the distal radius (arrow) and ulna in the anteroposterior projection (D) at 30 months and near
nonsclerotic bone in the right femur (arrows) at 47 months (E). The neurocranium at ages 22 and 33 months was large, resulting in
craniofacial disproportion (Fig. 2). The frontal bone bulged anteriorly; the midface was small. The posterior fossa appeared prominent.
Sutures were normal. Closure of the anterior fontanelle seemed delayed (open at 22 months; virtually closed at 33 months). The ascending
ramus of the mandible was smaller than expected, and the mandibular angle was obtuse. Some teeth were malformed or abnormally oriented. The
skull base was sclerotic, increasing between 7 to 33 months. Periorbital sclerosis was especially prominent along with sclerosis of the
greater and lesser wings of the sphenoid and the posterior portion of the sphenoid body. Maxillary and ethmoid sinuses were opaque at ages
22 and 33 months, and the mastoid air cells were small. At age 5 months, CT showed a sclerotic skull base but no hydrocephalus or
intracranial calcifications. The sulci were slightly enlarged. There was a suggestion of abnormal myelination. The optic foramina, middle
ears, and internal auditory canals appeared grossly normal, but detailed optic foramina and petrous bone imaging was not obtained. Multiple
follow-up CTs elsewhere were essentially unchanged. Chest shape was normal, but the ribs were broad and diffusely sclerotic with multiple
lower rib fracture deformities at age 7 months. By age 22 months, the ribs were more sclerotic, the medullary cavities were delayed (because
they were just beginning to form), and there were multiple healed fractures that had become more numerous in the fifth through the eleventh
ribs bilaterally. The ribs were shortened with a modeling error anteriorly, and wide anteriorly and laterally (Fig. 3A). Fractures had
occurred anteriorly, and laterally and were not remodeling. At 33 months, the ribs were still sclerotic and widened, and they had more
recent fractures and multiple fracture deformities but were showing further medullary cavity development. The clavicles were sclerotic, and
their medial ends widened at ages 22 and 33 months. The sternal segments were broad and sclerotic, with a central lucency, as were the
scapulae. The heart and lungs appeared normal. Sclerosis was accompanied by a normal-appearing central portion of the iliac bones causing a
“bone in bone” appearance at age 22 months (Fig. 3A), and even more apparent at 33 months. The upper iliac borders were irregular. The
ischial and pubic bones were sclerotic. The femoral heads and metaphyses were sclerotic, and the necks were wide with failure of modeling.
The vertebral bodies were sclerotic, with the cranial and caudal ends appearing “sandwich-like,” and their anterior margins were pointed
anteriorly. Compared with age 7 months, when the lumbar vertebrae had a more oval shape (Fig. 3B), vertebral body flattening was more
striking at age 22 months, and at 33 months the vertebral bodies showed rectangular shapes with greater relative flattening (Fig. 3C). There
was some anterior vertebral notching. The disk spaces were relatively widened. The neural arches also were sclerotic. A pars defect, in
keeping with an OPT,(24) was observed at L4, but healed by 33 months. The overall pattern was one of sclerosis focused primarily on the
metaphyses that also were expanded (Fig. 4). Tubulation failure was best seen in the distal femurs (Fig. 4A, B). By 33 months, this
expansion extended almost to the midshafts. The expansion, which was greatest in the metaphyses, extended into the diaphyses and from
sclerotic bone into nonsclerotic bone. Between the ages of 7 and 43 months, the dense sclerosis at the ends of the bones increased
appreciably in length. Some areas of metaphyseal sclerosis were sharply demarcated at the diaphysis, whereas others appeared to fade into
more normal-appearing bone. There was a healing fracture in the distal left femur at the junction of the sclerotic and nonsclerotic bone,
shown by periosteal new bone formation and focal expansion of the bone (Fig. 4A). The rate at which extremity fractures healed was delayed.
Fractures continued to occur. Transverse lucent areas that were small and faint were seen in the dense sclerosis of some metaphyses, such as
the distal femur (Fig. 4E). In the proximal end of the humeral metaphyses and both distal radii and ulnas, between 7 and 33 months of age,
there were well-demarcated areas of dense sclerosis that increased in length (Fig. 4C, D). The junctions between the sclerotic and
nonsclerotic bone were varied, being transverse, oblique, and rounded. The cortices in the midshafts were thickened. The proximal humeri and
the distal radii and ulnas showed best the irregularity of the provisional zones of calcification at the physeal plates (Fig. 4C, D). The
epiphyses were sclerotic. Sclerosis was greatest in the metacarpals, metatarsals, and distal radii and ulnas and often most in their
metaphyses (Fig. 5). Nevertheless, metacarpals and metatarsals contained nonsclerotic areas. Some phalanges were almost entirely sclerotic,
whereas others appeared normal. In some, metaphyseal sclerosis terminated abruptly into more normal-appearing bone, and then into a mixed
sclerosis pattern. The cuboids had focal sclerosis, as did some other tarsal bones, but the carpals and distal radial epiphyses had no
sclerosis. The distal radii and ulnas showed irregular physeal plates, provisional zones of calcification, and broad undertubulated, densely
sclerotic metaphyses where the sclerosis terminated abruptly into more normal-appearing bone (Fig. 5D). In addition, the sclerosis ended in
a rounded or oblique shape. The second metacarpals had accessory epiphyses. The bone age at 22 months was delayed to 18 months. At 33
months, the metaphyses of the phalanges were more sclerotic, as were the epiphyses. At age 3 years, DXA L1–L4 spine BMD Z-score was +8.1.
Fractures would occur through radiographically dense bone (Fig. 5D) or at the junction of osteosclerosis and less remarkable bone (Fig. 5E)
and were slow to heal. Transapophyseal iliac crest biopsy showed a disordered growth plate consistent with the findings in some appendicular
radiographs (see above). Specifically, the physis had zones of chondrocytes with normal proliferative and hypertrophic morphologies (Fig.
6A), but the cells were not arranged in their usual columnar orientation. An area deep to the growth plate, which at the patient's age is
normally composed of trabecular bone with modest amounts of centrally located cartilage remnants, consisted almost entirely of calcified
cartilage, as shown by H&E, toluidine blue, and von Kossa stains (Fig. 6,B–D). There was replacement of trabecular bone by calcified
cartilage and diminished numbers of hematopoietic cells. Fluorescence imaging of unstained sections (not shown) demonstrated diffuse uptake
of demeclocycline in areas of calcified cartilage near the growth plate, but there were no linear single or double labels to indicate normal
bone formation. The area between the calcified cartilage contained primarily mesenchymal cells (ie, osteoblasts and fibroblasts), with only
rare hematopoietic cells. Osteoclasts were not identified morphologically or by TRAP staining (Fig. 6E). Overall, the findings of increased
amounts of cartilage, decreased hematopoietic marrow, and an absence of identifiable osteoclasts were consistent with a form of “osteoclast-
poor” OPT. Osteoclast-poor osteopetrosis. Sections of the nondecalcified transapophyseal iliac crest biopsy at age 25 months show a growth
plate (A) containing proliferative (Pr) and hypertrophic (Hy) chondrocytes that lack the normal columnar orientation along the axis
perpendicular to the bone surface. In this toluidine-stained section, the bone surface is toward the left, and the chondrocytes should be
arranged in rows from left to right. Scale bar = 200 µm. H&E-stained (B) and toluidine blue–stained (C) sections demonstrate disorganized
trabeculae composed primarily of cartilage (purple in both stains), with only minimal bone matrix (pink in B, pale gray in C). A von Kossa
stain (D) shows that the cartilage in these “trabecular” areas is calcified. TRAP staining (E) fails to identify any osteoclasts. Scale bar
(B–E) = 100 µm. Skeletal survey of the parents revealed no significant abnormalities. The mother, 5 feet, 1 inch tall, had brachycephaly and
minimal degenerative changes of L5. The father, a 5 foot, 11 inch postman, had brachycephaly, spondylolysis of L5, anterior wedging of T12,
and multiple Schmorl's nodes in his lumbar and thoracic spine. The patient's two brothers and three paternal cousins had several radiographs
taken elsewhere following trauma that were essentially unremarkable. DXA of the mother showed BMD Z-scores at the upper half of the age-
matched normal range for the L1–L4 spine, total hip, wrist, and whole body. The father's values were average for gender and age. Studies of
mineral homeostasis were unremarkable for the mother and father. Respectively, serum TRACP-5b was 3 and 2 U/L (normal 2 to 4 U/L for females
and 3 to 5 U/L for males), osteocalcin 8 and 5 ng/mL (normal 3 to 14 ng/mL), and BAP 16 and 15 U/L (normal 12 to 31 U/L for females and 15
to 41 U/L for males). Urine free DPD was 5.0 and 2.9 nmol DPD/mmol of Cr (normal 3.0 to 7.4 nmol/mmol for females and 2.3 to 5.4 nmol/mmol
for males). The father's profile suggested low-normal remodeling. Mutation analysis of the patient's CLCN7, TCIRG1, and OSTM genes was
notable only for a previously unreported heterozygous missense variation in CLCN7 (p.T198M). This seemed noncontributory to the DSS because
it occurred in the healthy father and would affect an amino acid not conserved across species.(25) No mutations were detected in TNFRSF11A,
TNFRSF11B, CSF1, CSF1R, or ANKH. However, in TNFSF11, encoding RANKL, we found a heterozygous single-base alteration predicting an amino
acid change (c.107C > G, p.Pro36Arg). This missense variation also was identified in the patient's father, but not in her mother, and was
not listed in dbSNP,(26) nor had it been reported in several association studies of RANKL polymorphisms.(27,28) However, we did find it
(heterozygous) in 4 of 67 patients [4 of 134 alleles (3.0%)] with a variety of metabolic/dysplastic bone diseases (see “Discussion”) and
homozygous in a man with an unusual, severe variant of Camurati-Engelmann disease.(29) Nevertheless, using this candidate gene approach, we
did not identify a causal gene defect for the DSS that we presume was inherited in this family as an autosomal recessive trait. Microarray-
based genomic copy-number analysis of the patient and parents also was unrevealing. Lowering excessive dietary calcium was advised to ensure
that circulating PTH levels were not suppressed and thereby impairing bone resorption. Following her second inpatient evaluation, reduction
from approximately 950 to 500 mg calcium (RDA) was recommended, but a food record suggested intake of 775 mg. Thereafter, even small changes
seemed to explain wide swings in serum PTH levels (Table 1), in keeping with severe OPT.(30) No recommendation was made for bone marrow
transplantation (see “Discussion”). Teriparatide was not prescribed, and PTH seemed ineffective in a previous patient.(6) Particular
attention was paid to possible surgical intervention if narrowed cranial foramina caused symptoms. To date, 23 patients are said to have
DSS. In 2008, Lemire and Wiebe(16) found that 17 patients had been reported with DSS(4,6,8–11,15,16,31–35) after Spranger and colleagues(2)
had, 40 years earlier, described their one case, four previously reported patients from Ellis in 1934 (case 2),(12) later studied by Field
in 1938,(13) and one known to Maroteaux and to Stehr in 1942 (case 2).(36) However, our review showed that the precise diagnoses of the
unusual patients of Chitayat and colleagues(37) and Maheshwari and colleagues(38) are somewhat unclear. The patient of Maheshwari and
colleagues(38) seems to have a type of craniometaphyseal dysplasia. Undoubtedly, there are more unreported and unrecognized patients. Of
historical note, DSS has previously affected a nonconsanguineous Turkish infant girl.(14) Comprehensive investigation of our patient
revealed that DSS presents in infancy as a distinctive “osteoclast-poor” form of OPT associated with reduced bone remodeling. DSS was
delineated in the German medical literature in 1968 when Spranger and colleagues(2) described an affected 12-year-old boy and reviewed five
similar pediatric cases.(12,13,36,39) The principal radiographic features were osteosclerotic and dysplastic abnormalities in long bones
similar to Pyle disease (OMIM % 265900)(1) but with characteristic platyspondyly and inconsistent hypoplasia of the iliac bones, also with
short stature, bone fragility, dysodonty, and cranial nerve compression.(2) By 2008, there were 23 reported cases.(4,6,8–11,15,16,31–35) Our
literature review indicated that nearly all represent DSS. DSS presents in infancy and is readily distinguished from other sclerosing bone
disorders by its remarkable early acquired sclerotic platyspondyly, metaphyseal expansion, and demarcated osteosclerosis.(6) Follow-up of
one patient(16) to age 44 years revealed that the widened and osteosclerotic metaphyseal areas of the long bones seem, unlike most types of
OPT,(3) to eventually become radiolucent. The patient's skull, facial bones, ribs, and spine remain dense, with persisting platyspondyly and
vertebral endplate sclerosis.(16) DSS features bowing of long bones, absence of marrow failure or acroosteolysis,(38) perhaps skin changes
(red-violet spots in a patchy distribution),(11–14) developmental regression, and a variable prognosis. There are reports of dental and
enamel hypoplasia with delayed or absent tooth eruption and premature loss of teeth.(35) The enamel can be irregular and, of interest,
hypercalcified.(35) The dental manifestations of DSS were reviewed by Utz in 1970,(40) and osteomyelitis of the mandible by Packota and
colleagues in 1991.(7) Major radiographic abnormalities in DSS that change with age include thickening and sclerosis of the calvarium and
base of the skull, decreased pneumatization of paranasal sinuses and mastoids, and sclerosis of the scapula, clavicles, and ribs that are
also broad and contain multiple fracture deformities. The pelvic bones are sclerotic, with the iliac bones having a nonsclerotic center or
the “bone-in-bone” appearance. The vertebrae are sclerotic and flattened with anterior body wedging. Preadolescent long bone findings
include dense sclerosis of epiphyses, metaphyses that are expanded and club-shaped, but midshafts that are relatively spared. There is
irregularity of the physeal plates and the adjacent provisional zones of calcification. In childhood, the hand and foot bones, including the
carpals and tarsals, are sclerotic, with the increased density appearing greatest at the ends of the tubular bones. The dense, expanded,
Erlenmeyer flask–shaped bone ends evolve into osteopenic widened bones that include portions of the diaphysis with thin cortices. Sclerosis
remains focal (largely in the metaphyses) in the long bones, but is present in much of the rest of the skeleton.(6,8,16) Serial radiographs
during infancy should distinguish DSS from other conditions, including various OPTs, pyknodysostosis, Camurati-Engelmann disease, and
craniometaphyseal dysplasia.(41) The especially helpful (diagnostic) feature in DSS is the flattening of vertebrae with punctate densities.
Alternatively, mutation analysis is available for these other disorders. For DSS, a severe type of OPT is the principal diagnostic
consideration.(3) The key features for diagnosis are the spinal osteosclerosis, flattening, and anterior beaking early on, as well as the
sharply marginated sclerotic and expanded metaphyses. However, in older (eg, adolescent) DSS patients, osteosclerosis is replaced by
radiolucency in the expanded ends of the tubular bones.(6,16) Sclerosis then may involve the diaphyses and appear only focally in the
metaphyses. Eventually, DSS probably will be diagnosed by mutation analysis. DSS is considered to be an autosomal recessive trait (OMIM %
224300).(1,6) However, X-linked recessive inheritance seems possible,(11) although affected girls,(10,31) such as our patient, challenge
exclusivity for this pattern. DSS is not classified among the OPTs by the International Skeletal Dysplasia Society.(42) Yet osteoclast
failure is unequivocal in DSS, with persistence of unresorbed primary spongiosa (calcified cartilage bars or islands) revealed by iliac
crest biopsy. How this finding occurs with increasing osteosclerosis in most, but not all, areas of the skeleton remains an enigma. DSS
affects especially endochondral bone formation, but also intramembranous bone formation(33) and perhaps development of the teeth.(4) Our
patient's sequential radiographs indicated that failed osteoclast activity began abruptly and then could be profound. Our patient had bone-
within-bone appearances on radiographs (especially the iliac bones), representing another feature of OPT. Faint transverse banding in
several metaphyseal areas suggested slight fluctuation of compromised bone remodeling, as can be seen in Albers-Schönberg disease (ie,
“benign” OPT).(43) Our patient's recurrent fractures through dense bones, as in other OPTs, probably resulted from retention of cartilage
rests, failure of osteons to interconnect during remodeling, and compromised microfracture repair. Our patient also had a pars defect in
keeping with the brittleness of OPT.(24) Furthermore, in DSS, bone histology has shown a paucity of both osteoclasts and osteoblasts(11)
and, after tetracycline double labeling, a mineralization abnormality featuring large amounts of osteoid with diffuse tetracycline
labels.(4) Failure of osteoclast-mediated external shaping of long bones (modeling or tubulation) in any OPT leads to expanded metaphyses
with an Erlenmeyer flask deformity.(44) Marrow cavity compromise occurs because of failure of endosteal bone resorption,(45) but to date we
have not found dysfunction of hematopoiesis in our patient. Facial sinuses do not form properly and aerate, likely explaining her nasal
“stuffiness.” Similarly, neural foramina in the skull do not widen in OPT, but our patient has not manifested cranial nerve compression. In
our patient, in keeping with her relatively young age of 3¾ years, sequential radiographs revealed the increasing metaphyseal expansion and
osteosclerosis of DSS. Her other major radiographic changes were sclerosis of the base of her skull and around the orbits, vertebral body
sclerosis with worsening flattening and anterior pointing, sclerosis of the ribs with loss of medullary space and multiple healed fractures,
long bone metaphyseal sclerosis, expansion, and failure of modeling. These findings indicated acquired, early postnatal osteoclast failure.
At age 7 months, our patient's radiographs showed that “older” skeletal regions contained relatively normal bone. Subsequently, remarkable
demarcation occurred as osteoclast activity failed. Notably, serum BAP, osteocalcin, and TRACP-5b all were low, consistent with slow bone
remodeling as osteoclast activity decreased. Absence of osteoclasts would preclude their signaling to osteoblasts. Our biochemical findings
are in keeping with a postnatal OPT, especially one featuring few osteoclasts, with low or low-normal serum levels of markers of bone
turnover.(46) Consonant with reports of DSS, our patient's markers of bone remodeling matched her radiographic and histopathologic findings
and indicated suppression of skeletal turnover, including bone formation. Histopathologic study revealed an associated defect in
mineralization. Notably, her serum CK-BB was normal, and TRACP-5b was persistently low in contrast to other forms of OPT(17) featuring
defects intrinsic to osteoclasts, where CK-BB and TRACP5b are elevated. Furthermore, unlike in Albers-Schönberg disease, due to inactivating
mutations in CLCN7, serum LDH and AST levels were normal (not elevated).(17) In DSS, remarkable resolution of appendicular osteosclerosis
over time might question classification as an OPT. However, in the carbonic anhydrase II (CA II) deficiency form of OPT in which osteoclasts
do not acidify the pericellular milieu, this finding does occur,(47) perhaps from the chronic metabolic acidosis. Our patient did not
manifest the renal tubular acidosis that characterizes CA II deficiency, and therefore CA II levels in erythrocytes or mutation analysis of
CA II were not performed. The acquired reversal of osteoclast failure in DSS remains unexplained. Although DSS is extremely rare, autosomal
recessive inheritance seems certain for at least some cases because of reports of consanguinity.(15) Our patient's family history was
negative for consanguinity, which was absent for another Turkish infant girl with DSS.(10,14) No mutations were found in our patient in
CLCN7 or TCIRG1, that account for most human OPT,(48) or in OSTM1. Unlike most human forms of OPT, where dysfunctional osteoclasts are
present or abundant,(46,47) deficiency of osteoclasts appears to account for OPT in our DSS patient. Osteoclast precursor cells seem to be
available because our patient's circulating monocyte counts were repeatedly normal, but we did not test osteoclastogenesis from CD14 cells.
Insufficiency of osteoclasts causing OPT has been observed in humans only for RANKL(21) and RANK(48) deficiency (see below). This finding
has crucial therapeutic implications for DSS because bone marrow transplantation (BMT) might not help.(46) Accordingly, we sequenced the
exons and splice junctions of TNFRSF11A (RANK), TNFRSF11B (OPG), and TNFSF11 (RANKL) and found no mutations. Because the OPT from an
insertion mutation within m-csf in the op mouse resolves over time,(49) we studied our patient's CSF1 gene encoding M-CSF and the CSF1R gene
encoding its receptor C-FMS but found no abnormality. Because DSS seems to share some of the radiographic features of craniometaphyseal
dysplasia by the teenage years, including metaphyseal widening and craniofacial sclerosis,(41) we studied ANKH, but the findings were
unremarkable. Bone-formation rates are reduced in osteoclast-poor forms of OPT, according to biochemical markers and histopathology.(50) In
fact, markers in our patient were repeatedly remarkable for very low serum osteocalcin and TRACP-5b levels. However, the high-bone-density
phenotype of the osteocalcin knockout mouse does not appear to be an OPT.(51) Hence we did not sequence our patient's osteocalcin gene. RANK
gene (TNFRSF11A) analysis was unrevealing for our patient's osteoclast-poor OPT. Additionally, there was no evidence of a TNFSF11 splice
site or exonic defect involving RANKL but instead a likely rare polymorphism. Our patient carries a heterozygous variation (P36R) in RANKL
that represents a nonconservative amino acid change in a conserved region of this molecule.(52) P36 is part of a proline-rich region (7
proline residues/10-amino-acid stretch) near the intracellular side of the transmembrane domain. However, we do not know of any function for
this 10-amino-acid proline-rich region in RANKL. This TNFSF11 change was not found in dbSNP(26) and was not reported in several association
studies of RANKL single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with bone phenotypes.(27,28,53) However, we identified this RANKL variant in 4 of 67
heterozygous patients (or family member) with various bone diseases and 1 homozygous patient with a unique variant of Camurati-Engelmann
disease,(29) but a healthy population has not been screened. It may represent a rare polymorphism conditioning the DSS phenotype of our
patient. Thus, we were unable to discover a genetic basis for DSS using this candidate gene approach in this patient. A considerable number
of animal models for OPT lack osteoclasts and thus provide further candidate genes,(46,47) including TRAF6, FOS, JUN, NFATc1, NFκB subunits,
and RGS1D.(42,46) Microarray studies were not revealing, but homozygosity mapping may be useful. Gene expression studies using DSS monocytes
are planned, which may help to identify the gene defect(s). Negative mutation analyses in our single patient do not exclude involvement of
the tested genes in other DSS patients because there may be genetic heterogeneity for this disorder. Because our patient has osteoclast
deficiency, we did not advise BMT, which has been used for severe OPT when the pathogenic defect is intrinsic to these cells.(45,48) In
RANKL-deficiency OPT, where few osteoclasts form, BMT has not been helpful.(21) In fact, one DSS patient died at age 10 months from
complications of BMT.(31) Furthermore, we have not advised teriparatide in part because of our patient's paucity of osteoclasts. The patient
of Houston and colleagues(6) did not respond biochemically with hypercalcemia, etc. following intramuscular injections of PTH. Our patient's
management has been largely orthopedic, but we recommended control of her excessive dietary calcium to ensure that circulating levels of PTH
are not suppressed and thereby blocking bone resorption. Although the few case reports of DSS leave much uncertainty concerning the natural
history, bone remodeling may become active later in childhood. This report was made possible by the skill and dedication of the nursing,
laboratory, and dietary staff at the Center for Metabolic Bone Disease and Molecular Research, Shriners Hospital for Children, St Louis, MO,
USA. Vivienne Lim and Dawn Russell helped to prepare and illustrate the manuscript. Angelia English and Sharon McKenzie provided expert
secretarial help. This work was supported by the Shriners Hospitals for Children, the Clark and Mildred Cox Inherited Metabolic Bone Disease
Research Fund, the Hypophosphatasia Research Fund, the Barnes-Jewish Hospital Foundation, and R01DK067145 from the NIDDK. The content is
solely the responsibility of the authors and does not necessarily represent the views of the NIDDK or the NIH. All the authors state that
they have no conflicts of interest.
