To the Editor: Chikungunya fever was first described in Tanganyika (now Tanzania) in 1952 and is now emerging in Southeast Asia. Chikungunya
virus (CHIKV) infection, a self-limiting febrile illness, shares similarities with dengue fever such as headache and myalgia. Additionally,
patients with CHIKV infection typically have arthralgia, arthritis, and tenosynovitis (1). Although usually benign, CHIKV infection may on
rare occasions lead to neurologic and hepatic manifestations with high illness and mortality rates (2). We report 2 immunocompromised
patients with CHIKV infection associated with peritonitis, encephalitis, and secondary bacterial infections. Patient A, a 66-year-old
Singaporean-Chinese man, had a history of chronic renal disease secondary to obstructive uropathy. His baseline creatinine level was 300–400
μmol/L. For 3 years, he had ingested traditional Chinese medicine, which we suspect was contaminated by steroids because he appeared
cushingoid. An outbreak of CHIKV infection was reported at his workplace. He was admitted to National University Hospital, Singapore, in
July 2008 with abdominal pain, vomiting, and fever of 1 day. He had no joint symptoms. Clinically, he had systemic inflammatory response
syndrome complicated by acute-on-chronic renal failure. His creatinine level was elevated at 921 μmol/L on admission. A complete blood count
showed leukocytosis (19.24 × 109 cells/L) with neutrophilia and thrombocytopenia (62 × 109 cells/L). Initial blood and urine cultures and
serologic results were negative for dengue virus, but serum reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) and indirect immunofluorescent assay for
immunoglobulin G (IgG) (Euroimmun Medizinische Labordiagnostika, Lubeck, Germany) and IgM (CTK Biotech, Inc, San Diego, CA, USA) were
positive for CHIKV (3,4). Computed tomographic scans of the abdomen showed dilated small bowel loops. An urgent laparotomy did not show
bowel perforation, but peritoneal cultures yielded Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, and Candida glabrata, and RT-PCR from the
concentrated peritoneal fluid was positive for CHIKV (3). He was administered appropriate antimicrobial drugs. He required repeat
laparotomies because of elevated intraabdominal pressure. He subsequently received broad spectrum antimicrobial drugs to treat secondary
intraabdominal infections caused by P. aeruginosa and Enterococcus faecalis. Ventilator-associated pneumonia also developed. Despite maximal
support and prolonged antimicrobial therapy, this patient died after 5 months of hospitalization. Patient B, a 45-year-old Malaysian–Chinese
man with diabetes mellitus, had undergone a cadaveric liver transplant in 2001 for hepatitis B liver cirrhosis. He was receiving
immunosuppressants (azathioprine and prednisolone). He was admitted in August 2008 after experiencing fever, headache, and abdominal
bloating for 3 days. He had no neurologic symptoms. Acute self-limiting febrile illnesses with arthritis had occurred in his hometown; CHIKV
infections were suspected. Results of his examination on admission were normal, except for bilateral enlarged cervical lymph nodes. Chest
radiograph results were unremarkable. He had mild transaminitis (alanine aminotransferase 173 U/L, aspartate aminotransferase 170 U/L),
elevated C-reactive protein (107 mg/L), and thrombocytopenia (120 × 109 cells/L) without leukocytosis. Results of comprehensive serum and
urine microbial studies were negative for posttransplant infections. Results of serum RT-PCR were negative for CHIKV, but IgG and IgM tests
were positive for CHIKV. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was performed because of the patient’s persistent severe headache and transient
drowsiness. It showed several nonspecific areas of enhancement, which suggested encephalitis, given the clinical scenario (Figure). However,
a lumbar puncture was not performed, and hence, whether the patient’s cerebrospinal fluid contained CHIKV could not be determined. Bilateral
frontoparietal white matter lesions with restricted diffusion has been suggested as an early sign of viral encephalitis (5). However, a
retrospective series demonstrated that, in CHIKV encephalitis, abnormalities on magnetic resonance imaging were uncommon, and no
pathognomonic features were found (6). Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain of patient B, showing several nonspecific areas of
enhancement (arrows), which suggests encephalitis, given the clinical scenario. Hospital-acquired pneumonia also developed and was treated
with broad-spectrum antimicrobial drugs. Bronchoscopic cultures were negative for CHIKV. The patient responded well to antimicrobial drugs,
and his mental status was normal on discharge. He possibly had encephalitis associated with CHIKV infection, complicated by secondary
hospital acquired pneumonia. In this case, CHIKV was detected in peritoneal fluid, but because of the positive bacterial cultures, we are
not confident about its causative role in patient A’s peritonitis. Although a series reported that 6 patients with CHIKV infection had
perforated jejunal diverticula while receiving long-term nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and steroids (7), the perforations were likely
secondary to prolonged steroid use rather than CHIKV infection. In addition, both immunocompromised patients in our study had their CHIKV
infections secondarily complicated by nosocomial infections. We note that other viral infections have been associated with bacterial
translocation and secondary nosocomial infections (8). Whether these infections were linked to CHIKV infection or to the underlying chronic
immunosuppressed state is unclear. Both of our patients did not have the joint manifestations that are characteristic of CHIKV infection
(9). More prospective studies are required to determine the full spectrum of clinical features of CHIKV infection in immunocompromised
patients. Recently identified biomarkers may predict patients at risk for complications but we were unable to study them in our patients
(10). Although most cases of CHIKV infection are self-limiting, clinicians should be alert to atypical presentations and severe
complications in immunosuppressed patients.
