A 45-year-old human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-positive male from northeastern India presented with fever and cough as well as a 3-month-
old ulcer over the chin. On examination, there was a 5 × 5-cm superficial ulcer with a thick adherent crust over the chin (Figure 1). The
individual had three papules with central umbilication over the neck and face. He had anemia (hemoglobin = 7.5 g) and a cluster of
differentiation 4 (CD4) count of 89 cells/μL. His chest radiograph and computed tomography (CT) scan of the thorax showed right mid- and
lower-zone consolidation. Histopathology of the umbilicated papule and the ulcer showed numerous yeast forms and a few sausage-shaped
structures with central septation within the histiocytes (Figure 2). Fungal tissue cultures from skin lesions and bronchoalveolar lavage
aspirates showed a greenish yellow, flat, velvety wrinkled colony with surrounding diffusible red pigment (Figure 3). This was diagnostic of
Penicillium marneffei infection. Sputum smears and culture were negative for tuberculosis. Direct immunofluorescence detection for
Pneumocystis carinii from sputum sample was negative. Superficial ulcer with adherent crusts over the chin. This figure appears in color at
www.ajtmh.org. Yeast and sausage shaped structure with central septation, PASD 400×. This figure appears in color at www.ajtmh.org. Greenish
yellow, flat, velvety colony with surrounding diffusible red pigmentation. This figure appears in color at www.ajtmh.org. Mucocutaneous
lesions are seen in two-thirds of patients with Penicillium marneffei infection. These include generalized papular eruptions, central
umbilicated papules resembling molluscum contagiosum, acne-like lesions, folliculitis, subcutaneous nodules, necrotic nodules, papules and
nodules with ulceration, oropharyngeal papules, palatal perforation, and genital papules.1 Authors' addresses: Dincy Peter, Department of
Dermatology, Christian Medical College, Vellore - 632004, Tamil Nadu, India, E-mail: dincypeter@gmail.com. Meera Thomas, Department of
Pathology, Christian Medical College, Vellore - 632004, Tamil Nadu, India, E-mail: tom_meera@hotmail.com. Mary Mathews, Department of
Microbiology, Christian Medical College, Vellore - 632004, Tamil Nadu, India, E-mail: mmathews@cmcvellore.ac.in.
