A 59-year-old man was admitted with numbness, pain, and a tingling sensation in both lower legs. He was initially diagnosed with diabetic
peripheral neuropathy based on a symptom questionnaire and a quantitative sensory test. Despite symptomatic treatment of diabetic
neuropathy, he complained of worsening sensory symptoms and additional motor weakness in both lower extremities. As the motor weakness of
both extremities became more aggravated over time, brain and spine imaging tests and a nerve conduction test were performed. The nerve
conduction study revealed motor and sensory axonal neuropathy. In his cerebrospinal analysis, albumino-cytologic dissociation, which is
compatible to the Gillian-Barre syndrome, was found. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed albumino-cytologic dissociation. He was treated
with intravenous immunoglobulin and his neurologic deficits were gradually improved. Neuropathy in diabetic patients is heterogenous, so can
present with many sensory and motor symptom . Diverse neuropathic symptoms are important in the early recognition and diagnosis of diabetic
neuropathy (DN). If the neurological symptoms are atypical and are not resolved, especially when motor neurons were involved, other causes
should be considered because DN is an exclusive diagnosis and nondiabetic neuropathy may be present in diabetic patients . Among these,
Guillain-Barre syndrome (GBS) is a disease that should be considered when acute flaccid weakness occurs . We report here a case of diabetic
neuropathy combined with GBS, which was diagnosed with some delay due to the underlying diabetes. A 59-year-old man complained of pain and
numbness in both lower legs of several months duration. His medical history was diabetes of 15 years and he recently had caught a common
cold. He had no significant neurological history and received insulin treatment for glucose control. Laboratory findings showed: proteinuria
(+), glucosuria (++), hemoglobin 10.1 g/dL, aspartate aminotransferase (AST)/alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 24/30 IU/L, creatinine kinase
(CK) 64 U/L, glucose 288 mg/dL, Na+/K+/Cl- 130/4.1/98 mmol/L, blood urae nitrogen (BUN)/creatinine (Cr) 28/1.2 mg/dL, HbA1c 8.8%, C-peptide
1.2 ng/mL, and total cholesterol 248 mg/dL. On the neurological examination, there were no abnormal findings for the motor response. After
admission, the patient was treated with insulin for glucose control and alpha-lipoic acid (ALA), gabapentin, and amytryptilin for diabetic
peripheral neuropathy based on symptoms (total symptom score, 9.65), 10 g monofilament test, and quantitative sensory test (Table 1). After
two days, however, the sensory symptoms in both legs were more aggravated and there was additional motor weakness in the lower legs. These
symptoms were not present before admission. On day 4, he could not walk and had difficulty sensing movement of upper extremities, although
he had not had any discomfort in ambulation at the visiting hospital. Cervical and brain MRI were performed but resulted in near normal
findings except for mild herniation of an intervertebral disc. On day 5, aggravated weakness of the lower legs had spread to the upper
extremities, so we consulted with the neurology department. Deep tendon reflex was absent and so cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) examination and a
neurophysiological study were performed. The CSF showed albumino-cytologic dissociation (Table 2) and the electrodiagnostic finding was
acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy compatible with GBS (Table 3). Immunoglobulin was the administered intravenously and the
neurological deficit of motor weakness improved gradually over the next week, allowing the patient to be discharged. The sensory discomforts
however, such as pain, numbness, and tingling sense, which were thought to be caused by DN, were little relieved with continuous medication
of ALA and gabapentin. Many diabetic patients suffer from neuropathic symptoms involving sensory and motor nerves . However, motor neuron
involvement including paralysis or weakness of extremities is not common in DN. Generally confirmation of DN can be established by
neuropathic symptoms, sensory and autonomic function test, and quantitative electrophysiology. Nevertheless, other causes should be excluded
. Cerebrovascular accident, peripheral vascular insufficiency, spinal disease, periodic paralysis, myasthenia, transverse myelitis, toxic
neuropathy, diabetic peripheral neuropathy, and GBS are all possible causes . Since the prognosis of the neuropathic patient sometimes is
dependent on early recognition and prompt treatment of the cause, an exact diagnosis is needed in the early period of the disease. To avoid
misdiagnosis when the patient suffers from neuropathic symptoms combined with acute weakness or paralysis of limbs, the physician must be
aware of the possibility of GBS, even if the patient is being treated for another disease. Although there are no reports show of a high risk
of GBS in diabetic patients, a few cases of GBS associated with diabetic ketoacidosis have been described . GBS underlying DN is uncommon
but could possibly be a serious cause of paralysis or weakness of limbs, although this condition can be overlooked on presentation. Prompt
and sufficient evaluation and management should be done in the early stages when patients are suffering from neuropathic symptoms which are
not explained by previously diagnosed underlying disease. GBS is a treatable disease which is associated with morbidity and mortality if
untreated . GBS is the commonest peripheral neuropathy affecting children but it can occur at any age and condition. It is characterized by
rapidly progressing symmetric limb weakness, loss of tendon reflexes and sensory signs, and autonomic dysfunction . Diverse symptoms in GBS
can occur according to the subtypes. Acute peripheral neuropathy in GBS includes acute inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy,
acute motor axonal neuropathy, and acute motor and sensory axonal neuropathy . The onset of neurological symptoms, such as flaccid weakness
of lower limbs, is usually sudden, but is possible anytime between 1 to 28 days after the prodromal event. Weakness of the limbs is usually
present bilaterally with symmetrical involvement spreading upwards to the arms, but asymmetrical presentation and only distal involvement of
the legs are also possible . Although the exact pathogenic mechanisms are uncertain, there is considerable evidence that an acute
demyelinating process occurs by an immunemediated reaction with neural antigen after various viral illnesses including herpes, mumps,
mycoplasma, cytomegalovirus and Campylobacter or after immunization . For the diagnosis of GBS, CSF findings of increased protein and normal
cell count is helpful. In addition, neurophysiological examinations including nerve conduction studies are essential for the confirmation of
GBS. Marked slowing of motor conduction velocity, prolonged distal latency, and conduction block can be shown in nerve conduction studies.
Early symptomatic and supportive treatments including careful monitoring of vital signs are the mainstay of the management. Until now plasma
exchange or intravenous immunoglobulin have been recommended for effective treatment . Several factors such as occurrence in adulthood,
rapid development of paralysis, delay in the diagnosis, marked distal involvement, a low amplitude or fibrillation pattern in the
electromyographic potential have been suggested as predictors of poor prognosis . In our case, due to diagnostic delay, rapid progression
and electromyografic findings, a poor prognosis was predicted. However, near complete recovery was achieved. We report a case of DN combined
with overlooked GBS that was detected with delay to encourage prudence in caring for neuropathic diabetic patients. No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported. Quantitative sensory test results on admission day Cerebrospinal fluid finding of the
patient Nerve conduction studies TL, terminal latency; A, amplitude; NCV, nerve conduction velocity.
