Preoperative imaging to delineate anomalous vascular anatomy is mandatory to perform laparoscopic radical nephrectomy for a pelvic ectopic
kidney. Laparoscopic radical nephrectomy of a pelvic kidney for renal cell carcinoma is a procedure with little precedent, but one that
offers the advantages of the minimally invasive approach. We present our experience with this unique procedure. A 64-year-old male with a
history of end-stage renal disease was diagnosed with a 2.6-cm enhancing mass in a pelvic left kidney with 2 separate sources of blood
supply. He was offered either an open radical nephrectomy or a laparoscopic radical nephrectomy and opted for the minimally invasive
approach. The procedure was performed successfully without complications and with minimal blood loss. The case was marked both by difficulty
in mobilizing the sigmoid colon and the limited working space of the pelvis, which made localization of the numerous hilar vessels
challenging. Laparoscopic radical nephrectomy for a pelvic ectopic kidney appears to be safe and efficacious. Success is dependent on
familiarity with pelvic anatomy, optimal port placement, and preprocedure knowledge of the often-complicated vascular anatomy of the ectopic
kidney. Preoperative imaging to delineate anomalous vascular anatomy is mandatory, and ureteral catheter placement is helpful for
intraoperative identification purposes. A pelvic kidney is caused by complete failure of ascent of the metanephros between weeks 6 and 9 of
gestation, with an estimated incidence of 1 in 2100 to 1 in 3000.1,2 The incidence of renal cell carcinoma in this entity is not known, but
overall, it is undoubtedly infrequently encountered. Despite the proliferation of minimally invasive techniques, laparoscopic radical
nephrectomy of a pelvic kidney for renal cell carcinoma is a procedure with little precedent. Herein, we present the report of a successful
laparoscopic radical pelvic nephrectomy for renal cell carcinoma. The performance of this procedure presents challenges unique to this
entity, including a limited working space; proximity of various vital structures, including the great vessels; anomalous hilar structures;
and difficulty encountered with optimal port placement. This procedure offers the advantages of the minimally invasive approach, with
associated decreased convalescence and morbidity. The patient is a 64-year-old male with a history of end-stage renal disease, secondary to
hypertension and diabetes mellitus, who is hemodialysis dependent. During workup for renal transplantation, a computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed an ectopic pelvic left kidney with a 2.6-cm enhancing mass located in the anterior portion of the mid to lower pole (Figure 1). The
ectopic kidney measured 9.5 cm by 5.5 cm. The CT also revealed 2 separate sources of blood supply to the kidney. The first originated from
the contralateral common iliac artery and vein and entered the kidney into the medial aspect. The second originated directly from the aorta
and vena cava and entered the kidney from the anterolateral direction (Figure 2). Incidentally, the renal vein entering the vena cava was
retroaortically located. The patient was offered laparoscopic radical pelvic nephrectomy and open pelvic radical nephrectomy and opted for
the laparoscopic approach. 2.6 cm mid to lower pole location of enhancing renal tumor (arrow). Separate hilar structures demonstrated with
arrows. A ureteral catheter was placed for intraoperative identification purposes, and the patient was positioned in a modified flank
position, with his back at a 45-degree angle to the horizontal. The Veress needle was used to initially insufflate the peritoneal cavity.
The camera port was placed just to the left of the umbilicus. The left hand 12-mm port was placed along the lateral border of the rectus
abdominis muscle lateral to the umbilicus. The right hand port was placed on the lateral border of the rectus near the dome of the bladder.
A fourth port was placed laterally to retract the sigmoid colon medially (Figure 3), because it was draped directly over the kidney and
difficult to mobilize (Figure 4). Location of port sites for left sided pelvic nephrectomy. Sigmoid colon (left arrow) and anterior surface
of kidney (right arrow) during medial mobilization of sigmoid colon. The sigmoid colon was encountered first. It was mobilized medially by
reflecting the bowel along the avascular line of Toldt. After the sigmoid was mobilized, some dense adhesions were noted at the level of the
internal ring. These were taken down with sharp and blunt dissection. Due to the relatively large size of the kidney and the overlying
sigmoid colon, it was somewhat difficult to perform the medial dissection. A fourth port was placed laterally to retract the kidney
medially. Dissection was then carried posterior to the kidney, between it and the psoas muscle in a cephalad direction, but the medially
located hilum could not be identified from this direction. Therefore, dissection was carried in a caudal direction starting at the upper
pole, which then uncovered these hilar vessels that were draped over the ipsilateral common iliac artery (Figure 5). The vessels were
individually divided with the endovascular stapler. At the level of the upper pole, the second set of hilar vessels were identified and
individually divided with the endovascular stapler (Figure 6). The ureter was ligated after the removal of the ureteral catheter. The
specimen was entrapped in a bag. Because of the possibility of a future renal transplant, the specimen was removed via a small, lower
midline incision instead of a Gibson incision. Difficulty encountered visualizing first set of hilar vessels (middle arrow), due to sigmoid
colon (left arrow). Renal tumor visualized (right arrow). Second set of hilar vessels visualized (right arrow) with sigmoid colon in
proximity (left arrow). Estimated blood loss was 50cc. Total operative time was 210 minutes. No intraoperative or postoperative
complications occurred. Pathology revealed a Fuhrman Grade 3 conventional clear cell renal cell carcinoma, 2.5cm in its largest dimension,
with negative surgical margins. At 2-year follow-up, the patient is disease free and awaiting renal transplantation. Advancements in
laparoscopic procedures in urologic surgery continue to expand the boundaries of what is performed in a minimally invasive fashion. Although
urologists who perform minimally invasive techniques are typically familiar with laparoscopic procedures in the pelvis, such as radical
prostatectomy or pelvic lymph node dissection, the performance of a laparoscopic pelvic nephrectomy has certain inherent difficulties. The
first is the limited amount of space in the pelvis, which becomes most apparent when an attempt is made to locate and dissect the hilar
vasculature. On the left side, the limited mobility of the sigmoid colon can further limit visualization of medially located renal hilar
vessels. In addition, the pelvic kidney is often located quite medially, causing difficulties in port placement. Anomalous kidneys such as
these may have anomalous vascular anatomy creating additional challenges.3 The key to success is to perform the steps in an analogous
fashion to laparoscopic nephrectomy of a traditional orthotopically placed kidney. The key step is to develop the plane posterior to the
kidney from the level of the lower pole and trace gradually cephalad to the hilar vessels. In our case, when the sigmoid colon limited the
exposure of the medial surface of the kidney, this issue was circumvented by then moving to the upper pole and gradually dissecting
caudally. The issue of port placement is especially germane to this particular procedure. An important first step is to gain access to the
peritoneal cavity via a periumbilical port. After this is accomplished, the remaining ports can be placed under direct vision as best suits
the level and anatomic position of the kidney. Placing the initial port at the umbilicus ensures that the camera position stays as medial as
possible, because the pelvic kidney hilum is medially located. The left hand port is placed along the lateral border of the rectus abdominis
muscle, lateral to the umbilicus. The right hand port is placed in the same line as the left hand port and as close to the dome of the
bladder as possible. A fourth port can be placed close to the anterior superior iliac spine (Figure 3). The anomalous vascular anatomy of
the ectopic kidney often requires extensive dissection. For this reason, one must be wary of the possibility of unintentional ligation of
vital pelvic vessels if definitive identification is not completed. We place a ureteral catheter to facilitate intraoperative identification
of the ureter and delineate it from other vascular structures within the pelvis. Preoperative cross-sectional imaging (CT or MRI) to fully
elucidate the anomalous vascular anatomy is also mandatory.4 Terrone and colleagues4 described a case of renal cell carcinoma in an ectopic
presacral kidney, removed by an open radical nephrectomy. Their operative success was dependent on a thorough preoperative magnetic
resonance angiogram, which delineated the anomalous vasculature. Pre-procedure knowledge of the hilar location and originating vessels
results in a successful procedure, whether performed laparoscopically or open. The type of incision made for specimen removal is up to the
surgeon's discretion. A Gibson incision or lower mid-line incision can both be utilized. In our case, we utilized a lower midline incision
in the event that the left pelvic fossa would need to be used for a possible future renal transplantation. The performance of laparoscopic
radical nephrectomy for a pelvic ectopic kidney appears to be safe and efficacious. Success with this procedure is dependent on familiarity
with pelvic anatomy, optimal port placement, and preprocedure knowledge of the often-complicated vascular anatomy of the ectopic kidney.
Port placement should be initiated at the level of the umbilicus, and the ports should be placed in a fashion to best triangulate the
ectopic kidney. Ureteral catheterization is also recommended as a helpful aid to better delineate the anatomy in a situation rife with
anomalous structures.
