Right Coronary Artery (RCA) originating from left anterior descending artery is a very rare congenital coronary artery anomaly. A 66-year-
old man presented with hypertension and complaints of exertional chest pain. The angiography was performed. Aortic root angiography showed
no coronary ostium orginating from the right sinus of valsalva. Right coronary artery was vizualized as anomalously originating from the
midportion of left anterior descending artery. Severe stenosis were seen in ostium of anomalous right coronary artery, in midportion of left
anterior descending and in midportion of circumflex artery. The patient was referred for coronary artery bypass grafting. The patient
underwent coronary artery bypass surgery for three vessels. He was discharged home on postoperative day 7 without any complication. His
echocardiogram on follow-up visit revealed good biventricular function. Congenital coronary artery anomalies are rare and usually an
incidental finding during coronary angiography. Most of them have no clinical signifance. Right Coronary Artery (RCA) originating from left
anterior descending artery (LAD) is a very rare congenital coronary artery anomaly. We present a patient with three vessel disease in whom
the right coronary artery originated as a seperate branch from the midportion of LAD. A 66-year-old man with hypertension presented to the
hospital with complaints of exertional chest pain for two months. His electrocardiogram and echocardiography were unremarkable. The
angiography was performed upon persistent chest pain. During his diagnostic coronary angiogram, multiple attempts to cannulate the RCA with
the right Judkins catheter were unsuccessful. Aortic root angiography showed no coronary ostium orginating from the right sinus of valsalva.
RCA was vizualized as anomalously originating from the midportion of LAD artery with coursing to the familiar area (Figure 1, 2) and its
continuation (Figure 3, 4). Severe stenosis were seen in ostium of anomalous RCA, in midportion of LAD and in midportion of circumflex
artery. The patient was referred for coronary artery bypass grafting. The patient underwent coronary artery bypass surgery for three
vessels. He was discharged home on postoperative day 7 without any complication. His echocardiogram on follow-up visit revealed good
biventricular function. Right Coronary Artery Originating from the midportion Left Anterior Descending Artery with coursing to the familiar
area of the RCA. Right Coronary Artery Originating from the midportion Left Anterior Descending Artery with coursing to the familiar area of
the RCA. The course of RCA in right atrioventricular groove and its continuation. The course of RCA in right atrioventricular groove and its
continuation. The most common coronary anomaly is the circumflex coronary artery arising from the right sinus or the RCA, with an incidence
of 0.37%-0.6% . The next most common and pathologically significant anomalies are the right coronary artery from the left sinus of valsalva
and the left main coronary artery arising anomalously from the right sinus of Valsalva. The combined incidence of these defects 0.17% in
autopsy series and 0.1%-0.3% in patients undergoing catheterization or echocardiography . A variety of anomalous origin of the RCA has been
reported, including the left anterior sinus with variable courses, ascending aorta above the sinus level, descending thoracic aorta, left
main coronary artery, circumflex coronary artery, the pulmonary arteries, or below the aortic valve . Single coronary artery occupies
approximately 0.024% of the general population . In most of the cases, aberrant RCA originates from the left main coronary artery and
traverses anterior to the right ventricle or between the pulmonary trunk and ascending aorta . The RCA originating as a branch from the
midportion of the LAD is a very rare anomaly. Six cases have been reported in the literature so far, and no patient had underlying
congenital heart disease . In our patient RCA was stemming from the midportion of the LAD and had not congenital heart disease. Most of the
coronary anomalies remain asymptomatic and are incidental to investigations by coronary angiography. Coronary artery anomalies are
classified as benign (80.6%) but potentially serious anomalies (19.4%) . However, myocardial perfusion can be affected, ranging from
exertional angina to sudden death, within the different subtypes of these anomalies, such as a coronary artery arising from the pulmonary
artery and a single coronary artery arising from either the left or right sinus of valsalva . The pathophysiology of the restricted coronary
blood flow seen in the presented case anomaly is suggested to be as follows. The acute takeoff angle, slit-like orifice, and compression of
the intramural segment by the aortic valve commissure. Lateral luminal compression of the intramural portion of the coronary artery and
compression of the coronary artery between aorta and pulmonary artery are also other possible ischemic mechanism . Some autopsy-based
studies have shown that slit-like orifice structure and acute angle takeoff are more common in sudden cardiac death patient . However, there
is still controversy concerning the mechanism by which the interarterial course is compressed between the aorta and pulmonary artery. An
intravacular ultrasound study found that luminal compression of the coronary artery was totally attributable to the aorta because the
pressure of the pulmonary artery was much lower than that of the aorta . In our patient there was exertional angina. There was no surgical
finding related with compression of the coronary artery between aorta and pulmonary artery. In conclusion, RCA as a branch of LAD is very
rare coronary anomaly. If RCA course is not between aorta and pulmonary artery, this anomaly is accepted as relatively benign rare anomaly.
In case of classic appearence of RCA was not established during angiography physician should kept in mind that RCA can stem from LAD artery.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HT: Chief of the Cardiovascular Surgery Departmant, performed the coronary artery
bypass grafting and primary author. OB: Cardiovascular Surgeon, assisted in surgery and preparing manuscript. LO: Cardiologist, provided
pre-operative care and advice during the manuscript writing process. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
