Psoriatic arthritis (PsA) is an inflammatory arthritis associated with psoriasis. There are no generally accepted diagnostic criteria for
PsA. Indeed, the diagnosis of this inflammatory arthritis is made by exclusion of other possible diseases and based upon immunologic,
radiologic, and clinical features which are consistent with the diagnosis. Inflammatory arthritis in a patient with psoriasis can be an
important clue for the diagnosis of PsA, but the possibility for diagnosis of other inflammatory arthritides ever remains. Herein we report
a case of a female patient who was not diagnosed with PsA, but with rheumatoid arthritis, even though she had psoriasis. Psoriatic arthritis
(PsA) is an inflammatory arthritis associated with psoriasis. The prevalence of PsA among patients with psoriasis ranges from 3& to 30& .
Currently, the diagnosis of PsA is based on clinical, radiologic, and immunologic features which are consistent with the diagnosis of
psoriatic arthritis, rather than other inflammatory arthritides, because there are no generally accepted criteria for the classification of
PsA. Sometimes, it is difficult to differentiate PsA from rheumatoid arthritis (RA) when the disease is manifested by a polyarticular
pattern and the rheumatoid factor (RF) is positive. A 41-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital because of multiple joint pains and
swelling of 1 month duration. She had been diagnosed with psoriasis since 10 years of age. Two months previously, her skin lesions were
exacerbated and she had multiple erythematous patches and pinhead-sized pustules distributed over her entire body. She was treated with
acitretin and narrow-band ultraviolet B radiation, but her skin lesions did not improve. After the use of oral prednisolone (30 mg/day),
there was a slight improvement in her skin lesions. The prednisolone was tapered over 2 weeks. Several days after cessation of the
prednisolone, she began to complain of pain and swelling involving multiple joints, which led to her visit to our office for evaluation. On
physical examination, there were multiple tender and swollen joints including the right shoulder, the elbows, the wrists, the proximal
interphalangeal joints, the knees, and the ankles, but there was no involvement of the distal interphalangeal (DIP) joints nor findings of
nail dystrophy (Fig. 1). Laboratory findings revealed a white blood cell count of 11,450 /µL, a hemoglobin level of 11.9 g/dL, a platelet
count of 395,000 /µL, an erythrocyte sedimentation rate of 120 mm/hr, a C-reactive protein level of 31.7 mg/dL, a RF level of 966 IU/mL, and
an anti-cyclic citrullinated peptide antibody (anti-CCP Ab) titer of 229.3 U/mL. A whole body bone scan showed multiple increased uptakes in
bilateral 5th metatarsal phalangeal joints, wrists, and finger joints, suggesting the presence of inflammatory arthritis, but plain X-ray
studies showed no significant bony abnormalities, including periostitis and marginal bone erosion (Fig. 2). On the basis of clinical
features such as symmetric inflammatory polyarthritis of the hand joints involving more than 3 joints and the presence of RF and anti-CCP
Ab, we assigned the diagnosis of RA with psoriasis rather than PsA. She had began treatment with methotrexate (7.5 mg/wk), sulfasalazine (2
g/day), hydroxychloroquine (200 mg/day), prednisolone (10 mg/day), and meloxicam (15 mg/day). She is now followed in the regular outpatient
department and her pain and swelling of the joints are improving. There are currently no diagnostic criteria for PsA; the diagnosis of PsA
is made clinically. Moll and Wright have described five clinical patterns of joint involvement in PsA: 1) distal arthritis (involvement of
the DIP joints), 2) asymmetric oligoarthritis, 3) symmetric polyarthritis, 4) arthritis mutilans, and 5) spondyloarthropathy. While distal
arthritis and arthritis mutilans are specific for PsA, polyarthritis is thought to be more frequent in PsA . Sometimes, PsA presenting with
a polyarticular pattern is clinically indistinguishable from RA. Generally, PsA can be discriminated from RA by physical findings, such as
the presence of DIP joint involvement, an asymmetric pattern of arthritis, spondyloarthropathy, dactylitis, and nail dystrophy. However, the
absence of these clinical features does not exclude PsA as a possible diagnosis. RF exists in 2% to 10% of patients with PsA. Low titers of
anti-nuclear antibodies are also found in nearly one-half of patients with PsA; clinically significant titers (i.e., ≥ 1 : 80) exist in 14%
of patients with PsA . Anti-CCP Ab, with a high specificity for RA, are widely used in distinguishing RA from other disease conditions .
However, anti-CCP Ab are found in 8% to 16% of patients with PsA, especially in those with erosive and polyarticular disease, and anti-CCP
Ab are also found in those patients with psoriasis alone . Therefore, the presence of anti-CCP Ab do not exclude PsA from a possible
alternative diagnosis. In this patient, we made the diagnosis of RA because she had morning stiffness, arthritis involving more than 3
joints, arthritis of the hand, RF positivity, and seropositivity for anti-CCP Ab. However, we could not verfiy that she did not have PsA
because there is no generally agreed upon diagnostic criteria for PsA. Several criteria for PsA have been suggested. Recently, new
diagnostic criteria have been suggested by Taylor et al. , the so-called CASPAR (classification criteria for psoriatic arthritis) criteria,
the sensitivity and specificity of which are 91.4% and 98.7% respectively. The criteria consist of established inflammatory articular
disease with at least a sum of three points from the following: current psoriasis (2 points), a history of psoriasis (1 point), a family
history of psoriasis (unless current psoriasis was present or there was a history of psoriasis; 1 point), dactylitis (1 point),
juxtaarticular new bone formation (1 point), RF negativity (1 point), and nail dystrophy (1 point). In the case of our patient, she had
inflammatory articular disease and psoriasis. Therefore, according to the CASPAR criteria, she could not be diagnosed with PsA because she
scored 2 points only. It is easy to think that a patient with both psoriasis and inflammatory arthritis may have PsA. However it should be
noted that other forms of arthritis can be present in the setting of psoriasis and inflammatory arthritis. Assessing serologic markers, such
as RF and anti-CCP Ab, can be of help in the differential diagnosis, but it should be noted that the laboratory studies also have
limitations, i.e., false positivity. It is sometimes difficult to diagnose a patient with PsA due to a lack of internationally accepted
criteria. Newly developed criteria, such as the CASPAR criteria, can facilitate the diagnosis of PsA. We hope that appropriate diagnostic
criteria will be accepted for the diagnosis of PsA in the future. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Photographs of the hand and foot. There are multiple erythematous patches suggesting psoriasis on the hand and foot. (A) Shows swellings on
Proximal interphalangeal, Metacarpophalangeal, and wrist joints. (B) Shows swelling of the ankle joints. Radiographic assessment. (A) Whole
body bone scan shows multifocal increased uptakes on bilateral wrist and finger joints, suggesting arthritic changes. (B) The plain
radiograph of both hands showed no grossly abnormal findings.
