Spontaneous evisceration through the vagina was first described in 1907 by McGregor.1 To date, only eighty-five cases of transvaginal small
bowel evisceration have been documented worldwide.1,2 The primary risk groups for spontaneous vaginal evisceration include postmenopausal
women,1,3–7 vaginal surgery cases,1,8–10 multiparae,11 and women of older age.2,3 In postmenopausal woman, transvaginal evisceration is
frequently associated with increased abdominal pressure,1 vaginal ulceration due to severe atrophy, and straining at stool.6,8 Vaginal
evisceration is a medical emergency that requires prompt recognition and immediate surgical intervention.1 The associated mortality rate is
5.6 percent; however, the incidence of morbidity is higher3,8 when the bowel has become strangulated through the vaginal defect. Here, we
report a case of vaginal vault rupture with evisceration through the vagina and highlight the risk factors, clinical presentation, and
treatment options for this rare gynecological emergency. A female patient aged seventy-five years was admitted to the emergency room with
abdominal pain ten days after an angioplasty plus coronary stent implantation, which had been performed through the femoral artery. Three
days after the angioplasty; i.e., one week prior to presentation to the emergency room, an inguinal hematoma developed as complication of
the femoral arteriography had to be drained. Thereafter, the patient suffered from constipation and had difficulties with evacuation. On the
day the woman presented to the emergency room, she felt a sudden and dull abdominal discomfort during evacuation and noticed a loop of bowel
protruding from her vagina. There was no history of abdominal or vaginal trauma. Thirty years prior to the present admission, the woman had
undergone a total abdominal hysterectomy for a benign pathology. The operation had no complications, and the patient’s recovery was
uneventful. After the hysterectomy and ten and twelve years prior to the present admission, the woman had undergone two perinea surgeries
for a prolapsed bladder. Apart from these three surgeries, the she had no past medical or gynecological history worthy of note. Upon
admission to the emergency room, the patient’s blood pressure was 110 × 70 mmHg, her heart rate was 88 bpm, and an abdominal examination
indicated significant pain. The pelvic examination revealed 40 cm of small bowel prolapsing through her vagina (Figure 1). After
resuscitation of the patient, she received intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics (1 g of Ceftriaxon and 500 mg of Metronidazole), and her
bowel was wrapped with warm, sterile, and saline-soaked gauze for transfer to the operating room. There, under rachianesthesia, the woman
was placed in lithotomy position, so that the viability of her small bowel could be assessed. The examination revealed that the bowel was
edematous and thick-walled, but still viable. There was no evidence of necrosis. The inguinal hematoma, which looked infected, was drained
(Figure 2). The patient was then placed in the Trendelenburg position. Because the vault defect was located high in the vagina, all attempts
to transvaginally reduce the small bowel into the peritoneal cavity were unsuccessful. Consequently, a midline subumbilical incision was
made, and the prolapsed bowel was reduced into the abdomen and inspected for damage throughout its length. Thereafter, the vaginal vault
defect was closed with absorbable sutures (Polygleprone 2.0) by a vaginal route (Figure 3), and a 30-cm segment of bowel was excised.
Although the bowel was viable, we decided to carry out this procedure because there was an expansible hematoma in the mesum. Broad-spectrum
antibiotics were postoperatively given for six days. The patient had no postoperative complications and was discharged from the hospital
after six days. In a follow-up examination three months later, the woman exhibited no evidence of recurrence, and the vaginal vault had
healed satisfactorily. Vaginal evisceration is a rare event that has been reported to occur after vaginal traumas induced by coitus,
obstetric instrumentation, and the insertion of foreign bodies. Vaginal evisceration has also been reported after pelvic surgery and in
patients with enterocele.8 The risk groups for transvaginal small bowel evisceration include the elderly; postmenopausal women;2,7 female
patients after vaginal,9,10,12 abdominal,4–6,13 or laparoscopic hysterectomy; 14 and multiparous women.11 Due to the weakening of vaginal
tissue caused by genital atrophies and enteroceles, the risk of spontaneous evisceration is increased in postmenopausal women, particularly
in combination with straining at stool and/or vaginal ulceration.8,15 Because the postmenopausal vagina is thin, scarred, foreshortened, and
has diminished vascularity, it is more prone to rupture.1,4 In postmenopausal women, vaginal ruptures most commonly occur at the posterior
fornix.8,16 In postmenopausal women, evisceration can occur either spontaneously or, more frequently, in connection with an increase in
intra-abdominal pressure induced by coughing, defecating, or falling.11 In premenopausal patients, evisceration is usually preceded by
vaginal trauma caused by rape, coitus, obstetric instrumentation, or the insertion of foreign bodies.1,3,8,16 Additional risk factors for
vaginal evisceration include previous vaginal surgeries and enteroceles.8 According to Kowalski et al.2, 73 percent of patients with vaginal
evisceration had previously undergone some kind of vaginal surgery, most commonly transvaginal hysterectomies or enterocele repairs. In 63
percent of the reported cases, the patients had enteroceles, which putatively caused further stretching of the atrophic vagina, thus making
it more susceptible to rupture. Of all the eighty-five cases of vaginal evisceration reported in the literature to date,8 50–75 percent of
the patients had undergone one or more previous vaginal operations,3,8 and roughly 25 percent of the eviscerations occurred after abdominal
hysterectomy.2 Postoperative cuff infections after hysterectomy have also been shown to contribute to evisceration.13 So far, there are no
reported cases of vaginal vault rupture and evisceration due to perineal proctectomy or rectal prolapse. In the present case, one of the
underlying causes of the evisceration was probably the fact that the patient was a postmenopausal woman with previous history of pelvic
surgeries (hysterectomy and perinioplasty), which putatively had weakened her pelvic floor and consequently contributed to the vaginal
rupture. A second cause for the evisceration was excessive strain due to the difficulty in evacuating in the presence of a retroperitoneal
hematoma. Vaginal evisceration is a surgical emergency, and immediate recognition and surgical repair are crucial for its successful
management. The appropriate management of evisceration includes a thorough assessment of the herniated viscus and surgical repair of the
vaginal defect. In cases where the eviscerated bowel is viable and can be reduced into the peritoneal cavity without complication, the
closure of the vaginal defect can be accomplished by a vaginal approach;2 however, in patients with minimal or no enterocele, the vaginal
defect may be located high in the vagina, as was the case in the present study. Under these circumstances, a vaginal approach is not viable
because the bowel, which becomes trapped and strangulated after protruding through the defect, prevents access to the defect itself. In
these cases, laparotomy is necessary to access the defect, reduce the bowel into the abdomen, and resect any nonviable bowel. To date, all
the reported cases that have required bowel resection have been managed with exploratory laparotomy followed by repair of the vaginal
defect.2,17 A combined abdominal and vaginal surgical approach, as the one used in the present case report, is recommended for adequate
evaluation and effective repair of the tissues involved.11 Pelvic examination revealing the small bowel prolapsing through the vagina. The
pelvic examination revealed that the small bowel was edematous and thick-walled, but still viable. The inguinal hematoma was drained for a
second time, specifically at the time of the prolapse surgery, because it looked infected. The vaginal defect was closed by absorbable
sutures via the vaginal route.
