Microcephaly, mental retardation and congenital retinal folds along with other systemic features have previously been reported as a separate
clinical entity. The sporadic nature of the syndrome and lack of clear inheritance patterns pointed to a genetic heterogeneity. Here, we
report a genetic analysis of a female patient with microcephaly, congenital bilateral falciform retinal folds, nystagmus, and mental
retardation. Karyotyping revealed a de novo pericentric inversion in chromosome 6 with breakpoints in 6p12.1 and 6q21. Fluorescence in situ
hybridization analysis narrowed down the region around the breakpoints, and the breakpoint at 6q21 was found to disrupt the CDK19 gene.
CDK19 was found to be expressed in a diverse range of tissues including fetal eye and fetal brain. Quantitative PCR of the CDK19 transcript
from Epstein–Barr virus-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines of the patient revealed ~50% reduction in the transcript (p = 0.02),
suggesting haploinsufficiency of the gene. cdk8, the closest orthologue of human CDK19 in Drosophila has been shown to play a major role in
eye development. Conditional knock-down of Drosophila cdk8 in multiple dendrite (md) neurons resulted in 35% reduced dendritic branching and
altered morphology of the dendritic arbour, which appeared to be due in part to a loss of small higher order branches. In addition, Cdk8
mutant md neurons showed diminished dendritic fields revealing an important role of the CDK19 orthologue in the developing nervous system of
Drosophila. This is the first time the CDK19 gene, a component of the mediator co-activator complex, has been linked to a human disease.
Congenital retinal fold (ablatio falciformis congenita) refers to a congenital malformation that is characterized by the presence of a
raised retinal fold extending radially from the posterior pole to the fundus periphery. It is reported that congenital retinal fold is not a
single clinical entity, but can be a manifestation of a diverse group of conditions (van Nouhuys 1982a). Familial exudative
vitreoretinopathy (FEVR; MIM 133780) and microcephaly are frequently associated with congenital retinal fold (van Nouhuys 1981, 1982a). In
OMIM two separate entries (MIM, 152950 and 156590) describe several reports in which the patients suffer from microcephaly, mild to moderate
mental retardation, chorioretinopathy or congenital retinal fold, and lymphedema. The reports depict a heterogeneous clinical spectrum of
these features with an uncertain inheritance pattern pointing towards a heterogeneous genetic etiology for this rare developmental syndrome.
In four eyes of three patients from two large families with FEVR, congenital retinal folds were found (van Nouhuys 1982a). In the same
report, it was mentioned that the formation of congenital retinal folds is the consequence of a developmental disorder of retinal
vasculature during the last few months of intrauterine life and the folds may even develop after birth. The clinical picture and familial
occurrence of many cases of congenital retinal folds previously described were suggestive of FEVR. Nishimura et al. (1983) likewise found
falciform retinal folds as a sign of FEVR. Several reports on patients with bilateral congenital retinal folds mention the presence of
microcephaly with varied degree of mental retardation. The majority of the patients showed bilateral falciform folds extending from the
optic disc to the inferior-temporal quadrant of the fundus periphery. The similarity of the retinal folds in this group of microcephalic
patients suggested an independent clinical entity (van Nouhuys 1982b). Gartner (1941) and Masuda (1962) reported two independent exudative
vitreoretinopathy patients, of which the parents were consanguineous, pointing to autosomal recessive transmission. On the other hand,
Pfluger (1885) and Jarmas et al. (1981) reported patients of which one of the parents shared some, but not all of the clinical features,
suggesting autosomal dominant transmission with variable expression. Recently, Nguyen et al. (2005) reported on a boy with congenital
microcephaly, juvenile retinal dystrophy but without mental retardation. His eye examination revealed an optically empty vitreous and poorly
developed fovea, pointing to the etiological relationship between this condition and FEVR. In this study, we report the clinical and
molecular findings in a female patient with bilateral congenital retinal folds and microcephaly with mild mental retardation. By cytogenetic
and molecular genetic analyses, we have found that one copy of the CDK19 gene, located at 6q21, is disrupted in the patient as a result of a
de novo pericentric inversion. In addition, we have used Drosophila as a model system and identified a role of this gene in the developing
nervous system. An informed consent was obtained from our index patient as well as from other individuals who has been recruited for the
present study. Ophthalmological examination of the index patient has been performed on several occasions from 1979 to 2008. The following
methods have been used: determination of visual acuity (Landolt C and Cardiff tests) and contrast sensitivity, applanation tonometry (Haag-
Streit, Koeniz, Switzerland), gonioscopy, slit lamp examination of the anterior segment and vitreous (Rodenstock slit lamp, Munich,
Germany), indirect ophthalmoscopy (Zeiss ophthalmoscope, Oberkochen, Germany), biomicroscopy (Rodenstock slit lamp), and digital fluorescein
angiography of the fundi (Zeiss FF450 fundus camera, Win station software, Medivision-OIS, Sacramento, USA) and Goldmann perimetry (Haag-
Streit perimeter, Munich, Germany). The patient has also been subjected to a full pediatric, neurological and otolaryngological examination.
Human B-lymphocytes were immortalized by transformation with the Epstein–Barr virus (EBV) according to established procedures (Wall et al.
1995). EBV-transformed lymphoblastoid cell lines (EBV–LCLs) of the patients and controls were grown to a density of 0.7 million cells per ml
RPMI 1640 medium (Gibco, Breda, The Netherlands) containing 10% (v/v) fetal calf serum (Sigma, The Netherlands), 1% penicillin–streptomycin
(Gibco, The Netherlands), and 1% GlutaMAX™ (Gibco, The Netherlands). Twenty-five million cells were harvested by centrifugation at 200×g for
5 min at room temperature and re-suspended in 500 μl 8 mM Na2HPO4, 2 mM KH2PO4, 137 mM NaCl, 2.7 mM KCl pH 7.2 (PBS). Non-radioactive in
situ hybridization on human metaphase spreads was performed essentially as described earlier (de Bruijn et al. 2001). The probes to be
tested by FISH were selected from an array of 32,000 BAC probes covering the human genome (32 K BAC array). The analysis was performed on
methanol/acetic acid fixed cells of cell lines from individuals under study. In short, BACs are biotin labeled by nick translation and then
purified, and ethanol precipitated together with a 30-fold excess of Cot-1 DNA (Life Technologies). Immunocytochemical detection of the
hybridizing probe was achieved using fluorescein isothiocyanate (FITC)-conjugated avidin followed by one application step of goat-anti-
avidin conjugated with FITC. The commercially available (Vysis) reference probe for centromere of chromosome 6, gives an orange fluorescence
signal. A Zeiss Axiophot-2 microscope equipped with the appropriate fluorescence filters was used for analysis of the fluorescence signals.
Images were captured by a Leica DC 350 FX camera using Leica CW 4000 software package. Total RNA was isolated from EBV-LCLs using the RNeasy
midi-kit (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The quality and quantity of the RNA was determined by
spectrophotometric measurement and gel electrophoresis. cDNA was synthesized from 2.0 μg total RNA using random hexamers (Amersham, The
Netherlands), and M-MLV reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, The Netherlands) in a total volume of 85.0 μl. After the synthesis, the cDNA was
purified using QIAquick PCR purification columns (Qiagen, Venlo, The Netherlands) and eluted in 30 μl milliQ water. To determine the
expression profile semi-quantitative RT–PCR was performed using primer pairs that amplify parts of CDK19 and ELOVL5 transcripts. The primer
sequences for CDK19 was 5′-CGGAACCTATTTTTCACTGTCG-3′ (exon 7) and 5′-TGTGGGATATTCTGGCATCTT-3′ (exon 8) and that for ELOVL5 was
5′-CATTCAGACCTACAACAAGAAAGG-3′ (exons 6–7) and 5′-GGCTTCACATTGTTTTCCAGGG-3′ (exon 7). The PCR was performed for 30 cycles using RNA (cDNA)
from 12 different human tissues. GAPDH was used as a reference gene. For real-time quantitative RT–PCR (QPCR), 40× dilutions of the cDNA
were made and 5.0 μl from the diluted stock was used for each PCR reaction. Primers were designed using Primer3 software
(http://frodo.wi.mit.edu/cgi-bin/primer3/primer3_www.cgi). Amplicon lengths were typically kept between 80 and 130 bp. Quantitation was
performed using SYBR-Green-based relative quantification strategies according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Bio-Rad, The Netherlands). PCR
reactions were performed on an automatic iCycler (MyiQ single color Real-Time detection System, Bio-Rad, The Netherlands). Initially, the
primer conditions were optimized and a standard curve was determined for six different dilution points (10×–320×) until for each of the
primers PCR efficiencies close to 100% were obtained. For calculation purpose, all the PCR efficiencies were assumed to be exactly 100%. Two
independent cDNA syntheses were made from each RNA sample and duplicate QPCR reactions were performed for each cDNA to ensure
reproducibility. The following condition was used for all the QPCR experiments: initial denaturation for 3 min at 95.0°C, followed by 15 s
at 95.0°C and 30 s at 60.0°C for 40 cycles (QPCR data collection). The products were then denatured at 95.0°C for 1 min and cooled to 65.0°C
and kept for 1 min (melt curve data collection). Ten different EBV–LCLs from 10 unrelated control samples from the Netherlands were used to
determine the normal range of expression for CDK19 and ELOVL5. The mean expression level was used for normalization. A recent report has
systematically identified stable gene expressions in EBV–LCLs (de Brouwer et al. 2006) for use as reference genes for normalization purpose.
We have selected the most stable genes from this study, and after using Genorm (Vandesompele et al. 2002) GUSB and RNF111 were found to be
two most stable genes in our experiments. The geometric mean of the expression of GusB and RNF111 was used as the value for reference genes
for normalization. The differences in expression between patients and controls were calculated using the 2ΔΔCt method (Livak and Schmittgen
2001; Pfaffl 2001). By definition, Ct values equal the required number of amplification cycles to reach the threshold fluorescence level
(automatically determined); ΔCt implies the difference in the Ct values between the reference gene (mean) and the gene of interest (CDK19 or
ELOVL5) and ΔΔCt represents the difference between two ΔCt values obtained from patient and the control (mean). For statistical analysis of
the QPCR data, the p values were calculated in the p value calculator (www.graphpad.com/quickcalcs/PValue1.cfm) available in the public
domain. The UAS-Gal4 system (Brand and Perrimon 1993) was used for induced expression of dsRNA and for labeling of neurons with GFP. The
UAS-Cdk8RNAi lines were obtained from the National Institute of Genetics Fly Stock Center (stock numbers 10572R-1 and 10572R-3, Kyoto,
Japan). These stocks contain an inducible 500 base pair dsRNA homologous to the Cdk8 coding region (exon 1 and part of exon 2). Details on
the sequence and the absence of predictable off-targets are available at http://www.shigen.nig.ac.jp/fly/nigfly/index.jsp. The ubiquitous
promoter-Gal4 line y1w*;P{Act5C-GAL4}25FO1/CyO,y+(Act-Gal4) and y1w*;PLL5 (477-Gal4, UAS-mCD8::GFP), which expresses a membrane targeted
mCD8-GFP fusion protein in Drosophila type 4 multiple dendrite (md) neurons (Grueber et al. 2003), were obtained from the Bloomington
Drosophila stock center at Indiana University (stock numbers 4414 and 8746, Bloomington, USA). For analysis of Cdk8 knockdown efficiency
Act-Gal4 was balanced over a CyO-GFP chromosome. Act-Gal4/CyO-GFP flies were then crossed to wild-type flies and to flies harboring the
homozygously viable UAS-Cdk8RNAi insertion. Third instar larval progeny that received the Act-Gal4 transgene were identified based on the
lack of GFP staining. Drosophila total RNA was extracted in triplicate from third instar larvae of the genotypes UAS-Cdk8RNAi/+; Act-Gal4/+
and Act-Gal4/+ using the RNA Lipid Tissue mini kit (QIAGEN, Venlo, The Netherlands). RNA was transcribed into cDNA using the iScript cDNA
Synthesis Kit (Bio-Rad, Veenendaal, The Netherlands) and cDNA was purified using Nucleospin Extract II PCR clean-up kit (Macherey–Nagel,
Düren, Germany). SYBR-Green-based real-time quantitative PCR analysis was performed on a 7500 Fast Real-Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA, USA) using Power SYBR-Green PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. Relative expression levels were calculated as described above using the Act5c gene as a reference. For analysis of dendritic
development 477-Gal4, UAS-mCD8-GFP/CyO flies were crossed to wild type and UAS-Cdk8RNAi flies. Late third instar larvae expressing mCD8-GFP
were dissected and immunostained using a rat anti-mCD8 antibody (1/200) (Invitrogen, Breda, The Netherlands) and an anti-rat Alexa Fluor 488
conjugated secondary antibody (1/1000) (Invitrogen, Breda, The Netherlands). A Leica DM-IRE2 confocal microscope (Leica Microsystems,
Rijswijk, The Netherlands) was used to create images from a region of 375 × 375 μm between the denticle belts of the abdominal segments 3–5
of the wandering third instar larvae. Each larval hemi-segment contains four clusters of md sensory neurons (ventral, ventral’, lateral and
dorsal), which are morphologically characterized and are positioned in a highly stereotypical pattern (Grueber et al. 2002). In this study,
we have analyzed the morphology of the solitary type 4 md dendritic arborization neuron in the ventral cluster called vdaB (ventral
dendritic arborization neuron B). These neurons were chosen for analysis because of their highly stereotyped dendritic arbour that is
amenable to quantitative morphological analysis. Microscopic images were captured using a 40× lens. The field of view was always confined by
the denticle belts, on the upper (anterior) and lower (posterior) margin of the image, with the cell body of the vdaB neuron positioned
approximately in the middle of the field of view from left to right (Fig. 5d). Dendrite ends were counted manually from stacked images for
the entire field of view. Ten images were quantified for each genotype and the mean number of dendrite ends was compared using a one sample
t test. The birth weight of the girl had been 2,350 g and the neonate was not treated with oxygen, a risk factor for retinopathy of
prematurity. The pregnancy had been of normal duration, but had been complicated by an ovarian cyst, which had to be removed surgically soon
after parturition. Her cranial circumference at birth was only 29 cm and remained far below the P10 curve on several subsequent occasions.
Café-au-lait like pigmentations of the skin were found scattered over her body. Other changes that might be consistent with
neurofibromatosis were not found. From infancy, a moderate psychomotor retardation and some hearing loss was found. An adenotomy and
tonsillectomy were performed at age 4 after some recurrent upper airway infections. About 20 dB of hearing loss was diagnosed due to
perceptive dysfunction, which did not show progression. MRI scans performed when she was an adult did not show congenital or acquired
cerebral anomalies. The patient had been followed at regular intervals (once a year) for the last 29 years without any significant
progression of her visual and psychomotor conditions. At the age of 1 year, she had been referred to an ophthalmologist for a convergent
position of the left eye. She was found to have horizontal nystagmus when she was 2 years old. Fundus examination showed bilateral falciform
retinal folds running from the optic nerve head to the temporal periphery. Both folds were attached by white fibrous tissue to the pars
plana and temporal equator of the lens (Fig. 1).Fig. 1Fundus abnormalities in both eyes of the patient. aRight eye: posterior pole of
fundus. A falciform retinal fold extends from the optic disc to the inferior-temporal quadrant of the fundus. Note the absence of the macula
and abnormal course of retinal vessels. bLeft eye posterior pole of the fundus. A falciform retinal fold extends from the disc in temporal
direction. The retina superior to the fold shows some fibrous tissue Fundus abnormalities in both eyes of the patient. aRight eye: posterior
pole of fundus. A falciform retinal fold extends from the optic disc to the inferior-temporal quadrant of the fundus. Note the absence of
the macula and abnormal course of retinal vessels. bLeft eye posterior pole of the fundus. A falciform retinal fold extends from the disc in
temporal direction. The retina superior to the fold shows some fibrous tissue At the age of 14 years, visual acuity of the right eye and
left eye was limited to finger counting. The left eye showed a convergent position. Both eyes showed a marked horizontal nystagmus. Cyclopic
refraction showed a moderate hyperopic astigmatism of both eyes, but was difficult to determine because of poor fixation due to the
prominent folds in the posterior poles. The anterior segments of both eyes showed a clear cornea with normal dimensions. No abnormalities of
the iris and pupils were noted. Both lenses showed some capsular and sub-capsular opacity on the temporal side. The vitreous body of both
eyes showed syneresis with some optically empty lacunae. Some preretinal membranes were noted temporally in both eyes. The right fundus
showed marked deformation of the retinal vascular network in the posterior pole. A prominent retinal fold extended from the optic disc in
inferior-temporal direction to the fundus periphery where it ended in a local mass of white fibrous tissue attached to the pars plana
(Fig. 1a). The macula was not visible and several retinal vessels extended from the disc in the retinal fold. In the posterior retina, a
number of retinal vessels were visible outside the fold. Some of the vessels were seen to end in terminal ramifications. The peripheral
retina presented an atrophic appearance and seemed avascular. No demarcation line could be observed between vascular and avascular retinal
areas. Remnants of hyaloid vasculature could not be observed. The left fundus showed a similar falciform retinal fold running from the optic
nerve head towards the temporal fundus periphery, where it disappeared in a white tissue mass attached to the lens equator and the pars
plana (Fig. 1b). The retina showed several pigmentations on either side of the fold and some fibrous epiretinal tissue especially superior
to the fold. At 38 years, gonioscopy was repeated because of some flattening of the anterior chamber of the left eye and moderate narrowing
of the angle was noted. To prevent angle closure, an iridectomy was done with an Nd-YAG laser. No elevated intraocular pressure has been
noticed before or after this procedure. Until her current age visual functions seemed to be stable. Eye examination including fundus
biomicroscopy in the mother and father of the patient did not reveal significant abnormalities. A few maternal relatives showed unilateral
visual impairment due to high myopia. The patient was also found to have night blindness and lymphedema. She was subjected to several
pediatric and neurological examinations at different ages. At the age of 41 years, type 2 diabetes was diagnosed and treated with diet and
oral medication. Karyotyping revealed a pericentric inversion in chromosome 6 of the patient involving 6p11.1 and 6q21 (Fig. 2a). The
patient otherwise had a normal female karyotype. The parents also showed normal karyotypes indicating that the patient did not inherit the
chromosomal rearrangement.Fig. 2Schematic representation of breakpoints on chromosome 6. a Karyotyping showed a pericentric inversion in
chromosome 6 which is schematically depicted in b below; b schemes of chromosome 6 for both the derivative (inverted) and the normal copy.
The relative position and size of the FISH probes used are marked with corresponding colors on the right; c results of the FISH experiments
performed with probes of the p-arm (top panel) and the q-arm (middle panel). In both cases, one of the copies (marked ‘inversion’) show a
split signal positioning the breakpoint within the probe. The pink colored signal is from the centromeric probe for chromosome 6. The lower
panel shows the fine mapping of 6q21 breakpoint using a PCR product as FISH probe; d schematic summary of the entire breakpoint analysis
along with the genes involved in or near the breakpoints and their genomic coordinates. The cartoon shows that the inversion disrupts the
CDK19 gene on 6q21, but not ELOVL5 on 6p12 Schematic representation of breakpoints on chromosome 6. a Karyotyping showed a pericentric
inversion in chromosome 6 which is schematically depicted in b below; b schemes of chromosome 6 for both the derivative (inverted) and the
normal copy. The relative position and size of the FISH probes used are marked with corresponding colors on the right; c results of the FISH
experiments performed with probes of the p-arm (top panel) and the q-arm (middle panel). In both cases, one of the copies (marked
‘inversion’) show a split signal positioning the breakpoint within the probe. The pink colored signal is from the centromeric probe for
chromosome 6. The lower panel shows the fine mapping of 6q21 breakpoint using a PCR product as FISH probe; d schematic summary of the entire
breakpoint analysis along with the genes involved in or near the breakpoints and their genomic coordinates. The cartoon shows that the
inversion disrupts the CDK19 gene on 6q21, but not ELOVL5 on 6p12 To rule out other large copy number abnormalities in the patient’s genome
and to narrow down the inversion breakpoints in the patient, comparative genomic hybridization was performed which did not show any clone to
deviate significantly from the normal range of variation (data not shown). The karyotype for the derivative chromosome 6 indicated the
breakpoint at 6p to be very close to the centromere. A location of the p-arm breakpoint in the centromere was excluded using FISH analysis
of a centromeric probe for chromosome 6 (data not shown). Four BAC clones from 6q21, uniformly distributed across an 11-Mbp region, and six
probes covering 10 Mbp at 6p11–p12 were selected from the 32K BAC array. Probes RP11-109D10 (C″ in Fig. 2) and RP11-778B14 (C′ in Fig. 2)
were found to be broken at 6q21 and 6p12.1, respectively (Fig. 2c). To confirm these findings, additional probes from both arms of
chromosome 6 were selected which overlapped with the clones mentioned above. These clones, RP11-180C5 (6p12.1) and RP11-207N10 (6q21) also
showed a split signal on the derivative chromosome mapping the breakpoints to 220 kb regions on either side of the centromere. A more
detailed inspection of the genomic regions covered by these BAC clones revealed that at 6p12.1 both RP11-778B14 and RP11-180C5 partially
overlapped the ELOVL5 gene (Fig. 2d). Similarly, at 6q21, RP11-109D10 completely and RP11-207N10 partially overlap CDK19 (Fig. 2d). CDK19
and ELOVL5 were further investigated. Both CDK19 and ELOVL5 were found to have a wide range of tissue expression including fetal eye and
fetal brain—the two tissues most likely to be involved in the developmental problems observed in the patient (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Expression
profile of CDK19 and ELOVL5. The normal expression profile of CDK19 and ELOVL5 was determined in 12 human tissues. Both genes are expressed
in almost all tissues. Note the higher expression of CDK19 in fetal eye (lane 2) and fetal brain (lane 7) as compared to ELOVL5. GAPDH was
used as a reference gene. The PCR was done for 30 cycles Expression profile of CDK19 and ELOVL5. The normal expression profile of CDK19 and
ELOVL5 was determined in 12 human tissues. Both genes are expressed in almost all tissues. Note the higher expression of CDK19 in fetal eye
(lane 2) and fetal brain (lane 7) as compared to ELOVL5. GAPDH was used as a reference gene. The PCR was done for 30 cycles Parallel to the
efforts to delineate the breakpoints, we quantified the amount of the transcript present in the patient for the genes mentioned above. As
described in the “Methods” section, multiple reference genes have been used to normalize the data and RNA from 10 unrelated controls were
used to assess the normal distribution of expression for CDK19 and ELOVL5 (Fig. 4a). The transcript level for CDK19 in the patient was found
to be 54% (p = 0.022) when compared with the control mean, but that of ELOVL5 was not significantly reduced (Fig. 4b). This indicates to the
most likely situation that one copy of the CDK19 has become non-functional (haploinsufficiency) due to the pericentric inversion at 6q21. To
further refine the breakpoint on 6q21, overlapping fragments of ~10 kb were generated by long-range PCR from intron 1 of CDK19 and these
products were used as FISH probes. Owing to the repeat-rich nature of the template, most of these probes did not give reproducible results.
However, one probe (C″ in Fig. 2) shown complete translocation to the p-arm upon inversion (Fig. 2c) placing the break-point distal to this
probe. This data along with the data from two BAC clones as mentioned above almost certainly puts the 6q21 inversion breakpoint within
intron 1 of CDK19 confirming our initial observations (Fig. 2d). For 6p12.1, based on the transcript data, the breakpoint should be outside
and proximal to ELOVL5. To confirm that no partial duplication of the ELOVL5 gene is involved with this inversion, we have performed
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) and genomic QPCR in the region of the probes overlapping with ELOVL5 and none of the
probes showed any copy number changes (data not shown).Fig. 4Relative quantitation of CDK19 and ELOVL5 transcripts. a For relative
quantitation of the transcript amounts of CDK19 and ELOVL5 in the patient, the expression levels were compared with that of the mean of 10
controls (1–10). The graph also shows the mean value for the 10 controls and the four patients included in the study. Among these, the
sample marked with ‘Inv. patient 1’ is the patient with the de novo pericentric inversion. b The quantity of CDK19 and ELOVL5 transcripts of
the inversion patient was compared with the control mean (a). While the transcript amount for ELOVL5 was not significantly different and
that for CDK19 was found to be only 54% compared to the controls, which was statistically significant (p = 0.022). The results indicated
that the patient is haploinsufficient for the CDK19 gene. All quantitation was done using the 2ΔΔCt method after normalization with the
geometric mean of the expression of GusB and RNF111 for reference genes as described in the “Methods” section. p value was calculated from
the Z score derived from the ΔCt values for expression Relative quantitation of CDK19 and ELOVL5 transcripts. a For relative quantitation of
the transcript amounts of CDK19 and ELOVL5 in the patient, the expression levels were compared with that of the mean of 10 controls (1–10).
The graph also shows the mean value for the 10 controls and the four patients included in the study. Among these, the sample marked with
‘Inv. patient 1’ is the patient with the de novo pericentric inversion. b The quantity of CDK19 and ELOVL5 transcripts of the inversion
patient was compared with the control mean (a). While the transcript amount for ELOVL5 was not significantly different and that for CDK19
was found to be only 54% compared to the controls, which was statistically significant (p = 0.022). The results indicated that the patient
is haploinsufficient for the CDK19 gene. All quantitation was done using the 2ΔΔCt method after normalization with the geometric mean of the
expression of GusB and RNF111 for reference genes as described in the “Methods” section. p value was calculated from the Z score derived
from the ΔCt values for expression The pericentric inversion event was de novo which most likely occurred in the germ line of one of the
parents. To test whether the other CDK19 copy was involved, we sequenced the exons of this gene. However, no potentially pathologic sequence
variant was identified in the open reading frame of CDK19. We ascertained nine additional patients with similar phenotypic features. All of
them showed a normal karyotype, and no mutations were found in the CDK19 open reading frame, and the transcript levels were normal in three
of the nine patients in which RNA levels could be tested (AM, FPMC, unpublished data). In 100 sporadic patients with mental retardation in
which the Fragile-X gene has been excluded, we also screened the CDK19 gene for deletions using three MLPA probes covering the gene. None of
the patients shows an abnormal copy number suggesting that haploinsufficiency of CDK19 is not a common cause of mental retardation. Because
the patient exhibits developmental anomalies, we examined the physiological role of a CDK19 orthologue in the complex developing nervous
system of Drosophila melanogaster. Human CDK19 (NP_055891.1) is a paralogue of the CDK8 protein (NP_001251.1), and is also referred to as
CDK8-like. The protein products of these two genes share 77% identity suggesting that they are functionally related. Drosophila contains a
single (two-to-one) orthologue to both proteins, Cdk8 (NP_536735.2) (Leclerc et al. 1996), which shares 66% identity with human CDK19 and
71% identity with human CDK8. Construction of an unrooted phylogenetic tree using the neighbor-joining algorithm
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/clustalw) (Saitou and Nei 1987) shows that the Drosophila Cdk8 protein is almost equally related to both CDK19 and
CDK8 (Fig. 5a). Furthermore, biochemical and genetic studies have confirmed a structural and functional conservation of Drosophila Cdk8 when
compared with yeast and mammalian models (Loncle et al. 2007).Fig. 5Functional analysis of the Drosophila CDK19 ortholog, Cdk8.a An unrooted
phylogenetic tree comparing CDK8 protein family members in human (CDK8 and CDK19) and Drosophila (Cdk8) by the neighbor-joining method. b
Relative expression of Cdk8 mRNA was measured by quantitative PCR. Cdk8 mRNA is reduced by 68% in Cdk8(RNAi) flies (genotype ActGal4/+; UAS-
Cdk8(RNAi)/+) when compared with controls (genotype ActGal4/+; +/+). c Dendrite ends were counted manually from confocal images of type 4 md
neurons (d). Dendritic branching was reduced by 35% in Cdk8(RNAi) flies (genotype 477-Gal4,UAS-mCD8::GFP/+; UAS-Cdk8(RNAi)/+) when compared
with controls (genotype 477-Gal4,UAS-mCD8::GFP/+; +/+). d Representative images of ventral type 4 md neurons located in the larval skin.
Cdk8 knockdown in these cells (right panel) causes a decrease in dendritic branching (quantified in c) and restriction of the overall
dendritic arbor when compared with controls (left panel). The stippled line shows an area of restricted growth where a neighboring neuron
(the v’ada type 4 md neuron from the ventral’ cluster) has grown. This altered neuronal morphology is not observed in controls. Red dots in
the bottom panel show dendritic protrusions of <10 μm in length. These are more common in control neurons when compared with Cdk8-knockdown
neurons (44 as compared to 31 in this one representative panel). Posterior is up. Scale bar 50 μm in the upper panel and 10 μm in the lower
panel Functional analysis of the Drosophila CDK19 ortholog, Cdk8.a An unrooted phylogenetic tree comparing CDK8 protein family members in
human (CDK8 and CDK19) and Drosophila (Cdk8) by the neighbor-joining method. b Relative expression of Cdk8 mRNA was measured by quantitative
PCR. Cdk8 mRNA is reduced by 68% in Cdk8(RNAi) flies (genotype ActGal4/+; UAS-Cdk8(RNAi)/+) when compared with controls (genotype ActGal4/+;
+/+). c Dendrite ends were counted manually from confocal images of type 4 md neurons (d). Dendritic branching was reduced by 35% in
Cdk8(RNAi) flies (genotype 477-Gal4,UAS-mCD8::GFP/+; UAS-Cdk8(RNAi)/+) when compared with controls (genotype 477-Gal4,UAS-mCD8::GFP/+; +/+).
d Representative images of ventral type 4 md neurons located in the larval skin. Cdk8 knockdown in these cells (right panel) causes a
decrease in dendritic branching (quantified in c) and restriction of the overall dendritic arbor when compared with controls (left panel).
The stippled line shows an area of restricted growth where a neighboring neuron (the v’ada type 4 md neuron from the ventral’ cluster) has
grown. This altered neuronal morphology is not observed in controls. Red dots in the bottom panel show dendritic protrusions of <10 μm in
length. These are more common in control neurons when compared with Cdk8-knockdown neurons (44 as compared to 31 in this one representative
panel). Posterior is up. Scale bar 50 μm in the upper panel and 10 μm in the lower panel To examine the function of Cdk8 in fly development,
we first performed a ubiquitous knockdown of this gene by driving expression of an UAS-Cdk8RNAi transgene using the Act-Gal4 driver.
Ubiquitous knockdown of cdk8 resulted in lethality at pupal and pharate adult stages. Analysis of the knock-down efficiency in third instar
larvae showed that Cdk8 mRNA was significantly reduced by 68% (p < 0.05) when compared with controls (Fig. 5b) demonstrating that partial
activity of this gene is not sufficient to achieve normal development. This is consistent with the phenotype observed in Cdk8 null mutant
flies, which also show developmental lethality (Loncle et al. 2007) and the haploinsufficiency of this gene seen in our patient. Because the
neuronal pathology in our patient is uncertain, but dendritic abnormalities are commonly observed in MR (Kaufmann and Moser 2000), we
examined whether Cdk8 affects dendritic development in the Drosophila type 4 md sensory neurons located in the peripheral nervous system of
the Drosophila larvae. These neurons are amenable to quantitative analysis and have previously been shown to be relevant in other fly models
for mental retardation (Lee et al. 2003; Lu et al. 2009). We found that knockdown of Cdk8 in Drosophila type 4 md neurons by expression of
UAS-Cdk8RNAi with the 477-Gal4 driver resulted in reduced dendritic branching and altered morphology of the dendritic arbour (Fig. 5c, d).
Quantification of dendritic branching revealed a 35% reduction (p < 0.001) in dendrite ends upon Cdk8 knockdown (Fig. 5c), which appeared to
be due in part to a loss of small dendritic protrusions of a length <10 μm (Fig. 5d). This trend was seen consistently and is highlighted in
the lower panels of Fig. 5d where such protrusions (marked by red dots) are 35% less in mutant than in control neurons. A similar defect was
also observed with a second UAS-Cdk8RNAi line indicating that this phenotype does not result from non-specific effects due to insertion of
the transgene. In addition, 90% of dendritic arbours examined for Cdk8 knockdown showed restricted extension and did not occupy the full
field of view examined by confocal microscopy (Fig. 5d). In many cases, the unoccupied area was filled by a more faintly stained type 4 md
neuron from the ventral cluster (shown in Fig. 5d) and in some cases no other dendrites were stained in the ‘unoccupied’ area (data not
shown). In contrast, wild-type neurons always occupy nearly the entire field of view demonstrating a clear morphological defect in resulting
from knockdown of the CDK19 orthologue in these neurons. In this article, we described that the microcephaly, congenital retinal fold and
mild mental retardation is likely caused by CDK19 haploinsufficiency in a female Caucasian patient born to non-consanguineous parents. CDK19
expression was found in a wide variety of human tissues, with high expression in fetal brain and fetal retina (Fig. 3), the two tissues
involved in the phenotypes observed in the patient. Furthermore, our functional analysis in Drosophila shows that the closest CDK19
orthologue, Cdk8, is a regulator of dendritic development, an important factor in the etiology of mental retardation (Kaufmann and Moser
2000). In addition, recent reports showed that loss of CDK8 in Drosophila disrupts the neural wiring of the eye and development of sensory
bristles in the peripheral nervous system (Loncle et al. 2007; Berger et al. 2008), implying a role for Cdk8 both in dendritic development
and in development of peripheral sensory organs including the eye. Because Drosophila contains only one orthologue to the mammalian
paralogues CDK19 and CDK8, analysis in this system is not confounded by potential redundancies between CDK19 and CDK8 that may occur in
mammalian model systems and in humans. This is likely to contribute to the more dramatic phenotypes (e.g. lethality) in the model as
compared to our patient. CDK19 encodes a protein that is one of the components of the mediator co-activator complex. The mediator complex is
a multi-protein complex required for transcriptional activation by DNA-binding transcription factors for genes transcribed by RNA polymerase
II (pol II). The protein is 77% identical to cyclin-dependent kinase 8 (CDK8), which is another component of the mediator complex (Elmlund
et al. 2006). CDK8 (cyclin-dependent kinase 8), along with CycC, Med12, and Med13, form a repressive module (the Cdk8-submodule), which
inhibits the transcriptional coactivator function of the mediator complex by prevention of interactions with pol II and can operate
independently of the mediator (Elmlund et al. 2006; Knuesel et al. 2009a, b). Based on the homology with CDK8, it is reasonable to predict
that CDK19 also has related functions. Interestingly, the CDK8-submodule of the mediator complex is linked to mental retardation through
MED12, a causative gene for FG syndrome, a neurological disorder characterized by mental retardation, macrocephaly, hypotonia and
constipation (Risheg et al. 2007). MED12 is known to regulate neuronal gene expression through cooperation with the neuronal gene silencing
factor REST and euchromatin histone methyltransferase 2 (EHMT2/G9a) (Ding et al. 2008). EHMT2/G9a activity is dependent on interactions with
its close homolog EHMT1 (Tachibana et al. 2005), which is involved in Kleefstra syndrome, a neurological disorder characterized by mental
retardation and other morphological and behavioral phenotypes (Kleefstra et al. 2006). EHMT1 and EHMT2 have also been linked to REST
transcriptional activity through interactions with the histone demethylase JARID1c (Tahiliani et al. 2007), yet another mental retardation
gene with a known role in dendritic development (Iwase et al. 2007; Jensen et al. 2005). Taken together, these data strongly suggest that
the protein complexes containing CDK19 form a network of transcriptional repressors that effect neuronal development and function and
contribute to the etiology of mental retardation. However, a possibility cannot be excluded that in human and other mammals, CDK8 and CDK19
work in synergy, and lack of one molecule can be compensated by the other. Another important cyclin-dependent kinase, CDKL5, has been
associated with atypical forms of Rett syndrome (RS), an X-linked neurological disorder, characterized by microcephaly, seizures and mental
retardation (Tao et al. 2004; Weaving et al. 2005). CDK19 has 32% identity and 49% similarity with CDKL5 at the amino acid level. The
different phenotype described in this study and the eye phenotypes might be explained by the differences in spatial and temporal expression
of the two genes and having different targets for phosphorylation. A large deletion in patients with X-linked retinoschisis (XLR, MIM
312700) was found to have disrupted at least the last coding exon of CDKL5, in addition to disruption of the RS1 gene (Huopaniemi et al.
2000). One of the patients had congenital nystagmus, which we also observed in our patient. Interestingly, XLRS patients also show splits
and breaks in retina and occasionally retinal detachment, which are features of other vitreoretinopathies as well as overlaps with the
features in the patient described in this study. Recently, a growing number of studies have shown the involvement of ciliary proteins in
diseases involving mental retardation (Badano et al. 2006). Some examples include Bardet–Biedl syndrome (BBS, MIM 209900), Meckel–Gruber
syndrome (MKS1, MIM 249000 and MKS2, MIM 603194), and Joubert syndrome (MIM 610188). Bardet–Biedl and Joubert syndrome also manifest
microcephaly and mental retardation in addition to retinal degeneration in some cases. We hypothesized that CDK19 might be present in the
cilia and found it in the ciliary proteome database (Gherman et al. 2006). It was reported that the BBS patients have olfaction defects
(anosmia) which has been suggested to be a general manifestation of ciliary protein defects (Kulaga et al. 2004). To test our hypothesis, we
have performed the scratch-n-sniff test for our patient which revealed that she is highly anosmic (score 16 at the age of 41 years).
However, this data can be confounded due to underdeveloped mental abilities of the patient. In this article, we have described a female
patient with microcephaly, congenital retinal fold and mild mental retardation, who has a pericentric inversion in one copy of chromosome 6,
causing haploinsufficiency of CDK19 gene. The expression profile of CDK19, its homology with other serine/threonine kinases, and its role in
the in Drosophila nervous system development, together strongly suggests CDK19 as an important determining factor for this syndrome. The
authors thank Drs. Arjan P.M. de Brouwer, Anneke I. den Hollander and Karin W. Littink for their help during various phases of the work. Dr.
K. Devriendt from Leuven (Belgium) is acknowledged for providing us with DNA samples from six patients with similar phenotypes. Thanks also
to Astrid Oudakker, Saskia D. van der Velde-Visser, Christel Beumer and Tannavi Kiran for expert technical assistance. This study was
supported by European Union Research Training Network Grant RETNET MRTN-CT-2003-504003, a Vidi grant from The Netherlands Organization for
Scientific Research (NWO) to AS and Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR), India funded project, “An Integrative Biology
Approach in Deciphering Genotype–Phenotype Correlation for Human Complex Disorders” (SIP-0006). Open Access This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. A. Mukhopadhyay and J. M. Kramer contributed equally to
this work.
