Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Terms and Conditions set out at
http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/onlineopen#OnlineOpen_Terms Flanagan SE, Kapoor RR, Banerjee I, Hall C, Smith VV, Hussain K, Ellard S.
Dominantly acting ABCC8 mutations in patients with medically unresponsive hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. Recessive inactivating mutations
in the ABCC8 and KCNJ11 genes encoding the adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium (KATP) channel subunit sulphonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1)
and inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunit (Kir6.2) are the most common cause of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH). Most of these
patients do not respond to treatment with the KATP channel agonist diazoxide. Dominant inactivating ABCC8 and KCNJ11 mutations are less
frequent, but are usually associated with a milder form of hypoglycaemia that is responsive to diazoxide therapy. We studied five patients
from four families with HH who were unresponsive to diazoxide and required a near total pancreatectomy. Mutations in KCNJ11 and ABCC8 were
sought by sequencing and dosage analysis. Three novel heterozygous ABCC8 mis-sense mutations (G1485E, D1506E and M1514K) were identified in
four probands. All the mutations affect residues located within the Nucleotide Binding Domain 2 of the SUR1 subunit. Testing of family
members showed that the mutations had arisen de novo with dominant inheritance in one pedigree. This study extends the clinical phenotype
associated with dominant KATP channel mutations to include severe congenital HH requiring near total pancreatectomy in addition to a milder
form of diazoxide responsive hypoglycaemia. The identification of dominant vs recessive mutations does not predict clinical course but it is
important for estimating the risk of HH in future siblings and offspring. The pancreatic β-cell adenosine triphosphate-sensitive potassium
(KATP) channel is a complex of four sulphonylurea receptor 1 (SUR1) with four inwardly rectifying potassium channel subunits (Kir6.2) that
play a pivotal role in regulating insulin secretion (1). Metabolic regulation of KATP channel activity is mediated by changes in the
intracellular concentrations of adenosine triphosphate (ATP) and MgADP, which inhibit or activate the channel respectively (1, 2).
Sulphonylureas and diazoxide bind to the SUR1 subunits to, respectively, close or open the channels independently of ATP/adenosine
diphosphate (ADP) concentrations and stimulate or inhibit insulin secretion. Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) is characterized by the
dysregulation of insulin secretion that often presents in the neonatal period. Early diagnosis is important to avoid irreversible brain
damage because of prolonged hypoglycaemia (3). The clinical presentation is heterogeneous ranging from mild to severe symptoms of
hypoglycaemia. Inactivating mutations in the genes ABCC8 and KCNJ11 encoding the SUR1 and Kir6.2 subunits of the KATP channel are the most
common cause of HH (4, 5). Histologically, there are diffuse and focal forms of the disease. Focal lesions arise from paternal uniparental
isodisomy of the chromosome 11p15 region within the embryonic pancreas of a foetus with a paternally inherited KATP channel mutation (6).
Surgical removal of the lesion is usually curative. A similar number of cases have recessively inherited the loss of function mutations
where the entire pancreas is affected (diffuse). This usually leads to severe, medically unresponsive HH often requiring a near total
pancreatectomy. The lack of response to diazoxide is believed to be because of the absence of the KATP channels at the membrane (if the
mutation results in lack of protein product or affects maturation/transport to the membrane) or the presence of inactive KATP channels that
cannot respond to diazoxide. Dominant inactivating mis-sense mutations in ABCC8 and KCNJ11 are a rare cause of HH (7, 8). To date the
phenotype of patients with heterozygous mutations seems to be different to those with recessive mutations as they show responsiveness to
diazoxide. This response may be attributed to the binding of diazoxide to a normal SUR1 subunit within the heteromeric complex or to the
presence of a sufficient proportion of normal KATP channels as a consequence of the binomial distribution (9). Huopio et al. described the
first dominantly inherited ABCC8 mutation, E1507K (described by Huopio et al. as E1506K based on isoform L78207 that excludes the
alternatively spliced amino acid in exon 17), that caused HH in early life and predisposes to later insulin deficiency. All the patients
described in this large family had a mild form of HH that could be managed by long-term diazoxide treatment (7). Recently, Pinney et al.
have reported 14 different dominantly inherited ABCC8 or KCNJ11 mis-sense mutations in 16 families with HH that often escaped detection in
infancy and responded to diazoxide (8). We now describe five patients with heterozygous ABCC8 mutations who presented with severe, medically
unresponsive HH and underwent near total pancreatectomy. We studied five patients from four families with HH. In one family, a mother and a
son were affected, whereas for the three remaining probands there was no family history of HH. As a result of the failure to respond to
medical therapy, all patients underwent a near total pancreatectomy. This study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki
and informed consent was obtained from all patients, with parental consent given on behalf of children. Genomic DNA was extracted from
peripheral leukocytes and pancreatic tissue using standard procedures and the single exon of the KCNJ11 gene was sequenced as previously
described (10). When no KCNJ11 mutation was identified, the 39 exons of ABCC8 were amplified and sequenced (11). Sequences were compared to
the published sequence, NM_000352.2, that incorporates the alternatively spliced residue in exon 17 (L78208, L78224). Mutation testing was
performed on parental DNA extracted from peripheral leukocytes. When a de novo mutation was identified, microsatellite analysis confirmed
family relationships. In one family as the unaffected maternal grandfather was deceased, haplotype analysis was performed using six
microsatellite markers on chromosome 11p15 to determine the origin of the mutation. Novel mutations were tested by sequencing 500 control
chromosomes and dosage analysis of the ABCC8 gene was undertaken for all probands (MRC Holland, Amsterdam, the Netherlands, multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification kit P117). Pancreatic tissue was available from two probands and loss of heterozygosity was
investigated by microsatellite analysis of chromosome 11p15 (12). Paraffin sections (3 µm thick) were cut from blocks of resected pancreatic
tissue from the four probands and were stained with haematoxylin and eosin (H & E). Immunostaining was performed using polyclonal antibodies
for insulin, somatostatin, glucagon and pancreatic polypeptide as previously described (13). Pancreatic tissue was not available from the
mother of proband 2 who underwent a pancreatectomy 23 years ago. Sequencing of the KCNJ11 gene failed to detect any mutations but subsequent
analysis of the ABCC8 gene identified three different novel heterozygous mis-sense mutations in the five patients (Table 1). The D1506E
(c.4518C>A) mutation was seen in three patients from two families. In family 1, testing of the unaffected parents showed that the mutation
had arisen de novo in the proband. In family 2, the mutation had been inherited from the affected mother. Testing was undertaken for the
unaffected maternal grandmother who did not carry the D1506E mutation. No DNA was available from the deceased unaffected grandfather, but
haplotype analysis of chromosome 11p15 markers suggested that the D1506E mutation had arisen de novo on the grandmaternal chromosome (Fig.
1). The G1485E (c.4454G>A) and M1544K (c.4541T>A) mutations were each identified in one patient. Testing of their unaffected parents showed
that the mutations had arisen de novo. All three mutations affect highly conserved residues within the Nucleotide Binding Domain 2 (NBD2) of
SUR1, were not present in 500 normal control chromosomes and a second ABCC8 mutation was not detected by dosage analysis. Analysis of
markers on chromosome 11p15 in DNA extracted from the resected pancreatic tissue of probands from families 1 and 4 showed biparental
inheritance with no evidence for loss of heterozygosity. Summary of the clinical features, treatment, genetic and histological findings in
patients with dominant ABCC8 mutations Microsatellite analysis of markers spanning 15.5 Mb on chromosome 11p15.5-15.1 in family 2 with
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (HH) resulting from a heterozygous D1506E mutation in the ABCC8 gene. ABCC8 is located between markers
D11S1981 and D11S902. Black bars indicate the haplotype co-segregating with hyperinsulinism. Squares denote males, circles females, and
black symbols show individuals affected with HH. Genotypes are provided below each symbol and an arrow points to the proband. Histological
analysis of pancreatic material from the four probands with dominant ABCC8 mutations showed large giant endocrine nuclei in scattered cells
that stained positive for insulin antibodies, which is not dissimilar to the changes that are observed in patients with recessive ABCC8
mutations (Table 1 and Fig. 2). Pancreatic polypeptide-positive cells were also observed and immunostaining for somatostatin and glucagon
was unremarkable. (a and b) Comparison of the histology of the resected pancreas from the proband of family 2 and a patient with recessively
inherited congenital hyperinsulinism because of ABCC8 mutations. (a) Haematoxylin & eosin (H & E)-stained sections showing the presence of
scattered endocrine cells with large and frequently giant endocrine nuclei. The endocrine tissue was poorly organized into islets. (b) H &
E-stained sections of pancreatic tissue from a patient with recessive ABCC8 mutations showing the large and frequently giant endocrine
nuclei and irregularly sized islets. All five patients presented with severe HH immediately after birth and four patients were macrosomic
(birth weight >90th percentile; Table 1). None responded to maximum doses of diazoxide (20 mg/kg/day) and normoglycaemia could not be
maintained despite using high-calorie feeds and octreotide. The probands from families 2 and 3 had a near total pancreatectomy at 8 weeks of
age and subsequently developed diabetes mellitus. Proband 4 and the mother of proband 2 underwent a near total pancreatectomy at 8 and 5
weeks of age, respectively, but post-operatively they continued to have HH that was managed on a combination of subcutaneous octreotide
injections and frequent high-calorie carbohydrates feeds. Although proband 4 is still on treatment at the age of 3, the mother of proband 2
outgrew the HH at 11 years of age, but developed impaired glucose tolerance at 14 years of age and required insulin at 23 years of age
during her third trimester of pregnancy. Proband 1 underwent an initial near total pancreatectomy but severe post-operative hypoglycaemia
required a second total pancreatectomy. Despite this, the patient still requires continuous high-calorie feeds and octreotide to maintain
normoglycaemia (Table 1). We identified three novel heterozygous ABCC8 mis-sense mutations (G1485E, D1506E and M1514K) in five patients from
four families. The mutations had arisen de novo in all four pedigrees. Although a second mutation was not found in any of the five patients
by sequence or dosage analysis in leukocyte DNA, the presence of a mutation in the regulatory regions of the gene or as a result of a
somatic event during pancreatic development cannot be excluded. However, as histological examination and chromosome 11p15 microsatellite
marker analysis of resected pancreas, in four and two patients respectively, were consistent with diffuse disease, we conclude that G1485E,
D1506E and M1514K are dominantly acting ABCC8 mutations associated with diffuse disease and a 50% risk of HH in future offspring. All the
five patients presented with severe HH within the first 3 days of life with no response to maximum doses of diazoxide (20 mg/kg/day) and
subsequently underwent near total pancreatectomy. This clinical presentation is very different to that described in previous reports of
dominant ABCC8 mis-sense mutations that were associated with a milder phenotype (7, 8). The mutations identified in our series are novel,
suggesting a genotype/phenotype correlation where different mis-sense mutations may result in a variable severity of HH. Pancreatic β-cell
KATP channels are regulated by intracellular nucleotides (ATP and ADP). SUR1 has two cytoplasmic nucleotide-binding domains (NBD1 and NBD2)
that sense changes in intracellular and transmit the signal to the pore. Binding of MgATP to NBD2 leads to its hydrolysis to MgADP, which
then activates the KATP channel (14). The ability of diazoxide to activate the channel depends on the simultaneous presence of MgATP and/or
MgADP and functional NBDs (15–17). Mutations in NBD2 can therefore abolish channel activation by diazoxide or MgADP (15). This loss of
activation by MgADP on KATP channel activity when metabolism is reduced has been reported for patients with HH because of recessive ABCC8
mutations and seems to be a common molecular mechanism of HH (18, 19). Nine of the 11 previously reported dominant ABCC8 mutations affect
residues within the NBD2 region and functional studies have shown that these mutations significantly diminish or completely abolish the
channels' response to MgADP and diazoxide (7, 8). Further studies on 10 of the ABCC8 mutations, under simulated heterozygous conditions,
indicated that although the mutant subunits do reduce channel function, the wild-type ABCC8 allele is sufficient to confer partial channel
response to changes in the ATP/ADP ratio expected during glucose metabolism and to diazoxide (8). The three mutations identified in this
series of patients are located in the NBD2 region of SUR1 and it is likely that they also abolish the stimulatory effects of MgADP. This
hypothesis is supported by the identification of the same mutation, D1506E, in three individuals from two families with diazoxide-
unresponsive HH. Our findings suggest that the clinical presentation of patients with dominant inactivating ABCC8 mis-sense mutations is
variable, ranging from mild medically responsive to severe early onset HH requiring a near total pancreatectomy. The clinical presentation
of patients at the time of diagnosis cannot distinguish between recessive and dominantly acting ABCC8 mutations. A genetic diagnosis is
important because finding a de novo dominant mutation in a sporadic case with diazoxide-unresponsive HH confers a lower recurrence risk for
future siblings compared to a recessive mutation, but a higher risk of HH (50%) for the next generation. This work was supported by the
Wellcome Trust (081188/A/06/Z). We thank Annet Damhuis for technical assistance. S. E. F. is the Sir Graham Wilkins, Peninsula Medical
School Research Fellow and S. E. is a member of the core staff within the NIHR funded Peninsula Clinical Research Facility. The authors have
no conflict of interest to declare.
