Degenerative changes in the lumbar spine can be followed by cystic changes. Most reported intraspinal cysts are ganglion or synovial cysts.
Ligamentum flavum pseudocyst, as a cystic lesion in the lumbar spine, is a rare and unusual cause of neurologic signs and symptoms and is
usually seen in elderly persons (due to degenerative changes). They are preferentially located in the lower lumbar region, while cervical
localization is rare. Complete removal of the cyst leads to excellent results and seems to preclude recurrence. We report the case of a
right-sided ligamentum flavum cyst occurring at L3–L4 level in a 70-year-old woman, which was surgically removed with excellent
postoperative results and complete resolution of symptoms. In addition, we discuss and review reports in the literature. Different
etiologies for cystic lesions in the lumbar spinal canal have been reported in the literature, among them hemorrhagic cysts, perineural
cysts, dermoid cysts, and parasitic cysts . The most common lesion seems to originate from the facet joints: the synovial cyst, which
represents a protrusion of the synovial membrane into the surrounding tissue. The literature remains imprecise about the histopathologic
nature of cystic lesions in the lumbar region of the spine. Some authors differentiate between the terms “synovial cyst” (with a synovial
lining) and “ganglion pseudocyst” (without any synovial lining). Others proposed the term “juxtafacet cyst,” simply representing both. Also,
evolution from a synovial cyst into a ganglion pseudocyst has been questioned. Ligamentum flavum pseudocyst, as a cystic lesion in the
lumbar spine, has only rarely been mentioned [4, 5, 7, 25, 28, 29]. A 70-year-old woman presented with 5-year history of gradually
developing gait disturbance as well as pain in the lumbar area, buttock, and right leg, particularly the right knee, involving mostly the L4
distribution. In the meantime an artificial knee joint was implanted with inadequate recovery of the pain. The pain did not improve
substantially with conservative therapy. On clinical examination, motor function was normal and there was no sensory disturbance on
examination of the legs. Reflexes were hypoactive in both legs with right-sided patellar reflex loss. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed at
L3–L4 level a right-sided voluminous epidural cystic lesion, 10 mm in diameter, which was hypointense on T1-weighted images and hyperintense
on T2-weighted images and its wall was enhanced with contrast material. The mass displaced the dural sac anteriorly and resulted in marked
stenosis of the spinal canal. The mass was surgically resected together with the hypertrophied ligamentum flavum after partial L3–L4
hemilaminectomy (Fig. 1). A round, yellowish cyst of about 10 mm in diameter filled with somewhat gelatinous fluid and barely adhered to the
dura mater was found. There was no connection between the cyst and the facet joint. Pathological examination of the cyst revealed myxoid and
pseudocystic degeneration of the ligamentum flavum (Fig. 2). There was no synovial lining. The patient’s postoperative course was
uneventful, with complete resolution of symptoms. After 10 months follow-up the patient continues to do very well. She is neurologically
intact and symptom free. The patient provided her consent to the publication of this case report. Intraoperative view via the surgical
microscope showing part of the cyst and degenerated ligamentum flavum (arrow), regular ligamentum flavum (notched arrow), and dura mater
spinalis (arrowhead) Histopathologic section of operative specimen reveals degenerative changes in the ligamentum flavum with infiltration
of inflammatory cells and no synovial cell lining (hematoxylin and eosin) Several studies have shown that the usual aging process of the
ligamentum flavum causes thickening and loss of elasticity . Change in proteoglycans, loss of elastic fibers, and increase in collagen
tissue and chondroid metaplasia due to mechanical stress have been described . Additionally and closely related to age, amyloid can
accumulate within the ligamentum flavum . This amyloid deposition has been reported in only a few cases to be associated with systemic
amyloidosis . Similarly, age-related calcification of the ligamentum flavum can occur . A diffuse form of calcification contributing to the
loss of elasticity and the thickening and a focal form of calcified material accumulation as well as granulomatous inflammation and
tophaceous depositions of calcium pyrophosphate crystals can occur. These depositions have been ascribed to decreasing cellularity of the
ligamentum flavum with age and resultant diminished calcification inhibiting factor production by fibroblastic-like cells . The tophaceous
type of lesion seems to be closely related to previous degeneration of the affected ligament by minor trauma predisposing to calcium
deposition. Activity of proteolytic enzymes within the ligament, produced by neutrophils localizing to calcified nodules, has been found .
Wildi et al. found only four patients with calcium pyrophosphate depositions, suggesting that they play a minor role in the pathogenesis of
ligamentum flavum pseudocysts. In addition to calcification, ossification of the ligamentum flavum might occur. This seems to follow a
sequential process of chondroid metaplasia and eventual enchondral ossification mainly at the insertion site of the ligament. All these
factors, resulting partially from mechanical stress, seem to contribute to loss of the natural structure of the ligamentum flavum, making
them again susceptible to new mechanical stress, forming a vicious circle. The degenerated bony structure of the lumbar spine and the facet
joints suggest a major pathogenic role of degenerative segmental instability in pseudocyst formation of the ligamentum flavum, as found by
other authors too . Most ligamentum flavum cysts reported in the literature were also located laterally within the spinal canal. While
possibly a consequence of chronic bony degenerative disease, this phenomenon may be further elucidated in certain cases by the observation
that the yellow ligaments are not as thick laterally as they are medially. Furthermore, they form posterior recesses bilaterally to the
vertebral bodies. These recesses are filled with epidural fat and offer an area of decreased resistance and may, as a result, tolerate cyst
formation. The pathogenesis of ligamentous degeneration remains to be elucidated, but it may be considered in the context of degenerative
spinal changes. The spine is divided into alternating mobile and fixed segments, and the transitional zones between the mobile and fixed
regions incur the most severe stress during motion. The anatomic disposition, histologic characteristics, and biomechanical properties of
the ligamentum flavum indicate that it is markedly different from other spinal ligaments . The ligamentum flavum is a well-defined elastic
structure composed of 80% elastic and 20% collagen fibers . This composition of dense connective tissue with elastic fiber predominance is
rarely seen in other tissues, although it can be seen in the vestibular folds of the larynx and the media of large arteries . When a change
occurs in the ligamentum flavum, regeneration of elastic fibers that includes the formation of collagen fibers and degenerative changes
occurs, and this regenerative process leads to decrease in elasticity. Moreover, this process in the ligamentum flavum is markedly different
from other spinal ligamentous reactions . Thus, chronic irritative or degenerative changes of the ligamentum flavum in the area of the cyst
could predispose it to mechanical stress, even after a minor repeated injury . Cysts of the ligamentum flavum have myxoid degeneration and
arise from or are partially embedded in the inner surface of this ligament, and in contrast to juxta-articular cysts, are not related to the
facet joint cavity. Pathogenesis of the cyst formation is secondary to ligamentous and fibrocollagenous tissue degeneration and
hypermobility of the spinal segment, mainly at the transitional zones between the mobile and the fixed segments of the spine . These
degenerative changes represent a histologically distinct entity different from ganglion or synovial cysts. Pathologic ligamentum flavum
cysts can contain hemorrhage, and previous degeneration of the ligament may create conditions for the formation of hematoma. Rupture of
vessels in degenerated lumbar ligamentum flavum may develop secondary to stretching forces on the back. The pathogenesis of the hematoma may
originate from minor acute or chronic trauma such as minor back injury, physical exertion or heavy lifting [20, 26]. Intraspinal ligamentum
flavum cysts are rare; they occur preferentially in the lower lumbar region [5, 15, 32], while cervical localization is uncommon . In most
of the cases, ligamentum flavum cysts in the lumbar spine occur at L4–L5, the most mobile segment within the lumbar spine, and are
frequently associated with lumbar degenerative spondylolisthesis. Cervical cysts are preferentially located in the cervicothoracic junction
. Continuous stress to the ligamentum flavum due to minor chronic trauma such as listhesis may predispose to the formation of the cyst .
Only in a few cases is the localization of cysts C6–C7, C3–C4, and C5–C6 levels . No reports have described the appearance of these cysts in
any region other than the mobile spine. The T2–10 vertebrae mainly act with the ribs to form the thorax and are not generally considered to
be part of the mobile spine (Table 1).Table 1Reported cases of ligamentum flavum cysts occurring in the spineLiterature N Cervical Takano
et al. 1 Yamamoto et al. 2 Hatem et al. 1 Gazzeri et al. 1Cervicothoracic Chan et al. 1 Lunardi et al. 1Lumbar Haase 1 Abdullah et al.
4 Vernet et al. 6 Savitz et al. 6 Baker and Hanson 1 Bloch et al. 6 Mahallati et al. 1 Bärlocher and Seiler 1 Terada et al. 1 Cakir et al.
1 Wildi et al. 33 DiMario et al. 4 Asamoto et al. 1 Gazzeri et al. 1 Ayberk et al. 2 Our case1 Reported cases of ligamentum flavum cysts
occurring in the spine There are no specific clinical symptoms for ligamentum flavum cyst. Cysts in the spinal canal can impinge upon and
displace neural structures and can lead to neurologic symptoms. The majority of symptomatic cysts usually presents with radiculopathy, such
as sciatica in the case of lumbar cysts, and can mimic symptoms related to intervertebral disc herniation . In the study of Wildi et al. ,
97% patients complained of radicular pain, 39% showed motor deficits, 55% had sensory changes, 18% had abnormal reflexes, and 33% showed a
positive Lasèque sign. Our patient presented with gradually developing right-sided radicular pain involving mostly the L4 distribution with
patellar reflex loss on the same side. Neuroimaging is helpful in diagnosing cyst of the ligamentum flavum. On myelography, these lesions
are recognized as intraspinal extradural masses and on postmyelogram computed tomography as a faint cyst adjacent to the ligamentum flavum .
Magnetic resonance imaging provides the best images [14, 20, 25, 28]: on T1-weighted images, the cysts have a variable signal, and on
T2-weighted images, the cysts have a high-intensity signal [20, 28]. Differential diagnosis of imaging studies between ligamentum flavum
cysts and synovial cysts is useful to the surgeon, as the latter are more difficult to resect, requiring exploration of the facet joint.
Magnetic resonance imaging, in some cases of synovial cysts, reveals demonstrable communication with the facet joint with enhancement of the
synovial cyst wall and of the adjacent facet joint. Synovial cysts often have a calcified rim, while ligamentum flavum cysts do not. In our
study, magnetic resonance imaging revealed at L3–L4 level a right-sided voluminous epidural cystic lesion, 10 mm in diameter, which was
hypointense on T1-weighted images (Fig. 3a, b) and hyperintense on T2-weighted images (Fig. 4) and its wall was enhanced with contrast
material (Fig. 3c, d). The computed tomography appearance of synovial cysts is often diagnostic and correlates well with pathologic
findings. They typically consist of a cystic formation whose walls show calcification, and are located adjacent to facet joints that
frequently show signs of degeneration . Ligamentum flavum cysts, conversely, have not been observed to cause rim calcification. Juxtafacet
cysts appear as well-delineated cystic masses; the rim of synovial cysts is typically isointense to slightly hyperintense compared with
cerebrospinal fluid in T1 and hypointense in T2, and its contents have variable intensities and several classifications have been proposed.
In the case of ligamentum flavum cysts, they are seen adjacent to the ligamentum flavum and there is no observable communication with the
spinal facet joint. When intraluminal hemorrhage occurs in a minority of cases, they are easier to distinguish from herniated disk fragments
and most neoplasms . In addition to other cystic lesions that may affect the lumbar spine, calcium pyrophosphate dihydrate deposits have
been observed in the ligamentum flavum among patients presenting with lumbar pain and/or radiculopathy, and typically are hypointense on
magnetic resonance imaging and show calcifications on computed tomography imaging.Fig. 3T1-weighted magnetic resonance image demonstrating a
hypointense intraspinal extradural right-sided ligamentum flavum cyst (white arrow): a sagittal pre-gadolinium, b axial pre-gadolinium, c
sagittal post-gadolinium, d axial post-gadoliniumFig. 4T2-weighted magnetic resonance image showing a hyperintense signal of the above-
mentioned cyst (white arrow): a sagittal, b axial T1-weighted magnetic resonance image demonstrating a hypointense intraspinal extradural
right-sided ligamentum flavum cyst (white arrow): a sagittal pre-gadolinium, b axial pre-gadolinium, c sagittal post-gadolinium, d axial
post-gadolinium T2-weighted magnetic resonance image showing a hyperintense signal of the above-mentioned cyst (white arrow): a sagittal, b
axial Differential diagnosis of intraspinal extradural mass lesions includes ligamentum flavum cyst, juxta-articular cysts (ganglion and
synovial cysts), arachnoid cyst, perineural cyst, dermoid cyst, infectious cyst, schwannoma, meningioma, and metastasis or nontumorous-type
mass lesions including neurofibromas, fibrous dysplasia, ependymal cyst, and rheumatoid arthritis pannus [15, 20, 23]. The nomenclature of
cysts in the spinal canal is somewhat unclear in the literature. Most intraspinal cysts reported are juxta-articular cysts. Ligamentum
flavum and juxta-articular cysts can be definitely distinguished only by their pathological findings. Conservative therapy appears to have
no success [15, 20]. Most conservative therapies are temporary and have varying success in the short term. Surgical removal is the first-
choice therapy. The goal of surgery is spinal decompression as well as resection of the cyst and affected ligamentum flavum. Complete
excision at the base of the ligamentous insertion of the cyst assures a minimal rate of recurrence. Wildi et al. reported recurrence of the
cyst in the remaining ligamentum flavum in two patients 1 year after surgery. While nearly 95% of all operated cysts can be removed in their
entirety, a major reported intraoperative difficulty lies in the presence of adhesions to the dural wall, which is the main causative factor
of incomplete resection . Complete removal of pseudocystic lesions generally has excellent results [2, 9, 14, 27, 28, 30]. Our patient
showed complete postoperative resolution of symptoms. She is neurologically intact and symptom free to date. To summarize, ligamentum flavum
cysts represent a rare cause of lumbar nerve root compression or spinal stenosis. The lumbar ligamentum flavum undergoes lifelong mechanical
stress. Similar to bony structures in this region, it degenerates with age. The degenerative changes in the lumbar ligamenta flava can be
followed by cystic changes. Histologically, these degenerative changes represent a distinct entity different from ganglion or synovial
cysts. Magnetic resonance imaging provides the best images. Radical removal of pseudocyst guarantees in nearly all cases complete relief of
radiculopathy and seems to prevent recurrence of such a lesion at the same level. None. This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
