Sialadenoma papilliferum is a rare tumor, primarily of minor salivary gland origin, first described by Abrams and Finck (Cancer 24:1057–63,
1969). It is both an exophytic and endophytic papillary lesion histologically resembling syringocystadenoma papilliferum of sweat gland. The
tumor is considered benign although rare recurrent cases have been reported. Three cases of malignant transformation of sialadenoma
papilliferum have been described in the literature. We report a high grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma arising in a background of sialadenoma
papilliferum, at the base of the tongue, an unusual location for minor salivary gland neoplasms. Eleven months after excision and nodal
dissection, there is no evidence of recurrence or metastasis. Sialadenoma papilliferum is a rare tumor of minor salivary gland origin, first
described by Abrams and Finck in 1969 . It is both an exophytic and endophytic papillary lesion histologically resembling syringocystadenoma
papilliferum of sweat gland. The tumor is considered benign although rare recurrent cases have been reported [2, 3]. Three cases of
malignant transformation of sialadenoma papilliferum have been described in the literature . We report a fourth case, a high grade
mucoepidermoid carcinoma arising in a background of sialadenoma papilliferum, at the base of the tongue, an unusual location for minor
salivary gland neoplasms. An 82-year-old female with medical history of diabetes mellitus and hypertension presented with a 3-month history
of dysphagia secondary to a 2-cm papillary, exophytic mass at the left base of the tongue. This tumor ultimately was interpreted as a high
grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma arising in a background of a sialadenoma papilliferum. The patient subsequently underwent tumor excision and
follow-up margin excision with level II, III and IV left neck lymph node dissection. No residual tumor was identified and four lymph nodes
were negative for tumor. All specimens were negative for microvascular invasion. The patient was discharged. She was regularly followed-up
and no recurrence of the tumor was documented eleven months after the surgery. Microscopically, the lesion demonstrates prominent
papillarity that in some areas, appears to be centered around an excretory minor salivary gland duct. The opening of the duct is in direct
continuity with the stratified acanthotic squamous epithelium covering the papillary areas of the tumor (Fig. 1a, b). Most of the ductal
epithelium is bi-layered or stratified with tall columnar cells in the luminal layer and short, cuboidal cells in the basal layer. Scattered
goblet cells and ciliated metaplastic cells are interspersed. Extensive squamous metaplasia is present focally. The papillary fronds of the
tumor, which are supported by fibrovascular cores, protrude into the ductal space. Lymphocytic and plasmacytic inflammation is present in
the cores. The above described lesion was interpreted as sialadenoma papilliferum.Fig. 1a Sialadenoma papilliferum. Exophytic portion. 20×;
hemotoxylin-eosin stain. Boxed area is shown in higher magnification in illustration b. b Excretory salivary duct in direct connection with
squamous epithelium. Arrow indicates the connection between squamous surface epithelium and salivary excretory duct columnar epithelium.
200×; hemotoxylin-eosin stain. c Mucoepidermoid carcinoma with intermixed components of squamoid, mucous and intermediate cells. 200×;
hemotoxylin-eosin stain a Sialadenoma papilliferum. Exophytic portion. 20×; hemotoxylin-eosin stain. Boxed area is shown in higher
magnification in illustration b. b Excretory salivary duct in direct connection with squamous epithelium. Arrow indicates the connection
between squamous surface epithelium and salivary excretory duct columnar epithelium. 200×; hemotoxylin-eosin stain. c Mucoepidermoid
carcinoma with intermixed components of squamoid, mucous and intermediate cells. 200×; hemotoxylin-eosin stain The deeper and malignant
portion of the tumor grows in a more solid pattern with well defined squamous differentiation (Figs. 1c, 2a, b), intermediate cells, and
nests of gland-like structures. Scattered foci demonstrate definitive mucin-positive tumor cells (confirmed by mucicarmine stain, Sigma-
Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) (Fig. 2c), which are focally intermixed with the squamous component. Nuclear pleomorphism, hyperchromasia, and high
mitotic activity are evident in the squamous component, which is in close association with adjacent salivary ductal epithelium, and with the
deeper portion of sialadenoma papilliferum (Fig. 2a). In many areas, the malignant tumor obliterates the benign lesion and infiltrates
beyond the confines of the sialadenoma papilliferum. However, the sialadenoma papilliferum component retains its papillary and proliferative
configuration, mostly at the surface (Fig. 2a). Our diagnosis was therefore high grade (Brandwein grading system) mucoepidermoid carcinoma
arising in a background of sialadenoma papilliferum . The followup re-excision and nodal dissection specimens showed only squamous
metaplasia of minor salivary glands, and mucosal ulceration.Fig. 2a Mucoepidermoid carcinoma arising in a background of sialadenoma
papilliferum. Arrow, superficial component of sialadenoma papilliferum. Arrowhead, deep portion of the lesion with mucoepidermoid carcinoma
intermixed with sialadenoma papilliferum. 10×, hemotoxylin-eosin stain. b Mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Predominantly squamous component with
high grade nuclear features. 400×; hemotoxylin-eosin stain. c Mucicarmine stain for mucoepidermoid carcinoma, demonstrating both
intraglandular and intracellular mucin. 400×; Mucicarmine stain (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) a Mucoepidermoid carcinoma arising in a
background of sialadenoma papilliferum. Arrow, superficial component of sialadenoma papilliferum. Arrowhead, deep portion of the lesion with
mucoepidermoid carcinoma intermixed with sialadenoma papilliferum. 10×, hemotoxylin-eosin stain. b Mucoepidermoid carcinoma. Predominantly
squamous component with high grade nuclear features. 400×; hemotoxylin-eosin stain. c Mucicarmine stain for mucoepidermoid carcinoma,
demonstrating both intraglandular and intracellular mucin. 400×; Mucicarmine stain (Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO) Sialadenoma papilliferum
usually occurs in older males in sites that have minor salivary glands, such as palate, buccal mucosa, retromolar pads and lips . The base
of tongue location, as in our case, has not been documented previously, although minor salivary glands are found in this location. The
proliferative, dilated salivary gland ducts with papillary fronds protruding into the lumen, together with the hyperplastic, hyperkeratotic
overlying squamous epithelium, led us to the observation that there is a component of sialadenoma papilliferum, continuous with a deeper
high grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma. The true origin and nature of sialadenoma papilliferum have been controversial. The authors who first
described this lesion believed it arises from myoepithelial cells ; while others have proposed that it is a result of focal hyperplasia
following blockage of a salivary gland duct . The presence of ciliated cells in the lining epithelium of the duct in our case is consistent
with the possibly metaplastic, reactive nature of sialadenoma papilliferum . Most recently, it was reported that sialadenoma papilliferum is
a neoplasm that originates from ductal surface cells . Mucoepidermoid carcinoma sometimes is seen proliferating from a terminal salivary
duct, supporting the concept that the tumor may originate from cells of the salivary gland excretory and intercalated ducts . Although
mucoepidermoid carcinoma can be associated with a large excretory salivary duct, a papillary, proliferating ductal lesion, as in this case,
is not a feature. Chen reported a case of intraductal low grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma occurring in minor salivary gland. The lesion was
lobulated and composed of cystic ducts filled with tumor, which differs from the surface papillary configuration of a sialadenoma
papilliferum. Considering the papillary architecture of the lesion, our differential diagnosis consists of (1) a sialadenoma papilliferum
with a papillary squamous cell carcinoma, (2) an adenosquamous carcinoma with prominent papillary features, (3) papillary squamous cell
carcinoma, and (4) a papillary cystadenocarcinoma. Papillary squamous cell carcinoma is a distinct variant of squamous cell carcinoma
characterized by an exophytic, papillary growth, which can resemble sialadenoma papilliferum in its gross appearance . However, a glandular
component with mucin-secreting cells is not present in this lesion. Adenosquamous carcinoma has distinctively separate components of adeno-
and squamous differentiation with no papillary configuration . Cystadenocarcinoma is a rare malignant tumor characterized by predominantly
cystic growth and conceptually it is the malignant counterpart of the benign cystadenoma. It does not include squamous elements .
Distinctively squamous differentiation is not a feature of papillary cystadenocarcinoma. Cell types that comprise the lining epithelium of
cysts in papillary cystadenocarcinoma include, most often, cuboidal and columnar cells. Other cells types such as mucous, clear and
oncocytic cells occasionally are noted as well . Thus far, three cases of malignant transformation of sialadenoma papilliferum have been
documented in the literature (Table 1). Solomon et al. reported a soft palate sialadenoma papilliferum with lymph node metastasis, which
later was re-interpreted as a mucoepidermoid carcinoma by others [4, 8]. The case reported by Shimoda et al. is a clearer example of
malignancy associated with sialadenoma papilliferum. They described an epithelial–myoepithelial carcinoma containing a transition zone to
adjacent sialadenoma papilliferum. Most recently, Ponniah reported a case of sialadenoma papilliferum with carcinoma in situ in the
exophytic component.Table 1Four reported cases of malignant transformation of sialadenoma papilliferum (SP) (1978–2009)AuthorsYearAnatomical
siteAssociated malignancySolomon et al. 1978Soft palateSquamous cell carcinomaShimoda et al. 2004Junction between the soft and hard
palateEpithelial–myoepithelial carcinomaPonniah et al. 2007Floor of mouthCarcinoma in situ in the squamous component of benign SPLiu et al.
(current case)2009Base of tongueHigh-grade mucoepidermoid carcinoma Four reported cases of malignant transformation of sialadenoma
papilliferum (SP) (1978–2009) Our case demonstrates a mucoepidermoid carcinoma, apparently arising from a sialadenoma papilliferum. The
superficial benign portion of the lesion retains the configuration of sialadenoma papilliferum. In comparison to the malignant
transformation of a sialadenoma papilliferum reported by Shimoda et al. , in which the carcinoma component and the benign lesion are in
close contact and share a transitional zone, the mucoepidermoid carcinoma in this case comprises the deeper portion of sialadenoma
papilliferum while leaving the exophytic, papillary, surface structure intact. This case represents a rare example of malignant
transformation of sialadenoma papilliferum, occurring in an unusual location for minor salivary gland tumors.
