We reviewed the existing literature on medical termination of pregnancy in cases of congenital uterine malformation. Is medical termination
of pregnancy safe in the presence of a uterine anomaly? Can termination of pregnancy still be performed when information concerning the
presence of congenital uterine malformation is not available? The risk of adverse outcome, i.e. uterine rupture, was high in class 2 uterine
anomalies, whereas the risks in classes 3–6 were negligible. However, the very low incidence of class 2 anomalies in pregnant women results
in a calculated risk of uterine rupture in medical termination of pregnancy on the basis of this anomaly of 1 in 300,000 pregnancies.
Ultrasound scanning is of limited diagnostic value to diagnose congenital uterine malformations. The implications of uterine anomalies are
not an argument in the discussion whether to use misoprostol for termination of pregnancy in developing countries with scarce diagnostics
tools. Of the 210 million pregnancies worldwide each year, 87% occurs in developing countries. Twenty-two million terminations of pregnancy
per year of a total of 42 million are legal within a local judicial system . Medical abortion using prostaglandins became an alternative
method for surgical abortion of first and second trimester pregnancies in the early 1970s . This procedure appears to be an effective and
safe method for abortion, although it might bear certain risks for women with a uterine anomaly. The prevalence of congenital anomalies due
to Müllerian duct malfusion has been estimated between 0.1% in an unselected population and 6% in women undergoing diagnostic imaging [3,
4]. In the Netherlands, these congenital anomalies are mostly detected before the termination of a pregnancy, as ultrasound investigation is
routine in early pregnancy. However, detection is less likely in developing countries since diagnostic tools are scarce . There is little
knowledge about the risk of serious adverse outcome, i.e. uterine rupture in medical termination of pregnancy in the presence of a uterine
anomaly [6, 7]. In this paper we present a case report and a review of the literature on the use of misoprostol for termination of pregnancy
in women with uterine anomaly. Published risk percentages of uterine rupture in using misoprostol for medical abortion enabled us to
calculate this risk in a population of pregnant women in developing countries requesting abortion. A review on uterine anomalies by Nahum et
al. showed that congenital uterine anomalies affect 0.5% of women in the general population and 0.2% in fertile women (47 studies were
included in the review). The most common anomalies are the symmetric or duplication anomalies, including bicornuate uteri. Unicornuate
uteri, resulting from unilateral failure of normal Müllerian system development, comprise 5% of all uterine anomalies. The vast majority of
these have a contralateral rudimentary uterine horn of the non-communicating type, meaning that the endometrial cavity does not communicate
with cervix, vagina, or contralateral hemi-uterus. This is often diagnosed at exploratory laparotomy after pregnancy related uterine rupture
[6, 7]. In these rudimentary horns (85% are non-communicating), approximately 1 in 76,000 pregnancies occur [8, 9]. Fertilization in these
cases takes place through transperitoneal migration of sperm from the patent contralateral fallopian tube . In the 1990s, it became clear
that misoprostol is an effective and cheap alternative to the traditionally used prostaglandins in obstetric practice. The way of action is
similar to other prostaglandins although various natural and synthetic prostaglandins employ their action using different receptors and
different biochemical pathways. The natural prostaglandins are rapidly metabolized in lung tissue. Synthetic prostaglandins, such as
misoprostol, bypass the lung, thus prolonging their half-life. Misoprostol has a strong uterotonic effect and is widely used in obstetrical
and gynecological practice. In comparison to the traditional prostaglandins such as dinoprostone and gemeprost used in obstetrics,
misoprostol is cheap (one 0.2 mg tablet costs US$ 0.10–0.30), easy to administer, and stable in light and hot climate conditions. It can be
kept on the shelf for long periods of time without losing any of its properties. Misoprostol can be used safely for termination of pregnancy
in first as well as in second trimester, in case of a viable and nonviable pregnancy [2, 11–13]. It is a safe and cost effective alternative
to surgical abortion, in resource poor countries . Women with major uterine anomalies have an increased risk for uterine rupture during
pregnancy and delivery . This may be due to a developmental inferior musculature of the uterine wall. Myometrial thickness decreases with
gestational age and, in addition, the uterine wall becomes thinner as a result of uterine contractions [8, 9, 15]. These anatomical
phenomena will probably be less important in cases of symmetric anomalies such as didelphic, bicornuate, and septate uteri. However, for
pregnancies in (non-)communicating rudimentary uterine horns, vaginal delivery is impossible and potentially dangerous . Induction of
myometrial contractions is potentially hazardous in such cases as uterine rupture may ensue. If we consider all different subtypes according
to the classification of congenital uterine anomalies of the American Fertility Society “AFS” (1988, Fig. 1) it is especially class II that
poses an increased risk. Patients with a class I anomaly have no reproductive potential, class III and IV hardly have obstetrical
complications and class VI is considered a normal variant. Although the septate uterus (Class V) is correlated with reproductive
complications, there is no risk of uterine rupture since the musculature is normally developed.Fig. 1Classification of congenital uterine
anomalies according to the American Fertility Society “AFS” (1988) Classification of congenital uterine anomalies according to the American
Fertility Society “AFS” (1988) The prognosis of pregnancies in a rudimentary uterine horn is poor with regard to both maternal and fetal
outcome (neonatal survival rate of 6% and maternal mortality rate of 5.7 and 1.9% for non-communicating and communicating horns,
respectively) . Rupture of the rudimentary horn accounts for 82% of these maternal mortalities. Nahum et al. mentioned 47% of reported
pregnancies in non-communicating horns to be ruptured, as did 52% of the communicating horns resulting in an overall risk of about 50%. Of
these ruptures, 67% occurred during the second trimester and 13% in the first trimester . Induction of uterine contractions with misoprostol
is likely to cause uterine rupture, especially in the second trimester. The prevalence of uterine anomalies is 1 in 200 in the general
female population and 1 in 590 in the fertile female population . As the estimated risk of the class II uterine anomaly is 5% (Figs. 2, 3),
the prevalence of class II anomaly is 1/11880 fertile women (Figs. 2, 3). Pregnancy in a rudimentary horn occurs in 1/76,000 . Little is
known about racial differences in the prevalence of congenital uterine malformations.Fig. 2Distribution of uterine anomalies
Fig. 3Prevalence of uterine anomalies in fertile women Distribution of uterine anomalies Prevalence of uterine anomalies in fertile women
With a sensitivity of ultrasound scanning to detect a case of rudimentary horn of 26% , 292,307 scans have to be made to prevent one
possible case of uterine rupture (assuming the risk of rupture is 100% in case of a rudimentary horn). A 32-year-old primigravida presented
herself at our outpatient department requesting a termination of pregnancy. Ultrasound scan revealed a vital intrauterine pregnancy of
8 weeks and a uterine anomaly in the form of a class II or a class III malformation (unicornuate uterus with a rudimentary horn or a uterus
didelphys). Generally in our clinic all women requesting a termination of pregnancy are counseled for a surgical as well as a medical
procedure while taking all contraindications into consideration. Although our patient preferred a medical procedure, the attending physician
doubted the safety of medical termination with misoprostol, deciding upon the surgical procedure instead. A systematic search was performed
in PubMed and Cochrane, using the search terms: ‘‘uterine anomaly,’’ ‘‘uterine abnormalities,’’ ‘‘misoprostol,’’ ‘‘Müllerian anomaly,’’
‘‘rudimentary uterine horn,’’ “unicornuate uterus,” and ‘‘bicornuate uterus’’. Only three case reports and one accompanying report have been
published which matched our search. In two of these case reports, termination of pregnancy with misoprostol resulted in uterine rupture of
the non-communicating rudimentary horn [17, 18]. Chao et al. report the case of an incomplete medical abortion in a twin pregnancy in a
bicornuate uterus. Nahum et al. suggest a development of a set of practical guidelines. Since the introduction of misoprostol, there has
been concern about its safety. The manufacturer has sent several warning letters against the unlicensed use of misoprostol during pregnancy
. Risks concerning the use of misoprostol are its teratogenic properties, hyperstimulation of the uterus, pregnancy loss and uterine
rupture. Most of these safety issues have been addressed. Regimens used in obstetric and gynecological practice that are in accordance with
professional guidelines are considered effective and safe [13, 21]. These guidelines, based on best available evidence, presume that the
medical workup before a termination of pregnancy is carried out, is up to standard. Physical examination and access to ultrasound
diagnostics are essential in this. Ultrasound scanning can give an accurate estimation of gestational age, reducing the incidence and
severity of complications , but can also reveal the presence of uterine anomalies. Unfortunately, sensitivity of ultrasound scanning is only
26% in cases of corneal pregnancy . Generally the identification of uterine anomalies is difficult and will need well-trained personnel.
Criteria for recognition have been listed by Mavrelos et al. . During an established pregnancy, ascertaining the exact type of mullerian
anomaly is extremely challenging, with a definite diagnosis of the subclass being possible only outside pregnancy. Most pregnant women in
developing countries do not have access to ultrasound investigations or even physical examination by skilled professionals [1, 24]. Even so,
a class II anomaly can be easily missed on routine examination in the absence of an associated cervical or vaginal abnormality .
Particularly for this group of women, it is important to know whether the administration of misoprostol is safe without any knowledge on the
presence of a uterine anomaly. The precise risks of uterine rupture with misoprostol for termination of pregnancy in the presence of uterine
anomalies are not known. Only a few case reports are available. There is still a lack of evidence of safety for the use of misoprostol in
settings where diagnostic and therapeutic tools are scarce. The relatively low frequency of these uterine anomalies indicates that on a
large scale, the drug is safe, but the exact rate of complications in women affected by Mullerian anomalies remains unknown and is possibly
higher than in the general population. Calculations on the prevalence of uterine malformations and the incidence of possibly related serious
complications in cases of termination of pregnancy support our opinion that diagnostic ultrasound scanning prior to medical termination of
pregnancy to rule out a potentially dangerous uterine anomaly is not mandatory, although large scale studies would be needed to provide a
definitive answer toward the need of ultrasound scanning. Caring for pregnant women with congenital uterine malformations can be
particularly challenging, with increased risks of complications arising from surgical and medical ToPs alike. These women might benefit from
individualized protocols (e.g. lower doses, use of mifepristone prior to misoprostol). Conflict of interest statement None. Open Access This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
