Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists. We present herein an interesting tracing of a patient
who suffered from recurrent episodes of transient loss of consciousness (TLOC) associated with convulsive activity thought to be due to
epilepsy or conversion disorder. A thirty four year old woman was referred to our syncope and autonomic disorder center for evaluation of
recurrent unexplained periods of transient loss of consciousness (TLOC) associated with convulsive activity. The episodes would come on
suddenly while sitting or standing with little or no prodrome. She would abruptly lose consciousness and fall to the floor. Bystanders
reported her to be pale and ashen in color. Witnesses reported that during episodes she would display tonic-colonic like convulsive activity
lasting from 1-5 minutes associated with urinary incontinence. The loss of consciousness could last for 30 to 45 minutes. Afterwards the
patient was confused and fatigued for the remainder of the day. The patient had undergone multiple evaluations including, 12 lead
electrocardiograms, echocardiography, stress testing, tilt table testing and prolonged holter and event monitoring, all of which were
unremarkable. Repeated electroencephalograms (including a prolonged inpatient monitoring) were inconclusive and empiric therapy with
multiple anti- seizure medications did not alter the frequency or severity of her TLOC. She was labeled as having either refractory epilepsy
or conversion disorder. After presentation to our center she underwent placement of an implantable loop recorder (ILR). She later suffered
one of her typical TLOC episode associated with witnessed convulsive activity. A download of the device demonstrated that concomitant with
the episode of TLOC the ILR had recorded a periods of complete heart block followed by a prolonged periods of asystole, with artifacts
consistent with convulsive activity was noted. Prolonged periods of asystole have been reported to result in convulsive activity that may be
misdiagnosed as being due to epilepsy 1,2,3. The patient then underwent permanent pacemaker implantation with complete resolution of her
TLOC episodes. This case graphically illustrates the utility of the ILR in establishing the cause of recurrent unexplained TLOC. In addition
the tracing demonstrates an interesting sequence of complete heart block followed by prolonged asystole that resulted in TLOC with
convulsive activity. Prolonged asystole has been reported to cause abrupt onset, convulsive episodes with prolonged loss of consciousness
that at times can be misdiagnosed as epilepsy 1, 2, 3. An ILR can be invaluable in identifying these patients and facilitating prompt
therapy 3. Tracings downloaded from implantable loop recorder shows transition from sinus rhythm to complete heart block and prolonged
asystole. Asystole continues through out the tracing. Prolonged asystole followed by a convulsive activity. Tracing reveals return of
patients' rhythm to Sinus.
