Functioning adrenocortical oncocytomas are extremely rare and most reported patients are 40-60 yr of age. To our knowledge, only 2 cases of
functioning adrenocortical oncocytomas have been reported in childhood. We report a case of functioning adrenocortical oncocytoma in a
14-yr-old female child presenting with virilization. She presented with deepening of the voice and excessive hair growth, and elevation of
plasma testosterone and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate. She had an adrenalectomy. The completely resected tumor composed predominantly of
oncocytes without atypical mitosis and necrosis. A discussion of this case and a review of the literature on this entity are presented. An
oncocytoma is a tumor that is composed predominantly of polygonal oncocytes with abundant granular and intensely eosinophilic cytoplasm. It
occurs in virtually every organ, most commonly the kidney, salivary glands, and thyroid. An oncocytoma that arises in the adrenal gland is
very rare and usually benign and nonfunctioning. Because of the unusual occurrence of functioning adrenocortical oncocytoma, particularly in
childhood, we report here a case of adrenocortical oncocytoma in a girl presenting with virilization. We also discuss this case and review
the literature in terms of pathologic classification and malignant potential. A 14-yr-old girl presented with deepening of the voice and
excessive hair growth as well as change in body habitus since about 1 yr prior to admission. She was born at full term without perinatal
problems and had no special health problems previously. Her mother worried about not only her hypertrichosis but also her lack of menarche.
Her body weight was 69.5 kg (95-97 percentile), height was 165.1 cm (90-95 percentile) and body mass index was 25.5 kg/m2. Her blood
pressure was normal. Physical examination revealed acne on the face and a male pattern of excessive hair on the chin, anterior chest wall,
lower abdomen and inner thigh (Fig. 1). A huge, hard mass was palpated on the right abdomen. Her breast was Tanner stage 2, but her bone age
(17 yr) was advanced. She had mild clitomegaly. We performed a hormonal study for evaluation of virilization, which revealed increased
plasma testosterone (>1,500 ng/dL, reference range: ≤32 ng/dL) and dehydroepiandrosterone sulfate (DHEA-S) (>1,000 µg/dL, reference range:
≤260 µg/dL) levels. Plasma 17-hydroxyprogesterone (17-OHP) was also increased (56.4 ng/mL, reference range: ≤2.3 ng/mL). Plasma
adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) was 5.1 pg/mL (reference range: 5-37 pg/mL) and plasma cortisol was 26.7 µg/dL (reference range: 4-11
µg/dL). Plasma lutenizing hormone (LH) was 0.24 mIU/mL and plasma follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH) was <0.1 mIU/mL. The abdominal computed
tomography (CT) scan and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a 12×12×14 cm-sized, well-circumscribed, huge mass which displaced the
right kidney anteromedially (Fig. 2). The positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan revealed a heterogeneous hypermetabolic mass only in
the area between the liver and right kidney, which suggested a malignant retroperitoneal or adrenal tumor (Fig. 3). A whole body bone scan
found no active lesions. We performed a low dose (0.5 mg q 6 hr for 48 hr) and high dose (2 mg q 6 hr for 48 hr) dexamethasone suppression
test and the result of that was not compatible with Cushing's syndrome. She had a right adrenalectomy and her postoperative course was
uneventful. The resected tumor was a huge encapsulated round mass, measuring 17.5×15×14 cm in dimension and 1,100 gm in weight. The outer
surface was smooth and glistening (Fig. 4). Microscopically (Fig. 5), the tumor was composed of large cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm.
Capsular or sinusoidal invasion was not noted and the subcapsular area showed a compressed normal adrenal cortex. Atypical mitosis and
necrosis were absent. These findings were compatible with the diagnosis of oncocytoma. At 2 weeks after removal of the adrenal tumor, her
serum testosterone and DHEA level decreased dramatically to normal ranges, respectively. Virilization in an adolescent or woman can manifest
as clitoral enlargement, increased muscle strength, acne, hirsutism, frontal hair thinning, deepening of the voice, and menstrual disruption
due to anovulation. Some of the possible causes of virilization in women are polycystic ovary syndrome, androgen-producing tumors (of the
ovaries, adrenal glands, pituitary gland), hypothyroidism, anabolic steroid exposure, congenital adrenal hyperplasia due to 21-hydroxylase
deficiency (late-onset), and hormone replacement therapy (female-to-male) (1). Adrenocortical neoplasms are rare in children and
adolescents. Tumors account for less than 0.2% of all pediatric neoplasms and 1.3% of all carcinomas in patients less than 20-yr-old (2).
Single tumors usually are benign unilateral adenomas and more rarely malignant carcinomas. Adrenocortical tumors can be either functional or
non-functional. In children, most tumors are functional, with 80-90% having endocrine manifestations at diagnosis and up to 94% secreting
excess hormones on further evaluation (3). Most children (50-84%) present with virilization (pubic hair, accelerated growth and skeletal
maturation, an enlarged penis or clitoris, hirsutism and acne) due to excess androgen secretion. The adrenocortical oncocytoma is extremely
rarely found; only renal oncocytoma is commonly reported in children (4). Only a little more than 50 cases of adrenal oncocytoma have been
reported in the literature (5). They were usually benign and nonfunctioning. The functioning adrenocortical oncocytomas have been reported
so far in only 9 cases, of whom 7 patients were 40-60 yr of age and only 2 patients were 6 and 12 yr of age. The reported 2 children
presented with virilization and pseudopuberty, and our patient also presented with virilization showing high serum testosterone and DHEA
levels. The major practical problem for our case was to differentiate benign from malignant adrenocortical oncocytoma after complete
resection of the tumor. We considered her tumor as borderline because only one minor criterion was fulfilled according to the malignancy
scoring system proposed by Bisceglia (6). As Juliano et al. reported a case of metastatic adrenocortical oncocytoma (7), we tried a
metastatic work-up including a whole body bone scan, chest CT scan and PET-CT scan, which revealed negative findings. Based on the
borderline criteria of pathologic classification and no metastatic evidence, we decided to just observe her without further post-operative
chemoradiotherapy. However, she is being monitored by a physical examination and abdominal CT scan biannually for 2 yr, then annually for
the next 5 yr. In conclusion, we report a very rare case of virilizing adrenocortical oncocytoma, particularly in a female child. Although
the malignant potential of this tumor is feeble and controversial, we must pay attention to recurrences because little is known of the
tumor's long-term natural history. This work was supported by the Korea Science and Engineering Foundation (R13-2008-026-01001-0) through
the Medical Research Center at Hanyang University College of Medicine, Korea. Excessive hair pattern: (A) chin, (B) lower abdomen. An
abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan showed a 12×12×14 cm-sized, well-circumscribed, huge mass which displace the right kidney
anteromedially. The positron emission tomography (PET) CT scan revealed a heterogeneous hypermetabolic mass which suggested a malignant
retroperitoneal or adrenal tumor. Gross findings of resected tumor. (A) Well-demarcated huge mass, (B) Cut surface of resected tumor showing
smooth and glistening surface. Microscopic findings of resected tumor. (A) The tumor was composed of large cells with eosinophilic
cytoplasm. The capsular or sinusoidal invasion was not noted and the subcapsular area showed a compressed normal adrenal cortex. (B)
Atypical mitosis and necrosis were absent (H&E, A ×100, B ×400).
