A two-month-old male infant presented in surgical emergency of our institution, with complaints of excessive crying, epigastric swelling and
non bilious vomiting of one day. There was no history of such events before. On clinical examination, the infant was febrile with a
temperature of 100°F, a pulse of 110/min, respiratory rate 30/min and BP within normal range. The epigastrium revealed fullness and
tenderness on palpation. Bowel sounds were audible. X-ray abdomen erect was performed with AP and lateral views [Figures 1 and 2].
Anteroposterior view Lateral view What is the diagnosis? What are the types of this condition? What are the predisposing factors leading to
that condition? What is the management of this condition? What is the diagnosis? What are the types of this condition? What are the
predisposing factors leading to that condition? What is the management of this condition? X-ray abdomen erect was showing massive gas shadow
of the stomach due to volvulus around its long axis. This condition is pronounced as “acute gastric volvulus”, and defined as an abnormal
degree of rotation of one part of stomach around another; resulting in partial or complete obstruction at the inlet as well as outlet of the
stomach. If this condition is not managed promptly, compromise of the vascularity or gastric perforation may follow. Gastric volvulus was
first reported by Berti in 1886. Gastric volvulus is a rare entity in pediatric age group. The principal symptoms include excessive crying,
colicky abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and abdominal distension more marked in the epigastrium. Gastric volvulus is classified as
organoaxial and mesenterioaxial, according to plane around which rotation occurs. In organoaxial volvulus, the stomach rotates around its
long axis causing closure of cardiac and pyloric ends of the stomach. In mesenterioaxial volvulus, rotation is on an axis from greater to
lesser curvature. Gastric volvulus is uncommon because the stomach is held securely in place by the gastrophrenic ligaments, esophageal
hiatus, retroperitoneal fixation of duodenum, short gastric vessels, and gastrocolic ligaments. Ligamentous laxity, pyloric obstruction
leading to gastric dilatation, hiatus hernia, eventration of diaphragm, bochdalek's hernia, phrenic nerve palsy, diaphragmatic rupture,
splenic mobility, splenomegaly, polysplenia, malrotation, and dislocation or hypoplasia of the left lobe of liver etc. are the predisposing
factors leading to gastric volvulus. Gastric volvulus may present acutely, requiring urgent surgical intervention to prevent gastric
perforation and gangrene. Simple decompression with nasogastric tube may temporarily control the emergency, but definitive treatment
requires surgical intervention. During the surgery, the stomach is first decompressed and anatomy is restored. Then the predisposing factors
are identified and treated. Lastly, anterior gastropexy with or without gastrostomy is performed. The recurrence is scarcely reported and
gastropexy is curative. X-ray abdomen erect was showing massive gas shadow of the stomach due to volvulus around its long axis. This
condition is pronounced as “acute gastric volvulus”, and defined as an abnormal degree of rotation of one part of stomach around another;
resulting in partial or complete obstruction at the inlet as well as outlet of the stomach. If this condition is not managed promptly,
compromise of the vascularity or gastric perforation may follow. Gastric volvulus was first reported by Berti in 1886. Gastric volvulus is a
rare entity in pediatric age group. The principal symptoms include excessive crying, colicky abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting and abdominal
distension more marked in the epigastrium. Gastric volvulus is classified as organoaxial and mesenterioaxial, according to plane around
which rotation occurs. In organoaxial volvulus, the stomach rotates around its long axis causing closure of cardiac and pyloric ends of the
stomach. In mesenterioaxial volvulus, rotation is on an axis from greater to lesser curvature. Gastric volvulus is uncommon because the
stomach is held securely in place by the gastrophrenic ligaments, esophageal hiatus, retroperitoneal fixation of duodenum, short gastric
vessels, and gastrocolic ligaments. Ligamentous laxity, pyloric obstruction leading to gastric dilatation, hiatus hernia, eventration of
diaphragm, bochdalek's hernia, phrenic nerve palsy, diaphragmatic rupture, splenic mobility, splenomegaly, polysplenia, malrotation, and
dislocation or hypoplasia of the left lobe of liver etc. are the predisposing factors leading to gastric volvulus. Gastric volvulus may
present acutely, requiring urgent surgical intervention to prevent gastric perforation and gangrene. Simple decompression with nasogastric
tube may temporarily control the emergency, but definitive treatment requires surgical intervention. During the surgery, the stomach is
first decompressed and anatomy is restored. Then the predisposing factors are identified and treated. Lastly, anterior gastropexy with or
without gastrostomy is performed. The recurrence is scarcely reported and gastropexy is curative. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of
Interest: None declared
