Pheochromocytoma is a well known, catecholamine-producing tumor characterized by hypertension, headache, hyperglycemia, hypermetabolism, and
hyperhydrosis. Approximately 65% of cases of pheochromocytoma were shown to be associated with hypertension. A case of pheochromocytoma that
presented with thunderclap headache (TCH) and palpitations is reported. The patient never showed hypertension during the course of the
disease. Paroxysmal headache and palpitations led to the identification of the underlying condition, and the final diagnosis was confirmed
by histopathological examination of a surgical specimen. Pheochromocytoma should be identified as a less common although important cause of
TCH. In addition, due to its lack of utility in identifying this disorder, negative cranial imaging may impede further investigation of
extracranial lesions that may be the cause of a patient’s headache. According to the International Classification of Headache Disorders
(ICHD)-II, headache attributed to pheochromocytoma usually develops concomitantly with an abrupt increase in blood pressure. In our case,
however, hypertension was never observed, even when the patient was symptomatic. This is the first report of a case of pheochromocytoma with
TCH without hypertension. Thunderclap headaches (TCHs) is characterized by a sudden onset of severe head pain that peaks within 1 min of
onset. Although benign primary TCHs are described in the International Classification of Headache Disorders-II, TCHs are considered to be
symptomatic of subarachnoid hemorrhages, and their importance in diagnosis of acute illness by exclusion is specially mentioned. In a case
with a chief complaint of sudden headaches, we succeeded in detecting the presence of a pheochromocytoma because of the accompanying
palpitations. There is a danger of laxness in the differential diagnosis of TCH cases once the possibility of subarachnoid hemorrhage is
excluded. We present a case that may affect the long-term prognosis of TCH patients in which the decisive factor in the differential
diagnosis of TCH was detected by abdominal imaging rather than head imaging. A patient was a 33-year-old Japanese woman. Sudden intense
headaches and palpitations. The patient had experienced migraines without aura, since her early 20s. She had right ovarian cysts resected at
26 years of age and a myomectomy at 32 years of age. No family history of headaches, thyroid tumor, or hyperparathyroidism was present. On
the 10th of 10 years, while resting after lunch, the patient experienced sudden intense palpitations immediately followed by a severe
pulsating headache. Although there was no nausea or vomiting, the patient described it as the “worst headache of my entire life.” After
continuing for about 1 h, the headache gradually disappeared with rest. Because a similar attack occurred on the following day, the patient
was seen at the neurosurgery department at her local hospital 2 days after initial occurrence. A cranial CT scan was performed on the same
day. Owing to the relatively short duration of her headache, negative neurological examination, and negative brain CT scan, the patient was
judged to have no abnormalities or need a lumbar puncture. The neurosurgeon prescribed loxoprofen, etizolam, but there was not much effect.
After 10 days of examination, the patient underwent an outpatient migraine examination because of similar, frequent and intense headaches.
The patient had a normal blood pressure and heart rate on physical examination. There were no special neurological findings. There were no
abnormalities on standard blood and urine tests; thyroid functions were also normal. iPTH levels were 43 pg/ml, blood noradrenaline levels
were 1,340 pg/ml, adrenaline levels were 61 pg/ml, and dopamine levels were 21 pg/ml. Because noradrenaline levels were significantly
elevated, abdominal ultrasonography was performed. A well defined, roughly spherical tumor, with a diameter of 3.6 cm and partial cystic
degeneration, located within the left adrenal gland was found. With these findings, the patient was strongly suspected of having
pheochromocytoma, and was hospitalized for detailed examinations in the metabolic internal medicine department. Urinary normetanephrine and
metanephrine levels were significantly elevated (2,593 μg/ml). On MIBG scintigraphy, an area of high uptake corresponding to the left
adrenal gland was detected (Fig. 1). Cranial MRI was done on seventh day of her admission, 2 days after the most recent headache
attack.Fig. 1An area of high uptake conforming to the left adrenal gland is seen An area of high uptake conforming to the left adrenal gland
is seen The patient’s blood pressure was within the normal range for the duration of this study, including during both headache occurrence
and non-occurrence. There were seven headache during hospitalization of 18 days. The average blood pressure for this time period was
112.6/66.0 mmHg; no evidence of hypertension was observed. The average heart rate during headache occurrence was 88.0 bpm; however, the
patient reported experiencing palpitations three times. We administered prazosin hydrochloride and nifedipine to restore her circulating
blood volume. A laparoscopic adrenalectomy was performed 2 months later, and a macroscopically well defined, solid tumor measuring
3 × 3 × 2.7 cm was found in the left adrenal gland. The tumor consisted of solid and fascicular proliferation of polygonal and rhombic
cells. The tumor cells had hyperchromatic round nuclei with a rough chromatin pattern and basophilic cytoplasm. On immunohistochemical
analyses, the tumor cells were positive for CD56, chromogranin A, and synaptophysin. From these results, the tumor was diagnosed as a
pheochromocytoma. Thunderclap headaches occur suddenly, with pain intensity peaking in under 1 min and continuing from 1 h to 10 days. The
most dangerous condition associated with headaches meeting these criteria is subarachnoid hemorrhage; however, numerous other diseases
involving the vasculature of the central nervous system, such as ischemic stroke , cerebral venous thrombosis, cervical artery dissection,
acute hypertensive crisis, retroclival hematoma, pituitary apoplexy and non-vascular structure of the central nervous system, such as
spontaneous intracranial hypotension, third ventricle colloid cyst, and intracranial infection are found on the list of diseases that should
be excluded in the differential diagnosis. Therefore, TCH is a particularly important symptom in differential diagnosis by cranial imaging.
However, it is extremely important to bear in mind that many other diseases associated with TCHs, such as pheochromocytoma and, myocardial
infarction cannot be detected with cranial imaging and may have serious outcomes. Characteristic symptoms accompanying headaches in cases of
pheochromocytoma, include perspiration, palpitations, anxiety, and facial pallor; headaches are known to occur simultaneously with sudden
blood pressure elevation . Other than the present patients, all reported cases of pheochromocytoma with accompanying TCHs have included high
blood pressure (Table 1) . Although many of the patient’s headache occurring while under observation in the hospital were accompanied by
palpitations, blood pressure was within normal range during the headaches. Observation of normal or low blood pressure in pheochromocytoma
cases is not particularly rare , and it is known that catecholamine levels in the circulating blood are not well correlated with blood
pressure. There are other cases in which hypertension was not observed, despite confirmation of urinary catecholamine metabolite elevation .
Possible reasons for the observation of normal blood pressure in cases with pheochromocytoma (which is a catecholamine-producing tumor)
include: (1) reduced circulating plasma volume due to continuous vasoconstriction; (2) individual differences in the catecholamine metabolic
rate and related reactions, and (3) the effects of strong vasodilating agents (such as calcitonin gene-related peptides and adrenomedulin)
produced by the tumor .Table 1Previously reported cases of TCH with pheochromocytomaReferencesAge (years)SexHeadacheAssociated
symptomsHypertensionSanyal and Fletcher 45MaleSudden, short, excruciatingPulsating sensation in abdomen and chest+Heo et al.
45FemaleExplosive, pulsatile, worst of her lifeNone+Im and Kim 37MaleSudden, pulsating, worst of his lifeSweating, conjunctival injection,
restlessness+This case33FemaleSudden, pulsatile, worst of her lifePalpitations− Previously reported cases of TCH with pheochromocytoma This
case study suggests that pheochromocytoma should be included in the differential diagnosis of TCHs with accompanied by palpitations, even
when the blood pressure is normal. We would also like to propose that headache occurring concurrently with sudden blood pressure elevation
may be inadequate as diagnostic criteria for headaches caused by pheochromocytoma. None.
