Chronic HBV infection is a major cause of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) which meanwhile has become the 5th most reason for a fatal outcome
of cancer. Worldwide, approximately 350 million people are chronically HBV infected and as such of risk to develop HCC, of those an
estimated high rate of children. Treatment of chronic infection is sufficient to reduce the rate of HCC but the rate of sustained
virological response remains to low, not at least due to emergence of resistant virus strains. Less is known on HBV infection in children
despite the extremely high rate of chronicity. The case of a nine years old male with a 6 year history of chronic HBV infection, of those 5
years with antiviral treatment is described. Before our lab was consulted, the patient was unsuccessfully treated with interferon, an
obscure drug named Hepon, which should activate antiviral immune response, and Lamivudine, the latter most likely becoming ineffective due
to the mergence of resistant subpopulations (rtL180 M, rtV207 M, two strains with stop codons at position rt188 and rt198, rtM204V (YVDD),
rtM204K (YKDD)). Replacement of Lamivudine by adefovir displayed no advantage despite the lack of resistance mutations, thus no decrease in
viremia was observed under adefovir treatment. Novel mutations in the YMDD motif and its direct neighbourhood were observed, both being
compatible with Lamivudine resistance. No mutations were found that are associated with ADF resistance. Both, the clinical course of
treatment and the genotypic resistance profile emphasize the need for systematic analyses of the HBV resistance mechanisms and structured
therapy concept also for children chronically infected with HBV. Hepatitis B virus (HBV), discovered in 1966, is one of the major serious
and global public health problems affecting approximately 2 billion people worldwide http://www.who.org. Estimated 350 million persons are
chronically infected with HBV. Approximately 15-40% of infected patients will develop cirrhosis, liver failure or hepatocellular carcinoma
(HCC) . HCC incidence has increased worldwide to the 5th most frequent cancer killing 300,000 - 500,000 people each year. The estimated
worldwide mortality caused by HBV infection is 0.5-1.2 million deaths per year, although safe and effective vaccines against HBV infections
have been available since 1982 . Furthermore, the approval of oral antiviral agents has revolutionised HBV treatment since 1998, and enabled
effective clinical management of the disease. Acute hepatitis B in adults is self-limiting in most cases (95% of adults), therefore
antiviral therapy is indicated only for patients with protracted severe acute hepatitis or fulminant hepatitis . Although this scheme should
be applied also for pediatric patient cohorts less is known on the treatment of chronically HBV infected children. Also in those patients
two major strategies are believed to have potential to treat chronic HBV infection in adults, namely direct interference with viral
replication and modulation of the host's immune responses, the latter known to be immature in pediatric patients and thus resulting in high
chronicity rates. The lack of knowledge in this cohort may be a result of lacking clinical studies, the lack of drugs approved for the
treatment of chronically HBV infected children, and the fact that the majority of chronically HBV infected children comes from poor
countries never having access to antiviral therapy. Here we report the case of a young male patient suffering from chronic HBV who after
non-response to interferon and initial treatment with lamivudine developed resistance associated with YVDD and a novel mutation in the YMDD
motif. Furthermore, the patient showed initial non-response to adefovir despite the lack of resistance mutations, giving raise to the
hypothesis that host factors influenced this treatment failure. A male patient adopted from Cameroon, 4-year-old at the beginning of the
therapy history, was chronically infected with Hepatitis B virus infection perinatally, as assumed from anamnestic investigations. Chronic
Hepatitis B virus infection was diagnosed at the age of 3. Written informed consent for publication of the clinical course was obtained by
the legal representatives of the patient. First, he had undergone unsuccessful therapy with Intron® A (recombinant interferon alpha-2b, 3 ×
injections per week) for nine month, leading to severe side effects, including fever, insomnia with disorientation and ostealgia. Within the
first seven month of IFN-treatment, the level of viremia increased from 4.0 × 107 molecules of HBV DNA per milliliter to 8.4 × 108 molecules
of HBV DNA per milliliter (figure 1). Interferon therapy was replaced by Hepon application (2 × daily sublingual applications). Hepon is
suspected to be an immunmodulator with antiviral activity , but clinical data and studies are missing and the drug is not approved. The
level of viremia did not change significantly upon Hepon treatment. Level of viremia in a patient receiving Interferon, Hepon, Lamivudine
and Adefovir. The levels of viremia were measured by PCR-based amplification. The limit of detection of each assay is 0.17 × 103 copies per
mL. Replacement of Hepon with lamivudine (Zeffix® 100 mg per day) resulted in HBV DNA levels below the detection limit of the PCR assay
-about 170 molecules of HBV DNA per milliliter, within 12 month. However, the level of transaminases (GOT, GPT) increased drastically
(figure 2a). Lamivudine therapy was continued, with a dose adjustment to 40 mg per day and transaminase levels decreased to normal level.
After three years of lamivudine treatment resistance developed and the viremia increased again to up to 1.3 × 108 HBV DNA molecules per mL
accompanied by slightly increased GOT levels. This increase of viremia was suspected to be a clinical and virological resistance to
lamivudine which could be confirmed by the existence of remaining viral subpopulations with lamivudine resistance mutations (YVDD) (see
below). Therapy was switched to adefovir dipivoxil (Hepsera® 5 mg per day), which did not respond sufficient and viremia increased further
to 7.94 × 106 molecules per mL. a. Level of neutrophiles and lymphocytes during CHB treatment with interferon, hepon, lamivudine and
adefovir dipivoxil. b. Level of the transaminases GOT and GPT during CHB patient receiving interferon, hepon, lamivudine and adefovir
dipivoxil. Throughout the entire observation period, the patient was positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and had antibodies
against hepatitis Bc antigen (anti-HBcAg). Because lymphocytes are essential inflammation markers in viral infections, the level of
neutrophils and lymphocytes were analyzed throughout the observation period as depicted in figure 2b. The percentage of lymphocytes
throughout the observation correlates with the level of HBV DNA. During the first 2 years of treatment, only small fluctuations (65-75%)
were observed in the amount of lymphocytes. Replacement of Hepon with lamivudine resulted in a decrease in lymphocyte level from 70.9%
lymphocytes to 50.2% lymphocytes and, after an intermittent elevation to 62.9% lymphocytes, to 20.8% lymphocytes. When resistance developed,
the lymphocyte amount increased again up to 50% lymphocytes. The reference value for the percentage of lymphocytes from total blood cell
count lies in a range of 25-40%. The percentage of neutrophils behaved converse to the amount of lymphocytes. During the first 2 years of
treatment, only small fluctuations (~20% neutrophils) were observed in amount of lymphocytes. Replacement of Hepon with lamivudine resulted
in an increased level of neutrophils from 20% neutrophils to 44% neutrophils and, after an interceptive decrease to 31.2% neutrophils, to
64.3% neutrophils. When lamivudine resistance developed, the percentage of neutrophils decreased again to ~35%. The reference value for the
percentage of lymphocytes from total blood cell count lies in a range from 47-72%. Throughout the observation period, the patient had
elevated levels of transaminases (reference value <23U/L). The levels of transaminases during the treatment of CHB with interferon, hepon,
lamivudine and adefovir didivoxil are depicted. After application of hepon, GOT increases from 32-57U/L and GPT from 42-128U/L, which
significantly decreases again after application of lamivudine to 40U/L GPT and 45U/L GOT. GPT level drastically increase to 222U/L after
eight months of lamivudine therapy, which again decreased to 33U/L after adjustment of dosage. Replacement of lamivudine with adefovir
dipivoxil again resulted in a slight decrease in both enzymes. For quasispecies analysis, HBV DNA was isolated from patients' serum after
failure of adefovir dipivoxil treatment (06/2007) and parts of the polymerase gene of HBV were amplified and cloned into pCR® 4-TOPO® vector
as previously described . A total number of 34 clones were sequenced from both termini and in silico translated into their amino acid
sequences (figure 3). Alignment of quasispecies analysis. Sequence of amino acids 157 - 237 in the reverse transcriptase domain of HBV
polymerase is shown. The mutations that are associated with lamivudine restistance are at position rt204. The mutations that resulted in a
stop codon are highlighted in yellow. A further mutation is located at position rtL180 M The HBV polymerase was amplified from patient
material and cloned into TOPO vector, which was transformed into E. coli. After purification of plasmid DNA, parts of the pol gene were
sequenced as described above. Alignment was done using Vector NTi software. The patient had virus variants containing a mutation resulting
in a substitution of leucine to methionine at position rt180, as well as valine to methionine at position rt207. In addition, the patient
had a virus variant containing mutations that result in a stop codon (at position rt188 and rt198). The analyses revealed that, beside the
above mentioned mutations, also virus variants with mutations in the YMDD motif, namely a substitution of methionine to valine (YVDD) and
methionine to lysine (YKDD) at position rt204 were present in patients' serum, which is compatible with lamivudine resistance. Especially
this latter mutation rtM204K and the mutation in the direct neighbourhood of the so called YMDD motif, the rtV207 M exchange, may be
considered as novel mutations. No further mutations previously associated to antiviral resistance have been detected. A young male
chronically infected with HBV failed several therapy approaches, including INF-α and NRTIs. Quasispecies analyses revealed and proofed the
presence of several mutations, including the rtM204V substitution, which is well known to be associated with the selection of lamivudine-
resistance virus variants . In addition to the known rtM204V substitution, a novel virus variant with a methionine to lysine (YKDD)
substitution was found. To the very best of our knowledge this mutation was previously not reported and might also be associated with
lamivudine resistance. Induction of isoleucine or valine in the YMDD motif results in a sterical hindrance, preventing lamivudine from
appropriately configuring into the nucleotide binding site of the reverse transcriptase , and so the rtM204K substitution may also do. The
substitution of lysine to methionine at position rt180 is also connected and approved to contribute to lamivudine resistance and is known to
augments the lamivudine resistant in conjunction with rtM204V . Resistance-associated mutations outside the YMDD motiv include amino acid
exchanges at the reverse transcriptase codon L180 M (rtL180M) or the rtV207I codon . In this latter report, a novel valine to methionine
substitution was present at the above mentioned position rt207. Furthermore, at position rt188 and rt198 nonsense mutations were identified
in two clones, which can yield a truncated abbreviated protein often associated with loss of function. As a matter of speculation, such a
truncated form of the protein could still be able to bind nucleos(t)ides and their analogues that in turn are not available anymore in a
concentration necessary to efficiently suppress viral replication, which besides host factors may have led to the subsequent failure of ADF
therapy. Furthermore it cannot be excluded that viral genomes with stop codon mutations may be packaged into Dane particles in liver cells
coinfected with wildtype or other viral strains. Surprisingly, despite the well known fact that HBV forms quasispecies, the concept of
double infections or even multiinfections of a single liver cell is only rarely taken into account in the analyses of HBV quasispecies.
Consequently we assume that the mutations at position rt188 and rt198 may be not artefacts but true mutations, although this hypothesis
needs to be tested in further studies. The selection pressure caused by adefovir can lead to upraise of the mutations rtA181V and rtN236T or
rtI233V . None of those substitutions were found in the quasispecies analysis of the patient described. However, as a moderate response to
adefovir was observed due to the 2 log drop in viremia the patient's compliance was good and does not explain the stagnation at the high
level of viral load. This might be indicative for further mutations outside the polymerase gene that have not been identified so far. Other
options for adefovir treatment failure might be that either the applied prodrugs are not efficiently processed into the active metabolites,
or that the drugs are not efficiently delivered to the infected cell by a defective or altered transport mechanism. Here, as mutations
conferring to ADF resistance are missing, it can only be speculated whether mutations in the periphery or a host resistance have contributed
to the clinical ADF resistance. Nevertheless, the case is scholarly for a couple of aspects: On the one hand it shows that there is a
definite need for HBV-therapy also in paediatric patients. Guidelines for the treatment of paediatric patients are missing or leaky and
clinical studies are rare or completely missing. Chronic HBV infections are rare in fully industrialized countries with more or less intact
health care systems but are frequent in countries with emerging markets or in the developing world. In the view of the fact that chronicity
of HBV mainly develops if the infection was acquired in the early childhood it must become a major aim to sufficiently treat children that
became infected with HBV in order to avoid or reduce chronicity. Thus, consequent and systematic studies for the treatment of children are
required. Furthermore, as shown here by quasispecies analyses, the clinical case presented here is a timely reminder that HBV therapy is not
a black and white picture but a highly complicated challenge requiring systematic diagnostic procedures and sophisticated interpretation of
results in order to apply the most effective medication schemes. Finally, the case shows that more educational advertising is required in
order to avoid dramatic treatment failures with obscure drugs that may help to give parents some hope that their children could be cured but
may lead to severe desperation. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. VS performed the bioinformatical work, analyzed
the clinical data, performed parts of the cloning and analyzed the sequencing data. SZ established and performed PCRs and was involved in
sequencing. RLT was involved in cloning and sequencing. OS supervised the study, designed the experiments and wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from the German Ministry for Education and Research
(BMBF) and was part of the HOPE-Project.
