The incidence of concomitant abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA) and asymptomatic cholelithiasis is 5% to 6%.1 In such situations, isolated
standard AAA repair is associated with acute cholecystitis in up to 18% of these concomitant cases,2 which justifies correcting these two
diseases together. When a median route is used, it can lead to infection of the prosthesis. A good alternative for preventing this
complication is the use of endovascular techniques that are rarely associated with perioperative cholecystitis3 or the use of two different
surgical routes during the same operation.4 With the development of endovascular and videolaparoscopic techniques, a further possibility
described in this case report enables correction of the two diseases in the same operation with the aim of diminishing the risk of
infection: endovascular treatment of infrarenal AAA associated with laparoscopically assisted cholecystectomy. A 66-year-old man was found
to have an asymptomatic 5.7-cm infrarenal AAA and cholelithiasis on a computed tomography (CT) scan of his abdomen. He had a history of
controlled systemic arterial hypertension, myocardial infarction (14 years previously), coronary revascularization (one year previously) and
chronic kidney failure. He was undergoing hemodialysis three days a week and awaiting a kidney transplant. An infrarenal AAA measuring 5.7
cm was found while investigating a condition of abdominal pain in the right hypochondrium. On this occasion, chronic calculous
cholecystopathy was also diagnosed. Initially, the patient underwent endovascular treatment of AAA, using a Talent bifurcated endoprosthesis
measuring 24 × 12 × 140 mm (main body), 14 × 12 × 75 mm (main body extension) and 12 x 12 x 90 mm (left branch) by dissection of the
bilateral femoral arteries under general anesthesia. The operation lasted 85 minutes, 180 ml of iodide contrast agent was used, and there
were no complications. After closure of the skin and reversion of anticoagulation, the patient underwent laparoscopy-assisted
cholecystectomy. During the procedure, gallbladder empyema was observed, and, when drained, it caused extravasation of pus into the
abdominal cavity. The bile was sent for bacteriological analysis. Cholecystectomy and intra-operative cholangiography were successfully
performed, and a drain was left in the subhepatic space. Empirical antibiotic therapy consisting of endovenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole
was started during the operation. The patient demonstrated good postoperative evolution and did not require vasoactive drugs. He underwent
hemodialysis soon after the surgical procedure and had the tubes removed in the operation room. Nasogastric intubation was stopped and fluid
intake was started after 24 hours. Food intake was started 12 hours later. The drain in the right hypochondrium was removed on the fourth
day after the operation. Multisensitive Escherichia coli was identified in the liquid aspirated from the gallbladder. Oral ciprofloxacin
treatment was therefore started, and this was maintained for 14 days. The patient’s postoperative course was free of complications, and he
was discharged from the hospital on the seventh day after the operation. One month after the surgery, the patient had resumed a normal life.
A control CT scan taken six months after the operation is presented in Figure 1. The surgical approach used with patients having AAA and
cholelithiasis is controversial. If we choose to treat only the aneurysm by an intraperitoneal route, the patient may present acute
cholecystitis during the immediate postoperative period,1,5 although endovascular techniques reduce this complication.3 If we treat the
cholecystopathy alone, the aneurysm might rupt after the operation because of collagenase activity on the aortic wall following the intra-
abdominal procedure.7 Simultaneous repair through an intraperitoneal route may cause infection in the prosthesis,5 especially in cases such
as the one discussed in this paper, in which silent acute cholecystitis (oligosymptomatic) was diagnosed only during the operation, along
with extravasation of its infected content. If the procedure had been carried out using an intraperitoneal route, the prosthesis would
certainly have become contaminated. Due to the technique used in this case, the gallbladder contents did not come into contact with the
prosthesis at any time, because the two accesses used were not directly accessible to each other. Thus, there was no contamination of the
prosthesis and, consequently, no infectious complications. The endovascular repair of aneurysms appears to have a minor incidence of acute
cholecystitis in the perioperative period,3 but in a case such as this, in which silent acute cholecystitis was observed, the combined
approach was shown to be safe. Endovascular treatment of aneurysms is already well-established.9 It is indicated for patients presenting
high surgical risk who are in a good anatomical condition.10 In this case, in addition to presenting these two premises, the patient was
waiting for a donor kidney for transplantation. We sought to avoid open procedures to avoid surgical manipulation of the retroperitoneum and
thereby to facilitate the kidney transplantation in the iliac fossa. Another advantage of this technique is the shorter duration of ileal
paralysis, thus making it possible to resume feeding at an early stage.11 Our patient began receiving food after 36 hours and was able to
walk after only six hours. We chose to do the endovascular treatment first because pneumoperitoneum is not a problem when using a non-
compressible metallic endoprosthesis. Control CT Scan
