We describe a rare case of diffuse macroscopic discoloration and chemical gastritis due to chronic bromazepam intake. The chemical
composition of pharmaceuticals has to be considered at endoscopy and it is evident that some chemical substances damage the epithelial
tissue and lead to clinical symptoms. Endoscopy was performed in an 82-year-old patient due to gastroesophageal reflux symptoms and
epigastric pain. Gastroscopy showed a hiatal hernia and a scarred duodenal bulb. More striking was the yellow-brownish discoloration of the
gastric and the duodenal mucosa. The gastric antrum and the duodenal bulb showed local discoloration that could not be rinsed off. The
medical history indicated that bromazepam (6 mg) had been used daily as a sleeping aid in the previous two years. The histopathological
findings showed appearances of chemical gastritis. Within the lamina propria and on the epithelial surface there were granules. There was no
foreign body reaction to these granules. Corpus mucosa showed a mild chronic gastritis. If discoloration of the mucosa at endoscopy is seen,
a careful drug history must be sought. This is the first case in literature that shows a chemical gastritis after bromazepam intake. We
describe a rare case of diffuse macroscopic discoloration and chemical gastritis due to chronic bromazepam intake. The chemical composition
of pharmaceuticals has to be considered at endoscopy and it is evident that some chemical substances damage the epithelial tissue and lead
to clinical symptoms. Endoscopy was performed in an 82-year-old patient due to gastroesophageal reflux symptoms and epigastric pain.
Gastroscopy showed hiatal hernia and a scarred duodenal bulb. More striking was the yellow-brownish discoloration of the gastric and
duodenal mucosa. The gastric antrum and the duodenal bulb showed local discoloration that could not be rinsed off (Figures 1 and 2). The
medical history indicated that bromazepam (6 mg) had been used daily as a sleeping aid in the previous two years. Endoscopy appearance of
the gastric antrum with discoloration after bromazepam intake. Discoloration of the duodenal bulb after bromazepam intake. The
histopathologic findings of the gastric antrum showed foveolar hyperplasia, smooth muscle proliferation and a scant chronic inflammatory
infiltrate with dilated vessels, appearances of chemical gastritis. Within the lamina propria and on the epithelial surface there were
granules (Figure 3). There was no foreign body reaction to these granules. Corpus mucosa showed a mild chronic gastritis. Histology of
gastric antral mucosa. Arrows show the granules embedded in the mucus and the epithelial surface. This is an uncommon example for
discoloration of the epithelial surface in the stomach, especially the gastric antrum and the duodenal bulb (Figures 1 and 2). In the
literature, only a few examples of discoloration of the gastric mucosa or epithelial surface can be found. In one case Chung et al. found an
infectious disease related to a green discoloration in the stomach. Several other reports refer to esophageal injuries after medication
intake. Iron tablets , doxycycline , cyproterone acetate and ethinylestradiol are all described to have led to painful esophagitis. Even a
presentation of esophageal cancer-like symptoms after doxycycline intake is described by Tahan et al. . There is little information
regarding discoloration of the gastric antrum and duodenal bulb, despite their known propensity to be a hot spot for bleedings, ulcerations,
and tumors. In addition to the macroscopic findings some granules are found microscopically in the mucous that could not be rinsed away
(Figure 3). The etiology for this histological finding is not clear. It could be assumed that bromazepam is able to interact with the
epithelial surface in an acid milieu. The active pharmaceutical ingredient is bromazepam [(C14H10BrN3O), (Figure 4)] containing a bromo
substituent. Elemental bromine is a reactive element. Reactivity is based on its ability to react with certain metals to generate salts. The
color of elemental bromine appears in the liquid or gas phase reddish-brown. Yet, any generated bromine in tissue would only be transient,
because of its reactive nature. In general medical practice bromine derivatives are used as disinfectants. Bromine is also encountered as a
moiety in certain CNS-active drugs (Table 1) [CNS - central nervous system]. Drugs containing bromine (selection): Chemical composition of
bromazepam (C14H10BrN3O). Iodine, as an example for the same chemical group, is used for coloration of squamous epithelium in the esophagus
by absorption in the epithelial cells . This discoloration penetrats the mucosa. Thuler et al. describes a chemical esophagitis after using
Lugol's solution for detecting esophageal cancer . In contrast to these findings in use of iodine, the bromazepam discoloration refers only
to the epithelial surface and the mucus. This may be a reason for clinical symptoms like epigastric pain. As far as the literature is
concerned this is the first case where bromazepam is able to discolor epithelial tissue in specific parts of the stomach. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. OK and BK prepared case report. OK and TS analyzed case report and performed literature
research. MB analyzed the specimen and took microscopic photos. All authors read and reviewed the final manuscript. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for
review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-230X/10/84/prepub Special acknowledge to T. A. Kirschberg, Ph.D, for proofreading the manuscript and
illustrating the chemical composition of bromazepam.
