Non-neoplastic lesions have been known to mimic malignancies and metastases on positron emission tomography/computed tomography. We report
the rare occurrence of multiple fluorodeoxyglucose-concentrating sclerosing hemangiomas in a patient with soft tissue sarcoma mimicking lung
metastases. Morphologically sclerosing hemangiomas can mimic metastases in a patient with a known primary neoplasm. Lack of sufficient data
on the fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) uptake of sclerosing hemagioma confounds the problem even further. We report the occurrence of multiple FDG-
avid sclerosing hemangiomas, which by virtue of their multiplicity and avidity, were misinterpreted as pulmonary metastases in a patient
with a soft tissue sarcoma of the hand. A 37-year-old female was referred with complaints of swelling on the dorsal aspect of the right hand
for 2 months. A biopsy report of a synovial sarcoma (type of soft tissue sarcoma) was followed by a staging positron emission tomography
(PET)/computed tomography (CT) scan as per institution protocol for soft tissue malignancies. In addition to hypermetabolism (maximum
standardized uptake value (SUVmax) 8.1) at the site of the primary tumor in the right hand (arrows in Fig. 1a,b), a few FDG concentrating
foci were noted in the chest (arrows in Fig. 2a,d,g). These foci localized to soft tissue nodules of varying sizes in the lungs on the CT
component of the PET/CT study (arrows in Fig. 2b,e,h) which was confirmed on the fusion images (arrows in Fig. 2c,f,i). The SUVmax of the
nodules ranged from 4.1 to 4.4. In view of the primary diagnosis of a soft tissue sarcoma, the lung nodules were considered to be metastatic
in nature. A CT-guided biopsy was performed from 2 nodules, one in each lung to confirm the etiology. Histologic examination of the biopsy
specimens revealed cuboidal cells arranged in papillary fronds with focal lymphocytic infiltrates (Fig. 3). On immunohistochemistry the
cuboidal cells expressed CK 7. In accordance with the histopathology report the lung nodules were diagnosed as sclerosing hemangiomas and
the patient was treated with curative intent for the primary tumor. She is being followed up, and the lung lesions have remained unchanged
for 1 year. Figure 1Coronal PET (a) and coronal fusion PET/CT (b) images show increased FDG uptake at the site of the primary soft tissue
sarcoma in the right hand (arrows). Figure 2Axial PET (a,g) and coronal PET (d) images show FDG-avid foci in the lungs (arrows). Axial CT
(b,h) and coronal reformatted (e) images in lung window show bilateral lung nodules (arrows) corresponding to the FDG-avid foci. Fusion
PET/CT images (c,f,i) confirm the findings seen in the PET and CT images. Figure 3Photomicrograph (H&E stain, 200×) showing cuboidal cells
arranged in papillary fronds (arrow). Coronal PET (a) and coronal fusion PET/CT (b) images show increased FDG uptake at the site of the
primary soft tissue sarcoma in the right hand (arrows). Axial PET (a,g) and coronal PET (d) images show FDG-avid foci in the lungs (arrows).
Axial CT (b,h) and coronal reformatted (e) images in lung window show bilateral lung nodules (arrows) corresponding to the FDG-avid foci.
Fusion PET/CT images (c,f,i) confirm the findings seen in the PET and CT images. Photomicrograph (H&E stain, 200×) showing cuboidal cells
arranged in papillary fronds (arrow). Combined FDG-PET/CT is being used increasingly in staging and assessing treatment response in patients
with soft tissue sarcoma. As many as 20% of adult patients with an extremity soft tissue sarcoma can have lung metastasis during the course
of the disease. Most lung metastases appear as well-demarcated nodules surrounded by the lung parenchyma on the CT component of the study,
and often show FDG uptake in the fusion and PET images. Such a finding is considered a surrogate marker for metastatic dissemination of the
disease to the lungs. However, certain benign and inflammatory conditions can occasionally mimic this appearance and thereby produce a
false-positive result on FDG-PET/CT altering patient management. Sclerosing hemangioma (SH) is an uncommon pulmonary neoplasm. Since the
first report of SH in 1956 by Leibow and Hubbell, its origin has been variously attributed to vascular, mesothelial, mesenchymal, epithelial
and neuroendocrine precursors. In the largest series of immunohistochemical analysis of SHs, the authors ascribed its origin to primitive
respiratory epithelium by virtue of TIFF-1 expression. Most SHs are asymptomatic and are incidentally detected in middle-aged females (M/F
ratio 5:1) on chest radiographs as a solitary lung nodule. They can be multiple in 3–4% of cases. On CT scans, an SH appears as a well-
marginated nodule that enhances on contrast administration. Morphological features such as shape, margin, attenuation and calcification seen
on unenhanced CT scans can help narrow the differential diagnosis of lung nodules. Spiculated and lobulated margins usually favour
malignancy, whereas nodules with smooth margins, calcification and a homogenous attenuation are benign. Enhancement of benign nodules such
as SH on contrast-enhanced CT is often similar to that of vascular lung metastases and can add to the diagnostic dilemma. Dynamic CT
characteristics coupled with morphological features have been used to differentiate benign lesions such as SH from malignant lung
nodules.The gross and histopathological findings of SH are well described in the literature. The co-existence of chronic inflammation along
with other common microscopic findings could be a possible factor causing SH to be FDG avid on PET scans. There are just a handful of
reports so far describing PET findings in an SH of the lung showing moderate FDG uptake. The higher metabolic uptake in the nodules in our
case (SUVmax ranging from 4.1 to 4.4), which also showed the morphologic characteristics of metastases on CT images, raised a very strong
suspicion of lung metastases. Other than a few cases showing nodal metastases, SHs are largely considered benign with an excellent prognosis
following surgical resection. The combination of high FDG uptake and a CT morphology suggestive of metastases can occasionally be
misleading. The rare occurrence of multiple SHs in a patient with a known primary tumor can cause false-positive results by virtue of avid
FDG uptake, as depicted in our case. This is of particular relevance in malignancies such as bone and soft tissue sarcomas, which have a
high propensity for lung metastases; pulmonary nodules detected on imaging are presumed to be metastatic often without histological
confirmation. All the cases reported so far in the literature have shown FDG avidity in an SH presenting as a solitary pulmonary nodule,
whereas our report describes a patient with primary soft tissue sarcoma with multiple SHs presenting as FDG-avid lung nodules mimicking
pulmonary metastases. It remains to be seen whether the varying intensity of FDG uptake can be correlated with histology of SHs, an
apparently benign tumor but with the potential to cause false-positive findings on a FDG-PET/CT examination. This paper is available online
at http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL address, please use the DOI provided to locate the paper.
