A 50-yr-old man presented with intermittent hemoptysis and was diagnosed small cell lung cancer. 18F-FDG PET/CT for staging demonstrated
extensive hypermetabolic lesions throughout the skeleton and liver. Interestingly, skeletal muscles of limbs, mediastinum, bowel, and
especially brain showed very low FDG uptake. Because of some characteristics in common with super scan on skeletal scintigraphy, this case
could be considered as 'metabolic super scan'. The "super scan" of bone scintigraphy is defined as a bone image that "looks too good." Its
characteristics include intense activity in the bones and diminished renal parenchymal activity (1). Su et al. (2) had reported the case of
18F-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG PET) super scan involving skeletons, similar to the super scan of bone
scintigraphy. A "hepatic super scan" by FDG PET has been reported in a patient with Hodgkin disease who had unusually elevated hepatic
radioactivity, in addition to the multiple areas of focal uptake in the chest, mediastinal, left axillary, and abdominal lymph nodes, and
the adrenal glands. A liver biopsy demonstrated diffuse hepatic involvement (3). Here we report a case of 18F-FDG PET/CT super scan showing
extensive hypermetabolic lesions throughout the skeletons and liver. Contrary to the intense hypermetabolism of skeletons and liver, the
skeletal muscles of limbs, mediastinum, bowel, and especially brain showed very low FDG uptake. A 50-yr-old man presented with intermittent
hemoptysis. The patient has a history of alcoholic liver cirrhosis and primary hypertension. Subsequent diagnostic CT imaging of chest and
abdomen revealed 3.8 cm sized mass in left lower lung with multiple lymph nodes and hepatic metastasis. Excision biopsy of supraclavicular
lymph node was performed and histopathologic diagnosis was small cell lung cancer. The patient's mental status was clear and he underwent
18F-FDG PET/CT (Biograph Sensation 16, Siemens Medical Systems, USA) for staging of lung malignancy, 1 hr after injection of 444 MBq (12
mCi) 18F-FDG. 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated focal hypermetabolic lung mass in left lower lobe with diffuse and intense hypermetabolism
throughout the skeleton and liver. Interestingly, skeletal muscles of limbs, mediastinum, bowel, and especially brain showed very low FDG
uptake (Fig. 1). This patient had no medications could disturb cerebral glucose metabolisms, such as corticosteroids and sedatives. A super
scan is well-known phenomenon which is characterized by a strikingly high bone to soft tissue ratio on skeletal scintigraphy, with a uniform
symmetrical increase in bone uptake and absent renal visualization (4). The super scan is associated with various malignancies, and most
commonly in carcinomas of the prostate, stomach and breast (5). Metastasis from lung cancer rarely causes a super scan, although multiple
bone metastases or bone marrow involvement frequently occur in patients with lung cancer (6). Sy et al. (7) hypothesized that the increased
uptake of radiopharmaceutical by diseased bone results in reduced phosphate excretion, thereby producing faint renal images in the bone
scintigraphy. This case had some characteristics in common with super scan on skeletal scintigraphy. First, even though this is not uncommon
feature in patients with extensive metastasis, intense and diffuse hypermetabolism throughout the skeleton and liver was demonstrated. The
similar findings had reported in other cases of FDG PET super scan, however, this case had shown the best contrast between metastatic organs
and non-metastatic organs (2, 3, 8). Second, FDG uptakes in skeletal muscles of limbs, mediastinum, bowel, and especially brain were
remarkably low and this is the unique characteristic of the present case. The faint visualization of the brain, renal cortex, and soft
tissue might be the result of extraordinarily high uptake of FDG by bony and hepatic metastatic lesions. Low brain uptake of FDG has been
reported when using corticosteroids and sedatives, and these conditions should be taken into consideration (9, 10). The present patient had
no medications could disturb cerebral glucose metabolisms, such as corticosteroids and sedatives. Because of some characteristics in common
with super scan on skeletal scintigraphy, this case could be considered as 'metabolic super scan'. This paper was supported by Wonkwang
University in 2009. 18F-FDG PET/CT demonstrated focal hypermetabolic lung mass in left lower lobe with diffuse and intense hypermetabolism
throughout the skeleton and liver. Interestingly, skeletal muscles of limbs, mediastinum, bowel, and especially brain showed very low FDG
uptake. (A) Maximal intensity projection image. (B) Coronal images of torso. (C) Transaxial image of brain. (D) Coronal image of brain.
