To the Editor: Rabies is a fatal zoonotic infection of the central nervous system caused by viruses of the genus Lyssavirus (1). Because
person-to-person transmission is rare (2), public health action requirements in the countries where imported human rabies is seen are
limited. However, communication with persons in places of exposure to provide information that could lead to public health action may not be
easy. On August 28, 2007, a 45-year-old man from the Philippines who worked on a passenger ship used for pleasure voyages was admitted to a
hospital in Helsinki, Finland, because of difficulty swallowing since August 23 (Figure). He suspected rabies because he had been bitten by
a dog, allegedly owned by a neighbor in the Philippines, in June. When he called home on August 27, he found out that the suspected dog was
still alive. Time sequence of rabies case in a 45-year-old man from the Philippines who had been bitten by a dog, June–September 2007. RT-
PCR, reverse transcription–PCR; PEP, postexposure prophylaxis. Results of a physical examination, which included detailed neurologic tests,
were unremarkable except for a subfebrile axillary temperature. Basic laboratory test results were within reference limits. Cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) contained marginally increased levels of leukocytes, erythrocytes, lactate, and proteins. Results of bacterial staining and
culture of CSF were negative. Brain magnetic resonance imaging and an electroencephalogram showed no signs of encephalitis. On August 29,
the patient became febrile and disoriented, and samples (saliva, throat swab, and CSF) were obtained for rabies testing at the Finnish Food
Safety Authority. A reverse transcription–PCR (RT-PCR) result for a saliva sample was positive for rabies virus RNA glycoprotein–RNA
polymerase intergenic region (3); CSF and throat swab samples showed negative results. The virus strain (GenBank accession no. GQ856149) was
closely related to genotype 1 strains isolated from dogs in the Philippines (GenBank accession nos. AB116577 and AB116578). Saliva and
throat swab samples were positive by real-time RT-PCR also performed at the Institute of Tropical Medicine, Hamburg, Germany. The patient
died 12 days after onset of symptoms (September 4). The deceased patient was transported to the Philippines in an impervious body bag placed
in a zinc coffin according to instructions from the Philippine consulate and the Agreement on the Transfer of Corpses (4). Because there are
no rabies-vaccinated embalmers in Finland, embalming was not performed. The diagnosis was conveyed to the patient’s family in the
Philippines by relatives in Europe and the United States. These relatives also informed public health authorities in Finland that the dog
considered to be the source of rabies was alive and had caused anxiety and accusations in the home town of the deceased. Suspected
transmission from a dog still alive 7 weeks after the incident and anxiety among the population prompted a detailed investigation by the
National Public Health Institute (Helsinki, Finland) and the Research Institute for Tropical Medicine (RITM; Manila, the Philippines). On
September 6, a veterinary and medical team from RITM conducted an investigation in the home town of the patient. The suspected dog, a
2-year-old mongrel, had not been vaccinated against rabies but showed no clinical signs. The family indicated that the bite in June had
probably occurred in the evening, making identification of the dog difficult. With the owner’s consent, the dog was humanely killed and
tested for rabies at the RITM Rabies and Special Pathogens Laboratory. The cadaver was treated with 70% formalin before it was buried.
Results of a fluorescent antibody test for rabies were negative. Relatives of the patient received rabies prophylaxis in an animal bite
clinic in the Philippines on September 2 because of suspected exposure. The local government had conducted dog rabies vaccination in the
area. An information campaign of lectures about rabies in the affected area was initiated, and the need for dog vaccination and stray dog
control was emphasized. An investigation of the passenger ship on which the patient worked showed that he had shared a cigarette with his
cabin mate and they had drunk from the same bottle. The cabin mate was advised to receive prophylaxis. Attempts to contact the ship and
shipping company in the United States were not successful. Investigation in Finland identified 33 healthcare-associated contacts before
virus isolation was attempted. These persons received postexposure prophylaxis. Guidelines regarding those exposed to a rabies patient were
then updated. This case highlights the need to increase awareness of rabies infection among healthcare workers. Rapid collaboration between
public health authorities in the Philippines and Finland led to appropriate action at the site of origin of the rabies case within a few
days. In a country in which rabies is not endemic, diagnosing rabies and implementing control measures in healthcare settings are often
difficult because of limited experience with this disease. The last human rabies case in Finland was diagnosed in 1985, when a bat
researcher died after being bitten by bats abroad and in Finland (5). For imported cases, patient history may be incomplete, but use of RT-
PCR for saliva can provide a rapid confirmation of the diagnosis. To support risk assessment and decision making, better definition of the
roles of public health authorities regarding a mandate or responsibility to acquire information concerning international ships is needed.
Suggested citation for this article: Rimhanen-Finne R, Järvinen A, Kuusi M, Quiambao BP, Malbas FF Jr, Huovilainen A, et al. Imported human
rabies, the Philippines and Finland, 2007 . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2010 Aug [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1608.091380 We thank Elizabeth Miranda, Virginia Aguilas, Catalino Demetria, Virgilio Santos, Joel Rivera, and
the personnel of the veterinary virology laboratory at the Finish Food Safety Authority for excellent technical assistance; and Marcus
Panning, Christian Drosten, and the University of Bonn for confirming the RT-PCR result.
