The occurrence of acquired conjunctival inclusion cysts following various ophthalmic surgeries such as strabismus surgery, scleral buckling,
pars plana vitrectomy, ptosis surgery and phacoemulsification has been reported. We report two cases of conjunctival inclusion cysts
following manual Small Incision Cataract Surgery (SICS) in two male patients aged 65 and 67 years. The cysts originated from the scleral
tunnel used for manual SICS. Both were treated by excision and confirmed histopathologically. No recurrence was noted at three months
follow-up. To our knowledge, conjunctival inclusion cysts following SICS have not been reported previously. Careful reflection of
conjunctiva during tunnel construction and posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation may prevent their occurrence. Conjunctival
inclusion cysts are benign cysts filled with clear serous fluid containing shed cells or gelatinous mucous material. They can be congenital
or acquired. Acquired cysts occur following traumatic or surgical implantation of conjunctival epithelium, and are much more common. We
report two cases of conjunctival inclusion cysts following manual small incision cataract surgery (SICS). To our knowledge, this
complication of manual SICS has not been reported previously. A 65-year-old man came with complaints of a swelling in the left eye noticed
since one month. It was painless and gradually increasing in size. He had undergone manual SICS with posterior chamber intraocular lens
(PCIOL) implantation in Left Eye (LE) two years ago. On examination both eyes had best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/40 and were
pseudophakic with PCIOLs. A solitary cystic swelling was present at the superior limbus in the LE, overlying the previous scleral tunnel
incision, measuring 8 X 8 mm and containing clear fluid [Fig. 1A]. The remainder of the ophthalmic examination was unremarkable. He was
posted for surgical excision of the cyst under local anesthesia. The conjunctiva around the cyst was separated by blunt dissection, the cyst
ruptured while excising it from the base. The sclera underneath was cauterized. The conjunctiva was re-approximated to the limbus. The
excised cyst was subjected to histopathological examination, which revealed a cyst lined by non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
suggestive of a conjunctival inclusion cyst [Fig. 1B]. He has been followed up for three months, without any signs of recurrence.
Preoperative photograph of Case 1, showing a conjunctival inclusion cyst at superior limbus containing clear fluid Photomicrograph of the
cyst lined by non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium (H&E, ×100) A 67-year-old man came with complaint of a swelling in his Right
Eye (RE) noticed since two months, initially smaller in size, gradually increased to present size and associated with foreign body
sensation. He had undergone manual SICS with PCIOL implantation in RE eight months ago. On examination, RE had a BCVA of 20/60, and was
pseudophakic with PCIOL. A solitary oval cystic swelling was present at the superior limbus in RE, measuring 11 mm × 9 mm, and containing
clear fluid [Fig. 2A]. The LE had a BCVA of counting fingers 4 meters, with posterior subcapsular cataract. The anterior segment and fundus
examination were unremarkable. He was posted for surgical excision of the cyst under topical anesthesia. The conjunctiva overlying the cyst
was separated by blunt dissection, the cyst was excised at the base, but as with the previous case it ruptured during excision. The
underlying sclera was cauterized. The conjunctiva was re-approximated to the limbus by a subconjunctival injection of 0.5 ml gentamicin. The
excised cyst was subjected to histopathological examination, which revealed a cyst lined by non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium
showing occasional apical snouts [Fig. 2B], again suggestive of conjunctival inclusion cyst. He also has been followed up for three months
without any signs of recurrence. Intra-operative clinical photograph of Case 2, showing an oval conjunctival cyst at superior limbus; the
overlying conjunctiva has been reflected Photomicrograph of the cyst, showing non-keratinized stratified squamous epithelium lining with
occasional apical snouts (arrow) (H&E, ×100) Conjunctival inclusion cysts can be congenital or acquired. Acquired conjunctival inclusion
cysts occur following trauma or surgery. They are most common following strabismus surgery, but may also occur following other ophthalmic
surgeries such as pars plana vitrectomy, scleral buckling, Ahmed glaucoma valve insertion, and ptosis surgery. While conjunctival inclusion
cyst following phacoemulsification surgery has been reported, there are no reports following manual SICS. These cysts are generally
asymptomatic, or may cause a mild foreign body sensation or cosmetic concerns. The chief differential diagnosis is a filtering bleb.
Possible complications are infection and the rare possibility of epithelial ingrowth through the tunnel wound. These cysts may disappear
spontaneously; however, persistent cases require treatment. Surgical excision of the cyst is the best treatment. Thermal cautery under slit-
lamp visualization or YAG laser of the cyst can also be performed. From our cases, we note that conjunctival inclusion cysts can occur
following manual SICS. The conjuntival tissue may be implanted during the construction of the tunnel wound or due to dragging of conjunctiva
during PCIOL implantation. This complication may be prevented by paying careful attention to reflection of the conjunctiva prior to scleral
wound construction and by avoiding contact between the IOL and conjunctiva during intraocular lens implantation.
