Amongst the clinical presentations of retinal artery occlusion, hemi-central retinal artery occlusion (Hemi-CRAO) is rarely described. This
case series of four adults aged between 22 and 36 years attempts to describe the clinical profile, etiology and management of Hemi-CRAO.
Case 1 had an artificial mitral valve implant. Polycythemia and malignant hypertension were noted in Case 2. The third patient had Leiden
mutation while the fourth patient had Eisenmenger’s syndrome. Clinical examination and fundus fluorescein angiography revealed a bifurcated
central retinal artery at emergence from the optic nerve head, in all cases. Color Doppler examination of the central retinal artery
confirmed branching of the artery behind the lamina cribrosa. It is hypothesized that bifurcation of central retinal artery behind the
lamina cribrosa may predispose these hemi-trunks to develop an acute occlusion if associated with underlying risk factors. The prognosis
depends upon arterial recanalisation and etiology of the thromboembolic event. Acute retinal arterial obstruction presents as central
retinal artery (CRA) obstruction in 57% cases, branch retinal obstruction in 38% and cilioretinal artery obstruction in 5%. It may be
related to known preexisting systemic disease or may be an initial manifestation of previously undiagnosed systemic abnormality. In young
adults with retinal artery occlusion, associated etiological factors are more often obscure and diverse. Hemi-central retinal artery
occlusion (Hemi-CRAO) is an extremely uncommon clinical entity that has hardly been described in the literature. Hereby, we describe
systemic and ophthalmologic characteristics of four patients ranging between 22 and 36 years of age, who presented with hemi-central retinal
artery occlusion. A 26-year-old gentleman presented with sudden, partial visual field loss in right eye. He had a prosthetic mitral valve
implanted, 14 years back. Vision was 20/20 in both eyes. Anterior segment was essentially normal. Right fundus [Fig. 1] showed two central
retinal artery hemi-trunks instead of main central artery [Fig. 2]. Supero-temporal arteriolar attenuation was noted; upper hemi-trunk was
shorter. Retinal pigment epithelial alteration was noted; foveal reflex was dull. Left eye was normal. Findings of fundus fluorescein
angiography (FFA) [Fig. 3], visual field examination [Fig. 4], optical coherence tomogram (OCT) [Fig. 5], multifocal electroretinogram
(mfERG) [Fig. 6] and color Doppler study of right eye [Fig. 7] are summarized in Table 1. A summary of systemic investigations and treatment
is included in Table 2. A cardiology consult was sought; patient was advised to continue current treatment [Table 2] with regular follow-up.
Case 1. Color fundus photograph of the right eye shows attenuation of the superior and supero-temporal retinal arterioles. Retinal pigment
epithelial alterations are noted in the macula Case 1. Color fundus photograph of the optic nerve head shows the superior (A) and inferior
(B) hemi-trunks of central retinal artery emerging separately Case 1. Early phase FFA shows superior hemi-trunk of central retinal artery
with a reduced arteriolar caliber and filling-in earlier as compared to the inferior hemi-trunk Case 1. A (30-2) Humphrey’s visual field
analysis of the right eye shows an inferior altitudinal defect corresponding to the territory of vascular occlusion Case 1. Right eye OCT
revealed retinal thinning of the superior half of the macula as compared to inferior half. Also noteworthy is the preferential loss of inner
retinal layers. Both these findings correspond to the level and territory of retinal vascular occlusion Case 1. Multifocal ERG of right eye
showed normal implicit times and reduced amplitudes. This corresponds to the underlying pathology of retinal vascular occlusion Case 1.
Color Doppler study of the right eye shows branching of the central retinal artery into hemi-trunks just behind the lamina cribrosa (long
arrow) Summary findings of Ocular Investigations A-V*: Arterio-venous Summary findings of Systemic Investigations and Management Hb*:
Hemoglobin FBS†: Fasting blood sugar PT‡: Prothrombin time INR§: International normalized ratio ECG║: Electrocardiogram LVH††: Left
ventricular hypertrophy ESR**: Erythrocyte sedimentation rate RPR‡‡: Rapid plasma region A 36-year-old gentleman reported with sudden visual
loss in left eye. He had a similar problem two months back with spontaneous improvement, for which he did not seek any treatment. Vision was
20/20 in right eye and no perception of light in left. Anterior segment examination was normal. Right eye was normal. Left fundus revealed
patchy areas of retinal edema over posterior pole and bifurcated central retinal artery [Figs. 8 and 9]. Generalized arteriolar attenuation,
box-carring of vessels and cherry red spot at fovea were seen. Treatment was initiated immediately [Table 2]. However, fundus appearance
remained same. He was referred to the physician. Next day, the patient reported perception of light in that eye. A platelet-fibrin embolus
could be made out in infero-temporal arcade. Findings of FFA [Fig. 10 a and b], visual field examination [Fig. 11], ERG [Fig. 12] and color
Doppler study of the right eye are summarized in Table 1. A summary of systemic investigations and treatment is included in Table 2. Five
days later, vision recovered to 20/125. On the tenth day, it improved to 20/40 and after six months it was 20/20. The patient also had
regular follow-ups with the hematologist and cardiologist. Case 2. Left eye fundus photograph reveals well-demarcated retinal edema of the
superior quadrant and an accentuated foveal reflex Case 2. Color fundus photograph of the optic nerve head shows the superior (A) and
inferior (B) hemi-trunks of central retinal artery emerging separately Case 2: Left eye FFA shows early filling of superior hemi-trunk Case
2: Left eye visual field analysis shows an extensive defect corresponding to the territory of vascular occlusion Case 2: Negative-negative
waveform for scotopic response and a loss of oscillatory potentials were recorded in the ERG for the left eye. This corresponds to inner
retinal ischemia consequent to retinal vascular occlusion A 28-year-old lady reported with sudden, painless visual loss in right eye since
five days. Diagnosed to have systemic hypertension, rheumatic mitral valve regurgitation and chorea, she was under treatment for the same
[Table 2]. Vision was 20/60 in the right eye and 20/20 in the left. Anterior segment examination was unremarkable. Right fundus revealed
retinal edema involving superior half, sparing fovea with no embolus [Fig. 13 and 14]. Left eye was normal. Findings of FFA [Fig. 15],
multifocal ERG [Fig. 16] and color Doppler study of the right eye [Fig. 17] are summarized in Table 1. A summary of systemic investigations
and treatment is included in Table 2. The patient was detected to have Factor V Leiden mutation (Real time Polymerase Chain Reaction, RT
PCR) and was also advised a regular follow-up with cardiologist and hematologist. Case 3: Color fundus photograph of the right eye shows
gross retinal edema involving the superior half of the fundus, albeit sparing the fovea Case 3. Color fundus photograph of the optic nerve
head shows the superior (A) and inferior (B) hemi-trunks of central retinal artery Case 3. Right eye FFA showed increased transit time along
the superior retinal sector Case 3. Right eye multifocal ERG shows grossly reduced responses Case 3. Color Doppler of the right ophthalmic
artery shows branching of the central retinal artery behind the lamina cribrosa A 22-year-old young man, a known case of congenital heart
disease, reported with decreased vision in left eye since two days. Vision was 20/20 in both eyes. Anterior segment examination was
essentially normal. Right fundus was normal. Left fundus revealed retinal edema involving superior half, sparing fovea with no embolus [Fig.
18]. Findings of FFA [Fig. 19], ERG [Fig. 20], visual field examination [Fig. 21] and color Doppler study of the right eye [Fig. 22] are
summarized in Table 1. A summary of systemic investigations and treatment is included in Table 2. Diagnosed to have Eisenmenger syndrome,
the probable cause of vascular occlusion was paradoxical embolism through ventricular septal defect. At six weeks review, retinal edema had
reduced with no evidence of anterior segment neovascularisation. Case 4. Color fundus photograph of the left eye shows extensive retinal
edema in the superior half, sparing the fovea Case 4. FFA of the left eye shows early filling of the reperfused superior hemi-trunk Case 4.
Left eye ERG reveals a normal ‘a’ wave response and a reduced ‘b’ wave. This corresponds to inner retinal ischemia consequent to retinal
vascular occlusion Case 4. Left eye visual field analysis reveals an inferior altitudinal defect corresponding to the affected retina Case
4. Color duplex imaging of orbit detected a temporal branch emerging from central retinal artery before lamina cribrosa CRA commonly
originates as a separate stem from the first part of the ophthalmic artery and usually divides into two branches at the disc, each of which
further bifurcates into temporal and nasal divisions. Anatomical variations of branching patterns are known. Reports describe a case with
two CRAs running independently up to the optic disc and joining at the optic disc to form a loop, from the summit of which arose terminal
branches that followed the usual course. However, this anatomical arrangement was not seen in any of our cases. Singh and Dass also describe
a branch of CRA originating from behind the lamina cribrosa that supplied the supero-medial part of the retina but this was more of a
‘branching’ than a ‘bifurcation’. On entering the eye, CRA loses the elastic lamina and has a prominent muscularis as it bifurcates at the
optic disc. These histological changes distinguish retinal arteries from muscular arteries of the same size in other tissues. Additionally,
the unusually developed muscularis may allow greater constriction of the vessels in response to chemical and pressure changes. These
histological changes coupled with the pre-lamina cribrosa branching of CRA may make these hemi-trunks more ‘vulnerable’ to vascular
occlusion, especially in subjects with systemic co-morbid conditions. Hence, hemi-CRAO may be a manifestation of a preexisting systemic
condition or a harbinger of a hitherto undiagnosed systemic condition. Thromboembolic events are the main culprits in the pathogenesis of
retinal artery occlusions which can manifest as ‘Hemi-CRAO’ in a proximally bifurcated CRA. A sole report has described hemi-CRAO occurring
in association with sexual activity and sildenafil citrate; a coincidental finding as mentioned by the author. In our series, Case 1 had an
artificial mitral valve and was on anticoagulation therapy. Case 2 had polycythemia. Both are well documented etiological factors, which
lead to the devastating vascular episode. Genetic mutation in Factor V renders it resistant to anticoagulant effect of endogenous
anticoagulant protein C. The most common of these mutations is called the Leiden mutation. Similar etiological factor was reported in a
25-year-old woman with multiple bilateral retinal arteriolar occlusion and in a 33-year-old lady with branch retinal vein occlusion. Case 3
had Leiden mutation. There have been isolated case reports of ocular ischemic features in association with Eisenmenger’s syndrome. However,
its manifestation as hemi-CRAO (Case 4 in our series) is reported as first of its kind. All patients in this unique case series were young,
had angiographic evidence of hemi-CRAO owing to proximal, pre-lamina cribrosal branching pattern of CRA (confirmed by color Doppler) and
also had remarkable visual recovery of 20/60 or better. To conclude, unusual pre-lamina cribrosa (extraocular) branching pattern of central
retinal artery coupled with the unique histological features of the retinal arterioles (hemi-trunks) may predispose to the development of
‘hemi-central retinal artery occlusion’ in young adults with underlying systemic conditions. However, further histopathological studies are
required to understand this clinical entity better. Dr. V Suresh, Director, Mediscan Imaging, Chennai for the Doppler imaging.
