Juvenile idiopathic arthritis (JIA) is a heterogeneous condition encompassing all forms of chronic arthritis of unknown origin with onset
before 16 years of age. It is characterised by chronic synovial inflammation, with potential risk of developing progressive joint
destruction and serious functional disability. The reported incidence varies between 0.6 and 1 in 1,000 children. JIA thus represents an
important cause of acquired disability in the paediatric age group. During the last decade, new, potent therapeutic agents have become
available to children with JIA, underscoring the need for accurate monitoring of therapeutic response both in disease activity and
structural damage to the joint, the latter being considered the gold standard in treatment efficacy studies. Current classifications, based
on clinical criteria, are unsatisfactory since clinical parameters are poor markers for disease activity/progress and joint destruction
(Table 1). As for imaging, there has been a shift from traditional radiography towards newer techniques such as ultrasound (US) and magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), but without proper evaluation of their accuracy and validity. Joint damage evaluation in JIA is traditionally
performed by radiographic scoring methods, assessing joint space narrowing and erosions, but these are rather insensitive, in part due to
the growing skeleton. Wrist disease has been associated with a more severe course of arthritis and a poorer functional outcome, and the
wrist is the only joint in which suitable radiographic measures of disease progression have been reported. Much effort has recently been
spent on validating existing scoring systems and devising new ones, of which the adapted version of the Sharp/van der Heijde score has
gained the most acceptance (Table 1). Table 1Classification systems for active inflammatory change and chronic structural change in juvenile
idiopathic arthritisEvaluationActive inflammatory changeChronic, structural changeDetection of abnormalityScoring systemDetection of
abnormalityScoring systemClinical parametersJoint swelling (relatively low sensitivity)InaccurateJoint malalignment (late
finding)InaccurateRadiographyNot feasibleFeasibleLack of accurate scoring systems. Adapted version of the Sharp/van der Heijde wrist
score?UltrasoundEffusions, synovial hypertrophy, tenosynovitisNeeds validationRelatively unfeasibleInaccurateMagnetic resonance
imagingEffusions, bone marrowoedema, synovial hypertrophy with hyperaemia, tenosynovitisTo be published, relatively accurateRelatively
unfeasibleTo be published, relatively inaccurate Classification systems for active inflammatory change and chronic structural change in
juvenile idiopathic arthritis US has been shown to be superior to clinical examination in the diagnosis and localisation of joint effusion,
bursal fluid collection and synovitis. A structured assessment of synovitis and tenosynovitis, and classification of the findings have been
devised; however, the technique needs validation (Table 1). A few small, uncontrolled studies have described improved sensitivity for
detecting bone erosions in joints with the use of ultrasound as compared with conventional plain radiography; however, firm conclusions
cannot be drawn from these. US may also demonstrate abnormal changes in cartilage (Fig. 1). Fig. 1Sagittal ultrasound scan through the
distal femoral epiphysis in a 5-year-old boy, showing a focal, echogenic lesion within deep cartilage (stippled arrow), as well as bony
irregularities/erosion (long arrow). The cartilaginous cap of the epiphysis is clearly outlined (short arrows) Sagittal ultrasound scan
through the distal femoral epiphysis in a 5-year-old boy, showing a focal, echogenic lesion within deep cartilage (stippled arrow), as well
as bony irregularities/erosion (long arrow). The cartilaginous cap of the epiphysis is clearly outlined (short arrows) The value of MRI as
an advanced method to evaluate disease activity and secondary damage in adults with rheumatoid arthritis is under active investigation by a
research consortium called Outcome Measures in Rheumatology Clinical Trials (OMERACT). However, the results drawn from OMERACT studies are
not directly applicable to children because adult rheumatoid arthritis is different from JIA and because the growing skeleton of children
needs a different approach. Indeed, in children, ossification is incomplete and joint space widths vary with age. Thus, despite technical
progress in the imaging of cartilage (e.g., development of ultra-short TE sequences, driven equilibrium Fourier transform imaging, and
steady-state free precession sequences for the detection of subtle surface irregularities and tiny focal defects of the articular cartilage,
diffusion-weighted techniques to assess degradation of collagen fibres, delayed gadolinium-enhanced MRI of cartilage to detect changes in
cartilage proteoglycan content, and T2 relaxation time mapping to detect integrity of collagen in the extracellular matrix), the potential
helpfulness of these techniques is yet to be seen. The same goes for sophisticated analysis of three-dimensional image data to provide
articular surface contour mapping and three-dimensional rendering, as well as volumetric quantification of articular cartilage to evaluate
the progression and response to treatment in patients with chronic arthritis. Progress in the assessment of synovitis, including dynamic
contrast-enhanced MRI (DCE-MRI) to assess the degree of inflammation is also flawed with methodological difficulties, although voxel-by-
voxel analysis of signal intensity versus time curves has proven more accurate than the region-of-interest (ROI) approach in adults with
rheumatoid arthritis. Another technique for assessing inflammation using a semiautomated segmentation technique of DCE-MRI has also been
described. Thus, although MRI is a potentially powerful imaging tool to assess joint inflammation and the progression of joint damage,
standardised, validated and feasible assessment systems are lacking. During 2006–2009, we have, as part of a large, European Union-funded
multicentre study, devised a new scoring system for wrist and hip involvement in JIA, assessing both active and chronic change, based on MRI
and radiography combined. In a large cohort of around 350 patients from 5 to 15 years of age, we have examined the feasibility and accuracy
for all the different components within a scoring system, namely, bone erosions, bone marrow oedema, synovitis (effusion, synovial
hypertrophy, increased enhancement) and tenosynovitis. In general, the reliability, i.e. inter- and intraobserver agreement, seems to be
better for active than for chronic change (Table 1), and thorough standardisation of the scoring method prior to assessment appears to be
crucial. One major problem in assessing bone erosions and bone marrow change on MRI in particular is the lack of normal references (Fig. 2).
Thus, during the project, such standards were created based on a population of 89 healthy children aged 5–15 years old. Informed by these
findings, we had to adjust some of the definitions used for pathological change. Fig. 2Coronal T1-weighted volumetric fast spin-echo image
of the wrist (a) shows a tubular depression within the lunate (long arrow). Based on coronal, fat-saturated pre- (b) and post- (c) contrast
images, a tortuous vessel could be traced (short and stippled arrows), entering the lunate via this tubular depression, suggesting a normal
vascular channel rather than an erosion Coronal T1-weighted volumetric fast spin-echo image of the wrist (a) shows a tubular depression
within the lunate (long arrow). Based on coronal, fat-saturated pre- (b) and post- (c) contrast images, a tortuous vessel could be traced
(short and stippled arrows), entering the lunate via this tubular depression, suggesting a normal vascular channel rather than an erosion In
conclusion, most of the recent research on JIA has centred on advanced MRI techniques for detecting and assessing injury to cartilage and
for assessing synovitis as defined by synovial hypertrophy and hyperaemia, with a much smaller amount of work devoted to assessment systems
for clinical use. Thus, the role of MRI (as well as of US) in imaging of JIA is still unclear. Open Access This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License, which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Disclaimer Dr. Rosendahl has no financial interests, investigational or
off-label uses to disclose.
