Pediatric cases of Spigelian hernias are rare. Only a few reports on this condition, in combination with ipsilateral cryptorchidism and
testis in the hernia sac, have been published. We report on Spigelian hernia in a 3-week-old boy containing both the ipsilateral testis,
without a gubernaculum and an incarcerated loop of the small intestine. It has been suggested that the combination of Spigelian hernia and
ipsilateral cryptorchidism is part of a new syndrome. We discuss whether the lack of a gubernaculum and an inguinal canal reported in other
similar cases may be additional elements of this new syndrome. We present a comprehensive overview of pediatric patients with Spigelian-
cryptorchidism syndrome reported in the English language literature. In 75% of male infants with Spigelian hernia, there is an associated
ipsilateral cryptorchidism, and in 87% of these patients, the testis is found inside the hernia sac. Thus, the surgeon dealing with a
congenital Spigelian hernia should look for an undescended testis and be prepared to find it in the hernia sac. Spigelian hernia is a rare
condition, constituting 0.12% of all ventral hernias . It is most common in adults, with only 24 pediatric cases reported up until 2006 .
The anatomical basis of Spigelian hernia is weakness in the Spigelian hernia belt arising from a transversus abdominis aponeurosis between
the lateral edge of the rectus sheath and the semilunar line. Most Spigelian hernias occur cranially and laterally to the epigastric
inferior vessels, but with occasional medial and caudal location they are named “low spigelian hernias” . Whereas adult Spigelian hernias
are considered to be acquired because of trauma or increased intra-abdominal pressure, pediatric cases are suspected to be congenital [2,
4]. Among male infants with Spigelian hernias, 75% presented are associated with cryptorchidism . Raveenthiran suggested that a defect in
the Spigelian fascia, combined with ipsilateral cryptorchidism, may be part of a new syndrome. We report here on a 3-week-old child with a
concomitant incarceration of the small intestine and testis in Spigelian hernia sac. We suggest that the additional lack of a gubernaculum
observed in this patient, as well as the lack of an inguinal canal observed by others in similar cases, may be considered as two additional
and closely connected elements of this new syndrome. A 16-day-old full-term boy was admitted to hospital with dehydration after he had
refused breastfeeding. Clinical and laboratory examination did not reveal any underlying specific disease, and he was discharged after
2 days. No information on the content of the scrotum was recorded in the EPJ notes from this admission. 4 days later, he was readmitted with
pain and the appearance of a bulge in the right, lower part of the abdominal wall (Fig. 1) and no testis in the right scrotum. The abdominal
wall swelling was not reducible after sedation. An ultrasound revealed a hernia sac located between the m. obliquus externus and m. obliquus
internus, penetrating through a 7 mm wide hernia opening. The sac contained a normal-sized right testis and a loop of small intestine with
weak peristaltic movements. A normal X-ray did not show any sign of ileus.Fig. 1The Spigelian hernia appearing as a bulge on the lower,
ventral abdomen The Spigelian hernia appearing as a bulge on the lower, ventral abdomen The hernia was repaired the same day under general
anesthesia. Following a horizontal, small skin incision, an elongated hernia sac directed in a craniolateral direction was dissected from
the position under the obliquus externus muscle with its port close to the lateral edge of the rectus muscle (Fig. 2a). The sac was opened
and contained a normal-sized right testis, with no gubernacular cord attached to the epididymis in the lower pole of the testis, and the
mesorchium of the testis was connected directly to the wall of the hernia sac.Fig. 2a The Spigelian hernia sac after dissection, b the
Spigelian hernia sac containing a normal testis without gubernaculum and a loop of small intestine with compromised circulation a The
Spigelian hernia sac after dissection, b the Spigelian hernia sac containing a normal testis without gubernaculum and a loop of small
intestine with compromised circulation In addition, a loop of the small intestine with compromised circulation (Fig. 2b) was incarcerated
inside the hernia sac. The small intestine was recovered and returned to the abdomen, aided by a small incision in the hernia port. The
testis, with a sufficient long spermatic cord, was dissected from the hernia sac and tunneled subcutaneously into a subdartos pouch. The
hernia sac was then resected, and the opening was closed around the cord. No exploration for an inguinal canal was performed, and no
complications occurred. A successful descent of a testis is preceded by the development of an inguinal canal, which depends on the formation
of the gubernaculum ligaments during the seventh gestational week descending from the inferior poles of the testes down through the
abdominal wall at the site of the future inguinal canals. The processus vaginalis, an evagination of the peritoneum, then develops along the
gubernaculum and herniates through the abdominal wall forming the inguinal canal. In the third month, thickening and shortening of the
gubernaculum both pulls the testis down to the deep inguinal ring and enlarges the inguinal canal to make space for the last phase of the
testicular descent. Between the seventh and the ninth months, the transinguinal descent takes place under the influence of androgens
bringing the testes into the scrotum due to a second gubernacular shortening, which is aided by an increase in abdominal pressure . Most
Spigelian hernias associated with a cryptorchidism are recognized at birth or shortly thereafter (Table 1), indicating a congenital
condition. In our patient, no gubernaculum was identified during the operation. In 8 out of the 15 patients in Table 1, the authors have
reported no sign of gubernaculum, though this question has not been addressed in the corresponding reports for the other patients. However,
we question whether the gubernaculum may have been missing in these cases as well since no gubernaculum-related adhesions in the hernia sac
were reported during surgery.Table 1Fifteen patients with a total of 18 Spigelian hernias combined with ipsilateral cryptorchidism,
published in the English language literatureAuthor Age at diagnosis (months)Content of hernia sacPresence of inguinal canalPresence of
gubernaculumAdditional anomaliesGravier et al. 9Left testisNDNDRight indirect inguinal herniaPul and Pul 18Small intestineNDNDNoSilberstein
et al. 0Left testis, bowelNot identifiedNDAbdominal wall weakness right side0Right testis, bowelNot identifiedNot identifiedNoOstlie and
Zerella 0Right testisNot identifiedNot identifiedNoAl-Salem 3Left testisSigmoid colonNDNot identifiedNo0Left testisNDNDMultiple
anomaliasLevy et al. 1Right sac: right testis, small bowelLeft sac: left testisNDNDNo1Left testis, small intestineNDNDNoRaveenthiran 1Right
testis (on the outer aspect of the sac), bowelNot identifiedNDImperforate anus, left inguinal hernia, umbilical herniaDurham and Ricketts
8Left testisNot identifiedNot identified*No13Right sac: right testisLeft sac: left testisNot identified both sidesNot identified*No14Right
sac: right testisLeft sac: left testisNot identified both sidesNot identified both sides*No2Right sac: no contentNot identified on right
sideNot identified*Right testis intra-abdominal, left testis in inguinal canalRushfeldt (2010, present paper)1Right testis, small
intestineNDNot identifiedNoND no data* Personal communication Fifteen patients with a total of 18 Spigelian hernias combined with
ipsilateral cryptorchidism, published in the English language literature ND no data * Personal communication We did not look for an inguinal
canal during the acute operation of our patient. Other surgeons have reported a concomitant ipsilateral lack of both the gubernaculum and
inguinal canal in 6 patients with 7 hernias and the lack of an inguinal canal, with no information on the gubernaculum in 2 additional
patients. It is evident from the embryology that the gubernaculum is a prerequisite for the development of an inguinal canal . We therefore
assume that patients without a gubernaculum also lack the inguinal canal on the same side, even in cases in which no preoperative
exploration for an inguinal canal was performed. In our patient as well as the others listed in Table 1, the spermatic cord was of
sufficient length to bring the testes into the scrotum through a subcutaneous tunnel in the subdartos pouch. Still, the testes lacking
gubernacula have descended all of the intra-abdominal distance without the aid of a gubernaculum. However, it is known that the
transabdominal movement of the testes is largely a relative movement which results from growth of the cranial part of the abdomen away from
the caudal part , therefore not depending on the shortening of a gubernaculum. A syndrome is defined as a group of signs and symptoms that
collectively characterize or indicate a particular disease or abnormal condition. Raveenthiran suggested that the co-existence of Spigelian
hernia and an ipsilateral undescended testis probably forms a new syndrome. According to his hypothesis, the first step is a testicular
maldescent of unknown origin. Then, the ectopic testis “drags down a processus vaginalis” that forms a potential hernia sac. This sac opens
up with increased intra-abdominal pressure, thus converting it into Spigelian hernia. In the absence of a gubernaculum and inguinal canal,
this hernia may serve as an “emergency exit” for the testis. When evaluating his theory, it should be remarked that in the patient referred
to in this paper, with multiple anomalias, the testis was found outside the hernia sac, thereby mimicking a testis on the outside of a
processus vaginalis, such as in the case of a normal testicular descent through the inguinal canal. In all the other patients in Table 1, in
which the testes were found to be associated with the hernia sac, they were located inside the sac. As a result, this finding does not
support the Raveenthiran’s theory of an ectopic processus vaginalis. In addition, his hypothesis that the testis drags down a processus
vaginalis analogous to a normal scrotal descent is not in accordance with general embryologic knowledge [6, 7, 9, 10]. Our theory is that
the first step in the Spigelian-cryptorchidism syndrome is a failure in the development of a gubernaculum. As a consequence, the inguinal
canal will not develop and the testis will not be able to descend from their intra-abdominal position to the scrotum. These three
interconnected elements have only been described in relation to congenital Spigelian hernias, and we do not know how they are connected with
the ipsilateral defect in the Spigelian fascia. Is there an unknown mechanism leading to these simultaneous defects, or may the arrested
testis induce a sort of rescue canal through a weak area in the abdominal wall in the absence of an inguinal canal? It has been reported
that 75% of male infants with Spigelian hernia present an ipsilateral cryptorchidism and it has been shown (Table 1) that the testis is
found inside the hernia sac in 87% of these patients. Because of this, a surgeon dealing with Spigelian hernia should look for an
undescended testis, and expect it to be in the hernia sac if it is not detected in the scrotum or the inguinal canal. Furthermore, he should
be prepared to perform an orchiopexia via a subcutaneous route since an inguinal canal may very well not be found. Another surgical
implication is that Spigelian hernia containing a testis should be excluded during the ultrasound investigation of a congenital
cryptorchidism when a testis is not found along the pathway of inguinal descent. We conclude that a cryptorchidism, combined with the
finding of the ipsilateral testis in Spigelian hernia sac, is probably a new congenital syndrome which is distinct from an ordinary
cryptorchidism in addition to being distinct from other pediatric Spigelian hernias. We hypothesize that “the Spigelian-cryptorchidism
syndrome” consists of the following four congenital, ipsilateral elements: a defect in the Spigelian fascia, a hernia sac containing the
testis, the absence of gubernaculum and the absence of an inguinal canal. Future surgical explorations and descriptions of these rare cases
may add more evidence to this theory. Also, the exact mechanism behind this syndrome, as well as the probable connection between the defect
in the Spigelian fascia and gubernaculum-associated defects, remain to be investigated. The pediatric surgeon should be aware of these
associated anomalies when dealing with Spigelian hernias and/or cryptorchidism in male infants. This article is distributed under the terms
of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
