We present a case of a 77-year old female who had undergone a coronary artery bypass grafting with an aortic valve replacement and developed
three month later a Methicillin-Resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA) sternal wound infection which was successful treated with Daptomycin
combined with vacuum-assisted closure (VAC). Sternal wound infection is a severe complication in cardiac surgery despite continuing efforts
to improve perioperative conditions. This complication is often associated with significant morbidity and mortality rates of up to 45% ,
with prolonged hospitalization and additional surgical procedures, as well as prolonged antibiotic therapy and its inherent high costs . The
most common conventional treatments involve surgical revision, open dressing, closed mediastinal irrigation, debridement, complete
sternectomy, or reconstruction with omental or muscleflaps . With the increase of MRSA infection, the accompanying antibiotic therapy has
received more attention for treatment of sternal wound infections after cardiac surgery. A 77-year-old female was admitted with coronary
artery disease and severe aortic stenosis to the Department of Cardiac Surgery of the University Hospital of Goettingen, Germany in July of
2007. A coronary artery bypass grafting (left anterior descending artery was revascularized by the left internal mammarian artery) and an
aortic valve replacement (Cryolife O'Brien® 23 mm, biological) were performed. After an uneventful operation and postoperative course, the
patient was discharged home. Three month after discharge, at the initial postoperative visit, physical examination revealed an unstable
sternum with purulent drainage (MRSA-positive) from the distal portion of the incision. Subsequently, the patient was hospitalized and
started on wide broad spectrum antibiotics (Clindamycin and Rifampicin) in combination with local antiseptic washings. She was urgently
taken to the operating room for wound debridement. Once the incision was reopened, frank pus was noted. The wound was irrigated and the
sternum was realigned. Her general condition recovered and two months after the operation, the patient was discharged home. One month
following this, the patient returned with purulent drainage forming in the distal wound, necessitating hospital readmission with intravenous
antibiotics (Vancomycin 500 mg/d, for 10 days). Given the prior presentation of an unstable sternum, we elected to remove three sternal
wires. A vacuum-assisted closure (VAC) was placed along with Alginat to promote secondary wound healing. On the 26th postoperative day, the
patient was discharged home with instructions to return for clinic three-times-per-week for wound care. One month following this, eight
months since the initial surgery, the wound was not fully healed. Although there was some evidence of secondary degree healing, it was felt
the patient would benefit from removing the remaining two sternal wires. Therefore, each sternal wire was removed, the wound was widely
debridement of infected tissues, and a VAC was placed the entire length of the incision (Figure 1). This resulted in further wound healing
and the patient was again discharged home with wound care. Postoperative sternal wound infection eight months since the initial surgery. The
remaining two sternal wires were removed. After removing sternal wires, reapplication of VAC therapy was initiated. In March 2009, twenty
months since the initial surgery, the patient presented with yet another sternal wound dehiscence. When the wound was probed, a fistula was
noted to the mediastinum. She readmitted to the hospital and brought to the operating room for wound irrigation with VAC placement.
Bacterial cultures obtained intraoperatively grew MRSA and the antibiogram presented resistance to several conventional antibiotics but
displayed sensitivity to the new antibiotic drug Daptomycin (Cubicin®, Novartis Pharma GmbH, Germany). Daptomycin (4 mg/kg/day) was
administered and total duration of application was ten days. The wound eventually healed with no residual fistula or infection of MRSA
(Figure 2) and she was discharged on the 18th postoperative day. A follow-up visit in May 2010 in our ambulance revealed no indication of
bacterial colonization in latest microbiological tests. The patient is free of pain and able to function well in daily life. The wound
eventually healed with no residual fistula or infection of MRSA, twenty-one months since the initial surgery. The incidence of sternal wound
infection after cardiac surgery is reported to be 0.4-5% and Staphylococcus aureus is the most common pathogen isolated from sternal wound
infections after cardiac surgery as well as from bacteraemic blood cultures . An increasing trend in antibiotic resistance, with the
appearance of progressively more cases of MRSA strain infections have been shown in epidemiological studies . Sternal infection with S.
aureus is associated with high morbidity and mortality and carries a worse prognosis than that of other aetiologies . Vancomycin remains the
reference standard for the treatment of systemic infection caused by methicillin resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA). However, there are
many reasons for clinical failure of Vancomycin , therefore the need for alternative therapies that target MRSA has become apparent. One
alternative is Linezolid, because it has been shown that this antibiotic drug in retrospective evaluations of complicated skin and soft-
tissue infections (SSTIs) caused by MRSA, compared with Vancomycin, is associated with significantly higher clinical cure rates and reduced
lengths of hospitalization . Despite the apparent advantages of Linezolid in the treatment of MRSA infections, concerns about safety and
costs of therapy often limit its use. Daptomycin is a lipopeptide drug with bactericidal activity against MRSA in a concentration-dependent
manner . The difference between Daptomycin and standard therapy in the treatment of MRSA infections was up to now not statistically
significant, however Daptomycin has already been proven to be effective in the treatment of bacteremia and endocarditis caused by MRSA and
several case reports about its effectiveness in the field of cardiac surgery exist in the literature . Based on these observations,
Daptomycin may offer a possible new treatment option for surgical management of MRSA sternal wound infection after cardiac surgery combined
with surgical therapy. In our case the patient was re-submitted to our hospital with generalized colonization and infection with MRSA.
Standard therapy concerning antibiotic treatment has failed to eradicate the MRSA, so that we decided for an alternative antimicrobial
strategy in the form of Daptomycin application. However, its longterm efficacy in cardiac surgery should be further evaluated in a
controlled setting. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AP and JS had helped with surgical techniques, performed
data, analysis, statistics, graphics, and wrote the paper. TT, CB, AE, SM, MF and CW helped with data interpretation and helped to draft the
manuscript. FS co-wrote the manuscript and added important comments to the paper. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The project was supported by a grant from the Department of
Thoracic Cardiovascular Surgery, University of Göttingen, Germany. The authors gratefully thank Mrs. D. Sitte for her expert assistance at
wound treatment.
