Retroperitoneal Schwannomas are uncommonly found in the retroperitoneum and few of them show malignant transformation and invasion. Local
recurrence are common in malignant Schwannomas with very few reports of tumor distinct differentiation at recurrences. We report here a rare
case of retroperitoneal schwannoma with multiple origins from retroperitoneum and pelvic wall. Pathological examination confirmed the case
as a schwannoma with malignant transformation. Radical dissection of the tumors along with the sacrifice of adjacent sigmoid colon and left
kidney failed to provide a cure for this patient. Due to tumor recurrence, a second and a third surgery of radical excision were performed 6
months and 17 months later after the first surgery, respectively. Histopathologic analysis identified that the recurrent tumors were
different from the original schwannoma because of their smooth muscle-like differentiation. Malignant schwannomas are uncommon sarcomas with
a high incidence of local recurrence. Distinct immunohistochemical staining results of the tumors at recurrence indicate their potential of
smooth-muscle like differentiation. Radical excision of the tumors may provide benefit for their local recurrences. Schwannomas are a rare
variant of peripheral nerve sheath tumors that seldomly develop to malignancy. In the absence of Recklinghausen's disease, these masses
rarely occur in the retroperitoneum, which has a reported incidence of only 0.5-5% of all schwannomas . Schwannomas usually occur as
solitary encapsulated tumors with demarcated margins with neighbour organs. We report our experience with a rare case of malignant
transformed schwannoma invading kidney and sigmoid colon at its first occurrence. Tumors recurred after complete resection along with
adjacent tissue and viscera. Interestingly, tumors showed smooth-muscle like differentiation at recurrences. A large mass in the left lower
quadrant of the abdomen was found in a 51 year old male patient during physical examination and confirmed by computer tomography. The
patient has no history of any cancer and no family history of neurofibromatosis. Lab tests results including blood routine, urine routine,
serum chemistry, as well as examinations of several serum tumor markers such as Carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), α-fetoprotin (AFP) and
Carbohydrate antigen 19.9 (CA19.9) were all within normal ranges. Computed tomography scan confirmed a 15.0 × 12.3 × 10.0-cm enhancing
heterogeneous mass with left kidney invasion arising from retroperitoneal space (Fig. 1). As shown in the CT scan, we could identify several
smaller nodular lesions around the main tumor, locating in the soft tissues of the pelvic wall and sigmoid colon (Fig. 2 and Fig. 3). A
presumptive diagnosis of retroperitoneal sarcoma or possible pancreatic neoplasm was suspected. The patient underwent surgical excision of
the masses. The largest retroperitoneal mass was speculated to be the original site upon examinations during the operation. The nodules
found on the sigmoid colon were most likely "satellite" lesions, for it was confined in the colon wall but did not protrude into the colon
cavity, which may due to direct spread of tumor cells from the primary tumor. However, the pelvic masses rooted from the pelvic wall but not
from pelvic peritoneum indicated they may have independent origins. The left kidney and sigmoid flexure were extirpated together with the
tumors for the negative soft tissue margins. No further anti-tumor therapy was administrated after the surgery, and CT scan of the abdomen
and pelvic cavity was performed every three months as follow-up. In the follow-up examination 6 months post surgery, a mass 7-cm in diameter
was discovered at the retroperitoneal site (Additional file 1: Fig. S1). The mass was revealed to be well-circumscribed and complete
excision was performed. The patient was doing well after the second surgery till 11 months after, the second surgery, when a recurrent mass
involving the splenic hilum and cauda pancreatic was revealed by CT. A third surgery was performed to resect the tumor together with the
spleen and distal pancreas. All of the three surgeries were performed to obtain macroscopic clearance at resection. Computed tomography (CT)
showing a giant mass located in the retroperitoneal space with invasion to the left kidney. CT scan showing tumors involved the sigmoid
flexure. CT scan showing smaller masses located in the pelvis cavity. At first occurrence, the biggest primary mass had a grey fish-meat
like appearance on section with major solid features. Histopathological analysis identified the tumor as a schwannoma with malignant
transformation. It was not grossly clear whether the lesion was associated with a nerve trunk. Histologically, the lesion consisted of
spindle cells arranged in short bundles with occasional palisading nuclei. Cytologic atypia is evident as characterized by nuclear
hyperchromasia, atypical mitotic figures and tumor giant cells (Fig. 4 and Fig. 5). Seromuscular layer of sigmoid colon and renal capsule
were invaded by tumor cells as shown in HE staining section (Additional file 2: Fig. S2 and Additional file 3: Fig. S3). All the smaller
nodular lesions on the colon and pelvic cavity had the same histopathological characters with the largest one and the immunohistochemical
profile were very similar. Images of HE staining showing the schwannoma undergoing malignant transformation. High-power view of the spindle
cell component showing bland cytologic features with a suggestion of palisading, mitotic figures and tumor giant cells. (Original
magnification 200×). Benign part of the tumor showing hypocellular area without features of cytologic atypia. (Original magnification 200×).
Immunohistochemical studies were performed using a panel of antibodies, including S-100, Desmin, CK, EMA, CD117 and SMA (Dako, CA, USA). All
specimens from the three surgical resection were negative for CK, EMA, CD117 and SMA staining. Interestingly, the spindle cells in the first
resected specimen were positive for S-100 (Fig. 6A) but negative for Desmin (Fig. 6B). In contrast, specimens from the later two operation
were negative for S-100 (Fig. 6C) but strongly positive for desmin (Fig. 6D). These findings suggested diverse differentiation of the
schwannoma at recurrences. Immunohistochemical features of S-100 and desmin staining in the primary retroperitoneal mass (A and B) and
recurrent masses (C and D). The spindle cells of the largest primary mass were positive for S-100 protein (1+) (A) and negative for desmin
(B). The spindle cell component of the recurrent mass was negative for S-100 staining (C), while showed strong immunoreactivity to desmin
(D). (Original magnification200×). Most previously reported cases of retroperitoneal schwannomas were solitary tumors except for a few
reports of multiple tumors cases . Our case showing multiple tumors at different location simultaneously in the absence of neuromatosis
background was quite rare. In Voros's study, 7/29 cases presented with small nodular lesions around the main retroperitoneal tumor, which
turn out to be satellite tumors, having an adverse effect on recurrence and survival rates . The nodules found on the sigmoid colon in our
case most likely represent "satellite" lesion, which may due to direct spread of tumor cells from the primary tumor. However, the pelvic
ones were shown to be originated from tissues below the pelvic peritoneum, which indicated these tumors are of independent origins rather
than metastasis of the retroperitoneal tumor. Very few Schwannomas were reported to undergo malignant transformation and invade adjacent
viscera, including colon and kidney . Although diffuse positivity for S100 protein in the cytoplasm of tumor cells is the classical
immunohistochemical staining feature of benign schwannomas, the variants with malignant degeneration lesion may vary. The diagnosis of
malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor lacks standardized diagnostic criteria except that features such as dense fascicules in a "marble-
like" pattern consisting of asymmetrically tapered spindle cells . Malignancy is usually characterized histologically by mitosis figures,
pleomorphism, and blood vessel infiltration . Schwannomas have been reported to be coexisted with focal smooth muscle differentiation .
Controversy still exists in the pathological diagnosis of the recurrent retroperitoneal tumors. The cellular areas in the second surgical
specimen showed strong desmin expression but not S-100. In view of this expression pattern, a diagnosis of schwannoma was felt to be less
likely and a report of low-grade sarcoma, possibly showing smooth muscle differentiation was issued. However, distinct immunohistochemical
staining results in our case might also indicate different directions of differentiation of the malignant schwannoma. One possible
explanation for this observation may be the schwannoma was derived from multipotential neural cells that could have developed into various
phenotypes. This theory can also explain the different types of elements found in the schwannoma . Malignant schwannomas are aggressive
tumors that act as high-grade sarcomas with a high incidence of local recurrence or distant metastasis . Recurrence, however, has been
reported to occur usually within 6 months of the initial surgical treatment . The rates of local recurrence range from 16% to 54% after
conservative intralesional enucleation . According to a recent view of the surgical management of primary retroperitoneal sarcomas, the
completeness of resection and tumor grade are the most important predictors of local recurrence and overall survival . The prognosis of this
schwannomas with malignant transformation is correlated with tumor location, degree of differentiation, adjacent invasion and thoroughness
of surgical excision , however, to the best of our knowledge, the risk of recurrence for this type of rare tumors has not yet been
systematically studied. In our case, the reason of repeated recurrences within a relatively short period is unknown, we wonder whether
multiple origins and evident malignancy features such as atypical mitosis, giant tumor cell, local organ invasion may be two of the risk
factors. Radical excision is considered to be the best way to treat retroperitoneal neural sheath tumors, however, considerable controversy
exists concerning the soft tissue margins that are negative of tumor invasion . Some authors argued for complete surgical excision that may
include, if necessary, the sacrifice of adjacent tissue and viscera . Others believe that since schwannoma is usually a benign mass, a
simple enucleation or partial excision of the tumor is sufficient . Re-operation may provide a cure for the locally recurred schwannoma .
Nevertheless, in our case, although a complete excision of the tumor with the clear adjacent tissue margins was executed in the first
operation, recurrence occurred within 6 months and a second radical excision operation could not prevent its recurrence at the same location
for a third time. Since adjuvant radiotherapy and chemotherapy did not appear to provide any proven benefit and the single most important
prognosis factor is aggressively successful en bloc resection of the primary tumor, no adjuvant therapy after surgery was given in our case
. The patient is currently doing well 6 months after the third surgery, however, long-term follow-ups are warranted for this rare case of
multiple and recurrent schwannoma. Malignant schwannomas are uncommon sarcomas with a high incidence of local recurrence. Distinct
immunohistochemical staining results of the tumors at recurrence indicate their potential of smooth-muscle like differentiation. Radical
excision of the tumors may provide benefit for their local recurrences. Written informed consents were obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. Copies of the written consent are available for review upon request. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. WHY wrote the initial draft. LZQ and WHY contributed equally to this work. TLS is the
guarantor. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was partly supported by National Basic Research Program of China
(973 Program, No.2009CB521704). Fig S1. Recurrent schwannoma. Schwannoma recurred at the retroperitoneal space 6 months later after the
first surgery as indicated by arrow. Click here for file Fig S2. Tumor invading colon. Pathological findings showed the tumor invasion to
the colon seromuscular layer. (Original magnification 200×). Click here for file Fig S3. Tumor invading kidney. Pathological findings showed
the tumor invasion to renal capsule. (Original magnification 200×). Click here for file We thank Qihan You for technical assistance.
