Academic Editor: Guy Maddern Gallbladder agenesis is uncommon. In contrast, liver haemangiomas are the most common type of benign liver
lesions. We describe the first documented case of gallbladder agenesis where the clinical presentation was consistent with biliary colic,
and radiological investigation suggested the presence of gallstones. Subsequent operative findings revealed a solitary haemangioma of the
liver sited in the normal position of the gallbladder fossa but with absence of the gallbladder. It is important that clinicians should keep
gallbladder agenesis in mind when the gallbladder appears abnormal on preoperative imaging studies and cannot be found at laparoscopy. As
symptoms will improve in 98% of cases, it is very important to avoid unnecessary intervention in patients who have a negative laparoscopy.
The clinical presentation, investigations, and operative findings are discussed with a review of other relevant reported cases in the
literature. Gallbladder agenesis has been reported in the medical literature but is uncommon. It is thought to occur in approximately 1 in
6,000 live births . In contrast, liver haemangiomas are the most common type of benign liver lesions. We describe the first documented case
of gallbladder agenesis where the clinical presentation was consistent with biliary colic, and radiological investigation suggested the
presence of gallstones within a collapsed, fibrosed gallbladder. Subsequent operative findings revealed a solitary haemangioma of the liver
sited in the normal position of the gallbladder fossa but with absence of the gallbladder. A 23-year-old female presented with intermittent
episodes of nausea, vomiting, right upper quadrant abdominal pain, and occasional diarrhoea. Clinical examination was unremarkable. Routine
haematological and biochemical investigations including full blood count profile, c-reactive protein, liver function tests (including
alanine aminotransferase, total bilirubin, γ-glutamyltransferase, and alkaline phosphatase), and amylase were unremarkable. Stool culture
demonstrated no abnormality, and faecal elastase was within the normal range. Abdominal ultrasonography suggested a contracted gallbladder
containing gallstones. On clinical review following the ultrasound examination, the patient's pain had improved but the vomiting persisted.
Due to the continued vomiting, nonclassic symptoms of gallstones disease, and absence of dyspeptic symptoms, magnetic resonance
cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed. The MRCP report commented that the gallbladder was difficult to identify but appeared to be
contracted (Figure 1(a)). The common bile duct was not dilated, and there were no filling defects (Figure 1(b)). At laparoscopy, the
gallbladder and cystic duct could not be identified, either by direct vision or by the use of the intraoperative ultrasound probe. A pear-
shaped haemangioma was present on the surface of segment 6 of the liver within the gallbladder fossa mimicking the gallbladder (Figure 2).
No further procedure was undertaken. Further imaging was requested postoperatively to locate a potential ectopic gallbladder. The patient
recovered well from surgery, and her symptoms resolved. Subsequently repeated MRCP, confirmed the absence of the gallbladder, a normal
common bile duct and no change in the haemangioma. The patient remained well and symptom free 2 years later. Congenital anomalies of the
gallbladder are numerous, and in addition to agenesis, include location in an abnormal site (ectopic gallbladder) hypoplasia, diverticula,
duplication, heterotrophic tissue, and septation defects. Agenesis of the gallbladder (AG) is a rare congenital anomaly of the biliary
system and was first described by Lemary in 1701 . The average incidence of gallbladder agenesis at birth is about 0.02% , or 1 in 6000 live
births. AG has been observed in both children and adults, with a median age of 46 at the time of diagnosis . Clinical studies report a
female-male ratio of 3 : 1, while autopsy studies interestingly report an equal gender incidence . AG is due to a fault in embryological
development of the gallbladder. Approximately 70% of cases are thought to be isolated anomalies, and 9% are associated with biliary atresia.
The gallbladder is developed by the 4th week of gestation from the pars cystica (caudal portion) of the anterior diverticulum of the
primitive gut. The pars cystica originates from the anterior duodenum becoming the common bile duct after rotation of the duodenum. The
gallbladder is initially a hollow cord as the hollow portion of the pars cystica is obliterated by epithelial proliferation. Essentially, AG
is an anomaly of the development of vessels located on each side of the gallbladder bud (sinus venosus cordis, omphaloenteric, and umbilical
veins) which may explain the association of this anomaly in 21% of cases with cardiac, vascular, gastro-intestinal, and abdominal wall
malformations observed in the multiple fetal anomaly group . AG may be inherited, with several familial cases observed, including across two
generations . These series suggest a non-sex-linked inheritance pattern with variable penetration. Bennion et al. suggested a classification
system for AG based on a review of cases worldwide. They identified three groups: (1) multiple fetal anomalies, the most common
malformations being cardiovascular, followed by gastrointestinal and genitourinary, (2) asymptomatic cases, in which agenesis of the
gallbladder was found at autopsy or laparotomy for another reason and, in some cases, there was a familial association, and (3) symptomatic
cases, with the most common associated symptoms being biliary colic (54%), dyspepsia (34%), and jaundice (27%) [3, 12]. The presenting
symptoms of agenesis of the gallbladder are compatible with hepatobiliary dysfunction such as right upper quadrant pain, nausea, vomiting,
abnormal liver function, and jaundice, and these symptoms are found in 40% of cases . It is believed that these symptoms are a consequence
of biliary dyskinesia, but 98% of patients report resolution of symptoms postoperatively where no formal procedure was performed other than
identification of an absent gallbladder. This was the situation with our patient who did improve significantly following surgical
exploration, but why this occurs remains unclear. The majority of cases in the literature have been diagnosed at laparotomy, but with the
increasing use of laparoscopic surgery, case reports describing the diagnosis of gallbladder agenesis at laparoscopy are common. Even with
advances in imaging modalities, radiology reports are still frequently unable to be dogmatic, particularly in respect of anatomical
findings, and USS often reveals what is thought to be a small, contracted gallbladder. Gallbladder agenesis encountered during a surgical
procedure is almost always unexpected and usually presents the clinician with a surgical dilemma. Routine performance of laparoscopic
cholecystectomy has produced changes in technique, and the more limited dissection and lack of tactile feedback give less information about
the anatomical relationships. This often prompts the conversion to an open procedure if a gallbladder cannot be found . Frey emphasized the
need for a thorough surgical exploration to exclude an ectopic gallbladder prior to being able to confidently confirm the diagnosis of
gallbladder agenesis . Recognised ectopic locations are intrahepatic, left-sided, between the leaves of the lesser omentum, retroperitoneal,
retrohepatic, within the falciform ligament, retroduodenal, and retropancreatic [3, 14–16]. Unfortunately, the wide distribution of these
possible abnormal sites means that considerable open dissection and consequent morbidity would occur if an attempt was made to fulfill
Frey's criteria rigorously. A potentially less invasive method would be to use intraoperative ultrasonography (as was used in this case),
which is able to give extremely clear images of all the potential ectopic sites. In cases reported in the literature, intraoperative
cholangiogram is felt to be essential to exclude or confirm the presence of common bile duct stones and to complete the diagnosis. Some
groups recommend routine common bile duct exploration when its diameter is increased or a common bile duct stone has been found [3, 14,
16–18]. We elected not to perform an intraoperative cholangiogram or to explore the common bile duct because of reports of iatrogenic common
bile duct injury produced during the search for an absent gallbladder. In addition, the preoperative MRCP images (which were reviewed
intraoperatively) were of good quality, and we could not identify any filling defect suggesting ductal stones. If Frey's criteria are not
fulfilled intra-operatively, other authors advocate post-operative CT imaging to search for a potential ectopic gallbladder and confirm the
diagnosis of gallbladder agenesis . It can be extremely difficult to diagnose agenesis of the gallbladder preoperatively using routine
ultrasound examination. Consequently, in this era of minimally invasive surgery, it is important that clinicians should keep this rare
condition in mind when the gallbladder appears abnormal on preoperative imaging studies and cannot be found at laparoscopy. As symptoms will
improve in 98% of cases, it is very important to avoid unnecessary intervention in patients who have a negative laparoscopy. Laparoscopic
exploration combined with laparoscopic ultrasonography and potentially post-operative CT or MRI is helpful in establishing a definitive
diagnosis of agenesis of the gallbladder. They are also to refute a putative diagnosis of ectopic gallbladder, this approach will reduce the
morbidity associated with more invasive surgery. When intra-operative imaging is able to exclude an ectopic location of the gallbladder and
a diagnosis of gallbladder agenesis is established, then pain will resolve in almost all cases and further investigation will be difficult
to justify. (a) Axial T2-weighted half-fourier acquisition single-shot turbo spin echo (HASTE) MRI image demonstrating a faint area of high
signal in the area of the gallbladder fossa (arrow) adjacent to the second part of the duodenum (arrowhead). The radiological appearances
are suggestive of a small contracted gallbladder. Although with the absence of a recognisable cystic duct, a surface haemangioma is a
possible differential diagnosis. (b) T2 weighted coronal MRI image with fat suppression demonstrating a normal calibre extrahepatic biliary
ducts (arrow). Note the absence of any cystic duct. Normal appearance of the pancreatic duct (arrowhead). Laparoscopic image demonstrating
the Hepatic Haemangioma in the gallbladder fossa.
