Obstructive fibrinous tracheal pseudomembrane is a rare, but potentially fatal complication associated with endotracheal intubation. It has
been known that the formation of tracheal pseudomembrane is related with intracuff pressure during endotracheal intubation or infectious
cause. But in the patient described in this case, pseudomembrane formation in the trachea was associated with subglottic epithelial trauma
or caustic injuries to the trachea caused by aspirated gastric contents during intubation rather than tracheal ischemia due to high cuff
pressure. We report a patient with obstructive fibrinous tracheal pseudomembrane after endotracheal intubation who presented with dyspnea
and stridor and was treated successfully with mechanical removal using rigid bronchoscopy. Obstructive fibrinous tracheal pseudomembrane
(OFTP) is a rare condition associated with endotracheal intubation in which a pseudomembrane that encircles the tracheal wall is formed.
Little is known about the mechanisms involved in the development of this fibrinous pseudomembrane, but it requires early detection and
urgent management, as it causes a life-threatening tracheal obstruction. Here, we present a case of OFTP that developed 3 days after
extubation in a patient who was intubated for 3 days. A previously healthy, nonsmoking 66-yr-old woman (height 160 cm, weight 58 kg) was
admitted to the hospital because of altered mental status on November 8, 2007. According to her family, she was vomiting and becoming
increasingly lethargic when found, and empty sleeping pill bottles were discovered beside her. On arrival to the hospital, the patient was
somnolent and agitated, and unable to follow commands. Her blood pressure was 110/70 mmHg, pulse rate 80/min, body temperature 36℃, and
respiration rate 24/min. Physical examination revealed no evidence of trauma. The lungs were clear on auscultation. The results of
urinalysis and routine hematologic and blood chemistry tests were normal. Brain computed tomography (CT) was normal. The arterial pH was
7.23, PaO2 35.3 mmHg, PaCO2 62.7 mmHg, and SaO2 55.8% while the patient was breathing room air. After several unsuccessful and traumatic
attempts, her trachea was intubated with a 7.5-mm cuffed tracheal tube (Hi-Lo™, Mallinckrodt Medical, Athlone, Ireland) to treat acute
respiratory distress. After mechanical ventilation, the patient's condition improved rapidly. Suctioning via the endotracheal tube revealed
scanty amount of whitish sputum that showed no evidence of microorganisms. Seventy-two hours after intubation, the trachea was extubated.
While intubated, the intra-cuff pressure was monitored and maintained below 15 cmH2O. Three days after extubation, she complained of dyspnea
and inspiratory wheezing. On examination, she was afebrile and tachypneic. Despite treatment with a short-acting bronchodilator and
steroids, the symptoms became progressively worse. There were no signs suggestive of infection on a chest radiography, blood cultures,
urinalysis and sputum cultures. But chest CT revealed an irregular luminal narrowing in the proximal trachea just below the vocal cords
(Fig. 1). On flexible bronchoscopy under conscious sedation, a white, rubbery membrane encircling the trachea was seen just below the vocal
cords, which resulted in narrowing of the tracheal lumen by approximately 80% (Fig. 2). This pseudomembrane was tubular in shape, 4 cm long,
and adherent to the tracheal wall. We tried to remove the pseudomembrane using bronchoscopic forceps, but the lesion was cut to pieces.
Subsequently, rigid bronchoscopy was performed under general anesthesia and the pseudomembrane was removed entirely with mechanical forceps
(Fig. 3). After the procedure, no findings suggestive of tracheomalacia or granulation tissue formation in the tracheal wall were detected.
The patient's symptoms improved immediately after removing the pseudomembrane. The biopsy specimen showed fibrinoid material with
eosinophils and acute inflammatory cells (Fig. 4). Tissue cultures grew no bacteria or fungus. Bronchoscopy performed 3 months later showed
no residual lesion. The patient has remained asymptomatic for 17 months. Tracheal complications associated with endotracheal intubation
include tracheal stenosis, ulcers, granuloma, and tracheomalacia (1). Of these, tracheal stenosis is one of the most dire complications and
requires appropriate evaluation and management, such as endotracheal stenting or tracheal surgery. Tracheal pseudomembranes are rare, but
can occur following endotracheal intubation. Sigrist et al. (2) reported a rare, fatal case involving the development of a tubelike
formation in the upper trachea after intubation. Harbison et al. (3) also described a patient who developed a tracheal fibrinoid membrane 3
days after extubation. Deslée et al. (4) reported a series of ten patients with tubular, rubberlike pseudomembranes molding the trachea
after a short duration of intubation. In these patients, the mean duration of endotracheal intubation was 6.2±1.8 days, but in four cases it
was less than 24 hr. Seven patients developed symptoms of acute airway obstruction and these symptoms occurred shortly after extubation
(59±27 hr). As in the reported cases, our patient was intubated for 72 hr and developed dyspnea and stridor 3 days after extubation. Most
reported cases of pseudomembrane formation in the trachea are associated with an infectious cause. Diphtheria is a well-known cause of
pseudomembrane formation in the respiratory tract and other infectious etiologies have also been implicated, including fungi, bacteria, and
viruses (5). Membranous laryngotracheobronchitis (membranous croup) may be considered in the differential diagnosis of OFTP, but it is
predominantly associated with signs of infection including high fever, a greater degree of toxicity and presence of pathogenic bacteria in
tracheal secretions or membrane (6). The mechanism involved in the development of a pseudo-membrane following endotracheal intubation is not
clear, although tracheal ischemia due to cuff pressure injury of the endotracheal tube has been suggested as the etiology (4). When the cuff
pressure exceeds 30 mmHg, it can result in mucosal ischemia, which causes ulceration and shedding of the tracheal epithelium. The
pathological findings of tracheal pseudomembranes, such as superficial abrasions of the mucosa and desquamated necrotic tracheal epithelium,
support this hypothesis (4). However, we suggest that a pseudomembrane can be formed independently of cuff pressure. Indeed, the cuff
pressure in our case was maintained below 15 cmH2O while she was intubated. Considering the history of vomiting and several traumatic
attempts to intubate the trachea, acid injury or traumatic injury to the tracheal mucosa, rather than ischemic injury, may have triggered
the development of a pseudomembrane in our patient. When we tried to intubate the trachea, the endotracheal tube might have been smeared
with gastric acid in her oral cavity, which may eventually have damaged the tracheal mucosa in contact with the cuff, and trauma might have
increased the damage to the tracheal mucosa. Several papers support our hypothesis that the formation of a pseudomembrane is associated with
subglottic epithelial trauma or caustic injuries to the trachea caused by aspirated gastric contents during intubation (7, 8). If left
untreated, OFTP may cause acute tracheal obstruction, which can be life-threatening. Once a diagnosis of OFTP is established, the lesion
should be removed immediately. In many cases, the only successful treatment is excision of the lesion via rigid bronchoscopy (4). In our
case, we tried to remove the pseudomembrane with flexible forceps, but they were cumbersome and the procedure took too long. Subsequently,
we performed rigid bronchoscopy and removed the pseudomembrane easily. In summary, we described a case of OFTP that was removed via rigid
bronchoscopy. OFTP is a very rare condition, but should be considered in every patient who develops symptoms of acute airway obstruction
shortly after extubation. Tracheal ischemia has been considered as the main etiology in the development of a tracheal pseudomembrane, but we
postulate that acidic or traumatic injury to the tracheal mucosa was a more likely cause in our case. Physicians should be alert to this
fatal complication and bronchoscopy should be performed for the precise diagnosis to allow early detection. Mechanical ablation using a
rigid bronchoscope can cure this rare entity. Chest computed tomography image at the level of the trachea just below the vocal cords showing
luminal narrowing. Bronchoscopic image showing a thick, annular, rubberlike pseudomembrane encircling the tracheal wall. Gross view of the
pseudomembrane removed at rigid bronchoscopy. Microscopic examination showing that the pseudomembrane consists of fibrinous material with
polymorphonulclear cell infiltration (H&E stain ×100).
