Carcinoid is a rare malignancy originating from enterochromaffin cells and is clinically characterized by flushing, diarrhea and
bronchospasm, due to secretion of vasoactive substances. A dreaded complication is carcinoid heart disease, which mainly affects right
cardiac chambers, resulting in thickened, immobile and retracted tricuspid and pulmonary valves. In the current report, a case of a 60-year
old female presenting with symptoms of right heart failure is described. Transthoracic two-dimensional and real-time three-dimensional
echocardiography findings, as well as biochemical markers, including pro-BNP and NT-pro-BNP, were consistent with carcinoid syndrome. The
histological diagnosis of carcinoid was confirmed after surgical resection of an ovarian mass. Primary cardiac tumors are rare (5%) while
metastatic tumors of the heart, predominantly from carcinoma of lung and breast, malignant melanoma, and leukemias and lymphomas, constitute
the majority of cardiac tumors Cardiac carcinoid is an exceedingly rare cause of valvular disease and is characterized by plaque-like
deposits of fibrous tissue on endocardial surface of valve cusps and leaflets usually on the right heart valves (90%). A case, regarding an
ovarian carcinoid mass with cardiac manifestations involving both tricuspid and pulmonary valves, is described. A 60-year old Caucasian
female, was referred to our cardiology department, due to early fatigue (NYHA II/III) and ankle edema, progressively deteriorating over the
last year, also complaining of anorexia. She had a medical history of hypertension, which was treated with an angiotensin receptor blocker,
with no other risk factors for coronary artery disease. The rest of her medical history was unrevealing. On physical examination, the
patient had 90 bpm and a respiratory rate of 12 breaths/min. Her temperature was 37°C and her blood pressure was 140/90 mmHg. Cardiac
examination revealed a left parasternal holosystolic murmur, a third cardiac sound (S3) and a palpable right ventricular heave, whereas lung
auscultation was unremarkable. The rest of the physical examination indicated signs of right heart failure, including palpable liver,
elevated jugular pressure and pitting peripheral edema. The electrocardiogram revealed incomplete right bundle branch block, while the
initial biochemical control showed increased levels of natriuretic peptides Nt-proBNP (800 pg/ml) and BNP (387 pg/ml). According to two-
dimensional and real-time three-dimensional transthoracic echocardiographic study, left cardiac chambers had normal size and function and
the respective valves moved normally throughout the cardiac cycle. In contrast, enlarged and dilated right cardiac chambers with mildly
impaired systolic function were recorded. The leaflets of tricuspid and pulmonary valve were thickened, immobile and retracted, leading in
valve malcoaptation and consequent severe regurgitation, as showed by the color Doppler (Figures 1, 2, 3, 4) (See additional files 1, 2, 3,
4, 5). Moreover three-dimensional echo provided unique en-face views of the thickened tricuspid valve leaflets which were fixed in a
semiopen position, causing a large area of noncoaptation (Figure 5) (See additional file 6). The clinical and echocardiographic findings
aroused the suspicion of carcinoid heart disease. Levels of 24-hour urine 5-HIAA were increased (572 μmol/24 h), a finding consistent with
carcinoid disease. Due to impaired right ventricular function, the surgical replacement of both tricuspid and pulmonary valves was not
recommended. Right ventricular inflow view in systole showing thickened, immobile and retracted anterior and septal leaflets of tricuspid
valve. Short axis view in diastole depicting a fixed and immobile pulmonary valve. Apical four-chamber view in systole displaying an opened
and retracted tricuspid valve, while mitral valve is closed. Apical four-chamber view in diastole. The color Doppler demonstrates severe
tricuspid valve regurgitation. Real-Time three-dimensional image showing the thickened and retracted tricuspid valve from the perspective of
the right atrium. Moreover, the patient's abdominal CT revealed a mass in the ovary and she was operated. Primary ovarian carcinoid was
histologically revealed (Figure 6). Well differentiated neuroendocrine tumor. (A) Positive immunohistochemical stain for Chromogranin. (B)
Positive immunohistochemical membranal stain for CD56. Carcinoid tumors are uncommon malignancies that arise from enterochromaffin cells
typically located in the gastrointestinal tract or lungs . These tumors may secrete large amounts of vasoactive substances, including
5-hydroxytryptamine and prostaglandins, which in turn cause various clinical manifestations such as flushing, diarrhea, and bronchospasm.
Primary ovarian carcinoid tumors are rare and unique, due to the fact that they release vasoactive substances directly into the inferior
vena cava (right ovary) or renal vein (left ovary), entering the systemic circulation . Cardiac lesions are found in 50-60% of patients with
carcinoid syndrome, usually between 18-24 months after diagnosis is established . Patients with carcinoid heart disease typically present
with symptoms of right-sided heart failure (hepatomegaly, edema, ascites, fatigue, and low cardiac output), and when symptoms are advanced
(NYHA class 3 or 4), outlook is poor . Diagnosis can be made relying on biochemical markers and imaging techniques . Increased levels of
natriuretic peptides Nt-proBNP, BNP and 24-hour urine 5-HIAA are typical of this disease. Moreover, according to various studies, there
seems to be a strong correlation between serotonin, 5-HIAA levels and the prevalence of carcinoid heart disease . It is known that plaque-
like fibrous endocardial thickening leads to cardiac valve involvement. Echocardiography is the most commonly used modality in this setting,
revealing retraction and/or fixation of the valves, findings that are pathognomonic for the specific entity. Although the role of newer
imaging modalities has not yet been established, three-dimensional echocardiography may play an incremental role for valvular lesion and
right ventricular evaluation in patients with carcinoid heart disease . An alternative modality would be cardiac magnetic resonance
providing accurate anatomic and functional information, not only for cardiac chambers but also for heart valves . Moreover, magnetic
resonance imaging has the advantage over CT that the tricuspid valve motion and valvular dysfunction can be precisely assessed and
quantified using cine MRI in combination with velocity-encoded cine MRI . To this point, an integrated approach utilizing multimodality
imaging, in order to assess the severity of disease, is perhaps the most suitable management strategy . Treatment constitutes mainly of
somatostatin analogs, which inhibit the release of various biogenic amines and peptides, including serotonin, and as a result there is a
marked alleviation of symptoms . Cardiac surgery should be considered early for patients with symptomatic carcinoid valve disease and
controlled carcinoid symptoms , as disease progression may have an unfavourable impact on surgery and survival outcomes. This is a rare case
of cardiac carcinoid, because of the unusual primary tumor origin in addition to the dual valve involvement. Primary ovarian carcinoid
accounts only for 0.1% of all ovarian malignancies and less than 5% of total carcinoid tumors . On the other hand, carcinoid usually affects
the right cardiac chambers leading in thickening and retraction of the respective valves, with the tricuspid valve being the most commonly
affected structure. Therefore, the current report, where both tricuspid and pulmonary valve are involved, consists a minority of carcinoid
valve disease cases. Echocardiography is the modality of choice for the assessment of this entity, with real-time three dimensional echo
providing unique en face views of the complex anatomy of the cardiac valves and the valvular apparatus. In the present clinical case, the
combination of echocardiographic imaging and circulating biomarkers provided useful insights, leading accurately and undoubtedly to the
diagnosis, which was subsequently verified by the histological study. In our patient, although tricuspid and pulmonary valves had severe
regurgitation, the surgical replacement was not feasible, due to impaired right ventricular systolic function. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. CA conceived the case report, performed bedside echocardiographic examinations, IF reviewed literature and
wrote the manuscript. CK and AK have been involved in drafting the manuscript. DG has provided the histological analysis. CP contributed
critical revision of the manuscript. CS has supervised and commented the manuscript. All authors read and approved of the final manuscript.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's legal representative for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Video 1. Right ventricular inflow
tract showing thickened, immobile and retracted anterior and septal leaflets of the tricuspid valve. Click here for file Video 2. Short axis
view depicting fixed and immobile tricuspid and pulmonary valves. Click here for file Video 3. Apical four-chamber view displaying an opened
and retracted tricuspid valve with normal mitral valve function, enlarged right ventricle and dilated right atrium. Click here for file
Video 4. Apical four-chamber view. The color Doppler demonstrates severe tricuspid valve regurgitation Click here for file Video 5. Short
axis view depicting severe pulmonary valve regurgitation. Click here for file Video 6. Real-Time three-dimensional image showing the
thickened and retracted tricuspid valve from the perspective of the right atrium, while mitral valve moves normally throughout the cardiac
cycle. Click here for file
