To report a new surgical technique for excising pediatric corneal limbal dermoid and the post-resection ocular surface reconstruction. We
describe a method of deep lamellar excision followed by sutureless multilayered amniotic membrane transplantation in surgical management of
corneal limbal dermoid. This technique achieves a rapid corneal re-epithelization, reduces post-operative pain, and will diminish post-
operative scarring. Preoperative corneal astigmatism will persist. This method offers an alternative surgical approach in comparison to
simple excision in removal of simple pediatric corneal limbal dermoids. Epibulbar dermoids are choristomas of a single lesion or multiple
lesions involving central or perilimbal cornea, conjunctiva and/or periocular tissues. They are typically slow-growing, minimally
vascularized whitish lesions generally located in inferotemporal quadrant . Anatomically they have been classified into three grades. The
first grade, the limbal or epibulbar dermoid, is a superficial tumor lesion less than 5 mm localized on the corneal limbus. The second grade
is a large dermoid covering the majority of cornea and extending deep to Descemet’s membrane without involving it. The third grade, the
least common, is a large dermoid covering the whole cornea and extending deep, affecting all histological structures between the anterior
surface of the eyeball and pigmented epithelium of the iris. Despite their benign nature, epibulbar dermoids may affect vision by gradually
inducing corneal astigmatism resulting in anisometropic amblyopia . Enlarging limbal dermoids may also cause disturbance to the ocular
surface tear film, forming dellen that result in surface irritation and discomfort . There is a debate among surgeons as to the appropriate
time for excision and the most optimal way to surgically reconstruct the corneal defects following removal of such lesions in infants and
children . The time of surgical excision appears to vary depending on the lesion’s original size, growth, and area of involvement, as well
as the family’s request for removal due to psychosocial issues . Numerous surgical techniques have been reported in the literature, from
simple excision to lamellar and/or penetrating keratoplasty with corneal-limbal scleral donor graft transplantation, depending upon on the
depth, size and site of such lesions . Simple excision of corneal dermoids may result in persistent epithelial defect, corneal
vascularization and scar formation . A number of articles have shown amniotic membrane to have widespread application with or without limbal
allografts in ocular and corneal surface reconstruction [15, 16]. Here we describe a method of superficial lamellar dissection of grade-1
limbal dermoids combined with application of fibrin glue-assisted multilayer amniotic membrane transplantation (AmnioGraftTM, Bio-Tissue
Inc, Miami, FL, USA) as a biological substrate for corneal stromal growth, re-epithelization, retardation in post-operative scar formation,
and reduction of post-operative pain. Institutional review board exemption was granted, parental consent was obtained, and HIPAA regulations
were followed. A 6-month old boy had progressive enlargement of an inferotemporal corneal limbal dermoid in his right eye since birth
(Fig. 1). Visual acuity testing revealed normal fixation and following pattern for both eyes. No amblyopia was present. Examination for both
the alignment and versions were normal. After a period of observation, astigmatic error increased from 1D to 2.25D. Due to progressive
enlargement of the mass reported by parents, increasing astigmatic error and the parent’s desire to remove the lesion, the decision was made
to proceed with surgical excision. The surgical approach was reviewed thoroughly with the parents. Fig. 1Preoperative inferotemporal limbal
dermoid Preoperative inferotemporal limbal dermoid The border of the limbal dermoid was marked using a fine marking pen after anterior
segment B-scan showed superficial corneal involvement. Preservative-free lidocaine® 0.75% with epinephrine for total of 0.1 cc was injected
into subconjunctival space inferior to the lesion. A conjunctival peritomy was made at the inferior border of the lesion using blunt
Westcott scissors. The surrounding tissue was freed. With the use of a 57 curved crescent blade knife, lamellar dissection of the corneal
limbal dermoid was carried out starting from the base of the dome on the sclera moving towards the cornea. Following complete excision and
removal of the dermoid, a longitudinal planar dissection of residual dermoid fibers from the corneal stroma was performed using a 57
straight beaver blade knife. A fine diamond burr was used to smooth out the corneal surface bed. A clear stromal tissue bed became evident
following removal of approximately 20% of corneal stromal tissue measured by an ultrasound pachymeter. Calipers measured the corneal defect
to be 3 × 3mm. Fresh amniotic membrane (AmnioGraft®, Miami, FL, USA) was folded in a 3-layered sandwich pattern with the orientation of
stromal side on the corneal surface and epithelial side up, and then trimmed to the size of the measured corneal defect. The folded amniotic
membrane achieved complete filling of the corneal defective depth, and as a result lay at a similar height to the surrounding healthy
corneal tissue. Fibrin glue (Tisseel®, Baxter Inc, Deerfield, IL, USA) was then applied under the amniotic membrane layers to obtain
stability of the membrane and also allow for firm adherence to the corneal defect. An additional amniotic membrane was cut by a trephine to
6 mm diameter, and was firmly attached using fibrin glue to cover both the bare sclera and over the already placed amniotic membrane
extending to the rim of healthy corneal tissue. The recessed conjunctival tissue was repositioned to be adjacent to the amniotic membrane
edge and then reattached with fibrin glue. No bare sclera or corneal epithelial defect was present at the conclusion of the procedure. A
subconjunctival injection of preservative-free mixture of marcaine®, Ancef® and dexamethasone® 0.3 cc was administered into the inferior
fornix. An additional 0.1 cc of 40 mg/cc kenalog® (triamcinolone) was injected into inferior fornix. The patient’s eye was pressure-patched
after instillation of maxitrol® ointment and a drop of tetracaine (AK-T-Caine PF, Sigma Inc, Monticello, IA, USA) for 24 hours. At the first
post-operative day visit, parents reported regular sleeping and feeding behavior, and no discomfort was noted. Parents did not administer
pain medication after discharge and during the first post-operative day. No epithelial defect was evident at this visit. Amniotic membrane
was firmly attached (Fig. 2). Our patient continued normal behavior without eye rubbing for the first post-operative week. Direct
examination showed presence of amniotic membrane at 4 weeks following surgery (Fig. 3). Corneal transparency continued to improve such that
eight weeks postoperatively, amniotic membrane was no longer visible clinically. Conjunctival tissue had completely healed without
retraction and minimal corneal opacity was present. Three months post-operatively, the visual acuity was stable. No corneal or conjunctival
neovascularization or scar was present (Fig. 4). The astigmatic error remained at 2.25D at 3 months post-operatively. Fig. 2Post-operative
day #1: amniotic membrane covering the corneal defectFig. 3Post-operative week #4: corneal defect covered by amniotic membrane. minimal
vascularization of AMG is presentFig. 4Post-operative month #3: corneal defect area remains clear and quiet Post-operative day #1: amniotic
membrane covering the corneal defect Post-operative week #4: corneal defect covered by amniotic membrane. minimal vascularization of AMG is
present Post-operative month #3: corneal defect area remains clear and quiet A number of articles have shown the wide application of
amniotic membrane (fresh or preserved) with and/or without limbal allografts for ocular and corneal surface reconstruction . Indications of
amniotic membrane transplantation for treatment of ocular surface diseases have ranged from cicatricial ocular surface disorders such as
Stevens–Johnson syndrome, alkali burn, bullous or band keratopathy, ocular cicatricial pemphigoid to pterygium and conjunctival tumors [21,
22]. Fresh or preserved amniotic membrane has been shown to promote epithelization, reduce inflammation, prevent neovascularization and
suppress recurrent subconjunctival fibrosis following symblepharon lysis Furthermore, amniotic membrane is known to differentiate into
conjunctival epithelial cells . Additionally, recent advances in the use of fibrin glue in conjunction with amniotic membrane
transplantation has significantly enhanced the application of tissues adhesives in ocular surface reconstruction [25, 26]. In pediatric eyes
with low grade peri-limbal corneal dermoids having predisposition to scar formation following corneal dermoid resection, amniotic membrane
transplantation seems to provide an excellent alternative to reduce or prevent post-operative patients’ scar fromation. Higher grade ocular
surface dermoids should, however, be evaluated for appropriate surgical planning with pre- or peri-operative ultrasound biomcroscopy for
their depth of involvement [27, 28]. Simple excision and/or keratectomy of smaller lesions have been shown to lead to pseudo-pterygium and
conjunctival symblepharon formation due to surface tear fluid irregularities . In addition, it has been proposed that early surgical
intervention facilitates the ease of dissection with less complications, and also results in better final cosmetic and functional results .
We believe the amniotic membrane transplantation may also protect limbal stem cell populations from detriment of prolonged inflammation.
Furthermore, amniotic membrane tissue provides a natural biological substrate for indigenous corneal stromal growth, remodeling and
epithelial cell differentiation [29, 30]. An additional advantage of amniotic membrane transplantation is that it reduces post-operative
pain and associated inflammation as it covers the post-operative corneal epithelial defect and corneal nerves as well as the inflammatory
cascade. This helps to mitigate post-operative scarring. Although amniotic membrane has never been cited in the literature to be used
following surgical removal of corneal dermoid in pediatric patients, it has been applied in children and in strabismus surgeries to reduce
post-operative adhesions . Pre-operative counseling with parents should include potential failure to improve astigmatism. Yamada and
colleagues used amniotic membrane in a patient with subconjunctival fibrosis and fat adhesion syndrome with a satisfactory outcome . More
significant corneal defects have also been filled and reconstructed with multi-layered amniotic membrane . Our rationale for using
multilayered amniotic membrane was to achieve volumetric filling of the stromal and epithelial defect to prevent dellen effect. Extensive
corneal defects seem to show an improved healing response rate following multilayered amniotic membrane transplantation [34, 35]. In
addition, using tissue adhesives in the amniotic membrane transplantation for pediatric corneal dermoid removal permits a sutureless
procedure, thereby avoiding future suture exposure and foreign body sensation. Application of fibrin glue also shortens operating times by
eliminating suture placement. While application of multi-layered amniotic membrane with tissue adhesive in our patient added 7-10 minutes to
our procedure, lack of any suture use for the case conserved us more time. This technique also eliminates a return to the operating room for
suture removal thereby saving time and significant resources for both the provider and the family. The lack of more than one surgical case
as well as a short follow-up period are the main limitations of this report. A larger number of patients as well as a longer follow-up time
would be preferable in order to draw final conclusions. Although previous surgical techniques of pediatric corneal-limbal dermoid removal
such as simple excision and/or sclerocorneal graft transplantation have been adequate, they have been shown to result in suture exposure,
painful post-operative recovery, and corneal neovascularization, as well as, potentially, additional surgical procedures. Our technique
would help eliminate these issues. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial
License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are
credited. Amir Pirouzian as the principal author takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
No potential conflict of interest exists for authors. Authors do not report any financial interest in any reported items.
