Catecholamine-producing tumours are called pheochromocytomas when they are located in the adrenal gland and sympathetic paragangliomas when
they are located elsewhere in the abdomen. Rarely these tumours do not produce catecholamines and even more rarely they arise in the
spermatic cord. Over the past decade, systematic mutation analysis of apparently sporadic cases of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas has
elucidated the frequent presence of germ line mutations in one of five candidate genes, including RET, VHL, SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD. We
describe a 45-year-old man with a non catecholamine-producing paraganglioma of the spermatic cord. We performed SDHB immunohistochemistry
and performed mutation analysis of the SDHB, SDHC, and SDHD genes. There was no staining of tumour cells with SDHB immunohistochemistry,
indicative of an SDH mutation. Mutation analysis demonstrated a germ line SDHD mutation (p.Val147Met). Systematic mutation analysis is
required in paraganglioma patients for the detection of germ line mutations. This should be preceded by SDHB immunohistochemistry to limit
the number of genes to be tested. Extra-adrenal tumours originating from chromaffin cells are called sympathetic paragangliomas and arise
from paraganglia that are distributed along the pre- and paravertebral sympathetic chains and the sympathetic nerve fibres, which innervate
the pelvic and retroperitoneal organs. In contrast, tumours originating from the adrenal medulla are called pheochromocytomas . Between 25%
and 79% of sympathetic paragangliomas and about 90% of pheochromocytomas are associated with clinical signs of excess catecholamine
secretion, while the remaining cases represent clinically non-functional tumours . Most of these tumours produce but do not secrete
catecholamines and may therefore evade detection for many years. The majority of sympathetic paragangliomas occur in various abdominal
sites, mostly in a paravertebral location, or in the organ of Zuckerkandl, a sympathetic paraganglion that plays an important role early in
life. More rarely, sympathetic paragangliomas have been described in the bladder wall, which may elicit micturition-related complaints of
excess catecholamine secretion [3, 4]. An even less frequent location is in the spermatic cord, where until now eight cases had been
described in the international literature ; however, none of these have been investigated for mutations in sympathetic paraganglioma-related
genes. An overview of the clinical data of these previous eight patients is presented in Table 1. Table 1Clinical data of the previous eight
patients with spermatic cord PGLAgeSymptomsHormonally activeAdditional tumoursReference137Painless mass right scrotal sac for 10
yearsNoNoEusebi et al. 252Painless mass left scrotal sac for 10 years/elevated blood pressure at operationYesNoSoejima et al. 318Painless
mass in right scrotal sac for 2 yearsNoNoBacchi at al. 437Painful mass in right scrotal sacNoNoMashat et al. 540Painless mass in left
scrotal sacNoNoAttaran et al. 652Lump within the right spermatic cordNoNoYoung et al. 755Painless left scrotal massYesBilateral carotid body
paragangliomas and bilateral pheochromocytomasAbe et al. 869Weight loss, malaise, and mass in right testicleNoNoGaraffa et al. Clinical data
of the previous eight patients with spermatic cord PGL Between 12% and 24% of apparently sporadic paragangliomas have been shown over the
past decade to have a hereditary basis, involving mutations in one of five different genes: the REarranged during Transfection (RET) proto-
oncogene, the von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) gene, and the succinate dehydrogenase subunits B (SDHB), C (SDHC), and D (SDHD) genes , . In the
present study, we report the first case of a spermatic cord sympathetic paraganglioma in which the tumour tissue was investigated by SDHB
immunohistochemistry. This was shown to be a useful tool in diagnosing paraganglioma patients with SDHx mutations; negative immunostaining
was seen in paragangliomas with SDHx mutations, whereas paragangliomas without mutations are positive with SDHB immunohistochemistry . In
this spermatic cord sympathetic paraganglioma, the negative immunostaining gave an important clue for the presence of an SDHx mutation,
which was subsequently shown to be a previously unknown germ line SDHD mutation. A 45-year-old man presented with a painless lump in his
left hemiscrotum of months’ duration. In his past medical history, an episode of acute left epididymitis, which subsided with antibiotics,
was recorded 20 years earlier. On physical examination, a palpable, painless, firm mass was revealed in the upper pole of this left
testicle. With a provisional diagnosis of a testicular neoplasm, a left inguinal orchiectomy was recommended and subsequently performed. His
blood pressure was stable during and after surgery. The orchiectomy specimen displayed a tumour mass confined to the spermatic cord
measuring 4.8 × 3.3 × 2.5 cm, weighing 71 g, surrounded by a capsule. The cut surface showed homogeneously reddish-white tumour tissue with
an elastic consistency, while both the testis and epididymis were of normal colour, shape, and consistency (Fig. 1a). Fig. 1a Gross aspect
of spermatic cord paraganglioma. b Typical histology of the tumour showing large polygonal cells with ample amphophilic cytoplasm and
moderate nuclear pleomorphism. c Chromogranin A immunohistochemistry showing positive staining in the tumour cells. d SDHB
immunohistochemistry showing negative staining in tumour cells, while endothelial cells are immunoreactive. e Mutation analysis showing a
p.Val147Met mutation in the tumour DNA compared with normal reference DNA a Gross aspect of spermatic cord paraganglioma. b Typical
histology of the tumour showing large polygonal cells with ample amphophilic cytoplasm and moderate nuclear pleomorphism. c Chromogranin A
immunohistochemistry showing positive staining in the tumour cells. d SDHB immunohistochemistry showing negative staining in tumour cells,
while endothelial cells are immunoreactive. e Mutation analysis showing a p.Val147Met mutation in the tumour DNA compared with normal
reference DNA Microscopically, there was a solid-looking tumour, with well-defined nests or trabeculae of tumour cells, separated by highly
vascularized septa, focally thickened and hyalinized (Fig. 1b). Immunohistochemically, the tumour cells displayed strong and diffuse
reactivity for vimentin, chromogranin A (Fig. 1c), synaptophysin, and neuron-specific enolase. Moreover, sustentacular cells were
immunoreactive for S-100 protein. Taken together, a diagnosis of an abdominal, presumably sympathetic, paraganglioma was proffered.
Following this histological diagnosis, the urologists performed an additional 24-h urinary analysis of catecholamines and their metabolites,
which was shown to be normal. Three years after surgery, the patient is healthy, free of disease, and without tumours at other anatomic
sites. There were no other family members known to the patient that had one or more pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas. DNA was isolated
from formalin fixed paraffin-embedded (FFPE) material. A region of at least 80% tumour cells was micro-dissected, and DNA was isolated using
the Puregene DNA isolation kit (Gentra, Minneapolis, USA) according to manufacturer’s protocol. An SDHB immunohistochemistry was performed
using the rabbit polyclonal antibody HPA002868 (Sigma-Aldrich Corp, St. Louis, MO; 1:500) according to the method described by van Nederveen
et al. . Subsequently, mutation analysis was performed by direct sequencing of tumour tissue. The SDHB immunohistochemistry did not show any
reactivity of the neoplastic cells (Fig. 1d). The mutation analysis that was performed by direct sequencing, on tumour tissue of this
patient, showed an SDHD mutation in exon 4 (c.439 G→T, p.Val147Met) (Fig. 1e). In the present case report, we have described, for the first
time in an individual case the use of SDHB immunohistochemistry for the guidance of subsequent DNA mutation analysis. Because of negative
immunostaining, an SDHx mutation was predicted and eventually shown to be a p.Val147Met SDHD mutation. This patient represents the ninth
patient in the English literature with a spermatic cord paraganglioma, which was detected by its local mass effect, as it did not appear to
produce catecholamines. The latter has not been formally proven, as no biochemical analyses had been carried out prior to surgery; however,
the patient did not report any complaints that could be related to high blood pressure and/or catecholamine excess. The unusual location for
a paraganglioma in the spermatic cord has been attributed to migration of neural crest progenitor cells, which are known to be present in
the paraganglia throughout the abdomen, as is reflected by the various locations of abdominal sympathetic paraganglioma . It is entirely
conceivable that these progenitor cells migrate along with the developing male gonad and give rise to paragangliomas at low frequency. Thus
far, these paragangliomas have been described in middle-aged men, none of whom has had genetic testing, although one patient clearly had
evidence of multiple tumours, for which we would strongly recommend systematic candidate gene mutation analysis . Until about 10 years ago,
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas were known to occur in the context of various tumour syndromes, including multiple endocrine neoplasia
type 2 (MEN 2), VHL disease, and NF1. Since the beginning of this decade, four additional genes (SDHB, SDHC, SDHD, and SDHAF2) have been
added, causing the pheochromocytoma–paraganglioma syndrome, characterized by the occurrence of multiple pheochromocytoma and/or
paraganglioma in the same patient and his or her family members. Whereas originally the frequency of germ line mutations in
pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas was estimated at 10%, based upon patients from clearly recognizable familial tumour syndromes,
systematic analysis of all genes (with the exception of NF1) has shown that an additional 15–25% of pheochromocytoma and paraganglioma
patients are carriers of germ line mutations in each of these genes [13, 14]. Although somatic mutations in some of these genes have been
described, they are quantitatively insignificant . The finding of this mutation has important implications for further patient management,
as it is known that patients with SDHD germ line mutations are at increased risk to develop further paragangliomas, either abdominal or head
and neck, or even pheochromocytomas. In addition, other family members may also be affected, so they should be screened too. Taken together,
we show here that the spermatic cord can be a rare location for the occurrence of paragangliomas in male patients and that a stepwise
immunohistochemical and genetic approach can be employed for the diagnosis of inherited paraganglioma, even in the absence of a positive
family history. We are grateful to Frank van der Panne for the help in preparing the figures. Conflict of interest statement We declare that
we have no conflict of interest. Funding José Gaal is supported by a grant of Erasmus MC. Open Access This article is distributed under the
terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited. Precis Candidate gene mutation analysis on a paraganglioma of the spermatic
cord
