Leigh syndrome is a rare progressive neurodegenerative, mitochondrial disorder of childhood with only a few cases documented from India. The
clinical presentation of Leigh syndrome is highly variable. However, in most cases it presents as a progressive neurological disease with
motor and intellectual developmental delay and signs and symptoms of brain stem and/or basal ganglia involvement. Raised lactate levels in
blood and/or cerebrospinal fluid is noted. It is the neuroimaging, mainly the Magnetic Resonance Imaging showing characteristic symmetrical
necrotic lesions in the basal ganglia and/or brain stem that leads to the diagnosis. Here, we report a case of 7 months old female child
presenting to us with status epilepticus, delayed developmental milestones and regression of the achieved milestones suspected to be a case
of neurodegenerative disorder, which on MRI was diagnosed as Leigh syndrome. Leigh Syndrome , also termed as subacute necrotising
encephalopathy is a rare, inherited progressive neurodegenerative disorder with characteristic pathological features usually presenting in
infancy or early childhood. It was first reported in 1951 by Denis Leigh , a British neuropathologist, in a 7 month old infant that
progressed rapidly and resulted in death over a 6-week period. Clinically, Leigh syndrome is characterized by psychomotor delay or
regression, muscular hypotonia, brainstem signs (especially strabismus, nystagmus and swallowing difficulties), ataxia, pyramidal signs,
respiratory insufficiency, lactate acidemia and acute deterioration following common infections. In most cases, dysfunction of the
respiratory chain enzymes is responsible for the disease. It may be due to defects in genes for the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex,
cytochrome-c oxidase, ATP synthase subunit 6, or subunits of mitochondrial complex I. Patterns of inheritance include X-linked recessive,
autosomal recessive, and mitochondrial . However the genetic cause of a number of cases of Leigh syndrome remains unknown, despite the
presence of a specific biochemical defect in many of them. Despite its considerable clinical, genetic and biochemistry heterogeneity, the
basic neuropathological features in children affected are almost identical; which are focal, bilateral, and symmetric necrotic lesions
associated with demyelination, vascular proliferation and gliosis in the brainstem, diencephalon, basal ganglia, and cerebellum . It is
possible to come to a diagnosis of probable SNE during life on the basis of clinical signs and symptoms, mode of inheritance, metabolic
abnormalities, and neuroimaging findings . We report a rare case which presented clinically as a neurodegenerative disorder and diagnosed as
Leigh syndrome on MRI. A 7 month old female child, 2nd product of second degree consanguineous marriage, with an uneventful perinatal
history presented to our hospital with status epilepticus, delayed developmental milestones and regression of the achieved milestones. On
initial examination, she was unconscious (Glassgow Coma Scale-5) and afebrile. Initial management aimed at controlling the seizures with
Diazepam (i.v., 0.3 mg/kg stat) and Phenytoin (i.v., 20 mg/kg stat followed by 5 mg/kg per 12 hourly). Following control of seizures the
child went into decerebrate posturing. The raised intracranial tension was treated with Mannitol (i.v., 5 mg stat). Her pulse was 154 beats
per minute, respiratory rate 36 cycles per minute and blood pressure 84/46 mm Hg. Her weight was 5 kg and height 62 cms. CNS examination
showed increased tone in the lower limbs. Deep tendon reflexes were exaggerated with bilateral Babinski sign. Pupils were dilated and
sluggishly reacting to light. Fundus examination and visual evoked potentials were normal. After an hour of admission, she became apnoeic
and was put on ventilator. The above clinical findings were highly suggestive of a neurodegenerative disorder and the patient was further
investigated. Routine haemogram revealed haemoglobin 8.8 gm%, packed cell volume 28.6%, total leucocyte count 26,800 cells per mm3 with
marked neutrophilia (85%) and lymphocyte count 10%. Cerebrospinal fluid examination showed 4 cells, all lymphocytes and normal sugar and
protein levels. CSF lactate was significantly raised (8.8 mmol/L). Gram and ZN staining of the CSF showed no organism and pus cells. Serum
lactate (6.8 mmol/L) and creatinine kinase (320 U/L) levels were abnormally raised. Liver function test showed mild derangement with AST- 54
IU/L, ALT- 49 IU/L and ALP- 109 IU/L. Renal function test was within normal limits. Arterial blood gas analysis indicated metabolic
acidosis. Blood and urine cultures were negative. Magnetic Resonance Imaging was done which showed bilateral, symmetrical abnormal lesions
in the basal ganglia, thalami, cerebral peduncles, dorsal medulla and peri aqueductal grey matter which were hyperintense in T2W, FLAIR and
DW images (Figure 1A, B &1C). There were prominent extracerebral CSF spaces in the fronto-temporo-parietal region on both the sides and
showed the similar signal characteristics (Figure 1D). Frontal atrophy with myelination normal for age was noticed. Above radiological
findings on MRI established the clinical diagnosis of a neurodegenerative disorder as Leigh syndrome. MRI Findings of Leigh Syndrome. A & B:
T2W image showing bilateral symmetrical abnormal signal intensities, seen in cerebral peduncles, dorsal medulla and peri aqueductal grey
matter. C: T2W image showing bilateral symmetrical abnormal signal intensities, seen involving basal ganglia and thalami. D: T2W image
showing prominent extracerebral CSF spaces in fronto-temporo-parietal region on both sides depicting signs of frontal atrophy Supportive
therapy for the suspected mitochondrial disorder was begun with intravenous Thiamine infusions, Carnitine, alkali supplementation and oral
coenzyme Q10(Ubiquinone). Over the next 2 days, she improved clinically and was extubated. However, the next few hours were critical, her
conditions deteriorating and she went into respiratory arrest requiring reintubation. She went into coma with GCS 4. Oculocephalic reflex
became absent. The patient eventually died 10 days after admission. Leigh's disease or SNE is a rare progressive neurological disorder of
the childhood. The estimated prevalence of Leigh Syndrome was 2.05 cases per 1, 00,000 . The preschool incidence of Leigh syndrome was 1 out
of 32000 . Age of onset of symptoms is usually less than 2 years (infantile form), but others may present in childhood (juvenile form) and
unusually in adulthood. It presents early in life with psychomotor regression, abnormal muscle tone, weakness, dystonia, brainstem and
cerebellar dysfunction (ataxia), visual loss, missed milestones or regression of the achieved milestones, tachypnea, and seizures . Affected
children usually become symptomatic within the first year of life with feeding difficulties, vomiting and failure to thrive . Death usually
occurs within a few years after onset of symptoms, typically from progressive respiratory failure . Laboratory analysis shows metabolic
acidosis with elevated blood, CSF lactate, and pyruvate concentrations . It is usually inherited in an autosomal recessive fashion. The
underlying defect can be at any of the sites in the enzyme pathway for respiratory metabolism. Associated mitochondrial enzyme deficiencies
are those of pyruvate carboxylase, pyruvate dehydrogenase, cytochrome C oxidase, and Complex 1 (NAD-Coenzyme Q Reductase) . The diagnostic
criteria are: (1) Progressive neurological disease with motor and intellectual developmental delay; (2) Signs and symptoms of brainstem
and/or basal ganglia disease; (3) Raised lactate levels in blood and/or cerebrospinal fluid; (4) Characteristic symmetric necrotic lesions
in the basal ganglia and/or brainstem . Neuroimaging plays an important role in diagnosis of patients with Leigh syndrome. The most
characteristic neuro-radiological findings are bilateral, symmetric focal hyperintensities in the basal ganglia, thalamus, substantia nigra,
and brainstem nuclei at various levels on T2-weighted MRI. These high T2 signals on MRI reflect the spongiform changes and vacuolation in
the affected brain structures . In the basal ganglia, the putamen is particularly involved. In one series, 100% of the patients with proven
SNE had putaminal involvement . Ghosh and Pradhan reported two children with Leigh syndrome suspected clinically and confirmed by MRI in
1996. Low attenuation in the putamina on CT is considered to be characteristic of the disease . In India, Bhavsar VM, Kumta NB described the
role of CT scan of the brain in the diagnosis of Leigh syndrome in 1991. In 2004, Mannan and Sharma et al reported autopsy proven Leigh
syndrome in a 15-month-old girl admitted with cough and hyperventilation. In 2005, Hombal and Narvekar reported Leigh syndrome in a 3-year-
old child with regression of milestones and involuntary movements. The diagnosis in their case was based on neuroimaging. Specific therapy
for mitochondrial disorders in children is not available. The results and prognosis are variable. The aim of symptomatic treatment is to
improve the ATP production and to lower the lactate levels. Thiamine, a cofactor of pyruvate dehydrogenase complex has been reported to
improve the neurological status in some patients . Marked improvement was observed with riboflavin, which nearly normalized the adenosine
triphosphate production . Rapid clinical and biochemical improvement was observed in patients with acute central respiratory failure with
the use of intravenous soya bean oil (ketogenic emulsion) . Ketogenic diet has been found to improve the outcome in those with a deficiency
of pyruvate dehydrogenase . Coenzyme Q and Carnitine have also been found to be effective. Leung TF, Hui J et al described significant
relief of dystonia with intramuscular botulinum toxin . Nucleus transplantation into enucleated oocyte is emerging as a new option for
prevention of mitochondrial disorders . This child presented to us with seizures, regression of developmental milestones and acute
exacerbation caused by a trivial respiratory illness. These symptoms pointed towards a neurodegenerative disorder. Examination revealed
delayed development, hypertonia and disorientation, all of which are recognized features of Leigh Syndrome . CSF lactate was markedly
elevated, but arterial lactate was normal. Though Leigh Syndrome is conventionally associated with elevated serum lactate, earlier studies
have shown that serum lactate can be well within normal limits in spite of definite neuro-radiological features and spectroscopic evidence
of elevated brain lactate . The imaging findings suggested a progressive neurodegenerative disorder with the possibility of a mitochondrial
encephalopathy. This is consistent with the neuro-radiological findings in previous reports of Leigh Syndrome . Enzymology, histology and
functional fibroblast ATP synthesis rate, molecular studies were not performed due to the paucity of facilities and financial constraints.
The diagnosis of Leigh's disease should be considered in appropriate clinical and laboratory settings whenever symmetrical hypodensities are
encountered in the putamina and midbrain on CT and further investigated with MRI. Our experience suggested that bilateral symmetric T2
prolongation involving multiple brainstem nuclei/structures associated with basal ganglia abnormalities in a child with neurological
problems should prompt the clinician to consider Leigh syndrome and conduct further investigations such as measurement of blood and/or CSF
lactate, and respiratory chain enzymes activities. Neuro-sradiological discriminative observation is very useful in guiding the clinicians
for the most appropriate enzymatic and genetic study in their patients. Mitochondrial disease cannot be cured completely. Efforts for
prevention and prenatal diagnosis are still in the nascent stage. With appropriate investigations, accurate diagnosis and prompt institution
of adequate supportive therapy, symptomatic amelioration can be achieved, thereby adding life to the limited years of survival of these
children. Further research aimed at prenatal identification of the responsible mutations and prevention of the disease is warranted. Written
informed consent was obtained from the father of the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the editor-in-chief of this journal. MRI: Magnetic Resonance Imaging; SNE: Subacute necrotising
encephalopathy; DNA: Deoxyribonucleic acid; GCS: Glassgow Coma Scale; i.v.: intravenous; CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; AST: Aspartate
transaminase; ALT: Alanine transaminase; ALP: Alkaline phosphatase; NAD: Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; CT: Computed Tomography; ATP:
Adenosine triphosphate. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. DYS, PK, MMAS participated in the clinical diagnosis,
sequence alignment, drafting the manuscript and made useful contribution in the revision of the literature. KA and GS participated in
writing discussion. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We acknowledge the contribution of Dr. S. G. Gandage (MD, DMRD),
Professor and Head, Department of Interventional Radiology, Rural Medical College, Loni in confirming the clinical diagnosis with
appropriate neuroimaging.
