Conceived and designed the experiments: TG CU. Performed the experiments: MCGB DML MGH MM AB RP LMB. Analyzed the data: MM TG JJGP MM JA CU.
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: MM JA CU. Wrote the paper: CU. In recent years clinical evidence has emphasized the
importance of the mtDNA genetic background that hosts a primary pathogenic mutation in the clinical expression of mitochondrial disorders,
but little experimental confirmation has been provided. We have analyzed the pathogenic role of a novel homoplasmic mutation (m.15533 A>G)
in the cytochrome b (MT-CYB) gene in a patient presenting with lactic acidosis, seizures, mild mental delay, and behaviour abnormalities.
Spectrophotometric analyses of the respiratory chain enzyme activities were performed in different tissues, the whole muscle mitochondrial
DNA of the patient was sequenced, and the novel mutation was confirmed by PCR-RFLP. Transmitochondrial cybrids were constructed to confirm
the pathogenicity of the mutation, and assembly/stability studies were carried out in fibroblasts and cybrids by means of mitochondrial
translation inhibition in combination with blue native gel electrophoresis. Biochemical analyses revealed a decrease in respiratory chain
complex III activity in patient's skeletal muscle, and a combined enzyme defect of complexes III and IV in fibroblasts. Mutant
transmitochondrial cybrids restored normal enzyme activities and steady-state protein levels, the mutation was mildly conserved along
evolution, and the proband's mother and maternal aunt, both clinically unaffected, also harboured the homoplasmic mutation. These data
suggested a nuclear genetic origin of the disease. However, by forcing the de novo functioning of the OXPHOS system, a severe delay in the
biogenesis of the respiratory chain complexes was observed in the mutants, which demonstrated a direct functional effect of the
mitochondrial genetic background. Our results point to possible pitfalls in the detection of pathogenic mitochondrial mutations, and
highlight the role of the genetic mtDNA background in the development of mitochondrial disorders. Mitochondrial complex III (CIII,
ubiquinol-cytochrome c reductase or cytochrome bc1 complex, E.C.1.10.2.2) is a multiprotein enzyme complex that catalyzes the transfer of
electrons from reduced coenzyme Q to cytochrome c, with a concomitant translocation of protons across the inner mitochondrial membrane . The
purified bovine complex is a symmetric homodimer with a combined molecular mass of ∼450 kDa , . Each monomer is composed of 11 subunits, of
which ten are encoded in the nucleus and one (cytochrome b) in the mitochondrial genome. Respiratory chain complex III deficiency [MIM
124000] is a relatively rare cause of mitochondrial dysfunction. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) mutations in the cytochrome b (MT-CYB) gene
constitute a major cause of complex III deficiency, and underlie a wide range of neuromuscular disorders . These include mitochondrial
encephalomyopathy , hypertrophic or histiocytoid cardiomyopathy , , or sporadic mitochondrial myopathy, where exercise intolerance is the
predominant symptom . Additional features include blood acidosis, muscle weakness or myoglobinuria. Defects in MT-CYB are also documented in
patients with multisystem disorders in cases of exercise intolerance accompanied by deafness, mental retardation, retinitis pigmentosa,
cataract, growth retardation, and epilepsy , . Mutations in MT-CYB have also been associated with Leber hereditary optic neuropathy (LHON)
[MIM: 535000], a maternally inherited disease resulting in acute or subacute loss of central vision due to optic nerve degeneration . When a
new mutation is detected in the mtDNA of a patient with a mitochondrial defect, a strict association between the mutation and the cellular
dysfunction must be established before assuming pathogenicity. Although many mutations in mitochondrial tRNA genes and coding regions have
been shown to cause diseases, the high rate of evolution of mtDNA creates many new polymorphic sites. For this reason, a number of useful
criteria have been proposed in order to avoid the mistake of incorrect assignment of pathogenicity to a mutation . These criteria generally
include the following aspects: i) the mutation should be preferably found in heteroplasmic state; ii) there should be a strong association
between heteroplasmic levels, clinical symptoms, biochemical data, and family history; iii) the mutation should be highly conserved among
species; and iv) transmitochondrial cybrids should not restore the cellular and biochemical defects in mitochondrial function found in the
original tissue; when a defective mitochondrial function is maintained in cybrid cells bearing mutated mtDNA, it is generally assumed that
the mutation is likely to be a pathogenic cause of disease. Additionally, in recent years a number of studies emphasize the importance of
the mtDNA genetic background that hosts a primary pathogenic mutation in the clinical expression of mitochondrial disorders. The clearest
example is the preferential association of the Eurasian haplogroup J with the 11778/ND4 and 14484/ND6 LHON pathogenic mutations . In this
work we report a complex III-deficient patient with early-onset metabolic acidosis and seizures, who harboured a novel m.15533 A>G
homoplasmic mutation in the MT-CYB gene. Although this genetic variant did not easily fulfil the pathogenicity criteria for mtDNA mutations,
by forcing the de novo functioning of the OXPHOS system in mutant transmitochondrial cybrids we have demonstrated a direct functional effect
of the mtDNA genetic background on the biogenesis of the mitochondrial respiratory chain. This study was approved by the institutional
ethics committee (Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre, Madrid, Spain), and was in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki for Human
Research. The patient's mother has given written informed consent (as outlined in the PLoS consent form) to publication of the case details.
The proband was a male born to non-consanguineous parents, delivered at full term by caesarean after an uneventful pregnancy. At age 23 days
he presented with abnormal movements of his arms, and generalized hypertonia. He also showed central cyanosis with episodes of apnea that
required intubation and mechanical ventilation for twelve days, and a convulsive status with tonic-clonic seizures, which were recurrent
during the following two days. After treatment with antiepileptic drugs, the paroxysmal movements finally remitted. Brain computerized
tomography scans and brain ultrasonography revealed no abnormalities. Laboratory examinations revealed persistent metabolic acidosis that
was treated with bicarbonate, elevated anion gap, and moderate increase of resting plasma lactate (3.4 mmol/L; normal <2). At age two years
a muscle biopsy was taken, which showed a single mitochondrial respiratory chain complex III defect. Other studies discarded pyruvate
decarboxylase deficiency and organic acidemia. At three years of age brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) displayed small abnormal signals
in both thalami, and diffuse hypersignals in T2-weighted sequence in the white matter of the peripheral area of atrium as a consequence of
myelination delay. At the age of six he presented with developmental delay affecting his speech skills, which started to be treated by
language therapy. He also developed behaviour disturbances and a functional clubfoot. Brain MRI and MR spectroscopy were normal. At present,
at age nine years, he has a mild mental and developmental delay, functional clubfoot, cognitive abnormalities, attention difficulties and
hyperactivity, initiating treatment with methylphenidate. His parents and a maternal aunt were all asymptomatic. His mother suffered a
previous miscarriage at two months of gestation. A maternal aunt was referred to die at two months of age from an unknown disease.
Fibroblasts were obtained from skin biopsies and cultured in DMEM medium (Life Technologies) supplemented with 10% foetal calf serum (FCS)
and 100 IU/ml penicillin and 100 IU/ml streptomycin. Transmitochondrial cybrids were obtained by fusion of 143B206 TK- rho zero cells with
control or patient-derived enucleated fibroblasts or platelets as previously described . To block mitochondrial translation, 15 µg/ml
doxycycline were added to the culture medium. Cells were grown in exponential conditions and harvested at the indicated time points.
Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme activities were measured in muscle (quadriceps muscle biopsy), skin fibroblasts, and cybrids as
described before , and expressed relative to the citrate synthase activity in muscle, and as their specific activities in fibroblasts and
cybrids (Table 1). Enzyme activities are expressed as *cU/U citrate synthase (CS) and **nmol.min−1.mg prot−1. CS activity is expressed as
mU/mg protein. Abnormal values are indicated in bold. nd, not determined. Complex I, CI; Complex II, CII; Complex III, CIII; Complex IV,
CIV. Total DNA was extracted from blood, muscle, fibroblasts and cybrids by standard methods. The whole mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) from
patient's muscle was sequenced by SECUGEN S.L. (Madrid, Spain). The complete mtDNA was amplified from total DNA in 24 overlapping 800–1,000
bp-long polymerase chain reaction (PCR) fragments. The PCR fragments were sequenced in both strands in an ABI 3730 sequencer using a BigDye
v3.1 sequencing kit (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA), and were compared with the revised Cambridge reference sequence, CRS (Table 2).
Discrepancies were analyzed in the human mitochondrial genome databases MITOMAP (www.mitomap.org), mtDB (www.genpat.uu.se/mtDB/), and GiiB-
JST mtSNP (http://mtsnp.tmig.or.jp/mtsnp/index_e.shtml). To quantify the heteroplasmy levels of the m.15533 A>G mutation, PCR-restriction
fragment length polymorphism (RFLP) analysis was performed in the proband's family using the following primers: 5′-CACTATTCTCACCAGACCTC-3′,
(forward) and 5′-ACGCCTCCTAGTTTGTTAGG-3′ (reverse), and digestion with the restriction enzyme DdeI (New England Biolabs). Two hundred
healthy control subjects of Spanish background obtained from the Blood Bank of our Institution were screened to rule out the presence of
mutations in the healthy population. rCRS refers to the revised Cambridge reference sequence , which belongs to haplogroup H2a.
Additionally, sequencing ruled out mutations in the coding regions of the following complex III nuclear genes: CYC1, UQCRFS1, UQCRQ, UQCRH,
UCRC, and BCS1L. Cytochrome b protein sequences from diverse vertebrate species were downloaded from Uniprot (The Uniprot Consortium, 2010),
and aligned with MUSCLE v3.2 . The potential effect of the N263D and N260D mutations was evaluated by homology modelling of the mutated
sequences using the 3D structure of bovine complex III stored in PDB (1NTM) as a template. Modelling was performed at the Swiss model server
. 3D models were visualized using Chimera . Relative quantification of mtDNA versus nuclear DNA (nDNA) was performed by real-time PCR in a
HT 7500 Real Time PCR System (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) as previously described , except that the forward primer used for
mtDNA amplification was: 5′-CCA CGG GAA ACA GCA GTG AT-3′. Results were presented as mean ±SD values. Blue native methods were performed as
previously described . Primary antibodies (Molecular Probes) were raised against the complex I NDUFS3 and NDUFA9 subunits, complex III core2
protein, complex IV COX2 and COX5A subunits, and complex II SDHA subunit. Peroxidase-conjugated anti-mouse IgG was used as secondary
antibody (Molecular Probes). The signal was detected with ECL® plus (Amersham Biosciences). Mitochondrial respiratory chain enzyme
activities showed a single complex III defect in the patient's skeletal muscle (52% of the lowest control value), and a combined deficiency
of complexes III and IV in fibroblasts (52% and 31% of the lowest control values respectively) (Table 1). Sequencing of the entire
mitochondrial genome in patient's muscle enabled easy identification of haplogroup-specific polymorphisms and novel private substitutions
(Table 2), and confirmed that the patient belonged to the European haplogroup H2 (GenBank sequence accession number HM046248). Comparison of
the sequence with the revised Cambridge reference sequence (rCRS) revealed 12 synonymous substitutions, 5 non-synonymous substitutions, and
19 substitutions either in mitochondrial rRNAs, tRNAs or in the mtDNA D-loop region. One missense mutation in MT-CYB (m.15533A>G) was not
previously reported in the mtDNA sequence databases, and it was not detected in 200 ethnically-matched controls (Figure 1A). The relative
mutant load for this new nucleotide variant was measured by PCR-RFLP analysis in blood (not shown), muscle and fibroblasts of the patient
(Figure 1B), and showed homoplasmic levels of the mutation in all tissues. DdeI-RFLP analysis also showed that the MT-CYB mutation was
homoplasmic in blood from the proband's mother and maternal aunt, both clinically unaffected (not shown). (A) Electropherogram showing the
nucleotide change in patient's muscle DNA, indicated by arrowheads. (B) PCR-RFLP analysis of the MT-CYB mutation. Uncut (wild-type) DNA
consists of a 150 bp PCR product. The mutated sequence contains one DdeI restriction site that results in two products of 90 and 60 bp after
digestion. The control sequence contains one MseI restriction site that results in the same two products after digestion. C, wild-type
control; F, proband's fibroblasts DNA; M, proband's muscle DNA; Cy, control cybrid; 1, 2 and 3 refer to three independent mutant cybrid
clones. (C) Alignment of cytochrome b amino acid sequences from selected species. Asparagine at amino acid position 263 is indicated with an
arrow. (D) Partial 3D-images of the cytochrome b protein. The left panel shows the interaction site between the asparagine 263 (indicated in
red) of cytochrome b and the aspartate 2 of the cytochrome c1 subunit (coloured in green). This is the closest negatively charged side-chain
of cytochrome c1, which is facing the same aqueous pocket at a distance of 11.25 Armstrongs. Asparagine at position 260 of cytochrome b is
indicated in blue. The central panel shows the 3D-structure of the asparagine 263 (in blue) in controls. The right panel shows the predicted
structural effect of the N263D substitution (in red) in the patient. The images were obtained using the Chimera software . To discriminate
between a nuclear or mitochondrial origin of the disease, transmitochondrial cybrids were constructed by transferring mitochondria from
patient's fibroblasts into 143B206 TK- rho zero (ρ°) cells, which lack mtDNA. Ten independent cybrid clones retained homoplasmic loads of
the m.15533A>G mutation (Figure 1B). The enzyme activities of all respiratory chain complexes were normal in six independent mutant clones
(Table 1), which would in principle indicate that the main genetic defect should be located in the nuclear genome. The m.15533A>G transition
changes an asparagine into aspartate at amino acid residue 263, within an amino acid stretch relatively conserved amongst mammals, but not
further on in evolution (Figure 1C). Based on its crystal structure , , the cytochrome b subunit consists of eight intramembrane spanning
domains (helixes A–H). Asn 263 is located between the E–F transmembrane helixes, within the second half of loop ef of cytochrome b, in close
contact with functional domains of the RISP and cytochrome c1 subunits. The N263D amino acid substitution would exchange a positive for a
negative charge within this region, possibly affecting the interaction between cytochrome b and the RISP and cytochrome c1 subunits (Figure
1D). These findings suggested that the N263D mutation could have an effect on the structural integrity of mitochondrial respiratory chain
complex III. However, a structural analysis of the N263D substitution only predicted a mild effect on the interaction between complex III
subunits. As shown in Figure 1D, residue 263 (shown as red or yellow residues on the pink-coloured chain) is facing an aqueous pocket, and
the distances to the closest residues of cytochrome c1 (coloured in green) are larger than 7 Armstrongs. Several other charged residues, an
arginine and three aspartates, are present at close distances, suggesting that the relative charge introduced by the mutation is not large.
A similar asparagine to aspartate substitution at amino acid position 260 of cytochrome b (shown in blue in the figure) was previously
reported as a polymorphism . The side chain of this residue is facing the same aqueous pocket in a very close position to that of 263.
Altogether, these data do not plead in favour to consider the N263D as a true pathogenic mutation. To analyze the respiratory chain content
in digitonin-extracted mitochondria from patient's fibroblasts and cybrids, 1D-BN-PAGE analysis was combined with complex I in-gel activity
assay and western blot with antibodies raised against specific OXPHOS subunits (Figure 2). In patient's fibroblasts low steady-state levels
of respiratory chain complexes III and IV were observed, suggesting an impaired assembly/stability defect. Consequently, decreased enzyme
activities of these complexes were found in this tissue (Table 1). As expected from their restored enzyme activities, the mutant cybrids
displayed normal steady-state levels of respiratory chain complexes relative to the controls. Mitochondrial particles were isolated as
described in Methods and 40 µg of protein were analyzed on a 5–15% BN-polyacrylamide gel for the separation of multisubunit complexes.
Western-blot analysis was performed using antibodies against the indicated OXPHOS subunits. CI, fully-assembled complex I. CIII2, complex
III dimer. CIV, complex IV. CIII2+IV indicates the presence of the supercomplex containing complexes III and IV. C1 and C2, control
fibroblasts. P, patient's fibroblasts. C, control cybrid. Two independent mutant cybrids are indicated as #1 and #2. Next, we reversibly
blocked for 6 days mitochondrial protein translation with doxycycline, thus depleting the cells of OXPHOS complexes that contained
mitochondrial-encoded subunits . After the release of drug inhibition, mitochondrial translation resumed and the assembly of newly-
synthesized mitochondrial complexes was investigated by collecting cells at different time points (0, 6, 15, 24, 48, 72, and 96 hours).
Digitonin-isolated mitochondria were analyzed by BN-PAGE electrophoresis in combination with in-gel activity assays (Figure 3A) or Western-
blot using antibodies against subunits from different OXPHOS complexes (Figure 3B). The signals obtained from the Western-blots were
quantified, normalized for the expression levels of mitochondrial complex II, expressed as a percentage of the untreated cells (which
correspond to the steady-state expression levels), and calculated the average numerical values for the restoration curves of the respiratory
complexes in control and mutant cybrids (Figure 3C). A significant delay in the recovery kinetics of respiratory chain complexes I, III and
IV was observed in the two independent mutant cybrids relative to two controls of the same haplogroup (Figure 3C). Two different control
cybrids belonging to haplogroup H, and two independent MT-CYB mutant clones were treated for 6 days with doxycycline (an inhibitor of
mitochondrial translation), the medium was replaced by doxycycline-free medium and cells were collected at 0, 6, 15, 24, 48, 72, and 96
hours (indicated as t0–t16). SS indicates the steady-state expression levels of the respiratory chain complexes (A) Example of one control
and one mutant clone. 40 µg of crude mitochondrial pellets were analyzed by BN-PAGE in combination with complex I and complex IV-IGA assays.
(B) Duplicate gels were blotted and incubated with antibodies against the NDUFA9 complex I subunit, complex III core2 protein, complex IV
COX5A subunit and complex II SDHA subunit. (C) The signals from the blots were quantified, expressed as percentage of the untreated cells
(SS), normalized with the complex II SDHA subunit and plotted. The restoration curves constitute the mean values ± SD obtained from the two
controls and the two independent mutant cybrids. Upper left panel, complex I assembly rates. Upper right panel, complex III assembly rates.
Lower left panel, complex IV assembly rates. Lower right panel, supercomplex CIII2+IV assembly kinetics. The mtDNA copy number was
calculated for control and mutant cybrids in order to exclude the possibility that the differences observed in the assembly kinetics of
respiratory chain complexes could be due to variations in the mtDNA content. No significant differences were found in the mtDNA/nDNA ratio
between the controls (292±35) and the mutants (289±38) belonging to haplogroup H. Taken as a whole, our results demonstrate a functional
effect of the mtDNA genetic background of the mutant clones in the assembly kinetics of respiratory chain complexes. In this work we have
shown the pathogenic role of the novel m.15533A>G genetic variant in the MT-CYB gene in a patient with metabolic acidosis and
hyperlactacidemia, seizures, mild mental delay, behaviour disturbances and a single enzyme defect of mitochondrial respiratory chain complex
III. Based on the current standard pathogenicity criteria for mtDNA mutations, the mutation would have been easily excluded as potentially
deleterious. Our patient harboured the mutation in homoplasmic state, as did his clinically unaffected mother and maternal aunt. The
mutation was not highly conserved along evolution and the predicted structural data did not plead in favour of a deleterious effect of the
N263D substitution on the structure of cytochrome b. Although he showed defective respiratory chain enzyme activities and protein levels in
muscle and cultured fibroblasts grown in exponential conditions, these respiratory chain enzyme activities and assembly defects were
restored to normal in transmitochondrial cybrids harbouring the homoplasmic m.15533A>G mutation, when these cells were grown in a favourable
glucose-containing medium under no stress conditions. Only when the mutant cybrids were forced to the de novo building up and functioning of
the OXPHOS system by treating the cells with doxycycline, we were able to observe a drastic functional effect of the mtDNA genetic
background on the assembly kinetics of the respiratory chain complexes. Similar observations were previously made by our group in cybrid
cell lines bearing the three classical homoplasmic LHON mutations . These cells neither showed respiratory chain enzyme defects nor
decreased steady-state levels of OXPHOS complexes, but displayed differentially-delayed assembly rates of respiratory chain complexes I,
III, and IV amongst mutants belonging to different mtDNA haplogroups. Likewise, the mtDNA genetic background was recently shown to play an
important role in modulating the bioenergetics and biochemical defects in cybrids bearing the ATP6 NARP/MILS mutation . This is in agreement
with the proposed effect on protein function of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are located in the coding region, which could
affect protein stability, ligand binding, catalysis, allosteric regulation and post-translational modifications . Basal differences in
OXPHOS capacities such as mitochondrial transcription and replication, protein synthesis, and bioenergetics have recently been demonstrated
in control cybrids from different mtDNA haplogroups , . These results reveal that specific mtDNA polymorphisms may modify the pathogenic
potential of mtDNA mutations by affecting the overall biogenesis and function of the OXPHOS complexes. In our MT-CYB mutant cybrids, the
m.15533A>G mutation most likely hampers the proper assembly of respiratory chain complex III, which would further affect the formation of
complex I . In addition, the mutant clones showed, besides strong complex I and complex III assembly defects, a severe impairment of complex
IV and supercomplex CIII2+CIV assembly rates. This effect could be explained by the presence of two mtDNA polymorphisms in the MT-CO3 and
MT-ATP6 genes, G9477A and A8860G respectively, plus two additional mtDNA polymorphic variants in the MT-CYB gene, C14766T and A15326G,
(Table 2) which could add a deleterious effect to that caused by the m.15533A>G mutation. Our results, however, do not explain the
differences in the clinical expression of the m.15533A>G mutation among members of the proband's family. Although reduced penetrance is a
relatively common feature of homoplasmic mtDNA mutations leading to mitochondrial disorders , , it suggests the requirement of additional
contributors to the clinical manifestations of the disease. For instance, most patients with LHON disease carry homoplasmic mtDNA mutations.
Although all offspring inherit the mutation, often only some family members will develop the disease , which emphasizes the importance of
nuclear genetic, epigenetic or environmental factors as phenotypical modulators of mitochondrial disorders. In general, the mutations that
have the most deleterious effect on mitochondrial function will cause obvious clinical phenotypes. The m.3243A>G mutation, for example,
usually causes a devastating multisystem disease and fulfils all the criteria for pathogenicity . The problems may arise when a mutation
causes disease only in the presence of an additional factor, or when it only causes a mild clinical phenotype as it occurs in our patient.
In these cases the ‘conventional’ criteria might not be applicable, and deeper functional tests should be performed in cybrid cell lines
that harbour the mutation of interest, including i.e. oxygen consumption and mitochondrial protein synthesis analyses, or de novo
restoration of enzyme activities and assembly of the various components of the oxidative phosphorylation system. In this sense our study
describes a useful mechanism to unveil potentially deleterious mutations in patients with signs of mitochondrial disease but apparently
normal respiratory chain enzyme activities. Besides, our results point to possible pitfalls in the detection of pathogenic mitochondrial
mutations, and highlight the potentially important effects of the genetic mtDNA background in the development of mitochondrial disorders,
which should be taken into account when defining the pathogenicity criteria for mtDNA mutations. Authors want to acknowledge Dr. Eduardo
Ruiz Pesini for his kind gift of the control cybrid clones, and Pilar del Hoyo for her excellent technical support. Competing Interests: The
authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Funding: This study was partially supported by Fundacion de Investigacion Biomedica
del Hospital Universitario 12 de Octubre/Agencia Pedro Lain Entralgo, and Instituto de Salud Carlos III (ISCIII) to C.U. (grant numbers
PI05-0379 and PI08-0021), and to M.A.M. (PI09-01359). T.G. was supported by grants from the ISCIII (PI06-0213) and the Spanish Ministry of
Science (MICINN) (BFU2009-09168). The funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation
of the manuscript.
