Plasmodium falciparum malaria developed in an African-born traveler who returned to Canada after visiting Nigeria. While there, she took
artesunate prophylactically. Isolates had an elevated 50% inhibitory concentration to artemisinin, artesunate, and artemether, compared with
that of other African isolates. Inappropriate use of artemisinin derivatives can reduce P. falciparum susceptibility. Artemisinin
derivatives were recently approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of Plasmodium falciparum malaria in North America
and are available through the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and through Health Canada (1–3). Artemisinin-based combination
therapy (ACT) remains the most effective therapy for P. falciparum malaria throughout the world, with the possible exception of the
Thailand–Cambodia border (4). Because of the large numbers in the Toronto area of returning travelers and recent immigrants who have
returned to countries of origin and visited friends and relatives, the Public Health Laboratory (Toronto) identifies ≈200 positive malaria
smears annually; most P. falciparum isolates have come from sub-Saharan Africa. Evidence has indicated that such travelers tend not to seek
medical advice before travel and are therefore at high risk of acquiring malaria (5). A 38-year-old Nigerian-born woman, who lived in the
Toronto area (and has a good ability to recount her experiences), returned to Lagos, Nigeria, for a visit in January 2009. She did not seek
pretravel advice. On arrival in Lagos, the woman purchased artesunate locally and began taking two 50-mg tablets weekly for the 4 weeks of
her visit. Immediately on her return to Toronto, the patient experienced myalgia, nausea with vomiting, and chills, ≈7 days after she had
taken her last dose of oral artesunate. She sought treatment at the emergency department of a community hospital. Physical examination
showed that her temperature was 39.1°C and that she was dehydrated. Laboratory tests showed the following: leukocyte count 3,700 cells/μL,
thromocyte count 72 × 103 cells/μL, hemoglobin level 12.7 g/dL. Her chest radiograph showed that her lungs were clear. An examination of
peripheral blood by thick and thin films showed a 0.7% parasitemia with P. falciparum. Her condition was treated with 1,250 mg of oral
mefloquine as a single dose. She was treated as an outpatient, and she reported that symptoms promptly resolved over the next 48 hours
without side effects. A blood specimen was placed into culture in the Public Health Laboratory (Toronto), and the P. falciparum isolate was
tested for drug susceptibility (6). The 50% inhibitory concentration (IC50) was the following for certain antimicrobial agents (tested in
triplicate): chloroquine 170.5 ± 7.8 nmol/L, mefloquine 16.6 ± 0.7 nmol/L, artemisinin 20.1 ± 0.6 nmol/L, artesunate 6.2 ± 1.4 nmol/L,
dihydroartemisinin 1.8 ± 0.9 nmol/L, and artemether 21.4 ± 5.3 nmol/L. For this P. falciparum isolate, IC50 was significantly higher for
artemisinin, artesunate, and artemether than for other representative P. falciparum isolates imported from Africa (Figure). Because of the
short half-life of artesunate, the weekly doses of the oral drug may have led to development of a resistant strain when the patient was in
Nigeria. Artesunate-containing drugs therefore should not be used for prophylaxis or single drug therapy. The purchased artesunate may also
have been counterfeit and may have contained lower levels of active drug. Although these data suggest that this isolate has reduced
susceptibility to artemisinin derivatives, the correlation between in vitro susceptibility and treatment outcomes does not appear to be
consistent (4). In vitro drug susceptibility of representative patient isolates from returning travelers who visited friends and relatives
in Africa. The mean 50% inhibitory concentrations (IC50) of chloroquine, mefloquine, artemisinin, artesunate, dihydroartemisinin, and
artemether are plotted in nmol/L for each isolate, performed in triplicate (error bars indicate SD; n = 3). Nigeria A denotes the patient
described in this report. The black horizontal line represents the median value. Previous studies have reported that resistance to
artemisinin is mediated by an increase in gene copy number, mutations within the efflux pump of the P. falciparum multidrug resistance 1
(pfmdr1) gene, or mutations in the calcium transporter pfATPase6 (7,8). When we examined each gene, using a combination of real-time PCR and
DNA sequencing, we found that pfmdr1 copy number was elevated in this isolate relative to that of the susceptible control strain 3D7. We
also observed nonsynonymous mutations in both pfmdr1 (Y184F) and pfATPase6 (A623E, S769N), whereas other implicated residues remained in the
wild-type form (9) (Table). Similar molecular analysis of other representative imported African clinical isolates demonstrated variable
mutations for pfmdr1 and pfATPase6 and copy number in relation to IC50 values for key drugs (Table). A trend, albeit weak, was observed in
which increased pfmdr1 copy number was correlated with an elevated IC50 to mefloquine (r = 0.52) and artemisinin (r = 0.42). The presence of
an asparagine (N) at position 86 of Pfmdr1, when coupled to an elevated pfmdr1 copy number, appeared to correlate well with reduced
susceptibility to artemisinin (Table). Chavchich et al. recently demonstrated that increased pfmdr1 copy number occurred in a laboratory
strain placed under drug selection pressure with artemisinin derivatives (11). However, Imwong et al. have indicated that genetic
polymorphisms and copy number in pfmdr1 do not predict treatment outcome with ACT (10). * At Pfmdr1 and PfATPase6 residues previously
implicated in artemisinin resistance and gene copy number of pfmdr1 by quantitative real-time PCR in relation to mean IC50 (n = 3) data for
key drugs (7,8,10). pfmdr1, P. falciparum multidrug resistance 1; CQ, chloroquine; MQ, mefloquine; ART, artemisinin; IC50., 50% minimum
inhibitory concentration; N, asparagine; Y, tyrosine; S, serine; D, aspartic acid; A, alanine; E, glutamic acid; 3D7, chloroquine-sensitive
laboratory strain; W2, chloroquine-resistant laboratory strain; Nigeria A, clinical isolate described in this report. Findings in the
published literature vary in terms of use of artemisinin derivatives for in vitro drug susceptibility testing. Jambou et al. reported
treatment failures with ACT in Cambodia, French Guiana, and Senegal (8). These authors used artemether for testing and showed IC50 values of
≈30 nmol/L in their “resistant” isolates from Senegal. Noedl et al. described treatment failures with ACT in Cambodia, for which IC50 values
to dihydroartemisinin were ≈10 nmol/L (12). Dondorp et al. showed IC50 values of 4–6 nmol/L to dihydroartemisinin and 6–8 nmol/L to
artesunate in a region of Cambodia and Thailand where ACT treatment failures have occurred (4). Systematic molecular surveillance and
standardized drug-testing methods with clinical isolates are required to establish the molecular correlates of reduced susceptibility to
antimalarial drugs. In this regard, efforts are ongoing under the auspices of the Worldwide Antimalarial Research Network (13). The
patient’s infection responded to mefloquine when she was back in Canada, possibly because of the high oral dose of mefloquine. Current
guidelines from the US Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend quinine sulfate plus doxycycline, tetracycline, or clindamycin;
or atovaquone-proguanil (Malarone; GlaxoSmithKline, Mississauga, Ontario, Canada) as first- and second-line treatment for uncomplicated P.
falciparum malaria. Reduced susceptibility to artesunate is more likely to occur when it is associated with inappropriate use of artemisinin
derivatives than because of circulating artemisinin-resistant P. falciparum in sub-Saharan Africa. In an effort to achieve consensus that
artesunate oral monotherapies should not be marketed, the World Health Organization convened the international pharmaceutical sector in
April 2006. At that time, 15 companies agreed to cease manufacturing artesunate monotherapies. However, oral artesunate montherapies may
still be purchased over the counter in malaria-endemic countries, as this report shows. Thus, strains of P. falciparum malaria are currently
at risk of developing reduced susceptibility to artesunate derivatives. Suggested citation for this article: Shahinas D, Lau R, Khairnar K,
Hancock D, Pillai DR. Artesunate misuse and Plasmodium falciparum malaria in traveler returning from Africa. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2010 Oct [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1610.100427 We thank the Clinical Parasitology Department at the Public
Health Laboratory (Toronto) for expert technical assistance. This work was funded by the Ontario Agency for Health Protection and Promotion.
Dr Pillai is a medical microbiologist at the Public Health Laboratory (Toronto), clinical associate at the University Health Network, and
assistant professor of medicine at the University of Toronto. His research interests focus on reversing mechanisms of antimicrobial
resistance and laboratory surveillance of infectious diseases, including malaria and Streptococcus pneumoniae and Clostridium difficile
infections.
