Claude's syndrome is a distinctive brainstem syndrome characterized by ipsilateral third cranial nerve palsy with contralateral hemiataxia
and is due to an intrinsic or extrinsic lesion in the midbrain. We report a case of Claude's syndrome caused by neurocysticercosis
infection. A 68 year-old Asian man was admitted to our hospital because of ataxia, left ptosis, and diplopia. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) showed a cystic lesion in the midbrain, which was surrounded by ring enhancement and peripheral edema. Neurocysticercosis
infection was diagnosed by the cerebral spinal fluid study. The patient was treated with albendazole and steroids. A follow-up brain MRI
three months later demonstrated the disappearance of a surrounding brain edema and rim enhancement. The most common cause of Claude's
syndrome is cerebrovascular disease and malignancy. However, there is no report caused by neurocysticercosis infection. Therefore, if we
encounter Claude's syndrome, we should consider neurocysticercosis infection as one of the etiologic factors. There are various clinical
manifestations of neurocysticercosis (NCC) that depend on not only the topography, number, and size of the lesions, but also the status of
the host's immune response to the parasite infection.1 Only a few reports have described third cranial nerve palsy in patients with NCC
involving, especially, the midbrain.2-4 Meanwhile, Claude's syndrome is a distinctive brainstem syndrome characterized by ipsilateral third
cranial nerve palsy with contralateral hemiataxia and is due to an intrinsic or extrinsic lesion in the midbrain.5 We report a case of
Claude's syndrome caused by NCC infection. A 68 year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of ataxia, left ptosis, and diplopia
started two days prior. His previous medical history was unremarkable. He did not travel overseas before this event. The left eye pupil was
1.5 mm larger than the right side with impaired pupillary light reflex. Extraocular movements were normal in the right eye. In contrast,
there was limited movement (adduction, elevation, depression) in the left eye and fourth cranial nerve function was considered normal in the
left eye because intorsion of the left eye was preserved. The gait was ataxic and dysdiadochokinesia was present on examination of the right
arm. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a cystic lesion in the midbrain, which was surrounded by ring enhancement and peripheral
edema (Fig. 1A and B). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for an anticysticercal antibody in serum was negative, but it was positive in
cerebral spinal fluid of 0.38 (normal range < 0.18). A lumbar puncture yielded clear cerebral spinal fluid under normal opening pressure,
and cytochemical analysis showed 3 mononuclear cells per mm3, 90 mg/dL proteins, and normal glucose contents. Cerebral spinal fluid cytospin
test for malignancy was negative. The patient was treated with oral albendazole 15 mg/kg/day in two divided doses for two weeks, and
intravenous methylprednisolone 1g/day for six days. Paresis of the third cranial nerve and ataxia resolved completely within one week of
treatment. A follow-up brain MRI three months later demonstrated the disappearance of surrounding brain edema and ring enhancement (Fig. 1C
and D). NCC is a common parasite affecting the central nervous system. Brain parenchyma involvement is the most common and usually presents
with seizures. Other clinical manifestations may occur, depending upon the localization and viability of the parasite. There have been
several reports that NCC occurred within the intrinsic midbrain, manifested by isolated third cranial nerve palsy with poor prognosis,2
isolated bilateral ptosis,4 accompanying hydrocephalus,6 and recurrent third cranial nerve palsy.7,8 However, none of these patients
presented with ipsilateral third cranial nerve palsy accompanying contralateral hemiataxia, that is, Claude's syndrome. The Claude described
a house painter who developed right third cranial nerve palsy with contralateral gait ataxia.9 The pathological examination revealed a
paramedian mesencephalic infarction on the right involving the superior cerebellar peduncles, the medial half of the red nucleus, and some
reports describe the syndrome with Claude's original red nucleus involvement.5,10 In this case, the lesion of NCC involved the left superior
cerebellar peduncle but not the red nucleus. This finding supports the report that suggests the lesion of the superior cerebellar peduncle
just below and medial to the red nucleus can be a cause of Claude's syndrome.11 The most common cause of Claude's syndrome is
cerebrovascular disease and malignancy.11 There is no report caused by NCC infection. Therefore, we should consider NCC infection as an
etiologic factor if we encounter Claude's syndrome. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Brain MRI. (A) Initial FLAIR image
shows high signal intensity on left midbrain and perilesional edema. (B) Initial contrast enhanced T1-weighted image shows cystic lesion
with peripheral ring enhancement. The lesion involves dorsal midbrain tegmentum, left third cranial nerve fascicle, and superior cerebellar
peduncle, but not the red nucleus. The lesion is located posterior and inferior to the red nucleus. (C and D) Follow up MRI after three
months, reveals disappearance of perilesional edema and ring enhancement.
