Wandering spleen is a rare condition defined as a mobile spleen only attached with its pedicle. It can be complicated by a volvulus, which
is a surgical abdominal emergency. Preventing infarction is the aim of a prompt surgery that can preserve the spleen and then proceed to
splenopexy. We report a rare case of torsion of a wandering spleen associated with a dolichosigmoïd. Wandering spleen is a rare condition
characterized by the absence or underdevelopment of one or all of the ligaments that hold the spleen in its normal position in the left
upper quadrant of the abdomen. It is an uncommon clinical entity. It mainly affects children, who make up one third of all cases with a
female predominance after the age of one. At adult age it most frequently affects women of reproductive age, in whom acquired laxity of the
splenic ligaments is usually the cause. The clinical presentation of wandering spleen is variable, but the main symptom is abdominal pain.
Its major complication is acute torsion with subsequent infarct, which is a potentially fatal emergency. We report a case of torsion of a
wandering spleen associated with a dolichomegasigmoïd. A 27-year-old woman presented to the emergency department after three days of
abdominal pain, vomiting and constipation without fever. She had a recurrent constipation but no history of recurrent abdominal pain,
abdominal mass, or trauma. On physical examination, abdominal distension was noted. There was a moderate diffuse abdominal tenderness more
pronounced on the left side. Abdominal radiography showed an important colon distention especially at the upper left quadrant without air
fluid levels [Figure 1]. An abdominal ultrasonography showed a “whirl” image beside a spleen of ectopic position with homogenous echo
texture [Figure 2]. Computed tomography (CT) revealed a colonic distention, especially of the sigmoid and an abnormal position of the spleen
at the left lower quadrant without any sign of spleen ischemia [Figure 3]. The patient underwent laparotomy. Her spleen was in an ectopic
position. It was rounded by a large and long left colon [Figure 4]; there was no sustentaculum lieni, nor any of the spleen ligaments. The
spleen pedicle was twisted without any sign of ischemia [Figure 5]. Splenopexy was performed by the fixation of the spleen pedicle to the
posteroparietal peritomeum. We used separated sutures with vicryl® 0 prepared on the upper and lower borders of the pedicle before the
spleen replacement in its quadrant, which were knotted at the end; sigmoidectomy and colorectal anastomosis were performed. The patient
recovery was uneventful. She was discharged on the sixth day. Figure 1Abdominal radiography showed an important colon distention at the
upper left quadrant without air fluid levels Figure 2Ultrasonography image demonstrated a whorl of concentric vessels in the region of
splenic hilum. Note a spleen of ectopic position Figure 3Contrast enhanced abdominal CT in axial (a, b) and sagittal views (c, d) showed
spleen vessels and surrounding fat forming a whirled appearance (arrows) at the spleen (star) hilum. The spleen is located below the level
of the left kidney Figure 4Dolichosigmoid associated to the wandering spleen Figure 5Volvulus of the wandering spleen Abdominal radiography
showed an important colon distention at the upper left quadrant without air fluid levels Ultrasonography image demonstrated a whorl of
concentric vessels in the region of splenic hilum. Note a spleen of ectopic position Contrast enhanced abdominal CT in axial (a, b) and
sagittal views (c, d) showed spleen vessels and surrounding fat forming a whirled appearance (arrows) at the spleen (star) hilum. The spleen
is located below the level of the left kidney Dolichosigmoid associated to the wandering spleen Volvulus of the wandering spleen Wandering
spleen is defined as mobile spleen that is attached only by an elongated vascular pedicle, allowing it to migrate to any part of the abdomen
or pelvis. It is a result of congenital anomalies in the development of the dorsal mesogastrium and the absence or malformation of normal
splenic suspensory ligaments. The splenic ligaments include the gastrolienal and lienorenal ligaments. The former attaches the spleen to the
greater curvature of the stomach, whereas the latter attaches the spleen to the posterior abdominal wall, both ligaments attach to the hilum
of the spleen medially. The phrenicocolic ligament supports the spleen inferiorly. However, acquired anomalies have been described and are
attributed to laxity of the ligaments due to weakness of the abdominal wall, multiple pregnancies, hormonal changes or increase in size in
the spleen. Both congenital and acquired conditions result in a long pedicle, which is predisposed to torsion. The splenic vessels course
within the pedicle, and therefore, torsion of the pedicle results in partial or complete infarct of the spleen. Patients with a wandering
spleen may be asymptomatic, present with a movable mass in the abdomen, or have chronic or intermittent abdominal pain because of partial
torsion and spontaneous detorsion of the spleen. Torsion is the most common complication. It usually presents as an acute abdominal problem.
This makes the physical examination more difficult and preoperative diagnosis less accurate. Clinically, the diagnosis can be suspected when
a firm, movable abdominal mass is felt with the typically described “notched border”. However splenic engorgement may hide the splenic
notch. Preoperative diagnosis of wandering spleen is rarely suggested, based on clinical findings alone, because of nonspecific symptoms.
Therefore, imaging plays a major role in establishing the diagnosis, plain radiography and barium studies showed medial or superior
displacement with extrinsic impression of the splenic flexure of colon along with a soft tissue mass in an unusual site corresponding to the
wandering spleen but are non-specific. Sonography showed the characteristic comma-shaped spleen in an ectopic position and the lack of
splenic tissue in the left upper quadrant. Duplex Doppler color flow evaluation, provided optimal visualization of the organ and assessment
of vascular supply. However, sonography can often be hampered by bowel gas. Angiography can also provide definite evidence of splenic
torsion and ectopic splenic location, showing a tapered and abruptly twisted distal splenic artery at the point of torsion, but it is
invasive and not essential for diagnostic purposes. Computed tomography is the preferred study for diagnosing a wandering spleen when
torsion is suspected clinically or on other imaging studies. The CT manifestations included: (I) absence of the spleen anterior to the left
kidney and posterior to the stomach, (II) a lower abdominal or pelvic mass with homogenous or heterogenous splenic parenchyma and an
attenuation value less than that of normal splenic tissue, (III) whorled appearance of splenic vessels and surrounding fat only, and (IV)
secondary findings such as ascites and necrosis of the pancreatic tail. However, it is the whorled appearance of the splenic vessels and
surrounding fat at the splenic hilum that is considered as specific of torsion of a wandering spleen. This sign was shown by the CT scan of
the patient of this case. Until recently, splenectomy has been performed for wandering spleen though several authors had advocated
splenopexy earlier. Stringel et al. fixed the spleen via its pedicle. Maxwell-Armstrong et al. fixed it by omentum. Caracciolo et al. and
Peitgen et al. used transposition of the colonic flexure and gastrocolic ligament for splenopexy. Allen and Andrews sutured a basket of
Dexon® mesh around the spleen, whereas Seashore and McIntosh, van der Staak and Festen, and Steinberg et al. dissected a posterolateral
retroperitoneal pouch during laparotomy. Actually, laparoscopic splenopexy is an easy alternative to laparotomy. The laparoscopic approaches
reported have used sacks and slings of Dexon® or Vicryl® mesh for fixation or an autologous peritoneal pouch in the posterolateral abdominal
wall permitting to avoid the risk of infection of the mesh. The latest technique seems to have the best results according to the
satisfaction of the patients and the esthetic appearance. In the present case, the spleen was fixed by its pedicle using a technique
inspired by the one described by stringel. In the stringel technique, the spleen was repositioned in the splenic fossa in the left upper
quadrant. Two stabilizing continuous sutures of 3/0 silk were inserted running from the upper and lower ends of the hilum of the spleen to
the posteroparietal peritoneum. These sutures appeared to provide enough fixation of the spleen to prevent torsion. The splenic torsion is
sometimes associated with other manifestations like gastric or pancreatic tail volvulus. The only colonic manifestations reported is
obstruction by splenic flexure volvulus. Dolichosigmoid associated with a wandering spleen seems to be reported for the first time in our
case. The torsion of a wandering spleen is a rare abdominal emergency. Its diagnosis should be made in prompt time to prevent infarction of
the spleen. Splenopexy by means of the extraperitoneal pocket creation appears to allow anatomic placement of the spleen along with the
protection of the rib cage without the employment of biomaterials. Splenectomy should be performed only in patients with splenic torsion in
whom massive infarction and thrombosis of the splenic vessels has occurred. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
