This report describes a case of small bowel obstruction caused by an aberrant intraabdominal vessel. Small bowel obstructions are most
frequently caused by hernias or adhesive bands. However, there have been several rare reported cases of mechanical small bowel obstructions
caused by loops of bowel or vascular bands. We describe a case of a 30-year-old woman with a clinical presentation suggestive of
appendicitis. Laparoscopic evaluation showed an aberrant vessel looping around the small bowel extending from the lateral anterior abdominal
wall to the mesoappendix, resulting in a partial small bowel obstruction. We review the literature relating to bowel obstructions resulting
from bowel knots and vascular bands. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of a small bowel obstruction caused by an aberrant
intraabdominal vessel. Small bowel obstructions (SBO) are most commonly caused by either adhesions or hernias. However, there have been
several reported cases of mechanical SBO caused by other loops of bowel forming knots and by vascular bands. We describe the case of a
30-year-old woman with a 1-week history of abdominal pain and presenting with signs and symptoms mimicking appendicitis. On diagnostic
laparoscopy, an aberrant vessel was visualized looping around the small bowel from the anterior abdominal wall to the mesoappendix,
resulting in a partial SBO. We review the literature related to bowel obstructions resulting from bowel knots and vascular bands. A 30-year-
old woman presented with a 1-week history of progressively worsening colicky right lower quadrant abdominal pain. Over the counter
analgesics did not relieve her pain. She admitted to nausea, but denied fever, chills, and emesis. Her last bowel movement was 2 days prior
to admission, and was normal per her report. Past medical and surgical history was insignificant. The patient's medications included oral
contraceptives and acetaminophen as needed for pain. She denied tobacco, alcohol, and intravenous drug use. At the time of presentation, she
was afebrile and in mild distress. Her abdominal examination was significant for tenderness at McBurney's point with voluntary guarding and
borborygmi. Laboratory results revealed a negative urine β–human chorionic gonadotropin and a normal white blood cell count of 6.6 × 103/μL.
Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen without contrast revealed mildly dilated loops of small bowel and questionable periappendiceal
inflammation. The patient was taken to the operating room for diagnostic laparoscopy with intended appendectomy. To minimize the risk of
injury to the patient's distended small bowel, she was mobilized in the reverse Trendelenburg position, and the Hasson technique for
peritoneal entry was performed. Blunt 5-mm trocars were placed, under direct visualization utilizing a zero-degree laparoendoscope, in the
suprapubic area and slightly left of midline halfway between the umbilicus and pubis. During laparoscopy, the appendix was macroscopically
normal in appearance and was therefore not prophylactically resected, in accordance with modern approaches1–4 to minimize potential
intraabdominal contamination. However, an aberrant vessel originating from an epigastric vessel (Figure 1) and extending from the lateral
anterior abdominal wall to the mesoappendix was visualized. This vessel was distinct from the ureter, ovarian vessels, and primary
appendicular blood supply. The positioning was not consistent with an omphalomesenteric duct remnant, which would persist as a Meckel's
diverticulum extending from small bowel proximally from the ileocecal junction to the umbilicus. The vessel was noted to be looped around
the small bowel, causing a partial small bowel obstruction (Figures 2 and 3). Laparoscopic view of vessel originating from the anterior
abdominal wall lateral epigastric vessel. Laparoscopic view of vessel looping around small bowel. Laparoscopic view of vessel looping around
small bowel. The vessel was ligated with a laparoscopic stapler, freed from the bowel, and then excised. Histologic examination revealed a
vessel 11.9 cm long with a 5 mm diameter and perivascular fibrosis. The patient made an unremarkable recovery and was discharged on
postoperative day one. The patient has continued to be asymptomatic for the last 6 months following her operation. Small bowel obstructions
are common, with typical causes including adhesions, hernias, and cancer. Less frequent causes of obstruction include loops or knots of
nonherniating bowel,5–8 as well as mechanical obstructions from fibrous bands9–12 distinct from the adhesions caused by intraabdominal
surgeries or infections. Found primarily in the pediatric population, several types of fibrous bands have been described, but few have been
reported to contain vascular structures. There are several reports in the literature of intestinal knots (ileal-ileal, ileo-sigmoid, or
appendico-ileal), causing partial or complete small bowel obstruction.5–7 In many cases, a particularly long or inflamed appendix loops
around the ileum, and this constriction results in a mechanical obstruction. A lengthy appendix is required for this mechanism, and although
appendico-ileal knots are uncommon, lengthy appendices are not. A study of 100 cadavers in Nigeria reported an average vermiform appendix
length of 9.5cm in males and 8.7cm in females, with a maximum measured length of 17.6cm.8 The symptoms of this band may mimic appendicitis
or cause symptoms of a partial or complete small bowel obstruction. Even after appendectomy, the mesoappendix can cause obstructions if not
properly ligated. Heffernan13 described 4 cases of the mesoappendix creating a noose for small bowel obstructions, either via formation of
adhesions on the cut surface after appendectomy or because of the length of the residual mesoappendix. Adhesions are a very common cause of
small bowel obstruction, responsible for up to 54% to 75% of all cases.14,15 In a long-term study of over 2700 laparotomies at Westminster
Hospital in the London,15 1% of patients developed an adhesional obstruction requiring an additional procedure within one year of surgery,
and another 0.7% required conservative management. Although fibrous bands are frequently related to prior abdominal surgery, they also occur
in the virgin abdomen, although the reported incidence is widely varied. In a cadaveric study by Weibel and Manjo,16 de novo adhesions were
found in 28% of those without a prior abdominal operation, whereas Butt et al17 calculated an incidence of 3.3% in a retrospective analysis.
In a prospective cohort study by Ellis,15 10.4% of the surgically naïve population undergoing laparotomy were found to have intraperitoneal
adhesions. Most of these were inflammatory in nature, while less than 1% were determined to be of congenital origin. Obstructions in both
the pediatric and adult populations may result from congenital fibrous bands, such as the remnants of the omphalomesenteric or vitelline
ducts.9–11 A singular case report by Maeda et al12 describes a segment of ileum strangulated by an anomalous loose connective tissue band.
The fibrous band was 2mm in diameter, contained many mature arteries, veins, and nerves, and was felt to be of congenital origin. The band
extended between the antemesenterium of the terminal ileum and the mesoappendix, strangulating an 85-cm segment of ileum trapped between
this band and the mesentery. The normal anatomy of the vermiform appendix is not conducive to vessel formation extending from the anterior
abdominal wall. The appendicular blood supply is usually via the main appendicular artery arising from the ileo-cecal artery. Frequently,
accessory appendicular arteries branch from the anterior or posterior cecal arteries or from arterial loops formed by the ileo-cecal artery
branches. A review of the medical literature, including cadaveric anatomical studies, reveals no instances of vasculature connecting the
mesoappendix with the anterior abdominal wall.8 In our patient, this unique vascular anomaly of the mesoappendix caused a small bowel
obstruction, which clinically resembled appendicitis. The symptoms of appendicitis may be mimicked by other intraabdominal processes. To the
best of our knowledge, this is the first reported case of an intestinal obstruction caused by a single intraabdominal vessel. This case
illustrates that intestinal obstructions can be caused by anomalous vasculature, may appear in the adult population, and may be a rare cause
of abdominal pain otherwise not apparent on radiological examinations.
