This report describes a laparoscopic approach for the removal of a large gastric bezoar. Gastric bezoars are a rare clinical entity, most
commonly observed in patients with mental or emotional illness. Large bezoars can be difficult to remove laparoscopically without extending
a port incision. We report the case of a large symptomatic trichobezoar with Rapunzel syndrome that occurred in a 17-year-old girl who had
trichotillomania. The bezoar was removed laparoscopically, in piecemeal fashion, through a gastrotomy port. This procedure did not require
an extension of any incision, nor did it require the contents of the stomach to directly touch the incision, thereby reducing the risk of
infection. The patient was discharged home, on the fourth postoperative day, free of any complications. This case illustrates the safety of
the laparoscopic approach in the removal of large gastric bezoars. In considering use of this approach, the potentially long operative time
must be weighed against the benefits of both minimal risk of infection and minimal incisions. Trichobezoars are a rarely encountered late
complication of trichotillomania, a disease characterized by the uncontrollable urge to pull out one's hair. Occasionally, patients with
this disease also have trichophagia, resulting in hair accumulation within the stomach and intestine. They can present with abdominal pain,
loss of appetite, weight loss, and vomiting. After long periods of time, these patients can present with trichobezoar-induced bowel or
gastric outlet obstruction. In the present report, we describe the case of a large gastric trichobezoar that was successfully removed
laparoscopically and review the findings that led to this course of treatment. A 17-year-old girl presented with a sharp, epigastric pain.
She said she had the pain for 3 weeks, and that it had gotten especially worse during the 5 days prior to admission. The patient denied any
nausea, vomiting, or hematemesis. She also denied fever, chills, or any sick contacts. She said that she had been having normal bowel
movements. However, she had noticed a decreased frequency over the past 3 weeks. She also complained of decreased appetite with weight loss
of approximately 10 pounds during this time. Review of systems was otherwise unremarkable. Her past medical history was only remarkable for
migraines, for which she took sumatriptan as needed. Her surgical history included a distal pancreatectomy in 2000 after a bicycle accident.
She denied any psychiatric history and had no known history of mental illness. On physical examination, she did not demonstrate obvious hair
loss. Her abdomen was mildly tender in the epigastric region with more pain in the left upper quadrant than the right. She also displayed
mild guarding in the left upper quadrant. Laboratory values were all within normal limits. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) revealed
heterogeneous material in the lumen of the stomach, suspicious for a bezoar, measuring over 10cm within the lumen (Figures 1 and 2). An
ultrasound revealed gastric outlet obstruction caused by a large echogenic mass. Axial computed tomography demonstrating bezoar obstructing
entire lumen of stomach. Axial computed tomography demonstrating gastric bezoar in lumen of stomach with extension to duodenum. The patient
was first brought to the operating room for an upper endoscopy, where the bezoar was visualized. The mass extended to the pylorus with
possible obstruction of the gastric outlet. Over a 6-hour period, <10% of the bezoar was removed. Pediatric surgery was then consulted. The
patient returned to the operating room on the second day of admission. Three laparoscopic ports were created: 5mm (umbilical), 5mm (left
lower quadrant), and 12mm (left upper quadrant). The adhesions between the stomach and peritoneum were lysed, and 2 stay sutures were
applied to the stomach through the greater curvature. A gastrotomy was then performed by inserting a blunt trochar into the stomach,
inflating a gastric balloon, and pulling the balloon against the stomach wall, creating a 10-mm intragastric port (Blunt Tip Trocar, United
States Surgical, Tyco, Norwalk, Connecticut (Figure 3). Carbon dioxide was then pumped into the stomach to create 4mm Hg pressure. Dark hair
was found in the stomach in many clumps (Figure 4). Using the working scope, the hair was removed in pieces (Figure 5). The duodenum was
then entered, demonstrating Rapunzel syndrome. After complete removal of the bezoar, the gastrotomy was closed with an endostapling device.
Total operation time was approximately 6 hours. Intraoperative photograph demonstrating gastrotomy with stomach apposed to abdominal wall.
Intraoperative photograph demonstrating trichobezoar in lumen of stomach. Total gastric trichobezoar removed. Ruler shown is 15 cm.
Postoperatively, the patient was placed on a nasogastric tube and fed nothing by mouth. On the fourth postoperative day, the patient
tolerated a regular diet and was discharged home. The patient's postoperative course was free of complications. An inpatient psychiatric
evaluation revealed only a guarded and hesitant patient who denied any hair eating. She admitted only to hair-biting, nail-biting, and some
insomnia. She admitted to seeing a psychologist 1 to 2 times per week over the last 2 years. It was recommended that she see an outpatient
clinician on an intensive basis, and subsequently she was diagnosed with nonspecific anxiety disorder “NOS.” Trichobezoars are most commonly
associated with trichotillomania. In this psychiatric disorder, patients recurrently pull out their own hair. The patients experience an
increasing sense of tension immediately before pulling out the hair or when attempting to resist the behavior. The feeling of tension is
followed by a sense of gratification after pulling out the hair. This behavior cannot be accounted for by another disorder, and causes
significant impairment.1 Trichotillomania affects about 1% of the population. One third of these patients have trichophagia, and 1% of these
patients eat enough hair to require surgery.2 The first reported case of trichobezoar was described by Baudamant in 1779,3 and the first
successful surgical removal was performed by Schonborn in 1885.4 The clinical presentation of a trichobezoar is usually that of a gastric
outlet or bowel obstruction, although most are found in the stomach. Patients experience epigastric pain, nausea, vomiting, and loss of
appetite. Obstruction can result if the mass is allowed to enlarge. Uncommonly, Rapunzel syndrome can occur in which a tail of hair extends
from the stomach to the small intestine, or from the small intestine in the colon.5 Past accepted treatment modalities have included
observation, dissolution, fragmentation, or surgery. The surgical approach could either be laparoscopic or open. In a retrospective study
conducted by Yau et al,6 the laparoscopic approach was shown to have better postoperative outcomes. The authors took all patients with
bezoar-induced small bowel obstruction and divided them based on either open or laparoscopic surgery. The patients treated laparoscopically
had fewer complications, shorter hospital stays, and shorter times for return of bowel function. Therefore, if possible, the laparoscopic
approach should be pursued. Several authors have described a laparoscopic approach. Nirasawa et al7 described using an 8-cm laparoscopic
gastric incision, placing the bezoar in a plastic bag, and then removing it through a suprapubic minilaparotomy. However, the authors
acknowledged that hair and gastric juice were spilled and retrieved. This method poses 2 risks. First, spillage of the bag contents could
lead to an intraabdominal infection; and second, the incision itself could be contaminated, leading to wound infection. In addition, an 8-cm
incision is a sizeable incision within the gastric wall. Kanetaka et al8 used a 2-channel laparoscopic approach, in which a gastric incision
of 1cm was made, and the bezoar was then fragmented using laparoscopic scissors. The fragments were then retrieved using gastroscopy. As
Song et al9 pointed out, it is difficult to fragment the bezoar with laparoscopic scissors. Setting up gastroscopy in the same operating
room also poses a logistical challenge. Shami et al10 described making 3 laparoscopic ports followed by a longitudinal anterior gastrotomy.
The bezoar was then placed in a tissue retrieval bag. The bag was brought to the exterior through a 4-cm extension of one of the ports. The
bezoar was fragmented within the bag, and retrieved in piecemeal fashion. The abdominal cavity was then washed out. Song et al9 described a
similar approach in which a gastric incision was made laparoscopically. The bezoar was then placed in a laparoscopic retrieval Endo-bag. The
opening of the bag was then externalized so the bezoar could be fragmented within the bag. Once fragmented, the bezoar was then extracted
within the bag through the incision. Both of these techniques attempt to minimize the possibility for contamination of the field by gastric
contents. However, as described in Shami's case, wound infections can still occur. Although the contact is minimized, there is still a risk
of gastric spillage and contamination. Moreover, with respect to all of these approaches, the efficacy is limited by the size of the bezoar.
We surmise that it would be difficult to manipulate a large bezoar into a bag and then fragment it. Our approach involved a completely
laparoscopic resection and removal of the bezoar, without exposing the abdominal cavity to the stomach contents. By securing the stomach to
the abdominal wall, then creating an intragastric port, the risk for contamination was minimized. However, this approach too is limited by
size. Since the bezoar was so large, and only piecemeal removal was possible, operating time was long. In choosing an approach, the
anesthesia time and the patient's ability to tolerate it, in addition to possible surgeon fatigue, must be weighed against the benefits of
both minimal risk of infection and minimal incisions in the abdomen and stomach.
