Dear Sirs, Niemann–Pick disease type C (NP-C) is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with a wide clinical neuropsychiatric spectrum
resulting from a disorder of intracellular cholesterol trafficking and synthesis caused by mutations in the NPC1 or NPC2 gene [1, 2]. We
describe a 51-year-old man with a long disease course who showed a remarkable photomyogenic (photomyoclonic) response at photic flash
stimulation during EEG recordings. Thirty years after the initial presentation of symptoms, the patient was referred for the evaluation of
an early onset dementia, progressive behavioural disturbances, tremors, and gait disturbances. Until puberty a normal intelligence and
psychomotor development were reported. After puberty he gradually deteriorated in daily functioning and intelligence, and at the age of 46
his IQ score was below 70. He increasingly presented action tremors, gait disturbances, falls, myoclonic jerks in the limbs and the body,
and an increased startle response. He showed severe obsessive traits and a sexual preoccupation towards young girls and women for which he
was transferred to a psychiatric hospital. Neurological examination revealed poor facial mimics with a staring gaze. Speech was dysarthric
and he had an aphasia. There were myoclonic jerks which increased on motor action and startle. Motor exam showed a severe ataxia of the
extremities and muscle tendon reflexes were increased, but not pathologic. Until that moment, laboratory tests, genetic counselling, and
imaging studies never revealed a diagnosis. Brain MRI studies showed diffuse cerebral atrophy, most severely of the frontal and temporal
lobes. Consecutive EEG recordings showed a background pattern of 8–9 Hz which slowed towards 7–8 Hz. These recordings increasingly showed
repetitive runs of bilateral synchronous theta activity of 4–6 Hz frontotemporally, which lasted 1–3 s. Photic flash stimulation provoked a
photomyogenic response (Fig. 1). Stimulation with repetitive flashes caused time-locked muscle artefacts at the rate of flashing with
increasing amplitude on faster frequencies and a sudden ending on the cessation of flash stimulation. The muscle activation bursts started
48 ms after the flash and had a duration of approximately 150–200 ms. The posterior regions showed a normal photic driving response. NP-C
was diagnosed when the accumulation of unesterified cholesterol by positive fibroblast Filipin staining and reduced LDL cholesterol
esterification in fibroblasts was demonstrated.Fig. 1EEG recording during 1 and 6 Hz photic flash stimulation. Rhythmic muscle activity
appears in phase with the repetitive light flashes and ends at the moment photic flash stimulation is stopped EEG recording during 1 and
6 Hz photic flash stimulation. Rhythmic muscle activity appears in phase with the repetitive light flashes and ends at the moment photic
flash stimulation is stopped At the age of 53 he succumbed from an aspiration pneumonia. Myoclonic contractions are not a typical feature of
NP-C and a photomyogenic reaction has been described only once before in NP-C . Two cases of cortical myoclonus and one case on a
progressive cortical action myoclonus on motor activity have been described [4, 5]. The photomyogenic response results from stimulus time-
locked rhythmic contractions of periocular and facial muscles in phase with the flash stimulus frequency which can extend to myoclonic
jerking of the muscles of the upper body. It ceases directly after flash stimuli are stopped. It is considered to be a normal physiological
response which can, however, expand under emotional circumstances or metabolic or toxic states. In our patient, EMG activity was mostly
dominant in the posterior regions. Its physiological mechanism was originally thought to be of muscular origin. Myoclonus can have a
cortical origin or it can be generated by the brain stem showing mechanisms similar to the blink reflex or in the reticular formation. A
startle reflex induces a facial muscle reaction comparable to the blink reflex with a latency shorter than the latency we measured.
Myoclonic responses generated by the reticular formation typically induce a motor reflex of the orbucularis oculi muscle 40 ms after the
stimulus. These EMG bursts typically show a rostro-caudal recruitment starting with activiation of the cranial nerves-innervated muscles and
traversing downwards to the muscles of the arms and legs . We did not dispose of more extensive EMG recordings covering muscles of face,
neck, and limbs, so we cannot be conclusive about the generator mechanism. However, EMG activity bursts in our patient were of a long
duration of 150–200 ms. Moreover, the reticular reflex myoclonus is a response typically induced by touch, noise, tendon reflex, or muscle
stretch. More recently, research findings suggest a cortical origin of the photomyogenic reaction, which, however, remains to be elucidated
. Myoclonic disorders have repeatedly been associated with cortical hyperexcitability [10, 12, 13]. Such a mechanism is, for instance, the
case in the progressive myoclonic epilepsies. This is a progressive neurodegenerative disease characterized by seizures which can be
provoked by stimuli and myoclonus of variable morphology. These patients show exaggerated evoked potentials after somatosensory and light
stimuli as a result of cortical hyperexcitability. This may also occur in NP-C cases as described in this report. However, in our patient,
evoked potential studies were not performed. Our patient did not have seizures, making the clinical state of our patient more consistent
with a progressive myoclonic ataxia. In the literature the neurophysiological findings of NP-C are described in only a number of reports [2,
4, 5]. EEG features reported consist of unspecific diffuse slowing of background activity. Epilepsy is described sporadically . The
recognition of vertical gaze palsy by electro-oculography has been described . Neurophysiologic investigations may help to better understand
the pathophysiological mechanism of NP-C with respect to the nervous system, may help to reveal a diagnosis, and may help to evaluate the
effects of treatment. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits
any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
