Cheyne‐Stokes respiration (CSR) is a form of periodic breathing in which central apneas and hypopneas alternate with periods of
hyperventilation, producing a waxing and waning pattern of tidal volume. This brief case described an interesting association of CSR and
hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) in a patient with normal left ventricular ejection fraction, providing physiological insights for the
genesis of CSR. A 64‐year‐old male patient was admitted for a routine cardiac evaluation with complaints of witnessed apnea during sleep. He
had previous history of HCM and permanent atrial fibrillation. He was on regular use of carvedilol 50 mg/d; enalapril 40 mg/d, furosemide
80 mg/d and warfarin 5 mg/d and was on NYHA stage III heart failure. Echocardiography demonstrated interventricular septum wall thickness of
20 mm and posterior wall thickness of 11 mm, without left ventricle outflow tract obstruction. The left ventricle ejection fraction was in
the normal range (69%). The right ventricle systolic pulmonary pressure was 35 mmHg. Echocardiographic diastolic function evaluation was
impaired due to atrial fibrillation. Technetium (99mTc) radionuclide ventriculography showed normal biventricular systolic function and a
median pulmonary transit time of 13 seconds (normal <10 seconds), denoting diastolic dysfunction. Cardiac nuclear magnetic resonance also
demonstrated normal global biventricular function. Arterial blood gas while awake showed pH:7.41; pCO2:33 mm Hg; paO2: 78 mm Hg; Sat: 97%;
HCO3: 20.6 mMol/L; BE: ‐2.6 mMol/L. A full‐overnight polysomnography indicated a sleep efficiency of 95% with predominantly light sleep
(9.9% of stage 1, 75.9% stage 2, 4% of delta sleep (non REM stage 3/4) and 10.2% stage REM). The study showed an apnea‐hypopnea index of
34.3 events per hour divided in: obstructive apneas = 8; central apneas = 12.1; mixed apneas = 5.3 and hypopneas = 8.9 events/hour. CSR
pattern of breathing was present during the entire night (Figure 1). The respiratory pattern characteristics were averaged over 10
consecutive cycles of apnea at stage 2 sleep and the results are presented as mean±SD. Hyperpnea duration was 42±3 seconds (calculated as
the time between the beginning of inspiration during the ventilatory cycle and the onset of the subsequent apnea). Apnea duration was 19±3
seconds (defined as the time between the end of inspiration of the breath preceding a central apnea and the onset of inspiration of the
breath terminating the apnea) resulting in a cycle duration of 62±5 seconds (calculated as the sum of the hyperpnea and apnea durations).
The circulation time from the lungs to the peripheral chemoreceptors was increased (29±2 seconds‐estimated by measuring the lung‐to‐ear
circulation time ), which is the time from the first breath after a central apnea to the subsequent nadir of SaO2 detected at the ear by an
oximeter. This measure reflects the circulatory delay due to cardiac dysfunction. HCM is the most common hereditary cardiac disease and is
characterized by left ventricular hypertrophy that may lead to diastolic heart failure. The annual rate of sudden cardiac death, the most
feared complication of HCM, ranges from 0.5% to 1.5% per year for most age groups.1 We have recently reported a high prevalence of
obstructive sleep apnea in 80 consecutive patients with HCM.2 Obstructive sleep apnea was independently associated with heart remodeling and
atrial fibrillation in this population. In patients with systolic heart failure, CSR is an independent marker of poor prognosis3 and may be
part of a vicious cycle, further stressing the failing heart in patients with congestive heart failure. CSR is characterized by a prolonged
waxing and waning pattern of breathing interposed by central apneas. CSR has been extensively described among patients with systolic
congestive heart failure with low ejection fraction. The prevalence of CSR among patients with systolic congestive heart failure is
strikingly high and ranges from 30% to 50%.3 One of the key features of CSR is hyperventilation and low arterial PaCO2 that, when it falls
below the apnea threshold during sleep, triggers central apneas.4 Patients with CSR present a low PaCO2 both awake and asleep. Our patient
also presented a low awake PaCO2 (33 mmHg). The mechanisms leading to hyperventilation are not completely understood. Increased pulmonary
capillary vascular pressures may trigger hyperventilation through stimulation of pulmonary vagal afferent‐nerve activity. Left ventricular
systolic dysfunction has been suggested as the cause of pulmonary congestion, but diastolic dysfunction could also lead to pulmonary
congestion. Diastolic dysfunction has also been associated with increased hypercapnic ventilatory responsiviness.5 Increased chemorreflex
could contribute to respiratory instability due to increased loop gain.3 A previous study that evaluated 20 patients with diastolic
dysfunction found that 2 patients presented central sleep apnea and CSR pattern of breathing.6 The present case report extends these
findings by showing that CSR may also be present in patients with HCM. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time this association
was presented in a patient with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy and normal systolic function. It is important to stress, however, that the
presence of atrial fibrillation is a marker for loss of atrial contraction and poor cardiac pumping function and may contribute to the
genesis of CSR in the present case.7 Atrial fibrillation is 8 times more common among patients with central sleep apnea than among normal
controls.8 Another important finding encountered in this patients that helps explain the respiratory pattern is that mean pulmonary transit
time was prolonged, denoting increased circulation time, a hallmark of CSR, previously described in association with systolic dysfunction.
It also has been found that the duration of hyperpnea is directly proportional to the lung to peripheral chemoreceptor circulation time, and
inversely proportional to cardiac output. Patients with heart failure and CSR present with the periodic cycle duration averaging
approximately 60 seconds, compared with only 35 seconds in patients with idiopathic central sleep apnea or high‐altitude periodic breathing
without heart failure.9 Hall et al.10 compared central apnea in patients with normal systolic function versus patients with systolic
dysfunction. While the duration of apnea was similar, patients with normal heart function presented a significantly shorter hyperpnea and
cycle length time than patients with systolic dysfunction. The investigators concluded that prolonged periodic breathing cycle and hyperpnea
durations, typical of CSR, are a consequence of left ventricular systolic dysfunction, low cardiac output, and prolonged circulation time.
However, the patient described presented values of cycle length, apnea length, and LECT similar to those described in patients with CSR and
heart failure due to systolic dysfunction:11 hyperpnea time (42 ± 3 vs 35 ± 7), apnea time (19 ± 3 vs 27± 3), cycle length (62 ± 5 vs 62 ±
10) and LECT (29 ± 2 vs 27 ± 3). Therefore, we extend the concept proposed by Hall et al.10 by showing that prolonged circulation time can
also occur in patients with normal left ventricular systolic function but impaired left ventricular diastolic function. We conclude that
patients with normal left ventricular function but with severe diastolic dysfunction and atrial fibrillation may present the typical CSR.
Polysomnographic recording (5 minutes tracing) of an HCM patient with normal left ejection fraction presenting a Cheyne‐Stokes respiration
during sleep. The patient was on stage 2 sleep; top channel is related to sleep recordings. ←The following channels, from top to bottom,
trac respiration by monitoring motion of the thorax, abdomen, respiratory flow (nasal canulla), ear lobe oxymetry, and derived heart rate.
Black arrows show how the circulation time is measured (time from the first breath after a central apnea to the subsequent nadir of SaO2
detected at the ear by an oximeter).‐ Polysomnographic recording (5 minutes tracing) of an HCM patient with normal left ejection fraction
presenting a Cheyne‐Stokes respiration during sleep. The patient was on stage 2 sleep; top channel is related to sleep recordings. ←The
following channels, from top to bottom, trac respiration by monitoring motion of the thorax, abdomen, respiratory flow (nasal canulla), ear
lobe oxymetry, and derived heart rate. Black arrows show how the circulation time is measured (time from the first breath after a central
apnea to the subsequent nadir of SaO2 detected at the ear by an oximeter).
