Among high-grade gliomas, childhood glioblastoma multiforme (GBM) is particularly challenging in terms of therapeutic treatment.1-5 Cerebral
tumors are the most frequent childhood solid neoplastic disorders and are the primary cancer-related cause of death among children.1,3
Gliomas constitute approximately 60% of all cerebral tumors, and approximately half of them are considered to be high-grade malignant
tumors.1 The prognosis for recovery is conservative, and 5-year survival rates range from 5% to 15%.2,6,7 This case report documents a GBM
that was located deep in the right cerebral hemisphere of a 9-year-old child. Because this is a rare illness for a patient of this age, we
also provide a brief literature review to supplement this case report. A previously healthy 9-year-old girl with adequate neuropsychomotor
development was admitted to the hospital with a 15-day-long hemiparesis and disorientation. A skull computerized tomography (CT) scan showed
a deep-seated, irregularly shaped expansive lesion on the right of brain, with peripheral contrast uptake that was impinging on and
obstructing the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pathways (see Figure 1). We performed a ventriculoperitoneal shunting and stereoctatic biopsy of
the lesion. The histopathology showed a pleomorphic neoplasia, which was associated with vascular neoformation, and necrosis with elongated
cells and hyperchromatic and pleomorphic nuclei that had atypia and mitotic figures. The immunohistochemistry (see Table 1) was positive for
the glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP), Ki-67 proliferation antigen, and S-100 protein. These findings, along with the morphological
features and the presence of necrosis, confirmed the diagnosis of GBM (see Figure 2). The patient, whose level of consciousness improved
with steroids but whose motor functioning remained impaired, was referred to radiotherapy. After 40 days, there was a significant
neurological worsening with hemiplegia and a fluctuating level of consciousness. Skull CT and MRI results showed an increase of the lesion
size (see Figure 3). A craniotomy with a partial tumor removal was performed to reduce the intracranial hypertension. The patient died ten
days after the procedure. Malignant gliomas are rare in childhood, comprising approximately 6.5% of all intracranial neoplastic disorders in
the pediatric population. Although these gliomas may occur in any anatomical site within the central nervous system, they are most
frequently located in the supratentorial site.1,3,5 Males are slightly more affected than females (male:female ratio = 1.5:1). In terms of
histology, anaplastic astrocytomas are characterized by hypercellularity, nuclear atypia, mytotic figures, nuclear pleomorphism and vascular
proliferation; GBM also has associated necrosis.2,6 Children with high-grade gliomas present with a variety of signs and symptoms that
chiefly depend on their age and the tumor localization. The rate of neurological impairment is characteristically quick and may range from
months to days. Seizures may herald the onset, especially when tumors are close to the cerebral cortex. Other common clinical manifestations
include hemiparesis, visual deficit, headache, and, in some cases, signs of intracranial hypertension due to an obstruction of the CSF
pathways.2-8 In our case, the first clinical manifestation was hemiparesis and clouding of the consciousness, with rapidly evolving
intracranial hypertension despite partial removal of the tumor. A brain MRI is the investigational tool of choice for determining a GBM
diagnosis.1-3,8 In this case, there was an irregularly outlined, deep-seated cerebral lesion with a mass effect, peripheral contrast uptake
and central necrosis. Such findings are consistent with the literature.1,3 The treatment of malignant gliomas is still a challenge,
particularly in children. Chemotherapy and radiotherapy, far from being satisfactory treatment options, are associated with a significant
rate of morbidity.9-12 Present day treatment includes tumor resection, local radiotherapy, and chemotherapy, which are approaches that
promote an improvement in the length of survival but do not seem to change the inexorable course of the disease.1,3-5,13,14 Our patient
developed obstructive hydrocephalus that demanded ventriculoperitoneal shunting. A subsequent stereotactic biopsy led to the
histopathological confirmation of GBM. We chose to perform radiotherapy and chemotherapy. The quick, unfavorable evolution of the disease
precluded the use of chemotherapy and led us to try a partial tumor resection for decompression, which was ultimately unsuccessful. The role
of adjuvant chemotherapy for the treatment of pediatric high grade gliomas (HGGs) was established in the 1980s,15 which is based on the
results of a randomized Children's Cancer Group study using lomustine and vincristine. Recently, studies have shown a small increase in
survival rates using temozolomide and lomustine to treat pediatric HGGs.16 These studies have demonstrated that surgery, chemotherapy, and
radiotherapy were ineffective in achieving long-term survival. There have only been anecdotal reports of good results in the treatment of
glioblastoma in children. Further research on this disease is needed so that better treatments may be developed to improve the quality of
life and prognosis of these patients. Skull CT: Deep-seated cerebral lesion with an irregular outline, mass-effect, peripheral contrast
uptake, and central necrosis.- Skull CT: Deep-seated cerebral lesion with an irregular outline, mass-effect, peripheral contrast uptake, and
central necrosis. A, B: Histological sections of cerebral tissue showing areas of elongated cells with pleomorphic and hyperchromatic nuclei
that are associated with vascular neoformation and extensive hemorrhage and necrosis.- A, B: Histological sections of cerebral tissue
showing areas of elongated cells with pleomorphic and hyperchromatic nuclei that are associated with vascular neoformation and extensive
hemorrhage and necrosis. C: Immunohistochemistry positive for GFAP. CT (above) and MTI (below): A large lesion impinging on the thalamus and
basal ganglia with peripheral contrast uptake and central necrosis.- CT (above) and MTI (below): A large lesion impinging on the thalamus
and basal ganglia with peripheral contrast uptake and central necrosis. Antigens that were used for the immunohistochemistry.
