Kikuchi-Fujimoto's disease (KFD), also called histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis, is a rare, idiopathic and self-limited condition
usually characterized by cervical lymphadenopathy and fever, most often affecting young patients. Aetiology is unknown. Differential
diagnosis includes mainly malignant lymphoma, tuberculous lymphadenitis and systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), so early diagnosis is
crucial. Pleuropulmonary involvement due to isolated KFD has been seldom reported. a 32-year-old man, on treatment for iatrogenic
hypothyroidism, was admitted due to high grade fever and painful cervical lymphadenopathies. KFD was diagnosed by lymph node biopsy. Some
days after admission the patient got worse, he developed generalized lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusion and interstitial lung
disease. All of them resolved with prednisone and after two years of following up he remains asymptomatic and without evidence of any other
associated disease. Pleural effusion and interstitial lung disease are very uncommon manifestations of KFD. In our experience, treatment
with oral prednisone was effective. Kikuchi-Fujimoto's disease (KFD), or histiocytic necrotizing lymphadenitis, was first described in Japan
in 1972 as a self-limiting disease mostly affecting the cervical lymph nodes of young individuals, mainly females . In 1982 the first cases
of KFD were reported in North America and Europe and the disease is now reported worldwide. Although the aetiology is unknown, it has been
suggested to be an apoptotic process mediated mainly by CD8-positive T lymphocytes, and viral or autoimmune factors are believed to be
involved . Occasionally it may be associated with autoimmune disease, mostly systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) . Enlargement of cervical
lymph nodes, fever and leukopenia are the most prominent symptoms, although several other clinical manifestations have been reported . The
authors report the first case of isolated KFD with interstitial lung disease and bilateral pleural effusion, which also improved quickly
with oral prednisone. A 32-year-old Caucasian man, with a history of hyperthyroidism six months previous due to toxic multinodular goiter,
treated with radioactive iodine, who developed iatrogenic hypothyroidism and on initiation of substitutive treatment, was admitted due to
persistent fever (39-40°C), malaise and painful cervical lymphadenopathies that had been present for two weeks. Laboratory findings were as
follows: haematocrit 34%, haemoglobin 12 g/dl, leukocyte count 3400/mm3 (neutrophils 88.2%, lymphocytes 8.7%, monocytes 2.8%), platelet
count 246000/mm3, erythrocyte sedimentation rate 63 mm/h (normal range 0-20 mm/h), alanine transferase (ALT) 176 IU/L (0-40 IU/L), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) 89 IU/L (0-40 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (AlkP) 176 IU/L (40-129 IU/L) and gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase (GGT) 657
IU/L (10-50 IU/L); serum lactic dehydrogenase (LDH) 1896 IU/L (240-480 IU/L), thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) 73 μIU/ml (0.27-4.2 μIU/ml)
and thyroxine (T4) 0,25 ng/dl (NR:0.93-1.71). Blood cultures and serologic tests were found to be negative for human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV), hepatitis B virus (HBV), hepatitis C virus (HCV), Epstein-Barr virus (EBV), cytomegalovirus (CMV), herpes simplex virus (HSV),
Rubella, Toxoplasma, parvovirus B19, Yersinia enterocolitica, Salmonella and Brucella. Serum antinuclear antibody (ANA) and rheumatoid
factor were also negative. On admission, chest X-ray was clear in both lung fields and computed tomography of the neck, thorax and abdomen
revealed only lymphadenopathy affecting bilateral cervical and one mediastinal lymph nodes (Figure 1). Cervical lymph node surgical biopsy
was performed on the second day after admission. On macroscopic examination it appeared homogeneous, of medium consistency, dark grey colour
and 2 × 1.2 × 1.1 cm in size. The patient's condition worsened over the following days, with high-grade daily fever, increasing size of
cervical lymph nodes, the development of axillary lymphadenopathy and mild dyspnoea on exertion, with decreased breath sounds in both lung
bases on physical examination. A second computed tomography of the thorax revealed generalized axillary, mediastinal and hilar
lymphadenopathy, interstitial infiltrate in both lungs and bilateral pleural effusion (Figure 2). Thoracocentesis was performed with the
following results in pleural fluid: pH 7.39 (6.8-7.6), glucose 102 mg/dl (60-100), proteins 3.2 g/dl (0-3), LDH 1694 IU/L (0-200), 50
leukocytes/ml (0-300); stains and cultures for bacteria and mycobacteria were negative and malignant cells were not found on cytologic
examination. Cervical lymph node biopsy revealed necrotizing lymphadenitis with prominent areas of cortical and paracortical necrosis and
distortion of the nodal architecture (Figure 3), abundant non-neutrophilic karyorrhexis and large numbers of various types of histiocytes at
the margins of the necrotic areas, performing phagocytosis of cellular debris. Stimulated lymphocytes and immunoblasts were observed around
these areas, along with reduced numbers of plasma cells and no neutrophils (Figure 4). Lymphoma cells were absent and stains and tissue
cultures for bacteria, fungi and mycobacteria were negative. Prednisone therapy was started on the 7th day (after receiving negative viral
results) at a dose of 1 mg/kg/day, with rapid improvement: the patient became afebrile on day 10, cervical and axillary swelling and
tenderness began to decrease, dyspnoea disappeared and respiratory auscultation normalized. The daily dose of thyroxine was slowly increased
by the endocrinologist. Prior to discharge, chest X-ray was normal. Tapering doses of prednisone were prescribed throughout the subsequent
two months; all biochemical and haematological parameters normalized except for TSH, which reached normal values four months later. After
two years of follow-up appointments the patient remains asymptomatic, physical examination and chest X-ray are absolutely normal and serum
antinuclear antibodies remain negative. On admission both lung fields were clear and one isolated mediastinal lymph node was observed. Some
days after admission the patient got worse; and bilateral pleural effusion, interstitial infiltrate in both lungs, and mediastinal and hilar
lymphadenopathy developed. Peripheral part of the lymph node with cortical and paracortical necrosis, associated with distortion of normal
nodal architecture. Hematoxylin and eosin staining; magnification ×10. Non-neutrophilic karyorrhexis. Histiocytes and plasmacytoid monocytes
performing phagocytosis of cellular debris. Hematoxylin and eosin staining; magnification ×60. KFD is a benign disease that usually resolves
spontaneously within one to four months, affects all ethnic groups and is more common in young women (4:1 female:male ratio), manifests as
localized lymphadenopathy, usually in the cervical region, and is commonly associated with fever and leukopenia . The aetiology of KFD
remains obscure: a viral pathogenesis is thought to be the most likely candidate due to its self-limiting clinical course and the lack of
neutrophilic response . It has been reported in association with Epstein-Barr virus, human herpesvirus, human herpesvirus 8, HIV, HTLV1,
dengue virus, parvovirus B19, Yersinia enterocolítica, Bartonella, Brucella, Entamoeba histolytica and Toxoplasma . On the other hand, an
autoimmune origin has also been suggested due to electron microscopic studies that have identified tubular reticular structures in the
cytoplasm of stimulated lymphocytes and histiocytes in patients with KFD, which have also been noted within lymphocytes and endothelial
cells of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus and other autoimmune disorders, so it is possible that KFD may represent an exuberant
T-cell-mediated, self-limited immune response to a variety of non-specific stimuli in genetically susceptible individuals . The differential
diagnosis of lymph node enlargement in patients with the clinical signs of KFD includes mainly tuberculous and other infectious types of
lymphadenitis, and malignant lymphoma . The diagnosis is confirmed by lymph node biopsy, when histopathology reveals necrotizing
lymphadenitis restricted to the cortical and paracortical areas, with partial or complete loss of follicular architecture, marked
karyorrhexis and absence of neutrophils, granulomatous reaction or lymphoma cells . Most KFD cases improve within a six-month period , and a
wide range of recurrence rates have been reported, from 4% to 27% . Kikuchi-Fujimoto disease has occasionally been described in association
with simultaneous SLE , Sjögren syndrome , antiphospholipid syndrome , relapsing polychondritis or even autoimmune hepatitis . On the other
hand, unusual manifestations of isolated KFD include axillary and mesenteric lymphadenopathy, splenomegaly, parotid gland enlargement, skin
rashes, arthralgias, myalgias, aseptic meningitis, bone marrow haemophagocytosis and liver dysfunction . Patients with arthritis or
bilateral panuveitis have been reported on occasion. KFD has seldom been reported in association with pulmonary involvement and most such
cases have been in patients who developed SLE . Wilkinson et al. described a 41-yr-old lady diagnosed with KFD who subsequently developed
polymyositis with pulmonary involvement . Meanwhile, Kucukardali et al. reported one case of fatal pulmonary haemorrhage due to KFD upon
post-mortem examination and three cases who developed KFD after transplantation and died of respiratory failure . Finally, one case of KFD
associated with cryptogenic organizing pneumonia has been reported recently . In the present case, the patient developed isolated KFD with
pleuropulmonary involvement due to interstitial lung infiltrate and pleural effusion, both bilateral and with rapid improvement and
resolution with oral prednisone. The simultaneous hypothyroidism of the patient should not be ignored, nor its possible clinical co-
expression. However, its presence several months before the development of KFD and even after the clinical and analytical resolution of the
latter, combined with the absence of any other clinical symptoms related to thyroxine defficiency and the rapid development and improvement
of the pleuropulmonary manifestations with prednisone, suggest an inflammatory rather than an endocrine aetiology. In conclusion,
pleuropulmonary involvement in patients with KFD has seldom been reported. We describe a patient with isolated KFD in whom bilateral pleural
effusion and an interstitial lung pattern developed. Clinical and radiological responses to prednisone were excellent. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. AGZ has contributed providing the clinical data, he has performed the literature review and he has
written the main manuscript. He was involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, and gave final
approval of the version to be published. JTG was involved in revising the manuscript critically for important intellectual content, making
substantial contributions and gave final approval of the version to be published. PBG was involved in revising the manuscript critically,
and gave final approval of the version to be published. MFM was involved in revising the manuscript critically, and gave final approval of
the version to be published. LZD provided the histopathological figures. She was involved in revising the manuscript critically, and gave
final approval of the version to be published. MUM provided the Computed Tomography images and was involved in revising the manuscript
critically, and gave final approval of the version to be published. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2466/10/54/prepub The authors
are grateful to Dr. J. Mar for his helpful advice during the preparation of this manuscript.
