Contract grant sponsor: ED is aspirant of the Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk Onderzoek (FWO)-Vlaanderen. MC was supported by a grant from the
Foundation for Polish Science. HB is supported by the Institute for the Promotion of Innovation through Science and Technology in Flanders
(IWT-Vlaanderen). This work is supported by research grants from the FWO Vlaanderen (G.0578.06 and G.0551.08 to EL); the Interuniversitary
Attraction Poles (IAP) granted by the Federal Office for Scientific, Technical and Cultural Affairs, Belgium (2007-2011; P6/05) (EL) and by
a Concerted Action Grant from the KULeuven (EL).This study was supported by Grants-in-Aid from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports,
Science and Technology of Japan and the Program for Promotion of Fundamental Studies in Health Sciences of the National Institute of
Biomedical Innovation (NIBIO). TYKS evo grant to PS. Communicated by Mark H. Paalman Legius syndrome presents as an autosomal dominant
condition characterized by café-au-lait macules with or without freckling and sometimes a Noonan-like appearance and/or learning
difficulties. It is caused by germline loss-of-function SPRED1 mutations and is a member of the RAS-MAPK pathway syndromes. Most mutations
result in a truncated protein and only a few inactivating missense mutations have been reported. Since only a limited number of patients has
been reported up until now, the full clinical and mutational spectrum is still unknown. We report mutation data and clinical details in
fourteen new families with Legius syndrome. Six novel germline mutations are described. The Trp31Cys mutation is a new pathogenic SPRED1
missense mutation. Clinical details in the 14 families confirmed the absence of neurofibromas, and Lisch nodules, and the absence of a high
prevalence of central nervous system tumors. We report white matter T2 hyperintensities on brain MRI scans in 2 patients and a potential
association between postaxial polydactyly and Legius syndrome. © 2010 Wiley-Liss, Inc. Legius syndrome (MIM# 611431) was recently identified
as a Neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1)- like syndrome caused by heterozygous germline loss-of-function SPRED1 (MIM# 609291) mutations (Brems et
al., 2007). In the original report five families with an autosomal dominant inherited condition presenting with multiple café-au-lait
macules (CALM), axillary freckling, macrocephaly and at times a Noonan-like facial appearance were described. Learning difficulties and/or
attention deficit were observed in several children and multiple lipomas were present in several adults. Some typical NF1 (MIM# 162200)
features such as Lisch nodules of the iris, neurofibromas and central nervous system tumors were systematically absent. Pasmant et al.
identified five probands with a SPRED1 mutation in 61 index cases. They confirmed a high prevalence of CALM, freckling and learning
disability as well as absence of neurofibromas and Lisch nodules (Pasmant et al., 2009b). Noonan-like dysmorphism was not observed and
macrocephaly was reported in only one individual. Lipomas were seen in one family. Spurlock et al. identified 6 probands with SPRED1
mutations in 85 unrelated patients referred for NF1 gene (MIM# 613113) testing who were NF1 mutation negative and had no cutaneous
neurofibromas (Spurlock et al., 2009). All affected probands but 1 satisfied NF1 diagnostic criteria. They all had CALM. None had Noonan-
like features, macrocephaly, Lisch nodules or cutaneous neurofibromas. No significant developmental or learning problems were observed.
Messiaen et al. performed a genotype-phenotype study in 22 unrelated probands carrying a SPRED1 mutation identified through clinical testing
(Messiaen et al., 2009). Fifty percent of SPRED1 positive individuals fulfilled NF1 NIH diagnostic criteria based on the presence of more
than 5 CALM with or without freckling or a NF1 family history. Symptomatic optic pathway gliomas, neurofibromas or typical NF1 osseous
lesions were absent in the affected individuals and there was no increased prevalence of lipomas. Relative macrocephaly was documented in
27% of individuals and language/speech difficulties in 25% of children. In a second cross-sectional study Messiaen et al. performed SPRED1
mutation analysis in 1318 unrelated patients presenting with a broad range of signs typical for NF1 but no detectable NF1 mutation (Messiaen
et al., 2009). They identified 26 pathogenic SPRED1 mutations in 33 probands and 7 probable non-pathogenic missense mutations in 9 probands.
A SPRED1 mutation detection rate of 19% was found in families with an autosomal dominant phenotype of CALM with or without freckling and no
other NF1 features. Muram-Zborovski et al. sequenced the SPRED1 gene in 151 individuals with a clinical diagnosis of NF1 and identified 2
SPRED1-positive individuals. They both had multiple CALM, intertriginous freckling, learning difficulties and absence of neurofibromas
(Muram-Zborovski et al., 2010). The SPRED1 gene is a relatively small gene (7 coding exons) located on chromosome 15q14. Most germline
mutations truncate the protein, but two pathogenic missense mutations and one in-frame deletion have been reported. Similar to
neurofibromin, the protein product of NF1, SPRED1 is a negative regulator of RAS-MAPK signalling. Whereas neurofibromin acts as a GTP-ase
activating protein that accelerates conversion of active GTP-bound RAS to inactive GDP-bound RAS, SPRED1 is believed to act at the level of
RAS-RAF interaction (Wakioka et al., 2001). Both syndromes thus belong to the group of RAS-MAPK pathway disorders or neuro-cardio-facial-
cutaneous (NCFC) syndromes (Bentires-Alj et al., 2006; Denayer et al., 2008). Different degrees of cognitive impairment and tumor
predisposition are associated with these syndromes. In Legius syndrome one occurrence each of non-small cell lung cancer, Wilms tumor,
tubular colon adenoma, (Brems et al., 2007) acute myeloblastic anemia,(Pasmant et al., 2009a; Pasmant et al., 2009b) tenosynovial giant cell
tumor, breast cancer and dermoid tumor of the ovary (Messiaen et al., 2009) has been reported. No causal relationship with the germline
SPRED1 mutation has been proven in any of these cases. Whether Legius syndrome is associated with an increased risk for a specific range of
malignancies remains unknown. Messiaen et al. estimated that a study of 250 adult patients would be needed to detect rare complications with
a prevalence of only 1% (Messiaen et al., 2009). Therefore it remains important to report on new cases of Legius syndrome. In this study the
clinical data of fourteen new probands with Legius syndrome and their affected relatives are described. One missense mutation was
characterized functionally. After publication of the first report, SPRED1 mutation analysis was performed in the Department of Human
Genetics, Catholic University of Leuven, Belgium in 35 probands with a NF1-like syndrome. DNA samples included patients followed in the
Leuven neurofibromatosis clinic as well as samples sent by clinical geneticists from other centres in Belgium or from abroad. Clinical data
of 6 affected probands and their relatives carrying a mutation were collected by an extended phenotypical checklist (families 6, 7, 10, 11,
12, 14). In addition clinical data of eight other SPRED1 -mutation positive families were obtained. Mutation analysis for these cases was
performed in the Department of Clinical Genetics, Erasmus Medical Centre, Rotterdam, The Netherlands (families 1, 2, 3, 5, 8, 9, 13) and in
the Medical Genetics Centre, Munich, Germany (family 4). Most of these cases showed a phenotype compatible with Legius syndrome: presence of
CALM and freckling and absence of neurofibromas and several had been tested before for NF1 mutations. Brain imaging data were available for
10 patients (9 MRI, 1 CT). Height and head circumference at a given age were converted to standard deviations using the growth charts of
Flanders 2004 (http://www.vub.ac.be/groeicurven) and Roelants et al., 2009. An individual was recorded as macrocephalic when head
circumference was 2 standard deviations above the mean. An individual was recorded to have relative macrocephaly when head circumference was
above 2 standard deviations at the age when height would have been at the mean. Mutation analysis was performed as reported before (Brems et
al., 2007). Mutation numbering was based on the cDNA sequence with +1 corresponding to the A of the ATG translation initiation codon in the
reference sequence (GenBank accession code: NM_152594.2). For protein numbering the initiation codon is codon 1 (NP_689807.1). Names of all
variants were checked using the Mutalyzer program (http://www.LOVD.nl/mutalyzer/). Amino acid conservation for a novel missense mutation was
evaluated with the Conseq program (http://conseq.tau.ac.il/). Bio-informatical prediction of the possible impact of the missense change on
the SPRED1 protein was performed with Polyphen (http://genetics.bwh.harvard.edu/pph/). Mutation analysis in DNA extracted from paraffin-
embedded tissue from a vestibular schwannoma was performed with a different set of primers resulting in smaller amplicons. Wild-type SPRED1
cDNA was cloned into a pcDNA3.1 (Invitrogen) construct encoding an N-terminal Flag-tag. SPRED1 mutant p.Trp31Cys was generated by PCR-
directed mutagenesis and verified by sequencing. Wild-type and mutant SPRED1 constructs were subcloned in a pmax vector (Amaxa Biosystems).
The GAL4/Elk-1 reporter assay was performed as described before (Messiaen et al., 2009). The Elk-1 transcription factor is a substrate for
phosphorylation by the activated MAPK pathway. In the GAL4/Elk-1 reporter assay luciferase activity is measured in HEK293T cells co-
transfected with pFA-Elk1, pFR-Luc, β-galactosidase and Flag-tagged SPRED1 constructs after stimulation with epidermal growth factor (EGF).
Twelve different truncating SPRED1 mutations were found in 13 unrelated probands: 7 frameshift and 5 nonsense mutations, 11/13 cases were
familial. A missense mutation was found in proband 3 and occurred de novo. Mutation analysis of DNA extracted from peripheral blood of both
parents of proband 3 showed only wild type SPRED1 sequence. An overview of the different mutations is given in Table 1. Six mutations had
not been reported as germline mutations in the literature before (c.93G>T, p.Trp31Cys; c.304dupA, p.Thr102AsnfsX7; c.360dupA,
p.Glu121ArgfsX13; c.576_580dup, p.Gln194ProfsX4; c.940C>T, p.Gln314X; c.1045_1046del, p.Arg349GlyfsX4). Trp31 is a highly conserved amino
acid residue (Conseq score 7, conserved in Bos Taurus, Mus musculus, Gallus gallus, Xenopus tropicalis, Danio rerio, Drosophila
melanogaster). Bio-informatic analysis using Polyphen software predicts the p.Trp3 1Cys mutation to be probably damaging. It may disrupt the
function of the EVH1 domain. In the Elk-1 reporter assay overexpression of wild-type SPRED1 efficiently inhibited the activation of the MAPK
pathway after stimulation of the cells with EGF resulting in low luciferase activity. The SPRED1 mutations in fourteen families with Legius
syndrome Mutation numbering was based on the cDNA sequence with +1 corresponding to the A of the ATG translation initiation codon in the
reference sequence (GenBank accession code: NM_152594.2). For protein numbering the initiation codon is codon 1 (NP_689807.1). Bold: novel
mutations This mutation has already been reported as a somatic mutation in melanocytes of a patient with Legius syndrome no DNA from family
members available to prove sporadic or familial occurrence of the mutation Trp31Cys SPRED1 mutant was unable to suppress the EGF induced
Elk-1 dependent transcription activation confirming that this is an inactivating and therefore pathogenic mutation. (Figure 1) Elk-1
quantitative luciferase assay for Erk activation. Empty vector or vector carrying wild-type (WT; as a control) or mutant SPRED1 (Trp31Cys,
W31C; Thr102Arg, T102R; Ile81del, I81 del) were transfected into HEK293T cells along with Elk-1 reporter plasmids. Elk-1 activation is
measured as an increase in luciferase activity after stimulation with EGF. Three different amounts of plasmids were transfected: 0.05μg, 0.1
μg and 0.2 μg. The bars represent the average increase in luciferase activity of 3 replicates and error bars represent the standard
deviation. Wild-type SPRED1 vector efficiently suppresses EGF induced Elk-1 activation in comparison to empty vector. Similar to the known
pathogenic Thr102Arg and Ile81del mutations, Trp31Cys is unable to downregulate the increase in luciferase activity after EGF stimulation.
Clinical information was obtained for 14 probands and 16 affected relatives. Phenotypic features are summarized in Table 2. All individuals
had more than 5 CALM, except for two adults from the same family who had none. Freckling was present in 10/27 individuals, macrocephaly in
1/24, relative macrocephaly in 2/24. In 20/24 individuals the head circumference was on a higher percentile than the height. Lisch nodules
were systematically absent in those patients who had been investigated ophthalmologically (17/30). Neurofibromas were not observed, lipomas
were present in 2/15 adults. Information regarding psychomotor development was only available for 17 patients. Five children had motor
delay, 5 children delayed speech. Learning difficulties were mentioned in 14/25 individuals. Three individuals were diagnosed with ADHD; in
a fourth individual hyperactivity and attention deficit were noticed, but there was no formal diagnosis of ADHD; one patient had attention
deficit without hyperactivity (ADD). In another child concentration problems were noted. In 7 patients the diagnosis of Noonan syndrome was
considered previously and in 20 patients the diagnosis of NF1 was suspected. Sixteen patients fulfil the NF1 NIH diagnostic criteria based
on the presence of more than 5 CALM with or without freckling and a positive family history. One patient had a desmoid tumor of the
abdominal wall. A vestibular schwannoma had developed after the age of 50 in patient I1 of family 11. She was said to have the same
pigmentary findings as her daughter and granddaughter, but had not been examined clinically. SPRED1 mutation analysis was conducted on
paraffin-embedded tissue from this vestibular schwannoma. In this tissue the familial SPRED1 germline mutation was confirmed, but no somatic
second hit was found in SPRED1. T2 hyperintense spots in the subcortical white matter were observed on brain MRI in 2 patients. (Figure 2)
Other findings were epilepsy and Parkinsons disease (n=1), unilateral postaxial hexadactyly (n=2), Chiari malformation with syringomyelia
(n=1), scoliosis (n=4) with block vertebra (n=1), sensorineural hearing loss (n=1), asymptomatic arachnoid cyst detected by brain MRI (n=1),
congenital hypothyroidism (n=1). One patient had a clinical diagnosis of Marfan syndrome, which was confirmed by a pathogenic mutation in
the FBN1 gene (c.3757C>T, p.Gln1253X). Clinical features in 14 families with Legius syndrome SD: standard deviation; U: unknown; L: left; R:
right; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging; ADHD: attention deficit hyperactivity disorder; FSIQ: full-scale intelligence quotient; VIQ: verbal
intelligence quotient; PIQ: performance intelligence quotient; IUGR: intrauterine growth retardation clinical phenotype present, but no
mutation analysis performed in this patient T2 weighed sagittal secion of brain MRI of patient I1 family 11: T2 hyperintense spot is present
in the frontal white matter (arrow). We report on the second largest series of families with Legius syndrome. In this report we describe 30
new individuals from 14 families. Our results confirm previous findings that Legius syndrome is characterized by the presence of CALM with
or without freckling and the absence of typical NF1 complications such as Lisch nodules and neurofibromas. In a subset of patients we find
Noonan-like facial features (n=12) and/or sternal abnormalities (n=7; one of these patients had an additional diagnosis of Marfan syndrome,
which is also associated with sternal abnormalities). No congenital vascular malformations were present in this cohort. One vestibular
schwannoma and one benign tumor of the abdominal wall (desmoid tumor) were observed. Both tumor types had not been reported before in
association with Legius syndrome and it is unclear whether there is a causal relationship between these tumors and the germline SPRED1
mutation. Learning difficulties were mentioned in 14/25 patients (56%), three patients were diagnosed with ADHD and one with ADD. Combining
the data in the literature with that of the current report (142 individuals) learning difficulties were observed in 26 individuals (18.3%)
with Legius syndrome, delayed psychomotor development (mostly confined to specific speech delay) in 13 (9.2%), and hyperactivity, attention
problems or ADHD in 14 (9.9%). Whether Legius syndrome is associated with a specific neurocognitive profile warrants further investigation.
Focal areas of high signal intensity on T2-weighed or FLAIR images of brain MRI, also denoted UBOs (Unidentified Bright Objects), are found
in about 70% of children with NF1 (Gill et al., 2006; North, 2000). UBOs occur most often in the basal ganglia, cerebellum, thalamus,
brainstem and subcortical white matter. They are not associated with focal neurological deficits, but the pathological correlate remains
controversial (North, 2000). The number and intensity of UBOs diminish with age in the basal ganglia, cerebellum, brainstem and thalamus,
whereas lesions in the cerebral hemispheres and hippocampus do not change in prevalence over time, suggesting a different pathologic
background (Gill et al., 2006). There is no consensus on the relationship between UBOs and cognitive impairment in NF1. We report two
patients (one child and one 39 years old woman) with Legius syndrome and aspecific T2 hyperintense lesions on brain MRI. Thus the presence
of such a lesion cannot be used to exclude the diagnosis of Legius syndrome. However at an adult age these lesions are aspecific and not
uncommon in the general population. To gain better insight into the prevalence of these and other structural brain lesions in patients with
Legius syndrome it would be interesting to systematically perform brain MRI in all patients in whom the diagnosis is made. Unilateral
postaxial polydactyly has been observed both by Messiaen et al. (in one case) and in this report (two cases) to be associated with Legius
syndrome. Combining the data in the literature with that of the current report clinical details of 142 individuals with a SPRED1 mutation
have been described (Brems et al., 2007; Messiaen et al., 2009; Muram-Zborovski et al., 2010; Pasmant et al., 2009b; Spurlock et al., 2009).
According to the EUROCAT data the prevalence of any type of polydactyly at birth in the European member states was 8.11 cases per 10000
births in the 2000-2007 period. The highest prevalence in a specific region of the European Union in that time frame was 15 cases per 10000
births (Strasbourg, France). Comparing the prevalence of polydactyly in Legius syndrome (3/142) with the maximal birth prevalence in the
European Union (15/10000) results in a significant difference (p= .0014 for 3 or more cases in a group of 142, binomial distribution). It is
interesting to note that a similar figure was reported in an Italian study in children with NF1. Ruggieri et al. reported polydactyly in 4
children in a total group of 135 children with NF1 (Ruggieri et al., 1999). Germline SPRED1 mutations are found in all exons of the gene and
although some recurrent mutations have been reported, no clear mutational hotspots are present. The majority of reported SPRED1 mutations
are predicted to result in a premature stop codon (nonsense, frameshift, splice-site, out-of-frame insertions and deletions). One in-frame
deletion and 11 different missense mutations have been reported. By means of functional analyses 2 missense mutations were classified as
pathogenic and 7 as rare benign variants.(Messiaen et al., 2009). Two missense mutations were not characterized (Pasmant et al, 2009b,
Spurlock et al., 2009). We characterized an additional missense mutation and classify this Trp31Cys mutation as pathogenic based on de novo
occurrence in the family, amino acid conservation and functional analysis. Combining the data in this report and previous publications, one
can conclude that the highest chances of finding a SPRED1 mutation are in familial cases of CALM with or without freckling. Sporadic cases
of CALM are more likely due to mosaicism for NF1(Kehrer-Sawatzki and Cooper, 2008). Although the diagnosis of NF1 is made clinically based
on the NIH criteria, the importance of mutation analysis for genetic counselling is increasing with the discovery of allelic and non-allelic
NF1 variants. Especially in young children the diagnosis of NF1 can be difficult since only approximately half of children with NF1 and no
known family history meet the NIH criteria by age one year, because many features of NF1 increase in frequency with age. The more general
availability of NF1 mutation analysis allows for more general use of NF1 mutation testing also in young children. Children with typical
multiple CALM who test negative for NF1 are candidates for SPRED1 mutation analysis. In sporadic cases the yield will be low (2.4%)(Messiaen
et al., 2009). In children testing negative for mutations in both NF1 and SPRED1 mosaicism for NF1 should be suspected (Maertens et al.,
2007). As has been shown in this and previous reports Legius syndrome is associated with a milder phenotype than NF1. Likewise a mild NF1
variant associated with a 3-basepair inframe deletion of exon 17 (c.2970-2972 delAAT) has been described in which neurofibromas are rare and
multiple CALM may be the only apparent manifestation (Upadhyaya et al., 2007). In contrast, patients with a microdeletion of the NF1 region
tend to have a more severe phenotype associated with large numbers and more early appearance of cutaneous neurofibromas, a higher risk for
development of malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumors, more severe cognitive impairment and sometimes somatic overgrowth with large hands
and feet and dysmorphic facial features (Mensink et al., 2006). In conclusion, we report clinical details of 30 probands from 14 families
with pathogenic SPRED1 mutations. Six novel germline mutations were found. The p.Trp31Cys missense mutation is a pathogenic missense
mutation. Our results confirm previous reports that Legius syndrome shares clinical features with NF1 but has a milder phenotype, although
serious problems can be present such as learning difficulties. Therefore we can recommend less stringent surveillance of these patients than
for patients with NF1. We would recommend routine screening for developmental delays and behavioural and learning problems. However physical
examination by a clinical geneticist or physician familiar with Legius syndrome every 3 years during childhood seems sufficient. A possible
association with polydactyly is suggested by the finding of two cases in this report and one in a previous report.
