Pyogenic granuloma (PG) is a benign non-neoplastic mucocutaneous lesion. It is a reactional response to constant minor trauma and might be
related to hormonal changes. In the mouth, PG is manifested as a sessile or pedunculated, resilient, erythematous, exophytic and painful
papule or nodule with a smooth or lobulated surface that bleeds easily. PG preferentially affects the gingiva, but may also occur on the
lips, tongue, oral mucosa and palate. The most common treatment is surgical excision. This paper describes a mucocutaneous PG on the upper
lip, analyzing the clinical characteristics and discussing the features that distinguish this lesion from other similar oral mucosa lesions.
The diagnosis of oral lesions is complex and leads the dentist to consider distinct lesions with different diagnostic methods. This case
report with a 4 year-follow-up calls the attention to the uncommon mucocutaneous labial location of PG and to the fact that surgical
excision is the safest method for diagnosis and treatment of PG of the lip, even when involving the mucosa and skin Pyogenic granuloma (PG)
is a benign non-neoplastic mucocutaneous lesion, with the term "pyogenic" being used erroneously since this condition does not produce
purulent secretion1 and is not related to infection7. PG is also known as pregnancy granuloma or pregnancy tumor when occurring in pregnant
women, or as vascular epulis, benign vascular tumor and hemangiomatous granuloma4. Jafarzadeh, et al.7 (2006) defined PG as an inflammatory
overgrowth of the oral mucosa caused by minor trauma or irritation. According to Neville, et al.9 (1998), these injuries might be caused in
the mouth by gingival inflammation due to poor hygiene, trauma or local infection. Lin and Janniger8 (2004) reported an association between
dermatosis and the occurrence of PG. PG is manifested as a sessile or pedunculated, resilient, erythematous, exophytic and painful papule or
nodule with a smooth or lobulated surface that bleeds easily4,7. The gingiva is the most commonly affected site by PGs, accounting for 75%
of all cases8, although occurrence of these lesions on the lips, tongue, oral mucosa, palate9 and fingers2 has also been reported. PGs
affecting the labial mucosa are rare4. A higher frequency of PG is observed in the second decade of life1, especially among women, probably
because of the vascular effects of female hormones8. A preference for children has been reported by some investigators7. Microscopically, PG
is characterized by marked vascular proliferation amidst granulation tissue and chronic inflammatory infiltrate. When ulcerated, the surface
of the lesion is covered with fibrin. Older lesions may present areas of fibrosis10. In view of its clinical characteristics, the
differential diagnosis of PG includes peripheral giant cell granuloma, peripheral ossifying fibroma, metastases of malignant tumors,
hemangioma, conventional granulation tissue, fistula, inflammatory gingival hyperplasia, Kaposi's sarcoma, angiosarcoma, non-Hodgkin's
lymphoma7 and cutaneous horn in the lower lip11. The final diagnosis depends on biopsy9. Surgical excision is the most common treatment12;
however, this may result in scars5, which is why the use of more conservative treatments, such as cryosurgery6,14 and laser surgery, is
preferred3,5. The recurrence is about 3% after simple excision13. This is a case report of PG on the upper lip. It presents the clinical
characteristics and discusses the features that distinguish this lesion from other similar lesions of the oral mucosa, with special emphasis
on the diagnosis and treatment of this condition. A 12-year-old mulatto girl presented a 3-month history of a "blister on the upper lip".
The initial aspect of the blister changed after application of thinner because the lesion bled easily. The lesion was asymptomatic, grew
slowly and continued to bleed. The patient's main complaint was her fear of going to school because of the cruel comments by other students.
Medical history revealed no other systemic or local contributory factors associated with the oral finding. No palpable cervical lymph nodes
were detected. Clinical examination revealed a reddish-yellow, ulcerated, superficial nodule measuring 1 cm in diameter, involving the
mucocutaneous line of the upper lip on the left, which bled on touch and was resilient to palpation (Figure 1). The diagnostic hypotheses
were PG, recent oral syphilis (hard chancre) or tuberculous ulcer. Complementary blood tests, complete blood count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, VDRL (venereal disease research laboratory) test and radiography of the pulmonary fields made it possible to exclude
infectious diseases, a fact also supported by the patient's general good health. Reddish-yellow, ulcerated, superficial nodule involving the
mucocutaneous line of the upper lip The nodule was removed by excisional biopsy (Figure 2). Microscopic analysis showed an oral mucosa
consisting of continuous, parakeratinized, stratified pavement epithelium covered with a serofibrinous membrane. The underlying granulation
tissue was rich in blood vessels, fibroblasts and macrophages. Skeletal striated muscle fibers were observed in the deep layers (Figure 3).
The diagnosis was PG. After 6 months (Figure 4A) of follow-up the patient was satisfied with the esthetic outcome, and 4 years (Figure 4B)
after surgery the patient was definitively discharged. Excisional biopsy to remove the nodule Microscopic aspect showing an oral mucosa
consisting of continuous parakeratinized, stratified pavement epithelium covered with a serofibrinous membrane. The underlying granulation
tissue was rich in blood vessels, fibroblasts and macrophages. Skeletal striated muscle fibers were observed in the deep layers (Original
magnification x 25) Labial aspect 6 months (A) and 4 years (B) postoperatively There is consensus that PG is a reactional lesion formed in
response to minor trauma and/or chronic irritation, with reports of its occurrence after low-intensity traumatic injuries1,2,4,8-10. PGs are
preferentially found in the gingiva9, whereas its occurrence in the upper lip seems to be rare5. Thus, the present case of PG affecting the
upper lip, a region rarely subjected to trauma, is unusual, especially the location of the lesion in the lip vermilion (with involvement of
the mucocutaneous line and skin). This unusual location led to other diagnostic hypotheses for ulcerated lesions of the upper lip, such as
hard chancre (lesion resulting from inoculation of Treponema pallidum) and labial tuberculous ulcer. Although Jafarzadeh, et al.7 (2006)
have suggested that the differential diagnosis of PG should include a large number of lesions such as malignant ulcers, sarcoidosis,
syphilis, aphthous ulcers, mycotic infection and traumatic injuries. Neville, et al.9 (1998) suggested the inclusion of tuberculous oral
lesions in the differential diagnosis since, although uncommon, these lesions may present nodular, granular or ulcerated areas. Treponema
pallidum is the etiological agent of syphilis, a chronic, sexually transmitted disease of universal incidence that can affect various organs
and systems, including the mouth, which is one of the main extragenital sites of syphilis. Oral primary syphilis manifests as a deep
solitary ulcer with a red or brown base and irregular border usually located on the upper lip. The disease is followed by cervical
lymphadenopathy, which is observed 1 to 3 weeks after acquisition of the infection. The condition might be confused with other solitary
ulcerated lesions, especially traumatic lesions. Diagnosis of primary syphilis is made analyzing the patient's social and sexual lifestyle
and his/her partner, together with nonspecific serological tests, such as the VDRL test, fluorescent treponemal antibody and treponemal
immobilization9,10,12. Tuberculosis is also a universal disease whose understanding is of utmost importance for the Brazilian population
because of the lack of basic sanitation and adequate sanitary conditions. Mycobacterium tuberculosis, the causal agent of tuberculosis, is
contracted through sputum or air, reaching the lung and causing primary infection. The primary complex then heals through fibrosis and
calcification, which are visible on chest x-rays. Tuberculosis can also affect the mouth, especially the tongue, floor of the mouth, lips,
oral mucosa, soft palate, uvula, gingiva and alveolar mucosa as superficial ulcers, hard nodules in soft tissues or central bone lesions
(tuberculous osteomyelitis). The disease is confirmed by sputum examination, Mantoux reaction, chest x-rays and biopsy of the lesion9,10,12.
In the present case, lesion type and location led to the suspicion of syphilis. This was ruled out by investigation of the patient's sexual
life and a non-reactive VDRL test. Similarly, tuberculosis was raised as a diagnostic hypothesis, especially because of the characteristic
of the lesion. This was ruled out based on chest radiography, which showed normal pulmonary fields and because the patient was in good
general health. Once syphilis and tuberculosis were ruled out in this case, only PG remained as a diagnostic hypothesis. Initially, chemical
irritation resulting from the use of a paint solvent for cauterization of the initial blister (possibly a blister resulting from the fusion
of herpes vesicles frequently found at this site) was believed to be the etiological agent. This hypothesis was not supported since the
patient reported use of the solvent only to control bleeding, which is uncommon for a herpes lesion. When asked, the patient denied the
habit of biting on her upper lip, which made the determination of a traumatic etiological agent inconclusive. In a 12-year old female
patient, an age characterized by important hormonal changes and hormonal factors that can be related to the PG's etiology7, this lesion may
be related to hormonal etiology. Despite the possible occurrence of scars5, biopsy is the method for adequate diagnosis of oral lesions9 and
surgical excision is the most common treatment of PGs12. In this case, an excisional biopsy was performed for diagnosis and treatment. The
procedure was simple, essential for final diagnosis, and provided a rapid result to fulfill patient expectations. In the present case, there
was a discrete scar and the patient was psychologically satisfied with the outcome. This case reports emphasizes that the diagnosis of oral
lesions is complex and leads the dentist to consider distinct lesions with different diagnostic methods. We call attention to the uncommon
mucocutaneous labial location of PG and to the fact that surgical excision is the safest method for diagnosis and treatment of PG of the
lip, even when involving the mucosa and skin.
