We report a patient who presented during fetal life with severe aortic stenosis, left-ventricular dysfunction, and endocardial
fibroelastosis (evolving hypoplastic left heart syndrome). Management involved in utero and postnatal balloon aortic valvuloplasty for
partial relief of obstruction and early postnatal hybrid stage I palliation until recovery of left-ventricular systolic function had
occurred. The infant subsequently had successful conversion to a biventricular circulation by combining resection of endocardial
fibroelastosis with single-stage Ross-Konno, aortic arch reconstruction, hybrid takedown, and pulmonary artery reconstruction. The
morphologic and functional spectrum of the left ventricle in severe aortic stenosis ranges from the smaller, hypertrophied “borderline” left
ventricle to the dilated and thin-walled left ventricle. In addition, several studies have demonstrated that aortic stenosis with left-
ventricular dysfunction presenting in fetal life may lead to hypoplastic left heart syndrome at birth, with varying degrees of chamber
hypoplasia and endocardial fibroelastosis (EFE) [6, 8, 10]. Neonates with severe aortic stenosis generally require either surgical valvotomy
or transcatheter balloon valvuloplasty , whereas those with hypoplastic left heart are generally managed with univentricular palliation
(Norwood or hybrid transcatheter-surgical techniques) or cardiac transplantation. A 3.48-kg male infant was delivered by way of planned
repeat Cesarean section at 39 2/7 weeks’ gestation to a 36 year-old gravida 3, para 2 mother. The pregnancy was complicated by a diagnosis
of fetal aortic stenosis made at 22 3/7 weeks’ gestation (Fig. 1). At 23 4/7 weeks’ gestation, fetal balloon aortic valvuloplasty was
performed. After the procedure, as demonstrated by color Doppler, aortic arch flow had gone from retrograde to antegrade across the aortic
valve and in the ascending and transverse aortic arch; there was mild aortic insufficiency. Postnatally the left ventricle and mitral valve
were of normal size; the aortic valve was mildly hypoplastic at 5 mm with a peak Doppler-derived gradient of 60 mmHg; and there was
significant left-ventricular hypertrophy (diastolic left ventricular posterior wall dimension, LVPWd 6 mm) with poor systolic function
(LVEF% < 20%). Doppler flow in the transverse arch and isthmus was antegrade. Cardiac catheterization showed increased left atrial pressure
of 25 mm Hg. The aortic valve was dilated by way of a retrograde approach with a 5-mm Slalom balloon catheter (Cordis Corporation, Miami,
FL, USA) with a decrease in peak-to-peak gradient from 60 to 45 mm Hg. After valvuloplasty, a 5-mm stent was placed in the interatrial
septum. The neonate was maintained on prostaglandin infusion.Fig. 1Fetal echocardiogram at 22 4/7 weeks’ gestation. The left ventricle is
dilated with echo-bright endocardium suggestive of endocardial fibroelastosis (a), and there is left-to-right flow across the atrial septum
(b). Sagittal two-dimensional (c) and color Doppler (d) images demonstrate retrograde perfusion of the aortic arch in red (arrowheads), and
antegrade flow in the ductal arch is also apparent (blue). LA left atrium, LV left ventricle, RA right atrium, RV right ventricle Fetal
echocardiogram at 22 4/7 weeks’ gestation. The left ventricle is dilated with echo-bright endocardium suggestive of endocardial
fibroelastosis (a), and there is left-to-right flow across the atrial septum (b). Sagittal two-dimensional (c) and color Doppler (d) images
demonstrate retrograde perfusion of the aortic arch in red (arrowheads), and antegrade flow in the ductal arch is also apparent (blue). LA
left atrium, LV left ventricle, RA right atrium, RV right ventricle On day of life 14, with no change in clinical status or LVEF%, the child
underwent stage I hybrid palliation with placement of an 18-mm ductal stent and bilateral pulmonary artery banding. Repeat dilation of the
aortic valve was performed at that time, resulting in a decrease in peak-to-peak gradient to 11 mm Hg and mild to moderate aortic
insufficiency. The LVEF% improved gradually to 60% during the subsequent months. Cardiac catheterization at 9 months of age showed a 38 mm
Hg peak-to-peak gradient across the aortic valve and mild to moderate aortic insufficiency. Left atrial pressure was 11 mm Hg; left
ventricular end diastolic pressure was 14 mm Hg; and estimated pulmonary vascular resistance was 4 Woods units. After recovery from a severe
intercurrent pulmonary illness, the child underwent a Ross-Konno procedure, placement of a 16-mm right ventricle-to-pulmonary artery
homograft, ductus arteriosus and atrial stent removal, aortic arch reconstruction, pulmonary artery debanding, resection of extensive EFE
(Fig. 2), and closure of an atrial septal defect. He was successfully extubated on postoperative day 7 and weaned from inotropic and
vasodilatory support. Follow-up echocardiography showed no evidence of mitral inflow obstruction or regurgitation, normal left-ventricular
systolic function, and a well-functioning autograft with no aortic arch obstruction. At catheterization 1 month later, the cardiac index was
3.3 ml/min/M2 by thermodilution; wedge pressure mean was 10 mm Hg; and pulmonary vascular resistance was 6 Woods units (decreasing to 2.6
Woods units in response to inhaled nitric oxide).Fig. 2Surgical specimens of the explanted aortic valve (inset, left) and left-ventricular
endocardium. The aortic valve was severely dysplastic, doming, and unicuspid. At the time of biventricular repair, the valve was detached
from the aortic wall. The endocardium was diffusely thickened and excised from base to apex through the left-ventricular outflow tract
Surgical specimens of the explanted aortic valve (inset, left) and left-ventricular endocardium. The aortic valve was severely dysplastic,
doming, and unicuspid. At the time of biventricular repair, the valve was detached from the aortic wall. The endocardium was diffusely
thickened and excised from base to apex through the left-ventricular outflow tract At 1 year of life, left heart dimensions are normal
(mitral valve 13.7 mm [Z score +0.7], LV end diastolic diameter 24.9 mm [Z score +0.3], and LVPWd 6 mm [Z score +2.4]), and his systolic
function is normal with an LVEF% of 69% by Simpson’s biplane method (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Echocardiogram 2 months after biventricular repair
demonstrates an apex-forming left ventricle and mild residual left-ventricular hypertrophy Echocardiogram 2 months after biventricular
repair demonstrates an apex-forming left ventricle and mild residual left-ventricular hypertrophy Experimental models involving surgically
created aortic obstruction do not recapitulate the human phenotype ; therefore, study of the pathophysiology of this disease has been
difficult. However, natural history studies have shown that in the presence of certain physiologic findings (specifically left-to-right
atrial shunting and retrograde aortic arch perfusion in fetal life), progression to hypoplastic left heart syndrome at term can be reliably
predicted . The rationale for fetal aortic valvuloplasty is to relieve aortic obstruction and promote antegrade flow through the left heart
and aorta. With restoration of antegrade flow, we observed continued growth of the left heart structures through the remainder of gestation;
however, ventricular function did not improve appreciably. The reason for this is speculative, but it has been proposed that the fetal left
ventricle responds to obstruction with increase in mass without increase in capillary density, which may result in a hypertrophied
myocardium with increased susceptibility to ischemia [9, 12]. The extensive EFE in this patient as well as the observed hypertrophy might
support this theory. Fetal valvuloplasty partially relieved the obstruction, and after birth we undertook a combined approach that may have
further mitigated the effect of long-standing obstruction and ischemic insult through relief of obstruction (by way of additional
valvuloplasties) and decrease in preload (left atrial decompression with atrial stenting). Facilitating antegrade perfusion of the aorta and
coronary circulation with normally saturated blood, along with improvement in myocardial perfusion, may have contributed to the slow
improvement in the patient’s systolic and diastolic function. Previous reports have also documented the possibility of reversible severe
left-ventricular dysfunction and ventricular growth in the neonate [1, 2, 5]. Emani et al. reported a series of patients with borderline
left heart disease who underwent “primary left-ventricular rehabilitation” at a median age of 5.6 months, with aortic and/or mitral valve
surgery and EFE resection, with good short-term results and no deaths at a median follow-up of 25 months. Our case, however, represents the
first report to our knowledge of a patient initially palliated with a hybrid transcatheter-surgical approach after fetal intervention
followed by successful surgical takedown of the hybrid and conversion to biventricular circulation by adding Ross-Konno procedure and aortic
arch reconstruction to the EFE resection. Long-term outcome for patients undergoing extensive EFE resection as part of left-ventricular
rehabilitation are unknown. Medium-term results from patients undergoing neonatal Ross-Konno procedures have been mixed, and particularly
poor results in patients requiring concomitant aortic arch reconstruction have been noted. However, a recent large single-center experience
suggested that overall survival and functional status may represent improvement compared with single-ventricle palliation or neonatal
transplantation. Certainly long-term follow-up data, including evaluation of functional and neurodevelopmental status and comorbidities
(including pulmonary vascular disease) will be needed before there is widespread adoption of this type of approach. However, feasibility of
induction of significant left heart structure growth and significant myocardial recovery allowing restoration of biventricular circulation
is certainly suggested by our case and deserves further study. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and source are credited.
