Editor Heterotopia is the normal tissue of an organ found at an abnormal site without anatomic and vascular continuity from the original
organ. It is thought that this arises during embryonic development, where groups of cells differentiate in a manner which is inappropriate
for their anatomical position in the body1, 2. The usual gastrointestinal sites of Pancreatic Heterotopia (PH) include stomach, duodenum,
jejunum, Meckels diverticulum, and gallbladder3. The condition is relatively infrequent and usually asymptomatic with post-mortem
prevalences ranging from 0.6% to 13.7%4. Rare symptomatic cases do arise causing dyspepsia, abdominal pain, melaena, anaemia, nausea and
obstruction5, 6. We report a case of PH presenting as intermittent gastric outlet obstruction. A 43 year old man presented with a 4 month
history of intermittent post prandial epigastric pain and nausea. Complete gastric obstruction was not evident. An upper gastrointestinal
endoscopy revealed a 3cm lesion at the pylorus. (Fig 1) Ultrasound did not highlight any other cause for upper abdominal pain. Gastroscopy
view Endoscopic ultrasound (EUS) of the lesion confirmed it to be situated within the submucosa having morophological characteristics
suggestive of a gastro intestinal stromal tumour (GIST). (Fig 2) EUS can demonstrate echogenic differences between different types of
submucosal lesions and the depth of its invasion. Characteristic EUS features highly suggestive of PH tissue are hypoechogenicity or
heteroechogenic structure7. Anechoic areas usually correlate with ductal structures. These commonly arise from the third or fourth EUS
layers of the GI tract or a combination of both. Endoscopic ultrasound of gastric submucosal lesion GIST also originate from the fourth
layer of the GI tract and the presence of cystic spaces can indicate a risk of malignant change. The difficulty in diagnosis requires
histological confirmation for a definitive answer. CT scan confirmed the endoscopic ultrasound findings. There was no eveidence of distant
metastatic spread. (Fig 3) Retrospective study of CT appearances of gastric submucosal lesions shows that by using a list of specific CT
criteria PH can be differentiated from small gastro intestinal stromal tumours or leiomyoma with a high degree of accuracy8. CT scan axial
view. Red arrow: gastric submucosal lesion Subsequently the patient proceeded to laparotomy where a 3cm lesion was located in the pyloric
channel. A distal gastrectomy was undertaken and the patient made an uneventful recovery. Review in the outpatient department several months
following surgery confirmed the relief of his symptoms. Histology revealed the lesion to be consistent with a focus of PH encompassing a
cystically dilated duct. (Fig 4) Pancreatic exocrine glands PH is part of the differential diagnosis of gastric submucosal nodules. The
likely aetiology of PH is congenital and usually asymptomatic. However if symptoms occur they are usually in the fourth and fifth decades5.
PH is a rare differential diagnosis of a submucosal gastric lesion. The distribution of PH is 25% in the stomach and 30% in the duodenum9
with the rest distributed at other sites throughout the gastrointestinal tract. There is also the exceedingly rare possibility of malignant
change10, 11. This case highlights the rare aetiology of a symptomatic gastric submucosal lesion as well as the difficulty in making a
preoperative diagnosis even with modern imaging modalities such as CT and EUS. The authors have no conflict of interest
