A 32-year-old man presented to our hospital on July 5, 2006, after the onset of headache, paresthesias of the left upper limb for 10 days,
and weakness for 7 days before admission. He had eaten an inadequately cooked Pomacea canaliculata 20 days previously. Laboratory testing
indicated a normal white blood cell count of 6,700/mm3 with mild eosinophilia of 7.8% (523/mm3). A lumbar puncture test showed an opening
pressure of 220 mm H2O and 160 cells with 23% eosinophils, and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) cultures were negative. We detected the circulating
antigens (CAg) of Angiostrongylus cantonensis by double antibody sandwich enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), and they tested
positive. This method had a high sensitivity (86.4%), and no cross-reactions with sera from patients with many other parasites were
observed.1 Therefore, the result was helpful for diagnosis. Spinal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a lesion with high signal
intensity in the cervical spinal cord on both sagittal and transverse T2-weighted imaging (T2WI) (Figures 1 and 2) at 9 days after
admission. A lesion in the cervical spinal cord presented as hyperintense on a sagittal T2WI. A lesion in the cervical spinal cord presented
as hyperintense on a transverse T2WI. On the basis of history, clinical presentation, and examinations, a diagnosis of angiostrongyliasis
was made,2 and the patient was treated with a combination of albendazole and dexamethasone. Symptoms of headache and paresthesia resolved
within 14 days, and spinal-cord lesions completely resolved by a 1-month follow-up (Figures 3 and 4). The abnormally high signal on a
sagittal T2WI completely disappeared. The abnormally high signal on a sagittal T2WI completely disappeared. Authors' addresses: Zongli Diao
and Chenghong Yin, Beijing Tropical Medicine Research Institute, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical University, Beijing, China,
E-mails: diaozongli@yahoo.com.cn and modscn@yahoo.com.cn. Erhu Jin, Department of Radiology, Beijing Friendship Hospital, Capital Medical
University, Beijing, China, E-mail: erhujin@hotmail.com.
