This case report is about a case of breast cancer in pregnancy at the Brooklyn hospital Center. Our patient`s case highlights some of the
inherent causes of fatality in PABC and how to thread the line between the mother`s health and the baby`s safety to ensure a good outcome
for both parties. We report a case of breast cancer in pregnancy at our institution. The incidence of this disease is about 1.3 per 3,000
live births and is the first reported case in our hospital over the last 15 years. In this case report we compare the standard of care
received by our patient with currently recommended guidelines for managing Pregnancy Associated Breast Cancer (PABC) with special emphasis
on under-30 year old pregnant females. Frey’s syndrome can be socially debilitating and because of the difficulty in its management,
preventive measures should be instituted during the initial surgery. To our knowledge, the longest latency of Frey’s syndrome after
parotidectomy recorded in the literature is 50 years . Our patient had parotidectomy at the age of 7 years and presented 40 years later with
Frey’s syndrome. A 27 year old female at ten weeks Gestational Age (G.A) presented with complaints of bloody nipple discharge and a palpable
right breast mass of two weeks duration. There was gradual increase in the size of the right breast mass but no associated breast tenderness
or skin changes. Patient had a past history significant for Chlamydia (1995), Cesarean Section (1996) and dilatation and Curettage for
missed abortion in August 1999. Patient had no history of cancer in the family and denied any use of alcohol, cigarettes or intra venous
drugs. She worked for the Metropolitan Transport Authority and was actively involved at the World Trade Center rescue mission on September
11, 2001. She had her regular menstrual periods and denied ever using Oral Contraceptive Pills. Her menarche was at 11 years of age. On
physical exam she had a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 34.1, a distended abdomen (consistent with gravid status) and a right breast mass that was
firm and non-tender measuring 1.5 cm x 2 cm. On evaluation by breast ultrasound, a breast mass highly suspicious for breast malignancy was
noted. After initial patient hesitancy, she (at twenty seven weeks of fetal gestational age) underwent a right breast incisional biopsy
(under local anesthesia) with histopathology results showing estrogen receptor positive, progesterone receptor negative and human epidermal
growth factor receptor 2 (HER2) positive invasive ductal Carcinoma with grade 3 multifocal Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS) (Figure 1). At
thirty two weeks G.A patient, under General Anesthesia, had a pre-term Cesarean-section followed by a right Modified Radical Mastectomy
(MRM) and right axillary dissection. Surgery was uneventful with delivery of a 3.25 pounds male neonate and right breast mass (figure 2)
positive for an 8 cm invasive ductal breast carcinoma with axillary lymph nodes involvement and consistent with a staging of T3N2M0. Two
months after the mastectomy patient received the first of four cycles of chemotherapy (consisting of cytoxan and adriamycin), hormonal
therapy (consisting of trastuzumab) for 12 months and subsequently began radiation therapy six months after the first dose of chemotherapy.
During this period she formula fed her baby as initial breast feeding attempts from the left breast were unsuccessful. Twelve months post-
operatively patient underwent a transverse rectus abdominis myocutaneous (TRAM) flap reconstruction of the right breast. She had a
complicated post-operative course with septicemia from abscesses in the TRAM flap site and eventually succumbed to hepatic encephalopathy
secondary to liver and spine metastases a year and 7 months after her complicated cesarean delivery. No complications have so far been
reported concerning the child born to our patient during this period. When breast cancer is diagnosed in pregnancy both the patient and
physician alike are faced with a difficult situation. The difficulty stems from how to preserve both mother and fetus without harm. Reports
of an increased incidence of PABC are due partly to the older ages (greater than 30 years) at which females are currently having children.
The most recent updates show that breast cancer is the second most common malignancy diagnosed during pregnancy (after cervical cancer) and
when diagnosed at ages 30 years or younger up to 10-20% are detected during pregnancy or within the first post-partum year . A high index of
suspicion is therefore warranted for a breast lump in an under thirty year old pregnant female and a breast ultrasound remains the gold
standard for diagnoses. It may be difficult to palpate the mass due to increased breast engorgement and increased density of the breasts in
pregnancy. Our patient`s young age combined with being pregnant a third time were considered protective in earlier studies but a recent
study by Albrektsen et al showed that a risk (though less than the risk for above 30 year olds) exists in anyone having subsequent
pregnancies as their cases are characterized by a shorter time interval to disease occurrence. Our patient was managed surgically with post-
partum MRM of the right breast and therapeutically by hormonal, chemo and radiation therapy. Current guidelines recommend surgical
management similar to non-pregnant patients when discovered in the second or third trimesters with intra¬partum MRM and 2nd or 3rd trimester
adjuvant chemotherapy . Radiation therapy is contra-indicated in pregnancy as it is associated with mental retardation in the fetus. The
delay of twenty-two weeks from suspicious breast mass to surgical excision and the subsequent six month delay from diagnosis to beginning
radiation therapy contributed enormously to the eventual demise of our patient as the daily increased risk for developing metastasis for an
untreated breast carcinoma in a pregnant women is 0.057% . Even though patient hesitancy was partly responsible for delay in diagnosing and
treating her in a timely manner, a delay in starting radiation therapy was in part secondary to her cesarean section (which delays radiation
therapy compared to spontaneous vaginal delivery due to healing surgical incisions). It is worthy to note that our patient had a much faster
tumor growth rate (300-400% increase in 4 to 5 months) and a much shorter survival period (T3N2MO breast cancer has a 5 year survival rate
of 57%) than people with similar stages of breast cancer. Our case is unique on the basis of the age our patient presented especially in the
vicinity of no known family history. She refused to undergo the Breast receptor Cancer antigen (BRCA) I and II gene testing initially and
attempts on other female family members were unsuccessful. The right breast re-construction started a downward spiral of her health
secondary to multiple septic abscesses and combined with the spine and liver metastases only served to further undermine her already immune-
compromised status. There are some reviews from the medical literature that criticize breast reconstructive surgery in a post partum PABC
status post radiation therapy patient but no consensus exists as regards to post-mastectomy reconstruction in patients such as ours. Right
breast Ductal Carcinoma In Situ (DCIS). Microscopic examination reveals duct filled with monotonous round cell, markedly pleomorphic and
angular irregular contours, coarse chromatin, prominent nucleoli, frequent mitoses and comedo-type necrosis. Invasive ductal carcinoma of
the right breast. Microscopic examination reveals scattered irregular clusters of markedly pleomorphic tumor cells infiltrating into
surrounding stroma in a background of desmoplastic change PABC is going to become an increasingly common feature in the African continent
and will require medical providers increased awareness of guidelines for its management. Our patient`s case highlights some of the inherent
causes of fatality in PABC and how to thread the line between the mother`s health and the baby`s safety to ensure a good outcome for both
parties. Authors declared that they received written consent from the patient to publish this case report. The authors declared no conflicts
of interests
