Dear Sirs, A 56 year old man was diagnosed with B-chronic lymphocytic leukemia (B-CLL) in another hospital (RAI 4, BINET C, IGHV mutated;
FISH: 59% of cells trisomy 12). Treatment was started with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide and alemtuzumab. The patient received pneumocystis
jiroveci pneumonia prophylaxis and herpes prophylaxis with sulphamethoxazole–trimethoprim and valacyclovir. Evaluation after two cycles
showed evidence of response. Screening for cytomegalovirus (CMV) and Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) antibodies using ELISA was repeatedly
negative. After 2 months the patient developed memory loss and a sensory aphasia, and treatment including alemtuzumab was discontinued. A
cerebral MRI scan revealed several lesions with some irregular and faint ring enhancement in the occipital and frontal lobe of the left
hemisphere and the frontal lobe of the right hemisphere, with high signal intensity on T2 weighted images (Fig. 1). Treatment with
amoxicillin and cefotaxime was started and the patient was referred to our hospital. Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) showed 10 leucocytes (71%
lymphocytes) with an elevated total protein (1,08 g/l), normal glucose and a monoclonal B-cell population consistent with the B-CLL (CD5,
CD19 and CD23 positive). All CSF cultures for micro-organisms were negative. Two days after the last negative IgG and IgM screening for EBV,
PCR for EBV in serum and CSF showed high numbers of viral copies, respectively, 5,01E5 and 1,31E4. A biopsy of the left parieto–occipital
lesion revealed a diffuse large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL), positive for CD79a and CD23 and nuclear Pax-5. MIB-1 labeling was positive in 85%
of the tumor cells. The nuclear EBV-encoded RNA stain (EBER) was strongly positive, fitting in with the development of an EBV-associated
lymphoma. Despite high dose dexamethasone the patient deteriorated rapidly and he died 15 days after the initial MRI cerebrum. Autopsy was
not performed.Fig. 1Cerebral MRI Axial MRI images a–c showing lesions in the central and occipital regions of the left hemisphere and
frontal region of the right hemisphere with low signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences (a), faint ring enhancement on T1-weighted
sequences after gadolinium (b) and high signal intensity with subtle low signal intensity parts on T2 weighted sequences (c). The low signal
intensity parts on T2 weighted sequences suggests a lymphoma, but the faint ring enhancement is not typical for this diagnosis Cerebral MRI
Axial MRI images a–c showing lesions in the central and occipital regions of the left hemisphere and frontal region of the right hemisphere
with low signal intensity on T1-weighted sequences (a), faint ring enhancement on T1-weighted sequences after gadolinium (b) and high signal
intensity with subtle low signal intensity parts on T2 weighted sequences (c). The low signal intensity parts on T2 weighted sequences
suggests a lymphoma, but the faint ring enhancement is not typical for this diagnosis Symptomatic CNS involvement in patients with B-CLL is
an uncommon complication and generally limited to the meninges. Intracerebral localisations are exceedingly rare . Although development of
an aggressive large-cell lymphoma in patients with an underlying CLL occurs in 1–10% of patients, only six case reports on malignant
transformation of CLL (or Richter’s transformation) involving the brain parenchyma have been published . Alemtuzumab (Campath-1H) is an
anti-CD52 humanized monoclonal antibody . It is indicated for poor prognosis CLL and the drug is being investigated in combination therapies
for a variety of hematological malignancies and in multiple sclerosis. Because of its effects on B and T lymphocytes with prolonged T-cell
deficiency, the drug is highly immunosuppressive. Indeed, alemtuzumab is associated with a variety of opportunistic infections, especially
CMV reactivation, herpes simplex virus, and aspergillus infections . In addition, in alemtuzumab treated patients, EBV reactivation has been
described and several cases of EBV associated systemic lymphoma have been reported [5, 7]. Our patient developed a cerebral EBV-positive
immunodeficiency lymphoma during alemtuzumab treatment. The positive CD23 staining makes a transformation from the known B-CLL a theoretical
possibility, but otherwise no clonal relationship between the CLL and NHL were observed. Both in CSF and serum high copy numbers of EBV were
demonstrated. Moreover, the EBER staining of the biopsy specimen was positive, identifying the relation with EBV. Of note, in occasional
cases of malignant transformation in CLL, EBV has been identified in the higher-grade neoplasm . A retrospective study showed 16% of 25
patients with malignant transformation of CLL to be EBV-positive, indicating a role for EBV in malignant transformation in leukemia . In our
case, PCR EBV and CMV monitoring was not performed during treatment with alemtuzumab, and the ELISA assay for anti-EBV antibodies remained
negative. Only when the patient developed severe neurological symptoms the EBV PCR was done which revealed both in serum and CSF the EBV
reactivation. PCR techniques detecting EBV have a high sensitivity compared to the detection of antibodies with ELISA and are not influenced
by an immunocompromised state. Because of the increasing use of alemtuzumab and the profound and lasting immunosuppression this drug
induces, neurologists should be aware of opportunistic infections including EBV. Regular monitoring of EBV and CMV using PCR is indicated in
patients treated with alemtuzumab. If alemtuzumab treated patients develop neurological signs and symptoms, opportunistic infections and EBV
induced lymphoma must be considered. Conflict of interest B. van de Langerijt reports no disclosures; J.K. Doorduijn reports no disclosures;
K.H. Lam reports no disclosures; M.J. van den Bent reports no disclosures Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
