Dear Editor, We read with interest the case report linking phrynoderma and night blindness by Murthy et al. The authors have done well to
document the coexistence. We would like to share our experience with a similar case. A 15-year-old girl presented with history of anorexia,
generalized fatigue, decreased night vision and skin lesions. She had been ill for around 6 months and had previously received a blood
transfusion elsewhere. She denied any history of fever or any other chronic illness. She was pale and had hyperpigmented knuckles [Fig. 1].
The patient had a papular skin rash suggestive of toad skin on her elbows and abdomen [Fig. 2]. Sclera had a lemony tinge. The conjunctiva
appeared dry but there was no evidence of any Bitot spots or corneal lesion. Palpation of abdomen revealed an enlarged liver and spleen. The
hemogram was suggestive of macrocytic anemia (hemoglobin 7.2 g/dL, total leukocyte count 3200/μL, platelets 88,000/μL, mean corpuscular
volume 102 fL). Peripheral smear revealed macrocytes and hypersegmented neutrophils. Serum vitamin B-12 levels were reduced to 112 pg/mL
(normal range: 279–996 pg/mL). Folate levels were also reduced to 2 ng/mL (normal range: 5.4–18.0 ng/mL). Bone marrow examination was
consistent with the diagnosis of megaloblastic anemia. Liver functions revealed slightly elevated serum bilirubin (3.2 mg/dL) with normal
enzymes and serum albumin. The patient was put on replacement with cobalamin, folic acid and vitamin A. The anemia and the skin lesions
resolved over 6 months of follow-up. Hperpigmented knuckles Toad-like skin over trunk We present this case for two reasons. First, the case
demonstrates coexistence of phrynoderma and decreased nocturnal vision. Also, the coexistence of features of vitamin A, folate and B12
deficiency existed in this case. It is important because of coexistence of both water and fat soluble vitamin deficiency. It may be noted
that current belief is that multiple nutrient deficiencies coexist to result in phrynoderma. It is therefore of importance that patients
with phrynoderma be evaluated not just for vitamin A deficiency but also for deficiency of vitamins B, C and E.
