To report the incidence and new findings of abnormal brain imaging studies associated with patients initially diagnosed with Leber's
congenital amaurosis (LCA) without definite systemic abnormalities and to determine the need for brain imaging studies in these patients. A
retrospective review of medical records was performed in 83 patients initially diagnosed as LCA and without definite systemic abnormalities
before the age of 6 months in 2 tertiary referral centers. Brain magnetic resonance imaging was performed in 31 of 83 patients (37.3%). Six
of 31 patients (19%) had radiologically documented brain abnormalities. Two patients had cerebellar vermis hypoplasia, 1 patient showed an
absence of septum pellucidum, 2 subjects showed mild external hydrocephalus, and 1 patient was found to have a small cerebellum.
Approximately one fifth of the LCA patients in whom brain imaging was performed were associated with brain abnormalities, including the
absence of septum pellucidum, which has not been documented in the literature. Brain imaging is mandatory in patients primarily diagnosed
with LCA, even without definite neurologic or systemic abnormalities. Leber's congenital amaurosis (LCA) is a hereditary congenital
blindness usually presenting before 6 months of age, consisting of severe visual impairment, roving eye movements or nystagmus, extinguished
or severely reduced scotopic and photopic electroretinogram (ERG), abnormal or variable visual evoked potentials and variable fundus
examination results . LCA is frequently associated with ocular or systemic abnormalities, including oculomotor apraxia, deafness, renal
anomalies, skin or skeletal abnormalities, microcephaly, and developmental delay or mental retardation . A reappraisal of previously
diagnosed LCA patients revealed that 40% had an ocular or systemic disorder other than LCA, such as congenital stationary night blindness,
achromatopsia, early-onset retinitis pigmentosa, Joubert syndrome, Zellweger syndrome, or infantile Refsum's disease . Variable degrees of
neurologic abnormalities are reported in up to 78% of LCA patients . Therefore, a thorough systemic work-up is necessary in a patient
diagnosed with LCA. LCA is primarily a degenerative retinal disease, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings from a previous study
demonstrated that blindness in LCA patients is not related to abnormality of the primary visual pathway, as the primary visual pathway
signals were found to be normal in all the subjects and infants as young as 2 to 3 months, confirming that myelinization of this pathway had
occurred at the correct age . Therefore, brain imaging studies are not always recommended unless signs of neurologic deficiencies are
present. However, as LCA patients usually present before 6 months of age, neurologic abnormalities may not be clearly defined in a blind
subject when the developmental stages are mostly immature . The authors of the present study reviewed the medical records of 83 patients
initially diagnosed as LCA before the age of 6 months without definite neurologic or systemic abnormalities in 2 tertiary referral centers.
The incidence of abnormal brain imaging in the patients was investigated to determine the need for imaging studies. Additionally, the
clinical characteristics of LCA patients associated with specific radiological brain abnormalities, such as absent septum pellucidum or
cerebellar vermis agenesis are described. Based on a comprehensive Medline literature search, the present study is the first report of
absent septum pellucidum associated with LCA. The medical records of 83 patients initially diagnosed as LCA before 6 months of age, in the
department of ophthalmology of 2 tertiary referral centers, were evaluated. All patients fulfilled the diagnostic criteria currently
proposed by De Laey and a search for metabolic or degenerative central nervous system disorders was performed in all patients. Patients
initially diagnosed with alleged neurologic or systemic abnormalities, or patients whom revealed any other hereditary retinal disease during
follow-up were excluded. Brain MRI was performed in 31 patients who consented to the examination (37.3%). The described research adhered to
the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki and approval to conduct this study was obtained from the Institutional Review Board. Out of 31
patients, 6 patients (19.4%) had radiologically documented brain abnormalities. Two patients had cerebellar vermis hypoplasia with the
classic "molar tooth" sign. One patient had absent septum pellucidum. Other alterations on MRI with unknown clinical significance were found
in 3 subjects, which included a small cerebellum and 2 subjects with mild external hydrocephalus. The following cases depict the clinical
characteristics of LCA patients associated with specific radiological brain abnormalities, including absent septum pellucidum and cerebellar
vermis hypoplasia. A 4-month-old girl was referred for poor eye contact. She was delivered preterm at 35 weeks of gestation after an
uneventful pregnancy. She was born from healthy non-consanguineous parents and had an unremarkable family history. The patient did not
fixate with the eyes or follow objects. Esotropia and nystagmus were present. Slit lamp examination and fundus examination showed no
significant findings. Cycloplegic refractive errors were -1.50 D sph = -3.00 D cyl × 180° OD, -3.50 D sph = -3.00 D cyl × 180° OS. ERG was
extinguished in both eyes and she was diagnosed as LCA. Systemic evaluation for metabolic abnormalities, as well as of the kidney, liver,
and skin were unremarkable. Genetic analysis of mutations in CRX, CRB1, GUCY2D, AIPL1, RDH12, RPE65, LRAT, RPGRIP1, and TULP1 were
unremarkable. Development was within the normal limit and neurologic evaluation was unremarkable at the time of diagnosis. However, brain
MRI showed a prominent enlargement in the subarachnoid space of both frontal convexities, and the septum pellucidum was absent. No focal
lesions were present in the brain and the size of the corpus callosum and white matter myelination was normal. At the age of 15 months, a
follow-up brain MRI was taken, and external hydrocephalus with absent septum pellucidum was stationary (Fig. 1). A diagnosis of septo-optic
dysplasia was considered, however, normal appearance of the optic nerve and normal pituitary function left the diagnosis doubtful.
Strabismus surgery was performed for an esotropia of 40 prism diopters (PD). At the age of 3 years, the patient could still not fixate with
the eyes and nystagmus was present, while ocular alignment was orthotropic. Cognitive and motor development was moderately delayed
approximately 10 months, yet was slowly improving. The patient's medical history was unremarkable for myoclonic seizure. A 4-month-old boy
was referred for poor eye contact. He was born after an uneventful pregnancy, and his medical history was unremarkable in the perinatal
period. The patient could not fixate with the eyes, and nystagmus was present. Exotropia of 15 PD was observed. Slit lamp examination and
fundus examination showed no significant findings. Cycloplegic refractive errors were + 8.0 D sph OU. ERG was extinguished in both eyes, and
the patient was diagnosed with LCA. Development was within normal limits and neurologic evaluation was unremarkable at the initial
presentation. However, brain MRI revealed hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis with enlarged 4th ventricles. Systemic evaluation for
metabolic abnormalities, as well as of the kidney, liver, and skin were unremarkable. Genetic analysis of mutations in CRX, CRB1, GUCY2D,
AIPL1, RDH12, RPE65, LRAT, RPGRIP1, and TULP1 were negative. At 8 years of age, development was within normal limit. His visual acuity was
at the level of light perception in both eyes, and nystagmus had diminished; however, ERG was still extinguished. Pathologic findings in
brain MRI of LCA subjects with systemic or neurologic abnormalities are documented in up to 33% of patients . While most of the findings are
mild and nonspecific alterations on MRI, such as slight reduction of the dimensions of the chiasm and/or optic nerve or white matter
alterations, 2 to 10% of patients reveal pathologic findings of hypoplasia of the cerebellar vermis . Without consideration of mild
nonspecific alterations in brain MRI, the present study showed similar results to former reports, as 7% of primary LCA subjects were found
to have pathologic brain imaging; half of the patients showing cerebellar vermis hypoplasia and the other patients revealing mild external
hydrocephalus or absence of septum pellucidum, of which the latter is a novel finding in the present study. Notably, the perinatal history
or neurologic examinations of the patients were unremarkable at the time of presentation before 6 months of age. Moreover, as the brain MRI
was performed in only 37% of all patients who consented to the examination, the true incidence of abnormal brain structures may be larger.
Waugh et al. found that a significant amount of brain pathology occurs in children with congenital disorders of the peripheral visual system
and the number of lesions varies directly with the degree of visual impairment and both correlate with developmental outcome. Therefore,
brain imaging studies in patients initially diagnosed as LCA subjects should be mandatory, even if systemic or neurologic abnormalities are
not obvious. Case 1 and 2 showed MRI findings known to be a part of syndromic associations, namely septo-optic dysplasia with absent septum
pellucidum and Joubert syndrome with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia . However, the cases differed in many aspects from the typical syndromic
characteristic of septo-optic dysplasia or Joubert syndrome . In case 1, absence of the septum pellucidum without any other radiologic
abnormalities lead to a differential diagnosis of septo-optic dysplasia . The clinical picture of absent septum pellucidum and congenital
nystagmus overlapped with the clinical and radiological features of septo-optic dysplasia . On the other hand, the present case differed
from typical septo-optic dysplasia in a number of specific aspects, i.e., the absence of hypoplasia of the optic disc, the absence of
pituitary abnormalities and the absence of typical neurological impairment (e.g., myoclonic seizure was not present in our LCA subject). The
absence of septum pellucidum may be an isolated finding and, although a characteristic sign of septo-optic dysplasia, it is not
pathognomonic . Congenital absence of the septum pellucidum is not associated with significant intellectual, behavioral, or neurological
deficits in the majority of patients with septo-optic dysplasia . Thus, the clinical significance of an absent septum pellucidum in case 1
with mild developmental delay is unknown. Case 1 may be considered as a type of complex LCA associated with the absence of septum pellucidum
and mild developmental delay. In case 2, the "molar tooth" sign of cerebellar vermis hypoplasia was present. Cerebellar vermis hypoplasia is
found in up to 20% of brain imaging findings in LCA subjects . The "molar tooth" sign is now recognized as present not only in Joubert
syndrome but also in various cerebellooculo-renal syndromes (Arima, COACH, and Senior-Loken) . The Joubert syndrome and related disorders
are frequently associated with an LCA-like ocular phenotype . Therefore, looking for systemic involvement in LCA patients with cerebellar
vermis hypoplasia, including the kidney, liver and skin, to allow the delineation of LCA subtypes, is crucial . However, the two LCA
patients in the present study with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia differed significantly from the typical characteristics of Joubert syndrome-
related disorders in a number of specific aspects, i.e., the absence of episodes of apnea-tachypnea, the absence of oculomotor apraxia-like
head thrust, less severe neurological involvement (e.g., minimal hypotonia), and the absence of systemic involvement . Thus, the subjects
(including case 2) could be considered as a type of complex LCA associated with cerebellar vermis hypoplasia or another entity of Joubert
syndrome-related disorders with only the ocular LCA phenotype. In a previous report, mutations in CEP290 were found in LCA patients
associated with mental retardation or neurodevelopmental degeneration in the absence of the other systemic features of Joubert syndrome .
These individuals may represent a genetic subtype of LCA or an undiagnosed systemic disorder which remains to be elucidated . Unfortunately,
the genetic analysis of the CEP290 mutation was not available in the present study. Further studies and genetic evaluation are required to
define this heterogeneous disease. In conclusion, LCA has complex phenotypic features, and an absence of septum pellucidum can be associated
with LCA, which has not been documented in the literature. Neurologic abnormalities may not be definite in a blind subject, especially under
6 months of age. Thus, brain imaging is mandatory in patients primarily diagnosed with LCA in the absence of definite neurologic
abnormalities. This study was supported by a grant from the Korea Health 21 R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea
(A050488). No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. The T2 weighted axial magnetic resonance imaging of a
Leber's congenital amaurosis patient (case 1) shows the absence of the septum pellucidum, which should normally be present in the area
indicated between the black arrows. The hemispheric fissure is intact and indicated by the white arrows.
