A Fabry patient with poikilothermia is described. Laboratory investigations, neuro-imaging and autonomic function tests did not disclose a
cause. Assessment of intra-epidermal nerve fibre density and quantitative sensory testing revealed small fibre neuropathy with a highly
impaired cold sensation. We speculate that the poikilothermia is either caused by a vascular lesion in the hypothalamus not visible on MRI
or by small fibre neuropathy leading to disturbed body temperature perception and therefore impaired thermoregulation. Fabry disease (OMIM
301500) is an X-linked glycolipid storage disease caused by deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme α-galactosidase A. This leads to
accumulation of specific glycosphingolipids and results in multi-system disease. Early Fabry symptoms and signs are angiokeratomas, corneal
opacities, hypo- or anhidrosis and acroparesthesias. Later in life renal failure, stroke and cardiomyopathy occur . Most physicians take
care of few Fabry patients, and some symptoms have only become apparent upon studying larger patient groups. Hearing loss, for instance, was
only recently shown to occur frequently in these patients . Here, we report on an additional possibly related symptom: poikilothermia. A
38-year-old man was hospitalised because of malaise in December 2008. He was diagnosed with Fabry disease at the age of 18 years , and at
that time he had mild proteinuria, ankle oedema and left ventricular hypertrophy with normal cardiac function. In addition, white matter
lesions in the right parietal and temporal lobes on MRI, sensory hearing loss and tingling paresthesias of the hands and feet were noted. He
has been treated with human α-galactosidase A (Replagal, Shire Inc.) at a dose of 0.2 mg/kg since 2001. He was stable until March 2008 when
he was evaluated because of transient hypoalbuminemia. At this time, hypothermia was noted. A few months later, he complained of malaise,
slurred speech and difficulty with walking. At admission, physical examination revealed a bradyphrenic man with a body temperature of 34°C.
Repeated measurements over the next weeks showed temperatures between 32.9 and 34.3°C. He declined feeling cold. Laboratory investigations,
including electrolytes, vitamins, thyroid function and adrenocorticotropic hormones, were unremarkable except for minimal changes in thyroid
hormones [TSH 9.70 mE/L (N = 0.50–5.00), fT4 12.5 pmol/L (N = 10.0–23.0)] with negative anti-thyroxine peroxidase (aTPO). Structural lesions
of the hypothalamus or its efferent pathways were not seen on cerebral and cervical MRI. A forced breathing test, supine-standing up test
and Valsalva’s manoeuvre were performed and demonstrated normal cardiovascular autonomic function: the difference between maximal and
minimal heart rates during the forced breathing test (inspiratory-expiratory difference) was 9 beats per minute, the highest heart rate in
the first 15 s from the onset of standing minus the heart rate at baseline (∆HRmax) was 20 beats per minute, and the ratio between the
highest and lowest heart rate in the first 30 s from the onset of standing (HRmax/HRmin ratio) was 1.3. The Valsalva manoeuvre showed a
normal heart rate and blood pressure response with a Valsalva ratio of 2.9. Small nerve fibre function was assessed with quantitative
sensory testing: a special device that warms or cools the skin was placed over the patient’s left hand and right foot. The patient was asked
to press a button as soon as he felt the slightest change of temperature to warm or cold. These tests showed a highly impaired cold
sensation at the upper and lower limb (see Fig. 1). A skin biopsy taken 10 cm above the lateral malleolus showed an intraepidermal nerve
fibre density (IENFD) of 0.71 fibres/mm which is lower than healthy controls (median IENFD 8.4 fibres/mm, 0.05 quantile 4.7 fibres/mm ), but
similar to other male Fabry patients (median IENFD 0.5 fibres/mm, unpublished data).Fig. 1Quantitative sensory testing results at the lower
limb. Quantitative sensory testing consisted of thermal detection and thermal pain thresholds. These tests were performed using a TSA
2001-II thermal sensory testing device. Normative values have been well established in our laboratory. Each test was done four times. This
figure shows that our patient has a highly impaired cold sensation at the lower limb: a temperature decrease to 0°C was not perceived as
cold or pain. Warm sensation was normal. The horizontal lines represent normative values. Values with exclamatory mark indicate abnormal
value Quantitative sensory testing results at the lower limb. Quantitative sensory testing consisted of thermal detection and thermal pain
thresholds. These tests were performed using a TSA 2001-II thermal sensory testing device. Normative values have been well established in
our laboratory. Each test was done four times. This figure shows that our patient has a highly impaired cold sensation at the lower limb: a
temperature decrease to 0°C was not perceived as cold or pain. Warm sensation was normal. The horizontal lines represent normative values.
Values with exclamatory mark indicate abnormal value During the following summertime, temperature normalised, and the accompanying symptoms
resolved. The subsequent decrease of body temperature to 34°C during the next winter (2009) and again normalisation during the summer of
2010 suggested poikilothermia rather than hypothermia. Poikilothermia is defined as fluctuation in core temperature of more than 2°C due to
changes in ambient temperature. Temperature stress tests were not performed. Heat stress testing was considered unethical due to the
possible provocation of painful acroparesthesias that occur in Fabry patients. To find out whether poikilothermia is more prevalent in Fabry
disease than previously recognised, we measured body temperatures routinely in 60 Fabry patients (22 males, mean age 43 years) at the
outpatient clinic (ambient temperature of 21°C) from September to December 2009. Only one other patient (female, 50 years old, known with
white matter lesions, left ventricular hypertrophy and renal failure) had a temperature below 35°C. She also declined feeling cold. Except
for heat intolerance due to sweat gland dysfunction, temperature disturbances have not been reported previously in Fabry disease.
Maintenance of a constant body temperature is mainly governed by the thermoregulatory centres in the hypothalamus that contain warm-
sensitive neurons. These neurons are activated by increase of body temperature and inhibited by input from cold receptors in the skin .
Integration of temperature information leads to heat loss responses or to heat conservation and production. Aside from hypothalamic lesions
(e.g. vascular, multiple sclerosis and trauma), old age and thyroid disorders are the most common causes of impaired thermoregulation
presenting symptoms as described in our patient (malaise, bradyphrenia, slurred speech and disturbed gait). Autonomic neuropathy may
contribute to disturbed thermoregulation by impaired control of cutaneous circulation. We studied the autonomic nervous system in our
patient showing normal cardiovascular autonomic function. This is in line with our recent study in 48 Fabry patients, where the generally
accepted assumption that Fabry patients suffer from overt autonomic neuropathy was rejected . In that paper, we suggested that symptoms and
signs compatible with autonomic dysfunction in Fabry patients are mainly caused by end-organ failure due to continuous accumulation of
glycosphingolipids. However, other investigators argue that functional autonomic neuropathy is a key feature of Fabry disease due to
accumulation of glycosphingolipids in central and peripheral autonomic structures. A recent report on cardiovascular responses to
orthostatic challenge in Fabry patients using spectral analysis revealed a reduced sympathetic activation and a limited cardiovagal
withdrawal upon standing, suggesting subtle dysfunction of the autonomic nervous system . However, none of the studied Fabry patients had
overt orthostatic hypotension, whereas this is seen invariably in patients with autonomic neuropathy due to other diseases accompanied by
peripheral neuropathies . Abnormalities at the level of the heart, the vascular walls or the baroreceptors themselves could have accounted
for the abnormal cardiovascular responses in that study. Common causes of poikilothermia are hypothalamic lesions or thyroid disorders. In
1996, four women with poikilothermia were described . It was concluded that in these subjects, who had normal blood pressure responses to
standing up and Valsalva manoeuvre, poikilothermia had to be attributed predominantly to disorders of the central thermoregulatory pathways,
being a trauma, a tumour and an empty sella. Possibly, the poikilothermia in our patient is also caused by a central nervous system
abnormality. We cannot exclude for example that the white matter lesions found elsewhere in the brain of our patient point to a small
localised vascular episode in the appropriate part of the hypothalamus not visible on MRI. The minimal changes in thyroid hormones are a
consequence rather than a cause of the poikilothermia, as shown by its spontaneous normalisation. Finally, we propose that the small nerve
fibre dysfunction could underly the abnormal temperature regulation. Quantitative sensory testing and skin biopsy results showed the
presence of a severe small fibre neuropathy, which is a common finding in Fabry disease . These tests were done during summertime when body
temperature and thyroid hormones had normalised spontaneously. Possibly, the conduction of ‘cold’ information by small fibres from
peripheral thermoreceptors to the hypothalamus is insufficient, while increases in body temperature are detected normally by the
hypothalamic warm-sensitive neurons. This imbalance may lead to impaired feedback and therefore to a lower body temperature, especially
during the cold winter time. However, if this was the true cause of poikilothermia in our patient, it is remarkable that poikilothermia has
not been noted in other equally affected Fabry patients with small fibre neuropathy. Poikilothermia in Fabry disease may have various
causes. In our patient, the disturbed thermoregulation is either caused by a vascular lesion in the hypothalamus not visible on MRI or by
his small fibre neuropathy with highly impaired cold sensation leading to impaired feedback and a low body temperature. More clinical
observations and studies are awaited. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License
which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
