Breast metastasis from extra-mammary malignancy is rare. Based on the literature an incidence of 0.4-1.3% is reported. The primary
malignancies most commonly metastasizing to the breast are leukemia-lymphoma, and malignant melanoma. We present a case of metastasis to the
breast from a pulmonary adenocarcinoma, with extensive micropapillary component, diagnosed concomitantly with the primary tumor. A 73-year-
old female presented with dyspnea and dry cough of 4 weeks duration and a massive pleural effusion was found on a chest radiograph.
Additionally, on physical examination a poorly defined mass was noted in the upper outer quadrant of the left breast. The patient underwent
bronchoscopy, excisional breast biopsy and medical thoracoscopy. By cytology, histology and immunohistochemistry primary lung adenocarcinoma
with metastasis to the breast and parietal pleura was diagnosed. Both the primary and metastatic anatomic sites demonstrated histologically
extensive micropapillary component, which is recently recognized as an important prognostic factor. The patient received chemotherapy but
passed away within 7 months. Accurate differentiation of metastatic from primary carcinoma is of crucial importance because the treatment
and prognosis differ significantly. The National Cancer Institute of the U.S.A. estimates, that based on current rates, 12.7% of women born
today will be diagnosed with breast cancer in their life time . Although, primary breast cancer is the most common malignancy of adult
females, metastatic involvement of the breast is rare with a reported frequency of 0.4 - 1.3% in clinical series . Despite its rarity,
metastatic disease to the breast is an important diagnostic clinical dilemma, because its treatment differs greatly from that of primary
breast cancer. Sitzentfrey, in 1907, was the first to publish a case of ovarian carcinoma metastatic to the breast . Since then a wide
variety of malignancies have been reported to metastasize to the breast and according to the literature the most common primary tumors are
melanomas and haematological malignancies . Despite the fact that the lung is the most common cancer site in terms of incidence and
mortality there are only few published cases on pulmonary carcinomas metastasizing to the breast . Carcinomas with micropapillary components
have been reported at several anatomical sites, including the breast, urinary bladder, ovary and major salivary glands . The micropapillary
component is being increasingly recognized as a prognostic predictor in lung adenocarcinomas and according to many authors it may be a
manifestation of aggressive behaviour . We report a patient with metastasis to the breast from a pulmonary adenocarcinoma with extensive
micropapillary pattern diagnosed concomitantly with the primary tumor. A 73-year-old, non-smoker, housewife presented to the emergency
department with dyspnea and dry cough of 4 weeks duration. Examination of the chest revealed reduced breath sounds and percussion dullness
at the left hemithorax. Physical examination also revealed a painless, poorly defined mass, associated with skin redness, in the upper outer
quadrant of the left breast. Palpable left axillary lymph nodes were also noted. A chest radiograph showed massive pleural effusion
occupying most of the left hemithorax (Figure 1a). In the chest computed tomography (Figure 1b), the left lung was atelectatic and
compressed by massive pleural effusion. Imaging techniques. a) Chest x-ray: Massive pleural effusion occupying most of the left hemithorax
with evident displacement of the mediastinum to the right (blue arrow). b) Chest computed tomography: The left lung is atelectatic and
compressed by massive pleural effusion (red arrow). The mediastinum and the trachea are severely displaced to the right. A few lymph nodes
can be seen, deeply in the left axilla. Additionally, some paratracheal lymph nodes can be observed (yellow arrow). c) Chest computed
tomography: A 3,5 × 4,5 cm peripheral lesion, on the left upper lobe, with relative abnormal contour and extension into the surrounding
parenchyma. The tumor is in contact to the splanchnic pleura and approached the parietal pleura, possibly invading it (green arrow). d)
Digital mammography: Diffuse asymmetrical density in the subalveolar region and the upper outer quadrant of the left breast. The mediastinum
and the trachea were severely displaced to the right. A few lymph nodes deeply in the left axilla and some paratracheal lymph nodes were
observed. Clinically the diagnosis was considered to be either a primary breast tumor with lung and pleural metastasis or two synchronous
primaries. Mammography showed diffuse asymmetrical density in the subalveolar region and the upper outer quadrant of the left breast.
(Figure1c). Additionally, skin thickening was demonstrated in the affected area. Calcifications were not observed. The differential
diagnosis included inflammation, lymphoma and inflammatory breast carcinoma. Excisional biopsy was recommended. Moreover, the patient
underwent bronchoscopy which revealed submucosal infiltration causing widening of the secondary carina and obstruction of the orifice of the
lingula at approximately 70%. Pleural effusion re-accumulated rapidly so in order to perform pleural drainage and chemical pleurodesis
medical thoracoscopy was carried out. During the procedure biopsies were obtained from the parietal pleura. Chest computed tomography
(Figure 1d) followed and showed a 3,5 × 4,5 cm peripheral lesion, on the left upper lobe, with relative abnormal contour and extension into
the surrounding parenchyma. The tumor was in contact to the splanchnic pleura and approached the parietal pleura, possibly invading it.
Finally, an excisional breast biopsy was performed. Our patient received 4 courses of Bevacizumab, Cisplatin and Docetaxel with no clinical
response. Unfortunately the patient died 6 months following diagnosis. All cytologic specimens were stained by the Papanicolaou technique
and evaluated by cytology. By examining the pleural effusion (Figure 2a, b), bronchial washing (BW)s and bronchial brush (BB) specimens the
diagnosis of adenocarcinoma was achieved. By immunocytochemistry performed on smears prepared from the pleural effusion sample, tumor cells
were strongly immunoreactive for thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) (Figures 2c, d) and monoclonal CEA. Tumour cells were negative for
CK 5/6, estrogen receptors (ER), CA-125 and thyroglobulin (Table 1). Pleural effusion aspiration smears. a) Clusters of malignant cells with
morphological features of adenocarcinoma (Papanicolaou stain, ×400). b) Clusters of malignant cells with morphological features of
adenocarcinoma (Papanicolaou stain, ×600). c) Immunocytochemical positivity to TTF-1 (×350). d) Immunocytochemical positivity to TTF-1
(×280). Antibodies employed in the immunohistochemistry applied TTF-1, thyroid transcription factor-1; SP-A, surfactant apoprotein A; CEA,
carcinoembryonic antigen; GCDFP-15, gross cystic disease fluid protein-15; ER, estrogen receptor. Hematoxylin - Eosin (H&E) stained paraffin
sections of the bronchoscopy biopsy demonstrated bronchial mucosal infiltration by a low differentiated adenocarcinoma. An extensive
micropapillary component was identified (Figure 3). The latter was observed as papillary structures with tufts that lacked a central
fibrovascular core. Additionally, occasional psammoma bodies were noted. Our differential diagnosis included primary lung adenocarcinoma,
metastatic adenocarcinoma from the thyroid, the breast or the ovary and finally metastatic - epithelioid (papillary) type - mesothelioma.
The tumor cells demonstrated immunoreactivity for CD 15 (Leu-M1), TTF-1, Surfactant protein A (SP-A) and monoclonal CEA. The neoplastic
cells lacked expression of gross cystic disease fluid protein-15 (GCDFP-15), ER, mammaglobin, CK 5/6, calretinin, CA-125 and thyroglobulin
(Table 1). Based on the histology and the immunohistochemical staining pattern, a diagnosis of primary lung adenocarcinoma with
micropapillary component was rendered. Bronchoscopy biopsy. Low differentiated adenocarcinoma with micropapillary component (arrow).
(Hematoxylin-eosin, ×100). H&E stained paraffin sections of the parietal pleura biopsies revealed diffuse infiltration by malignant
epithelioid type cells, which demonstrated solid and micropapillary pattern. Additionally, numerous psammoma bodies were observed (Figures
4a, b). Tumor cells revealed the same immunoprofile as the lung biopsy (Figures 4c, d). Parietal pleural biopsy. a) Infiltration by
adenocarcinoma with micropapillary pattern (single arrow). Multiple psammoma bodies are observed (double arrow). (Hematoxylin-eosin, ×100).
b) Infiltration by adenocarcinoma with micropapillary pattern. (Hematoxylin-eosin, ×400). c) Immunohistochemical nuclear TTF-1 positivity of
malignant cells. (×400). d) Immunohistochemical cytoplasmic SP-A positivity of malignant cells. (×400). Finally, the breast biopsy specimen
demonstrated dense fibrohylinized stroma with atrophic terminal ductal lobular units. Within the stroma, sharply demarcated nodules of a
high grade adenocarcinoma with solid and micropapillary pattern was demonstrated (Figure 5a). Lymphatic tumor emboli of micropapillary
pattern adenocarcinoma with multiple psammoma bodies were also identified (Figure 5b). The surrounding breast parenchyma demonstrated mild
fibrocytic changes. Finally, no evidence of in situ carcinoma or elastosis was observed. Taking into account the diagnosis of the lung and
pleura biopsies our differential diagnosis included a second primary breast carcinoma and metastatic lung carcinoma. The tumor cells
demonstrated immunoreactivity for TTF-1 (Figure 5c, d), SP-A and lacked expression of GCDFP-15, ER and mammaglobin (Table 1). Breast biopsy.
a) Nodular infiltration by solid (high grade) adenocarcinoma. (Hematoxylin-eosin, ×400). b) Lymphatic tumor emboli of micropapillary pattern
adenocarcinoma (single arrow) and multiple psammoma bodies (double arrow). Ectatic duct is noted in the left side. (Hematoxylin-eosin,
×100). c) Immunohistochemical nuclear TTF-1 positivity of adenocarcinoma with solid and micropapillary component. (×100). d)
Immunohistochemical nuclear TTF-1 positivity of micropapillary component. (×400). Worldwide, lung cancer is the most common cancer in terms
of both incidence and mortality (1.6 million new cases per year and 1.378 million deaths) . Approximately one fifth, of newly diagnosed lung
adenocarcinomas, present with distant metastases. The most common sites of metastasis are brain, bone, liver, and adrenal glands, in
decreasing order. However autopsy series have demonstrated that NSCLCs may spread to virtually any organ. Breast metastases from extra-
mammary malignancies are rare accounting for 0.4 to 1.3% of all breast malignancies . Nearly 700 cases have been reported in small series
and case reports . According to the international literature the most common sources of primary tumors were haematological malignancies,
malignant melanoma, lung tumors, renal cell carcinoma, ovarian tumors, thyroid carcinomas and small bowel carcinoids . Williams et al in the
largest published series of 169 cases with metastases to the breast from extramammary solid tumors reported that the most common
histological type was malignant melanoma . Review of the literature (1990-2010) includes approximately 30 NSCLCs as case reports or part of
a series of secondary breast tumors . Twelve of the above cases were classified as adenocarcinomas . Additionally, 53 cases of breast
metastasis from lung tumors were presented however, no detailed histological classification was provided . The majority of breast metastases
present as palpable, rapidly growing, well circumscribed, painless breast masses with predilection to the upper outer quadrant . Unlike
primary tumors, in the vast majority of metastases retraction of the skin or nipple is not demonstrated despite their superficial location .
However, in our patient, the lesion was poorly defined and skin redness was observed. Other authors have rarely reported similar findings .
Distinguishing a breast metastasis from a primary mammary adenocarcinoma, based on mammographic findings, may be extremely difficult because
of the wide range of imaging manifestations of the metastatic lesion . Thus, metastasis can mimic a primary malignancy or even a benign
breast tumor . The most commonly described mammographic presentation is usually single but sometimes multiple well circumscribed lesions
with smooth margins . Microcalcifications are very uncommon but have been reported in patients with metastatic serous ovarian papillary
carcinoma . In our case, mammography showed diffuse asymmetrical density and skin thickening. In cases such as ours the differential
diagnosis includes inflammation, lymphoma and inflammatory breast carcinoma. As sited in the literature, histological features that may aid
in the recognition of secondary tumors are the following: The absence of in situ carcinoma strongly supports a metastatic tumor, although it
may not be present in all primary invasive carcinomas. Additionally, metastatic malignancies are often sharply circumscribed from the
surrounding breast tissue. Furthermore, elastosis is common in primary tumors but rare in extramammary malignancies . Occasionally,
metastases to the breast demonstrate features that can lead pathologists to the correct diagnosis such as presence of pigmentation and
intranuclear inclusions in malignant melanomas. Nevertheless, many extramammary malignancies such as adenocarcinoma of the lung lack
specific histological features. Carcinomas with a micropapillary component have been described in many organs including the breast, urinary
bladder, ovary and salivary glands . Amin et al. in 2002, was the first to report lung adenocarcinomas with micropapillary component .
Histologically, the latter is characterized by small papillary tufts lying freely within alveolar spaces or encased within the thin walls of
connective tissue. These small, cohesive nests lack fibrovascular connective tissue cores . In our case all biopsies examined demonstrated
an extensive micropapillary component. Although psammoma bodies have not been observed in invasive micropapillary pattern carcinoma of the
urinary bladder and salivary glands they have rarely been reported in cases of lung adenocarcinoma with micropapillary morphology . Multiple
psammoma bodies were demonstrated in the tissue sections of our samples examined. To the best of our knowledge this is the first report of a
breast metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma with micropapillary pattern diagnosed concomitantly with the primary tumor. The distinction
between metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma, particularly with extensive micropapillary pattern, and primary mammary adenocarcinoma may
cause a significant diagnostic dilemma. The contribution of immunohistochemstry to the correct diagnosis is crucial. TTF-1 is expressed in
68-80% of lung adenocarcinomas, and besides a single case published by Klingen TA et al, has never been reported to stain positive in breast
adenocarcinoma . The sensitivity of SP-A is substantially less. It is expressed in approximately 45% of lung adenocarcinomas . A negative
expression of thyroglobulin excludes the diagnosis of papillary carcinoma of the thyroid, which stains positive to both markers. ERs are
expressed in 80% and GCDFP-15 in 45-53% of breast carcinomas . As recently published, ER expression in the lung adenocarcinoma, by using the
monoclonal antibodies 1D5 and 6F11 is low (7,6-14,1%) . Additionally, 5,2-15% of lung adenocarcinomas express GCDFP-15 . Finally,
mammaglobin is expressed in 48-72,1% of mammary adenocarcinomas but stains negative in pulmonary adenocarcinomas . Consequently, a panel of
markers must be used as no single antibody is 100% sensitive and false negative results do occur. In our case, all the tumor specimens
(lung, pleura and breast) showed positive nuclear staining for TTF-1 and cytoplasmic staining for SP-A. The neoplastic cells lacked
expression of GCDFP-15, ER and mammaglobin. Overall metastasis to the breast has been associated with poor prognosis with most patients
dying within a year of diagnosis . Our patient survived 6 months following the diagnosis of both the primary lung tumor and the breast
metastasis. We reported a rare case of metastasis to the breast from an adenocarcinoma of the lung with extensive micropapillary component.
Metastatic disease to the breast, although rare, should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a primary mammary carcinoma because
the treatment and prognosis differ significantly. Furthermore, the distinction between metastasis from lung adenocarcinoma, particularly
with extensive micropapillary pattern, and primary breast adenocarcinoma may cause a significant diagnostic dilemma. The contribution of
immunohistochemstry to the correct diagnosis is very important. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of
this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in Chief of this Journal. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. NM and MC designed the study, performed the cytological, histological and
immunohistochemical evaluation, literature review and drafted the manuscript. SL participated in histological diagnosis and
immunohistochemical evaluation. EE participated in cytological diagnosis. AE and MD participated in revising the manuscript. XT conceived
the study and provided the clinical data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
