Anti-VEGF (vascular endothelial growth factor) therapy with the monoclonal antibody bevacizumab can cause gastrointestinal (GI)
perforations. In recent years it became apparent that GI perforations also occur during treatment with antiangiogenic tyrosine kinase
inhibitors (TKIs). It is of clinical importance to consider (vague) abdominal complaints during antiangiogenic treatment as a sign of a GI
perforation. To illustrate this serious complication, we report four cases of antiangiogenic treatment related GI perforations. In three
cases this was due to antiangiogenic TKI treatment. Reported risk factors of GI perforations due to bevacizumab include the presence of a
primary tumor in situ and recent history of endoscopy or abdominal radiotherapy. Pathology assessments of surgical removal of the perforated
intestinal part reveal that perforations are predominantly seen at the tumor or anastomotic site, in case of carcinomatosis or
diverticulitis or when GI obstruction or an intra-abdominal abcess is present. Whether the same risk factors may be involved in
antiangiogenic TKI related GI perforations is unknown. The underlying mechanisms responsible for GI perforation during antiangiogenic
treatment is unknown, but disturbance of host cell homeostasis of immune cells as well as platelet-endothelial cell interactions may play an
important role. In conclusion, while clinical awareness that antiangiogenic treatment can cause GI perforations is critical for current
medical practice, it is also very important to get more insight in its underlying mechanisms so that this life-threatening complication may
be prevented in the near future. Malignant tumors depend on the formation of new blood vessels from the pre-existing vasculature for their
growth and dissemination . This process, called angiogenesis, is regulated by pro- and antiangiogenic factors. One of the main angiogenic
factors is vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), which exerts its function by activation of VEGF tyrosine kinase receptors . Multiple
agents that target these angiogenic growth factor signaling pathways have been developed. Since these agents only interfere with growth
factor signaling pathways in proliferating endothelial cells, serious toxicities from these agents were not expected. Normally, more than
99% of the endothelial cells are quiescent in the absence of malignancy and angiogenesis only occurs during wound healing or in the
menstrual cycle . However, in contrast to preclinical tumor models, incidental severe toxicities were observed during clinical development
of these agents. For example, incidences of 1.5–5.4% were reported on GI perforations induced by treatment with the humanized monoclonal
VEGF-antibody bevacizumab [4, 5]. Only a few cases of GI perforations have been reported for antiangiogenic tyrosine kinase inhibitors
(TKIs) such as sunitinib or sorafenib. In this report we present four cases of antiangiogenic treatment related GI perforations, of which in
three cases an antiangiogenic TKI was responsible for this complication. In addition, we discuss current views on the potential risk factors
and mechanisms of antiangiogenic treatment related GI perforations. A 74-year-old man with a medical history of right hemicolectomy and
hepatectomy for metastasized colon carcinoma was treated in adjuvant setting with oxaliplatin, capecitabine and bevacizumab. Because of
rectal blood loss during the second chemotherapy cycle, a colonoscopy with subsequent band ligation of observed hemorrhoids was performed.
Three weeks later, the patient was admitted to the hospital with persistent diarrhea, severe anal pain and malaise. Body temperature and
blood pressure were normal, but pulse frequency was increased (105 bpm). Anal examination was very painful, but no abnormalities were
palpable. Laboratory and faeces examination as well as abdominal and chest X-rays revealed no abnormalities. At colonoscopy multiple deep
colonic and perianal ulcers were found and considered as drug induced enterocolitis (Fig. 1). Therefore capecitabine treatment was
immediately terminated. Despite this treatment interruption, the patient got worse and subsequently a laparotomy was performed. At the site
of the previously placed band ligations (3 weeks before), peri-anal and -rectal necrotic cavities connected to the anal canal were found.
The patient recovered within a few weeks after extended necrotectomies, a Hartmann-procedure and antibiotic treatment. No further adjuvant
chemotherapy was administered.Fig. 1Endoscopy results of patient 1 visualizing deep colonic ulcers Endoscopy results of patient 1
visualizing deep colonic ulcers A 68-year-old man with a medical history of metastasized renal cell carcinoma (RCC) started treatment with
sorafenib, after previous nephrectomy and immunotherapy (interferon-alpha), upon disease progression. Sorafenib treatment resulted in a
rapid partial response. However, the patient developed fever and abdominal pain 5 months after start of sorafenib treatment and his
condition deteriorated within hours. The patient suffered from diarrhea and substantial rectal bleeding. Physical examination revealed
fever, abdominal pain and hepatomegaly. Laboratory results showed anemia and signs of inflammation (hemoglobin 11.8 g/dl (normal value
between 13.5 and16.5 g/dl), C-reactive protein (CRP) 57 mg/l (normal value between 0 and 10 mg/l) and Leukocyte counts 9.5 × 109/l (normal
value between 4.0 and 10 × 109/l). Computed tomography (CT), performed because of progressive diarrhea together with substantial rectal
bleeding with a decrease in hemoglobin to 8.5 g/dl, revealed colonic perforation into the necrotic liver metastasis (Fig. 2). Based on these
findings, sorafenib treatment was terminated and antibiotics were prescribed. Because a surgical resection of these necrotic liver
metastases was impossible, a terminal ileostomy with a slime fistula was constructed. Within a few days the patient recovered rapidly and
could be discharged from the hospital. Two months later, when the patient was fully recovered from this episode, an mTOR inhibitor was
prescribed because of disease progression.Fig. 2Abdominal CT-scan of patient 2, performed pre-treatment (a) and post treatment (b),
revealing colonic perforation into the necrotic liver metastasis (arrows) post-treatment Abdominal CT-scan of patient 2, performed pre-
treatment (a) and post treatment (b), revealing colonic perforation into the necrotic liver metastasis (arrows) post-treatment After optimal
interval debulking and extensive treatment with standard chemotherapy, a 67-year-old woman with advanced ovarian cancer and extended
peritonitis carcinomatosa participated upon progression in a phase I trial with bevacizumab combined with an experimental antiangiogenic
TKI. Targets of this TKI include VEGFR-2 and PDGFR. One month after start of treatment she was admitted to the hospital because of
progressive pain in groin and lower left abdominal part accompanied by fever and elevated inflammation parameters (CRP 290 mg/l, Leukocyte
counts 13.8 × 109/l). A CT-scan revealed a necrotic tumor mass in the pelvis with, secondary to the tumor response, retroperitoneal
perforation. Surgical resection of this retroperitoneal complication was not feasible and optimal palliative care was initiated. A 62-year-
old woman with a medical history of metastasized RCC, for which she underwent surgery and radiotherapy, started sunitinib upon disease
progression. During the second 6 week treatment cycle, she developed pain at lower back and bottom accompanied by fever. At physical
examination, a peri-anal fistula was found and laboratory results supported systemic inflammation (CRP > 500 mg/l). Magnetic Resonance
Imaging revealed widespread peri-anal abscesses and fistulas. As extensive surgical resection was no reasonable option, optimal palliative
care was provided. The incidence of sunitinib or sorafenib related GI perforation is unknown, since only few cases were reported in trials
and case reports . Because of the potential serious outcome, it would be extremely helpful if we could predict patients at-risk on basis of
risk factors and underlying biological mechanisms. In addition, more insight in these underlying mechanisms is important to develop
potential novel agents with an improved toxicity profile. Since the first observations of GI perforation during bevacizumab treatment, the
risk factors of primary tumor in situ and recent history of endoscopy or abdominal radiotherapy [5, 21–26] were described. Pathological
findings, frequently associated with observed perforations, include perforation at the tumor or anastomotic site, abdominal carcinomatosis,
diverticulitis, GI obstruction and intra-abdominal abcess [5, 22–24]. Different biological mechanisms of bevacizumab related perforations
have been theorized, which we have outlined in the next part. Whether the same risk factors and mechanisms may be involved in TKI related
perforation is unknown, but seems very likely, because both type of agents inhibit VEGF signaling. We have summarized in Table 1 that for
both type of agents, gastrointestinal perforations were reported in diverse parts of the gastrointestinal tract. In the reported cases for
sunitinib and sorafenib, tumor cells at the site of perforation and previous radiation treatment were frequently mentioned similar to
bevacizumab reports [6, 13–17].Table 1An overview of the percentages and localisations of all reported gastrointestinal perforations for
treatment with sunitinib and sorafenib and of a few larger studies and meta-analyses regarding bevacizumab treatmentAntiangiogenic agentType
of study/articleTumor typePercentage (amount)LocalisationArticleSunitinibPhase IVarious7.1% (2/28)Rectum (fistula)Faivre et al. Phase
IIRCC1.1% (1/88)ColonDe Mulder et al. Phase IIPAC2%GastrointestinalO’Reilly et al. Case reportGIST1 ptTransverse colonHur et al.
RetrospectiveGIST7.1% (3/42)BowelRuka et al. Retrospective (sunitinib or imatinib)GIST4 ptsIntestinalRaut et al. Case reportRCC2
ptsAscending colonFlaig et al. Case reportRCC1 ptPeri-anal (fistulas)Walraven et al.SorafenibPhase IISarcomas0.7% (1/144)BowelMaki et al.
Phase IIMelanoma2.7% (1/37)IntestinalMin et al. Phase IIGIST3.8% (1/26)Not mentionedWiebe et al. Phase IIGalbladder canc./cholangiocarc.2.7%
(1/36)GastrointestinalEl-Khoueiry et al. Phase I (plus chemo)NSCLC7.7% (1/13)Small bowelOkamoto et al. Case reportRCC1 ptLeft colonEng et
al. Case reportRCC1 ptTransv. and sigm. colon (multiple perforations)Peters et al. Case reportMelanoma1 ptAscending colon (multiple
perforations)Frieling et al. Case reportRCC1 ptColonWalraven et al.BevacizumabPhase III (plus chemo)CRC1.5% (6/393)GastrointestinalHurwitz
et al. Phase III (plus chemo)CRC1.9% (37/1914)GastrointestinalVan Cutsem et al. BRITE registry (plus chemo)CRC1.7%
(34/1968)GastrointestinalSugrue et al. Literat. search (single agent/plus chemo/plus erlotinib)Gynaecologic tumors5.4% (16/298)BowelHan et
al. Retrospective (single agent/plus chemo)Various1.7% (24/1442)Gastroesophageal, -jejunostomy, duodeno-pancreatic, small bowel, appendix,
colorectalBadgwell et al. Meta-analysis (plus IFN/chemotherapy/erlotinib)Various0.9% (of >6000 pts)GastrointestinalHapani et al. Case report
(plus chemo)CRC1 ptRectal and analWalraven et al.Case report (plus antiangiogenic TKI)Ovarian cancer1 ptColonWalraven et al.RCC renal cell
carcinoma, PAC pancreas adenocarcinoma, GIST gastrointestinal stromal tumor, NSCLC non-small cell lung cancer, CRC colorectal cancer An
overview of the percentages and localisations of all reported gastrointestinal perforations for treatment with sunitinib and sorafenib and
of a few larger studies and meta-analyses regarding bevacizumab treatment RCC renal cell carcinoma, PAC pancreas adenocarcinoma, GIST
gastrointestinal stromal tumor, NSCLC non-small cell lung cancer, CRC colorectal cancer Tol et al. suggested a relationship between
bevacizumab treatment and ulcer development, which may eventually cause a GI perforation. In a phase III study with 755 patients receiving
chemotherapy with bevacizumab plus or minus cetuximab, twelve GI perforations were observed of which four were located in an ulcer. The high
incidence of ulcers in this study (1.3 vs. 0.1% in the general population), the occurrence of perforations early in treatment, the
established role of VEGF in ulcer healing and the inhibitory effect of bevacizumab on wound healing support their hypothesis. Since the
majority of perforations were located at the primary tumor site, pre-existent mucosal lesions were expected as preferential localizations.
In another report it was speculated that bevacizumab induced VEGF inhibition might result in the cholesterol emboli syndrome (CES), which
may consequently give rise to GI perforations due to mesenteric ischemia . Hypertension in combination with eosinophilia is a feature of
CES. All three out of twenty-two prospectively observed patients who developed hypertension during bevacizumab treatment had atherosclerotic
risk factors, an increased heart rate and eosinophilia at onset of hypertension. In this report it was hypothesized that CES might cause all
acute bevacizumab related complications in atherosclerotic patients, including GI perforations as a consequence of mesenteric ischemia.
Alternatively, Saif et al. postulated that GI perforation is caused directly by regression of normal blood vessels in the GI tract, induced
by excessive VEGF inhibition. The authors extrapolated data from animal models in which VEGF inhibition has shown to reduce vascular density
in the small intestinal villi as well as in other organs . In a recent editorial on the risk of bevacizumab associated GI perforation in
ovarian cancer it was speculated that bevacizumab induces necrosis of malignant ovarian cells that invade the bowel serosa resulting in GI
perforation . In addition, in this editorial it was suggested that increased pressure due to abdominal carcinomatosis or adhesions from
prior surgeries might lead to micro-perforations in vulnerable areas of the bowel, with subsequent delayed healing due to bevacizumab.
Finally, loss of nitric oxide (NO) release due to VEGF inhibition, leading to decreased blood flow to the splanchnic vasculature, was
proposed to result in bowel infarction and perforation at areas with marginal blood supply. On account of early closure of the ORBIT trial,
evaluating bevacizumab treatment in platinum resistant ovarian cancer, tumor involvement of the bowel was suggested . Five out of 44
patients developed GI perforation and showed radiographic evidence of bowel involvement at study entry. A significant association of GI
perforations with increased number of prior chemotherapy regimens (respectively three) and a non-significant relation with bowel wall
thickening/obstruction were found. In contrast, in another study with twenty-five heavily pretreated (median of five prior chemotherapy
regimens) patients with advanced ovarian cancer, treatment with bevacizumab did not cause any GI perforations . We recently discussed the
role of platelets in antiangiogenic treatment related toxicity [35, 36]. Platelets contain VEGF in their α-granules which they secrete upon
activation and on the other hand VEGF activation of the endothelium results in platelet binding and subsequent activation . In addition, we
found that bevacizumab is taken up by platelets, leading to VEGF neutralization . Since VEGF is an endothelial cell survival factor [2, 40,
41], we postulated that the subsequent disturbed platelet-endothelial cell interaction might be involved in GI perforation, disturbed wound
healing and bleeding complications . The platelet–endothelial cell homeostasis may be disturbed by antiangiogenic treatment. Therefore an
increased leakiness and extravasation of inflammatory cells may cause submucosal inflammation and subsequent ulcer formation. It is of
clinical importance to study underlying biological mechanisms of bevacizumab related GI perforation. In addition, it is expected that these
underlying mechanisms and risk factors might account for antiangiogenic TKI treatment as well. Risk factors of tumors at the primary site
and recent history of endoscopy or abdominal radiotherapy should be taken into account before treatment initiation with angiogenesis
inhibitors. In ovarian cancer patients it is recommended to consider the number of prior chemotherapy regimens and abdominal surgeries and
to exclude tumor involvement of the bowel by physical examination and CT-scan upon start of treatment with angiogenesis inhibitors.
Endoscopic evaluation is advised in patients with symptoms possibly related to GI ulcer during treatment . In addition, based on this
report, rubber band ligation should be prevented until bevacizumab or TKI treatment is interrupted or terminated. The third case of GI
perforation during combined bevacizumab and TKI treatment emphasizes a possible increased perforation risk related to combination treatment
with antiangiogenic agents with different biological mechanisms. Although most of the current preclinical and clinical knowledge on
potential underlying mechanisms of angiogenesis inhibitor induced gastrointestinal perforations is on bevacizumab, based on preclinical and
clinical studies potential underlying mechanisms as described may hold true for TKI-induced perforations as well. In conclusion, we would
like to advocate to include GI perforation in the differential diagnoses, when patients complain of (vague) abdominal pain during treatment
with TKIs as well as with bevacizumab. Maudy Walraven was supported by by the Dutch Cancer Foundation and an AEGON scholarship. Conflict of
interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author(s) and source are credited.
