A 25-year-old man had complained of sudden fever spikes for two years and his blood tests were within the normal range. In 1993, a surgical
biopsy of swollen left inguinal lymph nodes was negative for malignancy, but showed reactive lymphadenitis and widespread sinus
histiocytosis. A concomitant needle biopsy of the periaortic lymph nodes and a bone marrow aspirate were also negative. In 1994, after an
emergency hospital admission because of a sport-related thoracic trauma, a right inguinal lymph node biopsy demonstrated Hodgkin’s lymphoma
Stage IVB (scleronodular mixed cell subtype). Although it was improved by chemotherapy, the disease suddenly relapsed, and a further lymph
node biopsy was performed in 1998 confirming the same diagnosis. Despite further treatment, the patient died of septic shock in 2004, at the
age of 38 years. Retrospective analysis of the various specimens showed intracellular heavy metal nanoparticles within lymph node, bone
marrow, and liver samples by field emission gun environmental scanning electron microscopy and energy dispersive spectroscopy. Heavy metals
from environmental pollution may accumulate in sites far from the entry route and, in genetically conditioned individuals with tissue
specificity, may act as cofactors for chronic inflammation or even malignant transformation. The present anecdotal report highlights the
need for further pathologic ultrastructural investigations using serial samples and the possible role of intracellular nanoparticles in
human disease. Environmental pollution and occupational exposure to heavy metals are considered possible cofactors in the occurrence of both
chronic and malignant diseases. The bulk of epidemiologic and in vitro studies, as well as studies in experimental animals, support the
hypothesis that a cause and effect relationship exists between chronic irritation (oxidative stress) by heavy metals and carcinogenesis.
Unfortunately, there is a complete lack of relevant human studies, in particular concerning pathologic examination of serial samples
collected at various time intervals and showing host–particle interaction at the ultrastructural level. Hodgkin’s disease is a malignant
systemic lymphoma which affects a large number of young people. Its occurrence has been occasionally related to viral pathogenesis because
of the prevalence of Epstein–Barr virus infection in different types and locations of lymphoma.1–4 Sometimes the clinical history starts
with remitting episodes of fever followed by lymph node swelling, biopsy and pathologic examinations, which detects typical malignant
degeneration, with Reed–Sternberg cells spreading into the infiltrated lymphoreticular network. The progression from nonspecific
lymphadenitis to lymphoma is seldom histologically depicted because of the speed of transformation. Our case report describes a 25-year-old
man who, at the beginning of his disease, had lymph node enlargement for at least one year and underwent repeated biopsy of the nodes and
bone marrow until a diagnosis of Hodgkin’s lymphoma was finally made. We have investigated the possibility of a link between exposure to
environmental particulate matter and development of lymphoma5,6 using a new investigational tool, ie, field emission gun-environmental
scanning electron microscopy (FEG-ESEM) coupled with energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS) to determine the chemical composition of the
particles identified. We have investigated nanoparticle storage in lymph nodes and involved tissues retrospectively. This research has
highlighted the presence of heavy metal nanoparticles in cells and opens the debate on their pathogenetic role in the onset of Hodgkin’s
disease. This investigation has been performed in a young European male (1967–2004). He was a racing car driver who was regularly exposed to
toxic air pollution. In 1985, the patient underwent appendectomy for acute appendicitis with moderate leukocytosis (white blood cells).4,10
Two years later, he suffered from head and spine trauma, followed by a motorbike accident the following year. The latter led to a fracture
of the left tibia which was surgically treated with a titanium pin. In May 1993, the patient was hospitalized due to an unremitting fever
(37.5°C) which lasted for one month. A laboratory analysis was performed, and the results were negative for cytomegalovirus, pathogenic
fecal bacteria, HIC, human immunodeficiency virus, Epstein–Barr virus, Brucella, Shigella, and Salmonella typhimurium, but a toxoplasmosis
test was positive, and a computed tomography scan showed enlarged paraortic lymph nodes and an enlarged left inguinal lymph node. A needle
biopsy of the periaortic lymph nodes and a bone marrow biopsy showed an inflammatory mixed cell response. In July 1993, the surgical biopsy
of a left inguinal node led to the diagnosis of reactive lymphadenitis with widespread immature sinus histiocytosis, but without
paracortical tissue enlargement and a normal immunophenotype. In February 1994, the tibial pin was removed and, following the operation, the
fever disappeared. Five months later, the radiogallium lymph node scintigraphy suggested a possible diagnosis of sarcoidosis. Two months
later, the patient suffered a sports-related thoracic trauma which resulted in an emergency hospital admission. A plain chest X-ray showed
bilateral hilar polycyclic lymphadenopathy with right upper and middle lobe infiltration, raising the suspicion of lymphoma. A bone marrow
biopsy showed a pattern related to chronic infections and atypical lymphocytes (less than 5%), whereas a right inguinal lymph node biopsy
showed weakly positive Leu M1 Reed–Sternberg cells. Lymphatic cells were UCHL1- and CD3-positive (T lymphocytes), and a minority were
L26-positive (B lymphocytes). Finally, Hodgkin’s lymphoma Stage IVB (scleronodular mixed cell subtype) was diagnosed. The patient underwent
radiochemotherapy with partial volumetric regression of the right thoracic paraortic lymph nodes. In 1997, further lesions were found in the
spleen. The total body positron emission tomography revealed the involvement of the liver at the VII segment level, confirmed by an
ultrasound scan showing additional lesions at the V, VII, and VIII segments. Histologic analysis of the ultrasound-guided liver biopsy
showed Reed–Sternberg cell infiltration. In June 1998, a computed tomography (CT) scan showed relapse of the thoracic lesions. The patient
was treated with rituximab. Despite treatment, the disease progressed with bone involvement. In late November 1998, a further lymph node
biopsy confirmed the presence of Hodgkin’s disease (scleronodular mixed cell subtype). The patient died of septic shock in May 2004. Tissue
samples analyzed included a left inguinal lymph node in 1993, a right lymph node in the groin area in 1994, a bone marrow biopsy in 1994,
and another lymph node in 1998. Biopsy samples of benign (on the right) and malignant (on the left) lymph nodes and bone marrow were fixed
in 10% formalin, dehydrated in ascending concentration alcohols, and embedded in paraffin. A Leica microtome (RM 2125RT; Lecia Nussloch,
Germany) was used to cut biopsy sections 10 μ in thickness. The sections were deposited on an acetate sheet and deparaffined with xylol.
After that, with a few drops of xylol and 98% alcohol, they were mounted on an aluminum stub and inserted inside the chamber of a FEG-ESEM
Quanta (FEI Company, Eindhoven, The Netherlands) coupled with an EDS (EDAX, Mahwah, NJ). The use of the FEG-ESEM was recommended because it
does not need any further process to make the sample electron-conductive (gold or carbon coating of the biologic sections). The EDS
microanalysis system was used to identify the elemental composition of inorganic materials (foreign bodies) identified in the biopsy
samples. The working conditions of the FEG-ESEM were low-vacuum, from 20 to 30 kV, in secondary and backscattered electron modality, with
spots 3–5. For every sample, a list of the particles found in the sample was given, along with their size, morphology, and chemical
composition. Microsized and nanosized foreign bodies have been identified in all the samples analyzed. Table 1 shows a summary of the most
representative particles identified in the lymph node and bone marrow biopsies, taken at different stages of the disease, described
according to morphology, size and chemical composition. Particle accumulation is not uniform, and this might have been due to asymmetry of
the lymphatic circulation. The debris consists of heavy metals, including stainless steel and chromium compounds. These are not
biocompatible and, over time, release highly toxic ions, including iron, chromium, and nickel. Our investigation shows an increased amount
of metallic foreign bodies, with progression of the disease and progressive amounts of submicroscopic calcium storage.7 Chromium compounds
produce a variety of types of DNA damage, including single-strand breaks, alkali-labile sites, and DNA protein crosslinks. These compounds
bind isolated DNA and proteins, readily enter cells via anion channels, but do not cross cell membranes. Chromium inhibits the
transcriptional activity of nuclear factor-kappa B by decreasing the interaction of p65 with cAMP-responsive element-binding protein.8,9
Figure 1 shows submicronic particles (white spots) in the left lymph node biopsy sample. These particles appear whiter than the biologic
substrate because they are atomically denser. The biologic tissue is only composed of carbon, oxygen, phosphorus, sulphur, and chlorine,
whereas the particles contain chromium with traces of calcium. Chromium is chemically toxic in biologic tissue and can also release chromium
ions which worsen the toxicity.10–13 Raised concentrations of circulating metal degradation products, derived from orthopedic implants, may
have deleterious biologic effects over time. Accurate monitoring of metal concentrations in serum and urine, after total hip replacement,
can provide insights into the mechanisms of metal release. Corrosion significantly raises metal levels, including nickel and chromium in
serum and urine, when compared with patients with no radiologic evidence of corrosion and volunteers without metallic implants (P <
0.001).14–18 Samples of the progression of the disease are shown in Figures 2 and 3. A progressively increasing number of microsized and
nanosized metallic particles have been found. Our case report describes for the first time a pathophysiologic and ultrastructural five-year
follow-up of lymph nodes obtained from the same patient. It shows the progressive storage of heavy metal nanoparticles in lymphatic tissue,
which was in parallel with progression of a cancerous process from early chronic inflammation to Hodgkin’s disease. This is a unique case
report relating to one-year progression from lymphadenitis to lymphoma in the inguinal region of a patient, where the increasing presence of
foreign inorganic microsized and nanosized bodies has been demonstrated. Although the patient underwent appendectomy and tested positive for
toxoplasmosis which may be associated with malignancies, this relationship was unlikely in our patient. His appendectomy dated back to
childhood, and toxoplasmosis did not lead to infection with encephalic damage. Furthermore, we found no evidence of immunosuppression during
the lymphoma incubation period. Heavy metals, such as iron, chromium and nickel, are the main constituents of foreign bodies found in
cells.9,11,19–21 Occupational or incidental heavy exposure to many chemicals, including benzene, pesticides, ethylene oxide and metals
(mercury, cadmium, chrome, cobalt, lead, aluminum) is very dangerous for the hematopoietic system. Mercury and chromium cause
immunosuppression and evoke autoimmune reactions.10–12,22–25 An epidemiologic study assessing cancer risk in a small population exposed to
excessive amounts of chromium9 reported two cases of Hodgkin’s disease after protracted exposure and a long latency period. The calculated
and observed risk in this study is 65–92-fold higher than in nonexposed populations. Clinicians should be aware of the potential association
between hexavalent chromium exposure and Hodgkin’s lymphoma. The particles have been identified as foreign bodies arising from environmental
pollution. Their identification in anatomic areas, far from the putative route of entry, raises the issues of whether the mechanism of
entrance, internal distribution (streaming), and uptake (selective or not) in the human body involves a potential respiratory or digestive
source, and the potential pathogenic mechanism by which nonbiocompatible nanosized foreign bodies cause a chronic inflammatory reaction in
lymphatic tissue progressing to Hodgkin’s lymphoma.11,19,21,26 The possibility of environmental pollutants spreading inside the body after
inhalation has been shown by Péry et al27 in a study involving five volunteers after inhalation of technetium-radiolabeled 100 nm carbon
particles. They demonstrated that these radiolabeled nanoparticles overwhelm the lung barrier within 60 seconds and are stored in the liver
within 60 minutes. After this time, the radioactive signal decreases, but there can be a wider dispersion through the blood circulation.
Evidence of submicronic particles spreading in different organs or regions, including sperm and brain tissue, has been shown previously. The
transport of nanosized particles, due to their consistently small size, may be mediated by blood cells or other blood or lymph components.
The toxicologic pathway can be identified in the absence of biocompatibility. In particular, metal nanoparticles may produce toxic ions
locally by delayed corrosion mechanisms.14–18 Trapping of these nanoparticles within lymphatic cells, with mutagenic and carcinogenic
potential via an inflammatory reaction, could elicit a cytokine cascade and lymph node engulfment, with further critical concentration of
nanomaterials up to the level inducing carcinogenic mutations. With regard to the present case report, it would have been helpful if the
patient had been followed up during the five years preceding 1993, ie, when the progression from chronic inflammation to cancerous disease
actually occurred. However, it is important to bear in mind the difference between experimental research using animal models and that using
human subjects, whereby the latter must conform to more stringent ethical rules. In the absence of more robust data on humans demonstrating
a clear-cut cause and effect relationship between chronic exposure to heavy metals and malignancies (not only on the basis of epidemiologic
correlation studies, but on the basis of pathologic evidence, such as in the present report), we believe that the present case report could
be useful to the scientific community. However, caution is recommended when interpreting the results of a single case report, as well as
those of small studies such as that one by Bick et al,11 in which small numbers could be responsible for bias in risk calculation. In
addition, as our extended studies have already suggested,5,6,28–33 environmental pollutants are usually present in such a small
concentration in the atmosphere that they are unlikely to be solely responsible for the occurrence of malignant disease in the absence of a
congenital or inherited predisposition in the host. On the contrary, in the presence of frail predisposed subjects, even small amounts of
pollutants could be cofactors for the occurrence of chronic or even malignant diseases.1 Our anecdotal report highlights the need for
ultrastructural investigation in a larger sample of patients with Hodgkin’s lymphoma. It suggests the possibility that, at least in some
subtypes, or in a proportion of subjects with Hodgkin’s disease, the progression from chronic lymphadenitis to overt malignancy can be
facilitated or codetermined in addition to genetic or congenital factors. Moreover, it is likely to happen by chronic exposure or
accumulation of heavy metal nanoparticles within lymph nodes, which could determine additional carcinogenetic mutations. The authors are
deeply indebted to Lavinia Nitu and Roberta Salvatori for their technical support and the Associazione Ricerca è Vita Onlus of Modena for
the support in this investigation. FC has been suggested by the Prolife Project funded by the City of Milan. This article has not been
supported by grants. Disclosure The authors certify that there is no conflict of interest with any financial organization regarding the
material discussed in the manuscript. The microphotograph shows two submicronic particles (the white spots) embedded in the left lymph-node
biopsy sample. The EDS spectrum shows the chemical composition: carbon, oxygen, chromium, phosphorus, sulfur, and chlorine. The
microphotograph shows the analyses carried out on the right lymph-node with the EDS spectrum on the chemical composition of the debris.
Nanoparticles of iron, chromium, and silicon are identified. The bone marrow sample shows the presence of many nanoparticles (range 150 nm–5
μm) composed of iron, chromium, and nickel, namely debris of stainless steel. Type, chemical composition, and size of particles identified
in lymph node samples* Note: Elements are shown according to the energy dispersive spectroscopy peaks, from highest to lowest.
