Streptococcus pneumoniae is not commonly considered an agent of urinary tract infections. We report 3 children with urinary tract
abnormalities who had high numbers of S. pneumoniae in their urine (>104 CFU/mL) and varying clinical symptoms. The role of Streptococcus
pneumoniae as an agent of septicemia, pneumonia, and meningitis is well known (1,2). However, published reports of urinary tract infection
(UTI) associated with S. pneumoniae are scarce, and S. pneumoniae generally is not considered an agent of UTI in either adults or children
(3,4). We report 3 children with urinary tract abnormalities and high levels of S. pneumoniae in their urine. In June 2008, a 23-month-old
boy (case-patient 1) received care for fever and clinical signs of a UTI at the emergency department of the University of Heidelberg
Children’s Hospital. He did not show signs of respiratory disease. His medical history was remarkable for bilateral cystic–dysplastic
kidneys, a congenital urethral valve (surgery in October 2006), terminal kidney insufficiency and peritoneal dialysis since 2006, renal
anemia, hyperparathyroidism, hyperphosphatemia, microcephalus, and failure to thrive. Blood was drawn for culture, and a urine sample was
taken. After 9 hours of incubation, the blood culture was positive for S. pneumoniae, and the urine grew 105 CFU/mL of S. pneumoniae. Blood
leukocyte levels were elevated (20 cells/nL [normal <13 cells/nL]), as were leukocyte levels in the urine (568 cells/µL [normal <4
cells/µL]). A throat swab was negative for S. pneumoniae. The boy’s infection was treated successfully, and he was discharged 4 days after
admission. Further analysis showed that both isolates were serotype 15B and were fully susceptible to all antibacterial drugs tested (Table
1). *Values are MICs (mg/mL). S, susceptible; R, resistant; I, intermediate. In September 2009, a 12-year-old boy (case-patient 2) sought
care at the nephrology department of the University of Heidelberg Children’s Hospital for his yearly control examination 7 years after
kidney transplantation. He had no clinical signs of current infection. His medical history was remarkable for kidney insufficiency,
congenital obstruction and reflux in the urethral valve, kidney transplantation in 2002, ileocecal pouch, chronic transplant nephropathy,
metabolic acidosis, hypertension, and renal anemia. A urine sample showed 105 CFU/mL S. pneumoniae and 103 CFU/mL Enterobacteriaceae. Urine
leukocyte levels were slightly elevated (16 cells/µL). Further analysis showed that S. pneumoniae was serotype 34 and fully susceptible to
all antibacterial drugs tested (Table 1). In November 2009, a 7-year-old girl (case-patient 3) was sent to the emergency department of the
University of Heidelberg Children’s Hospital by her pediatrician because of abnormal results in a control urine sample 4 weeks after
percutaneous nephrolithoapraxia and concrement removal. She was known to have cystinuria and had already undergone extracorporeal shock wave
treatment with concrement removal in 2004. Her temperature was slightly elevated (37.5°C), but she had no dysuria or pain. Urinalysis showed
elevated leukocyte levels (158 cells/µL), and 104 CFU/mL S. pneumoniae could be grown. Because of the mild symptoms, no antimicrobial drug
treatment was started. Further analysis showed that the isolate was a 19F serotype (Table 1). For each patient, urine was routinely cultured
as follows: 2 samples of 1 µL each were placed on a 5% sheep-blood agar plate and a MacConkey agar plate. chromID CPS medium (bioMérieux,
Nürtingen, Germany) was injected with 10 µL of urine. All plates were incubated for 18–24 h at 36°C ± 1°C in ambient air (5). Susceptibility
testing was performed by using the BD Phoenix Automated Microbiology System with SMIC/ID panels (Becton Dickinson, Heidelberg, Germany). The
literature on urinary tract infections with S. pneumoniae is scarce. In 1980, Green and Selinger described a patient with a soft tissue
abscess and a UTI caused by serotype 3 (6). In 2004, Dufke et al. described a patient with pyelonephritis and urosepsis caused by serotype
6A (7). In 1988, Nguyen and Penn determined the frequency of pneumococci in urine specimens from adults and found 38 (0.18%) of 22,744
samples positive for S. pneumoniae (4). Similarly, Miller et al. determined that the frequency of pneumococci in urine specimens from
children was even lower: 43 (0.08%) of 53.499 samples (3). Of 28 patients, for whom clinical data were available, 5 had dysuria, and 2 had
pyuria. Three asymptomatic children had medical histories of genitourinary abnormalities; 6 asymptomatic children had medical histories of
recurrent UTI with Enterobacteriaceae. The serotypes and antibiotic susceptibilities of the respective isolates were not reported. A UTI is
defined as bacteriuria (>105 CFU/mL in adults, >104 CFU/mL in children) of 1 uropathogen and typical clinical signs, i.e., dysuria and
urgency. Depending on the age of the patient, clinical signs might be less typical, especially in children <2 years of age. Generally pyuria
is present (8,9). By contrast, asymptomatic bacteriuria is defined as a uropathogen (>105 CFU/mL in adults, >104 CFU/mL in children) without
pyuria (<10 leukocytes/µL) (9). Applying these criteria to the 3 cases in this report yields the following results. Assuming that S.
pneumoniae is a uropathogen, case 1 is a UTI accompanied by septicemia. No other focus of infection with S. pneumoniae was apparent or could
be identified. We believe this is an ascending UTI in a boy with known oliguria from bilateral cystic–dysplastic kidneys. Because case-
patient 3 showed only mild symptoms, diagnosis of UTI is not obligatory. Nevertheless, it is not a mere pneumococcosuria because of the high
numbers of leukocytes in the urine (158 cells/µL). Case 2 is more difficult to classify. The episode described might be pneumococcosuria
because the leukocyte level is not high; nevertheless, it is above normal. Reassessment of all microbiological data of case-patient 2
indicated that since 2005 we have received 29 different urine samples. In March 2007, we had already identified S. pneumoniae (104 CFU/mL)
and pyuria (92 CFU/µL). Additionally, 104 CFU/mL Proteus mirabilis had been present and considered the cause of the pyuria; 11 of 27 samples
had contained α-hemolytic streptococci >103 CFU/mL (Table 2). Unfortunately, no test to differentiate between pneumococci and the other
α-hemolytic streptococci was originally performed on these bacteria. Therefore, we can only speculate whether at least some of these samples
contained S. pneumoniae. Taking these facts into account, we believe that this might be a case of bacterial persistence according to the
criteria described by Chang and Shortliffe (cultures ± same organism) (8). *Reference value is <4 cells/µL. Reassessment of all available
laboratory data on case-patient 1 showed that we received 3 urine samples before the described episode and 8 afterward. In none of the
samples did we find S. pneumoniae or α-hemolytic streptococci. From case-patient 3 we did not receive any other material than described.
Further analysis of the S. pneumoniae isolates indicated that all 3 children were affected by different serotypes. Therefore, we do not have
an indication that a single serotype has a predilection for the urinary tract. In theory, 2 cases could have been avoided by vaccination,
i.e., case 3 (serotype 19F) and case 1 (serotype 15B). However, case-patient 3 was 4 years of age when the routine vaccination program aimed
at children <2 years of age started in Germany in 2006. Because no catch-up program existed, this child was never vaccinated against
pneumococci. Case-patient 1 was regularly vaccinated with heptavalent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine in 2006–2007 but was just 23 months old
at disease onset disease, i.e., 1 month too young to be eligible for the 23-valent pneumococcal polysaccharide vaccine. Case-patient 2 is
not yet vaccinated against pneumococci. Thus, we suggest that S. pneumoniae be added to the potential UTI-causing pathogens in children with
urinary tract abnormalities. Suggested citation for this article: Burckhardt I, Zimmermann S. Streptococcus pneumoniae in urinary tracts of
children with chronic kidney disease. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Jan [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1701.100895 Serotypes and bile solubility were determined at the National Reference Center for Streptococci,
Aachen, Germany. Dr Burckhardt is a consultant for microbiology, virology, and epidemiology of infectious diseases who works at the
Department for Infectious Diseases, Microbiology and Hygiene at the University of Heidelberg, Germany. Her main interest is the clinical
manifestation and epidemiology of pneumococcal diseases and identification of risk factors for pneumococcal diseases. Dr Zimmermann is a
consultant for microbiology, virology, and epidemiology of infectious diseases. He is the senior physician at the Department for Infectious
Diseases, Microbiology and Hygiene at the University of Heidelberg, Germany. His primary research interests include leptospirosis and
leishmaniasis.
