We report 2 cases of babesiosis in immunocompetent patients in France. A severe influenza-like disease developed in both patients 2 weeks
after they had been bitten by ticks. Diagnosis was obtained from blood smears, and Babesia divergens was identified by PCR in 1 case.
Babesiosis in Europe occurs in healthy patients, not only in splenectomized patients. Babesiosis, a tick-borne infectious disease that
occurs worldwide, is caused by species of Babesia, an intraerythrocytic parasite (1). Babesia spp. parasites infect wild and domesticated
animals and may cause a malaria-like syndrome. The first human case was described in 1957 in a splenectomized Yugoslavian farmer who died
(2). More than 100 Babesia species infect animals, but human infection has been associated with only a few species, mainly B. microti and B.
divergens (1–3). B. microti parasites are transmitted by Ixodes scapularis ticks and infect rodents. Since 1957, these parasites have caused
hundreds of human babesiosis cases in the United States, the most affected country. Infections are found mainly in healthy persons and
manifest as asymptomatic or mild to moderate illness; severe disease, even in immunocompromised or elderly patients, is seldom reported
(2,3). B. divergens parasites are endemic to Europe; they are transmitted by I. ricinus ticks and infect bovines (4). In Europe, the disease
is rare in humans; ≈40 cases have been reported (2,3,5–7). These cases are almost exclusively severe in immunocompromised patients,
especially those whose spleens have been removed (2,3,8). B. divergens parasites are responsible for >70% of these cases (2,8), although the
disease is not always confirmed by molecular-based methods. We report 2 cases of human babesiosis in Colmar, Alsace, a northeastern region
of France in which Lyme disease is endemic. The disease was diagnosed in spring 2009 in healthy young persons without history of travel
abroad who experienced a marked influenza-like syndrome and recovered. These cases should change the classic description of babesiosis in
Europe, in which the disease was thought to affect immunocompromised patients exclusively. Our study indicates that this disease also occurs
in Europe among immunocompetent patients. Patient 1, a 37-year-old woman without known medical history, sought treatment on April 29, two
weeks after a tick bite. She had a 38.5°C fever with chills, headaches, and arthromyalgia. Results of a physical examination were normal.
Laboratory findings included leukopenia (3,300 leukocytes/µL, 45% polymorphonuclear cells, 37% lymphocytes), aspartate aminotransferase and
alanine aminotransferase levels of 136 IU/L and 160 IU/L, respectively; γ-glutamyl transpeptidase 135 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase 131 IU/L;
and elevated C-reactive protein level (48 mg/L). Serologic results for Lyme disease, tick-borne encephalitis virus, tularemia, Anaplasma
spp., Coxiella burnetii, and Rickettsia spp., as well as blood cultures were negative. A thin peripheral blood smear stained with May-
Grünwald-Giemsa did not show any ehrlichial morulae in granulocytes, as suspected, but a retrospective examination of stored slides on May
22 (the same day that case 2 was characterized) showed pear forms and trophozoites of intraerythrocytic parasites (parasitemia level 0.29%),
leading to the diagnosis of babesiosis (Figure 1). The patient had initially received doxycycline (200 mg/d) for a suspected bacterial tick-
borne infection, and her symptoms rapidly resolved. The first blood sample was discarded, but on June 16 and June 24, additional serum and
whole blood samples were collected in sodium citrate vacutainer tubes (Becton-Dickinson, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The blood smears remained
positive until July but were negative in August. Two trophozoites, pear-shaped, of Babesia divergens in erythrocytes from case-patient 1
(original magnification ×1,000, May-Grünwald-Giemsa stain). Patient 2, a 35-year-old man with an uneventful medical history, was
hospitalized on May 21, two weeks after receiving 3 tick bites. He had a 39°C fever, severe headaches, and arthromyalgia. Results of a
physical examination were normal. Laboratory findings showed leukopenia (1,860 leukocytes/µL, with 35% polymorphonuclear leukocytes, 49%
lymphocytes), marked thrombopenia with 36,000 platelets/mm3, elevated liver enzyme levels (aspartate aminotransferase 70 IU/L, alanine
aminotransferase 77 IU/L, γ-glutamyl transferase 161 IU/L, and alkaline phosphatase 86 IU/L), and elevated C-reactive protein (124 mg/L).
Tick-transmitted disease serologic results and blood cultures were negative. A thin peripheral blood smear stained with May-Grünwald-Giemsa
showed intraerythrocytic Babesia spp. (parasitemia level 0.23%) (Figure 2). The patient received azithromycin 500 mg on day 1 then 250
mg/day plus atovaquone, and his illness rapidly resolved. Two samples of serum and whole blood were collected in sodium citrate vacutainer
tubes on June 16 and July 21 and sent to the veterinary laboratory of Nantes for B. divergens serologic analysis (indirect immunofluorescent
assay by using the gerbil-derived strain B. divergens Rouen F5 antigen), erythrocyte cultures, and DNA extraction (Wizard genomic DNA
Purification kit; Promega, Madison, WI, USA) for PCR Babesia spp (9). . Two trophozoites of Babesia spp. in 1 erythrocyte from case-patient
2 (original magnification ×1,000, May-Grünwald-Giemsa stain). Serologic results and cultures remained negative for both patients. However,
serologic analysis is neither sensitive nor specific (7,10), and cultures probably were inhibited because blood samples were collected after
doxycycline or azithromycin proguanil treatments. The PCR for Babesia spp. is specific for an 18S rDNA 540-base long region of a variable
part of the gene with Bab primers GF2 and GR2, was performed (9,11). Results were positive for patient 1. The sequencing of PCR products
showed 100% homology with B. divergens human strains GenBank accession nos. FJ944822 and FJ944823 (9). PCR results were negative for patient
2. Samples from patient 2 were collected 1 month after treatment with atovaquone-proguanil, and the blood smear was negative. However, the
clinical and biological data and the observation of trophozoites (especially 2 trophozoites in 1 erythrocyte) in the blood smear from
patient 2 confirmed by a reference laboratory led us to strongly suspect babesiosis (Figure 2). In this case, the Babesia species remains
unknown, and a non–B. divergens species cannot be ruled out, although it is rarer. Our cases highlight that, in Europe, babesiosis can occur
in healthy persons and manifest as moderate illness. The rarity of other reported cases in nonimmunocompromised patients in Europe may be
related to the difficulty of diagnosing babesiosis. A stained thin blood smear is rarely performed in Europe after tick bite in healthy
patients. The difficulty of detecting intra-erythrocytic forms of babesia coupled with frequent low levels of parasitemia, may result in
accurate diagnoses, although acridine orange and fluorescent microscopy may assist in the detection of parasites (1). Other diagnostic
tests, such as PCR and serologic analysis, are not routinely performed in France and require a reference laboratory (8). Babesiosis,
although difficult to diagnose, needs to be diagnosed for various reasons: 1) without treatment, babesiosis can lead to severe illness; 2)
the disease can persist for a long period without symptoms, which could lead to posttransfusion cases (12); and 3) effective specific
treatments are available (atovaquone plus azithromycin, or for severe cases, clindamycin and quinine) (2). These drugs are not usually
prescribed in febrile tick-bite cases; doxycycline is the usual drug used to treat tick-borne bacterial diseases. Moreover, patients with
moderate infection could benefit from an atovaquone plus azithromycin regimen, which is better tolerated (13). Previous serosurveys from
tick-exposed patients or healthy blood donors in France (7), Germany (14), and Switzerland (15) have demonstrated antibodies against Babesia
spp. antigens ranging from 1.0% to 11.5%. These data suggest that Babesia spp. infections probably occur more frequently in Europe than
previously believed and may affect healthy patients. Although most patients may be asymptomatic, our 2 cases demonstrate that babesiosis can
result in a serious influenza-like syndrome in previously healthy patients. In Europe, babesiosis is probably underdiagnosed; thus, we
suggest that when patients have influenza-like or malaria-like syndromes after confirmed or suspected tick bites, a blood smear be performed
regardless of whether the patient is immunocompromised. Blood smear can identify not only Babesia spp. infection but also Anaplasma spp.
infection, another emerging and underdiagnosed tick-borne illness. In cases of new European Babesia spp. infections, a deeper
characterization of the strains by erythrocytes cultures and standardized PCR, as well as a systematic study of the patients’ immune
systems, should be undertaken to enable a better understanding of this disease. Suggested citation for this article: Martinot M, Zadeh MM,
Hansmann Y, Grawey I, Christmann D, Aguillon S, et al. Babesiosis in immunocompetent patients, Europe. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the
Internet]. 2011 Jan [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1701.100737 Dr Martinot is a physician at the Department of Internal Medicine
and Rheumatology, Hospital Pasteur, Colmar, France. His specialty is infectious diseases and primary research interests are tick-borne
diseases, procalcitonin, and infections in immunocompromised patients (HIV).
