The expression non Hodgkin lymphoma is used to cover a wide group of lymphoid neoplasias unrelated to Hodgkin's disease, due to the huge
histological variety and the tendency to affect organs and tissues that does not physiologically contain lymphoid cells. The intraoral
location is not frequent (3 - 5 percent of cases) and the initial manifestations of the disease rarely take place here. We describe the case
of a 73 years old Italian caucasian male who came to our attention with a tongue lesion. The clinical manifestation was macroglossia and
bleeding, probably deriving from the tongue-bite injuries. The patient had been complaining of dyspnea for 48 hours. A tongue affected by
non-Hodgkin's lymphoma rarely occurs. In spite of this, this possibility should always be considered for the differential diagnosis of
benign and malignant lesions affecting such area. A rapid diagnostic assessment, together with an adequate histopathologic verification, are
indeed essential to improve the management and the prognosis of this disease. Lymphomas represent the third most frequent neoplasia on a
worldwide scale and constitute 3% of malignant tumors. Their prevalence progressively grows at the annual rate of 3%. The WHO classification
of tumors, which result from the hematopoietic tissues and the lymphoid tissues, allows to distinguish lymphoid neoplasias, according to the
cell line and the differentiation, into: • Hodgkin's lymphoma; • B-cell neoplasia; • peripheral B-cell neoplasia; • B-cell proliferations of
uncertain malignant potential; • T-cell neoplasia; • Peripheral T/NK-cell neoplasia; • T-cell proliferations of uncertain malignant
potential . The main histopathologic feature of Hodgkin's lymphoma is the presence of Reed-Stenberg cells (binucleated or multinucleated,
with big and clear nuclei and intensely colored "owl's eyes" nucleoli). The above-mentioned Reed-Stenberg cells are not found in the so-
called non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a category that include all the other histopathologic entities that are not related to Hodgkin's disease .
The considerable histological variety of non-Hodgkin's lymphomas involves significant classification problems, although from a morphological
point of view, we can identify two main forms of NHL: • Nodular (or follicular) forms, characterized by a regular nodular pattern. They
affect the whole lymph node or the extranodal area; • Widespread forms, in which neoplastic cells are uniformly distributed on the affected
tissue . From a clinical point of view and in almost all cases, Hodgkin's lymphoma is a nodular lesion that rarely involves the extranodal
areas, whereas NHL frequently have an extranodal onset. In addition, whereas Hodgkin's disease spreads in the nodal groups in a contiguous
fashion, in NHL the nodal evolution proceeds randomly; this means that it does not proceed in a contiguous fashion, but is instead
unforeseeable (obviously, this aspect has important repercussions on the therapeutic protocol). It is interesting to notice a geographic
variability between the North and the South of Italy, with a ratio of 2:1 in favor of northern regions. Apart from age, there are several
risk factors associated to NHL: 1) Primary or acquired immunodeficiency ; 2) Autoimmune diseases (Sjögren's Syndrome, LES, AR, Coeliac
disease) , especially if treated with immunosuppressant drugs; 3) Infective agents, such as: - Herpetic viruses (EBV, associated to the
African form of Burkitt's lymphoma , HHV8, associated to Kaposi's Sarcoma and found in some forms of NHL in HIV-positive subjects); - HCV,
whose association with non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is considered to be very high in several European countries with a high prevalence of this
infection) ; - H. Pylori, associated to peptic ulcer and gastric MALT lymphoma ; 4) Professional exposure to noxious chemical agents ; 5)
Hereditary factors . Chromosomal translocations play a crucial role in the pathogenesis of NHL, determining oncogenes activation or the
inactivation of oncosuppressor genes, with the consequent malfunction of the mechanism of genomic rearrangement in the lymphoid cells . The
primary sites most frequently affected are: - Sovraclevear and laterocervical lymph nodes (regarding nodal sites) - Extranodal sites (20-30%
of cases) such as Waldeyer's ring, the gastroenteric tract, the skin and the subcutaneous tissue. In the successive stages, there is the
frequent involvement of the bone marrow and spleen, causing splenomegaly, which is almost constant in the immunoblastic form. A severe
splenomegaly usually indicates a leukemic progression . At the level of the oral cavity, they can originate from the lymphoid tissue
associated to mucosa (Waldeyer's ring) or can be infiltrations of non-lymphoid tissue. The most affected sites are tonsils (55% of oral
cases), palate (30% of cases), genial mucosa (2% of cases). There are, instead, sporadic manifestations affecting the tongue (2% of cases),
the buccal floor (2% of cases) and the retromolar trigone (2% of cases) . From a clinical point of view, they manifest themselves with an
asymptomatic tumefaction, often associated to mucosa ulceration. The most common type in the head-neck area is the big cells type . A 73
years old caucasian male patient came to the authors' attention while they were providing an emergency first aid service; the patient
presented hypertension on treatment with ACE-inhibitors, chronic atrial fibrillation on treatment with oral anticoagulants, and diabetes
mellitus on treatment with biguanides: the clinical manifestation was bleeding, probably deriving from the tongue-bite injuries. The patient
had been complaining of dyspnea for 48 hours, caused by macroglossia. The clinical documentation that the patient provided, allowed the
Authors to identify the following clinical history: in the previous month, following the progressive volumetric increase of the tongue, he
had undergone neck CT scan with contrast agents, that showed a volumetric increase of the tongue, which was occupied by a solid lesion of
around 6 cm, contiguous to the muscles of the oral floor. In the submandibular and laterocervical area, there were also some lymph nodes of
15 mm in diameter at the most. The patient referred that he had previously undergone surgery, which was planned by another clinician, as
inferred from the discharge form. In general anesthesia together with an infiltration of local anesthetic, the clinician performed a
losangic biopsy (4 × 4 cm), an extemporary histological exam and suture: the intraoperatory examination showed extensive lymphoid
proliferation, composed of cells of big and middle size, also affecting the skeletal muscle. The medical report indicated an extensive NHL.
In order to make an accurate diagnosis, the patient received: - CT scans of the thorax, abdomen and pelvis, reporting enlarged lymph nodes
of 10 mm in diameter in the subcarinal area and in the right pulmonary hilum; - Hematologic consultation and osteomedullary biopsy. After
about 30 days since the first surgical removal of the tongue lesion, the patient came back at our clinic complaining severe dyspneic
symptoms. Therefore the patient was immediately received by the Authors, who suspected a possible relapse of the primary lesion. The
extraoral exam revealed a hard tumefaction of a normal color in the left submandibular region (Figures 1 &2). Hard tumefaction of a normal
color in the left submandibular region. Neck tumefaction affecting the same tongue's zone side. The intraoral exam revealed a considerable
volumetric increase of the tongue (Figures 3 &4), which was of a red-violet color, with well-delimited necrotic-ulcerative areas at the
level of the left margin and left region, and with bleeding probably caused by the tongue-bite injury. Considerable volumetric increase of
the tongue. A picture showing the entire involvement of the emi-tongue on the left side. The tongue was painful and woody to palpation. 72
hours later, a fiber-scopic examination of the larynx showed ab-extrinsic compression of the posterior wall of the trachea, with reduction
of the tracheal lumen; after the worsening of breathing, other colleagues performed an emergency inferior tracheostomy and provided medical
advice. The expression non-Hodgkin's lymphoma is used to cover a wide group of lymphoid neoplasias unrelated to Hodgkin's disease, due to
the huge histological variety and the tendency to affect organs and tissues that does not physiologically contain lymphoid cells. The
extranodal site is the primary site of disease in 20-30% of cases; in particular, the most affected areas are the gastroenteric tract and
the head-neck area (in descending order) . The intra-oral location is not frequent (3-5% of cases) and the initial manifestations of the
disease rarely take place here . The most affected sites are tonsils (55% of oral cases), palate (30% of cases), genial mucosa (2% of
cases). There are, instead, sporadic manifestations affecting the tongue (2% of cases), the buccal floor (2% of cases) and the retromolar
trigone (2% of cases) . In addition to the small number of cases reported in literature, this disease is also characterized by few signs and
symptoms, and a frequent and dangerous resemblance to benign orodental conditions. Obviously, these features are potentially responsible for
an incorrect or late diagnosis and an underestimation of the pathology, thus drastically worsening the prognosis. The prognosis, in fact,
strictly depends on the histologic type and is undoubtedly correlated to a rapid diagnosis. A tongue affected by non-Hodgkin's lymphoma
rarely occurs . In spite of this, this possibility should always be considered for the differential diagnosis of benign and malignant
lesions affecting such area. A rapid diagnostic assessment, together with an adequate histopathologic verification, are indeed essential to
improve the management and the prognosis of this disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. FI: performed the emergency treatment of this case. MT: drafted the manuscript and
reviewed the literature. FMA: participated in the follow-up of this patient. MM: participated in the design of this case study and in the
follow-up of this patient. ADI: revised the literature sources. AMI: documented this case report with digital pictures. GD: participated in
the follow-up of this patient. All the authors read and approved the final manuscript
