Unprovoked superficial thrombophlebitis and subsequent venous thromboembolism are well-described albeit rare presenting features of advanced
visceral malignancy that often manifest too late for curative intervention to be beneficial. We present the first reported case of early
gastric carcinoma presenting with these paraneoplastic phenomena in an otherwise healthy farmer. The early presentation allowed for a
curative partial gastrectomy, which itself was complicated by the presence of a deep vein thrombosis extending into the inferior vena cava.
Fortunately, stabilization of the clot allowed for surgery to proceed without the need for a caval filter. The patient was referred for
adjuvant chemotherapy and has since made an excellent recovery. This case provides new evidence for the presentation of superficial
thrombophlebitis in early gastric carcinoma and the potential for curative surgery in such instances. A high index of suspicion and a prompt
diagnostic workup are essential for timely planning and execution of surgery in these early albeit rare presentations. Unlike the well-
established association of spontaneous venous thromboembolism (VTE) with occult neoplasia, single episodes of unprovoked superficial
thrombophlebitis have been suggested not to be associated with malignancy . In contrast, the historically significant Trousseau syndrome
(i.e. migratory thrombophlebitis) is a well-described association of advanced malignancy - particularly of pancreatic and pulmonary tumours
. The mechanism of this paraneoplastic phenomenon is unknown but has been linked to the late stage of these tumours at presentation, which
in all reported cases to date, has precluded any form of curative intervention in these patients . A 41-year-old farmer with no significant
past medical history presented to Casualty with acute, severe pain over the medial aspect of his right leg and thigh. Examination revealed
exquisitely tender cord-like thickening along the distribution of the long saphenous vein. The patient firmly denied external trauma but an
infective cause of the inflammation was presumed 'until proven otherwise'. Intravenous penicillin and flucloxacillin were administered but
the inflammation persisted for a further three days. During this time, routine blood tests revealed a microcytic anemia (hemoglobin 9.3
g/dL, mean corpuscular volume 70 fL) of unclear etiology, suggesting the need for an esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) to exclude upper
gastrointestinal tract bleeding. Concurrently, acute swelling of his right calf prompted a duplex ultrasound scan (USS), which revealed a
deep vein thrombosis (DVT) with vague suggestion of extension up to the iliac veins. The patient was therefore switched from his
prophylactic regimen of low molecular weight heparin (LMWH; 5000 units of subcutaneous dalteparin sodium, once daily) to a therapeutic
regimen (15000 units, once daily). The EGD unexpectedly revealed an annular growth around the pylorus partially obstructing the gastric
outlet. Biopsy at endoscopy revealed a primary gastric adenocarcinoma. A contrast CT scan demonstrated mucosal confinement of the tumour
with no evidence of regional lymph node involvement or distant metastasis (Figure 1). In addition, the CT confirmed thrombosis within the
right femoral vein with extension into the lower inferior vena cava (IVC) to just below the renal veins (Figure 2), as previously suggested
on duplex USS. Clinical signs of an obstructed IVC were also apparent in the form of dilated superficial lower abdominal veins and a
positive Harvey's sign. Nevertheless, the normal renal function and absence of microscopic haematuria supported non-involvement of the renal
veins by the DVT. Contrast computed tomography reconstruction illustrating pyloric tumour (arrows) with consequent gastric outlet
obstruction. No regional lymphadenopathy or distant metastases were noted. Contrast computed tomography of the pelvis demonstrating
thrombosis (black arrow) within the lower inferior vena cava, just before the abdominal aortic bifurcation (white arrow). In anticipation of
surgery, anticoagulation was maintained with therapeutic-dose LMWH. A vascular surgical consult advised against the placement of an IVC
filter as the relatively prolonged confinement of the DVT and therapeutic heparinization made further extension or dislodgement unlikely. A
partial gastrectomy was performed with added precaution taken during dissection around the IVC to avoid thrombus dislodgement. Histology of
the resected specimen confirmed a diffuse-type adenocarcinoma with marked acute and chronic inflammation but no lymph node involvement (i.e.
T2N0MX or Stage I disease). The patient was subsequently referred for adjuvant chemotherapy and at 6-month follow-up, displayed no signs or
symptoms of recurrent disease. Although the natural progression of our patient's superficial thrombophlebitis cannot be extrapolated (i.e.
to ascertain if it was truly isolated or migratory), this is nonetheless the first reported case of early gastric cancer presenting with
this phenomenon and subsequently amenable to curative surgery. The other significant feature of our case was the development of DVT, which
is similarly unusual in the early stages of malignancy , and occurred despite prophylactic heparinization at admission. The propagation of
DVT to the IVC initially posed a challenge to the surgical management of our patient's gastric carcinoma, as it was unclear whether the
risks of deploying a caval filter were warranted prior to major surgery. A recent prospective study by Birkmeyer et al involving 6376
patients revealed that prophylactic IVC filters for gastric surgery did not reduce the risk of pulmonary embolism (PE) but resulted in
filter-related complications such as filter migration (e.g. into the heart or pulmonary arteries), insertion-site thrombosis and IVC
thrombosis . A study by Deguchi et al similarly demonstrated that the addition of IVC filters to anticoagulant therapy did not significantly
reduce the risks of perioperative patients with VTE prior to surgery . It also described occurrences such as major filter migration,
persistent attached thrombosis and connection failure. Apart from filter dislocation, complications such as catheter fracture, catheter-
related infection and critical IVC occlusion by massive thrombus post-tumour resection (i.e. necessitating open IVC ligation) have also been
reported with the use of temporary filters . Nevertheless, it is recommended that when the use of such filters is imperative, they should be
removed as soon as the risk of VTE has passed . We were reminded that proximal propagation of stable DVTs after two weeks was highly
unlikely, thereby negating the risks of filter insertion. The evidence supporting this includes a study by MacDonald et al, in which 91% of
all DVT propagation occurred within 2 weeks of initial diagnosis, leading to the authors' suggestion that follow-up after 2 weeks may be
unnecessary . Similarly, Masuda et al suggested a low likelihood of clot propagation after the first 2 weeks from DVT diagnosis, suggesting
serial duplex imaging weekly for the first 2 weeks, with an optional repeat scan at 4 weeks to confirm clot lysis . In slight contrast, the
most recent evidence by Lautz et al demonstrated that 43% of DVT propagation (or PE) occurred within the initial 2 weeks; and 71% within the
first 3 months . In our case, clinical evidence (e.g. lack of haematuria or altered urine output which may have indicated clot extension to
renal veins) and contrast CT imaging added to the reassurance of clot stability. The stability of our patient's thrombus is very likely
attributable to the full therapeutic heparinization administered upon DVT diagnosis, the efficacy of which has been proven on many
occasions. A study of DVT outcomes by Gillet et al showed no VTE extension or recurrence within the therapeutic anticoagulation period of 1
month, and also within the subsequent 2 months . Schwarz et al demonstrated a DVT propagation rate of 0% (i.e. despite a recurrence rate of
1.9% at 3 weeks) with therapeutic heparinization and compression therapy for 10 days, versus a 25% rate of DVT progression with compression
alone (P = 0.0002) . In support of this, Lautz's study showed a VTE recurrence rate of 30% in patients receiving no anticoagulation, 27% in
those receiving only prophylactic anticoagulation, and 12% in those receiving therapeutic anticoagulation (P = 0.0003). Together with a
previous history of VTE, lack of therapeutic anticoagulation was shown to be an independent predictor of VTE recurrence. Even during follow-
up, therapeutic anticoagulation resulted in a DVT resolution rate of 61.2%, compared to 40.0% for prophylactic anticoagulation and 41.0% for
no anticoagulation (P = 0.003) . Considering our patient's thrombophlebitic presentation, his initiation upon prophylactic LMWH may have
been an oversight of the admitting medical team. Nonetheless, the degree to which he would have benefited from therapeutic heparinization
during the first three days of admission remains unknown. In conclusion, this case provides new evidence for the presentation of superficial
thrombophlebitis in early gastric carcinoma and the potential for curative surgery in such instances. A high index of suspicion and a prompt
diagnostic workup are essential for timely planning and execution of surgery in these early albeit rare presentations. For resectable
malignancy associated with DVT extending up to the IVC, we support a conservative approach (i.e. therapeutic heparinization) until surgery,
provided that surveillance can demonstrate adequate clot stabilization over two weeks. Invariably, if DVT occurs on a suspected background
of malignancy, therapeutic-dose heparin should be used as the sole means of anticoagulation until the need for surgery is excluded (or
surgery is performed), before warfarin is commenced. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. MIMdZ and DNS were responsible for delivering patient care. SGT and AHMP contributed
equally towards to drafting of the manuscript while MIMdZ and DNS provided overall supervision and edited the final version of the
manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2482/11/1/prepub The authors acknowledge all the nurses who took care of our patient.
