We describe two cases of large solitary luteinized follicle cyst of pregnancy and puerperium (LSLFCPP) with new clinicopathologic findings.
The first case occurred in a 40-year old woman who was found to have a left ovarian mass during the third trimester of pregnancy. The
patient delivered a full term healthy female infant via caesarean section. The ovarian mass was removed by oophorectomy. The specimen showed
a unilocular, thin-walled, clear fluid filled cyst measuring 15 × 12 × 5 cm. Microscopically, the cyst was lined by single to multiple
layers of luteinized cells with mainly small, round and regular nuclei and focally enlarged, bizarre, and hyperchromatic nuclei. Occasional
mitotic figures were seen. The cyst wall showed marked edema and nests of luteinized cells that were morphologically similar to the cyst
lining cells. Groups of lesional cells were surrounded by reticulin fibers. The patient has been healthy without disease after 7 years. The
second patient was a 29-year old pregnant woman who was found to have a right ovarian cyst by ultrasound at 14-week gestation. She then
presented with preterm labor at 33-week gestation and delivered a healthy female infant via caesarean section. A right salpingo-oophorectomy
was performed. Gross inspection of the specimen revealed a unilocular, brown mucoid fluid filled cyst measuring 14 × 11 × 9 cm. The cyst
surfaces were smooth, and the cyst wall exhibited marked edema. Microscopic examination showed features similar to the first case: cyst
lined by luteinized cells with focal large nuclei, scattered nests of luteinized cells in the edematous fibrous wall, and reticulin fibers
surrounding large nests of lesional cells. No mitoses, however, were identified in the second case. The patient has been well without
disease 1 year after surgery. These two cases contribute to a better understanding of LSLFCPP. Our case in the 40-year old patient is the
first to show mitotic figures in LSLFCPP and suggests that the presence of occasional mitoses should not exclude a diagnosis of LSLFCPP. The
lesion in the second patient caused preterm labor. Nevertheless, absence of disease recurrence in our patients demonstrates a benign nature
of LSLFCPP. Ovarian tumors and tumor-like masses during pregnancy are uncommon, with an incidence of about 1% in one large study consisting
of 8420 patients (1). Most neoplasms are benign, and about 4% are malignant (1). Tumor-like lesions include pregnancy luteoma, hyperreactio
luteinalis, intrafollicular granulosa cell proliferation, hilus cell hyperplasia, ectopic decidua, and large solitary luteinized follicle
cyst of pregnancy and puerperium (LSLFCPP) (1-2). These lesions can simulate neoplasms by clinical, gross, and microscopic examinations. Of
particular interest is LSLFCPP for its enormous size and confusion with neoplasms. LSLFCPP is a rare lesion; only about 10 cases have been
reported in the literature. We now describe the clinicopathologic features of LSLFCPP in two patients. This was a 40 year old, premigravida
patient who initially presented to the infertility clinic at our institution for desired pregnancy. Her past medical history was significant
for primary infertility. A successful intrauterine pregnancy was achieved via intrauterine insemination. Due to advanced maternal age, the
patient underwent extensive prenatal testing and monitoring through the course of her pregnancy. All tests were normal, with the exception
of a left ovarian mass that was incidentally detected by ultrasound during the third trimester. The patient was closely followed without
prenatal surgical intervention. Her pregnancy advanced uneventfully, and labor commenced at 40-week gestation. Due to failure to progress, a
caesarean section was performed resulting in the delivery of a healthy female infant. At the time of caesarean section, a left oophorectomy
was performed. The specimen was received fresh for intraoperative pathology consultation. On gross examination, it consisted of an intact,
unilocular, thin-walled cyst measuring 15 × 12 × 5 cm and filled with clear fluid. Both the outer and the inner surfaces of the cyst were
smooth. The cyst wall ranged from 0.1 cm to 0.8 cm in thickness and showed marked edema. Based on the gross findings, an intraoperative
interpretation of benign ovarian cyst was made. No frozen section was performed. On subsequent microscopic examination, the cyst was lined
by single to multiple layers of large cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (Figure 1A). Most cells showed small, round and regular
nuclei, but focal cells displayed enlarged and bizarre nuclei with hyperchromasia and occasional mitosis (Figure 1B). The outer fibrous wall
of the cyst showed edema and nests of luteinized cells that were morphologically similar to the cyst lining cells. Special stain showed
reticulin fibers around nests of luteinized cells in the cyst lining (Figure 1C) and in the outer cyst wall. Adjacent residual ovarian
tissue exhibited a corpus luteum and numerous cystic follicles. Microscopic features of ovarian cyst in case 1. The cyst is lined by several
layers of luteinized cells showing focal marked nuclear pleomorphism (A) and occasional mitotic figures (B). Reticulin fibers surround nests
of lesional cells (C). Hematoxylin and eosin stain in A and B, and reticulin stain in C. Magnifications: ×400 in A, B, and C. The patient
has been free from disease for 7 years after surgery. The patient was a 29-year old pregnant woman who previously delivered through
caesarean sections two healthy full term infants. Her past medical history was significant for gastroesophageal reflux disease, asthma,
obesity, gallstones, and smoking. Ultrasound at 14-week gestation revealed a right ovarian cyst. At 33-week gestation, the patient presented
with preterm labor. With repeat caesarean section, a healthy female infant was delivered. At the time of caesarean section, a right
salpingo-oophorectomy was performed after approximately 2 liters of fluid were drained from the ovarian cyst. We received the specimen for
intraoperative consultation. Gross inspection revealed a cystic lesion measuring 14 × 11 × 9 cm. The external surface was maroon and smooth
with prominent vascular markings. Sectioning showed a unilocular cyst filled with brownish mucoid fluid. The cyst wall measured from 0.5 cm
to 1.0 cm in thickness and showed severe edema. The inner surface of the cyst was flat and displayed scattered patches of hemorrhage but no
solid or papillary tumor was identified. Attached to the cyst was a residual normal appearing ovary measuring 3 × 2.5 × 1.5 cm and an
unremarkable segment of fallopian tube measuring 3 × 0.5 cm. The gross findings indicated a benign ovarian cyst, and thus no frozen section
was performed. On microscopic examination, the cyst was lined by one to several layers of luteinized cells that exhibited abundant
eosinophilic cytoplasm with focal vacuolization. Most nuclei were small and round but focal nuclei were irregular and enlarged (Figure 2A).
No mitosis was identified. The outer cyst wall consisted of edematous fibrous tissue and scattered nests of luteinized cells that
morphologically resembled the cyst lining cells (Figure 2B). Special stain showed reticulin fibers surrounding large nests of luteinized
cells in the cyst lining (Figure 2C) and in the outer cyst wall. Remnant ovarian tissue showed a corpus luteum and multiple cystic
follicles. The segment of fallopian tube was unremarkable. Histologic characteristics of ovarian cyst in case 2. The cyst is lined by
multiple layers of luteinized cells showing focal nuclear pleomorphism (A). The outer cyst wall shows nests of luteinized cells (B). Nests
of lesional cells are surrounded by reticulin fibers (C). Hematoxylin and eosin stain in A and B, and reticulin stain in C. Magnifications:
×400x in A and C, and ×100 in B. The patient has been well without disease after 1 year since surgery. Our two cases of LSLFCPP demonstrated
many clinicopathologic features similar to those described in the literature (3-6), including a unilateral, unilocular cyst and the presence
of focal bizarre nuclei. However, our case in the 40-year old patient was the first to show mitotic figures. This finding indicates that the
presence of focal mitoses should not exclude a diagnosis of LSLFCPP. Although most patients with LSLFCPP do not show complications (3), our
second patient experienced preterm labor at 33-week gestation. As examination of placenta and review of prenatal history did not show other
causes of preterm labor in this patient who previously delivered two infants at full term, LSLFCPP was most likely the culprit of the
patient's preterm labor. Our cases demonstrate that LSLFCPP is benign as the patients have been free of disease since surgery for 7 and 1
year, respectively. The pathogenesis of LSLFCPP is unclear. Its occurrence during pregnancy suggests a role of human chorionic gonadotropin
(hCG). This association is supported by the presence of numerous cystic follicles, which are known to be induced by hCG, in the remnant
ovaries of our cases. The literature, however, has described several cases of LSLFCPP occurring late in the puerperium when hCG levels are
low (3). Thus hCG may not be the only contributing factor. Although lined by luteinized cells, the cyst is unlikely to originate from a
corpus luteum since a separate corpus luteum was seen in the remnant ovaries of our cases and in the contralateral ovary of another case
(3). The presence of reticulin fibers around groups of lesional cells supports a granulosa cell origin from a follicle. The major
differential diagnoses include the unilocular cystic granulosa cell tumors of both the adult and the juvenile types. Although LSLFCPP is
indistinguishable grossly from unilocular cystic granulosa cell tumor, they differ in microscropic features. Unlike LSLFCPP that show
luteinized cells with focal bizarre nuclei, adult granulosa cell tumor is composed of a monotonous population of granulosa cells usually
without luteinization and bizarre nuclei (7). Furthermore, nuclear grooves and Call-Exner bodies are seen in granulosa cell tumor but not in
LSLFCPP. Juvenile granulosa cell tumor may create a greater diagnostic problem as the neoplastic cells often exhibit abundant eosinophilic
cytoplasm and occasional bizarre nuclei. However, juvenile granulosa cell tumor is mitotically active while LSLFCPP shows absent to
occasional mitotic figures. The findings in our two cases contribute to a better understanding of LSLFCPP. Our case in the 40-year old
patient is the first to show mitoses in LSLFCPP and indicates that the presence of occasional mitoses should not exclude the diagnosis of
LSLFCPP. The lesion in the second patient caused preterm labor. Nevertheless, absence of disease recurrence in our patients demonstrates
that LSLFCPP is benign. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. ML collected case information and participated in
manuscript writing. SK collected case information and reviewed manuscript. CZ collected case information and wrote the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
