An osteosarcoma of cardiac origin is extremely rare, and a comprehensive description of MR imaging (MRI) findings of cardiac osteosarcoma
and its metastasis in the femur have not been reported in the literature. We present a case of cardiac osteosarcoma in a 47-year-old woman
and its metastasis to the femur, focusing on the description of MRI findings of the cardiac and metastatic bony osteosarcoma with a
histopathologic correlation. Primary cardiac tumors have a reported incidence of 0.002-0.3% in autopsy series. Cardiac osteosarcomas are
very rare, accounting for less than 10% of primary malignant cardiac tumors (1, 2). An osteosarcoma is a malignant osteoid or bone producing
tumor. Most reports in the radiology literature describe the characteristic CT imaging findings of osteosarcomas as mineralized lesions (3).
However, its MRI findings have not been described in detail. Herein, we present a case of a 47-year-old woman with primary cardiac
osteosarcoma which metastasized to the femur, 18 months after tumor resection and we describe MRI findings of the primary cardiac tumor and
its bone metastasis with histopathologic correlation. A 47-year-old woman was admitted to the hospital with gradually worsening dyspnea,
orthopnea, and nocturnal paroxysmal dyspnea. A non-contrast chest CT (Mx 8000 CT scanner, Philips) revealed bilateral pulmonary congestion
and pleural effusion with left atrial enlargement and a low-attenuated mass in the left atrium (LA). Neither distinct calcification within
the mass nor mediastinal lymph node enlargement was noted. MR images (Intera 1.5T, Philips) demonstrated a 46 × 41 mm, well defined mass
with a broad base at the posterolateral wall of the LA. The mass showed mildly heterogeneous and high signal intensity (SI) on double
inversion-recovery T1-weighted images (T1WI), with fat saturation (Fig. 1A). In addition, triple inversion recovery T2-weighted images
(T2WI) with fat saturation and cine-cardiac images showed heterogeneously high SI (Fig. 1B, C). On delayed contrast-enhancement MR images,
the mass was heterogeneously enhanced (Fig. 1D). The patient underwent surgical removal of the mass, which was found to be smooth, well-
encapsulated with focal necrosis and hemorrhage (Fig. 1E). Histologically, the tumor was mainly composed of atypical spindle cells with high
nuclear density and frequent mitosis in the background of abundant collagen and had foci of hemorrhage and coagulative necrosis. In
addition, the presence of minimal osteoid deposition foci confirmed the tumor as a fibroblastic osteosarcoma (Fig. 1F). At that time, a bone
scan was performed to identify any primary bone lesion or bone metastasis. The result was negative and, therefore, osteosarcoma of bone-
origin and the presence of bone metastasis were ruled out. The patient was further treated with adjuvant chemotherapy and radiotherapy.
Periodic check-ups with chest CT revealed no evidence of regional recurrence. Eighteen months after surgery, the patient complained of right
hip pain and consequently underwent a hip MRI. The examination revealed a mass at the right femoral neck. The lesion was isointense to
muscle on T1WI (Fig. 1G) and showed a heterogeneously high SI on T2WI (Fig. 1H). The mass was well-demarcated, with a peripheral low SI rim
on both T1WI and T2WI. Gadolinium-enhanced T1WI showed heterogeneous enhancement with central non-enhancing portions (Fig. 1I). A bone scan
using technetium-99m (Vertex™ V60, Philips, Best, The Netherlands) was performed to evaluate the presence of other bone lesions, and showed
an increased uptake at the known lesion in the right femur and no other pathologic uptake. A biopsy and following histological analysis
confirmed the lesions as metastases from the previously resected cardiac tumor on the basis of histologic similarity between them (Fig. 1J).
Most cardiac tumors are metastatic tumors which are 20-40 times more common than primary tumors. About 75% of all primary cardiac tumors are
benign and the remaining 25% being primary malignant tumors. The vast majority (95%) of primary malignant tumors are sarcomas and
osteosarcomas, which are relatively quite rare, accounting for less than 10% primary cardiac malignant tumors (1, 2). Primary cardiac
osteosarcomas exhibit a predilection for the LA, whereas the majority of malignant cardiac tumors, such as metastatic tumors, angiosarcomas
or lymphomas, commonly arise in the right atrium (4). Due to its left atrial location, patients with cardiac osteosarcomas generally present
as congestive heart failure with respiratory symptoms as in our case (5). Moreover, they tend to have a broad base of attachment, at a
location away from the fossa ovalis and invading the surrounding structures, such as the mitral valve or pulmonary veins (2). Osteosarcomas
are a heterogeneous group of tumors containing malignant, bone-producing cells. Histologically, the tumor contains variable amounts of
spindle-cells, osteoid, bone, or cartilage. Depending on the predominant component, osteosarcomas can be subgrouped as osteoblastic,
chondroblastic, or fibroblastic (3). Macroscopically, the tumor may be well circumscribed and pseudoencapsulated, or infiltrate into the
surrounding tissues and calcification, necrosis, or hemorrhage within the tumor can be seen (5, 6). The characteristic CT findings of
cardiac osteosarcomas have been reported as a low attenuation mass with dense mineralization (3, 7). Moreover, osteosarcomas often have
dense calcification to form hardy stone masses or may also have minimal calcification in the early stage. However, a tumor lacking the
identifiable calcification on CT presents as a nonspecific soft tissue mass as it did in our case, which made us miss the osteosarcoma as
part of our differential diagnosis. As the microscopic examination showed, the tumor had too minimal a portion of osteoid deposition to
reveal calcification on CT. The first report of MRI findings of cardiac osteosarcomas was presented in 2001 by Yamagishi et al. (8) in which
the tumor appeared as a huge mass of heterogeneous SI in the LA. The report focused on the role of MRI in differentiating malignant from
benign tumors based on a broad-based attachment and invasive features. Since then, a few cases have been reported with MR images, however,
with no detailed description of MRI findings and no contrast-enhancement study included. According to previous reports, cardiac
osteosarcomas appear to be irregularly lobulated and may have variable heterogeneous SI on T1WI and heterogeneously high SI on T2WI (2, 4,
6, 7, 9). In our case, the tumor showed mildly heterogeneous and high SI on both T1WI and T2WI. In addition, the heterogeneity of the signal
on T2WI was more definite on cine images with long echo time (Fig. 1C). This heterogeneity is attributed to the heterogeneous histologic
composition since some portion of the tumor was composed of spindle cells with collagen material, while the other portion consisted of
necrosis and hemorrhage. It is known that hypercellular areas are well-enhanced after gadolinium administration and show high SI on T2WI,
whereas low SI on T2WI corresponds to hypocellular areas (10). Our case showed heterogeneous enhancement and the areas of enhancement are
well-matched to the areas of high SI on T2WI, suggesting hypercellular areas. As discussed earlier, the tumor showed no calcification which
would have shown low SI on all pulse sequences, due to minimal osteoid formation discernable only on histologic examination. Primary cardiac
osteosarcomas are very aggressive with a high frequency of recurrence and metastasis. Metastasis was observed at various sites including
skin, lung, liver, bones, brain and adrenal glands (5). Our case also revealed metastasis at the femur, although the patient underwent
chemotherapy and radiotherapy after surgical removal of the tumor. A comparison of the metastatic bone lesion with the cardiac lesion
indicated less heterogeneity and denser enhancement with the lesser portion of non-enhancement which meant lesser extent of central necrosis
in the metastatic bone lesion. The peripheral rim of low SI on both T1WI and T2WI showed enhancement on gadolinium-enhanced images. This
finding is considered to correspond to a fibrous pseudocapsule, which has been reported in some extraosseous osteosarcomas (10). We present
a case of primary cardiac osteosarcoma with a detailed description of MRI findings and histopathologic correlation of cardiac osteosarcoma
and its bone metastasis. MRI and histologic finding of cardiac osteosarcoma and its femoral metastasis. A. Axial double inversion-recovery
T1-weighted image with fat saturation (TR/TE, 960/8.6 msec) showed well-demarcated mass of mildly heterogeneous and high signal intensity
without evidence of invasion into surrounding structures. B, C. Axial triple inversion-recovery T2-weighted image with fat saturation
(TR/TE, 960/100 msec) and four chamber view of cine image (3211/1605 msec) showed heterogeneous signal intensity of mass. D. Axial image of
delayed contrast-enhanced MRI (TR/TE, 4457/1427 msec) showed heterogeneous enhancement. E. Mass measured about 5.0 × 3.7 × 2.3 cm and had
focal hemorrhage and necrosis on gross specimen. F. Photomicrograph showed atypical spindle cells with abundant collagen material and
displayed focal immature osteoid production (Hematoxylin & Eosin stain, × 40). G. T1-weighted coronal image (TR/TE, 651/20 msec) showed mass
that was isointense to muscle at right femoral neck. Peripheral rim with low signal intensity was seen. H. T2-weighted axial image (TR/TE,
4053/100 msec) showed heterogeneously high signal intensity lesion with peripheral hypointense rim at right femoral neck. I. Gadolinium-
enhanced T1-weighted coronal image with fat suppression (TR/TE, 540/17 msec) was performed and lesion showed heterogeneous enhancement
within central portion of non-enhancement. J. Atypical spindle cells with abundant collagen material were seen on photomicrograph
(Hematoxylin & Eosin stain, × 40).
