Hepatic pseudolymphoma (HPL) and primary hepatic marginal zone B cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) are rare
diseases and the differential diagnosis between these two entities is sometimes difficult. We herein report a 56-year-old Japanese woman who
was pointed out to have a space occupying lesion in the left lateral segment of the liver. Hepatitis viral-associated antigen/antibody was
negative and liver function tests including lactic dehydrogenase, peripheral blood count, tumor markers and soluble interleukin-2 receptor
were all within normal limit. Imaging study using computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging were not typical for hepatocellular
carcinoma, cholangiocarcinoma, or other metastatic cancer. Fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography examination integrated with
computed tomography scanning showed high standardized uptake value in the solitary lesion in the liver. Under a diagnosis of primary liver
neoplasm, laparoscopic-assisted lateral segmentectomy was performed. Liver tumor of maximal 1.0 cm in diameter was consisted of aggregation
of lymphocytes of predominantly B-cell, containing multiple lymphocyte follicles positive for CD10 and bcl-2, consistent with a diagnosis of
HPL rather than MALT lymphoma, although a definitive differentiation was pending. The background liver showed non-alcoholic fatty liver
disease/early non-alcoholic steatohepatitis. The patient is currently doing well with no sign of relapse 13 months after the surgery. Since
the accurate diagnosis is difficult, laparoscopic approach would provide a reasonable procedure of diagnostic and therapeutic advantage with
minimal invasiveness for patients. Considering that the real nature of this entity remains unclear, vigilant follow-up of patient is
essential. A primary hepatic lymphoma (PHL) is defined as lymphoma localized and limited in the liver , not the secondary involvement of
high- or intermediate grade non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, and accounts for less than 1% of all extranodal lymphomas . Among them, a primary
hepatic low-grade marginal zone B cell lymphoma of mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue (MALT lymphoma) is extremely rare. On the other hand,
hepatic pseudolymphoma (HPL), also termed as reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, or nodular lymphoid lesion, is extremely rare disease and
characterized by the proliferation of non-neoplastic, polyclonal lymphocytes forming follicles with an active germinal center , and most
importantly, is mimicking clinicopathologically to low grade lymphoma including MALT lymphoma. The etiology, pathogenesis and clinical
implications of these two diseases remain unknown to a large extent. Reported underlying liver diseases include chronic viral hepatitis,
autoimmune liver diseases, etc . Since clinical diagnosis is often difficult especially at its earlier stage, surgical resection appears a
mainstay for diagnostic/therapeutic purpose. We herein present a laparoscopically operated case of hepatic pseudolymphoma which was
difficult to differentially diagnose from primary hepatic MALT lymphoma, and discuss the clinicopathological features and clinical
implications of these two disease entity. In April 2009, a 56-year-old Japanese woman was pointed out to have a space occupying lesion in
the lateral segment of the liver on abdominal ultrasonography during health examination. Her social and family history was noncontributory
and she had a previous medical history of appendectomy for acute appendicitis and laparoscopic cholecystectomy for cholecystolithiasis. She
showed no abnormal physical findings, including lymphadenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Laboratory findings of blood examination were almost
normal, including blood cell counts and differentiation, serochemical tests including liver enzymes and lactate dehydrogenase (LDH),
hepatitis viral associated markers including hepatitis B virus surface antigen (HBsAg), hepatitis B virus core antibody (HBcAb) and
hepatitis C virus (HCV) antibody. Also, tumor markers including carcinoembryonic antigen and carbohydrate antigen 19-9, alpha-fetoprotein
(AFP), fucosylated AFP (L3-AFP), protein induced by vitamin-K absence or antagonist II (des-gamma carboxy prothrombin, PIVKA-II), and
soluble interleukin 2 (s-IL2) receptor were within normal limits. Abdominal ultrasonography showed 15-mm-diameter hypoechoic in segment 3 in
the liver, and on enhancement study, it showed slight enhancement of ring-like in the peripheral but not in the entire tumor, the center of
which being minimally enhanced, which indicated metastatic tumor rather than hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). On abdominal computed
tomography (CT) scan (Figure 1), 15-mm-diameter low density area was demonstrated before contrast material injection, which was enhanced in
early arterial phase and subsequently washed out in the late phase after contrast material injection, not incompatible with HCC. Other
organs including regional or para-aortic lymph nodes showed no abnormal finding. Unenhanced CT scan showed low density area of 1 cm in
diameter in the segment 3 of the liver (arrow). Contrast-enhanced CT scan during arterial phase showed minimally peripheral ring
enhancement. No lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly was observed. On magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, Figure 2), the hepatic tumor was low
signal intensity in T1-weighted imaging and slight high signal intensity in T2-weighted imaging, and low intensity in hepatobiliary phase 20
minutes after injection of gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid (Gd-EOB-DTPA, Primovist, Bayer Schering Pharma), and
on dynamic Gd-EOB-DTPA MRI protocol not clearly visualized during arterial dominant phase and slight ring-like enhancement persisted,
indicating hypovascular tumor, such as cholangiocarcinoma or liver metastasis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the hepatic tumor (arrow)
was low signal intensity in T1-weighted image (A) and slight high signal intensity in T2-weighted image (B), and low signal intensity in
hepatobiliary phase after Gd-EOB-DTPA injection, and on dynamic Gd-EOB-DTPA MRI protocol not clearly visualized during arterial dominant
phase with slight ring-like enhancement persisting, indicating hypovascular tumor, such as cholangiocarcinoma or liver metastasis. On
gastric fiberscope examination, atrophic gastritis was noted without evidence of MALT lymphoma. She had previously received eradication
treatment for Helicobacter pylori. Colonoscopy examination found no other lesions. In a fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography
examination integrated with computed tomography scanning (FDG-PET CT, Figure 3), the tumor was revealed to have a high standardized uptake
value (SUVmax: 3.6) for FDG. No other site showed FDG uptake, suggesting that liver tumor is not secondary from malignant lesions of other
organs. FDG-PET CT demonstrated the tumor had a high standardized uptake value (SUVmax: 3.6) for FDG. No other site showed FDG uptake,
suggesting that liver tumor is not secondary from malignant lesions of other organs. Abdominal angiography revealed small tumor stain in the
tributaries of A2 during arterial phase; hence transcatheter arterial infusion of epirubicin and lipiodol was performed under the diagnosis
of small HCC. Percutaneous needle biopsy was performed, but failed to provide with definitive diagnosis regarding the tumor partly due to
inappropriate material obtained because of the size of the targeted tumor, except for chronic hepatitis of minimal grade activity and
fibrosis (A1/F1, according to the New Inuyama Classification , and hepatocyte ballooning with fatty degeneration being noted. In November
2009, under a clinical diagnosis of primary malignant liver tumor, laparoscopic-assisted lateral segmentectomy was performed. On macroscopic
examination, there was a grey-white solid tumor, measuring 1.0 cm in largest diameter (Figure 4). The tumor was completely excised. On
microscopic examination, the tumor in the liver was composed of dense lymphocytic infiltration including multiple lymphoid follicles with
germinal centers (Figure 5A). The interfollicular areas were expanded and filled with small to medium-sized lymphocytes with pale cytoplasm
and cellular atypia (Figure 5B, C), most of which were positive for CD20 and bcl-2 (Figure 5D, E), and negative for CD5 and CD10.
Lymphoepithelial lesions with bile duct epithelium destruction by lymphoid tumor cells were noticed (Figure 5F). At the edge of the nodule,
lymphocytic infiltration extended into perinodular portal tracts (Figure 5G). Bile ducts were observed at the periphery of the nodule
(Figure 5H). Ki-67 index of those lymphoid cells was 25%. Taken together, these findings were consistent with diagnosis of both extranodal
marginal zone B-cell lymphoma and non-neoplastic lesion mimicking MALT lymphoma including HPL, reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, or nodular
lymphoid lesion, but still insufficient to distinguish these conditions. Polymerase chain reaction was performed to detect monoclonal
immunoglobulin heavy chain (IGH) gene rearrangement in an attempt to differentiate these two entities, but was unsuccessful due to
degradation of extracted DNA from the specimen, presumably partly because of deleterious effect on DNA integrity by the previous local tumor
ablation using transcatheter arterial chemo-embolization. The background liver showed 30% macrovesicular steatosis with scattered ballooned
cells and perivenular fibrosis, suggesting non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) or early non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH). No
histological finding suggested concomitant primary biliary cirrhosis (PBC) or viral hepatitis. Resected specimen: section of the liver and
12 × 10 mm, well-defined, light-tan, firm, solid nodule (arrow). Microscopic appearance of the lesion. (A) Low-power view of the tumor
showing dense lymphocytic infiltration with lymph follicles (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×4). (B) Interfollicular areas
are infiltrated with small to intermediate-sized lymphocytes with pale cytoplasm, which are characteristic features of hepatic
pseudolymphoma as well as marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×40). (C) Intermediate-sized atypical
lymphocytes are observed (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×40). (D) Most of the lymphoid cells are positive for CD20. These
cells are negative for CD5, which rules out other small B-cell non Hodgkin lymphomas, including lymphocytic lymphoma and mantle cell
lymphoma (original magnification ×4). (E) Bcl-2 expression in the mantle zones and the interfollicular areas (original magnification ×4).
(F) Lymphoepithelial lesions are observed at the bile ducts (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×40). (G) At the edge of the
nodule, lymphocytic infiltration extends into perinodular portal tracts (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×10). (H) Bile ducts
are observed at the periphery of the nodule (hematoxylin and eosin, original magnification ×10). The postoperative course of this patient
was uneventful and she was discharged from the hospital on postoperative day 8. Any adjuvant chemotherapy or radiotherapy was not indicated,
considering that the tumor was confined in the liver with no extrahepatic involvement, and she is currently doing well with no sign of
relapse 13 months after the surgery. Hepatic pseudolymphoma (HPL), also known as reactive lymphoid hyperplasia, or nodular lymphoid lesion,
is extremely rare disease entity and so far 35 cases have been reported worldwide since the first report by Sharifi et al . Its pathogenesis
and clinical implications have not been fully elucidated. According to the recently proposed criteria by Zen et al, the present case
reported here would be diagnosed with HPL, although not confirmed by molecular examination, such as detection of gene rearrangement. Primary
hepatic marginal zone B-cell lymphoma of the mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue type (MALT lymphoma), also rare entity with only 48 cases
being reported in the worldwide literature since the first report by Isaacson et al , accounts for 1.6-3% of PHL , is the most important
differential diagnosis from HPL. The etiopathogenesis of HPL remains unclear, although 27% of the patients had chronic liver diseases
including HBV- or HCV-related liver cirrhosis, and moreover, 23% had autoimmune disorders, such as PBC, in extrahepatic organs . In terms of
background disorders, this figure is comparable with that of MALT lymphoma, where half of the patients have chronic inflammatory liver
diseases including autoimmune disorders . The similarity would imply the common pathogenesis of these two conditions. In this regard,
several authors have proposed that chronic persistent, prolonged immunogenic stimulation targeted either to infectious agents, such as
Helicobacter pylori and HCV, and autoimmune diseases, such as PBC, Hashimoto thyroiditis, and Sjögren syndrome, would induce development of
acquired MALT and subsequently MALT lymphoma , and/or HPL during this process as well . As a background liver condition associating with
HPL, in accordance with the case reported by Zen et al , our case would suggest the possible role for NAFLD/NASH as a pathogenesis in this
entity through chronic persistent inflammatory stimulation in the liver, though via non-immunological pathway, yet further study is required
on this matter. Clinical resemblance includes the age of patients (mean age, 55.1 vs. 61.4 years old, HPL vs. MALT lymphoma), and tumor
characteristics including the size (size range, 0.5-5.5 vs. 2-7.7 cm, HPL vs. MALT lymphoma) and the number, where the majority of cases had
solitary tumor at presentation in both entities (81% vs. 78%, HPL vs. MALT lymphoma). The single pronounced difference would be the female
preponderance in HPL (86% vs. 51%, HPL vs. MALT lymphoma, 4, 16, 26). The diagnosis of HPL, not to mention the preoperative one, appears
challenging. In fact, the case report by Sato et al indicating the transformation of HPL into lymphoma would implicate the significance, as
well as difficulty, of differential diagnosis of these two conditions. In our case, since the lack of molecular diagnosis hampered the
definitive diagnosis, there still remains insufficiency in differential diagnosis from hepatic MALT lymphoma . Therefore, molecular analysis
should be routinely undertaken as the most potent diagnostic tool in such a controversial case. However, at the same time, it should be
noted that even a clonal IGH rearrangement would not be a gold standard for a diagnosis of lymphoma, as suggested by Geyer et al. in the
setting of lower female genital tract, and therefore both routine microscopic findings and detailed clinical information remain paramount in
establishing the correct diagnosis . In this context, the clinical course of this patient on careful follow-up hereafter might elucidate the
essentials of this disorder. Regarding the diagnostic significance of FDG-PET, no report on HPL is currently available. In contrast, FDG-PET
has been reported in the recent two reports as a useful and convenient modality for the diagnosis of hepatic MALT lymphoma . Considering the
positive uptake of FDG seen in our case, however, this examination would not be used solely to differentiate the two conditions. Natural
history of HPL is yet delineated. Malignant transformation of pseudolymphoma into true lymphoma has been reported in the various organs,
such as lung, stomach, and skin , but actual frequency have not evaluated, since the majority of cases underwent surgical resection under a
suspicion for malignancy. Regarding liver, since only one case report is available , the possibility of transformation of HPL into hepatic
MALT lymphoma could not be determined. Therefore, surgical removal is the treatment of choice for these conditions . Further accumulation of
clinical data is required to clarify this matter. With respect to treatment strategy, reported cases demonstrated that even MALT lymphoma
has a favorable prognosis compared with other subtypes of PHL; the former is usually limited to the liver and surgical resection cures the
patient in most cases . Also, when diagnosis is confirmed after needle biopsy, non-resection treatment procedures would be permitted, such
as radiofrequency ablation instead of surgical resection. Furthermore, in case of HPL, simple observation proved to be practically enough
since spontaneous diminution of tumor size or even regression of tumor has been reported , yet further accumulation of data is needed.
Regarding prognosis after treatment, since no recurrence of MALT lymphoma has been reported to date to occur after adequate surgical
resection or chemotherapy treatments , even if the tumor is true neoplastic lesion, as long as it remains low-grade malignancy, the surgical
outcome would be comparable with that for HPL. However, it should be noted that there is a single report of local recurrence after surgical
resection, suggesting the importance of close post-treatment follow-up . Considering the relatively short duration of observation period in
the reported cases, vigilant follow-up of the patients including our case would be required. PHL and lymphoid lesions in general should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of space occupying lesions of the liver in the absence of elevated levels of ordinary tumor markers
including AFP and CEA . In addition, it is also important to distinguish HPL and MALT lymphoma from others, particularly from more
aggressive type, such as mantle cell lymphoma . However, because of their indolent, localized clinical presentation, diagnosis is often
accompanied by substantial difficulty, with the majority of cases being diagnosed incidentally. Admitted that even in case of lymphoma,
there is a certain chance of cure by means of medical treatment without surgery, en bloc resection of the hepatic tumor would be recommended
as a principle procedure for subsequent diagnosis and decision for treatment. Needle biopsy failed to present a diagnosis in our case,
partly because the tumor was among the smallest of the reported cases in the literatures. Finally, in such situation, laparoscopic approach
would provide a reasonable procedure of less invasiveness for patients . HPL and MALT lymphoma are very rare. We herein report a case with a
space occupying lesion in the left lateral segment of the liver, which was completely resected by laparoscopic-assisted lateral
segmentectomy. The tumor of maximal 1.0 cm in diameter was consisted of aggregation of lymphocytes of predominantly B-cell, containing
multiple lymphocyte follicles positive for CD10 and bcl-2, consistent with a diagnosis of HPL, but still necessitating differential
diagnosis from MALT lymphoma. Since the accurate diagnosis of this entity is difficult, laparoscopic approach would provide a reasonable
procedure of diagnostic and therapeutic advantage with minimal invasiveness for patients. Considering that the real nature of this entity
remains unclear to date, vigilant follow-up of patient is essential. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. HPL: hepatic pseudolymphoma; MALT: mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue; PHL: primary hepatic lymphoma; LDH: lactate dehydrogenase;
s-IL2: soluble interleukin 2; CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen; AFP: alpha-fetoprotein; HCV: hepatitis C virus; CT: computed tomography; MRI:
magnetic resonance imaging; HCC: hepatocellular carcinoma; Gd-EOB-DTPA: gadolinium ethoxybenzyl diethylenetriamine pentaacetic acid; FDG-
PET: fluorodeoxyglucose-positron emission tomography; SUV: standardized uptake value; IGH: immunoglobulin heavy chain; NAFLD: non-alcoholic
fatty liver disease; NASH: non-alcoholic steatohepatitis; PBC: primary biliary cirrhosis. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. MH conceived the study concept and design, was involved with patient care and drafted the manuscript and literature review. NY,
FH, MA, KM, AT, KY HH, and TT were involved with formation of the study concept and design, patient care and drafting of the manuscript and
literature review. NT carried out the operation on the patient and was the main contributor in the writing of the manuscript. All authors
have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
