Re-use of this article is permitted in accordance with the Terms and Conditions set out at
http://wileyonlinelibrary.com/onlineopen#OnlineOpen_Terms We describe the clinicopathological features of a case of total anomalous
pulmonary vein drainage (TAPVD) associated with atresia of the common pulmonary vein (ACPV). A male Japanese infant born at 37 weeks of
gestation demonstrated apnea and severe respiratory acidosis immediately after delivery. The patient died of hypoxemic respiratory failure 6
days after birth despite the initiation of artificial ventilation and administration of a surfactant. Autopsy showed the bilateral inferior
pulmonary veins joined with a blind confluence, representing ACPV, accompanied by atresia of the left superior pulmonary vein. Moreover, the
anomalous and small right superior pulmonary vein drained into the superior vena cava, consistent with partial and supracardiac type TAPVD.
A histological examination of the lungs exhibited diffuse dilation of the lymphatic channels in the peribronchial, interlobular, hilar and
focally, subpleural areas. The channels were lined with flattened endothelium which was immunohistochemically positive for D2-40. These
findings conformed to a secondary form of pulmonary lymphangiectasis due to the congenital cardiovascular anomalies, including TAPVD and
ACPV. To the authors' knowledge, this is the first case of TAPVD associated with ACPV, atresia of left superior pulmonary vein and pulmonary
lymphangiectasis. Atresia of the common pulmonary vein (ACPV) is an extremely rare congenital cardiac defect and a poorly documented disease
in neonates, it is characterized by the abnormal left and right pulmonary veins (PV) failing to communicate with either the left and right
atriums or any of the major systemic veins.1,2 The common pulmonary vein (CPV) is an embryonic structure connecting the venous elements of
early pulmonary vasculature to the common atrium and is subsequently incorporated as part of the left atrium occurring between the 25th and
30th day of fetal life.3 Thus, inadequate or absent absorption induces certain congenital anomalies. Early atresia of the CPV leads to total
anomalous pulmonary venous drainage (TAPVD), a fairly common entity that accounts for 1.3% of congenital cardiovascular malformations and is
detected in 2 to 5% of autopsy cases of congenital heart disease.4 Darling classified TAPVD into four types by which the systemic venous
system drains into the PV or CPV: type I is characterized by supracardiac connections (e.g. the innominate (left brachiocephalic) vein or
superior vena cava); type II, paracardiac connections (e.g. the coronary sinus or right atrium); type III, infracardiac connections (e.g.
the inferior vena cava, portal vein, hepatic vein, or ductus venosus); type IV, multiple and mixed, with two or more types of I to III.5
Drainage to the innominate vein occurs most commonly and is found in over 35% of TAPVD cases, followed by those to the superior vena cava
(about 13%), the coronary sinus (16%), the right atrium (15%), and the portal vein (6%).5,6 In contrast, late atresia or incomplete
absorption of the CPV after involution of the embryonic collaterals to the systemic venous circulation leads to ACPV.1,2,7,8 At least 32
cases of ACPV have been reported in the literature8,9 since the term was first used and described by Lucas et al. in 1962.10 ACPV could be
considered an extreme form of TAPVD in which virtually complete PV obstruction occurs in the uterus.2 However, this anomaly should be
clearly distinguished from the stenosis of aberrant PV at their junction with the systemic circulation common in TAPVD cases after birth or
surgery.6 Prenatally, the small pulmonary venous blood flow can be diverted to the systemic veins, for example the azygos and hemiazygos
veins, by way of bronchopulmonary anastomoses in the lungs,2,10–12 and persistently dilated fetal pulmonary lymphatic channels help to
remove the excess interstitial edema fluid from the lungs.2,7,13,14 Therefore, the fetus possibly tolerates severe obstruction to pulmonary
venous drainage. In contrast, postnatally, with the tenfold increase in pulmonary blood flow, these channels are very easily overwhelmed.15
Neonates with ACPV generally display symptoms of cardiorespiratory failure, such as cyanosis and/or acidosis within minutes of
birth.1,2,6–11 Pulmonary interstitial edema or occasional secondary pulmonary lymphangiectasis (PL) also impairs the gaseous
exchange.2,9,10,16 Cardiovascular and respiratory collapse and subsequent death rapidly occur in many ACPV cases, and early recognition and
surgical intervention are essential to patient care.1,2,6–11 According to previous reports, however, only five cases have undergone
successful surgical repair.2,7 In this paper, we describe an autopsy case of TAPVD type I, in which anomalous small right PV drained to the
superior vena cava (SVC), associated with ACPV of the left and right inferior PV (IPV) with blind confluence and atresia of the left
superior PV (SPV). In addition, secondary PL was also identified in the histological examination. A Japanese male neonate was born at 37
weeks of gestation without history of pregestational treatment for infertility through Caesarean section due to poor fetal movement for 2
days before his birth. He presented with apnea immediately after birth and his Apgar scores were very low, 1 and 2 points at 1 and 5 min,
respectively. He was the second child born to non-consanguineous parents who were both 40 years old. The parents' first baby was also born
at full term of spontaneous gestation 2 years before this case, and had weight appropriate for gestational age. This patient, however,
weighed about 2420 g at birth. The amniotic fluid was clear, and the placenta, weighing 420 g, had no remarkable changes. A chest X-ray of
the case showed marked pulmonary congestion and diffuse bilateral reticulogranular infiltrates in the lungs without evidence of cardiomegaly
(Fig. 1) and an echocardiogram revealed that PV did not connect to the left atrium or CPV but an innominate vein-like small vein drained
into the SVC, suggestive of TAPVD, supracardiac type. The patient could not have surgery because of his poor general condition. Although
artificial ventilation after intubation and surfactant substitution therapy were performed, he died of hypoxemic respiratory failure, which
was resistant to the intravenous administration of dopamine and bicarbonate and the inhalation of nitric oxide, 6 days after birth. Plain
chest X-ray. A chest X-ray film taken just before the patient's death shows marked pulmonary congestion and diffuse bilateral
reticulogranular infiltrates. No apparent cardiomegaly is seen. The blood cell counts and values of blood biochemistry showed
thrombocytopenia (6.8 × 104 /µL), high lactic acidemia (108 mg/dL) and severe hypoglycemia (4 mg/dL). Additionally, a venous blood sample
when breathing 100% oxygen concentration in the incubator demonstrated elevated partial pressure of carbon dioxide (PaCO2; 73.6 mmHg), abd
decreased base excess (−10.2 mEq/L) and pH (7.097), indicating marked respiratory acidosis. An autopsy was performed approximately 20 h
after death, but the brain could not be examined due to the family's objections. At autopsy, the baby measured approximately 45 cm in height
and weighed 2420 g. An external examination showed anomaly of the right accessory auricle and a few needle marks on the extremities. In an
internal examination of the thoracic cavity, markedly involuted thymus, weighing 1.5 g, was noted in the anterior mediastinum. The heart,
weighing 21.5 g, showed a dilated and hypertrophic right ventricle and modest hypoplasia of the left ventricle without apparent PV returning
to the left atrium (Fig. 2a), consistent with the findings of TAPVD. Although there were no PV draining into the right atrium or funiculi,
reminiscent of an atretic fibrous band of CPV, between the atrium and pericardium (Fig. 2a) two IPV from the lower lobes of the lungs were
seen to form a blind confluence behind the left atrium with a tiny branch-like structure (Fig. 2b), they did not connect with the epicardium
or pericardial cavity. No vertical veins draining into the innominate or portal vein were noted. The diagnosis of ACPV was established based
on these features. There was no apparent left superior PV (SPV) or atretic PV-like funiculus on a thorough gross examination, this case was
considered to be associated with ACPV and likely atresia of one PV. As to the right SPV, an anomalous, small and hypoplastic PV (Fig. 2c,d)
from the right upper lobe was identified (Fig. 2c) that drained into the SVC (Fig. 2d), indicating that this case was partial and
supracardiac type I TAPVD, according to Darling's classification.5 Atrial septal defect (ASD) and persistent ductus arteriosus (PDA) were
present. However, other major structural cardiac anomalies, such as single ventricle, single atrium and anomalies of truncus arteriosus,
were absent. The schema of this anomalous heart is summarized in Figure 3. The left and right lungs weighed 25.4 g each and were firm in
consistency. The cut surfaces of the congested lungs after formalin fixation showed modestly thickened interlobular septum and hilum without
evidence of cystic changes. An internal examination of the abdominal cavity exhibited clear yellow peritoneal fluid (100 mL) and markedly
atrophic and hemorrhagic adrenal glands, weighing 4.4 g combined, without other extracardiac malformations including visceral situs inversus
or polysplenia. Gross findings of the heart and lungs. (a) On the anterior view of the lung with the heart displaced upward, no pulmonary
veins (PV) returning to the left or right atrium are seen. (b) The posterior view of the lung reveals right and left inferior PV (IPV) from
the lower lobes joining to form a blind confluence behind the left atrium with a tiny branch-like structure (arrow). No vertical veins
draining into the innominate or portal vein are recognized. (c,d) The anomalous, small and hypoplastic right superior PV (SPV) (arrowheads,
c,d) from the right upper lobe is identified (c), and apparently drains into the superior vena cava (SVC) (d), where the bloodstream is
indicated by a metal sound (c,d). Partial and supracardiac type (type I) TAPVD is suggested. Although atrial septal defect (ASD, arrow) also
coexists in the heart, the other major structural cardiac anomalies are absent. Moreover, there is no left SPV. Bar = 1 cm. Schema of the
anomalous heart. The present case has been diagnosed as partial and supracardiac type I TAPVD associated with ACPV (•) and atresia of left
superior pulmonary vein (SPV) (). Atrial septal defect is also present. The bloodstream is indicated by arrows. IPV, inferior pulmonary
veins; Lt., left; Rt., right; SVC, superior vena cava. A histological examination of the heart revealed hypertrophy of the right cardiac
muscle, but no subendocardial inflammation or infarction was evident. The lungs showed diffuse and moderate lymphatic dilation in the
interlobular (Fig. 4a), hilar (Fig. 5a–d), peribronchial (Fig. 4b) and focally, subpleural areas. The dilated lymphatic channels were
invariably lined with flattened endothelium, which was immunohistochemically positive for D2-40 (Nichirei Bioscience Co., Tokyo, Japan; 1:1
dilution) (Fig. 4c), CD31 (DakoCytomation Co., Tokyo, Japan; 1:20 dilution) and CD34 (IMMUNOTECH, Marseille, France; 1:50 dilution). No
CD68-positive (Dako; 1:100) foreign body type histiocytes were seen in these cystically dilated lesions. No lymphangiectasis was found
around the mediastinum or the intra-abdominal organs. The diagnosis of secondary pulmonary lymphangiectasis (PL) due to congenital
cardiovascular anomalies, including TAPVD and ACPV, Noonan classification group 217 was established based on these features. Most of the
mature-looking alveolar spaces were collapsed, and the alveolar walls were close to each other with frequent deposits of hyaline membrane
along the bronchioli or alveolar ducts (Fig. 4d). Moreover, the pulmonary arteries (PA) did not manifest intimal hyperplasia, but did show
slight to mild and focal medial hypertrophy in each of the bilateral lobes (Fig. 5a–d), displaying a clear contrast with Elastica van Gieson
(EVG) staining compared to those of the other full term neonate autopsy cases without any evidence of cardiac anomalies. Despite no evidence
of a left SPV-like funiculus on gross findings, left SPV vessels on the peripheral side could be identified microscopically in the
parenchyma of the left upper lobe (Fig. 5a), hence, we finally made a conclusive diagnosis of atresia, not aplasia, of the left SPV.
Histological examination of each lobe showed there were no clear distinctions in the size or shape of PV in this present case and the
control case. Additionally, atretic left SPV and CPV in the centre could not be identified. Histological findings of the secondary pulmonary
lymphangiectasis. (a–c) Low-power views of the lung demonstrate diffuse and conspicuous lymphatic dilation of the interlobular (a) and
peribronchial (b) areas. They are invariably lined by flattened lymphatic endothelium (HE stain), which is immunohistochemically positive
for D2-40 (c). (d) Many mature-looking alveolar spaces are collapsed, and the alveolar walls are close to each other with deposits of
hyaline membrane along the bronchioli to the alveolar ducts (HE stain). Histological findings of each of the lung lobes in the hilar areas.
(a–d) On scan magnifications, the pulmonary arteries (PA) do not manifest intimal hyperplasia, but slight to mild and focal medial
hypertrophy (arrows) in each of the bilateral lobes (Elastica van Gieson stains), compared with those of another neonate autopsy case
without any evidence of cardiac anomalies. The left superior pulmonary vein (SPV) vessels on the peripheral side can be identified in the
left upper lobe (LUL) (a), and we thus finally made a conclusive diagnosis of atresia of the left superior vena cava (SPV). However, the
atretic left SPV on the central side cannot be recognized. There are no clear distinctions of the pulmonary veins (PV) in size or shape
between this present case and the control case. Moreover, a mild to moderate and diffuse secondary PL is also noted (arrowheads). Br,
bronchus; LLL, left lower lobe; RLL, right lower lobe; RUML, right upper and middle lobes. The markedly involuted thymus showed advanced
lymphocyte depletion without a starry-sky pattern accompanied by aggregated Hassall's corpuscles with a mild inflammatory infiltrate of
neutrophils. Pseudofollicular cysts were present in the definitive cortex of severely atrophic adrenal glands. These findings were
considered likely due to severe stress during intrauterine life and after birth. ACPV is an extremely rare congenital heart disease with a
very poor prognosis, first described by Lucas et al. in 1962,10 demonstrating clinical manifestations of aggressive cardiorespiratory
failure immediately after birth, cyanosis, acidosis and death.1,2,6–9 Although early clinical recognition and immediate surgical treatment
are essential, it is very difficult to establish an antemortem diagnosis of ACPV, and thus it results in an adverse clinical outcome.2,7–9
The definitive diagnosis can be made by cardiac catheterization or during surgery, however, determining it at autopsy accounts more than 40%
of reported cases.2,18 Nevertheless, due to the recent advances in neonatal care, the outcome of the patients has improved. Dudell et al.
reported three cases of corrective surgery; despite the required continued postoperative support with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation
due to pulmonary hypertension and severe pulmonary parenchymal disease, two patient survived and were discharged from the hospital.2 ACPV
can be considered an advanced form of TAPVD, which is a much more common entity and whose etiology is probably early atresia of the CPV.4,6
In contrast, late atresia after involution of the embryonic collaterals to the systemic veins such as azygos and/or hemiazygos veins leads
to ACPV.1,2,6–11,13 The PV of ACPV do not communicate with either the left atrium or the systemic venous system, but join between them with
a very closed and blind confluence.1,2,6–11,13 Funiculi, reminiscent of an atretic fibrous band of CPV, are rarely identified between the
atrium and pericardial cavity in cases of ACPV.1,19 Although in the present case there are no apparent atretic fibrous bands, it is presumed
that the tiny branch-like structure in the closing IPV (Fig. 2b) might have connected to the CPV before the ACPV occurred. Only a few cases
of TAPVD associated with ACPV are reported in the literature.2,19,20 The cases, however, varied in TAPVD types and associated anomalies, for
example, infracardiac type (type III) TAPVD accompanied by not only ACPV with an atretic fibrous band, but also atresia of paraesophageal
abnormal PV connection in a Japanese case,19 supracardiac type (type I) TAPVD associated with ACPV in another Japanese case,20 and
supracardiac type (type I) TAPVD associated with not only ACPV but also aplasia of the right and left superior PV in an American case.2
Thus, ACPV cases, including ours, can have wide varieties of features sometimes closely related with TAPVD, and the presence of TAPVD and
ACPV in the same siblings may indicate the genetic relationship between two.2 Furthermore, although TAPVD cases very rarely accompany ACPV,
ACPV with or without TAPVD may be more common than generally considered, because those clinical or radiological features are very difficult
to distinguish.1,2,8 ACPV is the only occasion where congestive cardiac failure occurs without cardiomegaly, this contrasts with TAPVD where
a large heart is commonly present.1,4 It is well known that the increased pulmonary pressure in ACPV causes a pressure overload on the right
ventricle and hypertrophy occurs,1,2 but, interestingly, no cardiomegaly is detected clinicopathologically. This is because atrophy or
hypoplasia of the left ventricle could coexist with hypertrophy of the right one, as in the current case. However, in addition, differential
diagnoses of other cardiac anomalies should be considered, including pulmonary vein stenosis, cor triatriatum, congenital mitral stenosis,
or persistent fetal circulation. Echocardiography, particularly two-dimensional sector scanning, might prove helpful in distinguishing these
conditions.8 If echocardiographic examinations cannot be performed, a chest radiography showing pulmonary congestion without cardiomegaly in
combination with an electrocardiogram revealing right ventricular hypertrophy and right axis deviation strongly suggest ACPV.1,8 The X-ray
in the present case (Fig. 1) showed marked pulmonary congestion and diffuse bilateral reticulogranular infiltrates as a partial result of
dilated pulmonary lymphatic channels with an almost normal-sized heart, resembling the findings previously reported,1,19,20 however, the
electrocardiogram of the case has not been available. Nevertheless, a tentative diagnosis of ACPV should be borne in mind whenever a
clinician encounters a neonate with severe cyanosis and acidosis which are unresponsive to oxygen therapy and resistant to early medical
management. Although the prognosis of ACPV is usually fatal and survival beyond 4 weeks is indeed very rare, only a few neonates without
effective surgical management may survive because of the presence of PV outlet in the various forms, such as bronchial venous circulation,
minor PV communication, pulmonary arteriovenous malformation and dilated lymphatic channels.8,12,14,15 One unusual ACPV case has been
reported in a 6-month-old infant; this child had suffered from complex congenital heart disease and visceral heterotaxy associated with
anomalous drainage of the right SPV.8 As to the current case, survival of 6 days is not exceptional, however, the fact that anomalous right
SPV drained into the SVC, might be uncommon. On the other hand, this anomalous right SPV was smaller in size, and probably could function
less than the IPV, given that histopathological examination of the lungs showed no remarkable difference between right and left (Fig. 5a–d)
(i.e. no congestion, medial hypertrophy of pulmonary arteries, or pulmonary lymphangiectasis (PL), demonstrating signs of pulmonary arterial
hypertension).16,17 Nevertheless, as described above, there could be unidentifiable minor PV outlets including the outflow from the closing
IPV or left SPV, the circulation system of the bronchial arteries and veins, and dilated pulmonary lymphatic flows, as an assistant
circulation system of this anomaly. There is the possibility that this assistant system might not lead to significantly distinct findings
between the right and left lung lobes. Many ACPV cases, including ours, have reported the complications of secondary PL, whereas the change
to pulmonary vascular vessels, such as marked medial hypertrophy or intimal hyperplasia, is inconspicuous.7–9 It is very likely that PL
could be more easily reflected in pulmonary arterial hypertension in the agonal phase. PL is characterized by a severely disturbed pulmonary
gas exchange leading to a poor prognosis because of the compression of the alveolar tissues and reduction of the alveolar spaces.16 The
present case displays not only PL but also hyaline membrane disease in the congested lungs (Fig. 4), and the cause of death in this patient
is considered to be cardiorespiratory failure. In summary, we report a unique neonate autopsy case of TAPVD type I, in which anomalous and
relatively small right PV only drained into the SVC, associated with ACPV of left and right IPV in a blind confluence, and atresia of left
SPV, featuring one series and a wide variety of PV atresia. Secondary PL was identified in the histopathological examination. Although TAPVD
with ACPV is an extremely rare anomaly, we should be aware that ACPV is one of the possible causal factors in the development of severe
pulmonary symptoms in neonates.
