We encountered two cases of endometrioid carcinoma of uterus with extensive surface epithelial changes (SECs) mimicking serous borderline
tumor (SBT) of the ovary. The first case was a well-differentiated endometrioid carcinoma arising in a background of complex atypical
hyperplasia. The second case was moderately-differentiated endometrioid carcinoma with squamous and mucinous differentiation. The SECs
comprised of thin microapapillae without hierarchal branching, lined by cuboidal cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and mild to moderate
nuclear atypia. These areas were reminiscent of SBTs of ovary, micropapillary type. This report expands the existing spectrum of SECs.
Serous borderline tumor of ovary like surface epithelial changes could be misleading if present in an endometrial biopsy or curettings.
Therefore, knowledge of this morphologic variation is important. The surface epithelial changes (SECs), typically seen in well to moderately
differentiated endometrioid carcinoma of endometrium, are histologically defined by better cellular differentiation and an architectural
pattern different from underlying carcinoma. The SECs can occur as microglandular, solid syncytial or as mixture of both patterns . The
microglandular pattern is characterized by small, tightly packed round glands, lined by cuboidal to columnar cells containing abundant
eosinophilic cytoplasm with round to oval nuclei, mimicking microglandular endocervical hyperplasia. The solid syncytial type pattern shows
syncytial aggregates of cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm showing micropapillary, squamoid or transitional-type differentiation. The better
cellular differentiation manifests as low nuclear cytoplasmic ratio, absent or rare nucleoli and no mitosis. The papillary syncytial
metaplastic pattern is similar to papillary syncytial change seen with endometrial breakdown. We encountered two cases of endometrioid
carcinoma showing exuberant SECs, histologically mimicking serous borderline tumor (SBT) of ovary. This is unusual and has not been
described in literature. We discuss both cases and review associated literature of SEC. A 56 year-old female underwent total hysterectomy
with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy for uterine endometrioid carcinoma. The macroscopic examination showed a 9.0 × 5.0 × 3.0 cm polypoidal
tumor involving uterine corpus and cervix invading more than 50% of myometrium. The microscopic examination showed FIGO Grade 2/3
endometrioid carcinoma with squamous and mucinous differentiation. The tumor showed exuberant SECs comprising of cuboidal tumor cells with
well-defined cytoplasmic borders, moderate eosinophilic cytoplasm and round to oval nuclei with inconspicuous nucleolus. These cells were
arranged in papillary pattern (Figure 1A) and classic well differentiated endometrioid adenocarcinoma (Figure 1B). This peculiar pattern was
reminiscent of serous borderline tumor of ovary with "Medusa head-like appearance" (Figure 1C). Figure 1D shows multilayered cuboidal cells
with "cracked" appearance. Figure 1E reveals PTEN-null tumor and Figure 1F shows focal, faint p53 immunostaining in SECs. Case 1 (A - H).
Scanning power (A) showing well differentiated endometrioid carcinoma with SECs mimicking micropapillary serous borderline tumor of the
ovary. Medium power (B) showing area of well differentiated endometrioid carcinoma, (C) with "Medusa head-like appearance", (D) multilayered
cuboidal cells with "cracked" appearance. (E) PTEN-null (F) focal faint p53 immunostaining in SECs and (G, H) typical "cracked" artifact in
micropapillary serous borderline tumors, low and high magnifications respectively of Case 2. The uterine cervix was involved by tumor and
lymphatic invasion was also identified microscopically. A 65-year-old postmenopausal female presented with chief complaint of vaginal
bleeding. She underwent excision of a cervical polyp. The microscopic examination showed a well differentiated endometrioid carcinoma
arising in a background of complex atypical hyperplasia of endometrium. The tumor also showed exuberant SECs, which consisted of multiple
micro papillae with non-hierarchal branching, lined by cuboidal cells with well-defined cytoplasmic membrane, moderate eosinophilic
cytoplasm, round to oval nucleus with inconspicuous nucleolus, reminiscent of micropapillary SBT of the ovary. Figures 1G and 1H show
typical "cracked" artifact seen in serous borderline tumor of ovary, low and high magnifications respectively. These cells showed focal
cytoplasmic clearing and glandular lumen formation. There was no evidence of high grade serous carcinoma. In 1980, Kempson et al coined the
term "endometrial epithelial metaplasias" for the phenomenon of replacement of the surface endometrial glandular epithelium with an
epithelium that is normally encountered in another mullerian-derived organ such a fallopian tube or endocervix. The authors described total
seven patterns of metaplasia including already well known squamous metaplasia and adding six other types including papillary, tubal,
eosinophilic, mucinous, hobnail and clear cell type. Interestingly, all the 89 cases reported by Kempson et al were benign and none of them
showed any evidence of invasive adenocarcinoma on hysterectomy specimen . In 1987, Anderson et al reported the association of endometrial
metaplasia with endometrial adenocarcinoma. Their 15/40 cases with endometrial carcinoma had associated endometrial metaplasia. The
eosinophilic metaplasia was the most common metaplasia associated with endometrial cancer. An important observation made was that carcinoma
occurring with metaplasia was always low-grade, occurred in young females with associated hyperplasia and hyperestrogenism. A similar
association between endometrial metaplasias and endometrial carcinoma was reported by Kaku T et al. The metaplastic changes have been
described in both benign and malignant endometrial processes. Jacques SM et al segregated the metaplastic changes in carcinomas from the
benign endometrium. Jacques SM et al called the metaplastic changes occurring on the surface of the endometrial adenocarcinoma as "surface
epithelial changes". They described two distinct types of patterns: papillary syncitial type and microglandular type. Most commonly,
endometrial adenocarcinoma showed admixture of these two patterns, however these patterns are also present exclusively on the tumor surface.
The SEC showed less atypicality than the underlying carcinoma. However, the nuclear atypia in the SEC is more than the benign endometrial
metaplasia. The papillary syncitial type of SEC resembles the papillary syncitial change seen with endometrial breakdown. The microglandular
type of SEC mimics the microglandular hyperplasia of the cervix. The SECs mimicking the serous borderline tumor of ovary have not been
reported in the literature. These SECs differ from the two types of SECs described by Jacques SM et al. In our cases, cells only focally
formed glandular lumen and the cells were less atypical than the underlying tumor cells. Most of the metaplastic change comprised of thin
cords of the eosinophilic cuboidal cells with distinct cell membrane arranged in micropapillae with non-hierarchal branching. In a study of
399 consecutive cases of endometrioid carcinoma, Murray SK et al identified 26 cases of uterine endometrioid carcinoma with small nonvillous
papillae (ECSP). In their study, they compared ECSP with uterine serous carcinoma, and therefore did not use the term "micropapillary", to
avoid confusion with micropapillary type of serous carcinoma. Murray et al concluded that endometrioid carcinoma with small nonvillous
papillae may be confused with serous papillary carcinoma on microscopic examination . On one hand the molecular changes in two major
subtypes of endometrial cancer are well known: the estrogen-related type I shows defects in DNA-mismatch repair, mutations in PTEN, beta-
catenin, and k-ras, while type II, nonendometrioid such as papillary serous and clear cell shows aneuploidy and p53 mutations . The
mechanism of origin of the SEC is unclear. Jacques SM proposed that SECs occur only under the condition of a larger space into which the
epithelium can proliferate. Thus, SEC develops only on the endometrial surface and in the dilated malignant glands involving adenomyosis.
There is a strong association of endometrial metaplasia with exogenous estrogen intake . Very few studies have investigated the molecular
characteristics of the SECs. Quddus et al observed weak and heterogenous p53 reactivity in the metaplastic endometrium . Interestingly, p53
staining is absent in normal and hyperplastic endometrium while a strong, diffuse p53 staining is diagnostic of uterine papillary serous
carcinoma. Quddus et al reported variable PTEN expression in the surface epithelial changes associated with hyperplasia and endometrioid
carcinoma . To our knowledge, SECs mimicking serous borderline tumor of the ovary have not been described in English literature. Our two
cases expand the spectrum of the SECs described with the endometrioid carcinoma. One of the cases showed PTEN null phenotype and weak, focal
p53 expression by immunohistochemistry, supporting the idea that these SECs originated from the underlying endometrioid carcinoma rather
than a denovo phenomenon. Knowledge of this morphological variation in SECs may be important while interpreting the endometrial
biopsy/curettage for an endometrial cancer. The Institutional Review Board of our academic institution does not require approval for case
reports as long as no patient personal identification information or patient photograph are included. Our report does not include any
personal identification of the patient or patient photograph. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. KS prepared the
manuscript and the figures. RAS helped in preparing the final manuscript and did PTEN staining. CZ contributed one of the cases. MRQ
contributed one case, initiated the case report and coordinated the preparation of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
