Although drug fever may develop after administration of the drug by various routes, it has not been reported with antibiotic-loaded bone
cement. Here, a case of drug fever induced by piperacillin/tazobactam loaded into bone cement is reported. A 72-yr-old woman presented with
fever that developed two weeks after insertion of bone cement loaded with antibiotics including piperacillin/tazobactam into the knee joint
for infectious arthritis. The fever was associated with a skin rash and blood eosinophilia. The work-up of the fever excluded several
causes. Drug provocation test demonstrated that the piperacillin/tazobactam, which had been loaded in the bone cement, was the cause of the
fever. The findings of this case suggest that drug fever can be induced by any drug placed and released continuously within the body.
Therefore, the evaluation for possible drug fever should include all drugs the patient has been exposed to regardless of the route of
administration. Drugs have been estimated to cause 10%-15% of adverse reaction in hospitalized patients in the United States (1, 2). Drug
fever occurs in 3%-5% of cases (3). The drug fever is a febrile response that coincides temporally with the administration of a drug and
disappears after discontinuation of the offending agent. Prompt recognition of the drug fever is essential. However, the drug fever is a
common condition that is frequently misdiagnosed (1, 3). It is important for clinicians to suspect drugs as a cause of fevers of unknown
origin (1). Because clinicians tend to suspect infection as a cause of a patient's fever, the drug fever can lead to overutilization of
antibiotics to treat infections that are not present, possibly increasing the risk of adverse drug reaction and the development of
resistance to antibiotics (1). In addition, of greater concern is the possibility that the drug fever may become more generalized with
resultant tissue damage (4). The drug fever may develop after administration of the drug by various routes. However, to the best of our
knowledge, the drug fever has not been reported with antibiotic-loaded bone cement. Here, a case of drug fever associated with
piperacillin/tazobactam loaded into bone cement, which is confirmed by drug provocation test (DPT), is reported. A 72-yr-old woman with a
previous history of left total knee replacement presented to the department of orthopedics with pain and swelling over the left knee joint
on May 21, 2009. She underwent knee joint aspirations in local clinic, and was thought to have an infectious knee joint arthritis. She had
suffered from diabetes mellitus for three years and had no known drug allergy. Surgery was performed to insert bone cement mixed with the
following antibiotics on May 28, 2009: piperacillin/tazobactam (Tazocin速, Wyeth Pharm., Seoul, Korea), ceftezol sodium (Cetrazol速, Sam Jin
Pharm., Seoul, Korea), gentamicin (Gentamicin速, Kuk Je Pharm., Seoul, Korea), and vancomycin hydrochloride (Hanomycin速, Sam Jin Pharm.,
Seoul, Korea). In addition, intravenous ceftezol and vancomycin, as well as oral rifampicin were administered, as shown in Fig. 1. Two weeks
after the insertion of the antibiotic-loaded bone cement, a fever began to develop. Five days later, a maculopapular skin rash developed
(Fig. 1). The blood showed an increased eosinophil count (Fig. 1) and C-reactive protein level (11.4 mg/dL). Initially, a thorough history,
physical examination, chest radiography, urinalysis, and blood cultures revealed no causes of fever. Further work-up to evaluate the fever
was performed. Serological tests for viral infections, including hepatitis A and B, Epstein-Barr virus, human immunodeficiency virus, and
cytomegalovirus, were all negative. Auto-antibody screening tests were negative for antinuclear and anti-neutrophil-cytoplasmic antibodies.
The total immunoglobulin E level was 361 IU/mL. The C3 and C4 levels were within normal range; however, the CH50 had decreased to 17 U/mL.
Trans-thoracic echocardiography, computed tomography of the abdomen and chest, and sigmoidoscopy showed no abnormal findings. The etiology
of the fever was unknown. Finally, the possibility of a drug fever was considered. Since then, no systemic antibiotics had been
administered. However, the fever persisted for two weeks. Body temperature returned to normal one month after the insertion of bone cement
(Fig. 1). The skin prick tests, intradermal tests, and patch tests were negative for the drugs: piperacillin/tazobactam, ceftezol sodium,
gentamicin, vancomycin and rifampicin. A single blind DPT was performed with a single administration of therapeutic dose for each drug after
written informed consent was obtained. DPTs for ceftezol, gentamicin and rifampicin were negative. However, the DPT for
piperacillin/tazobactam was positive; body temperature increased two hours after intravenous administration of piperacillin/tazobactam 2.25
g, and gradually decreased to normal within 72 hr (Fig. 2). No skin rash was accompanied. The DPT to vancomycin showed a reaction consistent
with the red man syndrome; however, no reactions were observed during a five hour-slow infusion. Since then, vancomycin has been used with a
slow infusion without any adverse reactions for the infectious arthritis. Finally, our case was confirmed as having drug fever due to
piperacillin/tazobactam loaded into bone cement, which was inserted into the knee joint for the infectious arthritis. The patient was
recommended to avoid the use the offending antibiotic. In the present case, fever developed two weeks after the insertion of bone cement
loaded with antibiotics including piperacillin/tazobactam into the knee joint. The fever was associated with a skin rash and blood
eosinophilia. The work-up of the fever excluded several causes. The DPT demonstrated that the piperacillin/tazobactam, which had been loaded
in the bone cement, was the cause of the fever. Finally, the present case was diagnosed with drug fever induced by piperacillin/tazobactam
loaded into bone cement. The onset of drug fever is highly variable and differs among drug classes, but most commonly appears after one to
two weeks of drug administration (5). Bone cement mixed with antibiotics has been developed to treat local infections of the bone and soft
tissue (6). A sustained level of the antibiotic is released to the systemic circulation from the bone cement (7, 8). The bone cement may be
assumed to release piperacillin/tazobactam to the systemic circulation at least for two weeks in the present case, based on the observation
that the drug fever developed two weeks after the insertion of antibiotic-loaded bone cement. The piperacillin/tazobactam is expected to be
continuously released until one month after the insertion of bone cement, on the basis of the finding that the fever disappeared one month
after the insertion (Fig. 1). The drug fever usually disappears within 48 to 72 hr after withdrawal of the offending agent (4). Kelm et al.
(9) showed that antibiotic-impregnated polymethylmethacrylate hip spacers could inhibit bacterial growth in vitro for 14 to 30 days,
suggesting that the antibiotic can be released for at least two weeks. Our case had evidences to support the diagnosis of drug fever. In
drug fever, readministration of the drug produces fever within a matter of hours (4). In the present case, DPT revealed a typical response
of drug fever to piperacillin/tazobactam. Fever developed two hours after intravenous administration of piperacillin/tazobactam and
gradually decreased to normal within 72 hours. Drug fever is commonly associated with skin rash and blood eosinophilia (4), which were also
observed in the present case. The diagnosis of drug fever is one of exclusion after eliminating other potential causes of the febrile
reaction; other causes were excluded in the present case. Furthermore, piperacillin is a well known antimicrobial associated with drug fever
(5). In the present case, DPT was performed with a single administration of therapeutic dose. However, it may be safer that DPT is performed
with graded challenge, which is to administer sufficiently small doses that would not cause a serious reaction initially, and to increase
the dose by safe increments (usually 2-fold to 10-fold) over a matter of hours or days until a therapeutic dose is achieved. Generally, the
initial starting dose is 1% of the therapeutic dose (4). The mechanisms associated with drug fever are suggested to be mediated by the
formation of circulating antibody-antigen complexes or T-cell lymphocyte immune responses (5). Based on the low serum CH50 levels, the
formation of immune complexes with the activation of complement may have been partly involved in the development of the drug fever in the
present case. In conclusion, the findings of this case suggest that drug fever can be induced by any drug placed and released continuously
within the body. Therefore, the evaluation for possible drug fever should include all drugs the patient has been exposed to regardless of
the route of administration. This study was supported by a research grant (09182pharmacovigilance889-2116) from the National Institute of
Food and Drug Safety Evaluation. The development of fever, skin rash and blood eosinophilia in relation to the insertion of antibiotic-
loaded bone cement and the administration of systemic antibiotics. The bone cement was loaded with piperacillin/tazobactam, ceftezol sodium,
gentamicin and vancomycin hydrochloride. Drug provocation test with piperacillin/tazobactam.
