Goldenhar syndrome (GS) is a relatively common developmental disorder characterized by craniofacial anomalies in association with vertebral,
cardiac, renal, and central nervous system defects. This paper describes GS features with special emphasis on oral characteristics. The
clinical features of 6 patients with GS aged 3 months to 12 years are described, and a brief review of the literature about this genetic
disorder is presented. All patients demonstrated the classical triad of GS, including mandibular hypoplasia resulting in facial asymmetry,
ear and/or eye malformation, and vertebral anomalies. In addition, renal and gastrointestinal abnormalities were observed in 2 patients.
Regarding the oral involvement, 2 patients presented cleft lip and palate, and 1 patient had temporomandibular joint malformation.
Malocclusion was found in all patients. Our orofacial findings correlate with the reported cases in the literature, and point out that after
diagnosis GS patients need to be examined for systemic abnormalities. Goldenhar syndrome (GS), also known as oculoauriculovertebral
dysplasia or hemifacial microsomia has a wide range of clinical manifestations, including craniofacial, vertebral , cardiac, renal, and
central nervous system anomalies1. The typical presentation of GS includes epibulbar dermoids, microtia, mandibular hypoplasia, and
vertebral anomalies8,10-11. The classic facial aspect of GS patients, described as hemifacial microsomia, and the other anomalies of this
syndrome are probably caused by development defects of the first and second brachial archs12. The causes for these developmental defects
seem to be heterogeneous2. GS is a condition with a prevalence ranging from 1:3,500 to 1:7,000 live births, and a male-female ratio of 3:24.
Although most cases are sporadic, familial occurrences have been observed8. Oral manifestations of GS are clearly heterogeneous, and range
from malocclusion to a more complex phenotype with complete absence of the mandibular ramus and temporomandibular joint (TMJ)3,13. Different
forms of cleft lip and palate and decreased palatal width are frequently found in GS patients4. This paper describes the clinical features
of GS, with emphasis on the oral manifestations, by presenting the cases of 6 patients and briefly reviewing the literature about this
genetic disorder. Six cases of GS were retrospectively reviewed. The patients were diagnosed between 2004 and 2007 at the Center for
Rehabilitation of Craniofacial Anomalies of the Dental School of the University of Alfenas, Brazil. The diagnosis was established according
to the minimal diagnostic criteria proposed by Stromland, et al.9(2007), considering the combination of hemifacial microsomia, vertebral
anomaly and ear or eye malformation. From the patient files, we collected the following data: age, gender, maternal and paternal age at
pregnancy, information on prenatal and perinatal periods, and family history. All patients were submitted to clinical evaluation, which
included general and craniofacial examination. Skull, facial and thoracic radiographs, electrocardiogram and abdominal ultrasonography scans
were also obtained. Informed consent was taken from the legal guardians of the children, and the study was approved by Ethics Committee of
the Dental School of the University of Alfenas. Five patients were females and 1 was male, and the mean age at diagnosis was 7.15 years
(ranging from 3 months to 12 years). The mean maternal age was 26.3 years, and the mean paternal age was 32.2 years. There was no history of
exposure neither to known teratogenic agents nor maternal diseases. All pregnancies were described as normal, and perinatal complications
were not mentioned in any case. All cases were isolated and no parental consanguinity was observed. When applicable, patients demonstrated
age-appropriate mental and speech development. The main clinical findings of the GS patients are depicted in Figure 1. All patients showed
mandibular hypoplasia, facial asymmetry and vertebral anomalies resulting in marked scoliosis and/or kyphosis (Figure 2). Ear abnormalities
were observed in all patients, except for patient #5. One (16.6%) patient showed anotia, 3 (50%) presented microtia, and preauricular tags
were observed in 4 (66.6%) patients (Figures 3A-B). Regarding eye abnormalities, 50% of the patients showed microphthalmia, 2 (33.3%) showed
epibulbar dermoid tumors (Figure 3C), and anophthalmia and eyelid coloboma were observed in the patient 1. Malocclusion was found in all
patients, whereas cleft lip and palate was observed in 2 (33.3%) patients, and narrowed palate and temporomandibular joint (TMJ)
malformation (Figure 4) were observed in 1 patient each. The main clinical findings of the 6 patients with GS (+) presence and (-) absence.
TMJ: temporomandibular joint. Skeletal and facial phenotypes of patient #2 of this study. (A) Anterior standing photograph of the patient,
demonstrating severe lordoscoliosis. (B) Frontal view of the face showing marked facial asymmetry, malocclusion, and eye involvement
characterized by microphthalmia and eyelid coloboma of the left eye. (C) Lateral view of the face showing ear malformations, including
microtia and preauricular tags (The parents signed informed consent authorizing the publication of these pictures) A-B Presence of
preauricular tags in patients #1 (A) (multiple accessory tags) and #4 (B) of this study. Preauricular tags are considered the most common
malformation in GS, and the identification should lead to the search of other GS-associated abnormalities. (C) Bilateral epibulbar dermoid
tumors affecting patient #3 of this study (The parents signed informed consent authorizing the publication of these pictures) Panoramic
radiograph of patient #6 of this study. The patient showed severe mandibular hypoplasia on the left side associated with hypoplastic
temporomandibular joint and marked malocclusion Genetic counseling was given to all parents regarding the inheritance patterns, recurrence
risks, possible ways of expression, and the consequences of each phenotype. The patients are currently on medical and regular dental
treatment and under observation for other possible malfunctions, including mental retardation, cardiac problems and hearing-speaking
difficulties. Several terms are used to describe GS due to the wide spectrum of anomalies that may be associated with this condition. The
authors suggested the use of term oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia to describe the syndrome characterized by epibulbar dermoids and/or
lipodermoids, auricular appendages, auricular fistulas, and vertebral anomalies1,8,11. However, an overlap in the clinical features of GS,
hemifacial microsomia, and oculoauriculovertebral dysplasia and suggested the term oculo-auriculovertebral (OAV) spectrum to describe the
patients affected by this association. Although OAV spectrum term is more inclusive and descriptive, GS is more widely recognized and
traditionally used. The etiology of GS remains unknown. Recently, Hartsfield2 (2007) reviewed the literature and suggested that GS is
resulted of some type of vascular perturbation and/or neural crestopathy during a critical time of embryogenesis. Although autosomal
dominant, autosomal recessive and multifactorial inheritance patterns have been reported in the literature, most of GS cases are sporadic.
GS is clinically heterogeneous, and there is no agreement in the literature on the minimal diagnostic criteria. Traditionally, the presence
of ear abnormalities, which leads to the search of mandibular hypoplasia and vertebral alterations, is the main clinical feature associated
with GS diagnosis9. However, the absence of evident features or the unknowledge of GS characteristics make the diagnosis difficult and late.
Although all patients were examined and treated by several doctors before our examination, only 2 patients were prematurely diagnosed at
ages of 3 and 8 months. The classical features of GS patients involve ocular anomalies, including microphthalmia, anophthalmia, epibulbar
dermoid (or lipodermoid) tumors, and eyelid colobomas, aural defects, such as preauricular tags, anotia, microtia and hearing loss,
vertebral abnormalities, such as scoliosis, hemivertebrae and cervical fusion, and mandibular hypoplasia8-12. Facial involvement is usually
unilateral, resulting in a marked asymmetry. In the series presented here the patients were affected unilaterally, and all showed mandibular
hypoplasia and vertebral anomaly. Mandibular hypoplasia resulted in facial asymmetry in all patients, with 3 showing severe features of
hemifacial microsomia. Interestingly, facial asymmetry is reported in 6575% of cases of GS10. We also observed an overall frequency of ear
anomalies in 83% and a frequency of eye malformations in 66% of patients. Ear abnormalities, ranging from anotia to preauricular tag, are
considered the most common malformation in GS, with an incidence of 100% of cases10. Interestingly, the patient 5 did not show any ear
involvement, but presented enough clinical features to fulfill the diagnosis of GS, including mandibular hypoplasia, scoliosis,
microphthalmia and cleft lip and palate. Cleft lip and palate is observed in 7-25% of GS patients10, compared to 34% in our studied
patients. Early diagnosis of GS is essential for an appropriate treatment of the affected patients and genetic counseling. GS spectrum of
malformations includes many other pathological findings, regarding the cardiovascular, pulmonary, central nervous, and gastrointestinal
systems9-10. After GS diagnosis, our patients were examined by specialists that identified renal alterations in 2 patients and
gastrointestinal abnormality in 1 patient. Although the frequency of cardiovascular alterations and conductive hearing loss has been
reported to occur with an overall frequency of approximately 50%11, in this case series, no cardiovascular alterations or deafness was
found. Recently, Tasse, et al.10(2005) reported that anomalies of the eye or orofacial clefts in GS patients are predictive of brain
malformations. Although 4 of our patients presented eye abnormalities or cleft lip and palate, central nervous system alterations were not
observed. Syndromes derived from aberrations in the development of the first and second branchial arches are in the spectrum of GS,
including Treacher-Collins syndrome (TCS). The presence of facial asymmetry and far less hypoplasia of the malar bones in GS are important
features to differentiate it from TCS6. The TCS affected patients presented downward slating palpebral fissures, colobomas, zygomatic and
mandibular hypoplasia, partial absence of the lower eyelid cilia, and abnormalities of the ears6. In summary, the molecular basis of GS is
still unclear, and currently no specific diagnostic test is available. Patients with GS can have multiple congenital anomalies, and they
need particular attention to internal abnormalities. Pediatric specialists should consult with ear-nose-throat, orthopedics, neurosurgery,
and ophthalmology clinics to decide on the most appropriatetreatment plan, which varies with age and systemic associations. Dental care with
experienced multidisciplinary team of orthodontists and maxillofacial surgeons is also necessary for good results5,7. Treatment of patients
with mandibular aplasia is complex and can be made with rib grafts, whereas underdeveloped mandibles can be lengthened with bone distraction
devices5,7. The management of GS patients requests a long-term commitment, and involves multiple procedures spanning the child's period of
growth and development. This work was partially supported by grants from the State of Minas Gerais Research Foundation-FAPEMIG, and the
National Council for Scientific and Technological Development-CNPq.
