We present the case of an 81-year-old patient with testicular metastasis from prostate carcinoma. After the initial diagnosis of prostate
cancer, he had an 8-year course of hormonal therapy and showed no clinical evidence of metastasis to other organs. Asymptomatic metastasis
of prostate carcinoma to the testis is a rare clinical condition. We diagnosed his condition, based on histopathology following a
subcapsular orchiectomy and transurethral resection of the prostate. Autopsy results show that the incidence of secondary testicular tumors
ranges from 0.02 to 2.5%.1 Furthermore, testicular metastasis from prostatic carcinoma is rare. We report a patient who was diagnosed with
localized prostatic carcinoma, treated with hormonal therapy, and later diagnosed with metastasis to the bilateral testis. The metastasis
was asymptomatic and incidentally detected after bilateral orchiectomy. There was no additional metastasis detected in other organs. Eight
years ago, a 73-year-old man, referred by his general practitioner, presented with a 1-year history of complaints of lower urinary tract
symptoms, including increased frequency of urination, nocturia, and weak urinary stream. At that time, the patient received a transrectal
ultrasound-guided prostate biopsy due to elevated PSA of 10.8 ng/mL that revealed adenocarcinoma in two of the six specimen cores. The
adenocarcinoma had a Gleason score of 3 + 3 and an estimated prostate volume was 25 gm. A metastatic evaluation of the chest, abdomen,
pelvis, and bone was negative. As the patient did not want surgical treatment at that time, he was treated with monthly injections of LHRH
agonist at private clinics and had no evidence of an increasing prostate specific antigen (PSA). After 8 years, he revisited our department,
presenting with aggravated irritative and obstructive urinary symptoms. An increased postvoid residual urine volume of 180 cc was noted. His
PSA was 9.3 ng/mL, and serum testosterone concentration was measured to determine whether he was indeed castrated and found to be 0.65
ng/mL. There were no other specific clinical symptoms to suggest metastases of the prostate cancer. A physical examination of the testis and
scrotum was normal. Metastatic evaluations, including a bone scan, were negative. Considering his poor health and old age, we suggested and
performed a bilateral subcapsular orchiectomy for hormonal management and a palliative transurethral resection of the prostate, rather than
a radical prostatectomy, to relieve his urinary symptoms. A histopathological analysis showed that the testis and resected prostate were
infiltrated by metastatic adenocarcinoma that had a Gleason score of 4 + 3 (Fig. 1). Tumor cells showed a strong positive stain for PSA and
p504s (Fig. 2). An androgen receptor block was initiated following the surgery. At the 2-month follow-up exam, his total PSA had decreased
to 0.8 ng/mL. It has now been 20 months since the surgery, and his PSA was elevated with 2.87. The rate of PSA rising seems to be around
0.10 ng/mL per month. Prostate cancer metastasizes more commonly to the lymphnodes, bone, lung, liver, bladder, or brain, but rarely to the
testis.1,2 This is a case of asymptomatic metastases of prostate cancer to the bilateral testis with no metastasis to other organs, and it
was incidentally detected in the absence of clinical symptoms of the testis and scrotum. In most instances, metastatic carcinomas of the
prostate that infiltrate the testis are asymptomatic and are incidentally detected during autopsies, or following a bilateral orchiectomy
for hormonal management in cases of advanced prostate cancer. Johansson and Lannes3 reported that about 4% of testicular metastases are
detected incidentally during orchiectomy for advanced prostate cancer. After examining 24,000 autopsy results, Pienkos and Jablockow4
reported a 0.06% incidence of testicular metastasis. Prostate cancer may spread to the testis by arterial embolism, retrograde venous
extension, retrograde lymphatic spread, or direct extension through the vas deferens.3-5 The prognostic significance of testicular
metastasis from prostate carcinoma is still unknown. Nevertheless, it is commonly regarded as a sign of advanced prostate disease. Owing to
the very unusual presentation of this case, it is difficult to assess the value of solitary testicular metastasis as a prognostic indicator.
This report calls attention to a rare manifestation of asymptomatic solitary testicular metastasis. This clinical event should be considered
in hormone-refractory prostate cancer patients with PSA progression and even in patients without evidence of metastasis to other organs. The
authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Neoplasm infiltrating the hole testicular tissue (arrow) with adenocarcinoma. The testis
shows an invasion by prostatic adenocarcinoma (×40) and resected prostate tissue (×150)(H&E). Tumor cells show a strong positive stain for
prostate specific antigen (PSA) (A) and p504s (B) (×200).
