Lipoid proteinosis (LP) is a rare disorder and it can affect every organ in the body. The clinical manifestations of LP may vary
considerably between affected individuals. Short stature is reported in patients with LP however the underlying etiology is not clear. Short
stature may be due to endocrine dysfunction caused by deposition of hyaline−like material in endocrine glands. We investigated a 13 year old
patient with LP (507 delT mutation) who had severe short stature. He had hoarseness since the age of one year, followed by characteristic
skin lesions for LP and short stature. There was no pathology with respect to endocrinological investigations in our patient including
growth hormone−IGF axis. Our results show that short stature in LP can not be explained by endocrinological abnormalities. Short stature may
be an intrinsic component of the syndrome. Conflict of interest:None declared. Lipoid proteinosis (LP) is a condition characterized by the
deposition of periodic acid Schiff−positive hyaline−like material in various tissues including skin, mucous membranes and internal
organs.(1, 2) The etiology of LP is currently unknown. It has been shown that LP results from mutations in extracellular matrix protein 1
(ECM1) genes on chromosome 1q21. Although classical features include laryngeal infiltration leading to hoarseness, scarring and
infiltrations of the skin, LP can affect every organ in the body.(1, 2) Recurrent episodes of inflamed parotid and submandibular glands may
occur. A shortened tongue with a thickened frenulum may also be seen.(3) Other extracutaneous features include epilepsy and neuropsychiatric
abnormalities, sometimes in association with calcifications in the temporal lobes or in the hippocampus.(4, 5) Deposition of hyalinelike
material in the eye may cause corneal opacities or secondary glaucoma. Intestinal bleeding may occur as a result of deposition in the small
bowel.(6, 7) Lung and bronchial involvement has also been reported in patients with LP.(8) Insulin resistance was also detected.(9)
Chakrabarti et al.(10) reported a patient with LP and dwarfism. The cause of dwarfism could not be elicited in this patient and it was
postulated that the short stature could have been due to defective osteoblasts which are biologically similar to fibroblasts.
Endocrinological dysfunction was not evaluated in this patient. Recently, short stature was reported in two LP patients from two different
families.(11) Considering the possibility that short stature in LP patients may be due to endocrine dysfunction caused by deposition of
hyaline−like material in endocrine glands, we investigated one of the patients reported below (Patient 1) for endocrinological involvement.
Patient 1. A 13−year−old boy had been referred to our clinic with a history of hoarseness since the age of one year, followed by skin
lesions and short stature. He was the offspring of a second degree consanguineous marriage. His height was 128.2 cm, weight 25.9 kg and body
mass index 15.8. Expressed as standard deviation scores (SDS), these values were –3.9 SDS, –3.1 SDS and –1.6 SDS respectively, according to
age and sex specific Turkish standards.(12, 13) Sitting height/ height ratio was normal for age (0.52). Mother’s height was 168.5 cm (0.9
SD) and father’s height was 175.1 cm (–0.2 SD). Physical examination revealed multiple acneiform scars on the face; beaded papules on the
margins of the eyelids; papulovesicular lesions, scars and skin hyperkeratosis on the hands, elbows, knees, axilla and buttocks (Figure 1).
Scarring was reported following trauma or injury. The cutaneous changes were unrelated to sun exposure. The patient’s tongue was firm,
thick, pale, with yellowish−white papules on its surface. The mobility of the tongue was restricted by a thickened frenulum. Dentition was
normal. There were no signs of puberty. Developmental milestones were normal. Routine blood chemistry, lipid profile, complete blood count,
urine analysis and stool examination were all within the normal ranges. Bone age corresponded to age 10 years, according to the Greulich and
Pyle method.(14) The electroencephalogram was normal. Further investigations were undertaken to detect deposition of hyaline−like material
at various sites. Fundoscopic and slit lamp examination of the eyes revealed normal results. Laryngoscopic examination showed mucosal
thickening in the vocal cords and subglottic region. Serum levels of vitamin A, zinc and copper were normal. Hoarseness and characteristic
skin changes of the patient was pathognomonic for LP. Histopathological examination of skin biopsy specimen showed orthokeratotic
hyperkeratosis and acanthosis of epidermis, hyperkeratosis, acanthosis and evident bunch of collagen arranged in parallel to surface, and
tight and fibrotic appearance of dermis and ectasia of some small blood vessels, some hyaline material deposition and hyaline appearance of
basal lamina and fibrosis of papillary dermis. The results of endocrinological investigations are shown in Table 1. Serum levels of thyroid
hormone, insulin like growth factor− I (IGF−I) and IGF−binding protein−3 (IGFBP− 3) were normal. Growth hormone (GH) secretion investigated
by GH tests and sensitivity investigated by IGF−1 response to GH injection did not reveal GH deficiency or GH insensitivity. Adrenal cortex
function was also normal at insulin tolerance test. Gonadotropin− releasing hormone test and testosterone response to human chorionic
gonadotropin (HCG) stimulation were within normal ranges for age and pubertal status, indicative of a normally functioning
hypothalamo−pituitary−gonadal axis. Oral glucose tolerance test, performed for evaluation of insulin resistance, revealed normal results.
Magnetic scanning showed calcification in both amygdals. Pituitary gland imaging results were unremarkable. For investigation of
osteoblastic activity and bone turnover, bone mineral density of the lumbar L1−L4 vertebrae, serum levels of calcium, phosphorus and bone
turnover markers were evaluated. The results were normal (Table 2). Endoscopic examination of the upper gastrointestinal tract and small
bowel biopsy also gave normal results. Patient 2. The family history of Patient 1 revealed that one of his younger cousins (a 6 years old
male) also had a hoarse voice and very mild cutaneous findings. On examination, this patient’s height and weight were at the 10th percentile
for age. His mental development was normal. His parents were also first cousins. Informed consent for genetic analysis was obtained from the
families of both patients. The genetic analyses were performed in St John’s Institute of Dermatology, London, UK. Both patients were
homozygous for mutation 507delT in exon 6 of ECM1. Genetic analysis of the parents yielded a heterogeneous mutation 507delT in both parents
of patient 1 and in the father of patient 2. LP results from mutations in ECM1, a glycoprotein expressed in several tissues including the
skin. This glycoprotein is composed of two alternatively spliced isoforms, ECM1a and ECM1b, the latter lacking exon 7 of this 10−exon gene.
The mutations map onto chromosome 1q21. To date, mutations that either affect ECM1a alone or that disturb both ECM1 transcripts have been
demonstrated in several cases. Over 20 different mutations have been detected throughout the world.(1, 2) Exons 6 and 7 are the most common
sites for ECM1 mutations in LP. Clinically, it appears that mutations outside exon 7 are usually associated with a slightly more severe
mucocutaneous LP phenotype. Neurological features do not show any specific genotype−phenotype correlation.(1, 2) The clinical manifestations
of LP may vary considerably between affected individuals. Individuals with the same genetic background and the identical mutation were shown
to have a vastly different phenotype.(1, 2) Homozygous 507delT mutation was detected in our patients. Although both of our patients have the
same mutation, the severity of disease was very different in the two patients. This particular mutation has been documented previously. Two
Thai brothers with temporal lobe epilepsy and a 3−year−old Iranian male only with skin lesions and hoarseness were reported.(2) Uchida et
al.(15) detected the same mutation in a patient with mucocutaneous lymphangiogenesis. Chakrabarti et al.(10) reported a patient with LP and
dwarfism. The cause of dwarfism could not be elicited in this patient and it was postulated that the short stature may have been be due to
defective osteoblasts which are biologically similar to fibroblasts. Our patient also has short stature. However, his osteoblastic activity
markers, bone turnover markers and bone mineral density were all normal. Endocrinological investigations based on the possibility that short
stature in LP patients may be due to endocrine dysfunction caused by deposition of hyaline−like material in the endocrine glands also failed
to detect any endocrinological organ involvement. Our results show that short stature in LP cannot be explained by endocrinological
abnormalities. We postulate that short stature in LP patients probably constitutes one of the components of this rare syndrome with a
hitherto unknown etiology. Further cases with short stature, if any, will enlighten this association. Sequencing of the ECM1 gene was kindly
performed by Dr Lu Liu and Professor John McGrath, St John’s Institute of Dermatology, London, UK.
