Giant leiomyosarcoma of scrotum is a rare tumour. A case of scrotum leiomyosarcoma is presented in a 67 year old patient with scrotal
filariasis which was managed successfully with total scrotectomy with bilateral orchidectomy, degloved penis reconstructed with rotation
advancement supra pubic fasciocutaneous flap. We made a literature search proving the rarity of this lesion type. Only 36 cases have been
described and the first case in a filarial scrotum Leiomyosarcoma of the scrotum is a rare tumour. Scrotal leiomyosarcomas (LMS) are slow
growing tumours that present as firm rubbery nontender irregular mass . They may arise from paratesticular or scrotal skin. Over 95% of all
paratesticular leiomyosarcomas are located in the spermatic cord or epididymis; their location in the scrotal skin is exceptional. To date
approximate 36 scrotal LMS have been reported in literature. We report a rare case of giant primary scrotal LMS arising in a filarial
scrotum. There is no report of such giant LMS and none in the background of scrotal elephantiasis. A 67 years old patient of high
socioeconomic status reported to the outpatient clinic with complain of rapidly ulcerated mass in the scrotum. He had history of filariasis
and scrotal swelling of more than 40 years duration. His Eastern Cooperative Oncology Group (ECOG) performance Status was 3, capable of only
limited self care, confined to bed or chair more than 50% of waking hours, due to large painful swelling of the scrotum . On local
examination, huge filarial scrotum with skin changes and buried penis, 30 × 30 cm ulcerated firm diffuse mass of the scrotal skin
encroaching over the root of penile skin [figures 1, 2]. The tumour was mobile not fixed to the testes. Metastatic work up included CT chest
and abdomen and was negative. Wedge biopsy was compatible with Leiomyosarcoma. After an informed written consent patient underwent a radical
resection of tumour including total scrotectomy and bilateral orchidectomy, degloving of buried penis with reconstruction by rotation
advancement supra pubic fasciocutaneous flap [figures 3, 4, 5, 6]. Patient recovery was uneventful. Patients ECOG performance scale improved
from 3 to 1, he became ambulatory with his ability to perform routine plus outdoor activity on his own. Large 30x30 cm tumour with overlying
ulcer over the right scrotum. Large 30x30 cm tumour with overlying ulcer over the right scrotum. Radical resection of tumour. Radical
resection of tumour. Radical resection of tumour. Reconstruction of degloved penis done with suprapubic fasciocutaneous flap. Post operative
histopathology revealed 28 × 25 × 15 cm fleshy tumour with an over lying ulcer. Testes were not involved by the tumour. All resected margins
were negative. Microscopically a malignant mesenchymal neoplasm was identified with smooth muscle differentiated intermingling bundle of
cells with eosinophilic abundant mitotic figure 15 mitosis per 10 high power. Tumour was positive for actin, vimentin and desmin and
negative for S 100. Based on histopathology findings and Immunohistochemistry markers diagnosis of scrotal leiomyosarcoma was made. Patient
received postoperative external beam radiation 60G/30fractions. He is on regular follow up for past 19 months and is disease free. Soft
tissue Sarcomas are 1% of all malignancies. Leiomyosarcomas constitutes 10 to 20% of soft tissue sarcomas. They arise most often from
uterus, gastrointestinal tract and retroperitoneal region . Subcutaneous LMS are 1 to 2% of all superficial soft tissue malignancies . Among
genitourinary sarcomas in adults, leiomyosarcomas are the most common type and arises in the bladder, kidney, or prostate. Its origin in
scrotum is exceptional with only 36 cases have been reported in literature. LMS are malignant mesenchymal line neoplasm with size of the
tumor varying from 2 to 9 cm, with an average of 5 cm. Biopsy is done to confirm the diagnoses of LMS. A confirmative diagnosis of LMS is
based on histological examination. They show spindle cells with cigar shaped nuclei arranged in interweaving fascicles . On
Immunohistochemistry they are positive for actin, desmin and CD 34 . The mode of spread is primarily haematogenous to lung, liver, and bone.
Prognoses of LMS depend on tumour size, depth, grade and evidence of distant metastases. Scrotal elephantiasis is caused by acquired
filarial infestation with Wuchereria bancrofti. Occasionally it has been attributed to radiotherapy, neoplasm and lymphadenectomy. It is
emotionally distressing and physically disabling. With problems of hygiene, urinary incontinence, unesthetic appearance, loss of libido and
immobility are severely debilitating symptom . Filariasis in advance stages may evolve into scrotal lymphedema and scrotal elephantiasis. In
1948 Stewart and Treves first described the association of chronic lymphedema with lymphangiosarcoma . Lymphangiosarcomas are common
malignancies in those with chronic filarial infections . Sarcomas have been seen after filarial infection and chronic lymphedema . Scrotal
leiomyosarcoma have a potential of distant metastases. Here in we report the first case of large Leiomyosarcoma of a filarial scrotum.
Scrotal Leiomyosarcoma in our case was a high grade, large size, stage III having a potential of distant metastases. The paucity of
literature in this area often makes treatment decisions difficult. Simple excision proved to be inadequate treatment for sarcomas in the
paratesticular region. In the Princess Margaret Hospital report, wide excision revealed microscopic residual disease in 27% of completely
excised cases . The primary treatment of LMS of scrotum is complete resection with histological negative margins. The difficulty in
achieving an oncological safe margin reflects the tumour biology. An aggressive initial resection is required at the time of the first
operation . Many surgical methods have been described for scrotal and penile reconstruction. Like pedicle groin flap based on superficial
circumflex iliac artery to cover the penis and bilateral superior medial thigh flap for scrotal reconstruction . We preferred a single
staged, simpler reconstruction by using rotation advancement flap of the supra pubic area over the two staged pedicle groin flap to
reconstruct the penis. The scrotal defect was primarily closed. For most patients, local control is improved with preoperative or
postoperative radiotherapy. Hensley and colleagues were the first to report the activity of the gemcitabine-docetaxel combination in
patients with leiomyosarcomas . The role of chemotherapy for high-risk patients remains controversial, but chemotherapy is used at several
major centres' for high-risk patients. In our case we treated our patient with wide local excision and postoperative 60 Gy radiotherapy. •
Scrotal leiomyosarcoma is a rare clinical entity and scrotal leiomyosarcoma in a filarial lymphadenomatous scrotum; this is the first case
to be reported. • Aggressive surgical resection including tumour and diseased filarial skin is recommended. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MT, SVSD, NKS, AK and MG prepared the
manuscript and reviewd the literature. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
