The authors suggest that the decreased blood loss associated with laparoscopic surgery coupled with appropriate perioperative factor
transfusions can minimize the risk of hemorrhage in patients with Hemophilia A who require prostatectomy. Given the rich blood supply to the
prostate and the adjacent Santorini's plexus, radical prostatectomy is associated with significant blood loss even in patients with normal
coagulation profiles. In patients with hemophilia, any surgical procedure carries a risk of significant hemorrhage due to a deficiency of
factors in the coagulation cascade. For these reasons, hemophiliac patients have often been encouraged to undergo radiation or other forms
of nonsurgical treatment for clinically localized prostate cancer. However, the decreased blood loss associated with a laparoscopic/robotic
approach and appropriate perioperative factor transfusions can minimize the risk of hemorrhage during robotic-assisted radical
prostatectomy. We present the case report of a successful robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy in a patient with mild hemophilia A,
with an estimated blood loss for the procedure of 20mL. We will focus on the perioperative management of the patient's factor replacement.
Better hematological management has reduced bleeding complications in patients with acquired or congenital bleeding disorders who have
undergone surgery. Successful open subtotal and transurethral prostatectomy has previously been described in patients with known hemorrhagic
disorders after appropriate perioperative preparation.1 One case report of a successful extraperitoneal laparoscopic radical prostatectomy
has been described in a patient with hemophilia B (factor IX deficiency).2 We present the first report to date of a successful
transperitoneal robotic-assisted laparoscopic prostatectomy (RALP) in a patient with hemophilia A (factor VIII deficiency). The patient was
a 69-year-old white male with mild hemophilia A, who was diagnosed with clinically localized prostate cancer following evaluation for an
abnormal digital rectal examination (T2a nodule). His PSA was 1.3. He underwent a prostate biopsy with periprocedural intranasal 1-deamino
8-D arginine vasopressin (dDAVP) and oral aminocaproic acid without bleeding complications, which revealed Gleason 3+4 = 7 prostate cancer
in 15% of one core. Prostate volume on ultrasound was 30mL. Aside from the hemophilia, the patient's past medical history is significant for
lower urinary tract symptoms managed with alpha-blockers and morbid obesity, with a body mass index of 38. He had a prior surgical history
of a left hip replacement in 1998, which was managed without bleeding complications following factor VIII replacement. All treatment options
were discussed, the patient sought numerous opinions from urologists and radiation oncologists, and the patient opted for RALP. The patient
underwent successful RALP with bilateral pelvic lymphadenectomy and bilateral nerve sparing with no bleeding complications and an estimated
blood loss of 20mL. No hemostatic agents, such as Surgicel (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ) or Floseal (Baxter, Deerfield IL), were used during the
procedure. He remained hospitalized until postoperative day (POD) 4 for careful hematologic monitoring and product administration. A small
hematoma was noted at his Jackson-Pratt drain site on POD 4, but he was hemodynamically stable and asymptomatic. The Foley catheter was
removed on POD 10. Final histopathology was pT2cN0, Gleason 3+4=7 with negative surgical margins and 10 negative lymph nodes. He had very
mild hematuria intermittently following catheter removal, but voided well until POD 28, when he developed gross hematuria and clot urinary
retention. Following a failed attempt at Foley catheter placement, he was admitted. Cystourethroscopy was performed that revealed a small
clot at the widely patent bladder neck and a slowly bleeding area at the level of the urethrovesical anastomosis. This area was fulgurated,
no further bleeding was identified, and a Foley catheter was placed. No further hematuria was noted, and he passed a trial of void 3 days
later. Since then, no further complications have developed, and his PSA is undetectable. Baseline factor VIII levels were 8% to 14% (normal
range, 50% to 150%), with a response of >50% with dDAVP. This is consistent with mild hemophilia A. The goal was to keep his factor VIII
levels above 100% during surgery and above 30% for 14 days postoperatively. On the morning of surgery, he received 20ug of intravenous dDAVP
and 2720 IU of intravenous concentrated factor VIII with von Willebrand factor (Alphanate). His postoperative factor VIII level was 87%, and
his hemoglobin was 13.9g/dL. Postoperatively, he received 2720IU of Alphanate every 12 hours for 3 days; in the 24 hours prior to discharge,
he received 2 doses of 4080 IU. He also received 20ug of intravenous dDAVP daily for the first 2 postoperative days. Hemoglobin on POD one
was 13.2; it reached a nadir of 13.0 on POD 3. His factor VIII level remained between 84% and 120% throughout his hospital course and peaked
at 190% immediately prior to discharge. Following discharge, he received infusions of 4080 IU of Alphanate daily for 7 days, then 2720 IU
daily for another 7 days. An outpatient factor VIII level was drawn on POD 7, which at 66% was within the target range. At the time of
readmission for gross hematuria on POD 28, his factor VIII level had dropped to 24% but his hemoglobin was 15.0. Prior to his
cystourethroscopy, he received intranasal dDAVP. He then received 4080 IU every 12 hours for 2 doses, and his factor VIII level responded to
74%. Open radical retropubic prostatectomy carries a high risk of intraoperative blood loss due to its rich blood supply and anatomic
location deep in the pelvis and adjacent to Santorini's plexus. However, the tamponade provided by pneumoperitoneum and better visualization
of vascular structures offered by the laparoscopic approach has substantially decreased the average blood loss during robotic radical
prostatectomy.3,4 The widespread availability and appropriate use of coagulant factors has also improved the perioperative management of
hemophiliac patients undergoing surgery.5 However, persistent concern regarding intraoperative hemorrhage has led many urologists to
consider radiation or other forms of primary prostate cancer treatment in patients with hemophilia. Our patient was extremely well informed
about prostate cancer and its various treatment options. He had no interest in active surveillance. He sought opinions from several open
surgeons who felt that his risk of intraoperative hemorrhage was too great to undergo open radical retropubic prostatectomy, and recommended
radiation therapy. Radiation oncologists felt that he was an appropriate candidate for intensity modulated radiation therapy. However, the
patient was concerned that his bothersome preoperative voiding symptoms would worsen following radiation therapy. He was most interested in
undergoing radical prostatectomy. A lengthy discussion was held with him regarding the risks and benefits of surgery, including the need for
factor administration and longer postoperative monitoring than usual, and he was accepting of the risks. Considering that he had previously
undergone successful orthopedic surgery without bleeding complications, he was confident that he could avoid significant morbidity following
prostatectomy. A multidisciplinary approach involving the urology, hematology, and anesthesia teams was used to coordinate his care. As
there had been no reported experience with the management of hemophilia A in this situation, the hematologic decisions were empiric, based
on experience with orthopedic and other open surgeries. It is recommended that patients undergoing surgery have factor VIII levels between
80% to 100% at the time of surgery and be maintained above 30% for at least 10 days to 14 days after surgery.5,6 Patients with mild
hemophilia A synthesize functional factor VIII, but at levels too low to be therapeutic. Such patients respond to dDAVP, which releases
factor VIII and von Willebrand factor (vWF) from platelets, increasing their serum concentration by up to 50%.5 In contrast, patients with
severe hemophilia do not produce any functional factor VIII, and thus do not respond to dDAVP. In addition to dDAVP, purified factor VIII is
available for intravenous infusion. This is usually necessary to achieve the factor VIII levels required in the perioperative period.
Alternatively, cryoprecipitate can be utilized; however, it can require as much as 15 units to 20 units for effective replacement.6 One risk
of factor replacement, however, is the development of antibodies to factor VIII, known as inhibitors, which functionally inhibit it. After
the patient develops such inhibitors, it is much more difficult to control future bleeding episodes, as transfused factor VIII is less
effective. The use of vWF in addition to concentrated human factor VIII has been reported to reduce the risk of inhibitor development, which
was the rationale for using Alphanate in our patient.7 His postoperative factor replacement regimen remains a topic of debate. During his
postoperative prophylactic Alphanate replacement, he did not have any bleeding issues. Potentially, this was overcautious and unnecessary;
perhaps he could have been managed with purified factor VIII alone or simply intranasal dDAVP. Clearly, when he had a bleeding complication
on POD 28, his factor VIII level was subtherapeutic. It is unknown whether this complication could have been prevented by maintaining his
factor VIII level above 30% at that time. Kernoff8 reported several cases of suprapubic or transurethral prostatectomies in which there were
extensive blood loss and massive blood requirements. Following the development and availability of factor concentrates, similar procedures
had improved rates of intraoperative hemorrhage and the postoperative course.9,10 Goldsmith1 later described a successful perioperative
management plan in hemophiliac patients who underwent subtotal prostatectomy. However, given the effective medical treatments for benign
prostatic hyperplasia that were subsequently developed, the need for surgical intervention in such patients largely disappeared. With the
growing acceptance of laparoscopic radical prostatectomy, this procedure is now feasible in patients with hemophilia.2 This case
demonstrates that with a multidisciplinary approach, RALP can successfully be performed in patients with hemophilia A. The patient was
observed in the hospital for 3 days longer than the standard one night stay, and there was a Clavien grade III bleeding complication at POD
28 that required surgical intervention.11 It is possible that this could have been avoided by longer home use of intranasal dDAVP or
intravenous factor VIII. We will use this information as we work toward establishing a protocol for the postoperative management of persons
with hemophilia undergoing RALP.
