In the current era of advanced cardiac surgery and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO), there are serious limitations with inadequate
neuromonitoring, misleading neuromonitoring, or both, especially in the setting of hemodilution and nonpulsatile flow.1 Multimodal
neurological monitoring is available and advocated in certain centers.2 However, the implications of neurological monitoring with relevance
to neurodevelopmental outcome have not been clearly delineated. As a result, there is equipoise about routine neuromonitoring, particularly
with near-infrared spectroscopy (NIRS) and the relevance of data.3 Single- or dual-channel NIRS has been used widely in cardiac theaters.4
In a previous study we used dual-channel NIRS in patients undergoing ECMO to understand cerebral and peripheral tissue oxygenation.5 Power
spectral density analysis was performed to extract vasomotion and respiratory and cardiac oscillations. To date, most NIRS studies have used
optodes placed on the forehead, which monitor only a small area of the anterior cerebrum. We have developed a novel multichannel NIRS
protocol for providing regional measures of cerebral oxygenation and hemodynamics for use in cardiac theaters and intensive care units.
Because ECMO in the cardiac intensive care unit could be a surrogate model similar to a patient undergoing cardiac surgery during
cardiopulmonary bypass, we have carried out preliminary studies on patients undergoing ECMO during manipulations in the ECMO circuit blood
flows. We present our preliminary results with our first patient undergoing ECMO in which we have identified differences in regional
cerebral oxygenation with changes in ECMO flows. In this pilot study an ETG-100 optical topographic system (Hitachi Medical Ltd, Tokyo,
Japan) was used to measure changes in oxyhemoglobin (HbO2), deoxyhemoglobin (HHb), and total hemoglobin (HbT = HbO2 + HHb) concentrations in
a 12-day-old neonate supported on venoarterial ECMO for severe respiratory failure. ECMO circuit flow was successively decreased by 10% from
initial flow every 10 to 15 minutes down to 70% of the initial flow and then gradually brought back to baseline. A novel neonatal cap was
constructed to accommodate the optical sources and detectors in a 3 × 3 array (interoptode distance = 3 cm), allowing data to be collected
from 12 channels (Figure 1, A). Multimodal data were collected synchronously with the optical data that included systemic parameters
(arterial blood pressure, heart rate , and arterial oxygen saturation ) and ECMO circuit parameters (venous oxygen saturation ). Changes in
HbO2, HHb, and HbT concentrations between phase I (from baseline flow to minimum flow ) and phase II (from 70% flow back to baseline) were
calculated from the differences in mean values over a 60-second period immediately before the change in flow. The results were analyzed with
a paired t test (P < .05). Figure 1, B, shows concentration changes in HbO2, HHb, and HbT collected from the 12 channels during changes in
ECMO flows. Significant changes in HHb, HbO2, and HbT concentrations were seen across all channels. During phase I, a decrease in ECMO flow
was associated with a substantial increase in HHb concentrations in all channels (range, 9.7 to 25.1 μmol/L). Much smaller changes were seen
in HbO2 concentrations (range, −4.3 to 3.8 μmol/L). Figure 2 shows the responses of HR, mean arterial pressure, Spo2, and Svo2 during phases
I and II. In this patient a decrease in flow is associated with a decrease in Svo2 and Spo2 and an increase in HR and mean arterial
pressure. The effect is reversed when the flow is increased back to baseline values. Similar to hemoglobin concentrations, these systemic
and ECMO parameters do not return to their baseline values by the end of the monitoring period. This single-patient study showed significant
changes in systemic oxygenation and cerebral hemoglobin concentrations in response to modest changes in ECMO flows. Regional variations were
observed between channels 8 and 10, which potentially cover different hemispheres. Reduction in flows was associated with a decrease in Svo2
and Spo2 suggestive of a decrease in oxygen delivery. This is reflected in the NIRS data with a significant increase in HHb concentrations.
The lack of a consistence decrease in HbO2 concentrations could be explained by a compensatory arterial dilation. We demonstrate that
multichannel optical topographic analysis can provide information on regional cerebral hemodynamics and oxygenation in patients supported by
ECMO. Simultaneous measurement of systemic and cerebral HbO2 and HHb concentrations can help elucidate mechanisms related to the response of
the brain during changes in ECMO and cardiopulmonary bypass flows. In this patient modest changes in ECMO flows appear to present a
significant hemodynamic challenge to cerebral circulation. Further work is necessary to support application of this novel brain-monitoring
technology in cardiac theaters and intensive care units, and we now have a protocol to further investigate regional brain oxygenation in
these patients. Supported by Hitachi Medical Ltd. Disclosures: Authors have nothing to disclose with regard to commercial support. A,
Schematic of the source-detector array and channel configuration. The photograph shows the UCL-designed neonatal cap in use with each source
(S) and detector (D) annotated. B, Oxyhemoglobin (HbO2), deoxyhemoglobin (HHb), and total hemoglobin (HbT) concentration changes from 12
channels during extracorporeal membrane oxygenation circuit flow changes. The vertical dotted lines represent the time at which a change in
flow was induced so that each section in the plots corresponds to a specific flow, as annotated on channel 1: a, baseline (100% flow); b,
90% flow; c, 80% flow; d, 70% flow; e, 80% flow; f, 90% flow; and g, baseline. Mean changes in systemic and extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation parameters during phases I and II. HR, Heart rate; MAP, mean arterial pressure; Spo2, arterial oxygen saturation; Svo2, venous
oxygen saturation.
