We report a case of early resolution of convergence spasms following the addition of antipsychotic medications and present it as a possible
alternative to the conventional treatment for convergence spasms. The cessation of atropinization of the eyes and the use of reading glasses
was achieved after only 2 months following the initiation of antipsychotic medications for childhood emotional disorder. The triad of
symptoms used to diagnose convergence spasms consists of intermittent episodes of sustained maximal convergence, accommodative spasm, and
constriction of the pupils . The etiology of convergence spasms is usually functional . Unless an organic cause can be found, the treatment
of convergence spasms consists of prolonged atropinization of the eyes and the prescription of plus lenses for reading glasses. This
treatment may have to be applied for as long as one year . We report a case of early resolution of convergence spasms following the addition
of antipsychotic medications. These results were attained not only after the initiation of antipsychotic medications in the patient, but
also following simultaneous medication of her mother's depression, which was the primary cause of the patient's emotional instability. A
7-year-old female presented complaining of intermittent diplopia and blurred vision for 2 months. The patient reported that her visual
symptoms were most severe during the daytime. Her best corrected visual acuity was 20/100 in each eye. The results of an ocular motility
examination were normal. During an ocular alignment examination, she was found to be orthophoric at distance (Fig. 1). However, variable
degrees (10 to 30 prism diopters ) of esodeviation and miotic pupils were evident only at near fixation (Fig. 2). Her esodeviation did not
change with the addition of +3.0 diopters (D) lenses. Autorefraction was performed and -10 D of high myopia was found in each eye. However,
cycloplegic refraction revealed that both eyes were nearly emmetropic (+0.5 D). The patient also complained of frequent headaches and
abdominal pain; the results of all physical and neurological examinations were normal, including a brain magnetic resonance imaging with
contrast. The patient was diagnosed with convergence spasms and was referred to the psychiatry department for her somatic complaints. Plus
lenses (+1.5 D) for reading were prescribed for atropinization of her eyes. One month after prescribing atropine eyedrops and reading
glasses, the patient's best corrected visual acuity increased to 20/20. She was orthophoric at distance but still esotropic at near fixation
without glasses. She continued to complain of intermittent diplopia, but the frequency and duration were decreased. However, the patient's
mother did not bring her daughter to the psychiatric department; the patient was again referred to the Department of Psychiatry. During a
mental status examination at the Department of Psychiatry, the patient was noted to be hyperactive, impulsive, and irritable. Her mother
appeared very depressed and her attitude toward her daughter was very cold. The patient was given a psychiatric diagnosis of childhood
emotional disorder owing to an emotionally unavailable mother suffering from major depressive disorder. The psychiatrist prescribed
Sertraline速 25 mg p.o. (antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor ) and Diazepam速 2 mg p.o. (anxiolytics, benzodiazepine) for
the patient. Additionally, Escitalopram速 10 mg p.o. (antidepressants, SSRI) was prescribed for the patient's mother. One month after
initiation of the antipsychotic medications, the patient's esodeviation at near fixation was resolved and all somatic complaints had ceased
(Fig. 3). The patient's visual acuity was 20/20 without glasses and her refraction was nearly emmetropic (+0.5 D). As such, successful
cessation of the atropinization of the patient's eyes was achieved after only 2 months. After the patient and her mother finished 6 months
of the antipsychotic medication regimen, no symptoms were evident of either convergence spasms or any other somatic disorders. The course of
therapy for convergence spasms depends on the etiology. Most convergence spasm cases are caused by a functional disorder, such as hysteria
or neurosis. If an emotional etiology is suspected, psychological counseling is in order. Emotional instability may result in a variety of
ocular manifestations besides convergence spasms, such as blurred vision, monocular diplopia, tunnel vision, blepharospasm, and nystagmus .
Emotional instability should be considered as a possible cause when patients present with these symptoms. If no signs of emotional problems
are present, a thorough neurological work-up is recommended. There are several organic causes of convergence spasms, including encephalitis,
tabes, labyrinthine fistulas, Arnold Chiari malformation, posterior fossa neurofibroma, trauma, and pituitary adenoma . Some authors have
reported positive outcomes from supportive psychotherapy and amytal interviews . However, the conventional therapy for convergence spasms
consists of atropinization of the eyes and the prescription of plus lenses for near vision . It often takes several months to a year for
ocular symptoms to dissipate . It is useful to produce cycloplegia in an attempt to break the cycle of sustained maximal convergence and
accommodative spasm. However, prolonged atropinization of the eyes can give rise to side effects. Dilated pupils can lead to photophobia and
blurred vision with near fixation and the wearing of reading glasses can cause discomfort. Other adverse events may include allergic
conjunctivitis and, rarely, fever and aggravation of asthma . In the present case, the successful cessation of the atropinization of the
patient's eyes was achieved only one month after the patient and her mother initiated antipsychotic medications. Of course, antidepressants
and anxiolytics may result in side effects. Sertraline速 may cause behavioral activation, nausea, and diarrhea . These events may occur early
in treatment with a high dose (>100 mg) of the drug or following the addition of drugs that inhibit the metabolism of SSRIs . In addition,
some patients also experience ataxia (<2%) and dizziness (<1%) with benzodiazepines . However, most benzodiazepines, especially low potency
benzodiazepines like diazepam, are generally well tolerated . The low dose and low potency of the antipsychotic medications given to the
present patient did not elicit any of these side effects. We report a case of early resolution of convergence spasms after the addition of
antipsychotic medications. Additional treatment for childhood emotional disorder, which was the indirect cause of the patient's convergence
spasms, reduced the required duration of atropinization of the eyes from one year to 2 months. We recommend active referral and
collaboration with psychiatrists when treating patients whose disease may be functional in origin. This course of action may reduce the
duration of symptoms in certain patients. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. The patient was
orthophoric at distance. The patient demonstrated esotropia of 15 to 20 prism diopters at near fixation. At this time, her pupils were
constricted and autorefraction performed immediately after near fixation revealed -10.0 diopters of pseudomyopia. The patient's esodeviation
at near fixation resolved only one month after initiation of the antipsychotic medications. The patient's visual acuity was 20/20 without
glasses and her refraction was nearly emmetropic (+0.5 diopters).
