Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection The
frequency of foreign body retention in the abdominal cavity ranges from 1 in 100 to 1 in 3000 surgeries performed. Worldwide literature
describes only a few cases of the migration of misplaced surgical gauze into the colon. The first case is a 60-year-old patient following
laparoscopic cholecystectomy, who excreted (on his own) a cotton sheet 30×65 cm after 26 weeks, which did not possess a radiological
locator. The latter fact caused diagnostic difficulties in interpreting ultrasonography, CT-scans and abdominal X-rays. Colonoscopy after 4
months following the excretion of the sheet showed flat, stretched ulceration of the colonic wall near the hepatic turn. The second case is
a 76-year-old who had undergone several abdominal surgeries, including a classical cholecystectomy and extirpation of the uterus along with
related tissues, as a result of cancer and with subsequent radiotherapy. The reason for the last intervention was an occlusion, which
required a resection due to abscesses inside the peritoneal cavity. Abdominal pain continued after the surgery. Uroscopy and abdominal
X-rays were performed 3 months later, which confirmed the presence of foreign matter in the abdominal cavity. Most foreign objects that have
migrated into the colon will be excreted autonomously, which warrants a conservative assessment. Radiologically-tagged materials should be
used, which will greatly ease identification in cases of suspected retention of surgical materials in the abdominal cavity. The frequency of
the retention of foreign bodies in the abdominal cavity ranges from 1 in 100 to 1 in 3000 performed surgeries . These foreign bodies consist
of various types of cotton surgical materials. Gauze may cause 2 types of intraperitoneal reactions: an aseptic fibrosis, which causes
fusions and encystment; or a suppurating reaction, which causes the formation of pustules . Yet another possibility is the migration of the
foreign body from the peritoneal cavity into the gastrointestinal lumen, most often occurring after gynaecological surgery and
cholecystectomy . The aforementioned types of surgery suggest the section of the gastrointestinal tract into which the surgical gauze
migrates. Surgical material regularly migrates to the section of the gastrointestinal tract located closest to it. For this reason, the
foreign body most often migrates into the lumen of the small intestine, and less often to the stomach, duodenum, colon or bladder . The
literature describes only a few cases of the migration of surgical gauze into the colon. The cases we present are unusual due to the size of
the foreign body left in the patient, its type, and diagnostic difficulties. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed in a 60-year-old man
because of chronic cholecystitis caused by gallstones. During the surgery, haemorrhaging was observed in the area of the gallbladder. Open
abdominal surgery was decided upon. The haemorrhaging was staunched using a suture with underpin. Six cotton surgical napkins with a
radiological tag and a blue ribbon loop sewn onto a corner were used during the surgery (30×70 cm). Abdominal pain ensued following the
surgery. Several ultrasound examinations made of the site of the excised gallbladder showed a heterogeneous area of 7×12 cm. This formation
had hyperechogenic reflections and septa inside. The ultrasonography (USG) operators treated the ensuing changes as the image of a haematoma
being absorbed post-cholecystectomy. After 6 months, X-ray analysis (Figure 1) and computer-aided tomography (Figure 2) of the abdominal
cavity were performed, and neither showed deviation from normal conditions. Two weeks following the tomography, the patient autonomously
excreted the cotton material, a 30×65 cm cotton napkin, lacking the blue ribbon and in-woven surgical marker (Figure 3), through the anus.
This material was not used in the surgical ward, but in the neonatal and obstetrical wards. Likely, during preparation and sterilisation,
this material was placed together with the surgical napkins. The foreign body left in the abdominal cavity was not noticed because of the
lack of visual tags. Following the operation, the absence of radiological markers made the unequivocal identification of the ensuing changes
difficult, and they were treated as a haematoma. A further, retrospective, examination of the X-ray analysis CT-scan showed that a foreign
body could have been observed in the abdominal cavity. Likewise, the changes observed in the USG were not due to a haematoma, but to
surgical material. Colonoscopy control performed 4 months following the excretion of the napkin showed flat, stretched ulceration of the
colon wall near the hepatic flexure. This was interpreted as a trace of the migration from the subhepatic region through the colon wall. A
76-year-old woman had undergone several abdominal operations; 20 years prior to submission she underwent a classical cholecystectomy, and 6
years earlier she underwent a full ovario-hysterectomy and excision of the inguinal lymph nodes due to uterine cancer. The reason for
another surgical intervention was a mechanical obstruction. During laparoscopy it was noted that the final loop of the small intestine had
been drawn into a metastasis in the lesser pelvis, which obstructed the intestinal lumen. A side-to-side anastomosis was made of the small
intestine with the caecum, bypassing the drawn-in loop. Lower abdominal pain appeared after the operation, as well as periodic diarrhoea,
burning sensation during urination, urinary incontinence and fever. Suspecting a subhepatic abscess on the basis of USG analysis, the
abdominal cavity was re-opened. A small cavity containing serous matter was emptied in the subhepatic region. Furthermore, a number of
adhesions were partially separated in the abdominal cavity. The aforementioned symptoms continued to occur in the patient following the
operation. Urography was performed after another 3 months, and X-ray analysis showed a foreign body in the abdominal cavity. Tomography was
performed, but its conclusions were equivocal. The patient was admitted into the surgery ward, but during the preparation for investigative
laparoscopy, her condition worsened. Due to respiratory and circulatory dysfunction, the patient was intubated and placed in intensive care.
Following another month, the patient excreted the surgical material. After another month in the intensive care ward, the patient died.
During the post-mortem, in a section of the sigmoid colon, a 5×4 cm indentation was found, covered by a small quantity of serous matter.
This indentation contained a perforation of the colon, 1.5 cm in diameter, connected to a similar opening in the ileum. Nearby was a similar
opening in the small intestine, connected to an opening in the bladder. The literature describes 10 cases of migration of a foreign body
from the peritoneal cavity into the colon (Table 1). The abandonment of a foreign body in the abdominal cavity is not characteristic only of
nations with a low level of medical development; the data shows that this complication occurs in many nations. The compiled data relating to
the migration of surgical materials shows that the most frequent operations following with gauze remains in the abdomen are cholecystectomy
and caesarean section . This also pertains to patients in whom the foreign body enters the colon. From among 10 cases of foreign body
migration into the colon, in 4 this occurred following cholecystectomy, and 3 in women following caesarean section. The increasing use of
the laparoscopic technique in the treatment of bile stones may change the aforementioned ratio in favour of the caesarean section. Although
the documentation relating to the 10 discussed cases of the migration of surgical gauze into the colon is not always complete, it is certain
that haemorrhaging during surgery occurred in 3 cases. In a further 2 patients, caesarean section was the indication. In 5 cases the
aforementioned circumstances may have been caused by the hurried activity of surgical staff and may have led to the abandonment of foreign
matter in the abdomen. The period elapsing from the operation during which the foreign body was left behind to the diagnosis varied from 2
months to 5 years. Most often, however, this period was less than 1 year; this was true in 6 cases out of 10. In all of the described cases,
the foreign body entered the colon in the immediate vicinity of the operated organ. In female patients who had undergone caesarean sections
or hysterectomies, the foreign body migrated into the sigmoid colon or rectum. The migration of dressing materials through the colon wall is
made possible by the intraperitoneal reaction to a foreign body, where aseptic fibre-formation processes occur, leading to the occurrence of
numerous adhesions . In this way, despite the opening of the colon wall, peritonitis does not occur. Abscess formation does not accompany
the migration of a foreign body through the colon wall. Abscesses in the area of the ingress of surgical material into the sigmoid colon
occurred in only 1 patient, and was accompanied by numerous perforations of the small intestine . The material which entered the colon
varied in size, from swabs of several centimetres in size, up to comparatively large napkins of 40×60 cm, or 30×70 cm. The mechanism of
migration of such large material through the colon wall is not entirely understood. Significantly, the volume of the surgical material
decreases after saturation with blood or serum, and the material is further folded and twisted by the surrounding organs. The complaints
noted in patients with remaining foreign bodies were periodic pains of moderate intensity. Rarely, other symptoms were noted: fever or bowel
movement disorders such as constipation or diarrhoea. Physical examination showed painful resistance in as many as 6 out of 10 cases.
Abdominal X-ray analysis demonstrated signs of a foreign body in 7 out of 9 cases. As some authors indicate, this diagnosis is unequivocal
if the foreign body contains a radiological marker, whereas in the remaining cases it is difficult . Excluding metallic foreign bodies, the
investigative X-ray will show small air bubbles or banded shading . The air bubbles may be the result of contact between the foreign body
and the colon as a result of its perforation or erosion . Another explanation of the air bubbles may be the inflammation caused by a foreign
body, abscess formation or air caught in the synthetic fibres . The air bubbles disappear gradually over time . USG examination was
performed on 4 persons. It showed a hyperechogenic foreign body in the lumen of the transverse colon and intestinal oedemas . The masses
observed during USG are often cystic, with a strong acoustic signature . CT scans of the abdominal cavity were performed more often than
were USG analyses. In this technique, foreign bodies are characterised by calcification and air bubbles, forming a marbled image . In 3
persons, a contrasting perfusion was made of the intestine, which showed signal loss . Colonoscopy was performed in 3 cases, which confirmed
the presence of a foreign body. It should be stressed that this examination made it possible to remove the foreign body in 1 of the patients
. In another case, the migration of surgical material was observed through the colon wall, up to its autonomous excretion . Among the 10
cases of foreign body migration through the colon wall, 6 patients autonomously excreted the surgical material, and only in 3 cases was
surgical treatment required. In 2 patients the migration of the foreign object into the colon was accompanied by perforations of the small
intestine . In these patients the foreign body was removed from the colon, and portions of the small intestine and colon were resectioned .
The number of reports of abandonment of foreign bodies in the abdominal cavity, and thus cases of migration through the colon wall, is
likely lower than the actual occurrence of this event . Surgical material with radiological markers should be used, which greatly eases
diagnosis in suspected cases of material being left in the abdominal cavity. Colonoscopy is indicated in cases of suspected migration of a
foreign body into the colon, which is not only of diagnostic significance, but also facilitates the endoscopic removal of the surgical
material from the intestine. Most foreign bodies that have migrated into the colon will be excreted autonomously, which justifies a
conservative approach. Source of support: Departmental sources Patient I Abdominal cavity X-ray in the vertical position. Patient I
Abdominal cavity CT scan. Patient I surgical gauze spontaneously excreted through the colon. Migration of foreign body into the colon –
literature review.
