Enhanced S Cone Syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized clinically by an absence of rod function, a replacement of
most L and M cone function by S cone activity (Goldmann-Favre Syndrome) and by variable degrees of retinal degeneration in different
families. The causative gene, nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group E, member 3 (NR2E3), controls the developmental sequence for rods and
cones. The purpose of this study was to compare the nature and implications of mutations in two subjects with Enhanced S Cone Syndrome who
have significantly different degrees of degenerative damage. A direct sequencing approach was used to identify the mutations. Genomic DNA
was amplified from all the exons of NR2E3 and used as a template for sequencing. Of the two families studied, Case 1 is of Persian ethnicity
while Case 2 is Brazilian. A total of six individuals within the two families were studied. Case 1 (original propositus of the syndrome) has
the characteristic developmental rod/cone abnormality with large amplitude electroretinogram responses and no retinal degeneration. She was
homozygous for a novel mutation, c. (p.G66-C67del), which lies entirely within the P-box for this gene. By comparison, Case 2 had Goldmann-
Favre Syndrome with retinal degeneration and low electroretinogram signals. She was a compound heterozygote for c. (p.N65-C67del), mutations
that have been reported previously. Her second mutation overlaps that of Case 1 within the P-box. The novel in-frame homozygous deletion of
Case 1, within the P-box motif of the DNA binding domain, caused a developmental abnormality without retinal degeneration. Case 2, with more
traditional Goldmann-Favre Syndrome with retinal degeneration, was a compound heterozygote where one allele had a similar P-box deletion but
the other was a splicing defect. Case 1 is the first reported homozygous deletion within the P-box. This is the first report of NR2E3
mutations in a Persian and a Brazilian family. Enhanced S Cone Syndrome (ESCS) is a rare autosomal recessive retinal disorder that overlaps
clinically with the more severe Goldmann-Favre Syndrome. It is characterized clinically by an absence of rod function and a replacement of
most L and M cone activity by S cone responsiveness . The diagnosis is determined by characteristic electroretinogram (ERG) findings of no
rod activity and large S cone–mediated responses under both photopic and scotopic conditions. There may also be retinal degenerative changes
in a circular pattern about the arcades, and cystic edema in the fovea, which carry the designation of Goldmann-Favre Syndrome and are
associated with a considerable loss of visual acuity and visual field . There is debate as to whether ESCS is largely static or progressive,
and there is variability among different families . The gene for ESCS on chromosome 15q23 was originally identified by Haider et al. , and
was termed nuclear receptor subfamily 2, group E, member 3 (NR2E3). It encodes a nuclear receptor ligand-dependent transcription factor. The
expression of this gene was localized to the outer nuclear layer of the human retina , as well as other animal models . This influences the
development of photoreceptors and their differentiation into rod and cone types . In ESCS, rods fail to develop and are replaced largely by
cells that behave physiologically as S cones. L and M cones are reduced in number. Different abnormalities in the NR2E3 gene have been
reported, and individuals with ESCS manifestations may be either homozygous or heterozygous. Most of these reports involve patients with
significant levels of retinal degeneration and visual dysfunction. NR2E3 mutations including the common mutation c.119–2A>C have been
reported in clumped pigmentary retinal dystrophy . Autosomal dominant/recessive retinitis pigmentosa patients also have been shown to carry
the common p.G56R (RP37) mutation . We had access to the original propositus , a unique case that might elucidate the distinction between
photoreceptor developmental abnormality and retinal degeneration. This case was first described because of her unusual ERG, showing large
amplitude signals with a characteristic S cone pattern but with essentially no degenerative changes. We have sequenced the gene from her
family as well as that from another family with more typical Goldmann-Favre Syndrome, to see if the results might give clues to the
phenotypic variation in ESCS (development versus degenerative change). It raises the intriguing question of how certain in frame deletion
mutations within the ligand binding domain results in a developmental only defect. The study was approved by the Institutional Review Board
of the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA-HSPC 94–07–243–03). Informed consent was obtained from participants and the study was
performed according to the tenets of the Helsinki Declaration. The patients were given full ophthalmological exams, and ERGs were performed
according to the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision (ISCEV) standards. A total of six individuals from two
families (Family 1: #2743, 3385, 3386, 3387 and Family 2: #2883, 2884) in good health were studied. DNA was extracted from whole blood
lymphocytes, using the Gentra blood extraction kit (Qiagen, Chatsworth, CA). PCR amplification of the genomic DNA was performed using
intronic primers to the human NR2E3 gene (Table 1). The PCR products were separated on agarose gel; bands were cut and then purified using a
Qiagen DNA gel purification kit (Qiagen). The purified DNA was sequenced using a Thermo Sequenase Radiolabeled Terminator Cycle Sequencing
Kit (USB, Cleveland, OH) and electrophoresed on a 6.5% acrylamide gel containing 7 M urea and 1× TBE containing 90mM Tris, 45 mM Tris-borate
and 1 mM EDTA pH 9.5 on a DNA sequencing apparatus (Biorad, Hercules, CA) at 80 W in 1× TBE. The NR2E3 reference sequence NM_014249.2 was
used as the reference RNA sequence and the AJ276674 genomic assembly was used for the DNA sequence. The propositus of ESCS is a Persian
female (#2743) first seen at age 10 years because of night blindness. No other immediate family members were reported to be affected. She
was otherwise asymptomatic, and had a visual acuity 20/25 on the right, 20/20 on the left. Visual fields and color vision were normal, and a
retinal exam was normal except for a few sparse yellowish spots in the arcade regions. Vascular caliber was full, and she had a normal
foveal reflex. Her ERG showed no detectable rod signal, but large amplitude slow scotopic responses that hardly changed under photopic
conditions were observed (Figure 1) . These findings were stable on follow-up nine years later . Multifocal ERG testing showed L and M cone
function mixed in with the S cone responses in the central 9° of the macula. The individual represents an unusual extreme of ESCS in which
there are essentially no stigmata of the retinal degeneration of the Goldmann-Favre Syndrome. Electroretinograms comparing normal tracings
to Case 1 and Case 2. Case 1 shows electroretinogram (ERG) amplitudes similar to the normal dark-adapted combined rod-cone response under
both scotopic and photopic conditions (Scale bars show amplitude 500 microvolts, duration 75 ms). The responses from Case 2 have similar
waveform, and scotopic-photopic homology, but lower amplitude. After amplification of all exons of NR2E3, we sequenced them for patient
#2743. Using these data, we identified a homozygous in-frame deletion mutation c.del196–201del6 (p.G66-C67del; Figure 2). We amplified exon
2 for all three family members (parents #3385, #3387 and brother #3386; Figure 2). None of the family members had the ESCS phenotype. DNA
sequencing results revealed that both the parents (#3385 and #3387) were heterozygous for the mutation (data not shown). The patient’s
brother (#3386) was negative for the mutation (data not shown), suggesting that he inherited the normal allele from both parents. As shown
in Figure 3, this novel mutation is located within the conserved P-box of the DNA binding domain. DNA sequencing of the NR2E3 gene in family
1 with the propositus #2743 showing the homozygous deletion. Pedigree: + - indicate individual that have been examined. Black solid fill ● –
affected phenotype. White solid fill □ – normal phenotype. Pattern filled square and circle– individual assumed carrier. # - Sample Number.
Sequence of intron 1 and exon 2 of NR2E3 showing the mutations of Case 1 and 2. Repeat sequences are given in bold. The novel mutations of
Case 1 are underlined. The mutations of Case 2 are shaded. A square box defines the P-box. This 29-year-old Brazilian woman had been night
blind all of her life, and had poor vision in the right eye for many years . Her parents were not affected. Visual acuity was 20/400 on the
right and 20/40 on the left. Fundus examination showed mildly attenuated arteries and a zone in the midperiphery of diffuse depigmentation
and faint yellow spots. The central macula was grossly cystic on the right but minimally so on the left. She had a chronic fluctuating
uveitis and vitritis in the right eye, which affected her visual acuity, but never had uveitic attacks on the left. Goldmann visual fields
were not testable on the right because of poor vision, and showed generalized constriction on the left. Her ERG responses were similar in
the two eyes, and showed no detectable rod responses. However, she had slow and low amplitude b-waves to a strong flash, of similar
waveform, under both scotopic and photopic conditions (Figure 1). The ERG was unchanged on a follow-up examination two years later. Her
clinical diagnosis was Goldmann-Favre Syndrome. Sequencing of all exons was performed after amplification of genomic DNA for the patient
#2883 (Figure 4). The results revealed that the patient has a compound heterozygous mutation, which was c. (Figure 4). The mother (#2884)
was heterozygous for the mutation c.del 194–202del9 (data not shown) and a normal allele. As shown in Figure 3, this mutation is located
within the conserved P-box of the DNA binding domain. We were unable to obtain DNA from the father. Patient #2883 could have inherited the
c. mutation from the father, or it could have been a de novo event. This combination of mutation has previously been reported in another
case . DNA sequencing of the NR2E3 gene in family 2. Individual #2883 illustrates the compound heterozygous mutation. Pedigree: + - indicate
individual that have been examined. Black solid fill ● – affected phenotype. White solid fill □ – normal phenotype. Pattern filled square
and circle– individual assumed carrier. # - Sample Number. From a clinical standpoint, our two cases are quite different. Case 1, which has
been described previously in electrophysiological studies , lies at one extreme of the ESCS complex, being essentially free of Goldmann-
Favre stigmata and without evidence of degeneration. The patient’s ERG signals are of comparable amplitude to a normal “mixed rod-cone” ERG,
which suggests the presence of functional S cones in numbers comparable to the photoreceptor density of the normal retina. This striking
developmental abnormality results from a small deletion of “ggctgc” at position c.196–201 (see Figure 3), which lies within the P-box region
that has been described for this gene . The P-box of nuclear receptors is responsible for the interactions of nuclear receptors with
specific response elements in DNA upstream of target genes, and thus the control of gene expression. It is perhaps relevant that there is a
similar “gcctgc” sequence at position c.187, and a “ggcttc” at position c.205. The sequence can also be viewed as a direct repeat
TGCA(A/G)CGGC at position 190 and 199 within the P Box. The spectrum of clinical phenotypes with NR2E3 abnormalities is wide, and includes
clumped pigmentary degeneration and autosomal dominant retinitis pigmentosa as well as ESCS and Goldmann-Favre Syndrome . Three recent
reports have discussed possible mechanisms by which the degenerative component of the ESCS complex may vary greatly . Cases with
surprisingly little degenerative change have been reported with variations of the c.119–2A>C mutation . Our report adds to this growing body
of evidence that mutations in this gene lead to a developmental defect and/or degenerative changes. Whereas the P box deletion of Case 2 has
previously been reported with varying phenotypes , we believe Case 1 is the first homozygous deletion within the P-box to be reported, and
to define this locus as possibly developmental (although we recognize that a single case cannot confirm this conclusion). Case 2 would be
diagnosed as Goldmann-Favre Syndrome, although not a terribly severe example. The individual is somewhat similar to the “mild phenotype”
reported by Hayashi et al. in a Japanese patient with two missense mutations. Her chronic uveitis in one eye has not been reported as a
component of this syndrome, and could be a new or an unrelated finding. It is interesting that her foveal cystic changes were markedly
accentuated as a result of the uveitis, and visual acuity was only mildly reduced in the left eye where cystic changes were minimal. This
individual exhibited the splice junction c., which is responsible for her developmental as well as degenerative changes. The c.119–2A>C
change is the most common mutation found in ESCS, autosomal recessive retinitis pigmentosa (arRP), and clumped pigmentary retinal dystrophy
patients . The second mutation in Case 2 is also located within the P-box. This is the first ESCS mutation reported in a Brazilian patient.
Due to nomenclature recommendations, this mutation is designated as c.+[del194–202del9 (p.N65-C67del)]. However this does not rule out the
possibility that this mutation is actually +[del 190–198del9] (p.C64-G66del). Results using Sanger DNA sequencing in either direction would
essentially give identical results for either of the two above mentioned mutations due to the presence of a short sequence repeat. However
the amino acid translations are different for the above-mentioned mutations. Therefore, one has to be cautious in assuming the nature of
p.N65-C67del versus p.C64-G66del mutation in all reported cases. Although functional assays have been developed by Kanda et al. , these may
not be able to differentiate between these changes at the functional level. We hypothesize that the NR2E3 protein could have functions
beyond the developmental process that are independently controlled and lead to degeneration. We also hypothesize that the presence of direct
repeats near the 5′ end of exon 2 and another repeat within the P-box may lead to looping structures in the DNA within these two respective
regions. A consequence of this could lead to errors in replication . These are de novo events and are not related to mutations that are
inherited. This report brings the total number of mutations overlapping this region at amino acid position p.N65-C67 to seven reports in
seven different families . The synonymous variation at position c.195 C>T, N65N reported by Bernal et al. overlaps with this region as well.
It is possible that these mutations are random events and not specific for a family/ethnicity; however, this will need to be verified in the
future by genotyping these samples with closely linked markers. We hope that further studies on the phenotypic variability of this syndrome
will enhance the understanding of how both retinal development and retinal degeneration are controlled. This study was funded in part by The
Foundation Fighting Blindness (K.W.S.) and The Molecular Insight Research Foundation (K.W.S.).
