A 32-year-old man presented with vague pain and lump in the right hypochondrium and lumbar region for last six months. Physical examination
revealed a mobile, nontender lump (6 × 6 cm) in hypogastrium. Patient had normocytic normochromic anemia and baseline serum creatinine was
2.1 to 2.9 mg%. Barium meal follow through (BMFT, Figure 1) and contrast enhanced computed tomography (CECT, Figure 2) were performed.
Barium meal follow through in a 32-year-old male with abdominal lump Contrast-enhanced axial (a) and coronal (b) computed tomography images
in a 32-year-old male with abdominal lump Patient underwent living related donor renal transplantation for treatment of end-stage renal
disease caused by chronic interstitial nephritis seven years ago. Triple drug immunosuppression was initiated. The allograft functioned well
and there were no rejection episodes for seven years. Q1. What is your diagnosis? BMFT demonstrates a dilated segment of distal small bowel
loops with areas of ulceration. Computed tomography (CT) of abdomen show irregular low-attenuating wall thickening with areas of ulceration
involving the small bowel loops and aneurysmal dilatation of small bowel loop. Note the presence of transplanted kidney in right iliac
fossa. Findings are suggestive of post transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD). Post transplant lymphoproliferative disorder (PTLD)
is well-recognized, although relatively uncommon, and occurs in approximately 1% of renal allograft recipients. In most cases, PTLD is
associated with Epstein-Barr virus (EBV) infection of B cells, either as a consequence of reactivation of the virus posttransplantation or
from primary posttransplantation EBV infection acquired from the donor. While T-cell lymphoproliferative disorders not associated with EBV
infection have also been documented after solid organ and bone marrow transplantation, the vast majority are B-cell proliferations. A
diagnosis of PTLD is made by having a high index of suspicion in the appropriate clinical setting; histopathological evidence of
lymphoproliferation on tissue biopsy; and the presence of EBV DNA, RNA, or protein in tissue. Most cases of PTLD are observed in the first
posttransplant year. The more intense the immunosuppression used, the higher the incidence of PTLD and the earlier it occurs. The
cornerstone of successful treatment of PTLD is reduction or withdrawal of immunosuppression. Alimentary tract involvement by
posttransplantation lymphoproliferative disorder is reported in 30% of transplant recipients with abdominal disease in a series. The
radiologic appearances are similar to that of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma, with the exception that patients with PTLD have an increased
propensity for ulceration and perforation of the alimentary tract. Involvement of the hollow abdominal viscera can manifest as
circumferential mural infiltration with luminal excavation, a discrete eccentric mass with or without ulceration, or luminal narrowing.
Because alimentary tract disease has a propensity for extraluminal extension, CT is the imaging technique of choice to evaluate the extent
of disease. Extranodal disease in PTLD is much more common than in lymphoma. CT is a commonly performed study in symptomatic organ allograft
recipients to evaluate complications related to transplantation. Recognition of the CT findings of PTLD is important because early diagnosis
may result in an improved response to therapy, which often consists of only reducing the level of immunosuppression. Source of Support: Nil
Conflict of Interest: None declared.
