Sir, We read with great interest the study of Michie et al (2010) evaluating capecitabine-induced hypertriglyceridaemia (CIHT). The authors
suggest that it should be classified as a common adverse effect and we fully agree with their recommendation for targeted screening in
patients with diabetes or pre-existing hyperlipidaemia. Here we report an additional case of severe CIHT in a patient with pre-existing
hyperlipidaemia to focus attention on possible mechanisms. A 50-year-old woman with a history of breast cancer, treated by surgery and
hyperlipidaemia stabilised with pravastatin, was diagnosed in January 2009 with a progression of her breast cancer. Before receiving
carboplatin, TAXOL (Bristol Myers Squibb, France) and bevacizumab, cholesterolaemia level was 6.68 mmol l−1 (2.59 g l−1) and triglyceridemia
level was 2.51 mmol l−1 (2.20 g l−1) (Figure 1). During the 6-month treatment, a transient increase in triglycerides was observed and
pravastatin was replaced by rosuvastatin. In July 2009, bevacizumab alone was administered once a week as maintenance treatment. In August
2009, because of secondary gastric and ganglion infiltration, carboplatin and taxol were stopped and the patient received a combination of
capecitabine and bevacizumab. Nine cycles of this treatment were scheduled. After six cycles, in December 2009, highly raised triglycerides
(26.77 mmol l−1 (23.48 g l−1)) and slightly raised cholesterol levels (8.75 mmol l−1 (3.39 g l−1)) were observed, without any clinical sign
of pancreatitis. At no time had the patient reported alcohol consumption or dietary changes and no weight gain was observed. The replacement
of rosuvastatin by fenofibrate was followed 1 week later by a significant decrease in her triglyceride level to 6.26 mmol l−1 (5.49 g l−1).
However, 1 month later, the triglycerides level again increased to 11.33 g l−1 (9.94 mmol l−1). Owing to both side effects and progression
of her cancer, capecitabine and bevacizumab were stopped and replaced by fulvestrant (FASLODEX; Astrazeneca, Cheshire, UK). A return to
baseline triglyceridaemia values (3.27 mmol l−1 (2.87 g l−1)) was observed within 2 months. Our case fulfils the criteria for a probable
case of CIHT. Concomitant bevacizumab was not suspected because the increase in triglycerides during first-line chemotherapy resolved
spontaneously, whereas treatment with rosuvastatin was unchanged. We would like to propose two ways to improve our understanding of CIHT: A
defect of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is linked with an accumulation of chylomicrons and/or of very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL). Kurt et al
(2006) suggest that CIHT may appear more readily in individuals with hereditary LPL deficiency. It is worth noting that LPL defect also
occurs in the case of an increase in its inhibitor (apolipoprotein CIII) and/or a decrease in its activator (apolipoprotein CII). As far as
we know, the link between capecitabine and apolipoprotein CII/CIII levels has never been explored. We suggest that laboratory test of
patient should include measure of LPL activity as well as of apolipoprotein CII/CIII levels.As a triple prodrug, capecitabine is designed to
be sequentially activated to 5-FU: capecitabine is hydrolysed in the liver to 5′-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine, which is then converted into
5′-deoxy-5-fluorouridine (5′-dFUR) and subsequently into 5-FU by thymidine phosphorylase. Many cases of severe hypertriglyceridaemia were
described with capecitabine, but to the best of our knowledge only one study has dealt with the influence of 5-FU on serum and it did not
report any changes in triglyceride level in human (Stathopoulos et al, 1995). Recently, a case of recurrent grade-4 hypertriglyceridaemia in
a patient treated with capecitabine and tegafur/uracil was reported (Yildiz et al, 2010). This observation of hypertriglyceridaemia with
another prodrug of 5-FU suggest that capecitabine and tegafur might share a mechanism responsible for hypertriglyceridaemia. Tegafur is
bioactivated in 5-FU by thymidine phosphorylase in a single step. Considering that this enzyme is also responsible for the phosphorylation
of 5′-DFUR in 5-FU, we suggest that thymidine phosphorylase could have a role in the generation of hypertriglyceridaemia. Thymidine kinase
and thymidine phosphorylase compete for thymidine, and catalyse opposing synthetic and catabolic reactions implicated in proliferation and
angiogenesis, respectively (Brockenbrough et al, 2009). As a modification of the expression and activity of thymidine kinase as well as a
strong increase in the secretory phospholipase-A2 was observed in resistant colon cancer cells (Temmink et al, 2010), a link between
thymidine metabolic pathways and phospholipids metabolism that may at least partially explain CIHT. A defect of lipoprotein lipase (LPL) is
linked with an accumulation of chylomicrons and/or of very low-density lipoprotein (VLDL). Kurt et al (2006) suggest that CIHT may appear
more readily in individuals with hereditary LPL deficiency. It is worth noting that LPL defect also occurs in the case of an increase in its
inhibitor (apolipoprotein CIII) and/or a decrease in its activator (apolipoprotein CII). As far as we know, the link between capecitabine
and apolipoprotein CII/CIII levels has never been explored. We suggest that laboratory test of patient should include measure of LPL
activity as well as of apolipoprotein CII/CIII levels. As a triple prodrug, capecitabine is designed to be sequentially activated to 5-FU:
capecitabine is hydrolysed in the liver to 5′-deoxy-5-fluorocytidine, which is then converted into 5′-deoxy-5-fluorouridine (5′-dFUR) and
subsequently into 5-FU by thymidine phosphorylase. Many cases of severe hypertriglyceridaemia were described with capecitabine, but to the
best of our knowledge only one study has dealt with the influence of 5-FU on serum and it did not report any changes in triglyceride level
in human (Stathopoulos et al, 1995). Recently, a case of recurrent grade-4 hypertriglyceridaemia in a patient treated with capecitabine and
tegafur/uracil was reported (Yildiz et al, 2010). This observation of hypertriglyceridaemia with another prodrug of 5-FU suggest that
capecitabine and tegafur might share a mechanism responsible for hypertriglyceridaemia. Tegafur is bioactivated in 5-FU by thymidine
phosphorylase in a single step. Considering that this enzyme is also responsible for the phosphorylation of 5′-DFUR in 5-FU, we suggest that
thymidine phosphorylase could have a role in the generation of hypertriglyceridaemia. Thymidine kinase and thymidine phosphorylase compete
for thymidine, and catalyse opposing synthetic and catabolic reactions implicated in proliferation and angiogenesis, respectively
(Brockenbrough et al, 2009). As a modification of the expression and activity of thymidine kinase as well as a strong increase in the
secretory phospholipase-A2 was observed in resistant colon cancer cells (Temmink et al, 2010), a link between thymidine metabolic pathways
and phospholipids metabolism that may at least partially explain CIHT. A lipid survey should be mandatory before initiation of capecitabine
or other 5-FU prodrugs. Patients with dyslipidaemia should be closely monitored and further studied. Clinical course of triglyceride (▪) and
cholesterol (▴) levels in patients, expressed in mmol l−1.
