The article describes paraganglioma case in woman with von Hippel–Lindau disease. She was found to be a carrier of a rare germline mutation
in the VHL gene (393C>A; N131K). The patient developed large, untypical for von Hippel–Lindau disease, carotid body paraganglioma at the
common carotid artery bifurcation. The carotid body paraganglioma coexisted with the haemangioblastoma situated intramedullary in region
C5/C6. The haemangioblastoma reached the right-sided dorsal part of the spinal cord in section C5/C6. It produced radicular symptoms within
C5/C6, followed by the later paresis of the right limbs. The haemangioblastoma was resected completely. Twelve months after the operation,
the spinal symptoms receded and the carotid body paraganglioma still was asymptomatic. The current case of carotid body paraganglioma in
patient with the 393C>A (N131K) missense mutation in the VHL gene, supports association of this specific mutation and VHL disease type 2,
and suggests its correlation with susceptibility to paragangliomas. Von Hippel–Lindau disease is a syndrome of high genetic predisposition
towards neoplasms, which shows genealogical traits of autosomal dominant inheritance. The frequency of occurrence of this condition is
estimated at 1 per 36 thousand people, which means that in Poland there are about 1,000 patients suffering from VHL disease. The condition
is caused by carrying germline mutations of the VHL gene. The diagnosis of VHL disease is established based on genealogical/clinical
criteria and an analysis of carrying mutations of the VHL gene. Families who are affected by VHL undergo a series of preventive/diagnostic
tests and examinations whose aim is early detection and treatment of neoplastic lesions . Von Hippel–Lindau disease often manifests itself
with the following conditions: haemangioblastoma cerebelli, angioma of the brain stem and of the spinal cord, retinal angiomatosis, renal
cysts, pancreas cysts, pheochromocytoma or renal carcinoma . Paragangliomas, especially those situated extrarenally, occur very rarely in
Von Hippel–Lindau disease . They develop within the adrenal medulla, abdominal cavity, chest and occasionally—in the head and the neck. Zak
and Lawson quote almost 20 sites within the head and the neck where paragangliomas may occur, not only in Von Hippel–Lindau disease. The
paraganglioma in the head and the neck is connected to the parasympathetic system, while in the adrenal medulla—to the sympathetic system.
In Von Hippel–Lindau disease the adrenal medulla is the place where the tumour of the pheochromocytoma type develops. Up to 5% of VHL
patients die of pheochromocytoma-induced endogenous catecholamine intoxication . Paragangliomas producing catecholamine lead to hypertensive
crises and are thought to be the cause of various clinical symptoms of sudden onset. Since paragangliomas of the neck occur very rarely in
Von Hippel–Lindau disease, we decided to discuss the case of a patient with a lesion of this type on the neck and an haemangioblastoma of
the spinal cord. The latter was treated surgically in the Department. No record has been found in Poland of a patient with Von Hippel–Lindau
disease and a paraganglioma of the neck. The female patient, aged 49, reported pains in her second and third finger of the right hand that
she had had for 2 years. Initial diagnosis revealed isthmus carpalis and the patient was operated on without much success—no improvement was
noticed. A year later, intensifying root pains of Root C5 and C6 on the right side were the reason for performing an MRI scan of the
cervical spine. The findings from the study showed an intramedullary lesion of 1.5 cm in diameter, localized at the height of C5–C6 with
accompanying syrinx stretching from C3 to C7. The patient was consulted neurosurgically several times, but refused to submit to a surgical
treatment. Gradually, the pains extended to the entire forearm of the upper right limb, and numbness appeared of both lower limbs. She met
the clinical diagnostic criteria for VHL disease . Sequencing of the VHL gene revealed the presence of the 393C>A (N131K) missense mutation
(Fig. 1) . VHL disease was also diagnosed in her relatives (shown in Fig. 2).Fig. 1Sequencing chromatogram showing the 393C>A (N131K)
germline mutation in the VHL gene. The mutation is marked by an arrowFig. 2Pedigree of family with VHL disease caused by the N131K mutation.
Solid squares indicate affected men, solid circles indicate affected females. The type of cancer and age of diagnosis are indicated next to
the symbol. A plus near the symbol indicates the presence of the mutation. A minus near the symbol indicates mutation negative cases. r hbl
retinal haemangioblastoma, CNS hbl central nervous system haemangioblastoma, d48 age of death, 49 current age of a patient Sequencing
chromatogram showing the 393C>A (N131K) germline mutation in the VHL gene. The mutation is marked by an arrow Pedigree of family with VHL
disease caused by the N131K mutation. Solid squares indicate affected men, solid circles indicate affected females. The type of cancer and
age of diagnosis are indicated next to the symbol. A plus near the symbol indicates the presence of the mutation. A minus near the symbol
indicates mutation negative cases. r hbl retinal haemangioblastoma, CNS hbl central nervous system haemangioblastoma, d48 age of death, 49
current age of a patient The patient was treated surgically several times at the Ophthalmological Department because of gradual
deterioration of vision in the left eye. Presently, the patient claims to be blind in the left eye. An ophthalmological examination proved
the presence of a vast retinal angiomatosis of the left eye. Moreover, a CT scan of the abdominal cavity showed renal cysts. In the clinical
examination carried out on admission to the Department of Neurosurgery the following conditions were found: amaurosis oculi sinistri,
paraesthesiae to algetic stimuli in the medial part of the right forearm and first , second and third fingers of the right arm increased
deep reflexes in the upper right limb along with decreased muscle power of this limb, as well as Babiński syndrome on the right side; RR:
134/85 mmHg; pulse: 76/min. An MRI scan of the cervical spine showed a contrast enhancing image of an intramedullary lesion located near
C5/C6 and extending to the dorsal part of the spinal cord on the right side to the subarachnoid space. Upwards to C3 and downwards to C7
syrinx was identified. An MRI of the head demonstrated an angioma of 1.5 cm in diameter, localized in the choroid fissure on the right side
with a small cyst. The patient was treated surgically. A laminectomy was performed from C3 to C6. Then the spinal cord was incised along the
sulcus medianus posterior to uncover a lesion of the type of haemangioblastoma and a syrinx filled with yellow liquid. The neoplastic lesion
was localized excentrically in the dorsal part of the spinal cord on its right side; it reached the subarachnoid space and was connected to
Root C5 originating in the spinal cord. The tumour was excised completely. In the postoperative course, some paraesthesia and pains in the
upper left limb appeared, which gradually subsided within 3 weeks. After the surgery, the upper right limb pain subsided and the right-sided
hemiparesis retreated. A follow-up MRI showed a total resection of the tumour. Below we present an MRI image of the cervical spine before
and after the surgery (Fig. 3a, b).Fig. 3a MR of the cervical spine, sagital section: intramedullary tumour at the height of C5/C6 with
syrinx reaching as far as C3 and below the lesion to C7. b MR of the cervical spine, sagital section: total resection of the tumour; a
considerable reduction of the syrinx around the tumour a MR of the cervical spine, sagital section: intramedullary tumour at the height of
C5/C6 with syrinx reaching as far as C3 and below the lesion to C7. b MR of the cervical spine, sagital section: total resection of the
tumour; a considerable reduction of the syrinx around the tumour Findings from a histopathological test showed haemangioblastoma. At a
follow-up examination estimating how complete the excision had been, a tumour was discerned at the common carotid artery bifurcation on the
right side. As a result, a detailed examination of the patient was made at the Radiodiagnostics Department of the Comprehensive Cancer
Centre in Gliwice. The radiological examination showed a carotid body paraganglioma of 45 × 32 × 24 mm3 on the right side (Fig. 4a,
b)Fig. 4a MR of the neck, frontal section: tumour in the carotid bifurcation, of the type of paraganglioma, on the right side. b MR of the
neck, axial section: tumour in the parapharyngeal space on the right side, of the type of paraganglioma a MR of the neck, frontal section:
tumour in the carotid bifurcation, of the type of paraganglioma, on the right side. b MR of the neck, axial section: tumour in the
parapharyngeal space on the right side, of the type of paraganglioma The tumour can be seen in the right carotid space, in the right common
carotid artery (CCA) bifurcation into the internal carotid artery (ICA) and the external carotid artery. The tumour appears hypointense in
unenhanced T1-weighted images. “Salt and pepper” signal pattern of the tumour is visible in T2-weighted images. The tumour appears fast and
intense after contrast enhancement. Time signal intensive curves calculated from the tumour, CCA, ICA appear to be of the same shape,
maximum value of the signal intensity and maximum contrast enhancement at the same time. These signs evidence the heavy vascularization of
the tumour. There are irregular no-signal spots in T2 in the lesion, which may be consistent with haemosiderin. The tumour models and
translocates outwards the neighbouring vascular structures without infiltrating them; it models the parapharyngeal space and the right-sided
wall of the pharynx, as well as to some extent the pterygeal muscles. The upper pole of the tumour is adjacent to the cranial basis near the
carotid canal inlet, without traces of infiltration. The posterior part of the tumour leans against the I and II vertebra arches on the
space of about 1.5 cm, without traces of infiltration. No traces of infiltrating the intervertebral foramen were found. The lower pole of
the tumour is located about 2 cm above the division of the common carotid artery. The tumour had not given any symptoms until then. The
patient refused to agree to the treatment of the carotid body paraganglioma. Laboratory testing of the noradrenaline level, adrenaline in
blood and HVA in the 24-h urine collection failed to give evidence of catecholamine production by the paraganglioma. Three weeks after the
surgery of the haemangioblastoma of the spinal cord the patient was discharged from hospital in good overall condition. Herein we describe a
rare case of carotid body paraganglioma in a woman with von Hippel–Lindau disease, caused by the N131K mutation in the VHL gene. The N131K
is a rare missense mutation of the VHL gene. To date, it has been reported only once, in a family affected with VHL type 2 disease (VHL with
pheochromocytoma) . VHL type 2 disease is typically caused by missense mutations. However, only specific missense mutations are associated
with pheochromocytoma—those mutations which map to protein binding sites of pVHL and which are predicted to cause local protein defects. The
current case report of carotid body paraganglioma in patient with the 393C>A (N131K) missense mutation, further supports association of this
mutation and VHL disease type 2, and suggests its correlation with susceptibility to tumours situated extrarenally. VHL kindreds with
pheochromocytoma-associated missense mutations require careful surveillance for pheochromocytoma as this is frequently the first
manifestation. Therefore, the correlation between the 393C>A (N131K) missense mutation and VHL type 2 may be useful in genetic counselling.
On admission to the hospital, the patient could not see in her left eye because of retinal angiomatosis; she suffered from renal cysts,
haemangioblastoma near the fissura chorioidea on the right side and she had symptoms of a tumour of spinal cord. The retinal angioma found
in the patient occurs in over 50% of VHL patients, often leading to blindness in the eye unless treated with laser therapy or
cryocoagulation, preferably in the asymptomatic period . The patient was referred to the Department of Neurosurgery because of the
intramedullary tumour at C5/C6. The lesion caused pain in the upper right limb and a slight paresis of both right limbs. Pain is reported to
be the most frequent symptom of haemangioblastoma of the spinal cord . During the operation, it was discovered that the tumour reached the
subarachnoid space of the dorsal surface of the spinal cord, and was connected to Root C5 on the right side, which may have been the reason
for pains in the upper right limb. The fact that intramedullary haemangioblastomas in von Hippel–Lindau disease usually reach the dorsal
surface of the medulla/spinal cord has already been reported by other authors [2, 15, 16]. The haemangioblastoma was accompanied by the
syrinx much larger in size than the tumour itself, which might have been responsible for the numbness of the lower limbs. According to
Wanebo et al. , the symptoms of VHL disease with haemangioblastoma of the spinal cord are most often caused by the syrinx and not by the
tumour itself. The tumour was not large in size—just 1.5 cm. Haemangioblastomas of the spinal cord, both the ones occurring sporadically and
the ones accompanying VHL disease, are usually of small size, and the prognosis in the case of surgical treatment is favourable [15, 18].
The tumour was resected totally. After a total resection of heamangioblastoma in VHL patients, the recurrence in the same area is extremely
rare . One cannot exclude, however, the possibility of developing new angiomas in new locations. A histopathological examination confirmed
the diagnosis of haemangioblastoma. A tumour of this type usually accompanies VHL disease . In von Hippel–Lindau disease, a tumour of the
medullar layer of the adrenal gland of the pheochromocytoma type occurs in 10–35% of cases [4, 10]. Lesions of the type of paraganglioma,
localized extrarenally, are extremely rare [4–6, 19]. In the patient, a large lesion was found to originate in the carotid body and situated
at the carotid bifurcation, on the right side. According to the radiological findings, the tumour compressed the wall of the pharynx and it
displaced the neighbouring vascular structures outwards giving no clinical symptoms. The tumour is hormonally inactive; it was not joined to
the cervical roots and it did not infiltrate the intervertebral foramen. In view of the absence of ailment, the patient currently refuses to
submit to surgical treatment of the paraganglioma. Oosterwijk et al. report that the frequency of occurrence of surgically treated
paragangliomas of the head and the neck in The Netherlands comes to one case per one million inhabitants annually. In the autopsy material,
paragangliomas of the neck occur much more frequently [21, 22]. Therefore, a conclusion can be drawn that paragangliomas of the head and the
neck fail to produce clinical symptoms and consequently they are not treated surgically. This is reflected in the case of the patient.
Unlike the paragangliomas of the adrenal medulla, the paragangliomas of the head and the neck usually do not show endocrinal function . The
case of the patient seems to confirm this observation. That is why the paragangliomas growing in the neck develop slowly, giving no clinical
symptoms for a long time . Incidentally, these tumours may metastasize to lungs . The current case of carotid body paraganglioma in patient
with the 393C>A (N131K) missense mutation in the VHL gene, supports association of this specific mutation with VHL disease type 2, and
suggests its correlation with susceptibility to paragangliomas. VHL kindreds with pheochromocytoma-associated missense mutations require
careful surveillance for pheochromocytoma as this is frequently the first manifestation. Therefore, a correlation between the 393C>A (N131K)
missense mutation and VHL type 2 may be useful in genetic counselling. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original
author(s) and source are credited.
