Bullae and sweat gland necrosis remain rare cutaneous manifestation, and these conditions can be misdiagnosed as Vibrio vulnificus
infections or other soft tissue infections because of their low index of suspicion. A 46-yr-old man with a history of continued alcohol
consumption presented with erythematous and hemorrhagic bullous lesions on his left arm. The patient reported that after the ingestion of
clams, he slept for 12 hr in a heavily intoxicated state. Then the skin lesions started as a reddish patch that subsequently became
hemorrhagic bullae. V. vulnificus infection, cellulitis, and necrotizing fasciitis were considered in initial differential diagnosis.
However, on the basis of sweat gland necrosis on histopathologic examinations and negative results on bacterial cultures, we made the
diagnosis of bullae and sweat gland necrosis. Therefore, bullae and sweat gland necrosis should also be considered in chronic alcoholic
patients who present with bullae and a previous history of unconsciousness. Bullae and sweat gland necrosis are rare clinical and
pathological entities that are associated with drug-induced coma and carbon monoxide poisoning (1, 2). Skin lesions, including bullae,
purplish plaques, and erosions occur on the extremities and trunk, especially at pressure points (1, 2). The prominent histopathological
features include necrosis of the eccrine secretory coils (3). In this study, we report the case of a patient with clinical and
histopathological findings characteristic of bullae and sweat gland necrosis that developed due to heavy alcohol consumption. Although this
condition was first thought to be caused by Vibrio vulnificus infection or cellulitis, the subsequent clinical course and histological
findings of the patient confirmed the diagnosis of bullae and sweat gland necrosis. A 46-yr-old man with a history of chronic alcohol
consumption for the past 20 yr presented with erythematous bullous lesions on the left arm (Fig. 1) on April 20, 2010. The patient reported
that after the ingestion of clams and alcohol, he fell asleep in a state of intoxication for 12 hr with unconsciousness. After he awoke, he
noticed skin lesions that first appeared as reddish patch that subsequently became hemorrhagic bullae. A dermatological examination showed
multiple broad-based tense bullae and erosions on the left arm with prominent edema (Fig. 1). Two erythematous plaques were also observed on
the left upper arm and chest which produced a mild heating sensation (Fig. 1). At the initial examination, the patient had mild tenderness
and stiffness in the left arm, and also complained of decreased grasping power and paresthesia of the hand. He denied any recent trauma to
the arm or any other part of the body. V. vulnificus infection, cellulitis, and necrotizing fasciitis were considered in the differential
diagnosis due to the patient's personal history of chronic alcoholism, ingestion of raw seafood, and the findings of hemorrhagic bullae, and
paresthesia of the hand. The patient was immediately referred to the emergency room for further evaluation. His body temperature was 36℃,
and other vital signs were within normal ranges. The initial laboratory findings included a leukocyte count of 6.49 × 109/L and a C-reactive
protein level of 1.18 mg/dL with normal hemoglobin, hematocrit, and platelet counts. A liver function test showed the following values:
aspartate aminotransferase, 173 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 57 IU/L; alkaline phosphatase, 579 IU/L; lactic dehydrogenase, 535 IU/L; and
total bilirubin, 0.88 mg/dL. Titers were negative for hepatitis A and B, and the human immunodeficiency virus. To identify possible
bacterial infections, consecutive cultures and gram stains of the blood, urine, and tissue were carried out. An MRI of the left arm revealed
diffuse soft tissue enhancement on the proximal medial side and distal posterolateral areas of the left arm, suggesting cellulitis and
edema. The hand and forearm radiographs did not reveal any remarkable abnormal findings. On the basis of suspected cellulitis, intravenous
ceftriaxone (2 g daily) therapy was initiated. During the remainder of the hospitalization, no new tense bullae or erythematous plaques
developed. Two weeks later, the skin lesions appeared to be completely healed with only mild erythema. A skin biopsy from the erythematous
nodule on the upper arm revealed focal epidermal necrosis with re-epithelialization and a mild perivascular lymphohistiocytic inflammatory
cell infiltrate (Fig. 2A). In the dermis, there was extensive necrosis of the eccrine secretory coils and eccrine duct, and eosinophilic
homogenization of the cytoplasm (Fig. 2B). In addition, bacterial cultures from the blood, urine, and tissue were all negative for
pathogens. Therefore, both V. vulnificus infections and cellulitis were ruled out. Overall, the clinical course, microbiological and
histopathological results were consistent with the diagnosis of bullae and sweat gland necrosis. Bullae and sweat gland necrosis arise rare
cutaneous manifestation associated with prolonged impairment of consciousness (1, 2, 4). The characteristic features of sweat gland necrosis
were first documented in a patient in barbiturate-induced coma (2). Similar findings have been reported in patients who are comatose due to
drug overdose, those with neurological or metabolic disorders (e.g., cerebral tumor, cerebrovascular accident, head injury, viral
encephalitis, hypoglycemia, and diabetic ketoacidosis), and in immobilized non-comatose patients (2). Although barbiturates remain the most
frequently reported drug associated with these entities, other causative agents include benzodiazepines (2, 3, 5), narcotics (6, 7),
tricyclic antidepressants (8), and alcohol (9). Clinically, bullae and sweat gland necrosis are characterized by bullae, violaceous plaques,
erosions, and macular erythema. They are typically localized to the skin overlying bony prominences on the extremities and trunk (1). The
skin lesions appear within one hour to several days after the ingestion of drugs, and resolve within 10-14 days (2, 10). There is no
specific therapy for bullae and sweat gland necrosis and so they are typically treated with supportive care only (11). The pathogenesis of
the skin changes remains unclear, although several theories exist that involve: pressure (12), hypoxia (6, 12), drug toxicity (7, 13), and
immune-mediated mechanisms (14). It was initially ascribed to local pressure and hypoxia because the lesions are commonly noted over a bony
prominence (12). More significantly, the secretary portion of sweat glands may be particularly sensitive to such hypoxic damage (12).
However, this does not explain the occurrence of similar lesions that are not associated with trauma or that are located at pressure prone
sites. Others have suggested a direct toxicity related to specific drugs as important factors in the pathophysiology of this skin disorder
(13). However, similar findings are also seen in nondrug-induced comas (15). To date, the cause of this skin disorder remains to be
determined, and several factors such as pressure, hypoxia, and trauma are most likely to be associated with this disorder (2, 3). In the
current case, the histopathological features were characterized mainly by necrotic changes of the eccrine secretory unit (the eccrine
secretory coils and eccrine duct) and bullous lesions with necrotic epithelium. The dermal blood vessels exhibited with mild degenerative
changes, erythrocyte extravasation, and a slight perivascular inflammatory infiltrate of the lymphocytes (1, 2). In the case reported here,
the patient's clinical features and past history suggested several dermatoses for differential diagnoses, including V. vulnificus infection,
cellulitis, and necrotizing fasciitis. First, hemorrhagic bullae and past history of seafood intake in chronic alcoholic requires careful
examinations in order to rule out V. vulnificus infection. This is because the infection can cause fulminant cellulitis, myositis,
necrotizing fasciitis, and death. Vibrio cellulitis is painful, and has a rapid onset within 12 to 24 hr of exposure. In septic patients,
large hemorrhagic bullae commonly arise on the extremities or trunk and usually progress to necrotic ulcers and necrotizing fasciitis (16).
Nevertheless, cutaneous manifestations of V. vulnificus infections were observed in various cutaneous manifestations such as bullae,
pustules, petechiae, purpura, papules, macules, cellulitis, urticaria, and erythema multiforme-like lesions (17). Therefore, the findings of
bullous lesions in alcoholic patients with a recent history of exposure to sea water or the ingestion of raw seafood should alert the
physician to the possibility of V. vulnificus infection. Although our patient has very similar cutaneous lesions, the clinical course and
absence of systemic symptoms allowed V. vulnificus infection to be ruled out. In V. vulnificus infection, before extensive cutaneous lesions
appear primary septicemia often begins with prodromal symptoms including watery diarrhea, fever, chills, nausea, vomiting, and abdominal
pain (18). In addition, the sepsis has a rapid progression, and most of patients are in shock with hypotension at the time of hospital
arrival (18). Second, it was considered that the patient had cellulitis because of the clinical features and the results from the
radiographic and MRI evaluations. Usually, the diagnosis of cellulitis is made by clinical features, and it often presents as erythematous
patch with ill-defined, non-palpable border (16). Our patient has unique clinical features with extensive healing erosions and hemorrhagic
bullae, which prevented an easy diagnosis of cellulitis. However, in some cases of cellulitis, it is possible that the overlying epidermis
undergo bullae formation or necrosis (16). Therefore, a clear differentiation between bullae and sweat gland necrosis and cellulitis can be
difficult until histologic confirmations. In this case, chronic alcoholic with bullae and a previous history of coma can be a clue to the
diagnosis of bullae and sweat gland necrosis. Last, the diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis, which could be made because of the patient's
history and examinations, was supported by leukocytosis, soft-tissue gas on radiographs, positive blood cultures, and deteriorating
metabolic and hemodynamic status (16). However, the absence of typical radiologic and hematologic findings allowed necrotizing fasciitis to
be ruled out. In summary, bullae and sweat gland necrosis associated with alcoholism are rare conditions but should be considered in
patients with bullae and a previous history of coma. It is important to maintain a high level of suspicion and recognize the characteristic
histological findings in the diagnosis of this peculiar skin disorder. This work was supported for two years by Pusan National University
Research Grant. Clinical photographs. Multiple broad-based tense bullae, healing erosions, and prominent edema are visible on the left arm
compared with the right arm. Two erythematous plaques on the left upper arm and left chest that were mildly tender are seen.
Histopathological findings from the left arm. (A) Focal epidermal necrosis with re-epithelialization and a mild perivascular
lymphohistiocytic inflammatory cell infiltrate are seen on sections (H&E stain, ×40). (B) Extensive necrosis of the secretory cells of sweat
glands and eosinophilic homogenization of the cytoplasm are seen on the sections (H&E stain, ×400).
