Fibrous dysplasia (FD) and aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) are uncommon benign intraosseous lesions. Simultaneous occurrence of both lesions is
extremely rare. We present an example of concomitant FD and ABC in a 7 year-old with left eye blindness and discharge of one month duration.
Physical examination revealed a proptotic left eye and bulging of the hard palate. CT and MRI are consistent with FD and ABC that involved
the sphenoid and ethmoidal bones bilaterally. Incomplete combined endonasalcranial resection was performed. The patient presented five
months postoperatively with a large recurrence and subsequent follow up was lost. Concomitant FD with ABC may occur in paranasal sinuses and
may develop rapidly and exhibit locally aggressive behavior. Fibrous dysplasia (FD) consists of rare and benign osseous lesions of unknown
etiology. They represent 2.5% of all bone tumors and 7% of benign bone tumors , in young, predominantly male patients . The salient
pathological feature of FD consists of the replacement of medullary bone by histologically benign fibro-osseous tissue . FD may present as
monostotic (70%), polystotic (30%), or as the main feature of McCune-Albright syndrome . Craniofacial bones can be affected by monostotic
(25%-30%) and polystatic (in 50%) lesions . The most affected craniofacial bones are maxilla, mandible, frontal, sphenoid and temporal bones
. Aneurysmal bone cyst (ABC) is rare, benign vascular lesion, and considered secondary to certain pathological bone lesions . ABC represents
approximately 1.4% of all bone tumors, and only 3% among those are located in the cranium . These lesions occur most commonly in patients
under 20 years old of both genders . Radiographs reveal an eccentric, lytic lesion typically with an expanded, remodeled "blown-out" or
"ballooned" bony contour of the affected bone, with a delicate trabeculated appearance frequently. Fluid-filled spaces are common and may be
seen on CT scans and MR images . Concomitant FD and ABC are extremely rare with only 13 cases reported previously . The clinical
presentation of both FD and ABC depends on their location and the extent of involvement. The majority of reported cases are predominant in
male children and young adults that are presented with symptomatic or asymptomatic mass. The development of ABC in FB may hastens the course
of presentation . In general, a complete excision of these lesions is recommended, and reports of aggressive behavior are occasionally
found. We report a rare example of concomitant FD and ABC of the skull base that presented with blindness and rapid local recurrence in a 7
year-old female patient. Also, we are presenting the multidisciplinary team approach of treating such cases. A 7 year-old female, is
presented at a local hospital with left eye blindness and discharge of one-month duration. Physical examination showed a slightly proptotic
left eye with no light perception, absence of direct pupil reflex and optic nerve atrophy in the left eye. In addition to, a slight
hypertelorism. Otolaryngologic examination showed rhinorhea, bulging hard palate, and a left nasal mass (Figure 1). Endoscopic nasal view of
left nostril, revealed huge nasal mass that occupied the whole cavity and reach to the level of inferior turbinate. Preoperative CT findings
(Figure 2, A) were consistent with fibrous dysplasia involving the sphenoid, ethmoidal sinuses, and posterior aspect of the nasal cavity as
well as, the left maxillary sinus and the left optic foramen. Large expansible cystic spaces were also noticed in the lesion on preoperative
MRI (Figure 3). Endoscopic biopsies revealed fibrous dysplasia with vascular component that were associated with significant and difficult
to control bleeding. Series CT scans of the tumor. (A) preoperative CT revealing ground glass appearance is consistent with fibrous
dysplasia affecting of the sphenoid bone, ethmoidial bones, LT maxillary sinus, involving the optic foramen and harboring cystic expansible
component. (B) Immediate post operative CT scan. (C) 5 months post operative follow up CT scan. Preoperative Axial T2 of the skull base
revealed multiple fluid-fluid levels with hemorrhagic areas (white arrow) are consistent with associated aneurysmal bone cyst. A combined
endonasal-cranial approach to resect this lesion that entailed an extradural bi-coronal craniotomy (pericranium saving technique for
closure) and medial bilateral orbitotomy was performed (Figure 2, B). The preoperative assessment of the tumor (using the neuronavigation
system) revealed a volume of 88.67 cc, approximately 95% (84.17 cc) of the tumor was removed. 4.5 cc was left over the right optic nerve to
preserve the vision on the unaffected eye. The intraoperative blood loss was estimated about 1700 cc. And the patient recovered without any
appreciable complications, along with improvement of her proptosis. She was discharged with clinical and imaging follow up. Histological
evaluation revealed fibroblastic proliferation comprised of benign fibrous spindle areas with mature irregular bone formation (Figure 4).
Cystic formation and hemorrhagic spaces lined by osteoclast-like multinucleated giant were also noted (Figure 5). The findings were
consisted of fibrous dysplasia with aneurismal bone cyst-like features. Fibrous dysplasia. Photomicrograph reveling spindle cells
proliferation with islands of mature bone structure (with Chinese like characters). No mitosis or cellular features of malignancy are
presented. Aneurysmal bone cyst. Photomicrograph shows spindle cell proliferation with giant cell lining bloody cystic structure. Five
months after surgery, a recurrent large tumor was noticed, estimated to be 30.5 cc (Figure 2, C). The patient's parents declined any further
treatment, and the patient was lost to follow up. We present a rare case of FD with ABC in the skull base of a female child with sudden
blindness. The radiological and pathological findings were consistent with the diagnosis in this case. In contrast to previous reports,
however, the present case progressed rapidly and led to bone destruction and extension to adjacent vital structures. Saito et al presented a
similar case involving the nasal cavity and the sphenoid sinus with symptoms that preceded the diagnosis by one year. In their case,
complete excision was achieved with no recurrence after 3.5 years of follow up. Of the concomitant FD and ABC that have been reported (Table
1), , three occurred in the sinonasal cavity . Clinical, radiological findings, and treatment of reported combined fibrous dysplasia and
aneurysmal bone cyst of the skull FD; fibrous dysplasia. AG; angiogram. LPMA; Lt posterior meningeal artery. SAH; subarachnoid hemorrhage.
ABC; aneurysmal bone cyst. f/u; follow up. k/c; known case. PNS; paranasal sinuses. The presentation of these lesions, as in our case,
depends on the location, rate of growth and site of involvement. Symptoms may include painless mass, pressure symptoms, nasal obstruction,
headache and loss of vision. Acute hemorrhage into the cyst(s) may causes pain, rapid enlargement and/or rupture and subarachnoid hemorrhage
. All reported cases were treated surgically with generally good outcomes. ABC in distal tibia has been treated by high-energy, low-dose
radiation on one patient and was successful, with no recurrence during the five years follow up . However, radiation for ABC of skull base
or concomitant ABC with FD residual tumors has not been reported. The aggressive nature of the present case and others suggests that
adjuvant therapy may be required in some cases. Our case represents a rapid developing fibrous dysplasia with aneurismal bone cyst at the
skull base leading to unilateral blindness. Awareness of such cases may lead to early detection and diagnosis for effective therapy. A
multidisciplinary team is needed for both diagnosis (clinical, radiological, and histopathological) and management (otolaryngology,
neurosurgery, and neuronavigation) in this kind of diseases. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AST: writer,
alignment and drafted the manuscript. KHQ: surgen, writer. EB: radiological diagnosis, writer. LS: neuronavigation, writer. ABM:
pathological diagnosis, writer. AJS: surgen, writer. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. We are grateful to Dr. Adel El-Naggar for his great influence in reviewing this manuscript, Dr.
Suhail Maqbool for his helpful guidance in writing the manuscript and patient management, and Dr. Mahmoud Al-Yamany for helping in
innovating and performing the skull base approach.
