We report the first case of primary infective spondylodiscitis due to Lactococcus garvieae, confirmed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing, in the
absence of concomitant endocarditis in a patient with long-standing gastritis on famotidine. He responded to a 6-week course of ampicillin.
The gastrointestinal tract is probably the source of infection. Lactococci are Gram-positive, catalase-negative, facultative anaerobic cocci
in short chains or pairs traditionally considered to be of low virulence to human beings . Among the eight species and subspecies,
Lactococcus garvieae is responsible for the majority of reported cases of opportunistic human infections in the literature. Similar to L.
lactis , the most well-recognized clinical syndrome of human L. garvieae infections is infective endocarditis involving either native or
prosthetic valves . Other reported entities included liver abscess , peritonitis , diverticulitis , and infective spondylodiscitis in
association with endocarditis . Here, we describe a rare case of primary infective spondylodiscitis caused by L. garvieae in the absence of
endocarditis in an immunocompetent patient who was successfully treated with antibiotics alone. After a thorough review of all of the
sporadic reports in the literature, we conclude that the organism likely causes opportunistic infections in body systems with local defects
by entering the bloodstream from diseased sites in the gastrointestinal tract after the ingestion of contaminated food. A 70-year-old
Chinese man with long-standing gastritis on histamine-2 receptor antagonist (famotidine 20 mg twice daily) was admitted for fever and low
back pain for 1 week. On admission, he had a temperature of 38.8°C and localized tenderness at the mid-lumbar spine. Blood tests showed a
total white cell count of 8.67 × 109 l−1 (normal, 4.40–10.10 × 109 l−1) with 79.4% neutrophils (normal, 44.0–72.0%) and a neutrophil count
of 6.89 × 109 l−1 (normal, 2.2–6.7 × 109 l−1), raised C-reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) levels of
5.2 mg dl−1 (normal, <0.76 mg dl−1) and 58 mm/h (normal, <20 mm h−1), respectively, and normal liver and renal function tests. A
roentgenogram of the lumbar spine showed degenerative changes, including reduced lumbar lordosis and marginal osteophytes. Magnetic
resonance imaging of the lumbar spine revealed abnormal contrast enhancement in the posterior aspect of the L3–4 disc and end-plate with
surrounding soft tissue and epidural enhancement (Fig. 1). Culture of the percutaneous bone biopsy of L3–4 yielded tiny non-hemolytic
colonies of Gram-positive cocci in short chains on 5% sheep blood agar after 24 h of incubation in 5% CO2 at 37°C. The bacterium was grouped
as Lancefield group D, catalase-negative, bile esculin-positive, pyrrolidonyl arylamidase-positive, arginine-positive, vancomycin-
susceptible, and did not grow in 6.5% NaCl. Although the Vitek (bioMérieux, Durham, NC, USA) system identified it as Enterococcus faecium
with a 99% confidence level, the absence of growth in 6.5% NaCl prompted the use of alternative identification methods. The API Rapid ID 32
Strep (bioMérieux, Marcy l’Etoile, France) and the BD Phoenix™ automated microbiology (Becton–Dickinson Diagnostics, Sparks, MD, USA)
systems identified it as L. garvieae with 67.7 and 99% confidence levels, respectively.Fig. 1T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the
lumbar spine showing abnormal contrast enhancement in the posterior aspect of the L3–4 disc and end-plate with surrounding soft tissue and
epidural enhancement (arrow) T1-weighted magnetic resonance imaging of the lumbar spine showing abnormal contrast enhancement in the
posterior aspect of the L3–4 disc and end-plate with surrounding soft tissue and epidural enhancement (arrow) 16S rRNA gene sequencing of
the Gram-positive coccus was performed according to our previous publications on the identification of other Gram-positive cocci [11, 12],
using LPW8427 5′-GCGAACGGGTGAGTAACG-3′ and LPW8428 5′-GACTTCACCCCAATCATC-3′ (Sigma-Proligo, Singapore) as the polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) and sequencing primers. The sequences of the PCR products were compared with the sequences of closely related species in GenBank by
multiple sequence alignment using ClustalX 1.83 . Phylogenetic relationships were determined using the neighbor-joining method. The results
showed that there was no base difference between the 16S rRNA gene sequence of the Gram-positive coccus and that of L. garvieae (GenBank
accession no. FJ915634.1), indicating unambiguously that the Gram-positive coccus was a strain of L. garvieae (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Phylogenetic
tree showing the relationships of the patient’s isolate to other closely related Lactococcus species. The tree was inferred from 16S rRNA
data by the neighbor-joining method using Kimura’s two-parameter correction and was rooted using the 16S rRNA gene sequence of Streptococcus
gallinaceus (NR_025453.1). Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000 trees. The scale bar indicates the estimated number of substitutions
per 100 bases. Names and accession numbers are given as cited in the GenBank database Phylogenetic tree showing the relationships of the
patient’s isolate to other closely related Lactococcus species. The tree was inferred from 16S rRNA data by the neighbor-joining method
using Kimura’s two-parameter correction and was rooted using the 16S rRNA gene sequence of Streptococcus gallinaceus (NR_025453.1).
Bootstrap values were calculated from 1,000 trees. The scale bar indicates the estimated number of substitutions per 100 bases. Names and
accession numbers are given as cited in the GenBank database Based on the Clinical and Laboratory Standards Institute’s (CLSI)
recommendations on viridan streptococci, the organism was susceptible to ampicillin, vancomycin, ceftriaxone, intermediately resistant to
penicillin with a minimum inhibition concentration of 1.0 μg ml−1, and resistant to clindamycin . In view of previous reports on infective
endocarditis associated with L. garvieae and a previous report of concomitant infective spondylitis and infective endocarditis ,
transthoracic echocardiogram was performed, which showed normal heart valves without any vegetation. Three sets of blood cultures taken
before the use of antibiotics were negative and no clinically apparent immunologic or vasculitic phenomenon was observed. He was, thus,
treated as a case of acute osteomyelitis with a 6-week course of intravenous ampicillin 2 g q6h and responded well clinically. The
neutrophil count, CRP, and ESR levels normalized after 18 days of treatment. He was discharged 64 days after admission and remained well at
follow-up 3 months afterwards. L. garvieae was separated from the Streptococcus genus in 1985 . It was first isolated from bovines with
mastitis and, subsequently, from fish and human specimens . It causes mastitis in ruminants, and lactococcosis, a septicemic infection
characterized by hemorrhagic enteritis; bilateral exophthalmos; darkening of the skin; and congestion of the intestine, liver, kidney,
spleen, and brain, in fish [16, 17]. In the recent years, it has gained recognition as an emerging zoonotic pathogen, since an increasing
number of cases of human infections due to L. garvieae have been encountered. Furutan et al. first described the possible association
between the organism and prosthetic valve endocarditis in 1991, although no clinical details were mentioned. Subsequently, including our
patient, a total of 12 cases with clinical details have been reported in the English literature (Table 1). Six cases presented with
infective endocarditis (five infecting native valves and one prosthetic valve) , one had liver abscess , one had septicemia with multiorgan
failure , one had diverticulitis , one had secondary peritonitis , and one had infective spondylodiscitis associated with probable
endocarditis . Ten out of the 12 cases (83%) had bacteremia. The present case is the first in describing L. garvieae infective
spondylodiscitis in the absence of endocarditis and detectable bacteremia.Table 1Characteristics of patients with infections due to
Lactococcus garvieaeReference (year)Sex/age and predisposing factor(s)Clinical syndrome (presentation)Organism(s) isolated (site;
confirmatory method)TreatmentOutcomeFefer et al. (1998)F/84Hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (complete heart block with dual-chamber pacemaker and
AVR; calcified mitral valve)HypothyroidismImmune thrombocytopenic purpuraPPI (omeprazole)Native-valve endocarditis (fever and heart failure
due to ruptured chordae tendineae with mitral regurgitation)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; phenotypic reactions)MVR followed by IV CTR started
1 week after surgeryDied one month after admission due to cerebral hemorrhageJames et al. (2000)F/56AVR 12 years agoInfective spondylitis
and probable prosthetic valve endocarditis (low back pain for 9 weeks and fever for 5 weeks)Lactococcus garvieae (blood and biopsied bone;
automated identification system)IV TEI for 3 monthsDischarged after clinical remissionMofredj et al. (2000)F/68Cholangiocarcinoma with
Teflon biliary prostheses and on steroidsLiver abscess (gastrointestinal hemorrhage due to hemobilia and obstructed biliary prostheses with
liver abscess)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; automated identification system)Removal of obstructed prostheses and antibiotics (IV AMP, NET,
and MET)Died 12 days after admission due to massive gastrointestinal hemorrhageFihman et al. (2006)F/86AVR 6 years agoCholecystectomySmall
bowel obstruction HerniaDuodenal ulcerationColonic diverticulosisPPI (omeprazole)Prosthetic valve endocarditis (fever and aortic
vegetation)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; 16S rRNA and sodAint gene sequencing)IV AMO and GEN for 4 weeks followed by oral AMO for
3 weeksDischarged after clinical remissionVinh et al. (2006)M/80Malignant colonic polyps with resectionDiabetes mellitusIschemic heart
diseaseHypercholesterolemiaNative valve endocarditis (fever and heart failure)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; 16S rRNA gene sequencing)IV AMP
for 3 weeks prior to and 6 weeks after AVRDischarged after clinical remissionYiu et al. (2007)M/67Mitral regurgitationAtrial
fibrillationH2-blocker (famotidine)Frequent visits to fish marketNative valve endocarditis (fever for 3 weeks and worsened mitral
regurgitation)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; phenotypic reactions)IV AMP for 6 weeks followed by elective MVR and left atrial placation
2 months after antibioticsDischarged after clinical remissionWang et al. (2007)M/72Mitral valve prolapseGastric ulcerConsumption of raw
fishNative valve endocarditis (fever and purpuric leg lesions for 2 weeks, diarrhea, new-onset mitral regurgitation with
vegetation)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; 16S rRNA gene sequencing)IV PEN for 4 weeks and GEN for 2 weeksDischarged after clinical
remissionM/10Repeated esophageal dilatation and reconstruction for corrosive injuryConsumption of raw fishSepticemia with multiorgan
dysfunction syndrome (fever, seizure, hypotension, multiorgan failure, and disseminated intravascular coagulopathy)Lactococcus garvieae and
Klebsiella pneumoniae (blood; 16S rRNA gene sequencing)Supportive treatmentDied 10 h after admission due to multiorgan failureF/56Small
bowel diverticulosisHyperthyroidism HypertensionAsthmaDiverticulitis (fever and suprapubic pain for 1 day)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; 16S
rRNA gene sequencing)IV CEF and GEN for 2 days, followed by oral CTX for 5 daysDischarged after clinical remissionM/47Good past
healthConsumption of raw fishPeritonitis secondary to traumatic jejunal rupture (fever and abdominal pain 2 days after car
accident)Lactococcus garvieae, Klebsiella pneumoniae, Klebsiella oxytoca, and Enterococcus faecium (peritoneal fluid; 16S rRNA gene
sequencing)Laparotomy with enterorrhaphy of jejunum followed by IV PIP and AMI for 1 weekDischarged after clinical remissionLi et al.
(2008)M/41Good past healthFrequent contact with raw fish at work (chef)Native valve endocarditis with septic embolic cerebral infarction
(right hemiplegia and new-onset mitral regurgitation)Lactococcus garvieae (blood; 16S rRNA gene sequencing)IV PEN and GEN for 30 days
followed by MVR 16 days after first dischargeDischarged after clinical remissionPresent case (2010)M/70Chronic gastritisH2-blocker
(famotidine)Frequent visits to fish market and intake of raw fishInfective spondylitis (fever and low back pain for 3 weeks)Lactococcus
garvieae (biopsied bone; 16S rRNA gene sequencing)IV AMP for 6 weeksDischarged after clinical remissionFurutan et al. described 8 blood
isolates of L. garvieae cultured between 1978 and 1990 without mentioning the specific details of individual cases, and thus they are not
included hereAMI, amikacin; AMO, amoxicillin; AMP, ampicillin; AVR, aortic valve replacement; CEF, cefazolin; CTX, cotrimoxazole, CTR,
ceftriaxone; F, female; GEN, gentamicin; IV, intravenous; M, male; MET, metronidazole; MVR, mitral valve replacement; N/A, not available;
NET, netilmicin; PEN, penicillin; PIP, piperacillin; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; TEI, teicoplanin Characteristics of
patients with infections due to Lactococcus garvieae Furutan et al. described 8 blood isolates of L. garvieae cultured between 1978 and 1990
without mentioning the specific details of individual cases, and thus they are not included here AMI, amikacin; AMO, amoxicillin; AMP,
ampicillin; AVR, aortic valve replacement; CEF, cefazolin; CTX, cotrimoxazole, CTR, ceftriaxone; F, female; GEN, gentamicin; IV,
intravenous; M, male; MET, metronidazole; MVR, mitral valve replacement; N/A, not available; NET, netilmicin; PEN, penicillin; PIP,
piperacillin; PPI, proton pump inhibitor; rRNA, ribosomal RNA; TEI, teicoplanin Although their clinical presentations vary, a number of
similarities among these patients who developed infection due to this relatively avirulent organism can be observed by thorough analysis of
the reported cases (Table 1). Concerning the probable pathogenesis, most of them started off with an anatomically or physiologically
disturbed gastrointestinal tract (9/12, 75%), in the form of past surgery, active pathology, or the use of gastric acid suppressive therapy.
As in our patient, who had regular visits to fish markets and intake of sashimi, the likely route of infection was often through the
ingestion of contaminated fish . Half of the cases had documented exposure to raw fish (6/12, 50%), while the history was not mentioned in
some of the other cases. The bacterium, after being acquired, then caused infection in the body systems with local predisposing factors
(9/12, 75%), including valvular abnormalities in endocarditis, biliary tract tumor with prosthetic stenting in liver abscess, diverticular
disease in septicemic diverticulitis, ruptured bowel in peritonitis, and degenerative spine in infective spondylodiscitis. These
observations were well illustrated in our patient: chronic gastritis, long-term acid-suppressive therapy, regular intake of raw fish, and
underlying degenerative spine. Thus, instead of developing infective spondylodiscitis due to other more common organisms [19, 20], our
patient developed the disease secondary to L. garvieae. Human infections caused by L. garvieae are associated with significant morbidity and
mortality. For the nine patients who survived, most received prolonged courses (median 6 weeks) of antibiotics, mainly consisting of high-
dose β-lactams with or without aminoglycosides, and surgical interventions were also performed in three patients (Table 1). Of note, while
clindamycin is often being used in cases of infective spondylodiscitis caused by other Gram-positive organisms such as staphylococci and
streptococci, it would be ineffective against L. garvieae, as the organism is always resistant. Alternatively, oxacillin could be
considered, as the bacterium is usually susceptible . However, even despite appropriate antibiotic use and maximal supportive treatment,
three patients (3/12, 25%) died as a result of cerebral hemorrhage complicating mitral valve replacement for infective endocarditis,
hemobilia in cholangiocarcinoma with liver abscess, and multiorgan failure in concomitant Klebsiella pneumoniae and L. garvieae bacteremia
(Table 1). This highlights the fact that, while three-quarters of cases of L. garvieae infections were treatable, a significant proportion
could be fatal if serious complications, incurable comorbidities, or coexisting infections are present. In summary, human infections due to
L. garvieae are rare. The most common manifestation is infective endocarditis. Our case is the first case of primary infective
spondylodiscitis in the absence of endocarditis. A thorough review of the literature suggests that the organism is probably acquired from
the ingestion of contaminated food, especially raw fish, which then enters the bloodstream via anatomically or physiologically altered
gastrointestinal tract, and, from there, spreads to infect distant sites with local predisposing pathologies. At-risk individuals,
particularly those who have an anatomically or physiologically altered gastrointestinal tract, and coexisting local predisposing defects,
especially valvular heart disease, are, therefore, discouraged from eating undercooked food, as this emerging zoonotic bacterium with
supposedly low virulence is capable of causing serious infections with potential morbidities and mortalities. Accurate identification of the
bacterium is essential and can be achieved by 16S rRNA gene sequencing. Conflict of interest There is no conflict of interest. Open Access
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
