Communicated by: Verena Peters Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) form a group of metabolic disorders caused by deficient
glycosylation of proteins and/or lipids. Isoelectric focusing (IEF) of serum transferrin is the most common screening method to detect
abnormalities of protein N-glycosylation. On the basis of the IEF profile, patients can be grouped into CDG type I or CDG type II. Several
protein variants of transferrin are known that result in a shift in isoelectric point (pI). In some cases, these protein variants co-migrate
with transferrin glycoforms, which complicates interpretation. In two patients with abnormal serum transferrin IEF profiles, neuraminidase
digestion and subsequent IEF showed profiles suggestive of the diagnosis of CDG type I. Mass spectrometry of tryptic peptides of
immunopurified transferrin, however, revealed a novel mutation at the N-glycan attachment site. In case 1, a peptide with mutation
p.Asn630Thr in the 2nd glycosylation site was identified, resulting in an additional band at disialotransferrin position on IEF. After
neuraminidase digestion, a single band was found at the asialotransferrin position, indistinguishable from CDG type I patients. In case 2, a
peptide with mutation p.Asn432His was found. These results show the use of mass spectrometry of transferrin peptides in the diagnostic track
of CDG type I. Congenital disorders of glycosylation (CDG) comprise a group of rare inherited metabolic disorders caused by deficient
glycosylation of proteins and/or lipids. For N-glycan biosynthesis, a lipid-linked oligosaccharide is synthesized in the endoplasmatic
reticulum, and transferred en bloc to a nascent protein. N-glycans are exclusively transferred to an asparagine in the consensus sequence
Asn-Xxx-Ser/Thr, where Xxx is any amino acid except proline. The glycosylated protein is then transferred to the Golgi for further
processing of the glycans. Defects in the biosynthesis and transfer of the lipid-linked oligosaccharide result in the loss of whole
N-glycans on glycoproteins, resulting in a CDG type I (CDG-I). Diagnostic screening of CDG is performed by isoelectric focusing (IEF) of
transferrin. In its most abundant form, this serum glycoprotein carries two complex N-glycans attached to Asn432 and Asn630. Each N-glycan
is terminated by two negatively charged sialic acids. Defects in the biosynthesis of N-glycans in the endoplasmatic reticulum cause a loss
of one or two complete N-glycans, resulting in a typical IEF pattern of CDG-I, characterized by increased asialo- and disialotransferrin
bands, and decreased tetrasialotransferrin. Secondary causes of hypoglycosylation such as galactosemia or fructosemia may cause an identical
pattern and therefore must be excluded. Several transferrin protein polymorphisms result in a shifted IEF pattern, caused by pI differences
of the polypeptide chain (Fujita et al. 1985; Kamboh and Ferrell 1987). Variant TF C is the most common form of transferrin, the anodic
variant B and cathodic variant D are less common. In particular, heterozygous combinations of C and D variants may lead to misinterpretation
in CDG diagnosis (Fujita et al. 1985; Marklova and Albahri 2009). Nevertheless, these polymorphisms can be identified by neuraminidase
treatment of serum, resulting in an IEF pattern with two distinct asialotransferrin bands (Fig. 1, lane 5). Fig. 1Transferrin isoelectric
focusing profiles before and after neuraminidase incubation. Lane 1 and 1’: control, lane 2 and 2’: PMM2-CDG, lane 3 and 3’: case 1, lane 4
and 4’: mother of case 1, lane 5 and 5’: case 2, lane 6 and 6’: mother of case 2, lane 7 and 7’: patient with a known “D variant”
polymorphism. Left and right of the figure are the numbers of sialic acids present on transferrin C variant Transferrin isoelectric focusing
profiles before and after neuraminidase incubation. Lane 1 and 1’: control, lane 2 and 2’: PMM2-CDG, lane 3 and 3’: case 1, lane 4 and 4’:
mother of case 1, lane 5 and 5’: case 2, lane 6 and 6’: mother of case 2, lane 7 and 7’: patient with a known “D variant” polymorphism. Left
and right of the figure are the numbers of sialic acids present on transferrin C variant To improve diagnostics of CDG, mass spectrometric
methods for glycoprotein analysis are being developed because of their higher sensitivity and specificity (Hahn et al. 2006; Lacey et al.
2001; Wada 2006; Wada 2007). Liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS) of immunopurified transferrin was proven to be a sensitive
screening method for CDG-I, showing distinct peaks for fully glycosylated transferrin, and transferrin lacking one or two oligosaccharide
chains (Bunkenborg et al. 2004; Hulsmeier et al. 2007; Lacey et al. 2001; Wada et al. 1992). For CDG type II with abnormal processing of
glycans, analysis of enzymatically removed glycans can be diagnostic (Guillard et al. 2011). Here, we present the application of MS of
transferrin peptides in the diagnosis of CDG and reveal two novel transferrin mutations in the N-glycan attachment site. IEF of transferrin
was performed as described in two cases. Case 1 was suspected of CDG due to a clinical presentation of cyclic vomiting accompanied with
ketosis and metabolic acidosis and the appearance of atypical fat pads and inverted nipples at the age of seven. Hemoglobin and mean
corpuscular volume were normal. Case 2 was a healthy donor for blood transfusion, who participated in a large-scale screening for
transferrin variants in populations of Japan and New Zealand (Yuasa et al. 1987). His mother was also healthy. Five μL of plasma was
incubated for 30 min with equal volumes of 6.7 mM Fe(III)citrate and 0.17 mM NaHCO3 (Fluka, Buchs, Switzerland) in ultrapure water, then
diluted ten times in saline. Two μL of each sample was transferred to a hydrated immobilin dry gel (GE Healthcare, Buckinghamshire, UK) with
Servalyt, pH 5–7 (Serva, Heidelberg, Germany) and run on a PhastSystem (GE Healthcare). Different isoforms of transferrin were detected by
immunoprecipitation in the gel with 60 μL rabbit-anti-human transferrin antibody per gel (8.5 g/l; Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) for 30 min,
followed by overnight washing in saline, fixation with 20% (w/v) trichloracetic acid and Coomassie blue staining. Removal of sialic acids
was achieved by incubating 3 μL of plasma for 30 min with the same volume of 6.7 mM Fe(III)citrate and 0.17 mM NaHCO3 (Fluka) in water,
prior to addition of 15 mU of neuraminidase (Roche diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and incubation for two hours at 37°C. IEF was then
performed identically to non-treated samples. Prior to SDS-PAGE analysis, plasma samples were centrifuged and diluted 100-fold with
ultrapure water. Three μL diluted sample was mixed with 100 μL sample buffer (10 mM Tris–HCl, pH 8.0, 1 mM EDTA, 2.5% SDS, 2% DTT, and 0.01%
bromophenol blue) and heated for 5 min at 95°C. The samples were then applied to a 12.5% Phastgel (GE Healthcare) and the proteins separated
on a Phastsystem (GE Healthcare). After separation, the proteins were detected by western blotting using a primary rabbit anti-human
transferrin antibody (Dako) and a secondary goat anti-rabbit peroxidase conjugated antibody, followed by electrochemiluminescence detection.
The purified transferrin was desalted by a ZipTip C4 (Millipore, Bedford, MA) and analysed by MALDI mass spectrometry using a Voyager DE Pro
MALDI-time-of-flight mass spectrometer with a nitrogen pulsed laser (337 nm) (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA) (Wada et al. 1994). The
sample matrix was 10 mg/mL sinapinic acid in a 0.1% (v/v) TFA and 30% (v/v) acetonitrile solution. The measurements were carried out in
positive ion and linear TOF mode. For electrospray MS of peptides, transferrin was dissolved in a solution of 6 M guanidine, 0.25 M Tris-
HCl, pH 8.0, reduced with 0.13 M dithiothreitol at 50°C for 1 h and then S-carbamidomethylated with 0.22 M iodoacetamide for 30 min at room
temperature. Tryptic peptides were desalted by ZipTip C18 (Millipore), dissolved in a 0.1% formic acid and 50% (v/v) acetonitrile solution
and were directly infused into an LTQ XL ion trap mass spectrometer (Thermo-Fisher Scientific, San Jose, CA) using a nanospray tip. The CID
MS/MS was carried out with helium gas and the spectra were acquired by 100 scans. DNA from case 1 and his mother was isolated from whole
blood samples by the commonly used salt-out method for DNA isolation. DNA of other family members was isolated from archived dried blood
spots on filter paper using the QIAamp DNA Micro Kit (Qiagen, Valencia, CA). The isolation process was performed according to the
recommended manufacturer protocols. The primers were designed to the intronic regions surrounding the 17 protein coding exons of the
transferrin gene (TF gene: OMIM 190000; NCBI gene ID: 7018; NG_013080.1; ENSG00000091513). Primer sequences are available upon request. The
fragments were amplified using the Combi PPP Master Mix (Top-Bio s.r.o; Praha, Czech Republic) and purified by gel extraction using Wizard
SV Gel and PCR clean-Up System (Promega, Madison, WI). All fragments were sequenced on ABI PRISM 3100-Avant Genetic Analyzer (Applied
Biosystems, Carlsbad, CA) using the Big Dye Terminator v.3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems) according the recommended
manufacturer protocols. Sequence analyses were performed using SeqScape Software v2.5 (Applied Biosystems). The nucleotide numbering follows
cDNA numbering with +1 corresponding to the A of the ATG translation codon in the reference sequence. The initiation codon is codon 1. For
restriction analyses of the c.1889A > C mutation, the HpyCH4IV (New England BioLabs, Ipswich, MA) restriction endonuclease was used
according to the manufacturer protocols of the enzyme. Clinical suspicion of CDG in case 1 triggered us to perform IEF of transferrin, which
showed a type I profile (Fig. 1, lane 3) with increased disialotransferrin and decreased tetrasialotransferrin. Neuraminidase treatment
resulted in a single band corresponding to asialotransferrin, suggesting that the double band in the untreated sample was not the result of
a protein variant (Fig. 1, lane 3’). IEF of serum transferrin from case 2 and his mother showed two major bands in a 1:1 ratio with one band
at the level of tetrasialotransferrin and one band just below disialotransferrin (Fig. 1, lanes 5 and 6). After neuraminidase treatment, two
bands were visible at the asialotransferrin position (Fig. 1, lanes 5’ and 6’). The distance between these two bands is much smaller than
between the bands of sialylated transferrin. Additional information was obtained by SDS-PAGE analysis of transferrin. In controls,
transferrin SDS-PAGE shows a single band around 79 kDa corresponding to the glycoprotein with two N-glycans (Fig. 2). The transferrin of a
PMM2-CDG (CDG-Ia) patient showed bands with nonglycosylated transferrin at 75 kDa, transferrin with one N-glycan at 77 kDa and the fully
glycosylated transferrin at 79 kDa (Wada et al. 1994). In cases 1 and 2, two bands of equal intensity were observed at 77 kDa and 79 kDa.
This finding was confirmed by MALDI-MS of whole transferrin (Wada et al. 1994). Instead of a single peak at 79.6 kDa, peaks were observed at
77.3 kDa and 79.6 kDa, corresponding to transferrin with one and two N-glycans, respectively (Fig. 2). Fig. 2MALDI-TOF profile of
immunopurified transferrin, carrying 1 (m/z 77.3 kDa) or 2 (m/z 79.6 kDa) N-glycan chains. Dotted line: control, continuous line: case 1.
The gray boxes represent the glycosylation consensus sequences of the transferrin protein. Right: SDS-PAGE of serum transferrin: C =
control, C1 = case 1, C1.M. = mother of case 1 MALDI-TOF profile of immunopurified transferrin, carrying 1 (m/z 77.3 kDa) or 2 (m/z
79.6 kDa) N-glycan chains. Dotted line: control, continuous line: case 1. The gray boxes represent the glycosylation consensus sequences of
the transferrin protein. Right: SDS-PAGE of serum transferrin: C = control, C1 = case 1, C1.M. = mother of case 1 Despite these indications
for true CDG-I profiles, a number of clues suggested otherwise. On transferrin IEF, the disialio- and tetrasialotransferrin bands were
present in a 1:1 ratio, while asialotransferrin was normal (< 3%). In CDG-I patients, such severe profiles are commonly associated with an
increase of asialotransferrin. IEF of thyroxin binding globulin (TBG), another serum glycoprotein used for screening of CDG, showed a normal
pattern (data not shown). Additionally, transferrin IEF and SDS-PAGE in serum of the healthy mothers revealed similar patterns to their
children’s (Fig. 1, lanes 4 and 6; Fig. 2). In contrast to the results after neuraminidase digestion, these findings were indicative of a
protein variant. In order to obtain more insight into the structure of the transferrin protein in cases 1 and 2, transferrin was
immunopurified from serum, trypsinized, and the peptides were analyzed by mass spectrometry. Glycopeptides, known to be present in the
normal transferrin, were detected. In addition, a thus-far unreported nonglycosylated peptide was found in case 1 as doubly charged ion at
m/z 1252.1 and triply charged ion at m/z 835.0. MS/MS analysis revealed the peptide sequence 622-QQQHLFGSTVTDCSGNFCLFR-642, corresponding to
the non-glycosylated glycopeptide 2 with a heterozygous p.Asn630Thr change (Fig. 3). This asparagine is the second N-glycosylation site of
transferrin (underlined). In case 2, an unknown doubly charged ion with m/z 750.4 was found. MS/MS sequencing indicated a p.Asn432His change
in the first glycosylation site: 421-CGLVPVLAENYHK-433 (Fig. 4). Fig. 3Analysis of transferrin peptides in case 1. a identification of
doubly- and triply charged species, not present in controls. b MS/MS analysis of m/z 1252.1 indicates a p.N630T mutation in the second
transferrin glycosylation site, thus peptide 622-QQQHLFGSNVTDCSGNFCLFR-642 is mutated to 622-QQQHLFGSTVTDCSGNFCLFR-642Fig. 4Identification
of a protein mutation in case 2. MS/MS analysis of m/z 750.4 indicated a p.N432H mutation in the first transferrin glycosylation site in
case 2, thus peptide 421-CGLVPVLAENYNK-433 is mutated to 421-CGLVPVLAENYHK-433 Analysis of transferrin peptides in case 1. a identification
of doubly- and triply charged species, not present in controls. b MS/MS analysis of m/z 1252.1 indicates a p.N630T mutation in the second
transferrin glycosylation site, thus peptide 622-QQQHLFGSNVTDCSGNFCLFR-642 is mutated to 622-QQQHLFGSTVTDCSGNFCLFR-642 Identification of a
protein mutation in case 2. MS/MS analysis of m/z 750.4 indicated a p.N432H mutation in the first transferrin glycosylation site in case 2,
thus peptide 421-CGLVPVLAENYNK-433 is mutated to 421-CGLVPVLAENYHK-433 Thus, in both cases, MS/MS analysis of transferrin peptides showed a
heterozygous amino acid change in one of the N-glycan attachment sites, resulting in a transferrin molecule with a single N-glycan. As a
result, the mutated transferrin will lack two sialic acids and therefore be located at the disialotransferrin level on IEF. The imidazole
group of the histidine in case 2 causes a slight pI difference between the common disialotransferrin and the mutated form. For case 1,
sequencing of the TF gene revealed the heterozygous c.1889A > C mutation, thereby confirming the p.Asn630Thr alteration at the amino acid
level. RFLP analysis in family members of case 1 showed the heterozygous mutation in the mother of case 1, her sister and the grandmother.
This p.Asn630Thr mutation was not found in 130 controls. Case 2 was not available for further investigations at the molecular level. Yet,
based on the amino acid sequence, a c.1294A > C mutation may have occurred, resulting in the substitution from Asn (AAT) to His (CAT). In
the diagnosis of CDG, it is important to exclude secondary causes of hypoglycosylation of transferrin, as well as transferrin variants which
show an IEF pattern suggestive of CDG. In this study, we showed that the current method to identify a protein variants by treatment of serum
samples with neuraminidase can be misleading when the mutation is located in one of the amino acids of the consensus sequence of
N-glycosylation for transferrin. The loss of the N-glycan in half of the transferrin proteins in serum resulted in a pattern with equal
amounts of disialo- and tetrasialotransferrin. Although this resembles a CDG type I pattern, the approximate 1:1 ratio between the two
isoforms in combination with low levels of asialotransferrin (< 3%), should trigger one to consider a mutation in one of the glycosylation
sites. If neuraminidase treatment is inconclusive, IEF of another glycoprotein, like TBG, may provide additional information about a
generalized glycosylation defect. When serum of the patient’s parents is available, IEF of transferrin in these samples can also help to
exclude such a mutation. Currently, mass spectrometry is increasingly used in diagnostics of inborn errors of metabolism. For CDG diagnosis,
MS opportunities are growing (Lacey et al. 2001; Wada 2007; Guillard et al. 2011). Here, we show that the application of MS of transferrin
(glyco)peptides reveals a non-glycosylated peptide with a mutated N-glycosylation consensus sequence Asn-Xxx-Thr/Ser. Alternatively,
identification of non-glycosylated peptides with normal sequence will direct the diagnostics toward CDG-I. These analyses do not require
additional serum sampling and provide unambiguous results. Our findings indicate the potential for mass spectrometric analysis of
transferrin (glyco)peptides, not only in CDG-II, but also in the diagnostic track of CDG-I patients. It allowed the detection of two novel
mutations in the consensus glycosylation sites, which influence the screening by transferrin IEF. This work was supported by the European
Commission (LSHM-CT2005-512131, Euroglycanet) and Metakids and a grant from the Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech
Republic MSM 0021620806. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License
which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
Congenital disorders of glycosylation Isoelectric focusing Liquid chromatography mass spectrometry Matrix assisted laser
desorption/ionisation Time-of-flight Competing interest: None declared.
