A patient with post-pneumonia empyema complicated by type-2 respiratory failure required mechanical ventilation as part of his therapy. A
pneumothorax was noted on his chest radiograph. This was treated with an intercostal chest drain (ICD). Unfortunately, he was still hypoxic,
his subcutaneous emphysema was worsening and the ICD was bubbling. A computed tomography (CT) scan of chest demonstrated that the ICD has
penetrated the right upper lobe parenchyma. A new ICD was inserted and the previous one was removed. Although both hypoxia and subcutaneous
emphysema improved, the patient chronically remained on mechanical ventilation. Tube thoracostomy is a common procedure to drain fluids
and/or air from the pleural space via an ICD. The British Thoracic Society (BTS) has published a guideline for ICD insertion which in many
institutions has been deployed as a standard approach to tube thoracostomy in both practice and training programs. Recently there is an
increasing concern regarding the training of doctors with regard to precise and methodological ICD insertion . Harris et al conducted a
national survey among chest physicians in the UK recording their experiences regarding complications and serious harms following ICD
insertion. The study revealed 67% of NHS trusts have experienced major complications of ICD insertion. A 51-year-old man with history of
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and cigarette smoking presented with a shortness of breath, chronic pneumonia and empyema
involving the right side of his chest. Soon after admission his condition deteriorated developing type-2 respiratory failure necessitating
intubation and commencement of mechanical ventilation. Patient required positive end-expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 10 mmHg and 80% fraction
of inspired oxygen (FiO2) to maintain the oxygen saturation of 91% with PCO2 (partial pressure of carbon dioxide) and PO2 (partial pressure
of oxygen) of 7.1 and 8.2 kPa respectively. Following central line insertion a pneumothorax was noted on his chest radiograph. Under aseptic
technique and blunt dissection a large bore ICD was inserted anterolaterally into the right chest preceded by the introduction of index
finger and sweeping manoeuvre explained by the BTS guidelines . It is imperative to appreciate that a diseased hyperventilated lung with a
high PEEP is very prone to perforation by any instruments penetrating the chest wall and pleura. Shortly after tube thoracostomy the patient
started to develop a large subcutaneous emphysema originating in the right moving towards the left side of the chest wall. Unfortunately his
hypoxic state became worse requiring augmentation of mechanical ventilation. In the interim ICD was bubbling constantly. A CT scan of chest
demonstrated that the ICD has penetrated the right upper lobe parenchyma (Figure 1). As a result patient was urgently transferred to our
institute for further management. ICD (arrows) penetrating the lung parenchyma. A new ICD was inserted with the same technique whilst the
ventilator was briefly disconnected. When it was proved that the new ICD is in the appropriate position with a characteristic swing of
column of water, the previous ICD was removed. Subsequent chest CT scan revealed the right upper lobe laceration containing gas
communicating with the anterior chest wall. This was accompanied by massive subcutaneous emphysema (Figure 2). Right upper lobe laceration
(arrow) containing gas communicating with the anterior chest wall (post ICD removal). Although following the new ICD both hypoxia and
subcutaneous emphysema improved the patient was chronically remained on ventilation. Previously the risks of ICD insertion in patients on
mechanical ventilation has been described however we presented the above case due to frequent referral of patients on mechanical ventilation
to us with harmful complications of tube thoracostomy. Prior to ICD insertion in a patient on mechanical ventilation, the PEEP must be
turned off and the ventilator must be disconnected briefly during the introduction of the ICD. In ICD insertion deploying Seldinger
technique the same steps need to be taken for introducing the guide wire as well as the chest tube. Any ICD breaching the lung parenchyma
should be removed after insertion of another ICD in the pleural space. We believe the BTS guidelines require a new revision with the view to
including the mechanical ventilation as a hazardous clinical setting in "pre-drainage risk assessment" section. Furthermore ICD insertion
needs to be explained separately in self- and mechanical-ventilating patients along with considering the clinical settings as well as the
specialty demands. For instance efficient drainage of left-sided pleural effusion in a post-CABG (coronary artery bypass graft surgery)
patient requires a tube thoracostomy below the triangle of safety; or fine bore ICD insertion under Seldinger technique for the treatment of
pneumothorax is a well established procedure deployed by respiratory physicians while in thoracic surgery a large bore ICD with conventional
insertion technique is favourable. The royal college of surgeons has introduced S-DOPS (direct observation of procedural skills in surgery)
via intercollegiate surgical curriculum programme (ISCP) . We recommend a unified usage of surgical DOPS in all specialties to sign off
junior doctors' competency in tube thoracostomy in self- and mechanical-ventilating patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. KS performed the procedure; VZ admitted the patient under
his care, instructed and supervised the procedure. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
