Scrub typhus, a mite-transmitted zoonosis caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi, is an endemic disease in Taiwan and may be potentially fatal if
diagnosis is delayed. We encountered a 23-year-old previously healthy Taiwanese male soldier presenting with the right ear pain after
training in the jungle and an eleven-day history of intermittent high fever up to 39°C. Amoxicillin/clavulanate was prescribed for otitis
media at a local clinic. Skin rash over whole body and abdominal cramping pain with watery diarrhea appeared on the sixth day of fever. He
was referred due to progressive dyspnea and cough for 4 days prior to admission in our institution. On physical examination, there were
cardiopulmonary distress, icteric sclera, an eschar in the right external auditory canal and bilateral basal rales. Laboratory evaluation
revealed thrombocytopenia, elevation of liver function and acute renal failure. Chest x-ray revealed bilateral diffuse infiltration.
Doxycycline was prescribed for scrub typhus with acute respiratory distress syndrome and multiple organ failure. Fever subsided dramatically
the next day and he was discharged on day 7 with oral tetracycline for 7 days. Scrub typhus should be considered in acutely febrile patients
with multiple organ involvement, particularly if there is an eschar or a history of environmental exposure in endemic areas. Rapid and
accurate diagnosis, timely administration of antibiotics and intensive supportive care are necessary to decrease mortality of serious
complications of scrub typhus. Scrub typhus, a mite-transmitted zoonosis caused by Orientia tsutsugamushi, is an endemic disease in Taiwan
and may be potentially fatal if diagnosis is delayed. It is an acute febrile illness characterized by a typical necrotic primary lesion
(eschar), generalized lymphadenopathy, maculopapular skin rash, and nonspecific symptoms and signs. The incidence of eschar reported in
patients with scrub typhus is low, < 25%, and only 5% are found over head, face and neck. An eschar in the external auditory canal has not
been reported previously, so the diagnosis of scrub typhus was delayed with serious complications, including acute respiratory distress
syndrome (ARDS) and multiple organ failure (MOF). In patients with scrub typhus, the incidence and mortality rate of ARDS are 11.1%-15.2%
and 20%-25%, respectively. Reported here is a case of an eschar in the external auditory canal in scrub typhus complicated by ARDS and MOF
in a 23-year-old previously healthy Taiwanese male soldier. A 23-year-old previously healthy Taiwanese male soldier presented with right ear
pain and an eleven-day history of intermittent high fever, up to 39°C, after training in the jungle. He was admitted to a local clinic and
amoxicillin/clavulanate 1 g was prescribed every 6 hours for otitis media, but the fever persisted. Furthermore, he developed a
maculopapular skin rash over whole body and cramping abdominal pain with watery diarrhea appeared on the sixth day of fever. He was referred
to our institution as his clinical condition has deteriorating with progressive dysponea and cough in the 4 preceding days. Physical
examination showed an appearance of cardiopulmonary distress, icteric sclera, an eschar (Figure 1) in the right external auditory canal and
bilateral basal rales. Laboratory evaluation revealed a white blood cell count of 9100/mm3 (reference range : 4000-11000/mm3) with 87.9%
segmented neutrophils, hemoglobin 14.6 g/dL (RR: 14-16 g/dL), platelet counts 24 × 103/mm3 (RR: 140-400 × 103/mm3), blood urea nitrogen 25
mg/dL, creatinine 1.5 mg/dl (RR: 0.7-1.4 mg/dL), sodium 140 mEq/L, potassium 3.9 mEq/L, chloride 108 mEq/L, calcium 8.2 mg/dL, total protein
5.8 g/dL (RR: 6.0-8.0 g/dL), albumin 3 g/dL (RR: 3.5-5.0 g/dL), total bilirubin 4.8 mg/dL (RR: 0.1-1.2 mg/dL), direct bilirubin 2.7 mg/dL
(RR: 0.0-0.2 mg/dL), C-reactive protein 16.23 mg/dL (RR <0.3 mg/dL), aspartate aminotransferase (AST) 368 IU/L (RR: 8-38 IU/L), alanine
aminotransferase (ALT) 271 IU/L (RR: 4-44 IU/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALK) 324 IU/L (RR: 50-190 IU/L), lactate dehydrogenase 783 IU/L (RR:
120-240 IU/L), glucose 94 mg/dL, creatine phosphokinase 229 IU/L (RR: 10-160 IU/L), and a positive for Weil-Felix reaction with a Proteus
OX-K titer of 1:1280 on day 11 of fever. Arterial blood gas analysis was pH 7.501, PaCO2 38.1 mmHg, PaO2 76 mmHg, HCO3- 30.1 mmol/l, and BEB
7.2 with a FiO2 of 60%. A central venous line was setup for monitoring his central venous pressure and fluid replacement because of
hypotension. Chest x-ray (Figure 2) revealed bilateral diffuse infiltration. An endotracheal intubation was performed due to progressive
dyspnea and desaturation, and then he was admitted to the intensive care unit. Doxycycline of 100 mg was prescribed every 6 hours for a
clinical therapeutic trial of scrub typhus with ARDS and MOF. Fever subsided dramatically the next day and the endotracheal tube was removed
on day 3. Chest x-ray abnormalities resolved gradually and full blood count and biochemistry results returned to normal ranges without
sequelae. He was discharged on day 7 with tetracycline 500 mg every 6 hours for 7 days. Eschar, a slightly raised erythema surrounding a
black necrotic center, in right external auditory canal, centered at 6 o'clock. Chest x-ray revealed bilateral diffuse infiltration
disclosing a presentation of acute respiratory distress syndrome. Scrub typhus, a mite-transmitted zoonosis caused by the intracellular
Gram-negative bacteria, Orientia tsutsugamushi (previously known as Rickettsia tsutsugamushi), is a disease distributed throughout the Asia
Pacific rim and endemic in South Korea, China, Japan, Taiwan, Pakistan, India, Thailand, Malaysia and northern Australia. It is an acute
febrile illness characterized by a typical necrotic primary lesion (eschar), generalized lymphadenopathy, maculopapular skin rash, and
nonspecific symptoms and signs such as fever, chills, headache, alerted sensorium, seizure, sorethroat, otalgia, cough, dysponea, vomiting,
abdominal pain, jaundice, diarrhea, hepatosplenomegaly, abnormal bleeding, arthralgia and myalgia. Unfortunately the typical eschar and skin
rash are found on examination in 46%~92% of cases in Korea and less than 10% of cases in Thailand. Serious complications, including
encephalitis, meningitis, pericarditis, myocarditis, cardiac arrhythmia, interstitial pneumonia, ARDS, acute renal failure, acute hepatic
failure, acute hearing loss and septic shock, generally occur in the second week of the course and may be potentially fatal if there is a
delay in diagnosis and treatment. Most cases of scrub typhus have a delayed (or no) diagnosis because the history of travel or exposure
history is omitted and the pathognomonic eschar of scrub typhus is not found or not adequately searched for in patients with fever of
unknown origin. The incidence of eschar, a slightly raised erythema surrounding a black necrotic center, over head, face and neck is 5%. In
our present case, he was a solider and was on training in the jungle, so his ear was often close to the ground providing the mites with an
opportunity to enter the ear canal and attach causing the resultant eschar. Although the eschar may be painless and otalgia is an unusual
manifestation, there was an incidence of 19% in scrub typhus with otalgia and one case of acute sensorineural hearing loss has been
reported. Initially, he was treated as otitis externa at a local clinic because of fever, otalgia, and an unusual and undetectable eschar in
the external auditory canal, resulting in delayed diagnosis and treatment of scrub typhus complicated with ARDS and MOF with respiratory,
renal, hepatic and hematologic involvement in our case. He was referred to our institution and scrub typhus was strongly suspected based on
clinical exposure history, eschar in the external canal on physical examination and multiple organ involvement, so clinical therapeutic
doxycycline was prescribed and the fever subsided dramatically. The pulmonary manifestations of scrub typhus include varying grades of
bronchitis and interstitial pneumonitis progressing to ARDS. ARDS is a rarely reported but is a serious complication of scrub typhus with an
incidence of 11.1%-15.2%. Only two short communication reports of scrub typhus complicated by ARDS have been published. Acute renal failure
is due to acute tubular necrosis caused by direct invasion of Orientia tsutsugamushi . Abnormal laboratory evaluations include leukopenia
(19%) or leukocytosis (6%-34%), thrombocytopenia (44%-100%), elevation of AST (81%-100%), ALT (75%-100%), ALP (84.2%-100%) and total
bilirubin (38.5%-100%), hypoalbuminemia (83.3%), and increased creatinine (9%). Weil-Felix test has low sensitivity and specificity to the
diagnosis of scrub typhus, but it can be a useful tool when used and interpreted in the correct clinical context. The criterion for a
positive result is either one determination of a titer of 1:320 or greater or a four-fold rise in titer starting from 1:50. Weil-Felix test
with Proteus OX-K titer of 1:1280 was obtained on day 11 after exposure in our case. While all current scrub typhus tests have limitations
and the Weil-Felix and immunofluorescent antibody (IFA) tests have low sensitivity and specificity. Weil Felix was the only test available
at our institution. Dyspnea, cough, white blood cell counts, hematocrit, platelet, total bilirubin, older age, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, hypoalbuminemia, and prolonged prothrombin time, presence of early pneumonitis and delayed used of appropriate antibiotics have
been reported as significant predictors of ARDS. The mortality rate was 6.1%-30% in previous literature and the major cause of mortality was
delay in diagnosis and treatment. Scrub typhus was diagnosed based on the clinical picture and the rapid response to doxycycline in our
case. In ICU, doxycycline for scrub typhus and ventilator support for ARDS were prescribed, so the clinical condition of this patient with
multiorgan involvement, including respiratory, liver, renal and hematological involvement, improved gradually with a full course of
doxycycline in this patient. We recommend that scrub typhus should be taken into consideration in acutely febrile patients with varying
degree of respiratory distress, impaired liver function, acute renal failure and hematologic involvement, particularly if there is an eschar
or a history of environmental exposure in an endemic area. Rapid and accurate diagnosis, timely administration of appropriate antimicrobial
therapy and intensive supportive care are crucial for the recovery of ARDS and other serious complications of scrub typhus. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. BJL took care of this patient in the intensive care units. CYC drew up the first draft of the
report. SYH made a substantial contribution to draft the manuscript and revised the draft all over the course of submission. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this study. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/11/79/prepub The authors thank the nursing staff in ICU for their assistance in the care of
this patient.
