Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection
Aortoesophageal fistula (AEF) is an uncommon condition that presents a problem in therapy because of the high rate of morbidity and
mortality associated with its surgical management and the uniformly fatal outcome of medical treatment. In this article we describe a case
of secondary AEF after endoluminal stent grafting of the thoracic aorta, which was observed by only conservative management and followed up
for 14 months with no signs of recurrent hemorrhage or chronic mediastinitis. A 54-year old man with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was
admitted to our hospital because of tarry stool. He had a history of traumatic aneurysm, and undergone segmental replacement with a stent
graft three years ago. After admission, Esophagogastroduodenoscopy and computed tomography identified AEF. He was treated conservatively,
because his stage of HCC was advanced. Oral intake was prohibited, and the patient received proton pump inhibitors, intravenous
hyperalimentation and antibiotics. Afterwards, no signs of hemorrhage were observed. Although oral intake was resumed after that, another
bleeding event or development of mediastinitis was not observed. Subsequently, He was received chemotherapy for advanced HCC, and we
observed downstaging of his advanced HCC. Although we observed 14 months survival in our case under conservative management of secondary
AEF, it seems that the treatment of secondary AEF should do the operative management. Aortoesophageal fistula (AEF) is an uncommon condition
that presents a problem in therapy because of the high rate of morbidity and mortality associated with its surgical management and the
uniformly fatal outcome of medical treatment. Primary AEF has been related to aneurysms of the aorta, foreign bodies in the esophagus,
esophageal malignancy, traumatic pseudoaneurysm, and other rare causes . Secondary AEF is rarely reported after endoscopic esophageal
procedures, operative procedures and endoluminal stenting . Endoluminal exclusion of abdominal aortic aneurysms has been performed in
clinical trials and in clinical practice . More recently endoluminal therapy has been extended to the thoracic aorta. The increasing use and
growing expertise in this field stimulated the expansion of indications to a wide spectrum of aortic diseases, although the long-term
results and complications of thoracic endografting are still unknown . AEF is one of the potential late complications , early diagnosis and
prompt surgical management for AEF is crucial for survival . Although conservative management may be chosen for secondary AEF, outcome of
conservative management is almost invariably fatal due to recurrent hemorrhage or chronic mediastinitis . In this article we describe a case
of secondary AEF after endoluminal stent grafting of the thoracic aorta, which was observed by only conservative management and followed up
for 14 months with no signs of recurrent hemorrhage or chronic mediastinitis. A 54-year old man with hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) was
admitted to our hospital because of tarry stool. He presented with back pain, fever and elevated laboratory markers of systemic
inflammation. He had a history of traumatic aneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta three years ago. He had undergone post segmental
replacement with a stent graft which was constructed by sewing a Dacron graft to a Gianturco-Rosch Z stent (Figure 1). On admission, there
was no sign of active bleeding and he was hemodynamically stable. After admission, Esophagogastroduodenoscopy (EGD) was performed. EGD
identified esophageal ulcer with evidence of slight ongoing bleeding at 20 cm beyond the dental arch (Figure 2). A subsequent enhanced
computed tomography (CT) showed soft tissue density mass and air bubbles inside which suggested an AEF around descending thoracic stent
graft (Figure 3). Surgical repair was not undertaken, because his stage of HCC was advanced, and his long-term prognosis was not expectable.
He was treated conservatively. Oral intake was prohibited, and the patient received proton pump inhibitors (PPI), intravenous
hyperalimentation and antibiotics (sulbactam/cefoperazone (SBT/CPZ)). SBT/CPZ was administered for 4 weeks. PPI was administered for 2
months. During follow up period, no signs of bleeding and mediastinitis were observed. Two months later, EGD showed regression of the ulcer
without ongoing bleeding (Figure 4). Although oral intake was resumed after that, another bleeding event or development of mediastinitis was
not observed. Subsequently, He was received chemotherapy for advanced HCC. After chemotherapy, we observed downstaging of his advanced HCC.
The subsequent post-chemotherapy course was uneventful and patient was discharged in good condition at 4 months after admission. At 10
months after discharge from our hospital, he was in good condition without evidence of bleeding and infection. We reported a case with
advanced HCC conservatively treated for AEF secondary to endovascular stent-graft repair of descending thoracic aorta. Aortoenteric fistula
following endovascular exclusion of abdominal aortic aneurysm has not been widely reported . Moreover, only a few cases of AEF secondary to
endovascular stent-graft repair of the thoracic aorta have recently been described . One case of such cases have undertaken open surgical
repair, and recovered . Although other cases have untreated or treated only medically for secondary AEF, all cases died because of
hemorrhagic shock or mediastinitis . The clinical symptom of AEF is a triad of midthoracic pain or dysphagia, a short symptom-free interval,
followed by a “herald” hemorrhage and fatal hematemesis. Furthermore, fever and/or sepsis also were described common findings of AEF .
Although our case was not observed fatal hematemesis, back pain, fever and findings of systemic inflammation were observed. We guessed the
existence of AEF in consideration of these symptoms and a history of traumatic aneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta post segmental
replacement with a stent graft. According to recent reports, it is said that AEF following endovascular repair is absorbed by the following
mechanisms; chronic endoleak leading to erosion into the adjacent esophagus, penetration of the stent graft through the aortic wall into the
esophagus , and ischemic necrosis of the esophageal wall caused by the occlusion of the esophageal arteries that arise directly from the
thoracic aorta . Although an EGD for our patient before stent graft implantation showed a normal mucosa of the esophagus and stomach, it
developed esophageal ulcer 3 years after stent repair for traumatic aneurysm of the descending thoracic aorta. Considering these facts,
ischemic necrosis of the esophageal wall was the most likely mechanism of AEF in our case. The level of the esophageal necrosis corresponded
to the segment of the esophagus vascularized by arteries originating directly from the thoracic aorta, under the left bronchus. Although
this segment is more susceptible to ischemia because of the lack of collaterals, esophageal ulcer in our case has been improved by use of
proton pump inhibitors, intravenous hyperalimentation and antibiotics. Therefore, other mechanisms might exist in our case. Multiple
combinations of treatment options have been used to deal with AEF, including in situ arterial reconstruction , extra-anatomic bypass with
concomitant primary esophageal repair , or esophagectomy with cervical esophagostomy and secondary restoration of gastrointestinal tract
continuity . There is no reasonable alternative for surgery and all surgical candidates should undergo prompt intervention. However,
operative management of AEF has a significant mortality and is frequently complicated by mediastinitis, sepsis, and hemorrhage . We chose
conservative management in our case, because his stage of HCC was advanced, and his long-term prognosis was not expectable. Conservative
management mainly consists of medical blockade of gastric acid with proton pump inhibitors and total enteral feeding via percutaneous
gastrostomy to unburden the esophageal lesion . In addition, antibiotic treatment is applied in cases complicated by mediastinitis.
Nevertheless, despite all these efforts, outcome of conservative management is almost invariably fatal due to recurrent hemorrhage or
chronic mediastinitis . Although our patient survived under conservative management for 14 months after the initial bleeding event, we will
schedule the operative management of AEF if we observe recurrent bleeding episodes or signs of mediastinitis. In conclusion, secondary AEF
following endovascular stent-graft repair of the thoracic aorta is an uncommon but grave complication with only very limited therapeutic
options. Although we observed 14 months survival in our case under conservative management of secondary AEF, it seems that the treatment of
secondary AEF following endovascular stent-graft repair of the thoracic aorta should do the operative management, considering the previous
report described about the risk of conservative management. Source of support: Departmental sources Computed tomography done 1 month after
endovascular stent grafting. There was no endoleak. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated esophageal ulcer with evidence of slight ongoing
bleeding at 20 cm beyond the dental arch. Computed tomography demonstrated soft tissue density mass and air bubbles (black arrow) inside
which suggested an AEF around descending thoracic stent graft Esophagogastroduodenoscopy demonstrated regression of the ulcer without
ongoing bleeding at 20 cm beyond the dental arch.
