Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection Patients
with trigeminal neuralgia (TN) and persistent or recurrent facial pain after microvascular decompression (MVD) typically undergo less
invasive procedures in the hope of providing pain relief. However, re-operation should be considered in selected patients. A 48-year-old
woman presented with recurrent trigeminal neuralgia (TN) 3 years following microvascular decompression (MVD). The patient underwent brain
magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), which did not reveal neurovascular compression; therefore surgical re-exploration was carried out.
During the operation, the fifth cranial nerve was seen without impingement from any blood vessels; however, a very firm tissue was observed
and identified as the muscle fragment from the previous MVD procedure. The fifth cranial nerve was carefully separated from the muscle.
Thereafter, the right SCA was dissected out from the muscle and suspended by a periosteum tape sutured to the nearby dura. Our findings,
along with similar cases reported in the literature, support the development of new inert materials and alternative surgical strategies that
can limit TN recurrence. The concept of vascular compression of cranial nerves in the posterior fossa has developed from several lines of
evidence. Over the past few years, microvascular decompression (MVD) has been shown to be effective . To date, MVD is the first surgical
treatment option for trigeminal neuralgia (TN) and other cranial nerve hyperactive dysfunctions. Although this technique has a high rate of
success with respect to pain relief and long-term benefit , pain can recur and re-exploration may be indicated in a subgroup of patients .
There have been several reports of recurrent TN, some of which are related to the prosthesis used for separating the offending vessel and
the nerve . In this paper we report on a patient with pain recurrence after MVD for TN caused by a muscle fragment piercing the trigeminal
nerve and encasing the offending artery. A 48-year-old woman presented with a long history of right TN within the ophthalmic and mandibular
divisions, which failed to respond to medical management. The patient underwent brain magnetic resonance angiography (MRA), revealing
neurovascular compression at the dorsal root entry zone of the right fifth cranial nerve and also underwent MVD with right SCA displacement
and muscle interposition. The neuralgia resolved immediately after surgery, but recurred 3 years later with the same distribution. The pain
was refractory to medical management. MRA was performed again but did not show any trigeminal vascular compression. The patient underwent
percutaneous rhizotomies, performed at another centre, without effect. Considering that most recurrences occur within 2 years following
surgery, and that new arterial loop compression, regrowth of veins, or incomplete decompression at the first surgical treatment are the main
causes, a decision was made to conduct surgical re-exploration. During the operation, the fifth cranial nerve was seen without impingement
from any blood vessels. However, inferiorly to the nerve and directly against it, a solid tissue was observed that was identified as the
muscle fragment from the previous MVD procedure. This tissue was distorting and stretching the nerve and encasing the right SCA (Figure 1).
The fifth cranial nerve was carefully separated from the muscle. Thereafter, the right SCA was dissected out from the muscle and suspended
by a periosteum tape sutured to the nearby dura. The patient had no intraoperative or postoperative complications. At 2-year follow-up the
patient was pain-free without medication. The concept of vascular compression of cranial nerves in the posterior fossa has developed from
several lines of evidence. Dandy first proposed the fifth cranial nerve compression, at its point of entry into the pons, by the superior
cerebellar artery, as a possible cause of trigeminal neuralgia . Subsequent reports confirmed that patients with trigeminal neuralgia,
hemifacial spasm, and glossopharyngeal neuralgia had blood vessels in close contact with the respective cranial nerve, and that separating
the blood vessel from the nerve by interposing a soft implant between them (microvascular decompression) could be curative .
Pathophysiological mechanisms underlying cranial nerve hyperactive dysfunction after vascular compression have been investigated extensively
and partially clarified. Briefly, it has been suggested that these clinical syndromes result from pulsatile compression by arteries at the
root entry/exit zone of the cranial nerve, a junctional area between central and peripheral myelin . Over the past several years, this
concept has been widely accepted and has stimulated several studies addressed primarily at establishing precise patient selection criteria .
With the advent of magnetic resonance imaging, which, using specific three-dimensional sequences , has offered a good visualization of both
cranial nerves and cerebral vessels, neurovascular compression disorders have been diagnosed with increasing frequency, thus providing
additional evidence supporting MVD treatment. To date, MVD is associated with a high incidence of pain relief and long-term success since
about 70% of patients remain pain-free and off medication for at least 10 years following the procedure . Recurrence may occur in 18–30% of
patients, mainly within 2 years of surgery and thereafter at a rate of 2–5% per year . This occurrence has been attributed to several
causes, including new arterial loop compression, regrowth of new veins, incomplete decompression and problems related to the interposed
material . In addition, arachnoid thickening or granulomatous severe adhesion between the nerve and the surrounding structures following the
first MVD surgery has been reported . In up to 44% of patients no factor explaining the recurrence can be identified . In this paper we
described the recurrence of TN in which autologous muscle was used as interposing material during the first operation. At the re-operation
the muscle formed a very firm tissue that distorted and stretched the trigeminal nerve. It also encased the right SCA, thus transmitting the
vascular pulsations into the nerve. In our experience, the use of autologous muscle as interposing material between nerve and vessel has
been shown to be safe, with a recurrence rate similar to those cases in which Teflon and other synthetic materials have been employed.
Conceptually, the use of muscle arises from the idea that an autologous material should be safer and better tolerated than a synthetic
prosthesis . However, dissolution of the implant and recurrent vascular compression of the trigeminal root entry zone related to the use of
resorbable materials, such as muscle, periosteum, collagen foam, or lyophilized dura, has been reported . Synthetic materials, such as
Teflon or Ivalon sponges have also been associated with a direct subsequent neurovascular compression by the same vessel because of a
slipped prosthesis . Compression of the trigeminal root entry zone, caused by the prosthesis itself or by severe adhesions, has been
reported by several authors , and even indirect vascular compression caused by fairly hard implants like Ivalon has been reported . Many
other reports have also focused on adverse reactions to synthetic materials. Teflon-induced granuloma has been documented in various reports
. Based on these experiences, some authors have recently advocated alternative techniques such as the “hanging technique”, where the
offending vessel is transposed from the nerve by using strips of autologous tissue or fenestrated clips for aneurysm surgery . This
technique, used in our case and already suggested by our group for the treatment of medulla oblongata compression by vertebral artery ,
seems to be a useful method, especially in cases such as we report, in which recurrence of the TN can be related to compression or adhesion
caused by the material used in the first MVD. In this paper we report on a patient with pain recurrence after MVD for TN caused by a muscle
fragment that had pierced the trigeminal nerve and encased the offending artery. Successful long-term outcome following MVD in cranial nerve
dysfunction disease depends primarily on maintaining the isolation between the nerve and the offending vessel. For this reason development
of new inert materials and use of alternative surgical strategies can limit TN recurrence. Source of support: Departmental sources
Intraoperative photograph at re-operation. (A) The image showing the right trigeminal nerve (asterisk) compressed by a firm tissue (arrow)
that was identified as the muscle fragment from the previous MVD procedure. Such a tissue, was distorting and stretching the nerve and, at
the same time, encasing the right SCA; (B) After careful partial dissection the right SCA was visualized (arrow).
