Pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy (PTTM) has been known as a rare and serious cancer-related pulmonary complication. However, the
pathogenesis and pathophysiology of this debilitating condition still remains obscure and no effective management was recommended. The
present study aims to elucidate the pathophysiology of PTTM. Autopsy records were searched to extract cases of pulmonary tumor embolism
induced by metastasis of gastric carcinoma in the Toho University Omori Medical Center from 2000 to 2006. And then, tissue sections of
extracted cases were prepared for not only light microscopic observation but morphometric analysis with the use of selected PTTM cases. Six
autopsies involved PTTM and clinicopathological data of them were summarized. There was a significant negative association between pulmonary
arterial diameter and stenosis rate in four cases. Although all cases showed an increase of stenosis rate to some degree, the degree of
stenosis rate varied from case to case. Significant differences were found for average stenosis rate between the under 100 micrometer group
or the 100 to 300 micrometer group and the 300 micrometer group in four cases. However, no significant differences were found for average
stenosis rate between the under 100 micrometer group and the 100 to 300 micrometer group in all cases. Meanwhile, all cases showed positive
reactivity for tissue factor (TF), five showed positive reactivity for vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), and three showed positive
reactivity for osteopontin (OPN). In the present study, we revealed that the degree of luminal narrowing of the pulmonary arteries varied
from case to case, and our results suggested that pulmonary hypertension in PTTM occurs in selected cases which have a widespread pulmonary
lesion with severe luminal narrowing in the smaller arteries. Furthermore, our immunohistochemical examination indicated that gastric
carcinoma indicating PTTM shows a higher TF-positive rate than typical gastric carcinoma. However, it remains still obscuring whether
gastric carcinoma indicating PTTM shows a higher VEGF or OPN-positive rate as determined by immunohistochemistry. Pulmonary tumor thrombotic
microangiopathy (PTTM) is known as a rare and severe devastating cancer-related pulmonary complication that was first reported by Von Herbay
et al. in 1990 . Previous studies aimed to determine how this unique complication developed with metastasis of carcinoma cells. Some
candidates produced by carcinoma cells were especially investigated as a key factor of the disease, such as tissue factor (TF) , vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) , and osteopontin (OPN) , and their contribution to the development of PTTM was investigated. Clinically,
patients with PTTM often present with subacute respiratory failure with pulmonary hypertension, right-side heart failure, and sudden death .
PTTM is histopathologically characterized by tumor embolism, multiple microthrombi, and intimal myofibroblast proliferation in the pulmonary
arteries and arterioles . However, the pathophysiology of this debilitating condition still remains obscure. The present study aims to
elucidate the pathophysiology of PTTM using morphometric and immunohistochemical examinations of six autopsy cases induced by metastasis of
gastric carcinoma. Autopsy records were searched to extract cases of pulmonary tumor embolism induced by metastasis of gastric carcinoma in
the Toho University Omori Medical Center from 2000 to 2006. And then, paraffin-embedded pulmonary tissue sections of these cases with
pulmonary tumor embolism induced by metastasis of gastric carcinoma were prepared, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE) double stain
and Elastica van Gieson (EVG) stain to determine whether they satisfied the diagnostic criteria of PTTM, histopathologically. For an
accurate histopathological diagnosis, tissues were examined by more than three pathologists. In addition, we extracted and sampled data from
the medical records associated with each case, such as age, sex, maximum diameter of the tumor, macroscopic type, histopathological type,
lymph-vascular involvement, organs with metastasis, and clinical symptoms. Initially, all arterial images of pulmonary EVG-stained sections
were photographed using a digital camera. In the present study, pulmonary arterial diameter, area within the internal elastic lamina (IELA),
and lumen area (LA) were measured with Image J 1.36b software (National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, MD) using these photographed images.
To evaluate the degree of pulmonary arterial stenosis, we calculated the stenosis rate using following formula: × 100 = stenosis rate (%).
Furthermore, we focused on PTTM cases with pulmonary hypertension. Therefore, we divided pulmonary arteries into three groups according to
the Heath and Edwards classification , such as artery under 100 μm, 100 to 300 μm, or over 300 μm in diameter (designated the 'under 100-μm'
group, the '100-300-μm' group, and the 'over 300-μm' group, respectively). To allow a more detailed discussion of PTTM, we performed the
following three investigations in each case. First, to assess any potential relationship between pulmonary arterial diameter and stenosis
rate, we made a scatter plot of pulmonary arterial diameter and stenosis rate, and Spearman's rank correlation coefficient was calculated.
Second, to clarify the frequency of pulmonary arterial lesion, the optional stenosis rate in each arterial group was calculated. Finally, we
calculated the average stenosis rate in each arterial group and statistical significance was tested using the one-way analysis of variance
(ANOVA) and the Bonferroni post hoc test. Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05. In the present study, the gastric and
pulmonary tissue sections in each case were used for immunohistochemical examination. Polyclonal anti-VEGF-antibody (Human vascular
endothelial growth factor (polyclonal antibody), dilution 1:50; Immuno-Biological Laboratories Co., Gunma, Japan), monoclonal anti-TF-
antibody (Human tissue factor, 1:100; American Diagnostica Inc., Stamford, United States of America), and anti- OPN-antibody (OP3N, dilution
1:100; Leica Biosystems Newcastle Ltd., Newcastle, United Kingdom) were used. 578 autopsies were retrieved from the autopsy records of Toho
University Omori Medical Center for the period from 2000 to 2006. According to these records, it was deemed that 37 patients died of gastric
carcinoma and a total of six cases involved pulmonary tumor embolism induced by metastasis of gastric carcinoma. According to the diagnostic
criteria of PTTM as proposed by Herbay et al. , we regarded these six autopsies as PTTM. Patient age ranged from 49 to 82 years (mean ±
standard deviation (SD): 68.3 ± 11.3). The gender ratio was 4:2 (male to female). Maximum diameter of the tumor ranged from 20 to 70 mm
(mean ± SD: 45.8 ± 25.4). Chemotherapy was given in one case (Case 5). Transthoracic Doppler echocardiography was used to confirm the
presence or absence of pulmonary hypertension in two cases (Case 1 and 2, respectively). As a result, case 1 and 2 involved clinically
proven or denied pulmonary hypertension, respectively. Unfortunately, no appropriate examinations were performed in the other patients (Case
3 to 6) and it is not known whether they suffered from pulmonary hypertension [Table 1]. Summary of patient characteristics por: poorly
differentiated adenocarcinoma, pap: papillary adenocarcinoma, ly/v-1: minimal lympho-vascular involvement, ly/v-2: moderate lympho-vascular
involvement, ly/v-3: prominent lympho-vascular involvement Patient age ranged from 49 to 82 years (mean ± standard deviation: 68.3 ± 11.3).
The gender ratio was 4:2 (male to female). Maximum diameter of the tumor ranged from 20 to 70 mm (mean ± standard deviation: 45.8 ± 25.4).
Main histology of gastric carcinoma involved poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma in five of the six cases (Case 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6), while
the remaining case involved papillary adenocarcinoma (Case 5). Although all cases more or less showed lymph-vascular involvement, lymphatic
involvement was prominent. Case 1 and 2 involved clinically proven and denied pulmonary hypertension, respectively. In the present study,
the main histology of gastric carcinoma involved poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (Case 1, 2, 3, 4, and 6), while the remaining case
involved papillary adenocarcinoma (Case 5). Although all cases more or less showed lymph-vascular involvement, lymphatic involvement was
prominent. Furthermore, the autopsies revealed that no patients had latent carcinomas [Figure 1 and Table 1]. Macroscopic and
histopathological findings of gastric carcinomas in case 1 and 2. Case 1 (A) The ulcerated tumor with relatively demarcated and raised
margins (Borrmann's type 3 tumor) was located in the gastric body. (B and C) Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma cells diffusely
proliferated (hematoxylin-eosin (HE) double stain, × 100, × 400, respectively). Case 2 (D) The ulcerated tumor with demarcated and slightly
raised margins (Borrmann's type 2 tumor) was located in the gastric body. (E and F) Poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma cells were arranged
in small nests or trabecular pattern surrounded by fibrous stroma (HE double stain, × 100, × 400, respectively). First, the scatter plot of
pulmonary arterial diameter and stenosis rate and the result of the Spearman correlation coefficient are shown in Figure 2. According to the
Spearman correlation coefficient, there was a significant negative association between pulmonary arterial diameter and stenosis rate in four
of the six cases (Case 1, 2, 3, and 6). In contrast, there was no significant association in the remaining two cases (Case 4 and 5). Second,
the relationship between optional stenosis rate and each arterial group is summarized in Table 2. Although all cases showed an increase of
stenosis rate to some degree, the degree of change in stenosis rate varied from case to case [Figure 3 and 4]. Finally, no significant
differences were found for average stenosis rate between the under 100-μm group and the 100 to 300-μm group in all cases. On the other hand,
significant differences were found for average stenosis rate between the under 100-μm group or 100 to 300-μm group and the 300-μm group in
four of the six cases (Case 1, 2, 3, and 6) [Figure 5 and Table 3]. Scatter plots of pulmonary arterial diameter and stenosis rate in
pulmonary arteries. There was a significant negative association between pulmonary arterial diameter and stenosis rate in four of the six
cases (Case 1, 2, 3, and 6). In contrast, there was no significant association in the remaining two cases (Case 4 and 5). The relationship
between optional stenosis rate and each arterial group Although all cases more or less showed an increase of the stenosis rate, the degree
of change in stenosis rate varied from case to case. In particular, case 1 showed widespread severe stenosis in the pulmonary artery.
Histopathological findings of pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy in case 1. (A and B) Fibrocellular intimal proliferation occludes
the lumen of the pulmonary artery under 100 μm in diameter (Hematoxylin-eosin (HE) double stain and elastica van Gieson (EVG) stain, × 400).
(C and D) Fibrocellular intimal proliferation associated with carcinoma cells proliferation occludes the lumen of the pulmonary artery over
300 μm in diameter (HE double stain and EVG stain, × 40). Histopathological findings of pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy in case
2. (A and B) Fibrocellular intimal proliferation occludes the lumen of the pulmonary artery under 100 μm in diameter (Hematoxylin-eosin (HE)
double stain and elastica van Gieson (EVG) stain, × 400). (C and D) Neither prominent fibrocellular intimal proliferation nor carcinoma
cells were present in the pulmonary artery over 300 μm in diameter (HE double stain and EVG stain, × 40). Average stenosis rate in each
arterial group for six patients with pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy. No significant differences were found for average stenosis
rate between the under 100-μm group and the 100 to 300-μm group in all cases. On the other hand, significant differences were found for
average stenosis rate between the under 100-μm group or 100 to 300-μm group and the 300-μm group in four of the six cases (Case 1, 2, 3, and
6). Statistical significance was tested using the one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) and the Bonferroni post hoc test. Values are
expressed as mean ± standard deviation. Differences were considered significant at P < 0.05 (*: P < 0.05, ns: P > 0.05). The average
stenosis rate in each arterial group (%) The pulmonary arteries were divided into three groups according to the Heath-Edwards
classification, such as artery under 100 μm, 100 to 300 μm, or over 300 μm in diameter (designated the 'under 100-μm' group, the '100 to
300-μm' group, and the 'over 300-μm' group, respectively). This table surmised the average stenosis rate in each arterial group. Values are
expressed as mean ± standard deviation. No differences were found for gastric and pulmonary tissue sections in our immunohistochemical
examinations. All cases showed positive reactivity for TF, five cases showed positive reactivity for VEGF (Case 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6), and
three cases showed positive reactivity for OPN (Case 3, 5, and 6) [Figure 6 and Table 4]. Photomicrographs showing representative
immunohistochemistry. (A, B, and C) Gastric carcinoma cells in case 1 showed positive reactivity for tissue factor and negative reactivity
for vascular endothelial growth factor and osteopontin (× 1,000). (D, E, and F) Gastric carcinoma cells in case 6 showed positive reactivity
for tissue factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, and osteopontin (× 1,000). Immunohistochemical examinations of gastric and pulmonary
tissue sections in each pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy case. TF: Tissue factor, VEGF: Vascular endothelial growth factor, OPN:
Osteopontin No differences were found for gastric and pulmonary tissue sections in our immunohistochemical examinations. All cases showed
positive reactivity for tissue factor, five cases showed positive reactivity for vascular endothelial growth factor (Case 2, 3, 4, 5, and
6), and three cases showed positive reactivity for osteopontin (Case 3, 5, and 6). PTTM has been regarded as a rare and severe devastating
cancer-related pulmonary complication, the majority of which is mainly induced by poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma arising from gastric
mucosa . Although it has been well known that the ante mortem diagnosis of PTTM is very difficult , Miyano et al. reported a PTTM case which
could be determined through an ante mortem diagnosis and the patient survived after chemotherapy . This report emphasized the necessity and
importance of intensive monitoring and prophylactic intervention, especially in the case of advanced gastric carcinoma, in order to make an
early diagnosis and save the life of patients with PTTM. According to previous research , the incidence of PTTM in autopsy cases with
gastric carcinoma has been reported ranging from 16.7% (6 PTTM cases among 36 gastric carcinoma patients) to 26.8% (11 PTTM cases among 41
gastric carcinoma patients). Similarly, our study revealed an incidence of 16.2% (6 PTTM cases among 37 gastric carcinoma patients), which
is largely consistent with these previous reports. In addition, the most common histological type of gastric carcinoma in the present study
was poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma (five of the six cases). This fact is also consistent with the previous studies which reported that
the most common tumor associated with PTTM is poorly differentiated adenocarcinoma . We now wish to discuss PTTM in more detail from the
viewpoint of our morphometric analysis of pulmonary arteries. Since some patients with PTTM suffered from pulmonary hypertension, we
suggested that pulmonary arterial remodeling induced by carcinoma cell adhesion onto the endothelium affected the status of pulmonary
hypertension. Therefore, in the present study, morphometric analysis was carried out on pulmonary arteries. Results showed that the degree
of luminal narrowing of the pulmonary arteries varied from case to case. We focused particularly on case 1 and 2 because pulmonary arterial
pressure was evaluated only in these two cases. Case 1 involved clinically proven pulmonary hypertension and revealed widespread severe
stenosis in the pulmonary artery that showed a significant negative association between arterial diameter and luminal stenosis rate, as well
as pulmonary arterial hypertension as reported by Heath and Edwards . In contrast, case 2 involved clinically denied pulmonary hypertension
and showed a significant negative association between arterial diameter and luminal stenosis rate. However, its stenosis was milder and
involved a smaller artery in comparison to case 1. Accordingly, the occurrence of pulmonary hypertension may require a widespread pulmonary
lesion with severe luminal narrowing. That is, pulmonary hypertension in a patient with PTTM may occur in the case of which distribution of
pulmonary lesion is similar to that shown by a pulmonary hypertension case. Then, we prefer to make a little discussion on the
histopathological difference between PTTM and pulmonary arterial hypertension (PAH). The initial event of PAH is understood as luminal
stenosis due to a symmetric intimal or medial thickening involving a terminal arteriole with a diameter less than 100 μm . However, quite
interestingly, our statistical analysis revealed no significant difference for average stenosis rate between the under 100-μm group and the
100 to 300-μm group in the all PTTM cases of this study. These results suggest that carcinoma cell adhesion onto the endothelium in PTTM
tends to start from larger arteries rather than a terminal pulmonary arteriole. Incidentally, VEGF and/or TF expression by carcinoma cells
has been confirmed in many cases of PTTM . VEGF has been known as an endothelial cell-specific angiogenetic mitogen and is upregulated by TF
. Furthermore, Takahashi et al. reported a case of PTTM with OPN expression and they suggested that OPN promotes thrombus formation, local
activation of coagulatory events, and pulmonary hypertension in the pathogenesis of PTTM. Therefore, we also performed immunohistochemical
examinations of both gastric and pulmonary tissue sections from each patient. In the present study, 100% (6/6), 83.3% (5/6) and 50.0% (3/6)
of PTTM cases showed positive reactivity for TF, VEGF, and OPN, respectively. It has been reported that 25.1% (52/207) , 76.4% (113/148) ,
and 69.5% (205/295) of gastric carcinoma cases show positive reactivity for TF, VEGF, and OPN, respectively. Accordingly, our
immunohistochemical examination indicated that gastric carcinoma of PTTM shows a higher TF-positive rate than typical gastric carcinoma.
However, it still remains obscuring whether gastric carcinoma inducing PTTM shows a higher immunohistochemical positive rate for VEGF or OPN
because typical gastric carcinoma also shows a high immunohistochemical positive rate for these entities. Moreover, no significant
difference was found in characteristics of phenotypic expression of VEGF or OPN for gastric adenocarcinoma cells between those with and
without PTTM, which represents an unknown and important factor that may influence the development of PTTM. In the present study, we examined
six cases of PTTM, histopathologically, and revealed that the degree of luminal narrowing of the pulmonary arteries varied from case to
case. Our results suggested that pulmonary hypertension in PTTM occurs in selected cases which have a widespread pulmonary lesion with
severe luminal narrowing in the smaller arteries. Furthermore, the immunohistochemical examination indicated that gastric carcinoma inducing
PTTM shows a higher TF-positive rate than typical gastric carcinoma. However, it still remains obscuring. Further investigations should be
required to know whether gastric carcinoma inducing PTTM shows a higher VEGF or OPN-positive rate as determined by immunohistochemistry.
PTTM: pulmonary tumor thrombotic microangiopathy; TF: tissue factor; VEGF: vascular endothelial growth factor; OPN: osteopontin; HE:
hematoxylin and eosin; EVG: Elastica van Gieson; IELA: area within the internal elastic lamina; LA: lumen area; ANOVA: analysis of variance;
SD: standard deviation; PAH: pulmonary arterial hypertension. Written informed consent (in Japanese) was obtained from the patients' family
for publication of this study and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. Dr. Shibuya reports receiving research grants from Pfizer Inc., Janssen Pharmaceutical K.K., and Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma Co.
All authors declare that they have no competing interests. YO conceptualized this study, integrated the data, and wrote the manuscript as a
major contributor; MW carried out the histopathological evaluation and revised the manuscript; KK carried out statistical evaluation and
revised the manuscript; TN carried out the histopathological evaluation and gave final approval to the manuscript as a corresponding author;
TY carried out a part of the histopathological and statistical evaluation; FA, NH, and DS searched and extracted data from autopsy records
in the Toho University Omori Medical Center and photographed a part of the pulmonary arterial images; MS, HN, and TI carried out the HE,
EVG, and immunohistochemical stain, and a part of statistical evaluation; KS carried out histopathological and statistical evaluation and
revised the manuscript as a last author. All authors contributed to conceptualizing and writing this study. Furthermore, all authors read
and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by the Health Science Research Grants for Research on Emerging and Re-emerging
Infectious Diseases (H16-Shinko-6 and H19-Shinko-8), Measures for Intractable Diseases (H20 nannchi ippann 35) from the Ministry of Health,
Labor and Welfare of Japan, by a Grant of the Strategic Basis on Research Grounds for Non-governmental Schools at Heisei 20th from the
Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology Japan to K. S, and a Toho University project grant to Y. O. The authors thank
Tsutomu Hatori, Aki Mitsuda, Chikako Hasegawa, Takayuki Hirano, Makiko Hirama, Riyo Owada, Tadashi Ide, and Rie Takahashi for their
histopathological advice or excellent technical support.
