Hypothyroidism can cause a variety of signs and symptoms of the neuromuscular system. However, ptosis in a patient with hypothyroidism is
very rare. We report here on a case of central hypothyroidism that was due to Sheehan's syndrome and it manifested as bilateral ptosis in a
51-yr-old woman. She complained of exertional dyspnea and weakness. About 25-yr ago, she had a history of severe postpartum vaginal
bleeding. The laboratory studies demonstrated hypopituitarism with secondary hypothyroidism. The ptosis was improved by replacement of
thyroid hormone. Hypothyroidism should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients who manifest with ptosis and that prompt
replacement of hormone can lead to a complete recovery. Ptosis may be due to myogenic, neurogenic, aponeurotic, mechanical or traumatic
causes. The most frequent disorder causing myogenic ptosis is myasthenia gravis (1). Hypothyroidism can cause a variety of signs and
symptoms of the neuromuscular system (2). However, in the absence of other obvious etiologies, ptosis in a patient with hypothyroidism is
very rare (3-5). We report here on a case of central hypothyroidism that was due to Sheehan's syndrome and the patient manifested with
bilateral ptosis, and the patient was initially suspected as having myasthenia gravis. The patient was a 51-yr-old woman with swelling of
the extremities and bilateral ptosis on March 8, 2010. She complained of exertional dyspnea and weakness. She married at the age of 25.
After that time, she developed drooping of her eyes, with the left eye drooping more than the right eye. Her symptoms persisted and they had
gradually increased during about the last 10 yr. About 8 yr ago, she underwent a ptosis repair operation at a local clinic, but her symptoms
were not improved. She denied a history of loss of consciousness, headache, dysphagia, dysarthria and myalgia. There was no family history
of similar symptoms and no history of trauma. There was no previous history of diabetes and hypertension. On examination, she was determined
to be 151 cm in height and 48 kg in weight. The initial vital signs were a blood pressure of 140/80 mmHg, a pulse rate of 68 beats/min and a
respiratory rate of 20/min. She was lethargic and had facial puffiness and no goiter. The lung and heart examinations were unremarkable. All
the extremities showed pitting. She had marked bilateral ptosis, while the external ocular movements were normal (Fig. 1A). The other
cranial nerve examinations were unremarkable. The laboratory findings were a total leucocyte count 4.75 × 103/µL with 61.6% polymorphs, a
hemoglobin level of 9.0 g/dL, the random blood glucose was 124 mg/dL, the serum sodium was 130 mM/L, the potassium was 3.7 mM/L, the blood
urea nitrogen (BUN) was 13 mg/dL, the creatinine was 0.8 mg/dL, the aspartate transaminase (AST) was 81 IU/L, the alanine transaminase (ALT)
was 29 IU/L, the total bilirubin was 0.93 mg/dL, the creatine kinase (CK) was 1,195 IU/L (normal reference: 20-180 IU/L ), the lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) was 517 IU/L (normal reference: 101-218 IU/L), the total cholesterol was 256 mg/dL, the triglyceride was 121 mg/dL, the
high density lipoprotein cholesterol (HDL-C) was 40 mg/dL and the low density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) was 196 mg/dL. The urinary
analysis was negative for blood and protein with using a dipstick. As the clinical findings suggested hypothyroidism and myasthenia gravis,
a thyroid function test and acetylcholine receptor binding antibody test were done. The serum T3 was 0.195 ng/mL (normal reference:
0.86-2.02 ng/mL), the free T4 was 0.08 ng/dL (normal reference: 0.93-1.705 ng/dL), the thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) was 2.08 µIU/mL
(normal reference: 0.27-4.2 µIU/mL), the antimicrosomal antibody was 17 IU/mL (normal reference: 0-34 IU/mL), the antithyroglobulin antibody
was 20.1 IU/mL (normal reference: 0-114 IU/mL) and the acetylcholine receptor binding antibody was negative. Secondary hypothyroidism was
suspected. We performed a careful history taking and other pituitary hormone evaluations. At the age of 26 the patient delivered her
daughter and she had a history of massive postpartum vaginal bleeding. Thereafter she not resumed menses. The basal levels of other hormones
were a serum cortisol of 4.03 µg/dL, the adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) was 29.64 pg/mL, the growth hormone (GH) was 0.06 ng/mL, the
IGF-1 was 25 ng/mL (normal reference: 71-263 ng/mL), the prolactin was 1.59 ng/mL, the luteinizing hormone (LH) was 1.49 IU/L, the follicle-
stimulating hormone (FSH) was 4.91 IU/L, the E2 was 17.29 pg/mL and the testosterone was 0.02 ng/mL. The combined pituitary stimulation
test, including the insulin tolerance test, the thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH) stimulation test and the gonadotropin-releasing hormone
(GnRH) stimulation test showed panhypopituitarism (Table 1). Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a finding of an empty sella
turcica and there was no evidence of an intracranial mass, hemorrhage and aneurysm (Fig. 2). Nerve conduction study (NCS) and
electromyography (EMG) of the limbs reveled normal results with the exception of incidentally detected carpal tunnel syndrome. Needle EMG of
the orbicularis oculi showed no evidence of dysfunction of the neuromuscular junction. We diagnosed her as having Sheehan's syndrome,
bilateral ptosis and subclinical myopathy caused by secondary hypothyroidism. Replacement with prednisolone of 10 mg/day and thyroxine (T4)
100 µg/day was started. The dose of prednisolone was decreased to 5 mg/day after 4 weeks. At 3 months follow-up, she had become euthyroid
with normalized muscle enzymes. She recovered from her presenting symptoms and the bilateral ptosis was much improved (Fig. 1B). Sheehan's
syndrome occurs as a result of ischemic pituitary necrosis due to severe postpartum hemorrhage. Although a small percentage of patients with
Sheehan's syndrome may have an abrupt onset of severe hypopituitarism immediately after delivery, most patients have mild disease and they
go undiagnosed for a long time and they are treated inappropriately (6). In this current patient, chronic fatigue and weakness had
persisted, but it had gone undiagnosed for about 20 yr. Initially, her symptoms such as ptosis, progressive dyspnea and weakness were
suspicious for myasthenia gravis. Myasthenia gravis is an acquired neuromuscular disorder that is characterized by fatigability and
fluctuating weakness of the skeletal muscles, and especially eye muscle weakness. The weakness is caused by circulating antibodies that
block the acetylcholine receptors at the postsynaptic neuromuscular junction, and this inhibits the stimulative effect of the
neurotransmitter acetylcholine (7). In most cases, the first noticeable symptom is weakness of the eye muscles. Therefore, the presence of
ptosis necessitates the exclusion of underlying ocular myasthenia gravis (4). In this patient, the acetylcholine receptor binding antibody
was negative and needle EMG of the orbicularis oculi showed no evidence of dysfunction of the neuromuscular junctions. Also, the ptosis was
improved by replacement of thyroid hormone. Therefore, myasthenia was adequately excluded. Ptosis has been previously reported in patients
with primary hypothyroidism, but there have been only a few case reports (3-5). In patients with hypothyroidism, myopathy, mononeuropathy
and diffuse peripheral polyneuropathy may encountered with various incidences (8). Carpal tunnel syndrome is the most frequently observed in
hypothyroidism. Polyneuropathy and myopathy are also well known (8). Patients can complain of muscle and joint pain, cramps, fatigue and
weakness. However, involvement of a cranial nerve in a patient with hypothyroidism is very rare. Although neuromuscular complications are
well recognized in thyroid disorders, their pathophysiology remains unclear. Generally, these abnormalities are secondary to
mucopolysaccharide infiltration of various peripheral organs (5). Cho et al. (9) described a case of pituitary apoplexy with Sheehan's
syndrome and isolated third cranial nerve palsy. In their case, direct mechanical compression of the third cranial nerve or the vascular
supply to the nerve resulted in a sudden onset of isolated third cranial nerve palsy. The patient's ptosis was improved by surgical
decompression. However, our patient had long standing secondary hypothyroidism and the ptosis had an insidious onset. The patient's ptosis
was improved by replacement of hormone. Moderate myopathy frequently develops in patients with hypothyroidism. This myopathy is most often
manifested as myalgia, muscle stiffness, cramps and sometimes elevated plasma levels of creatinine phosphokinase. Infrequently,
rhabdomyolysis can also develop in patients with hypothyroidism (10). Our patient had no specific symptoms of myopathy, but she had elevated
levels of muscle enzyme. After replacement of hormone, the muscle enzymes were normalized. Adrenal insufficiency is can produce generalized
muscle weakness, muscle cramping and fatigue. However, except for generalized weakness, musculoskeletal manifestations have rarely been
described in adrenal insufficiency (11) and which is thought to be due to the electrolyte abnormalities in primary adrenal insufficiency
(12). Our patients had secondary adrenal insufficiency and mild hyponatremia. Therefore we thought that our patient's musculoskeletal
manifestations with ptosis is due to mainly central hypothyroidism. We report here on an unusual case of ptosis associated with central
hypothyroidism due to Sheehan's syndrome. It is concluded that hypothyroidism should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients
who manifest with ptosis and that prompt replacement of hormone can lead to a complete recovery. Bilateral ptosis before (A) and 3 months
after (B) replacement of thyroid hormone. The sagittal noncontrast T1 weighted magnetic resonance image of the brain shows an enlarged sella
turcica and a nonvisualized gland. Results of the combined pituitary stimulation test GH, growth hormon; TSH, thyoid-stimulating hormone;
LH, luteinizing hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone.
