There are a few studies about the secretion of gonadotropins in women. Acute testosterone infusion to normal women with and without
testolactone inhibits LH sssecretion in a dose‐dependent manner, without no effect on FSH secretion,1 while short‐term administration of
testosterone to normal women and eugonadal female‐to‐male transsexuals did not alter either gonadotropin levels, or affect the pulsatile
secretion of LH.2 Regarding the effect of chronic hyperandrogenemia, in polycystic ovary syndrome a specific pattern of gonadotropins
secretion has been described, with an increased concentration of basal LH and diminished FSH and with an increase in the frequency of LH
pulses,3 while in adrenal or ovarian androgen‐secreting tumors, gonadotropin levels vary from high,4-6 normal for age7-9 or
suppressed.7,10-11 The reason for the different gonadotropins pattern in androgen‐secreting tumors is not clear. It is possible that the
level of testosterone and the time exposure could influence the secretion of gonadotropins, as postulated by Spinder et al in transsexual2
and Bachelot et al in virilizing ovarian tumors.10 We report one patient with an adrenal androgen‐secreting tumor (adrenal adenoma), where
we document for the first time the transition of gonadotropin levels from normal to a suppressed state. A 49‐year‐old female with a 4‐year
history of amenorrhea, excessive hair growth, hair loss, and deepening of the voice was admitted to the hospital. She had had normal
menstrual cycling since menarche and denied hot flushes. At presentation she denied using any medication in the previous 6 months. Physical
examination revealed a normal weight (body mass index of 22.6 kg/m2), parietal temporal baldness, and marked hirsutism. Her muscle mass was
slightly enlarged. Blood pressure was 120 × 70 mmHg and heart rate was 76 beats/min. Breasts were hypoatrophic, without masses or
galactorrhea. The abdomen was normal, and a pelvic examination revealed clitoromegaly. No anexial mass was palpable. The initial laboratory
investigation revealed a normal blood count. Liver and renal functions were within normal range. Basal hormone evaluation revealed an
increased level of total testosterone with a level of DHEAS, estradiol and gonadotropins concentration normal for age (Table 1).
Dexamethasone suppression test (0.5 mg, q.i.d. for 5 days) failed to suppress testosterone levels, whereas cortisol and DHEAS were
suppressed normally. Cushing syndrome was ruled out by an overnight dexamethasone suppression test (1.0 mg ‐ cortisol < 1.0 µg/dL). Pelvic
ultrasonography showed a right ovary of 6.8 cc and a left ovary of 5.8 cc, without nodules or cysts. Computed tomography of the abdomen
disclosed a normal right adrenal gland. A solid nodule of 1.58 cm was seen on the left adrenal gland. The patient refused further evaluation
at that time, but appeared for a new evaluation 2 years later. Her physical examination was largely unchanged, except for progression of
temporal balding. Basal hormone levels of total testosterone and estradiol did not change significantly (Table 1), while basal gonadotropin
levels were suppressed in two separated samples. After acute GnRH administration, gonadotropin levels remained suppressed. Pelvic
ultrasonography showed a right ovary of 2.7 cc and a left ovary of 1.8 cc, without nodules or cysts. On Computed Tomography of the abdomen,
the solid nodule on the left adrenal gland was unchanged. The patient underwent a left adrenalectomy by laparoscopy. The tumor measured 4.5
× 4.0 × 2.5 cm and weighed 45 g. Macroscopically, the tumor was encapsulated with a thin, smooth, fibrous capsule. The tumor had a firm
consistency with a variable brown to yellow colour on cross‐section. There were no haemorrhages, necrosis or cystic degenerations. On
microscopical examination, the tumor consisted of large polygonal cell with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, which showed focal peripherical
basophilic granules and sometimes fine clear, vacuolation. Occasionally, there was some lipofuchsin pigment. The patient was submitted to
blood collection 6 and 45 days and re‐examined 60 days after the surgical procedure. Total testosterone and estradiol decreased while
gonadotropins increase to postmenopausal range. She reported hot flushes and reduced libido, however male pattern baldness and hirsutism
were unchanged. The patient in this case study is a 49‐year‐old woman with a history of virilization for four years and an adrenal adenoma.
Upon first examination, her basal gonadotropin levels were normal. The patient refused further examination or treatment, and was not seen in
our out‐patient clinic for two years. Upon her return, basal and GnRH‐stimulated gonadotropin levels were suppressed, without significant
change in total testosterone and estradiol levels. After surgery, gonadotropins increased to postmenopausal range. As gonadotropin levels in
adrenal and ovarian androgen‐secreting tumors have been described as variable,4-11 this case led us to question whether the time of exposure
of the gonadotrophic axis could be one factor that regulates gonadotropin levels in virilizing syndrome. In patients with polycystic ovary
syndrome, a state of chronic mild hyperandrogenemia, dynamic abnormalities of gonadotropins secretion are some of the most prominent
findings.3 High basal LH levels and increased LH pulse amplitude have been described and may be related to elevated oestrogen levels3. This
same pattern of abnormality was also described in a patient with a luteinized thecoma of the ovary.12 In the other hand, there is not a
specific pattern of gonadotropin levels in patients with virilizing tumors, except for inhibin‐secreting ovarian tumors, where FSH is
suppressed and LH can be normal or low.13 As a rule, gonadotropin levels in androgen‐secreting ovarian tumors have been described as normal
or suppressed.7-11 Additionally, mean basal LH levels and LH pulse number and amplitude were lower in patients with ovarian tumors than
compared to those with PCOS or normal women,10 suggesting different mechanisms of hypothalamic or pituitary feedback. In the same way,
gonadotropin levels in patients with adrenal androgen‐secreting tumors have also been reported as normal or suppressed, and significantly
lower than in patients with non‐tumors forms of hyperandrogenism.5 As long‐term administration of androgens to women leads to virilizing
effects, some of them irreversible, the effects of testosterone on gonadotropins secretion in normal women have been studied in
female‐to‐male transsexual subjects.2 Administration of testosterone undecanoate for six‐weeks to eugonadal transsexuals, or for
three‐months to agonadal transsexuals, did not affect the pulsatile secretion of LH or the basal levels of LH and FSH, despite the fact that
this regimen resulted in a biologically effective androgen milieu. On the other hand, testosterone‐esters administered to agonadal
female‐to‐male transsexuals for at least six months, resulting in higher testosterone levels, were associated with a significant decrease in
mean basal LH and FSH levels.2 It is interesting to note that while acute testosterone infusion inhibited LH secretion in a dose‐dependent
manner, without any effect on FSH secretion1, long term administration was associated with a decrease in both LH and FSH levels2. According
to the authors, this could be a consequence of the duration of testosterone exposure. To our knowledge, this is the first documented case of
changing patterns of gonadotropins secretion observed in a patient with Virilizing Syndrome. This cannot be attributed to spontaneous
fluctuation of gonadotropins secretion because responses to acute GnRH stimuli were blunted. In the same way, there was no change in the
androgen milieu, as total testosterone and estradiol levels were unchanged. It could be that the gonadotropins pattern in virilizing states
changes with time, as in female‐to‐male transsexuals.2 In fact, an inhibitory effect of testosterone and dihydrotestosterone on the LH
response of GnRH in rat pituitary cells has been reported14. According to this, when the tumor was removed and the testosterone level felt,
there was a gradual release of the gonadotrophic axis, with increase of the gonadotropins levels to the status of menopause. We report a
patient who showed a changing pattern of gonadotropin levels that appeared to be time‐dependent. As there were no changes in testosterone
and estradiol levels, we postulate that exposure of the hypothalamus‐pituitary to an androgen milieu over time can regulate gonadotropin
levels in patients with androgen‐secreting tumors. Hormone levels under basal and dynamic condition and after surgery. LH: luteinizing
hormone, FSH: follicle stimulating hormone. After the administration of 200 µg by IV route. Two years later
