Academic Editor: Sean Blackwell Background. The Active Management of Risk in Pregnancy at Term (AMOR-IPAT) protocol has been associated in
several studies with significant reductions of group cesarean delivery rate. Present within each of these studies were nulliparous women
with risk factors for cephalopelvic disproportion. Risk factors for cephalopelvic disproportion in nulliparous women are especially
important because they represent the precursors for the most common indication for primary cesarean delivery. Cases. Three examples of
exposure of urban nulliparous women to the AMOR-IPAT protocol are presented. Each woman's risk factor profile for Cephalopelvic
Disproportion (CPD) was used to estimate her Upper Limit of Optimal Time of Vaginal Delivery for CPD (UL-OTDcpd). Labor management and
clinical outcomes for each case are presented. A simple table summarizing induction rates and birth outcome rates of exposed versus
nonexposed nulliparous women is also presented. Conclusion. Because the mode of delivery of the first birth substantially impacts birth
options in later pregnancies, the impact of AMOR-IPAT on nulliparous patients is particularly important. Determining the UL-OTDcpd in
nulliparous patients, and carefully inducing each patient who has not entered labor by her UL-OTDcpd, may be an effective way of lowering
rates of cesarean delivery in nulliparous women. Over the past two decades, national cesarean section rates have risen dramatically . In
2004, this rate increased to 29.1% . Despite the fact that cesarean section deliveries are associated with increased risk of intra- and
postpartum complications for both mothers and babies , no strategy to prevent cesarean delivery has been developed. We recently completed
two urban retrospective studies that demonstrated strong associations between exposure to an alternative method of care, called the Active
Management of Risk in Pregnancy at Term (AMOR-IPAT), and very low cesarean delivery rates [4, 5]. AMOR-IPAT uses risk-driven prostaglandin-
assisted preventive induction of labor to promote delivery before prenatal risk can develop into the two major indications for primary
cesarean delivery: cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) and uteroplacental insufficiency (UPI). In these studies of AMOR-IPAT, rates of primary
cesarean delivery in both nulliparous and multiparous women, for both CPD and UPI, decreased. The prevention of primary cesarean delivery is
especially important because the mode of delivery strongly impacts both the outcomes of the index pregnancy and the management and outcome
of future pregnancies [6, 7]. In each paper of this four-part series, we present three cases that outline the prenatal risks, clinical
management, and birth outcomes of patients exposed to AMOR-IPAT. This paper, the first of the series, focuses on nulliparous women with risk
factors for CPD. The second paper will focus on nulliparous women with risk factors for UPI, the third on multiparous women with risk
factors for CPD, and the fourth on multiparous women with risk factors for UPI. At the end of each paper, we also present a table
summarizing our urban experience with AMOR-IPAT in each parity/risk setting. We hope that these papers will shed some light on the inner
workings of AMOR-IPAT and its potential to reduce, in a safe and preventive fashion, primary cesarean delivery rates. Primary cesarean
delivery is more common in nulliparous than multiparous women, and the mode of delivery of the first birth clearly has a major impact on
future pregnancies. Women who undergo cesarean sections with their first birth are more likely to have future pregnancies complicated by
placenta previa, spontaneous third-trimester fetal demise, uterine rupture, and/or repeat cesarean delivery [6, 7]. In addition, increasing
rates of complications with repeat cesarean delivery have been associated with increasing number of previous cesarean deliveries . The most
common indication for primary cesarean delivery in nulliparous women is cephalopelvic disproportion (CPD) . CPD usually refers to the
condition where the fetal head is too large to fit through the maternal pelvis. With regards to CPD, AMOR-IPAT preventive theory is based on
two main issues. First, while any given woman's pelvis is a set size, the size of her fetus's head continuously grows during the term period
of pregnancy; therefore, the risk of CPD continuously increases during the term period. Second, a variety of risk factors predict that
either the maternal pelvis is smaller than average (short stature (<62′′) or narrow birth canal noted at initial pelvic exam), the fetus is
larger than average (excess weight gain during pregnancy (>30 lb), gestational diabetes, size > dates (≥3 cm), or third trimester ultrasound
with a projected EDC that is earlier than previously established EDC), or the fetus will be large relative to the mother's stature (elevated
BMI (>30) at conception). AMOR-IPAT combines these two main issues with a simple scoring system [4, 9]. Most risk factors for CPD have an
established odds ratio that quantifies its impact on cesarean delivery risk. Using the AMOR-IPAT paradigm, these odds ratios can be
converted into a number of days [4, 9], and the cumulative number of days reflecting each patient's CPD-related risk profile is subtracted
from 41 weeks 0 days gestation to estimate a CPD-related upper limit of the optimal time of delivery (UL-OTDcpd). If only one or two CPD
risk factors are present, then there is only a modest reduction in the UL-OTDcpd below 41 weeks 0 days of gestation. If there are multiple
CPD risk factors present, then the UL-OTDcpd may be reduced to as low as 38 weeks 0 days of gestation. In either case, if spontaneous labor
has not started on or before the UL-OTDcpd, then preventive labor induction is recommended. If a patient scheduled for preventive induction
has an unfavorable uterine cervix (modified Bishop's score <6), she is offered cervical ripening prior to the use of uterine contractile
agents. Especially in the nulliparous patient with an unfavorable cervix, AMOR-IPAT requires a persistent but patient approach to labor
induction. Three cases follow that illustrate the use of AMOR-IPAT in the setting of nulliparous women with risk factors for CPD. These
cases are followed by Table 1 that contains summary information concerning rates of labor induction, prostaglandin usage, and cesarean
delivery in nulliparous women with risk factors for CPD in the first two urban studies of AMOR-IPAT. In the first urban AMOR-IPAT study, 22
of 30 (73.3%) nulliparous women exposed to AMOR-IPAT had risk factors for CPD compared to 111 of 141 (78.7%) women in the nonexposed group.
In the second urban AMOR-IPAT study, 27 of 34 (79.4%) exposed nulliparous women and 81 of 102 (79.4%) nonexposed women had risk factors for
CPD. Clearly, in the AMOR-IPAT exposed group, labor induction and the use of prostaglandin for cervical ripening were used more frequently,
and cesarean delivery occurred less frequently. A 25-year-old G1 P0 5′ 7′′ woman had a LMP and an early second trimester ultrasound that
firmly established her EDC. At conception, she weighed around 150 lbs (estimated BMI 24). However, she had gained 35 pounds by 37 weeks
estimated gestational age, and measured 3-4 cm size > dates during several visits in her mid third trimester. Her one-hour 50 gm glucola
challenge test was 98 and her third trimester hemoglobin was 10.8 gms/dl. Her ULOTDcpd was calculated to be 41 weeks 0 days − 10 days = 39 w
4 days (6 days for excessive weight gain and 4 days for size > dates). However, between 37 and 38 weeks gestation, she gained over 4 lbs and
was noted to have a modest elevation of her blood pressure (132/90, 128/86). Due to the combination of impending CPD and impending pre-
eclampsia, she was scheduled for preventive induction at 38 weeks and 2 days estimated gestational age. She presented to the hospital on the
evening prior to her delivery, and her fetus was noted to have a vertex presentation. Her cervix was 1 cm dilated, 25% effaced and −3
station. Following placement of an IV and the documentation of a reactive NST, she received a single dose of dinoprostone per vagina (10 mg
pleget) at 10 pm. Uterine contractions started just before 5 am. Her contractions became stronger over the next few hours, and the
dinoprostone was removed at 8 am. Her cervical exam was unchanged. One hour after the dinoprostone was removed, a pitocin drip was added to
maintain and further augment her contractions. Cervical change started to occur about three hours later, that is, around noontime. Several
hours later, she was noted to be 5 cm dilated, and epidural analgesia was started. At around 9 pm, she experienced spontaneous rupture of
membranes, producing clear amniotic fluid. Cervical exam at that time revealed 6 cm dilatation, 80% effaced and −1 station. She was
completely dilated 2-3 hours later. She made steady progress with pushing, and her blood pressure remained within normal limits. Although
her second stage lasted just over three hours, she finally delivered a 7 lb 8 ounce infant spontaneously over a small 1st degree perineal
tear. Her estimated blood loss was initially 400 cc's, but she had additional bleeding about a half an hour after delivery due to moderate
uterine atony. She required external uterine massage, one dose of IM methergine and additional IV pitocin. Her postpartum hemoglobin was
9.6 mg/dl. Her baby's APGAR scores were 8 at 1 minute and 9 at 5 minutes, and it had an unremarkable normal nursery course. Both the mother
and her infant were discharged to home on the second postpartum day in good condition. We believe that, had she been allowed to gestate past
40 week gestation, she would have had a baby weighing eight pounds or more and would have probably required a cesarean delivery for second
stage arrest of labor. This belief is largely due to the prolonged second stage that she experienced and the fact that babies in the late
third trimester usually grow 4–6 oz/week [10, 11]. A 5′ 4′′ G1 P0 woman in her early 20s was known to have severe depression but otherwise
had an uncomplicated past medical history. An EDC provided by crown-rump length on an 11-week ultrasound was five days later than an EDC
provided by a reliable LMP. However, gestational sac measurement on this first ultrasound suggested an EDC that was six days later than the
EDC provided by the fetal crown-rump length. Following a review of this information, her final composite EDC was based on the crown-rump
length measurement as this balanced the other two estimates. Her BMI at conception was 34. Her one-hour 50-gram glucola challenge was well
within normal limits. However, she had gained 36 lbs by 38 weeks gestation, and, during the early 3rd trimester, she repeatedly measured at
least 3 cm “size greater than dates”. Her EDC based on a second trimester ultrasound was 9 days earlier than the previously estimated EDC
(i.e., the second ultrasound at 24 weeks 5 days gestation suggested the fetus was 26 weeks size), and her EDC based on a third ultrasound
was 13 days earlier than the previously estimated EDC (i.e., the third ultrasound at 32 weeks 3 days suggested the fetus was 34 weeks size).
We call this phenomenon an “encroaching EDC”, and it is suggestive of excessive fetal weight gain and impending fetal macrosomia. Consistent
with this concept, the third trimester ultrasound suggested that her fetus was in the >95th percentile for weight for gestational age (i.e.,
>2200 gms at 32 weeks 4 days gestation). At a prenatal visit at 37 weeks, 1 day her UL-OTD was calculated to be 41 weeks − 12 days = 39 w
2 d (2 days for elevated BMI, 4 days for size > dates, and 6 days for excessive weight gain). The lower limit of her optimal time of
delivery (LL-OTD) was estimated to be 38 weeks 0 days gestation. The patient requested elective induction as soon as possible because of the
relatively large size of her fetus noted during the third ultrasound. She was offered preventive induction of labor at 38 weeks 1 day
gestation due to multiple risk factors for CPD and she accepted this offer. She presented to the hospital one week later at 38 weeks 1 days
gestation. An NST was reactive, and she had normal vital signs. Her fetus had a vertex presentation, confirmed by ultrasound, and her cervix
was 1 cm dilated, 50% effaced, and the presenting part was at −4 station. Due to space problems in the labor and delivery department, her
induction could not be started until the following morning, when a single dose of 25 mcg dose of misoprostol was given per vagina.
Contractions started two hours later, and cervical change was first noted 5 hours after the start of her induction. By suppertime, her
cervical exam was 5 cm dilatation, 70% effacement, and −1 station. Artificial rupture of membranes produced clear amniotic fluid. She
refused all analgesics. Over the next hour, her fetal heart tracing revealed mild intermittent late decelerations that were successfully
treated with left lateral positioning and oxygen. Her contraction frequency and strength began to fade in the late evening, and IV pitocin
was started just before midnight. Thereafter, a regular contraction pattern returned. She was completely dilated by 2 am. She pushed for
about an hour and finally delivered an 8 pound 0 ounce infant over a small second degree perineal tear. Her EBL was 350 cc's. Her baby's
APGAR scores were 8 at 1 minute and 9 at 5 minutes. She and her infant had unremarkable postpartum courses, and both were discharged to home
in good condition on postpartum day #2. We believe that, had her delivery been delayed for another 1-2 weeks, the infant would have grown
another 4–8 ounces [10, 11], and the chance of cesarean delivery for CPD would have been considerably higher. In addition, the presence of
late decelerations during this labor suggests that, had her delivery been delayed another 1-2 weeks, with associated placental aging, the
likelihood of fetal intolerance to labor requiring a cesarean delivery would have also increased. An 18-year-old G2 P 0010 5′ 11′′ female
had an uncertain last menstrual period, but a 19 week ultrasound was used to determine her EDC. A second ultrasound at around 27 weeks
estimated gestational age suggested an EDC to two days earlier than previously estimated. The patient had a preconception weight of 300 lbs
(preconception BMI of 42 kg/m2). In the late third trimester, she measured 6 cm size greater than dates. Although she “only” gained a total
of 25 lbs during her pregnancy, this quantity was considered excessive given her high starting weight. Her 50-gram glucola screen was
110 mg/dl. Her UL-OTD was calculated to be 41 weeks − 12 days = 39 w 2 d (2 days for elevated BMI, 4 days for size > dates, 6 days for
excessive weight gain). Due to concerns about the presence of multiple risk factors, and very significant amounts of each risk factor, she
was admitted at 38 weeks 3 days gestation for induction of labor for impending CPD. On admission (just after suppertime), her cervical exam
revealed 0 cm dilatation, 50% effacement, and −3 station. Her fetus had a vertex presentation. She received a 10-hour course of dinoprostone
per vagina (pledget) followed by 8 hours of IV pitocin augmentation. Her cervix appeared unchanged at the end of the first day, and the
pitocin was stopped. She had supper and a shower, and a second dose of dinoprostone was placed. Ten hours later, the second dose of
dinoprostone was removed, and IV pitocin was restarted. Strong contractions developed by around 10 am. By 11 am, a cervical exam revealed
4 cm dilatation, 80% effacement, and −2 station. Artificial rupture of membranes revealed clear amniotic fluid. An epidural catheter was
placed for analgesia. Although some mild variable decelerations were noted, the fetal heart rate demonstrated good general variability. The
patient continued to make slow progress. After achieving full cervical dilatation, she pushed for about one hour. With the fetal head on the
perineum, several deep variable decelerations were noted. A soft vacuum-assisted vaginal delivery occurred, producing a 7 lb 4 oz infant. A
first-degree perineal tear was noted and repaired. Her EBL was 700 cc's, and this excessive loss resulted from the laceration of several
labial varicosities. Her baby's APGAR scores were 8 at 1 minute and 9 at 5 minutes, and it had an unremarkable normal nursery course.
Although the patient's postpartum hemoglobin was 8.1 mg/dl, she remained asymptomatic, and both the patient and her infant were discharged
to home in good condition on the second postpartum day. Again, we believe that, had the infant been born several weeks later, it would have
been 8–12 oz heavier [10, 11], and the likelihood of an uncomplicated vaginal delivery would have been substantially reduced. CommentThe use
of AMOR-IPAT in nulliparous patients with risk for CPD focuses on ensuring that labor develops before the fetus has become too large to pass
through the maternal pelvis. According to AMOR-IPAT theory, the more risk for CPD any given patient has, the earlier labor should occur
within the term period in order to maximize the likelihood of an uncomplicated birth.Especially in nulliparous women, a frequent impediment
to the goal of an uncomplicated vaginal delivery is the presence of an unfavorable uterine cervix. We believe that PGE2 products are ideally
suited for managing this potential impediment because they generally promote cervical ripening more than uterine contractility and this
allows cervical ripening to occur before the onset of active labor. Other methods of cervical ripening (PGE1, foley bulb catheters and
laminaria) are also available. Our cases illustrate that the successful induction of a nulliparous woman with an unfavorable cervix often
requires the investment of significant time on the part of both the patient and her providers. In approximately half of these inductions,
multiple days and multiple doses of PGE2 were needed. However, this investment yields shorter overall hospital length of stay for mother and
her baby (due to reduced rates of cesarean delivery and NICU admission) as well as reduction in levels of major adverse birth outcomes. We
have found that inductions lasting over 24 hours are not associated with increased infection rates (maternal fever, chorioamnionitis, or
suspected neonatal sepsis) as long as amniotomy is not performed until the patient is at least 3 cm dilated and has achieved a modified
cervical Bishop's score of at least 6.These cases illustrate several other important points. First, we have seen a reduction in rates of 3rd
and 4th degree perineal injury in patients with risk factors for CPD who are exposed to AMOR-IPAT. This is true for exposed patients who
delivered following induction of labor before their UL-OTDcpd and for exposed patients who delivered following the spontaneous onset of
labor before their UL-OTDcpd. Of note, the two primary studies that these cases were drawn from showed slightly higher rates of operative
vaginal delivery in the exposed groups and so the lower rates of major perineal injury in the exposed groups must have been the product of
some other factors. We believe that the other factors were a lower average birth weight and lower average fetal head circumference in
infants who deliver before, as compared to after, their mothers' estimated UL-OTDcpd. Second, we have found that our group rates of thick
meconium at rupture of membranes have been unusually low. Recent studies have confirmed that the presence of meconium at rupture of
membranes is a risk factor for adverse neonatal outcomes [9, 12]. Accordingly, if lower rates of thick meconium passage at rupture of
membranes is a marker for improved uteroplacental health, then the lower rates of thick meconium passage seen with the use of AMOR-IAPT
represents a secondary benefit from delivery relatively early in the term period of labor. Third, if pregnancy dating has been well
established with ultrasound, we do not rely on amniocentesis to confirm fetal lung maturity if preventive induction is performed after 37
weeks 6 days estimated gestational age. In patients preventively induced between 38 week 0 days and 38 week 6 days estimated gestational
age, we have not seen increased rates of either NICU admission or problems related to fetal lung immaturity. Fourth, the use of
prostaglandins in the setting of preventive induction seems to be associated with a slight increase in the risk of postpartum uterine atony
and higher postpartum blood loss. For this reason, we recommend active management of the third stage of labor in all patients (pitocin at
delivery of the anterior shoulder, heightened surveillance of uterine tone in the immediate postpartum period, and a lower threshold for the
use of methergine and/or hemabate. Finally, the use of AMOR-IPAT has been linked in a small randomized clinical trial with improved birth
outcomes, including a lower Adverse Outcome Index (AOI) Score and a higher rate of uncomplicated vaginal delivery .Over the past six years,
several physicians in the Department of Family Medicine and community health at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania have been
using an innovative, alternative method of obstetric care called the Active Management of Risk in Pregnancy at Term (AMOR-IPAT). This method
of care advocates preventively inducing pregnant women according to the presence of risk factors that are associated with cesarean delivery
and/or morbidity. This management reflects Caughey and Musci's statement that “complications of pregnancy increases not as a discrete risk
beyond some arbitrary gestational age, but instead increase continuously as a function of increasing gestational age.” While the benefits
and risks of AMOR-IPAT will ultimately need to be determined through a series of randomized controlled trials, our retrospective data
strongly suggests that a preventive approach to the improvement of birth outcomes is possible. We hope that these cases clarify some of the
methods used in the utilization of AMOR-IPAT in nulliparous patients with risk factors for CPD. The use of AMOR-IPAT in nulliparous patients
with risk for CPD focuses on ensuring that labor develops before the fetus has become too large to pass through the maternal pelvis.
According to AMOR-IPAT theory, the more risk for CPD any given patient has, the earlier labor should occur within the term period in order
to maximize the likelihood of an uncomplicated birth. Especially in nulliparous women, a frequent impediment to the goal of an uncomplicated
vaginal delivery is the presence of an unfavorable uterine cervix. We believe that PGE2 products are ideally suited for managing this
potential impediment because they generally promote cervical ripening more than uterine contractility and this allows cervical ripening to
occur before the onset of active labor. Other methods of cervical ripening (PGE1, foley bulb catheters and laminaria) are also available.
Our cases illustrate that the successful induction of a nulliparous woman with an unfavorable cervix often requires the investment of
significant time on the part of both the patient and her providers. In approximately half of these inductions, multiple days and multiple
doses of PGE2 were needed. However, this investment yields shorter overall hospital length of stay for mother and her baby (due to reduced
rates of cesarean delivery and NICU admission) as well as reduction in levels of major adverse birth outcomes. We have found that inductions
lasting over 24 hours are not associated with increased infection rates (maternal fever, chorioamnionitis, or suspected neonatal sepsis) as
long as amniotomy is not performed until the patient is at least 3 cm dilated and has achieved a modified cervical Bishop's score of at
least 6. These cases illustrate several other important points. First, we have seen a reduction in rates of 3rd and 4th degree perineal
injury in patients with risk factors for CPD who are exposed to AMOR-IPAT. This is true for exposed patients who delivered following
induction of labor before their UL-OTDcpd and for exposed patients who delivered following the spontaneous onset of labor before their UL-
OTDcpd. Of note, the two primary studies that these cases were drawn from showed slightly higher rates of operative vaginal delivery in the
exposed groups and so the lower rates of major perineal injury in the exposed groups must have been the product of some other factors. We
believe that the other factors were a lower average birth weight and lower average fetal head circumference in infants who deliver before,
as compared to after, their mothers' estimated UL-OTDcpd. Second, we have found that our group rates of thick meconium at rupture of
membranes have been unusually low. Recent studies have confirmed that the presence of meconium at rupture of membranes is a risk factor for
adverse neonatal outcomes [9, 12]. Accordingly, if lower rates of thick meconium passage at rupture of membranes is a marker for improved
uteroplacental health, then the lower rates of thick meconium passage seen with the use of AMOR-IAPT represents a secondary benefit from
delivery relatively early in the term period of labor. Third, if pregnancy dating has been well established with ultrasound, we do not rely
on amniocentesis to confirm fetal lung maturity if preventive induction is performed after 37 weeks 6 days estimated gestational age. In
patients preventively induced between 38 week 0 days and 38 week 6 days estimated gestational age, we have not seen increased rates of
either NICU admission or problems related to fetal lung immaturity. Fourth, the use of prostaglandins in the setting of preventive induction
seems to be associated with a slight increase in the risk of postpartum uterine atony and higher postpartum blood loss. For this reason, we
recommend active management of the third stage of labor in all patients (pitocin at delivery of the anterior shoulder, heightened
surveillance of uterine tone in the immediate postpartum period, and a lower threshold for the use of methergine and/or hemabate. Finally,
the use of AMOR-IPAT has been linked in a small randomized clinical trial with improved birth outcomes, including a lower Adverse Outcome
Index (AOI) Score and a higher rate of uncomplicated vaginal delivery . Over the past six years, several physicians in the Department of
Family Medicine and community health at the Hospital of the University of Pennsylvania have been using an innovative, alternative method of
obstetric care called the Active Management of Risk in Pregnancy at Term (AMOR-IPAT). This method of care advocates preventively inducing
pregnant women according to the presence of risk factors that are associated with cesarean delivery and/or morbidity. This management
reflects Caughey and Musci's statement that “complications of pregnancy increases not as a discrete risk beyond some arbitrary gestational
age, but instead increase continuously as a function of increasing gestational age.” While the benefits and risks of AMOR-IPAT will
ultimately need to be determined through a series of randomized controlled trials, our retrospective data strongly suggests that a
preventive approach to the improvement of birth outcomes is possible. We hope that these cases clarify some of the methods used in the
utilization of AMOR-IPAT in nulliparous patients with risk factors for CPD. Summary table of Nulliparous patients* in the two completed
Urban Studies [4, 5]. *With risk factors for CPD.
