Alveolar echinococcosis (AE) of human being caused by Echinococcus multilocularis is a rare but important zoonosis especially in tempered
zones of middle Europe and Northern America with endemic character in many countries. Due to the long incubation period, various clinical
manifestations, critical prognosis, and outcome AE presents a serious and severe disease. The primary focus of infection is usually the
liver. Although secondary affection of visceral organs is possible extrahepatic AE is highly uncommon. Moreover, the involvement of bone and
muscle presents with an even lower incidence. In the literature numerous cases on hepatic AE have been reported. However, extrahepatic AE
involving bones and/or muscles was described very rarely. We report a case of an 80-year-old man with primary extrahepatic alveolar
Echinococcosis of the lumbar spine and the psoas muscle. The etiology, diagnosis, differential diagnoses, treatment options and outcome of
this rare disease are discussed in context with the current literature. Two types of Echinococcus species are known - Echinococcus
granulosus (EG) and Echinococcus multilocularis (EM). EG causes cystic Echinococcosis (CE) while EM causes alveolar Echinococcosis (AE) . AE
is one of the most pathogenic zoonoses in the northern hemisphere with an annual incidence of 0.03 to 1.2 per 100.000 inhabitants . In
Europe EM is endemic in Belgium, Luxembourg, France, Switzerland, Liechtenstein, Germany, Austria, Italy, Poland, and the Czech Republic.
Latest epidemiology research on EM in Europe revealed additional endemic regions within urban and suburban areas. This seems to be due to
increasing prevalence of EM in foxes (Vulpes vulpes), the primary host . Besides foxes, dogs and cats, also domestic pigs might be affected
by EM . Usually, the primary infection site of AE is the liver. However, it can spread into extrahepatic structures and metastasize like a
tumorous disease even to remote organs such as brain and heart. The incubation time ranges from five up to fifteen years . Owing to its
infiltrating and metastasizing character, AE is clinically staged according to the Primary-tumor-Nodes-Metastasis-system (PNM)-system. It is
based on the extent of the hepatic lesion, the affection of adjacent organs as well as the number and extent of metastases (see table 1). AE
usually metastasizes to pancreas, spleen, retroperitoneum, lung, brain, but also to bone and soft tissue . Gottstein et al. described an
occurrence of metastasis in up to 20%, especially in lung and brain . While pulmonary metastases occur in 7 to 20%, cerebral metastases are
only described in 1 to 3% . Osseous affection is uncommon, occurring in up to 1% of all cases . To the best of our knowledge only 18 cases
of osseous AE have been reported so far . Primary extrahepatic manifestation of AE seems to be absolutely unusual and extremely rare. The
PNM classification of alveolar echinococcosis (a) For classification, the plane projecting between the bed of the gall bladder and the
inferior vena cava divides the liver in two lobes (b) Vessels mean inferior vena cava, portal vein and arteries (c) Chest X-ray and cerebral
CT negative In this context we present the case of a primary extrahepatic AE, affecting the lumbar spine and the psoas muscle. We discuss
the etiology, diagnosis, and therapy of this rare lesion based on the current literature. An 80-year-old man presented with sudden onset of
right upper and lower quadrant abdominal pain at an academic department for surgery in October 2009. In addition, he suffered from relapsing
nausea and vomiting, also describing recurrent low-grade fever a few days before and subjective feeling of swelling of the right upper
abdomen. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. Computed
tomography (CT) of the abdomen was performed revealing several cystic lesions of different size in the right psoas muscle. At that time,
abscess-like formations were considered to be the most likely diagnosis. Considering this the working diagnosis initial treatment included
the intravenous administration of antibiotics - Piperacillin/Tazobactam - and the percutaneous drainage of the biggest abscess under CT
guidance. A follow-up CT-scan showed a diminution of the drained abscess followed by clinical recovery. Therefore, another percutaneous
drainage of another, smaller abscess was performed. This led to shrinkage of the lesion and further clinical recovery. The inflammatory
parameters decreased and no microorganisms were detected in the drained fluid. Subsequently the patient was discharged home. One week later,
the patient presented with recurrent abdominal pain in the right lower quadrant at the same department he had initially turned to. An
abdominal ultrasound showed several obvious abscesses in the right psoas muscle. After readmission, three CT-guided suction drainages were
placed in the three biggest abscesses. The microbiological analysis of the drained liquid provided evidence of Staphylococcus aureus. Hence
antibiotic treatment was restarted with Piperazillin/Tazobactam. Despite continuous drainage for 7 days a follow-up CT revealed size
constancy of the abscesses. Therefore, surgery was indicated and an open debridement of the abscesses in the right psoas muscle with
resection of pannus was performed. The intraoperative microbiological work-up proved Staph. epidermidis and Staph. warneri. Thus, the
antibiotic treatment with Piperacillin/Tacobactam was continued with higher dose rate. The patient's general condition improved and he could
be discharged to rehabilitation 22 days after readmission. During rehabilitation he suffered from recurrent right lower quadrant abdominal
pain and therefore he was readmitted again. After readmission a CT-scan revealed a new multilobulated cystic lesion in the right psoas
muscle (see figure 1). Again a suction drainage was placed in the biggest abscess-like lesion and purulent fluid was obtained. The
cultivation of the drained fluid revealed growth of Staph. lugdunensis. Therefore the antibiotic treatment was changed to Amoxicillin. Owing
to drug hypersensitivity, the treatment had to be changed to Vancomycine and Zyvoxid. During hospitalization the patient developed
additional pain in the upper lumbar spine from lumbar vertebrae L1 to L3 without neurological deficit. Simultaneously the general health
condition of the patient worsened. A CT examination of the lumbar spine showed geographic bone destruction and inhomogeneous osteolysis of
the lumbar vertebra L1 to L3 without soft tissue involvement, leading to the diagnosis of osteomyelitis (see figure 1 and 2). Computed
tomography scans of the abdomen and pelvis. Non-enhanced (A) and contrast-enhanced (B) axial images show a multilobulated cystic mass in the
right retroperitoneum, originating from the psoas muscle. Besides of the cystic components with fluid-like density (*) thickened septa with
mild contrast enhancement (arrow) are seen. The coronal image (C) shows the extent of the mass along the psoas muscle. (D) The lumbar spine
presents lytic lesions of the first and second lumbar vertebra (arrows) with partial cortical destruction. Magnetic Resonance Imaging of the
lumbar spine. (A) The T2-weighted axial MR image shows multiple small hyperintense lesions in the right psoas muscle (arrows). The
corresponding fat-suppressed T1-weighted image after gadolinium administration (B) confirmed the diagnosis of a multicystic mass and
delineated the thickened, contrast-enhancing septations around the cystic components (arrow). T1-weighted image (C) and T2-weighted STIR
image (D) of the lumbar spine in sagittal orientation. These images showed the bone marrow replacement within the first, second, and third
lumbar vertebrae (arrows). The lesions comprise of cystic and solid components. Hence, the patient was transferred to our academic
department for orthopaedics and traumatology for further treatment. The range of motion of the right hip joint was painfully reduced and
there was a positive psoas sign. The patient's general condition was poor and he showed a lack of appetite with consecutive weight loss. He
denied nausea and vomiting, body temperature was normal. The physical examination was unremarkable. Only pressure pain to the right lower
quadrant of the abdomen and percussion tenderness at the level of the lumbar vertebrae L1 to L3 was revealed. Therefore surgical revision
was indicated; during surgery tubular cavities were detected macroscopically (see figure 3) and for the first time Echinococcosis was
suspected. A subtotal resection of the right psoas muscle was performed due to the multitude of obvious parasitic lesions. The lumbar
vertebrae L1 to L3 were removed and then filled up with polymethylmethacrylate bone cement (PMMA). The microbiological examination did not
reveal any microorganisms. However the histopathological examination showed typical parasitic vesicles consistent with Echinococcosis, which
were delineated by a Periodic-Acid-Schiff (PAS+) laminated layer test. The postoperative serology was highly positive for AE. In addition,
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) was conducted and specific nucleic acids of EM were detected. Thus the antibiotic treatment was stopped and
a continuous Benzimidazole therapy with Albendazole 400 mg twice per day was started immediately. In the course of the disease the patient's
general condition improved and finally the inflammatory parameters totally declined. The patient showed great improvement regarding
mobilization. A follow-up CT- and MR-examination was performed one month after the beginning of continuous Benzimidazole treatment. The
images revealed no parasitic residua in the right psoas muscle, but little cystic residua in the first lumbar vertebra were depicted.
Furthermore, a postoperative hematoma anterior to the psoas muscle was detected. No new parasitic cystic lesions were found. An additional
cerebral CT did not show any pathological findings. Finally the patient could be discharged for rehabilitation. Photograph of the resected
specimen demonstrates the macroscopic appearance of the multivesicular hydatid cyst. The typical "bunch of grapes" appearance is visible;
moreover it is obvious that the hydatid cyst has three layers. AE represents an important endemic parasitic zoonosis in the northern
hemisphere . Owing to its late onset and various clinical features a certain delay until definite diagnosis is common and AE is often found
incidentally. In the present case the patient reported a long history of abdominal discomfort and pain with additional relapsing nausea,
vomiting, fever, and a subjective feeling of swelling. The symptoms and clinical signs depend on the structures and/or organs affected.
Therefore, the clinical presentation of AE is highly variable and not specific . In hepatic affection the symptoms include cholestatic
jaundice and/or abdominal pain. Further symptoms are fatigue and weight loss . X-ray and CT findings of osseous AE are unspecific.
Inhomogeneous osteolysis and irregular bone destruction may be seen. In the soft tissues, CT can reveal cystic masses with irregular
thickened septations . Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may show tube-like cavities/cystic lesions with a multi-vesicular morphology if soft
tissue is infected. Diagnostic criteria for cystic lesions are high intensity on T2-weighted images and low intensity on T1-weighted images
without contrast agent enhancement (see figure 2). Because of the contrast enhancing thickened margins and septations AE can easily be
confused with abscess formations . In this context the multiple cyst-like formations in the right psoas muscle were initially considered as
bacterial psoas abscesses (BIA). Since BIA are common in the elderly population, this diagnosis seemed to be corroborated at first .
Moreover, antibiotic treatment and percutaneous drainage lead to a diminution of the abscess formation and improved general health status.
Additionally the diagnosis of BIA was even more corroborated because of the growth of various Staph. species. According to Ricci et al.
Staph. aureus is known as the most common microorganism with an incidence of over 88% in patients suffering from BIA . In parallel to AE BIA
also cause unspecific clinical symptoms . The classic clinical triad of fever, back and limb pain is present in only 30% of the patients
with BIA . Regarding etiology BIA is related with diabetes mellitus, intravenous drug abuse, AIDS, renal failure and immunosuppression .
Vertebral osteomyelitis, septic arthritis or infectious sacroiliitis may also cause BIA . In the present case, the patient developed lumbar
back pain. The CT examination of the lumbar spine was interpreted as vertebral osteomyelitis. Therefore, therapy included antibiotic
medication and percutaneous drainage. These management strategies are recommended for treatment of BIA . Because of failure of the
percutaneous drainage open surgery was performed in the further course. The intraoperative aspect of tube-like cavities in the psoas muscle
raised the suspicion for Echinococcosis. Finally the presence of AE was confirmed by histopathology and laboratory setup. In addition to the
radiological and macroscopic presentation the diagnosis of AE is based on serology and PCR . Histopathology typically reveals parasitic
vesicles delineated by a Periodic-Acid-Schiff (PAS+) laminated layer . The periparasitic granuloma is composed of epitheloid cells lining
the parasitic vesicles, macrophages, fibroblasts and myofibroblasts, giant multinucleated cells, and cells of the nonspecific immune
response, surrounded by lymphocytes . In the present case the postoperative serology was positive for AE. For serological diagnosis
purified, recombinant or in-vitro produced E. multilocularis antigens are used, mainly Em2, Em2+ and Em18 (2). Em10 is an E. multilocularis
specific recombinant antigen used for assays to confirm AE . According to the literature serology has a high sensitivity of 90 to 100% and a
specificity of 95 to 100% . Carmena et al. described high sensitivity and specificity of serological tests ranging from 75 to 100% . The
differentiation between E. multilocularis and E. granulosus is possible in 80 to 95% of cases using most of the purified antigens .
Nevertheless serological interpretation can be difficult in disease with extrahepatic infestation and sometimes remains insufficient in
differentiating AE from CE. Especially the use of total somatic antigens is considered to show a high degree of cross-reaction with other
parasites . In contrast, Gottstein et al. described improved immunodiagnostic with Em2+ ELISA using purified species-specific antigens 9.
The Western blot detects serum IgG in 97% of patients infected with Echinococcus and its sensitivity is higher than of the ELISA for the
detection of Echinococcosis . However, it can distinguish E. multilocularis from E. granulosus in only 76% of cases. In our patient, PCR was
conducted additionally in tissue specimens resected from the psoas muscle and the lumbar vertebrae. The result was equal 100% for the
presence of E. multilocularis. The aim of PCR is to detect specific nucleic acids of Echinococcus and consequently to differentiate E.
multilocularis from E. granulosus. So PCR is increasingly accepted as a complementary diagnostic tool for Echinococcosis and has been used
to confirm the pathology in unusual locations . Scheuring et al. were successful differentiating E. multilocularis and E. granulosus in a
patient with osseous and subcutaneous locations . Georges et al. described two cases of extrahepatic osseous infestation where PCR was
useful to diagnose AE because of limited serological interpretation . Regarding medical history, vocational or part-time farming, gardening,
forestry and hunting are known risk factors for a possible infection with AE . 559 patients were reported to the European Echinococcosis
registry from 1982 to 2000 on a voluntary basis. 61.4% of 210 registered persons presented with risk factors as listed . Therapy of AE
should be multidisciplinary addressing every potential organ affection. Early diagnosis is crucial for prognosis and outcome as mortality
reaches up to 80% in untreated patients . In Europe therapy has changed average life expectancy at time of diagnosis from 3 years in the
1970s to 20 years in 2005 . Although the introduction of Benzimidazole in the early 1980s brought an eminent breakthrough in treatment of AE
and CE, surgical therapy is mandatory . Whenever possible complete resection of AE lesions should be performed . Because of the infiltrating
growth of parasitic tissue and the potential for metastases principles and rules of tumor surgery should be considered and followed.
Unfortunately most patients are inoperable at the time of diagnosis . In the present case a subtotal resection of the right psoas muscle was
performed due to the multitude of parasitic lesions and we removed the lumbar vertebrae 1 to 3 and filled them up with bone cement. Although
postoperative Benzimidazole therapy is mandatory in all patients, there is no commonly accepted guideline regarding pre-surgical drug
therapy and duration of drug treatment. Some authors suggest that temporary treatment might be sufficient after complete resection . Reuter
et al. recommend a Benzimidazole treatment for at least two years since residual parasitic tissue may remain undetected . In case of
incomplete surgical resection and in inoperable patients long-term or even life-long Benzimidazole therapy is indicated . Recent studies
clearly demonstrated a significant improvement of the 10-year survival rate in non-radically resected patients who received a long term
Benzimidazole therapy in comparison to a historic control group . This is in line with the recommendation of Brunetti et al. suggesting
lifelong Benzimidazole therapy in non-radically resected patients . Follow-up of infected patients is crucial. This includes imaging in
terms of CT and MRI at intervals of 2-3 years and ultrasound at shorter intervals, blood tests with determination of Albendazole blood
levels and serological tests. Serological analysis in the follow-up presents a close relationship between clinical status and treatment of
patients with AE although interpretation of serological tests in patients under Benzimidazole treatment but without complete resection is
more complex . Scheuring et al. demonstrated that anti-Em2- and anti-Em18-antibodies rapidly decreased after complete resection of parasitic
lesions and become undetectable . In summary, primary extrahepatic AE of bone and muscle is an extremely rare disease. The clinical course
leading to diagnosis can be long and difficult because of the various and unspecific clinical features. As in the case described psoas
muscle abscesses are an important differential diagnosis. Recrudescent reappearance of obvious abscesses in a patient's history despite of
the continuous administration of antibiotics and percutaneous drainage for several times has to direct one's attention to the possible
presence of Echinococcosis. If a patient is suspected of having Echinococcosis imaging should be completed and serological tests and PCR
should be done immediately. Early diagnosis is very important for prognosis and outcome and a multidisciplinary approach of treatment should
be followed. Surgery and drug therapy are available options for treatment. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MN
wrote the manuscript and drafted it as well as he performed the review of literature in this context. RB conceived of the study and
participated in its design and coordination. GG participated in the design of the case report and review of literature and corrected the
first draft. RvER conceived of the study and participated in its design and coordination. CS has read the images and written the images'
subtitles. DT as an expert on echinococcosis gave his advice on treatment. CPdC performed the microbiological analysis and gave advice
regarding antibiotic treatment. RG approved the case report and review of literature and read the manuscript for corrections. CK conceived
of the study and participated in its design and coordination. All authors have read and approved this manuscript.
