Kawasaki disease is an acute febrile disease of unknown etiology, characterized by systemic vascular inflammation involving the small and
medium sized arteries, with a predilection for the coronary arteries. It represents the leading cause of acquired heart diseases in children
in developed countries. Diagnosis, difficult because of the clinical characteristics of the disease with typical signs and symptoms
appearing sequentially and not simultaneously, may be even more complicated in case of unusual presentation, leading to delay in
recognition, particularly in infant in whom a higher incidence of coronary arteries aneurysms has been reported. A high index of suspicion
of Kawasaki disease must be maintained in case of prolonged fever in these patients. Timely appropriate treatment is essential to avoid
severe sequels. We report the case of a 2 months old male infant with persistent febrile episode, transferred to us from another
institution, who presented on echocardiography giant aneurysms on both coronary arteries. Kawasaki disease is an acute febrile disease of
unknown etiology, characterized by systemic vascular inflammation involving the small and medium sized arteries, with a predilection for the
coronary arteries, first describe by Tomisaku Kawasaki in Japan in 1967 . The disease, counts for the leading cause of acquired cardiac
disease in the developed countries, with an annual estimated incidence of 112 cases/100000 children in Japan and 2.9 - 6.9 cases/100000
children in Europe. About 80% of the children with Kawasaki disease are younger than 5 years of age with the peak of incidence between 6 and
11 months. The disease is rare in neonatal and infant period (only 1.6% of patients are under 90 days of age) and extremely rare in
adolescents and adults. Hospitalization rate of children under 5 years of age in the US was about 20.8/100000 in 2006 and remained constant
from 1997 to 2007 . The diagnosis relies only on fever associated with transient typical signs and symptoms appearing sequentially, usually
not simultaneously present at the time of physical examination, therefore requiring an extremely precise case history. Difficulty in the
diagnosis is increased by unusual and incomplete presentation, that may lead to delay in recognition and treatment and therefore severe
sequels particularly in infant who are reported to have a higher incidence of coronary aneurysms . Prompt and appropriate treatment with
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) associated with acetyl salicylic acid significantly reduces the risk of cardiac complications . Among the
untreated patients 25% of patients develop cardiac complications, declining to 5% in the patients who underwent the appropriate treatment
16. We report on a 2 month old male infant with persistent fever, transferred to us from another institution, who presented giant aneurysms
of both coronary arteries on echocardiography. A 2 month old male infant was referred to our Hospital by another institution where he was
admitted one week earlier for a two day history of fever, loss of appetite and rash. At that time laboratory studies showed an elevation of
white blood cells (WBC 19.290/mm3). Chest x-ray and abdominal, cerebral and cardiac ultrasound were performed and urine, blood and
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples for culture were obtained. All these tests were negative. Therefore a systemic antibiotic therapy was
started with ampicillin and gentamicin, and after two days switched to ceftriaxone and teicoplanin. Moreover a low dose of IGIV was given.
On arrival in our Institution the patient was still febrile. Physical examination showed skin pallor, conjunctivitis and flushed lips,
tachycardia, with normal heart sounds, no murmur, tachypnea; an echocardiography was performed, which resulted normal, as well as Chest
X-ray, abdominal and cerebral ultrasound. Lumbar puncture was also performed and blood samples were obtained for complete blood cell count
and culture. Laboratory studies showed increased WBC (28.830/mm3), platelets (575000/mm3) and Reactive Protein C (RCP 308 mg/L) and low
hemoglobin (7.3 g/dL). The infant underwent red blood cell transfusion and antibiotic therapy with ampicillin and gentamicin was continued.
On the second day ankle edema appeared while fever disappeared; blood examination revealed a significant reduction of RCP (72.4 mg/L) and
WBC (21.910/mm3) with platelets persistently increasing (909000/mm3). The child remained well and apyretic for 7 days, then fever recurred,
associated with irritability, tachycardia, skin rash on physical examination, and RCP at 239 mg/L (normal range 0 - 5 in our laboratory) and
further increase of platelets (1170000/mm3) on laboratory investigations. The scheduled echocardiography was immediately performed and
showed mitral valve insufficiency, pericardial effusion and severe anomalies on both coronary arteries: 3 aneurysms from 5 to 6 mm in
diameter on the right coronary artery; left main coronary, normal proximally, was progressively dilated distally, as well as the circumflex
artery, and there was a tubular aneurysm of 5 mm on the left anterior descending artery. Infusion of IVIG (2 gr/Kg in a single dose in
twelve hours) and administration of acetyl salicylic acid (100 mg/Kg in 4 doses) was immediately started along with low molecular weight
heparin (LMWH). Rapid improvement in clinical status, a significant decrease in RCP and platelet values (RCP 139 mg/L, platelets 882000/mmc)
with complete normalization 20 days after IVIG infusion was observed. LMWH was then switched to Warfarin. The child was discharged 40 days
after admission with acetyl salicylic acid and warfarin therapy, monitored by CoaguCheck System to maintain INR between 2.0 and 2.5. During
follow up coronary aneurysms gradually improved. The last cardiac ultrasound showed a 5 mm left coronary artery aneurysm but right coronary
artery was not observable. Mitral valve insufficiency and pericardial effusion were no longer present. A Cardiac catheterization was
performed to study the coronary arteries which confirmed the presence of a 5 mm left coronary artery aneurysm with thrombus, and showed the
interruption of the right coronary artery 18 mm from its origin (Figure 1). Currently the child receives acetyl salicylic acid 5 mg/Kg and
warfarin 0.28 mg/Kg. LCA: main left coronary artery dilated with normal distribution and perfusion beyond the aneurysm. Aneurysm: aneurysm
of 5 mm in diameter at the bifurcation of the left coronary artery. RCA: thin right coronary artery, interrupted at 18 mm from its origin.
Diagnosis of Kawasaki's disease is a demanding challenge because it relies essentially on clinical criteria, with typical signs and symptoms
similar to those present in different common children's diseases, appearing sequentially and fleeting. In our case an a posteriori audit of
the first week report showed that the patient presented a fleeting episode of palm erythema along with edema of the hands and feet.
Erroneous treatment due to mistake in the interpretation of signs and symptoms may alter clinical status and feature without modifying the
course of the disease leading to a delay in the diagnosis and the timing of proper therapy. In our case the patient was given a low dose of
IVIG which cancelled the fever and improved the clinical status for a week which only transiently slowed down the inflammatory process,
leading to significant delay in the diagnosis and severe sequels. The key is a precise and well-done case history, and a close physical
examination. Laboratory studies, particularly inflammatory indexes such as RCP may be helpful in the presence of clinical signs. Abnormal
platelet count along with clinical signs and RCP value is revealing but is a late index which usually appears on the 12th - 14th day of
disease whereas treatment should be given between the 6th and the 8th day. In our case abnormal platelet count along with a revision of the
history and the other laboratory data should have raised the suspect of Kawasaki disease even in the presence of a completely negative
echocardiography with the rapid disappearance of the fever. Unusual presentation is an important risk factor for delay in the diagnosis and
severe cardiac sequels. Infants younger than one year of age are at the highest risk for coronary aneurysms and frequently show atypical
forms of the disease . In this category of patients, in case of fever lasting more than three consecutive days, Kawasaki disease should be
considered in differential diagnosis. Delayed diagnosis, along with incomplete clinical manifestation, has been suggested to be the major
contributor to the development of coronary artery aneurysms. Timely appropriate treatment is essential for the avoidance of serious sequels
in Kawasaki disease, particularly coronary aneurysms, especially in infants younger than one year of age in whom a high index of suspicion
of Kawasaki disease must be maintained in case of prolonged fever. The key relies on a precise, detailed and complete case history and
careful clinical evaluation and monitoring. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. ID: prepared the manuscript and
search the literature VR: Collected the data, participate in the search of literature MV: participate in the collection of the data BT: made
the diagnosis, made the echocardiography, review the manuscript DV: participate in the collection of the data MAB: made the diagnosis,
participate in the preparation of the manuscript SL: participated in the collection of the data GI: review the manuscript AA: made the
cardiac catheterization All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal.
