Background: Splenic cysts represent a pathology seldom encountered in practice, the most often etiology being, parasitic, congenital and
pseudo–cysts, which usually appear post–traumatically or after a splenic infarction.Splenic cysts indicate a surgical treatment when they
are large (and thus present a high risk for complications such as rupture, hemorrhaging, compression of the neighboring organs), when they
are symptomatic or present complications. Case report: We present the case of a patient diagnosed with splenic cyst in our Clinic, its
discovery being incidental, while conducting investigations for an abdominal pain syndrome. Discussions: The clinical case presented
completely abides to the literary description–the diagnostic has been incidental, the large size of the cyst has determined the need for
surgery (splenectomy), its etiology has been established by means of anatomo–pathological report (the presence of the epithelial inner wall
that indicates congenital cysts). The splenic cysts represent a seldom–encountered pathology, usually their discovery being incidental.
There are two classifications of the splenic cysts: Altemeier and Fowler. According to Altemeier, the splenic cysts are either real cysts
(parasitic and non–parasitic) and false cysts or pseudo–cysts (post–traumatic, degenerative, inflammatory) According to Fowler, the splenic
cysts are both primary cysts (with endocystic epithelial coating) and secondary cysts (without epithelial coating). Primary cysts are also
classified as: Congenital serum cysts Post-traumatic cysts (with cellular lining) Inflammatory cysts Neoplazic benign cysts (dermoid,
epidermoid, lymphangioma, hemangioma) Secondary cysts are classified as: Traumatic cysts (hematic, serum) Degenerative Inflammatory cysts
This is the most recent classification and it is the one most often used in practice. These cysts are diagnosed due to the fact that they
trigger splenomegaly or due to the complications that occur firstly from the symptomatic point of view (rupture, hemorrhaging, abscess,
etc.) The treatment is surgical, conducted by splenectomy in the case of symptomatic or complicated cysts. In the event of the incidental
discovery, there is a choice between supervision and intervention only in the event of a complication, usually through splenectomy, or
conservative interventions (puncture, cystomy, partial splenectomy). The patient aged 26, presenting herself to our clinic in January 2010
with non–systematized pain, localized in the epigaster and the left hypochondria. The pain has started a few months before, without being
connected to the diet, is of low intensity and of short length (a few minutes). Lately, the painful episodes have increased in number, but
the patient has not followed any antialgic treatment. With regard to the medical background, what should be taken into account is a vaginal
birth 4 years before. The clinical examination indicates splenomegaly (palpable spleen with 3 cm under the coastal margin), with no other
changes aside the ones mentioned. The lab exams are within the normal range, including the inflammatory markers (PCR, VSH) and the tumorous
ones (CA19–9). The abdominal ultrasonography indicates the presence of a trans–sonic formation, which occupies the entire left hypochondria,
measuring 9/8 cm, entering into contact with the left kidney and the spleen. The abdominal CT exam established the diagnostic of splenic
cyst (Figure 1) The CT result: voluminous cystic image with the axial diameter of 11.5/10.7 cm and a cranium–caudal diameter of 8 cm with
the departure point at the level of the spleen's superior point and with no actual demarcation limit. The formation pushes the spleen
inferiorly and posteriorly and towards the right, the stomach and the pancreas, towards which it presents a demarcation limit. Its content
is exclusively liquid and stretches towards the anterior abdominal wall. CT Image of the splenic cys The serology for the Echinococcus
granulosus has turned negative. In conclusion, after conducting all these investigations, the diagnostic for gigantic splenic cyst is set,
probably congenital serum primary cyst. The patient has been prepared for surgery, due to the existence of the symptomatic gigantic splenic
cyst. The surgical intervention has been conducted under general anesthesia with orotracheal intubation, the first incision being a median
one, from supraumbilical to infraumbilical. During surgery, the presence of the cystic formation localized on the visceral side of the
spleen has been noticed (Figure 2), the splenic parenchyma being compressed by the formation and pushed upwards and backwards (Figure 3).
The ‘in hil’ splenectomy has been conducted, without the evacuation of the cystic contents. Image taken during surgery after the
mobilization of the spleen The operated part (the cystic spleen) Post–surgery, the evolution of the patient has been favorable, being
released from hospital 7 days after the surgery, with the recommendation to continue the injectable anti–coagulant treatment afterwards,
anti–aggregation, and depending on the thrombocyte number, (the patient has presented post–surgical thrombocytosis up to the value of
1,000,000 plates/mm3). The anatomo–pathological examination has indicated a cystic spleen formation with a wall composed of conjunctive
fiber tissue with areas of hyalinization, which contains chronical inflammatory limphoplasmacytic infiltrations. The cystic wall presents
epithelium areas of a scuamous type. The histopathological aspect description is compatible with the diagnostic of primary epithelial
splenic cyst The patient has presented herself to the check-up, one month following surgery. The splenic cysts are a seldom–encountered
pathology, usually their discovery being incidental. The most often encountered types are the primary parasitic and congenital cysts, while
among the secondary ones; the most frequent are the post–traumatic cysts or the ones developed following an infection or an infraction of
the spleen. From the international communications up to date, approximately 800 cases of splenic cysts have been diagnosed, among which the
majority is parasitic and approximately 300 of them are congenital cysts. The etiological diagnostic of the cysts is not always easy,
usually departing from the exclusion of infectious cases (bacterial, parasitic), the exclusion of some traumatisms, neoplastic disorders.
The majority of the splenic cysts are incidentally discovered, but there are cases in which they might manifest symptoms such as upper
abdominal pain, a pain of the left shoulder, and urinary symptoms due to the compression of the left kidney. Some cysts are diagnosed during
surgery, either during a surgical intervention for another pathology or on the occasion of a surgical intervention due to a complication of
the cyst such as rupture, hemorrhage, abscess. The treatment of the splenic cysts remains the subject of controversy in literature
concerning the establishment of the surgical indication. There is, however, a consensus, which established the fact that in the case of
symptomatic cysts, of the complicated ones, as well as in the case of cysts with a diameter of 4–5 cm, the treatment is surgical. It is
possible to conduct splenectomies, partial splenectomies through classical or laparoscopic surgery. Supervision is recommended in the
situation of the cysts discovered incidentally, with dimensions less than 4–5 cm, the ulterior evolution being impossible to accurately
predict. In the event of the development of the symptoms or the increase in dimension, surgical treatment will be applied. Cases describing
the extremely rare involution of some small cystic formations have been reported. The clinical care previously presented, generally respects
the descriptions of the specialized literature. The diagnostic has been incidentally established, during the investigation for painful
abdominal syndrome. The surgical treatment has been the first recommendation, given the size of the cyst and the presence of some symptoms,
even attenuated. We have favored the open surgical approach given the dimensions of the cyst, the tight connection to the left kidney and
the possibility of occurrence of some serious surgical complications, such as hemorrhaging and lesions to the neighboring organs. The
certified etiological diagnostic has been provided by the anatomo-pathological exam, which has indicated the inner cystic epithelium
wrapping.
