Academic Editor: Gregory T. Spear Case. A 25-year-old woman presented with acute urine retention with overflow 6 months after an inadequate
treatment of severe monilia infections. Examination revealed complete adhesion between both labia majora. Division of adhesion was done with
reconstruction by labial mucocutaneous flap. Complete recovery was achieved with good cosmetic outcome. Conclusion. Labial adhesions
whatever their severity is can be surgically divided with complete correction by locally designed flap to reconstruct the introuitus with
rapid recovery, good healing, and good cosmetic outcome. Labial adhesions are common in young girls and occasionally occur in elderly women
. It is hypothesized that the relative hypoestrogenic states of these age groups predispose them to labial adhesions . Although surgical
dissection is sometimes required, topical oestrogen creams and gentle massage usually lead to successful breakdown of adhesions in these
groups within a few weeks . Labial adhesions have also been described in reproductive age women secondary to female circumcision, lichen
sclerosis, herpes simplex, diabetes, pemphigoid, and caustic vaginitis . To our knowledge, monilial labial adhesions are rarely described in
the medical literature. A 25-year-old woman, nulligravida, was divorced 5 years ago and was nondiabetic patient. Because of some Upper Egypt
traditions she refused to go to doctors (as approximately all surgeons in our localities are male). She had a severe itching with severe
monilia infection, and she consulted only dermatologic doctors, the conditions worsened till complete adhesion occured leading to urine
retention with difficulty in micturition, then urine retention with overflow. On taking the history, she was circumcised as a routine
procedure done for young female in villages and rural area in Upper Egypt. On examination she had a complete vulval adhesion with only
pinhole opening for micturation with complete adhesion of the labia and overflow of the urine with some leucodermic area from chronic
irritations (Figures 1(a) and 1(b)). She received antimonilia drug (Fluconazole). Spinal anastasia with sedations was used. The area was
infiltrated with injection of adrenalin in concentration of 1 : 10000. Separation of the adhesion and fusions was done, and bilateral vulvar
flaps to reconstruct the defect of raw surface resulted. Randomized mucocutaneous flaps were dissected posteriorly to be advanced to
reconstruct the raw surface after separation of adhesion. Urethral catheter was applied and lastly suturing of flaps using polyglactin (4/0)
(Ethicon). She was instructed for standard perineal care, which included spreading the labia periodically and washing with water and
antiseptic. The patient was discharged 48 hours after surgery with no complications and instructed to continue routine perineal hygiene at
home. Five days later she was seen in followup. She had resumed normal activity and was pain-free. Examination revealed that her labia were
completely healed (see Figures 1(a), 1(b) and 2(a), 2(b)). Labial fusion is most commonly noted between 3 months and 4 years of age and has
a peak incidence of 3.3% between 13 months and 23 months of age . Labial fusion is considered to be an acquired condition secondary to
hypoestrogenism and vulvovaginitis [8, 9]. Several previous authors hypothesized that the relative hypoestrogenic state of the immediate
postpartum period contributes to the formation of labial adhesions [1, 10]. This middle age lady has no history of recent delivery and did
not have any pattern of hypoestrogenic state. Severe and recurrent infection with bad hygiene can also predispose to labial adhesion,
especially monilia infection. The local cultural problems led to the late presentation of the case till complete urine retention occured.
The fusion of distal based randomized mucocutaneous flap to reconstruct the defect has not been described in the literature before and the
healing of the flap was excellent. Preoperative photos showing adhesion with and without separation of vulva. Postoperative photos showing
separation of the of vulva using mucocutaneous flap.
