Conceived and designed the experiments: JHS OS NCB JMR CC. Performed the experiments: NCB JMR RC. Analyzed the data: NCB JMR OS JHS CC.
Contributed reagents/materials/analysis tools: OS JHS. Wrote the paper: NCB CC. The transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR)
mediates the effects of a group of chemicals known as dioxins, ubiquitously present in our environment. However, it is poorly known how the
in vivo exposure to these chemicals affects in humans the adaptive immune response. We therefore assessed the functional phenotype of T
cells from an individual who developed a severe cutaneous and systemic syndrome after having been exposed to an extremely high dose of
2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD). T cells of the TCDD-exposed individual were studied for their capacity to produce cytokines in
response to polyclonal and superantigenic stimulation, and for the expression of chemokine receptors involved in skin homing. The
supernatants from T cells of the exposed individual contained a substantially increased amount of interleukin (IL)-22 but not of IL-17A,
interferon (IFN)-γ or IL-10 when compared to nine healthy controls. In vitro experiments confirmed a direct, AhR-dependent, enhancing effect
of TCDD on IL-22 production by CD4+ T cells. The increased production of IL-22 was not dependent on AhR occupancy by residual TCDD
molecules, as demonstrated in competition experiments with the specific AhR antagonist CH-223191. In contrast, it was due to an increased
frequency of IL-22 single producing cells accompanied by an increased percentage of cells expressing the skin-homing chemokine receptors
CCR6 and CCR4, identified through a multiparameter flow cytometry approach. Of interest, the frequency of CD4+CD25hiFoxP3+ T regulatory
cells was similar in the TCDD-exposed and healthy individuals. This case strongly supports the contention that human exposure to persistent
AhR ligands in vivo induce a long-lasting effect on the human adaptive immune system and specifically polarizes CD4+ T cells to produce
IL-22 and not other T cell cytokines with no effect on T regulatory cells. 2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin (TCDD) is the most potent
member of a group of halogenated aromatic hydrocarbons, generally known as dioxins . Dioxins are produced when organic material is burned in
the presence of chlorine and are therefore widely implicated in many industrial as well as natural processes. Major sources of environmental
dioxins include waste incinerators and steel industry as well as the use of herbicide and pesticide containing chlorophenols. Due to their
high lipophilicity and poor metabolism, dioxins accumulate in lipid-rich tissues of animals and rapidly climb the food chain up to humans .
In addition, dioxins are presents in cigarette smoke. As a consequence, concentrations of dioxins are found in all humans, with higher
levels commonly identified in persons living in industrialized countries. TCDD, considered as the prototypical dioxin, has been shown to
have pleiotropic biological effects at low doses in multiple animal species , . The majority of TCDD effects are mediated via binding and
activation of the intracellular aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR), as demonstrated by the loss of responsiveness to TCDD in AhR knockout mice
. The elevated toxicity of TCDD is caused by its extremely high affinity for AhR and its long half-life (5–10 years in humans ). Upon ligand
binding AhR undergoes a conformational change and translocates into the nucleus, where it dimerizes with the AhR nuclear translocator (ARNT)
and regulates, by binding to xenobiotic response elements (XRE), the expression of a variety of genes, including the xenobiotic metabolizing
enzyme CYP1A1 (cytochrome P450) . In mice, AhR activation is reported to regulate T helper (Th) 17 and T regulatory (Treg) cell
differentiation and to modulate immune responses to experimental induced encephalomyelitis in a ligand-dependent manner , , . In addition,
AhR has been shown to be crucial for interleukin (IL)-22 expression and a regulatory mechanism for IL-22 production via a Notch-AhR axis has
been identified . We and others have demonstrated a role for AhR agonists, including TCDD, in promoting the in vitro production of IL-22 but
not of IL-17 by human CD4 T cells. The possibility that in humans AhR stimulation could participate to the in vitro differentiation of
IL-10-producing Treg cells has also been suggested . IL-22 is a member of the IL-10 family of cytokines and signals via a receptor
consisting of IL-22R and IL-10R2 subunits. IL-22 does not serve the communication between immune cells since cells of hematopoietic origin
do not express IL-22R . It mainly acts on epithelial cells of the gastrointestinal tract and the skin, where it promotes antimicrobial
defense, protection against damage and regeneration . However, its role in chronic inflammatory disorders may be either protective or highly
pathogenetic , . T cells able to produce IL-22 in the absence of IL-17 and interferon (IFN)-γ, have been named Th22 cells and are enriched
in cells expressing the skin-homing chemokine receptors CCR6, CCR4 and CCR10 while lacking CXCR3 , . Th22 cells have been identified in the
skin of individuals suffering of psoriasis and atopic dermatitis , , and are thought to be important in skin immunosurveillance and
immunopathology , , . All the data on the effects of AhR ligands on human T cell subsets have been so far generated in vitro and their
relevance to in vivo situations remains largely unknown. In this report, we extensively characterize the long-term immunological
modifications induced by TCDD in one of the two ever reported cases of a human being who survived the in vivo exposure to an extremely high
dose of the pure compound . Our data indicate for the first time that in vivo exposure to TCDD induces a selective increase in the frequency
of T cells producing IL-22 but neither IL-17, IL-10, nor IFN-γ, which preferentially express skin-homing chemokine receptors. These data
strongly support the in vivo existence in humans of Th22 cells that depend on AhR for their expansion. We obtained written approval from the
patient to release peer-reviewed scientific information about his case. Our patient had been intoxicated by pure dioxin (TCDD) presumably in
late 2004 at the age of 50. In early January 2005 he arrived under controlled conditions at the Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland,
where we identified a TCDD concentration of 108,000 pg/g of lipid weight in his blood serum . Similar levels were identified by an
independent laboratory in a sample taken from the same patient in mid-December 2004 . This concentration was more than 50,000 times the
averaged TCDD in the general population (normal value: 10–20 pg/g of lipid weight) . The patient was suffering from a severe skin disease,
the historically called “chloracne”, consisting in what we call now “metabolizing acquired dioxin-induced skin hamartomas” (MADISH) to
describe his skin condition . All the experiments shown in this report were performed 4 years after the acute exposure to TCDD, when the
patient had a TCDD concentration of 19,000 pg/g of lipid weight in his blood serum and no TCDD-related pathology was anymore clinically
apparent. Nine sex and age (52±10 years) matched healthy members of the laboratory served as controls. CD4 and CD8 T cell frequencies in the
peripheral blood of the TCDD-exposed individual were within the range of healthy controls (CD4+CD3+ T cells: 62.4% and 61±7% of living
lymphocytes, respectively; CD3+CD8+ T cells: 25.7% and 18±7% of living lymphocytes, respectively). Permission to perform this investigation
was granted by Comité departemental de médecine interne et médecine communautère des hôpitaux universitaires de Genève. Written informed
consent according to the Helsinki declaration was obtained from each individual involved in this study. Fetal calf serum (FCS), phorbol
myristate acetate (PMA), β-mercaptoethanol, staphylococcal enterotoxin B (SEB) and brefeldin A were from Sigma Chemicals (St. Louis, MO);
TCDD from Cambridge Isotope Laboratories (Andover, MA); ionomycin from Calbiochem (Merck KGaA, Darmstadt, Germany); RPMI 1640 medium,
phosphate buffered saline (PBS), penicillin, streptomycin, L-glutamin, nonessential amino acids, sodium pyruvate from Life Technologies
(Carlsbad, CA); human rIL-2 from Biogen (Zug, Switzerland); anti-IL-22-PE from R&D (Minneapolis, MN); anti-CD28 (CD28.2), anti-CD45RA-FITC,
anti-CCR6-PercPCy5.5, anti-CCR4-PECy7, anti-CXCR3-APC, anti-CD4-PE-Cy5, anti-CD4-FITC, anti-CD4-APC-Cy7, anti-CD8-APC-Cy7 and anti-CD3-FITC
from BD (Franklin Lakes, NJ); anti-IL-17A-FITC, anti-IL10-Alexa 488 and anti-IFN-γ-PE-Cy7 from Biolegend (San Diego, CA); anti-CD25-APC and
anti-FoxP3-PE from eBioscience (San Diego, CA); anti-CD3 (OKT3) Ab from ATCC (Manassas, VA); CH-223191 from VWR (Dietikon, Switzerland).
Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) were purified by Ficoll-paque Plus (GE Healthcare, Pittsburgh, PA) gradient centrifugation and
frozen in liquid nitrogen until use or processed immediately (experiment in Fig. 1A). The cells from the TCDD-exposed individual were
treated under the same experimental conditions and in parallel to that of healthy individuals in all experiments shown in this manuscript.
PBMC were rested o/n in RPMI 1640 medium supplemented with 10% FCS (complete RPMI, cRPMI) as described and then used in short term (up to 24
h) or long term (7 d) cultures. In short term cultures PBMC were activated for 4.5 h by PMA (50 ng/ml) and ionomycin (1 µM) or for 24 hours
in flat-bottom 96-well plates in presence of coated anti-CD3 mAb (1 µg/ml) and soluble anti-CD28 mAb (1 µg/ml). When intracellular cytokine
determination was performed, brefeldin A (2.5 µg/ml) was added after 1.5 and 3 hours from the beginning of the activation, respectively. In
long-term activation experiments, PBMC were cultured at 1×106 cells/ml in 24-well plates in cRPMI in the presence of soluble anti-CD3 Ab
(0.1 µg/ml) or SEB (0.2 µg/ml). Culture medium was supplemented with IL-23 (10 ng/ml) and IL-2 (20 U/ml) was added 48 h after culture
initiation. When used, TCDD (10 nM, unless otherwise specified) and CH-223191 (3 µM) were added at the beginning of the culture. At day 7 of
culture, supernatants were collected and frozen until cytokine determination and the cells were harvested and activated for 4.5 h by PMA and
ionomycin for FACS analysis. Cytokine levels were assessed at d 7 in supernatants of PBMC activated by CD3-crosslinking (A) or by
Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B (SEB) (B). IL-2 (20 U/ml) was added 48h after culture initiation. Individual data for a single TCDD-exposed
individual (full symbols) and 9 (CD3-crosslinking) or 2 (SEB stimulation) different healthy individuals (empty symbols) are shown. Cell
surface and intracellular staining were assessed by FACS analysis using FACSCanto (BD) and data were analyzed by FlowJo software 7.5 (Tree
Star). For intracellular cytokine determination, cells were stained with anti-CD4-PE-Cy5 or anti-CD4-APC-Cy7 or anti-CD3-FITC mAbs, fixed
and stained with anti-IL-17A-FITC or anti-IL-10-Alexa 488, anti-IL-22-PE, anti-IFN-γ-PE-Cy7 and anti-IL-4-APC mAbs using BD Cytofix/Cytoperm
kit according to manufacturer’s instruction. To determine the frequency of Treg cells, PBMC were stained with anti-CD4-APC-Cy7, anti-CD45RA-
FITC and anti-CD25-APC, fixed and stained with anti-FoxP3-PE using eBioscience Foxp3 Fixation/Permeabilization buffer according to
manufacturer’s instruction. In chemokine receptor expression experiments, PBMC were stained with anti-CD4-APC-Cy7, anti-CD45RA-FITC, anti-
CCR6-PercPCy5.5, anti-CCR10-PE, anti-CCR4-PECy7 and anti-CXCR3-APC following by FACS analysis. IFN-γ, IL-22 and IL-10 were quantified in
culture supernatants at day 7 of culture by ELISA (R&D Systems or for IL-10 Sanquin, Amsterdam, The Netherlands). IL-17 was quantified by
ELISA (R&D) or by Luminex xMAPTM Technology using multiplex beads immunoassay (Fluorokine MAP Multiplex Human Cytokine Panel, R&D). Total
RNA was extracted from resting PBMC using RNAesy micro kit (Quiagen, Hilden, Germany) and cDNA synthesized from 0.25 µg of total RNA using
random hexamers and Superscript III reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) according to manufacturer’s instructions. SYBR Green
assays were performed on a SDS 7900 HT instrument (Applied Biosystems). Each reaction was performed in triplicates. Raw Ct values obtained
with SDS 2.2.2 software (Applied Biosystems) were analyzed and the more stable housekeeping genes TBP (TATA-box-binding protein) and EEF1A1
(eukaryotic translation elongation factor 1 alpha 1) selected for normalization. All oligonucleotides were obtained from Quiagen: CYP1A1,
QT00012341; TBP1, QT00000721; EEF1A1, QT01669934. CD4+ T cells characterized by the preferential production of IL-22 in the absence of IL-17
and IFN-γ have been recently described by us and others in the peripheral blood of healthy individuals , , . These cells have been named
Th22 cells. Cells with similar characteristics have been detected in the skin of individuals suffering of psoriasis and atopic dermatitis ,
. In humans, AhR natural ligands such as the tryptophan photoproduct 6-formylindolocarbazole (FICZ) and β-naphthoflavone as well as the
synthetic ligand TCDD, have been shown to favor the in vitro polarization of naïve CD4+ T cells toward IL-22-single producing cells , .
However, whether previous in vivo exposure to an AhR-ligand in humans could favor the preferential outgrowth of a particular cell subset,
thus affecting the adaptive T cell response, is unknown at present. To test this hypothesis, we determined the capacity of PBMC of a person
surviving the exposure to an extremely high dose of the stable AhR ligand TCDD to produce cell subset discriminating cytokines upon
CD3-crosslinking. When compared to those of 9 healthy individuals, the PBMC of the TCDD-exposed individual produced at base-line 3-fold
higher levels of IL-22 but similar levels of IL-17A, IFN-γ and IL-10 (Figure 1A). Similarly, PBMC of the TCDD-intoxicated individual
secreted higher amounts of IL-22 but not of IL-17A and IFN-γ following superantigen stimulation with Staphylococcal Enterotoxin B (SEB)
(Figure 1B). SEB is a superantigen able to specifically activate a subset of T cells expressing the T cell receptors Vβ3, Vβ12, Vβ13.2,
Vβ14, Vβ15, Vβ17 and Vβ20 chains . Thus, persistent TCDD-exposure in vivo does not favor in humans the outgrowth of IL-17 producing Th17
cells, as observed in mice , , , , nor of IL-10 producing Tr1 cells, as observed in vitro in humans , , . In contrast, it selectively favors
the production of IL-22, induced in response to both mitogenic and superantigenic stimulation. To further address the possible expansion of
Treg cells upon exposure to TCDD as documented in mice , , we assessed the frequency of CD4+ T cells simultaneously expressing high levels
of the IL-2 receptor subunit CD25 and the Treg-specific transcription factor FoxP3 in resting conditions . We observed comparable levels of
CD25hiFoxP3+ cells in the CD4+ T cell fraction of ex-vivo isolated PBMC from the TCDD-exposed and 5 healthy individuals (2.49% and
2.28±1.13% of CD4 T cells, respectively) (Figure 2A). Similarly, no difference were identified in the frequency of both resting
(CD45RA+FoxP3lo: 0.94% and 1.65±0.92% of CD4 T cells, respectively) and activated (CD45RA-FoxP3hi: 0.8% and 0.74±0.25% of CD4 T cells,
respectively) Treg cells, as defined by the expression of the phosphatase CD45RA and the transcription factor FoxP3 (Figure 2B) . Thus, the
frequency and subset composition of T cells with regulatory function was unaffected by TCDD exposure, although TCDD levels were still 10,000
times above normal values. Surface staining of ex-vivo isolated PBMC from the TCDD-exposed and a representative healthy individual of five
tested. Plots are gated on CD4+ T cells, numbers in plots indicate the percentage of CD25hiFoxP3+ Treg cells (A) or that of CD45RA+FoxP3lo
resting and CD45RA-FoxP3hi activated Treg cells (B) in the CD4+ T cell fraction. We next tested whether in vitro TCDD could modulate the
production of IL-22, IL-17A and IFN-γ by PBMC activated upon CD3-crosslinking. We found that TCDD dose-dependently increased further the
production of IL-22 in the TCDD-exposed individual and, as expected, boosted IL-22 production in controls. This increase was specific as far
as IFN-γ was not affected while IL-17A production decreased in the presence of TCDD (Figure 3A). Thus, exposure to TCDD in our patient did
not alter the ability of his lymphocytes to respond to TCDD stimulation and did not result in lymphocyte exhaustion. Together, these data
corroborate and expand previous observations demonstrating a direct ability of TCDD to modulate the production of IL-22 cytokine in short-
term culture in vitro . (A) PBMC were activated by CD3-crosslinking in the presence or absence of TCDD and the specific AhR inhibitor
CH-223191. Cytokine levels were assessed in the supernatants harvested at d 7. Dose-dependent responses to TCDD in a single TCDD-exposed
individual (full symbols) and one healthy individual (empty symbols). (B) Culture conditions as in A. Cytokine determination in a single
TCDD-exposed individual (full symbols) and 2 healthy individuals (empty symbols) (C) mRNA levels of CYP1A1 quantified by real-time PCR of
resting PBMC from a single TCDD-exposed (full symbols) and five healthy individual (empty symbols). Expression levels have been normalized
against the geometric mean of two house-keeping genes (EEF1A1 and TBP). TCDD is thought to form a long-lived and stable complex with AhR .
Thus, the higher amount of IL-22 produced by PBMC of the TCDD-exposed individual in the absence of exogenously added TCDD could result from
the persistent action of the ligand on a stable number of cells. Alternatively, it could be explained by an increased frequency of
IL-22-producing cells previously primed in vivo under the influence of TCDD. To discriminate between these two hypotheses, we cultured the
PBMC in the presence of the high-affinity AhR-antagonist CH-223191. If residual TCDD was binding AhR in the TCDD-exposed individual, the AhR
antagonist would reduce the amount of IL-22 produced upon T cell activation by displacing at least in part the bound TCDD, otherwise no
effects would be observed. The presence of the AhR antagonist CH-223191 in the culture in the absence of TCDD did not decrease the basal
level of IL-22 produced by the TCDD-exposed subject to the one observed in healthy individuals (Figure 3B). However, the specific AhR
antagonist completely reversed the enhanced IL-22 and decreased IL-17A production observed when exogenous TCCD was added to the cultures in
both the TCDD-exposed and healthy individuals (Figure 3B). To confirm these findings, we assessed the mRNA levels of the AhR-target gene
CYP1A1, which is readily up-regulated by TCDD ligation . In agreement with the lack of inhibition by CH-223191 in basal conditions, which
suggests no occupancy of TCDD binding sequences, no differences were observed in the transcription level of CYP1A1 in resting PBMC from the
TCDD-exposed and control individuals (Figure 3C). These data demonstrate the involvement of AhR in mediating dioxin effects and, most
importantly, suggest that the AhR receptor was not anymore occupied in the TCDD-exposed individual at the time of our investigation. Thus,
the increased production of IL-22 could be explained by an increased frequency of cells producing IL-22, which accumulated with time while
responding to novel antigenic challenges under the polarizing effect exerted by TCDD. To test this hypothesis we assessed the frequency of
ex vivo-detectable IL-22-secreting CD4+ cells in PBMC from the TCDD-exposed and healthy individuals. We observed that the frequency of CD4+
cells producing IL-22 was at least 3-fold higher in the TCDD-exposed individual compared to controls. By contrast, the frequency of cells
producing IL-17A, IL-10 and IFN-γ was similar (Figure 4A). The increase in IL-22 producing cells was reproducible in short term cultures
across a variety of activation stimuli, which included TCR-dependent (CD3 and CD28 cross-linking) and TCR-independent (PMA and ionomycin)
signaling (Figure 4A and B). In the CD4+ compartment, IL-22 is mainly produced by CD3+ T cells and to a minor extent by CD3- cells including
lymphoid tissue inducer (LTi) cells . In the TCDD exposed individual, all IL-22 producing cells were CD3+, thus indicating that the source
of IL-22 was CD4+ T cells (Figure 4B and C). Of interest, multiparameter flow cytometry analysis revealed that the majority of the IL-22+
cells in the TCDD-exposed individual did not concomitantly produce IL-17A, IL-4, IFN-γ (Figure 4B) and IL-10 (Figure 4D). Altogether, these
data strongly indicate that in vivo exposure to TCDD favors the expansion of CD4+ T cells having the functional properties of Th22 cells.
(A) Intracellular staining of ex-vivo isolated PBMC from a TCDD-exposed (full symbols) and healthy individuals (empty symbols) upon
activation by PMA/Ionomycin for 4.5 h (n = 5) or CD3/CD28 crosslinking for 24 h (n = 9). (B, C, D) Representative FACS plots of cells
activated by PMA/Ionomycin from the TCDD-exposed and a control individual (upper right panel in B) after gating on the forward and side
scatter of viable PBMC (B, C) or on CD4+ cells (D). Numbers in plots indicate the percentage of cells in each quadrant. Since the exposure
to dioxin resulted in severe skin manifestations, we tested whether the pattern of chemokine receptors associated with skin homing expressed
in CD4+ T cells was skewed in the TCDD-exposed individual , , , , . We found that the frequency of CCR6+ and CCR4+ cells in the memory CD4 T
cell compartment was higher in the TCDD-exposed individual than in controls, while the frequency of CXCR3+ cells was lower (Figure 5A). This
is remarkable, since Th22 cells were shown to be enriched in CD4+ T cells expressing CCR6, CCR4 and CCR10 in absence of CXCR3 , . A detailed
multiparametric analysis performed at a single cell level, revealed that in the TCDD-exposed individual there was a substantial three-fold
increase in the frequency of CD4+ memory T cells with the CCR6+CCR4+CXCR3-CCR10- phenotype and a modest increase in the
CCR6+CCR4-CXCR3-CCR10- subset when compared to healthy controls (Figure 5B). No differences were identified in the CCR6- compartment, thus
stressing the specificity of our finding. It is noteworthy that we did not observe a concomitant preferential expression of CCR10 in the
TCDD-exposed individual as observed by others in Th22 cells , . This may reflect a specific characteristic of T cell producing IL-22 under
the influence of TCDD. Surface chemokine receptor expression on CD4+CD45RA- memory T cells from ex-vivo isolated PBMC in a TCDD-exposed
(full symbols) or 5 healthy individuals (empty symbols). (A) Mean ± SD of cells expressing CCR6, CCR4, CXCR3 and CCR10. (B) Percentage of
cells expressing various combinations of CCR6, CCR4, CXCR3 and CCR10. Data from the 5 healthy individuals are expressed as box plots. Box
plots were automatically generated using GraphPad Prism version 4.00 for Windows (GraphPad Software). The box represents values between 25th
and 75th percentile with a line at the median (50th percentile). The whiskers extend above and below the box to show the highest and the
lowest values. 6, 4, 3 and 10 in panel B denote CCR6, CCR4, CXCR3 and CCR10, respectively. It is tempting to speculate that Th22 may have
contributed to some extent to the pathogenesis of the dioxin induced skin lesions . Th22 cells have been shown to be involved in skin
disease such as psoriasis and atopic dermatitis , , which molecular pathology is very different from the dioxin-induced skin lesions,
historically called “chloracne” and now defined as “metabolizing acquired dioxin induced skin hamartomas” which primarily involve sebaceous
glands . Further studies are needed to analyze the putative effect, if any, of IL-22 in sebaceous gland pathology. However, It is also
possible that the skewed pattern of chemokine receptor expression in the TCDD-exposed individual was only the consequence of the expansion
of Th22 cells taking place with time. In conclusion, we present here strong evidence indicating that prolonged exposure in vivo to high dose
of TCDD induces a profound, long-lasting, perturbation of the adaptive immune system and specifically polarizes CD4+ T cells to produce
IL-22 but not other T cell cytokines in an AhR-dependent manner. The best model explaining our findings suggest that antigenic exposure
taking place under the influence of TCDD polarizes T cells to the Th22 subset. While historically relevant environmental disasters , ,
caused people exposure to a mix of toxic agent including TCDD, the case here discussed represents a unique opportunity for investigating the
effect of pure dioxin on human T cells. TCDD is one of the major environmental pollutants, present in food and in cigarette smoke. While
current doses are largely below those observed in the index case, our observation helps to better understand the effect of dioxin on the
human immune system. We are grateful to Montserrat Alvarez and Marie-Elise Truchetet (Immunology and Allergy, Geneva University Hospital,
Switzerland) for technical assistance and Lionel Fontao (Dermatology, Geneva University Hospital, Switzerland) for critical discussion.
Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Funding: This work was supported by grant 31003A_124941/1
from the Swiss National Science Foundation to C.C. The funder had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to
publish, or preparation of the manuscript. No additional external funding was received for this study.
