To the Editor: Fatal piroplasmosis in domestic reindeer (Rangifer spp.) was first reported by Kertzelli in 1909; he named the piroplasm
Piroplasma tarandi rhangferis. Similar piroplasms also were observed in blood smears of reindeer that had a condition known as spleen
disease, which occurred in the second part of summer in the Arctic tundra and was characterized by clinical signs such as splenomegaly,
icterus, pale mucous membranes, and death (1). Hemoglobinuria, a characteristic sign of babesiosis, is not mentioned in these early 20th
century reports. However, these signs were observed in a Babesia divergens–infected reindeer herd in Scotland (2). The only other reported
cases of severe babesiosis in reindeer and caribou (Rangifer tarandus caribou) were caused by B. odocoilei, a predominantly nonpathogenic
parasite of white-tailed deer (Odocoileus virginianus) that can cause fatal infection in reindeer (3,4). Babesia sp. EU1 is a recently
recognized zoonotic Babesia species that has been associated with human babesiosis in Europe and is phylogenetically related to the B.
odocoilei parasite (5). We report on a juvenile reindeer with babesiosis caused by Babesia sp. EU1. A 5-week-old, captive-bred, female
forest reindeer from an otherwise healthy herd of 9 animals in a zoo in the Netherlands was euthanized after showing clinical signs of
lethargy, jaundice, and hemorrhagic diarrhea for >8 hours that did not improve after treatment with butylscopolamine (Buscopan; Boehringer
Ingelheim, Alkmaar, the Netherlands) and enrofloxacin (Baytril; Bayer, Leverkusen, Germany). At necropsy, jaundice was evident in the
sclera, aorta, and leptomeninges. On the basis of the degree of fat storage and muscle development, the body condition was fair. The lungs
were hyperemic and edematous, and the trachea contained foam. The liver was enlarged and pale; the spleen was enlarged. The kidneys were
dark brown. Hemoglobinuria was noted in the urinary bladder. Tissue samples from various organs were in fixed in 4% phosphate-buffered
formalin, embedded in paraffin, cut into 4-µm sections, and stained with hematoxylin and eosin. No microscopic lesions were found in the
skin, thymus, thyroid gland, tonsils, salivary glands, tongue, gastrointestinal tract, or heart. Numerous hemosiderin-laden macrophages were
found in the spleen and liver sinusoids. Pigmentary nephrosis with moderate tubular degeneration and focal interstitial petechial
hemorrhages were seen in the kidneys. Erythrophagocytosis was evident in the mesenteric lymph nodes, liver, and spleen. Cytologic analysis
was performed on samples from the brain, liver, spleen, lungs, and large intestinal contents, which were stained with Hemacolor (Merck,
Darmstadt, Germany). Large (2–3 μm), intraerythrocytic protozoal inclusions consistent with Babesia spp. (Figure) were identified in the
liver, spleen, lung, and brain. Lung of a forest reindeer infected with Babesia sp. EU1. Arrows indicate erythrocytes with protozoal
inclusions. Scale bar = 20 µm. DNA was extracted from 200 µL blood and ≈25 mg of the tissues collected during the necropsy: bone marrow,
brain, heart, kidney, liver, lung, lymph node, small intestinal wall, and spleen. All extractions were performed by using the Nucleospin
Tissue Kit (Macherey-Nagel, Düren, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s protocol. The detection of PCR products by reverse line blot
hybridization was performed as described (6). All blood and tissue samples from each organ tested were positive only for Babesia sp. EU1. To
confirm these results, primers 18SAN and 18SBN were used to amplify a 1,705-bp fragment of the 18S rRNA gene (7), the fragment was
subsequently purified, cloned into the pGEM-T Easy Vector (Promega, Leiden, the Netherlands), and sequenced (Baseclear, Leiden, the
Netherlands). The resulting sequence (GenBank accession no. GQ888709) was 100% identical to that of Babesia sp. EU1 isolated from human
babesiosis patients from Italy and Austria (GenBank accession no. AY046575). In an attempt to identify subclinical carriers of this
piroplasm, blood samples from the reindeer’s mother and another nonrelated calf from the herd were collected and tested by reverse line
blot, but test results for both animals were negative. These findings make transplacental transmission as a route of infection less likely
and favor the bite of an infected tick as the cause of disease. Babesia sp. EU1 is transmitted by Ixodes ricinus ticks (8), which are
widespread in cool humid areas of Europe. Of I. ricinus ticks from the Netherlands, ≈1% are infected with Babesia sp. EU1 (6). The only
confirmed reservoir host of Babesia sp. EU1 is roe deer (Capreolus capreolus) (9). The infected forest reindeer resided in a zoo in an area
without direct contact with roe deer, although roe deer are abundant in the forests surrounding the zoo. Because Babesia sp. EU1 can be
transmitted both transovarially and transstadially (10), the infection source may have been the offspring of a tick infected in a previous
generation or an immature tick that fed on infected roe deer outside the zoo or an as yet unidentified reservoir host and was carried into
the reindeer’s compound by hosts, such as birds or small rodents. Babesia sp. EU1 is the third Babesia spp. to be recognized as the cause of
fatal babesiosis in reindeer, together with B. divergens and B. odocoilei. Suggested citation for this article: Kik M, Nijhof AM, Balk JA,
Jongejan F. Babesia sp. EU1 infection in a forest reindeer, the Netherlands . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 May [date
cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1705.101834 Current affiliation: Freie Universität Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
