Our patient is a 64-year-old Chinese woman with a history of asthma with previous prednisolone usage, diabetes mellitus, and breast
cancer—for which left simple mastectomy and axillary clearance was performed. Her menopause had been at 54 years and she had been on
alendronate for 1 year for osteopenia, diagnosed by bone mineral density scan. She was referred to our department 1 month after her
mastectomy for bilateral thigh pain that had lasted 2 weeks, to exclude metastases before commencing chemotherapy. The thighs were tender
bilaterally. Plain radiographs of her femurs showed lateral cortex thickening bilaterally with a stress fracture of her right femoral shaft
(Figure 1). She had increased uptake at the lower one-third of her right femur and the proximal one-third of her left femur on Tc-99m bone
scan. Right (A) and left (C) femur showing lateral cortex thickening. Right femur also showing an undisplaced fracture (B; arrow). In view
of the above findings, she was advised to stop alendronate and was wheelchair-mobilized for 6 weeks. The option of intramedullary nailing
for the right femur stress fracture and prophylactic nailing of the left femur was discussed with the patient, but on follow-up, there was
radiographic evidence of fracture healing (Figure 2). Right femur at 3-month follow-up showing a healing fracture (arrow). Bone mineral
density scan at 3 years since stopping alendronate was normal. Repeat Tc-99m bone scan showed reduced uptake of tracer at the right femur
compared to the previous bone scan, consistent with a healing fracture. Apart from occasional bilateral thigh pain, our patient was
otherwise well. She was converted to letrazole with ibandronic acid by her oncologist at the 5-year follow-up. Once again, she complained of
bilateral aching thigh pain on walking and standing, with difficulty climbing stairs. Plain radiographs of her femurs did not reveal any new
fractures. She was still ambulating until 7 months after starting ibandronate, when she fell in the toilet after a sudden onset of severe
bilateral thigh pain; she was brought to the emergency department with bilateral thigh pain and deformity. Plain radiographs of both her
femurs showed bilateral shaft fractures (Figure 3). Blood biochemistry showed a normal serum alkaline phosphatase level, 41 U/L (32–103),
and normal total serum calcium, 2.11 mmol/L (2.10–2.60). Her serum Ca 15-3 level, a tumor marker for breast carcinoma, was not elevated
either. Fractures of the left and right femurs. Plate fixation of both femoral shafts was performed in a single operation instead of
intramedullary nailing with a risk of fat embolism, in view of her history of asthma with baseline hypoxemia (Figure 4). She was wheelchair-
mobilized again after surgery and histology from both fracture sites showed fracture hematoma with no evidence of malignancy. The fractures
healed uneventfully. After plate fixation. The calculated incidence of bisphosphonate-associated femoral diaphyseal fractures has been
estimated to be 1 in 1,000 patients per year (Schilcher and Aspenberg 2009). These fractures have been described in patients receiving
alendronate for 5–7 years (Kwek et al. 2008, Lenart et al. 2009). Authors have recommended plain radiographs of symptomatic patients to
check for lateral femoral cortex thickening and “beaking” with a short oblique or transverse fracture line such as in our patient (Kwek et
al. 2008, Lenart et al. 2009). Our patient had received alendronate for only 2 years, yet had evidence on plain radiographs of the
aforementioned changes related to its use and with its associated prodromal symptoms. Similar fracture patterns have been reported in
patients who were not on bisphophonate therapy (Tan et al. 2010). The described half-life of alendronate is 10 years and its continued
effect after cessation of therapy is why a “drug holiday” works in selected patients who respond to therapy with normal bone mineral density
scans after treatment (Khan et al. 1997, Black et al. 2006). Our patient had a normal bone mineral density scan 3 years after stopping
alendronate therapy. Despite stopping alendronate for 5 years, she still developed bilateral femur shaft fractures within a year of starting
ibandronic acid. This would suggest that the risk of an atypical femur fracture is increased by concurrent use of bisphosphonate rather than
being due to accumulation of bisphosphonate in the bones from previous use. In beagles, the effect of suppressed bone turnover by
bisphosphonates has been reported to include increased bone strength, but with accumulation of microdamage and a reduction in energy
absorption capacity and toughness (Mashiba et al. 2001). Microdamage accumulation has been proposed to contribute to the fragility of
osteoporotic bone (Burr et al. 1997). Such microdamage has been suggested to act as a stimulus for targeted bone remodeling through death of
osteocytes, resulting in a further increase in microdamage; this gives rise to stress fractures such as our patient's atypical femur
fractures (Heino et al. 2009). KLP participated in the management of the patient and wrote the first draft. MHT reviewed the manuscript and
was the attending surgeon for the patient.
