Intramedullary compression nails have recently been developed for knee arthrodesis. These implants have given fusion in 90–100% of cases
regardless of the initial diagnosis or experience of the user (Domingo et al. 2004, McQueen et al. 2006, De et al. 2008). However, many
clinicians have been reluctant to use this technique due to the perceived difficulty in or impossibility of removing these nails without
disrupting the fusion, to allow the management of associated complications such as infection. We present the case of a patient who required
removal of a compression intramedullary fusion nail for recurrent infection, in order to describe an easily performed extraction technique
that does not disrupt the arthrodesis and that allows definitive management of infection. A 48-year-old man was referred with a painful
failed knee arthrodesis that had originally been attempted for failed primary knee arthroplasty secondary to infection. There were no
clinical or hematological signs of residual infection, so we proceeded to attempt fusion with an intramedullary compression nail (Wichita
Fusion Nail; Stryker). He developed recurrent infection, which was managed with appropriate antibiotics until solid fusion was achieved. We
then proceeded to remove the nail 8 months after the fusion procedure and to manage the infection more definitively (Figure 1). A. 8 months
after fusion. B. 1 month after nail removal. The patient is positioned supine with a high thigh tourniquet applied. Access is gained through
the incision used for nail insertion. The 4 locking screws are removed via previous stab incisions. The site of the previous anterior window
osteotomy is reopened (Figure 2A). Easy access is thus obtained to the compression screw which is then removed (Figure 2B). With the locking
screws and compression screw removed, it is then possible to slide the intramedullary nail up and down the canal. The anterior window
osteotomy is extended by adding an angled anterior component to the tibial end of the osteotomy window, taking care not to remove the tibial
tuberosity (Figure 2C). The tibial component of the nail can also telescope within the femoral component, and this should be performed to
the maximal extent. This shortens the construct as much as possible. The implant is sectioned through the tibial component just below the
femoral component, as the femoral side is shorter (Figure 2D). A power metal cutting disc (Midas Rex; Medtronic, TX) is used to obtain an
angled cut of the implant. This cut must be angled enough to allow the femoral part of the nail to be maneuvered out. Once removed, the
tibial component can then be slid up the femoral canal and removed in a similar fashion to the femoral side (Figure 2E). A. Reopening of
osteotomy of the original anterior bony window. B. Removal of the locking nut. C. Direction of anterior sloping extension of anterior window
osteotomy in the tibia to allow extraction. D. Use of a high-speed power metal cutting disc to cut the nail at the appropriate angle. E.
Extraction of the distal tibial portion after telescoping into femoral canal and then angling out. In the presence of infection—as in this
case—thorough debridement, canal reaming, copious lavage, and possible application of special dressings (as desired) is possible. The
patient was initially allowed partial weight bearing in a brace for 6 weeks to protect the fusion. The fusion was intact and the patient was
walking without pain or any aids at the 1-year follow-up, with no further evidence of infection. We feel that the technique described here
is simple and repeatable, and should alleviate some of the existing concerns with use of these devices.
