Merkel cell carcinoma (MCC) is a rare cutaneous tumor and cases located in the eyelid have been described, but still its rarity may lead to
difficulty in diagnosis and delay in treatment. A 51-year-old female patient that presented with large lesions in the eyelid underwent
surgery after the diagnosis of acute chalazion. Following respiratory distress secondary to pulmonary metastasis, the patient's condition
deteriorated and was not fit for complete excision treatment. Histopathological investigation of the biopsies, taken from the tumor,
revealed that it was undifferentiated small cell carcinoma. Our aim with this paper is to point out that more cases should be reported for
more effective diagnosis, histopathological study, clinical investigation, treatment and prognosis of this specific neoplasm. Merkel cell
carcinoma (MCC), sometimes referred to as a neuroendocrine carcinoma of the skin, arises from the uncontrolled growth of Merkel cells in the
skin. It was first described by Toker and since then many cases have been reported. To the best of our knowledge, involvement of the eyelid
and face by large MCC has never been reported in the literature . We here report a further case of the unusual tumor in the eyelid with
histological, pictorial and immunohistochemical studies, which supports the hypothesis that it is derived from Merkel cells. We consider the
histopathological diagnosis of mass in the eyelid to be very important. And diagnosis and treatment approaches of this entity are complex
and require a skilled and experienced multidisciplinary team. A 51-year-old white woman was referred to ophthalmology centre at Tianjin
Medical University with an enormous tumor mass on her left upper eyelid that was growing rapidly. General medical history revealed that the
patient had been diagnosed with chalazion 3 years ago and was being treated with removal of the chalazion. Ophthalmic history was
unremarkable and specifically there was no previous trauma. According to the patient and her family, the lesion first appeared on her left
upper eyelid. On examination a firm lesion of the left eyelid measured 0.5 cm × 0.3 cm. Her physician initially diagnosed a chalazion and
the patient was treated with incision of chalazion. One year later the cystic lesion had recurred and occupied half of the eyelid, measuring
1 cm × 0.6 cm, a fast-growing asymptomatic lesion in the same location with sinuous blood vessels covering its surface. But on her next
visit three years later the tumor lesion was even larger, with necrotic and ulcerated areas on the surface, enlarged lymph nodes in the left
cervical part. Examination revealed a large hard and poorly defined tumor, measuring 20 cm × 15 cm on its basal diameter and 10 cm in height
with diffuse indurations of her left eyelid on which multiple, extensive large ulcer, big dome-shaped nodules could be seen (Figure 1A). The
clinical presentation to the ophthalmologist and oncologist, a pate computed tomography (CT) scan suggested a superior eyelid mass lesion
and enophthalmos (Figure 1B). Magnetic resonance imaging showed no invasion in orbit, but the results were compatible with a malignant
eyelid. Further investigation revealed systemic metastasis. A chest CT scan showed multi-metastases in the apex of lung, metastasis mass of
mediastinal lymph node and mediastinal lymphadenovarix (Figure 1C). Photograph showing patient who had a red lesion of the upper eyelid, the
most common localization of ocular Merkel cell carcinoma, but the large lesion was uncommon. (A) Bottom: (lateral view) The large violaceous
mass that involves the entire left eyelid and facial surface multiple, ectensive large ulcer. The large tumor with multiple big dome-shaped
nodules obscure boundary, plentiful blood vessels in the surface. (B) CT (computed tomography) scans show a large medium to high
reflectivity mass. (C) CT showed that there were tumor metastases of mediastinal lymph node and multiple micrometastases (yellow arrow) of
the lungs. (D) MCC with the mitotic index was high (black arrows) as stained by hemotoxylin & eosin. In view of the suspected diagnosis of
large malignant tumor, a biopsy was taken to confirm a provisional diagnosis. A biopsy was performed under local anaesthesia.
Histopathological examination of the biopsy sample showed a tumoral infiltration of the dermis by rounded monomorphic cells of medium size
with scant cytoplasm, round nuclei, and small nucleoli, clumps of a small cell tumor, forming solid masses or small trabecular structures.
The tomor cells with the mitotic index was high (Figure 1D). The cells were arranged in large nests, masses, and strands (Figure 2A). The
formation of glandular lumens was not observed. The tumor tissue immunohistochemical study proved positive for cytokeratin 20(CK20),
neuronal specific enolase (NSE) and cytokeratin CAM5.2. The positive results are shown in Figure 2 (2B-D). There was no immunoreactivity to
protein S-100, thyroid transcription factor 1(TTF-1) and leukocyte common antigen (LCA). Immunohistochemical staining showed characteristic.
All these features above are consistent with the diagnosis of MCC. A diagnosis of MCC was made and the patient was referred to the Oncology
Department. The patient's condition deteriorated rapidly with a midrange anaemia and she required palliative care for disseminated MCC by
her oncologist. Microscopic analysis of biopsy of Merkel cell carcinoma. (A) Photomicrograph showing that Merkel cell carcinoma tumor cells
are surrounded by intense inflammation with lymphocytes, plasma cells, and histiocytes. Proliferation of basophilic cells with round uniform
nuclei, scanty cytoplasm, patchy chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli (black arrows). (H&E, ×400). (B) Photomicrograph showing the same
tumor stained for CK20. There is strong expression of CK20 in the cytoplasm and membrane of MCC. C Immunostaining with CAM5.2 showing
characteristic para-nuclear accentuation. (D) NSE positive suffusion expresstion was localized on in the cytoplasm and membrane. (IHC,
×400). Merkel cell carcinoma is a frequently lethal skin cancer that has a high propensity for nodal metastases and local recurrence, has
poor prognosis. Several reports have described the association of MCC of the eyelids . We report the case of MCC that the patient had been
diagnosed with chalazion 3 years ago in the left upper eyelid and was being treated with surgical treatment. Although misdiagnosis of MCC
pathologically as chalazions is a pitfall, this sometimes occurs. Lesions demonstrate a broad spectrum of clinical appearances at
presentation, including large ulcerated lesions, large nodular lesions, exceeding 15 cm in diameter. Adjunctive techniques, including
biopsy, immunohistochemistry and electron microscopy, can be helpful in questionable cases. In this session, speakers will present the most
current data on the clinical presentation, pathology, and management of MCC. Representative and challenging cases will be presented to
highlight histopathological diagnosis and treatment options. To be exact, although MCC lacks specific clinical features, some patients may
have constitutional symptoms with evidence of regional or distant metastasis. Heath et al reported AEIOU Features derived from 195 patients
of MCC. The biopsy should be considered if the patient presents ≥ 3 features of the above. This study is the first to define the clinical
features that may serve as clues in the diagnosis of MCC. With this case, the initial diagnosis was a chalazion, and no histopathologic
diagnoses were performed. The histogenesis of MCC is controversial. Possible cells of origin include the epidermal Merkel cell, a dermal
Merkel cell equivalent, a neural-crest-derived cell of the amine precursor uptake. Less commonly, MCC may simulate lymphoma, or may exhibit
plasmacytoid, clear cell, anaplastic, or spindle-cell features. Vascular or lymphatic invasion is not uncommon. The tumor in this case
showed multi-morphological type such as round, small, plasmacytoid and spindle cells histology. Therefore, this tends to lead to
misdiagnosis in some cases, particularly if immunohistochemistry is not performed to confirm the nature of the cells present. In this case,
the tumor tissue was positive for CK20, NSE and CAM 5.2, the patient with bad prognostic factors .CK20 is expressed in a dotlike paranuclear
or crescentic pattern. Syn Neurofilament is also expressed in the cytoplasm of most MCC. The above findings support the diagnosis of primary
MCC. Diagnosis of MCC involves the following: General history, physical exam and pathological tests. It is a rare type of skin cancer that
is usually misdiagnosed. Although MCC has characteristic clinical features, the diagnosis generally relies on histopathologic
identification. Innunohistochemistry is required to differentiate MCC from other small round cell tumors; however, clinical correlation may
be required in differentiating MCC from other neuroendocrine tumors that have metastasized to the eyelids. The case we reported was
misdiagnosed as chalazion. The exact diagnosis of MCC is made with a biopsy, for special stains are used to distinguish.
Immunohistochemistry is very helpful. MCC from other forms of cancer, such as sebaceous cyst, small cell lung cancer (SCLC) and lymphoma,
small cell melanoma. Each of these cancers has a unique profile as defined by special stains. CK20 and TTF-1 (positive in SCLC) help
distinguish MCC SCLC . Further diagnostic tests are needed, for example, the imaging tests. With this case, the differential
histopathological diagnosis should be made with: 1. The tumor in this case showed very large lesion with ulceration and mixed epithelioid
and spindle cell histology, and the above presentations may lead to misdiagnosis in some cases , particularly if immunohistochemistry is not
performed to confirm the nature of the cells present. In our case, we did not see this feature. 2. In this case, the positive assay for
CK20, NSE, CAM 5.2 and the negative one for TTF-1and S100. In this tumor, a definition was also supported by multi-metastases in the apex of
lung and mediastinal lymphadenovarix of pathological findings on the plain CT chest. Treatment is generally based on the stage of the
disease. There are major treatments for MCC: surgical care and medical care . MCC is chemosensitive but only rarely chemocurable in patients
with metastasis or locally advanced tumors. Moreover, a high incidence of toxic death occurs due to chemotherapy. Combination chemotherapy
is more effective when two or more drugs are given at the same time because they are more powerful in combination than either individual
drug . Primary treatment of the tumor consists of excision with wide margins or micrographic surgery with or without adjuvant radiotherapy.
There is a decrease of local recurrence after radiotherapy . However, this has no effect on overall survival . Currently, most eyelid MCCs
are treated without irradiation. Merkel cell carcinomas respond well to radiation therapy, although some have recurred in the radiation
field or during radiotherapy . The goal of wide surgical excision is to control local recurrence and lymph node metastases. MCC should be
removed with clear margins as judged by pathology examination. It was recently reported that sentinel lymph nodes was effective in
predicting the risk of regional recurrence , however, lymph node dissection does not appear to convey a survival advantage . This may be the
result of the short follow-up in most reports. There are some reports of responses to interferon and intralesional tumor necrosis factor .
Radiation therapy, also referred to as radiotherapy, is the treatment of cancer with penetrating beams of energy waves or streams of
particles that can destroy cancer cells. Radiation therapy also damages healthy cells in the field of radiation . Cisplatin plus etoposide,
cyclophosphamide plus doxorubicin plus vincristine, or cyclophosphamide plus epirubicin plus vincristine are the most commonly used regimens
. The response rate is 70%, with a complete response in 35% . Interestingly, nonocular MCC is reported to be a very aggressive tumor, lethal
in 33% of patients. In contrast with the literature of MCC at other sites, the authors found only a few patients who died of MCC of the
eyelid. This may indicate a good prognosis for eyelid MCC. However, most MCC eyelid studies have a limited follow-up . Overall, the
mortality rate is less than 50% in two years, We need more studies including longer-term follow-up. In conclusion, this is the first report
of a case of MCC with a megalo-neoplasms, high malignance and a poor prognosis. Although reports about MCC have appeared successively, much
still remains to be explored about etiological factors, nosogenesis and treatment. It is important to distinguish it from other tumors and
early diagnosis and therapy. Informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. (MCC): Merkel cell carcinoma; (TTF-1): Thyroid
transcription factor-1; (CK20): cytokeratin 20, (NSE): neuron specific enolase; leukocyte common antigen (LCA) (MRI): Magnetic resonance
imaging; (CT): computerized tomography. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YJH and BCS proposed the study. LXC and
LMZ obtained images and critically write the manuscript provided and reviewed pathological images. JGW and TTL conducted a literature
search. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by Grant 09KZ102, 2010KZ101 From the Science and
technology Foundation of Health-bureau of Tianjin City, Grant from the Tianjin Natural Science Foundation (International Cooperation, No.
09ZCZDSF04400). The authors wish to thank the patient's family for permission to publish the photographs.
