Both authors made an equal contribution. In the last decade, the low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) gene, coding for
a coreceptor in the canonical Wnt signalling pathway, has been shown to play an important role in regulating bone mass and to be involved in
the pathogenesis of several bone disorders. Here we describe a patient who presented with a clinical picture of Autosomal Dominant
Osteopetrosis type I (ADO I), in whom we could identify the first deletion in the LRP5 gene causing increased bone mass. This mutation
caused the in-frame deletion of two amino acids in the fourth blade of the first propeller of the protein, namely the highly conserved
glycine at position 171 and the following glutamate residue. In vitro studies suggested that the pathogenic effect of this novel mutation
could be due to a decreased inhibition of Wnt signalling by the antagonistic proteins sclerostin and Dickkopf-1, encoded respectively by the
SOST and DKK1 genes, in the presence of mutated LRP5. Our results highlight an increasing molecular heterogeneity in LRP5-related bone
diseases. ► We report the first deletion of 2 amino acid residues in LRP5 in an ADO I patient. ► This suggests an increasing molecular
heterogeneity in LRP5-related bone diseases. ► This deletion causes decreased inhibition of Wnt signalling by sclerostin and DKK1. ► ADO I
and ADO II are clinically and molecularly distinct entities. ► No impairment of the immune system has been documented in ADO I patients.
Edited by: Stuart Ralston At the end of the eighties, Bollerslev and Andersen reviewed a large group of patients affected by Autosomal
Dominant Osteopetrosis (ADO) and, on the basis of radiological and biochemical findings, suggested that two different types of ADO existed .
More recently this clinical observation was supported by the results of molecular investigations in patients, which showed that monoallelic
defects in low-density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 5 (LRP5) gene caused human ADO I, in which the long bones and the skull are
mainly affected, while mutations in a single allele of the chloride channel 7 (ClCN7) gene were responsible for ADO II, in which an
increased rate of bone fractures is reported. Both LRP5 and ClCN7 proteins are involved in signalling pathways or cellular processes which
are crucial in bone metabolism as demonstrated by the range of bone diseases arising from different mutations in either encoding gene. In
particular, biallelic loss of function mutations in LRP5 are responsible for the autosomal recessive osteoporosis pseudoglioma syndrome
(OPPG; MIM 259770) ; on the contrary, monoallelic mutations in LRP5, initially thought to lead to a gain of function of the protein product,
cause a range of phenotypes inherited in an autosomal dominant way and characterised by increased bone density. These are endosteal
hyperostosis (MIM 144750), osteosclerosis (MIM 144750), dominant osteopetrosis (MIM 607634), van Buchem disease type 2 (VBCH2; MIM 607636)
and high bone mass syndrome (HBM; MIM 601884) . In addition, studies in different populations have suggested that LRP5 could be a
susceptibility gene for osteoporosis and fracture risk . The specific clinical picture is strongly related to the LRP5 domain affected by
the mutation. So far, the LRP5 mutations reported to have an activating effect on Wnt signalling are all missense mutations and clustered in
the first β-propeller domain of the protein. Biochemical studies showed that their effect is likely due to a reduced inhibition of the
canonical Wnt pathway by sclerostin and Dickkopf-1 . Here we report for the first time the identification and biochemical characterization
of a mutation in the LRP5 gene leading to a two amino acid deletion in the protein, found in a patient affected by ADO I. The patient herein
described is a 56 year old woman of Caucasian origin, presenting with an ADO I phenotype. The diagnosis was made on the basis of
radiological examinations, performed at menopause due to generalized bone pain, which she had been suffering from for many years. Increased
bone density mainly involved skull base, mandible and legs. No fractures were reported. At 16 years of age, she experienced complete and
sudden blindness of the left eye, whose origin was not investigated. At 50 years of age, she had an infection of the right ear and
subsequently monolateral impairment of the hearing capacity arose. At 55 years of age, ophthalmological and audiometric examinations
demonstrated reduction of the visual capacity also of the right eye and worsening of the auditory problems. A CT scan performed after
diagnosis showed a generalised thickening of the skull (Fig. 1) and restriction of both optical and auditory canals; in addition the patient
referred frequent headaches. Biochemical studies revealed normal values for serum calcium, phosphorus, 1,25(OH)2D3 and bone-specific
alkaline phosphatase (ALP), while PTH was slightly increased. The patient's father, her daughter and two paternal aunts were all diagnosed
as osteopetrotic on the basis of X-rays, but it has not been possible to confirm this diagnosis at a molecular level or to perform further
evaluations in any of them. DNA sample from the patient was obtained after receiving informed consent. Investigation has been approved by
the Local Ethic Committee. Genomic DNA was extracted from PBL by standard techniques; mutation analysis of the LRP5 gene (AF283320) was
performed as previously described . The deletion found in the proband (g.69547_69552delGGTGAG) was introduced in untagged full-length human
WT LRP5 construct (obtained from Dr. Matthew Warman, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Orthopaedic Research Laboratories, Boston, MA; ) using
the QuickChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA) with forward primer 5′-CTGGACAGACTGGACGCCCCGGATTG-3′ and reverse
primer 5′-CAATCCGGGGCGTCCAGTCTGTCCAG-3′. The inserted sequence was verified for the presence of the mutation and absence of PCR errors by
DNA sequencing. A mouse Wnt1-V5 expression construct was provided by Dr. Bart Williams (Van Andel Research Institute, Grand Rapids, MI), a
mouse mesdc-2 expression construct was provided by Dr. Bernadette Holdener (State University of New York, Stony Brook, NY), a human
DKK1-FLAG expression construct was provided by Dr. Sergei Sokol (Mount Sinai School of Medicin, New York, NY), a mouse amino terminal HA-
tagged Sost (HA-mSost) expression construct was obtained from Dr. Matt Warman (Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Orthopaedic Research
Laboratories, USA) and Dr. Bert Vogelstein (Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine, Baltimore, MD) kindly provided the Topflash Wnt
reporter construct (pGL3-OT). The Renilla Luciferase construct pRL-TK was purchased from Promega Corporation (Madison, WI) . HEK293T and
Saos-2 cells were grown in DMEM supplemented with 10%v/v FBS (Invitrogen, San Diego, CA). Twenty-four hours prior to transfection, cells
were plated at 1.25 × 105 cells/well in 24-well plates. Cells were transfected using Fugene 6 (Roche Applied Science, Indianapolis, IN)
according to the manufacturer's instructions. Transfection and luciferase reporter assay were performed as previously described . Data are
expressed as mean values ± SD. Comparison between two measurements for a single experiment was performed using a Student's t-test. Values of
p < 0.05 were considered significant. Statistical tests were provided by the SPSS 15.0 software package (IBM Corporation, Somers, NY).
Direct sequencing of the region of interest in the LRP5 gene revealed the presence of an in-frame deletion of six nucleotides
(g.69547_69552delGGTGAG; c.511_516delGGTGAG) in exon 3 in one allele, corresponding to two amino acid residues (p.Gly171_Glu172del), while
the other allele was normal (Fig. 2A). As has been reported for the other high bone mass-causing mutations, this newly identified one is
also located in the first β-propeller domain of the protein, in its amino terminal, extracellular portion. It involves the glycine at
position 171, which is highly conserved throughout evolution and between LRP5 and its homologue LRP6, and has been extensively studied.
Interestingly, two missense mutations have been already reported at this very same position: a p.Gly171Val, found in a family including
phenotypically normal individuals with extremely dense bones and in another kindred with other clinical features: torus palatinus and wide,
deep mandible, in addition to increased bone density ; and a p.Gly171Arg in a Belgian classical ADO I family . To evaluate the functional
effect of this new mutation, wild-type (WT) and mutant (Mut) LRP5 proteins were expressed independently either in the Saos-2 human
osteosarcoma cell line or in HEK293T cells along with a luciferase reporter construct. Co-transfection of LRP5 (either WT or Mut) with Wnt1
resulted in an identical increase in Wnt signalling (Fig. 2B). However, decreased inhibition was observed for the mutant LRP5 after co-
transfection with either SOST or DKK1 or a combination of both. Similar results were obtained in HEK293T cells (data not shown). This
suggested that the in vivo bone phenotype was caused by a decreased ability of the mutant protein to interact with these two inhibitory
molecules. In the last two decades, an increasing amount of genetic data has /INS; clearly demonstrated the role of LRP5 in the regulation
of bone homeostasis. In particular, a limited series of mutations has been associated with conditions characterised by increased bone
density in humans. In the present work, we report the identification of a new type of mutation in this gene, leading to the in-frame
deletion of two amino acids in the LRP5 protein and resulting in a decreased inhibition of Wnt signalling by the extracellular antagonists
sclerostin and DKK1. Previously it was shown that a missense mutation of Gly171 results in impaired binding of both sclerostin and DKK1 ,
which allows us to assume that deletion of this and its flanking amino acid will have a similar effect. This supports the hypothesis that,
besides the third β-propeller domain of LRP5 , the first β-propeller domain of the protein also has a critical role in the binding of
sclerostin and DKKs. In accordance with the hypothesis raised by Bhat and colleagues the deletion of the Gly171 and Glu172 residues could
alter the three-dimensional structure of the receptor, thus determining a reduction in the affinity for its inhibitory ligands. Overall,
this disease could be ascribed to a “gain of function” not with regard to the LRP5 protein itself, but to the entire signalling pathway,
which turns out to be activated even in the presence of its inhibitory factors. The proband herein described was a middle-aged woman who
suffered symptoms possibly related to the disease while in her teens, whereas the diagnosis of osteopetrosis was made at menopause when the
clinical symptoms had started worsening. Her daughter was found to be osteopetrotic after radiological examination, however she does not
present any symptoms. Although it is likely that she carries the same mutation as her mother, confirmation through molecular analysis was
not possible. Our data, together with those already reported in the literature, conclude that at variance with ADO II, in which several
cases of early onset of the disease are documented , ADO I symptoms most frequently arise in adulthood, after the first radiological signs.
In addition, ADO I patients do not display impairment of the haematological compartment, even though the canonical Wnt signalling is known
to play an important role in haematopoiesis, and rarely present visual deficits, while these defects can be very evident in some ADO II
patients. Interestingly, our patient did show a complete and abrupt occurrence of blindness at early age, although the exact cause could not
be documented at that time (more than 40 years ago). All these findings confirm the original observation of Bollerslev and Andersen that ADO
I and ADO II are two distinct entities both from a clinical and molecular point of view. The canonical Wnt signalling has been reported to
regulate key checkpoints in the development of many tissues, and among them, also in lymphopoiesis . Even though in other forms of
osteopetrosis both primary and secondary immunological defects have been described, no impairment of the immune system has been documented
in ADO I patients, including ours, possibly due to the high redundancy of this pathway. The identification of a new type of mutation in the
LRP5 gene in our patient highlights for the first time the presence of a molecular heterogeneity in LRP5-related diseases characterised by
high bone density, which adds to the well-known clinical heterogeneity arising from mutations in this gene. All authors declare no conflicts
of interest. This work was supported by E-rare project JTC 2007 OSTEOPETR to AV, Fondazione Cariplo grant to CS, Telethon Foundation (grant
GGP10116) to CS, by Ministero della Salute, convenzione 47 (Role of new inflammatory molecules in pregnancy pathologies and in maternal
neonatal health) to PV, by the European Commission [HEALTH-F2-2008-201099, TALOS] and by grants from the ‘Fonds voor Wetenschappelijk
Onderzoek’ [FWO, G.0065.10N], from the Special Research Funds (BOF TOP and NOI) of the University of Antwerp, all to WVH. EB holds a pre-
doctoral specialization scholarship from the “Institute for the Promotion of Innovation through Science and Technology in Flanders (IWT-
Vlaanderen)”. Axial view of a CT scan of our patient. A generalized thickening of the skull is evident. A. Sequence information on LRP5
around the new deletion. B. Functional evaluation of canonical Wnt signalling in Saos-2 cells expressing WT or mutant LRP5. Fold induction
of luciferase reporter activity in cells is normalized to the fold induction in cells expressing only the Wnt1-V5 expression construct. Bars
represent average values ± SD. *: p-value < 0.05.
