Brief case report of the treatment of a large axillary artery pseudoaneurysm after a pacemaker using a left brachial cutdown and a
retrograde delivery of a covered stent using ultrasound and fluoroscopic guidance. The patient's renal function precluded the use of
contrast materials. A 77 years old man presenting with acute renal failure and haemoglobin decrease arrived with an expanding pseudoaneurysm
of the left axillary artery from a pacemaker placement. Considering the site of the lesion and patient's comorbidities, under echographic
control, a Hemobahn® stent-graft was placed; fluoroscopy assisted manipulation of guidewires and sheaths into the aortic arch. The procedure
was successfully ended without any complications. At 8 months the stent graft was still patent. Ultrasound guidance may represent an
alternative for pseudo-aneurysm exclusion without any use of contrast medium, especially in those patient where lesions are easily
detectable using ultrasonography and when comorbidities contraindicate aggressive surgical or angiographic approach. A pseudoaneurysm is a
rare but serious complication after pace-maker placement procedures. Because of the risk of expansion and rupture, prompt repair is
indicated. Endovascular procedures currently represent a preferred treatment for these lesions, as they are less invasive than surgical
approach. Endovascular repair, however, implicates the use of a iodine contrast medium, which may represent a contraindication for patients
with a severe renal impairment. We report here the first case of endovascular exclusion of an axillary artery pseudoaneurysm under
ultrasound guidance, without any use of contrast medium. A 77 years old man was admitted to our hospital for a sudden pain under his left
clavicle, with a large palpable pulsing mass. Two weeks before, he had undergone a pacemaker positioning procedure to manage an arrhythmia.
The patient suffered also from coronary artery disease with stable angina, hypertension and type II diabetes mellitus. On admission the
patient was anuric and anaemic; his blood lab-tests showed high level of creatinine (4.2 mg/dl); his haemoglobin was 7.2 g/dl compared to
12.4 g/dl he had before the pacemaker positioning procedure. Moreover, he had a severe respiratory insufficiency and he had progressively
developed hypostenia and paresis of his left arm within the last hour. A duplex ultrasound was performed, demonstrating a 5.2 cm
pseudoaneurysm of the left axillary artery; a thoracic CT-scan without any contrast medium confirmed the lesion along with a large
contralateral pleural effusion (Figure 1). Preoperative CT-scan. Because of hemodynamic instability and new neurological changes in the left
arm, the patient was referred to our unit of vascular surgery for treatment. Considering the patient's comorbidities and the difficult
surgical access we decided that endovascular treatment was indicated. Because of the patient's labile renal function, however, we preferred
not to use any iodine contrast medium, so we attempted an endovascular exclusion under echographic guidance. An informed consent was
obtained by the Patient. MyLab™ 25 X-Vision scan (Esaote S.p.A. Firenze, Italy) with a linear 7-10 MHz probe was used for insonation of
axillary, subclavian and vertebral arteries. Preoperative duplex showed the entry point of the lesion and proximal and distal diameter of
the axillary artery of 7 and 7.2 mm respectively (Figure 2). Duplex scan control. Under loco-regional anesthesia the brachial artery was
cannulated in a retrograde fashion with a 5F sheath after surgical exposure. Fluoroscopy was used to assist manipulation of a 0.035-in.
hydrophilic guidewire into the aortic arch. Then it was exchanged over a 4F catheter to a 0.020-in. stiff wire (Boston Scientific Meditech)
in order to give more support to the entry of the stent-graft. Intraoperative duplex confirmed the proximal and distal diameter of the
axillary artery of 7 and 7.2 mm respectively. A 9 × 50 mm Gore Hemobahn® (W.L. Gore Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, AZ, USA) stent-graft was
then chosen; this graft is a 0.020" compatible device with a diameter that oversized 20% the vessel diameter. After removal of the 5F
sheath, under fluoroscopy, the device was advanced throughout the brachial artery without any sheath due to the inability to advance the
proper 9F sheath in such a little vessel. Then, under ultrasound guidance, it was placed across the neck of the pseudoaneurysm and deployed
when the correct position was achieved. No post-dilation was necessary. No intraoperative complications were observed. During the first
post-operatory day, the patient received a blood transfusion. His clinical condition gradually improved, and an echographic scan in the
third post-operative day showed the complete exclusion of the sac and vessel good patency (Figure 3). Post-operative Duplex ultrasound
control assessing the complete exclusion of the lesion. He was discharged five days later with a normal renal function and haemoglobin blood
level of 10.4 g/dL. Eight months later a contrast-enhanced CT-scan control confirmed the complete exclusion of the sac in absence of any
endoleaks, and an ultrasound evaluation excluded any flow impairment during upper limb movements. Iatrogenic axillary artery pseudoaneurysms
are uncommon complications of many invasive manoeuvres by transbrachial approach. As reported in literature, the incidence of iatrogenic
pseudoaneurysms ranges from 0.1 to 6%, but the number of upper limb pseudoaneurysms is even lower (less than 2% of all lesions). The
therapeutic practice in the management of iatrogenic pseudoaneurysms has changed over the last decade. A conventional surgical approach in
the axillary area may be associated with many complications, such as major blood loss and potential damage of adjacent neurovascular
structures. The surgical inaccessibility of axillary arteries makes endovascular procedure like stent graft placement or thrombin injection
particularly attractive . In our case, the lack of significant published experience with thrombin injections in axillary artery
pseudoaneurysms, the difficult surgical exposure and the associated patient's comorbidities, especially renal failure, have meant that
endovascular repair with a covered stent using sonographic control was the approach of choice. Considering the anatomy of the involved
district, an open surgical approach would have need an anterior thoracotomy above the nipple in the left third or fourth intercostal space
with a potential sternotomy to obtain a better exposure and proximal control, but this approach would have worsened the patient's already
impaired respiratory function. As an alternative, a supraclavicular incision with a transection of the clavicle would have been required,
implying a greater post-operative pain and a longer post-operative course. As for ultrasound-guided thrombin injection, Hirsch et al.
presented an approach to the management of catheter-related femoral artery pseudoaneurysms: in the reported algorithm, non-operative
intervention such as U.S.-guided compression or thrombin injection are not the option of choice in presence of a symptomatic pseudoaneurysm
which is rapidly expanding, causing nerve compression. As there are no clear guidelines about the treatment of axillary district
pseudoaneurysms, we referred to this algorithm, so thrombin injection was avoided because of the presence of neurological compression by the
hematoma that was progressively enlarging. Some case reports have demonstrated the feasibility of endovascular treatment of an axillary
aneurysm until now. In our Centre, 12 endovascular treatment of subclavian-axillary arteries aneurysms have been performed for the last five
years, using traditional endovascular methods and with good technical and clinical results. Because of important acute renal failure, in
this particular case a less invasive approach was preferred, treating the patient with endovascular technique under ultrasound guidance.
Using echography., the apposition of the stent-graft to the vessel wall could likely be assessed as well; to our knowledge, this report is
the first case of an endovascular treatment for axillary pseudoaneurysm ultrasound-guided. The fist decision concerned the access. To avoid
the use of any contrast material, we preferred surgical exposure of the brachial artery with a retrograde approach to the lesion. This
approach permitted an easy placement of the guide wire in the aortic arch with a very low risk of embolic cerebral events due to
manipulation in a very calcified aortic arch, even if it required a surgical cut. Some authors proposed a pre-operatory contrast-MRI
evaluation of the aortic arch in order to avoid difficult manoeuvres and large consume of contrast medium during supra-aortic vessels
cannulation, above all in case of a bovine conformation; as some past and recent studies reported about the role of gadolinium in triggering
renal insufficiency, we preferred, in this particular case, a brachial retrograde approach, which probably was the best option also
considering the clinical emergency. The second issue was about the choice of the stent-graft. In our institution, three stent-graft are
always available: Fluency Plus® (Bard Peripheral Vascular Inc, Tempe, Az, USA), Wallgraft® (Boston Scientific, San Francisco, CA, USA) and
Hemobahn® (W.L. Gore Associates, Inc., Flagstaff, AZ, USA.). Fluency device did not fit our lesion because of his strong radial force (not
recommended for joint positioning) and the presence of flared bare stents (in our experience dangerous for the vessel wall). In order to
avoid shortening of the device, a Gore Hemobahn® graft was chosen instead of Wallgraft®. The main disadvantage of this stent is in fact
shortening, which makes precise placement difficult. The third issue concerned the follow-up. In this case the normalisation of renal
function permitted the execution of a CT-scan with contrast medium, but maybe a simple Duplex scan would have been satisfactory alike. Some
authors reported a significant intimal hyperplasia at follow-up, especially in case of repair of traumatic axillary artery pseudoaneurysms;
in our case however, placing a covered stent was probably the best therapeutical choice, even if a so highly mobile artery could be prone to
neointimal proliferation and stent occlusion. Ultrasound guidance may represent an alternative for pseudo-aneurysm exclusion without any use
of contrast medium, especially in those patient where lesions are easily detectable using ultrasonography and when comorbidities
contraindicate aggressive surgical or angiographic approach. The author declares that they have no competing interests. DM participated in
the design of the case report and performed the search in the literature. GM, MTO, SS, DGT, GN participated in the design and coordination
of the report. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Our institution approved the report of this case. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
