Composing of less than 1% of all ovarian cancers, immature teratoma is a malignancy that mainly affects the young, and they present with
advanced disease. The treatment of immature teratoma is conservative primary surgery usually involving unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy
followed by combination chemotherapy. Here we present a case of a 68 year old woman with bilateral ovarian teratoma complicated with
carcinosarcoma. The patient was diagnosed as FIGO stage IIIC. She underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval cytoreduction followed by
optimal cytoreduction. The post operative management strategies and gynaecological follow up studies revealed no evidence of regional or
distant metastasis. Thus the choice of initial treatment should be decided in a selective fashion depending on various prognostic factors in
order to increase the survival of the patients. The term teratoma was derived from the Greek root teratos which means Monster . Teratomas
are the most common germ cell tumours (GCTs) composing of two or more germ layers (ectoderm, mesoderm or endoderm), derived from a
pluripotent malignant precursor cell. Mature teratomas consist of adult-type differentiated components such as cartilage and glandular
epithelium and immature teratomas contain tissues with partial somatic differentiation similar to that in foetal tissues . Composing of less
than 1% of all ovarian cancers, immature teratoma is rapidly progressing without treatment. The average age at diagnosis of this non-
dysgerminatous tumour is 19 years. The symptoms are often non-specific, usually consisting of mass effect inflicting abdominal/pelvic
discomfort . The foundations of treatment for immature teratoma have been steadfast throughout decades: conservative primary surgery usually
involving unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy followed by combination chemotherapy. We present here a patient with bilateral ovarian teratoma
complicated with carcinosarcoma at the age of 68. Women at this age group are less likely to be optimally debulked, more likely to have high
rates of chemotherapeutic toxicity and high rate of medical co-morbidities . Taking into account all these considerations the present study
was formulated to determine the impact and success of neoadjuvant chemotherapy and interval cytoreduction in the treatment of ovarian
teratoma in an old age woman. A 68 year old lady was referred to oncology outpatients in January 2010, with a month history of severe
abdominal pain. Her past clinical history included no tubal ligation or hormone replacement therapy. She had previously given birth to a
female child at her age of 21. The patient was fit and well with no significant past medical history apart from hypertension and diabetes.
There was no family history of breast or ovarian carcinoma. Physical examination revealed an abdominal pelvic mass with ascites and omental
deposits. Blood analysis showed haemoglobin concentration of 11.3 g/dl while the rest of the analysis were normal including the
carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA), alphafetoprotein and Cancer Antigen-125 (CA-125) (1.25 U/ml). The cytological examination of the ascitic
fluid showed cellular smear composing of mixed inflammatory cells admixed with papillary and acinar clusters of eosinophilic cells with
pleomorphic hyperchromatic nuclei thus suggesting a metastatic carcinoma. Pelvic sonogram revealed a large tumour mass with solid and cystic
components. Minimal ascites was noted. A subsequent computerized tomography (CT) scan of the abdomen and pelvis revealed heterogeneously
enhancing mass lesion measuring 9 × 7.1 cm with solid and cystic areas and calcification in the retrovesical region (Figure 1A). The mass
was found to be compressing on the right lower ureter leading to right hydrodeuteronephrosis. Multiple enlarged peritoneal nodules with a
largest one measuring 10 × 6.3 cm were observed. Moderate free fluid in abdomen and pelvis with moderate right pleural effusion was
observed. The diagnosis of the malignant transformation was suggested by the invasive growth of soft tissue components through the teratoma
wall by CT scan images. Finally based on the clinical manifestations she was diagnosed as having FIGO stage IIIC of immature teratoma.
Clinical observations of the malignant teratoma of the ovary. A: Computerised tomography of the abdomen, B: Characteristics of
carcinosarcoma, C: Stroma with rhabdoid elements, D: Malignant changes of squamous layer, E: Stroma with cartilaginous elements. Due to
unresectable bulky tumours and poor performance status the patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) followed by Interval
Cytoreductive Surgery (ICS). Four cycles of combination of paclitaxel and carboplatin were administered every 3 weeks. ICS was performed in
the 5th week after administration of the 4th cycle of NAC. Standard procedures of ICS consisting of total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral
salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and maximal debulking of metastatic tumour was adopted. Following the procedure there was no residual
macroscopic disease and she was transferred to high dependency. The surface of the tumour appeared rough and congested. On cutting, the
ovarian mass was full of sebaceous material and hair densely adherent to surrounding structures. Histopathological examination confirmed
bilateral teratoma complicated with carcinosarcoma (Figure 1B) with heterogeneous rhabdoid elements (Figure 1C) Microscopically the left
ovarian tumour displayed variable size cyst lined by multilayered malignant squamous cells (Figure 1D) with rhabdoid spindle cells,
cytoplasmic clearing, mature atypical cartilage (Figure 1E), malignant tubules, small round cells with rosettes, bone marrow and neural
bundle. In addition the focal area showed atypical giant bizarre cells. The observation of the right ovarian tumour displayed admixture of
malignant, epithelial and mesenchymal elements. The epithelial layers showed variable sized islands of squamoid and polygonal spindle cells
and rarely showed tubular papillary structure. The stroma appeared to be a mixture of rhabdoid spindle cells, primitive mesenchymal cells,
neural elements, adipocytic elements. Focal area showed pigmented cells. The patient recovered well from surgery and was referred for
oncological follow up and post- surgical chemotherapy (same regime as NAC). Given her age and performance status a surveillance approach was
taken with regular clinical examinations, serial tumour markers and routine CT scans. The follow up studies showed no evidence of
recurrence, regional or distant metastasis. The prognosis of immature teratoma heavily depends on the FIGO stage. The other prognostic
factors include tumour grade, growth pattern, capsular rupture and vascular invasion . Age alone has been shown to be an independent
predictor of survival in those with ovarian cancer . The 2-year disease free survival for grade 1, grade 2 and grade 3 is 83%, 50% and 33%
respectively . The general consensus in the treatment of stage I immature teratoma is unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy of the involved ovary
for grade I disease, followed by adjuvant chemotherapy if tumour is grade 2 or 3 . Several controversial arise regarding the standard
treatment of immature teratoma among paediatric/adolescent population . In spite of the controversial in treatment strategy, in the present
study we have presented a rare event of bilateral ovarian teratoma complicated with carcinosarcoma in a 68 year old woman. The FIGO stage
was IIIC. The rare event coupled with her age suggests that she was less likely to be treated with standard therapy and she was less likely
to tolerate these treatments when received . Taking into account her age factor she was less likely to be optimally debulked and also
necessitate a post operative intensive care stay . Thus in a view point not to worsen the prognosis for patient with such advanced ovarian
cancer, neoadjuvant chemotherapy followed by interval cytoreduction was suggested. Thus caring for older women with advanced ovarian cancers
presents unique challenges. Even after the achievement of optimal cytoreduction the survival rates are found to be very low. However careful
selection of primary cytoreduction versus neoadjuvant chemotherapy can result in higher rates of optimal cytoreduction, low rates of post-
operative death. Thus in patients where optimal debulking is not possible at presentation, neoadjuvant chemotherapy will be the best choice
of treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy
of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. SS and NSK designed the study and drafted the MS, SKG managed the treatment strategy, BK carried out the histopathological
findings, VN and VK revised the manuscript critically. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history
for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2407/11/218/prepub The authors greatly acknowledge Dr. VJ Senthil,
the Director of GVN Hospital, Tiruchirapalli, TamilNadu, India.
