Dear Editor, Caroticocavernous fistulas (CCFs) are abnormal connections between the carotid artery and the cavernous sinus. These lesions
may be classified according to several criteria: angiographically, as direct or dural; pathogenetically, as spontaneous or traumatic; and
hemodynamically, as high flow and low flow. Angiographically, type A fistulas are direct shunts between the internal carotid artery (ICA)
and cavernous sinus. Type B, C, and D are dural shunts. Type B fistulas are between meningeal branches of the ICA and cavernous sinus; type
C fistulas are between meningeal branches of the external carotid artery (ECA) and cavernous sinus; andtype D fistulas are between meningeal
branches of both ECA and ICA and cavernous sinus [Fig. 1]. Spontaneous CCFs are usually indirect and idiopathic; spontaneous closure is
possible and mostly seen in women older than 50 years and hypertension is the most associated disease with fistulas. CCFs can be unilateral
or bilateral. A unilateral CCF can cause bilateral eye symptoms, whereas a bilateral CCF can present with unilateral eye symptoms. Signs
like proptosis, chemosis, and nerve palsies are mostly seen at the side of the fistula. This article reports bilateral abducens palsies with
a unilateral spontaneous indirect CCF, which is very rare. Angiographical classification of the carotid–cavernous fistula. ιnternal carotid
artery; external carotid artery A 76-year-old woman was admitted to our clinic with complaints of bilateral protruding eyes, redness, and
inappropriate eye movements for 2 months. She had been treated at another hospital with intravenous and oral antibiotics and steroids, but
symptoms and signs did not improve. There was no history of trauma. Ophthalmic examination showed corrected visual acuity of 20/50 (on
Snellen's chart) in the right and 20/100 in the left eye. There was bilateral proptosis and abduction limitation. At the biomicroscopic
examination, conjunctival hyperemia and chemosis were present. Blood in Schlemm's canal was observed on gonioscopic examination in both eyes
[Fig. 2]. Intraocular pressure was 21 and 33 mmHg in the right and left eye, respectively, measured with a noncontact air puff tonometer
(with dorzolamide HCl and timolol maleate fix combination). Fundus examination revealed widespread retinal hemorrhages and retinopathy of
stasis [Fig. 2]. Clinical pictures of the patient. Right eye abduction failure (a); left eye abduction failure (b); dilatation and increased
tortuosity of episcleral vessels (c); blood in the Schlemm's canal (d); retinal hemorrhage and engorged venous channels (e and f) Brain
diffusion magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a bilaterally enlarged superior ophthalmic vein [Fig. 3] and brain-neck computed
tomography (CT) venography demonstrated a bilateral superior ophthalmic vein with dolicoectatic appearance. There was arterial flow in
colored Doppler imaging of the ophthalmic vein. Based on these results, angiography was performed and demonstrated an indirect fistula
feeding from the left internal carotid artery to the left cavernous sinus and via the intercavernous plexus to the right cavernous sinus
[Fig. 4]. Magnetic resonance imaging – brain axial T1 postgadolinium image showed bilaterally enlarged superior ophthalmic vein Angiograms
of the patient. Enlarged right superior ophthalmic vein (bold white arrow) (a); lateral left internal carotid artery angiogram demonstrating
an indirect caroticocavernous fistula feeding from the left ICA to the left cavernous sinus (thin white arrow) with reflux into the superior
ophthalmic vein (bold white arrow, b) Transvenous CCF embolization was performed by neuroradiology, but failed. In CCFs, isolated abduction
failure without CT evidence of ocular muscle swelling is due to an abducens palsy, while a generalized ophthalmoplegia is caused by
mechanical restriction from swollen ocular muscles. There was no significant extraocular muscle swelling in our patient. Bilateral abduction
failure with CCF is rarely seen. Leonard et al. reported a patient with a unilateral direct CCF with bilateral abduction failure and
swelling of extraocular muscles. In our case, there was bilateral abduction failure with a unilateral indirect CCF. Proptosis, chemosis,
dilated conjunctival veins, blood in Schlemm's canal, uncontrollable elevated intraocular pressure, and retinal hemorrhages are major
symptoms and signs of CCFs. In our case, all of the above-mentioned symptoms were present bilaterally, but were more evident on the left
eye. As seen in our case, diagnosis of CCFs should be considered with bilateral eye symptoms and bilateral nerve palsies.
