Lamellar keratoplasty (LK) is a technique which can be followed for both tectonic and optical purposes. We describe a technique of
sutureless anterior LK by fixing the donor lenticule to the recipient bed using fibrin glue. LK was performed in an eye with corneal opacity
using the manual dissection method. The donor lenticule was cut with a microkeratome after fixing the corneoscleral rim in an artificial
anterior chamber. The size of the donor lenticule was 8.5 mm and fixed to the recipient bed with fibrin glue. The surgical time was reduced
significantly with this technique. There was an uneventful postoperative period during the follow-up of 12 months. Best corrected visual
acuity improved from hand movement to 20/60. Thus, the use of fibrin glue for fixing the anterior lamellar lenticule is a viable option for
both optical and anatomical purposes. There are numerous suture-induced problem s in a corneal graft like postoperative irritation,
inflammation, infiltration, infection, and vascularization; all factors can ultimately lead to graft melting/failure. In addition, the
application of sutures is also time consuming. Persistent epithelial defects can be caused by persistence of a tight/loose suture. These
problems should be better avoided than treated. Currently, fibrin glue, a biological tissue adhesive, has gained its popularity as an
alternative to sutures. The present study aims to find out if lamellar corneal lenticule can be safely and adequately attached to the
recipient bed using fibrin glue. A 7-year-old boy was admitted with a history of diminution of vision in both the eyes following a cracker
injury 7 months ago. The acute symptoms had subsided, but there was constant irritation with poor vision. On examination, there were
multiple intracorneal foreign bodies, some reaching up to Descemet's with irregularly thinned cornea and leucomatous corneal opacity, in
both the eyes [Fig. 1]. Though anterior segment optical coherence tomography (OCT) would have been an ideal tool to identify the depth of
involvement precisely, the same could not be performed due to nonavailability. Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers
close to face in both the eyes. Refraction/acceptance was not possible. The peripheral iris was normal, - lens was clear, intraocular
pressure (IOP) was 18 mmHg and fundus could not be visualized although B-scan was normal. General physical examination and systemic
evaluation were within normal limits. The child was posted for anterior lamellar keratoplasty (LK) of the right eye under general anesthesia
using a donor cornea from a 62-year-old subject who died of cardiac arrest. The reported death to enucleation time (DET) was 10 h. Although
this is more than the accepted 6-h limit, but due to the limitation of availability of donor eyes in our country, we often accept the
tissues even after the scheduled DET of 6 h. These eyes are expected to have suboptimal endothelium for which these are either used for
therapeutic/tectonic keratoplasty. It was preserved in the McCarey-Kaufman medium for 14 h prior to transplantation. Clinical photographs
with multiple corneal opacities No specific preoperative medication like lowering of IOP was necessary as required in penetrating
keratoplasty. No corneal topography was possible preoperatively. After presurgical preparation, bridle sutures were passed into both
superior and inferior rectus. The center of the cornea was marked with gentian violet. The opacity size was measured by a caliper to decide
the trephine size. Accordingly, an 8.5-mm diameter and a 0.3-mm (approximately) depth partial thickness anterior lamellar dissection was
carried out [Fig. 2]. The recipient dissection was performed manually, with the help of a crescent blade, due to irregular thinning of the
cornea. Guarded trephine was not used due to nonavailability. Automated microkeratome blade was not used because of irregularly thin cornea.
However, care was taken to remove maximum number of foreign bodies to make the visual axis and pupillary area clear. Photograph showing
partial thickness anterior lamellar dissection Moria automated lamellar therapeutic keratoplasty (ALTK) artificial anterior chamber
(Moria/Microtek Inc. Doylestown, PA, USA) was used to mount the donor corneoscleral tissue button. A plate with a central opening and a
sliding platform was fixed. The microkeratome head (350 μ) was used to obtain an anterior partial thickness corneal button of 8.75 mm
diameter to be used for LK [Fig. 3]. The anterior partial thickness corneal button removed by microkeratome from the donor cornea After
giving a thorough wash to the recipient bed to remove the tissue debris, blood clot if any, or any other foreign bodies, the field was dried
with a cellulose acetate sponge. Few superficial blood vessels were also present. Freshly prepared fibrin glue solution (ReliSeal, Relinace
Life Sciences, India) was spread uniformly over the recipient bed and the donor button was placed over the recipient bed. A Duplojet
injector was used to apply the two components of the fibrin glue. Uniform and firm pressure was applied from the center to the periphery and
more toward the edge [Fig. 4]. The subconjunctival injection of gentamycin (20 mg in 0.5 ml) and dexamethasone (2 mg in 0.5 ml) was given
and a firm pad and bandage was applied to complete the surgery. Partial thickness corneal button glued to the recipient's cornea The bandage
was opened after 24 h and the eye received 1% prednisolone acetate eye drops every 2 h in the first week, every 4 h for the next 2 weeks,
four times a day up to 12 weeks, twice a day up to 6 months, and then it was stopped. Similarly, 0.3% gatifloxacin eye drops were instilled
four times a day for 2 weeks . Topical lubricants were given at 4-h intervals. The patient was followed up everyday for 3 days, every week
for 2 weeks, every month for 3 months, and every 3 months thereafter. Follow-up was of 12 months. 6 months post operatively, the patient was
symptom free with a graft clarity of 3+ and BCVA of 20/60 with -1 D sphere and -1D Cylinder 120°. On slit-lamp examination, there was a mild
interface haze but no vascularization at the graft host junction, despite there being a few preexisting superficial vessels in the recipient
eye. Fibrin glue has a long history of use in ophthalmology. It is well tolerated by the patients, nontoxic to the tissue wherever it is
applied and has some antiinfectious activity. It sets well in a comparatively wet field area as compared to cyanoacrylate glue. It allows a
smooth seal along the entire length of the wound edge and because of the shear adhesive strength, it maintains the tissue fixed to the
surface. In corneal surgery it has been used for varied applications such as amniotic membrane transplantation for ocular surface
reconstruction, limbal stem cell transplantation, epikeratophakia, and as an aid to stabilize temporarily sutured keratoprosthesis. Its use
was also advocated for corneal graft. Rosenthal et al. used a platelet/fibrinogen/thrombin mixture to fixate the lamellar corneal graft in
experimental animals. The average incisional bursting pressure was 185 mmHg (range 90–300 mmHg) for testing stability. Narendran et al.
carried out deep LK using fibrin glue supported with overlay sutures. They found it to be a time-efficient and effective technique. A
laboratory study was carried out by Bahar et al. in 2007 in “top hat” keratoplasty and they found fibrin glue mechanically more stable than
suturing. In the present communication, we evaluated the efficacy of fibrin glue in graft fixation in anterior LK. As the recipient cornea
was of irregular thickness, manual dissection was performed. However, the donor lenticule was obtained by using a microkeratome. We found
the technique as a safe and an effective one in terms of less surgical time and negligible postoperative reaction. Furthermore,
postoperative graft vascularization, a leading cause of graft failure, was also not seen. The graft was stable. Thus, we recommend that
suturing should no more be an automatic choice during LK. However, more number of cases with longer follow-ups in years should be performed
to find out the postoperative problems and wound stability. It would be more appropriate if the technique can be performed and compared by
more number of experienced corneal surgeons (preferably on LK) to highlight its efficacy.
