Conflict of Interest: The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists. Scar formation is a process consequent to the healing
of soft tissues after a trauma. However, abnormal or disturbed collagen production can cause anomalies of the cutaneous surface and textural
irregularities. In the presence of a depressed scar in deep tissue, we began to use a new simple technique. In the presence of adherent
scars, a small incision is performed so that an undermining scissor can enter inside. The entire cicatricial area is undermined on a
subcutaneous plane which, by separating the deep scar from the superficial one, completely frees it from the present adhesions so that the
existing depression is totally eliminated. In order to avoid the recreation of relapses, stitches formed in a U-shape are made in Nylon or
Monocril 2-3/0 are made with a large needle and are placed close together so that a wide aversion is achieved at the margins of the scar and
a deep wound closure is obtained by adhering to the undermined tissue. These stitches will then be removed about 2 weeks later. Scar
formation is a process consequent to the healing of soft tissues after a trauma. However, abnormal or disturbed collagen production can
cause anomalies of the cutaneous surface and textural irregularities. A cosmetically acceptable scar is often at the level with the
surrounding skin, a good color match, soft, and narrow. Favorable lines of closure are usually within or parallel to relaxed skin tension
lines: lines due to dynamic action of the underlying musculature.1 The scar abnormality will guide the choice of treatment technique. The
surgical strategy selected should be based on a correct evaluation of the scar's characteristics. In addition, while any scar with a
suboptimal appearance can be revised, greatest patient satisfaction is achieved with realistic expectations.2 In the presence of a depressed
scar in deep tissue, we began to use a technique which I believe is interesting to present. In fact, there are cicatricial aftereffects
that, though presenting a satisfactory aspect of the scar due to the presence of an adhesion of the skin to the underlying plane, disfigure
somewhat in a disagreeable manner and therefore reconstructive plastic surgery should be performed (Fig.1). Thus, in these cases especially
when there is not a lack of tissue secondary to trauma as for example the suffering of sub-cutaneous adipose tissue, it would be sufficient
to eliminate the single adhesion without reopening the entire scar again. Therefore, with this objective in mind, in the presence of
adherent scars, after having infiltrated the whole area with a solution of Lidocaine 0.5% and Epinephrine 1:200,000 very close to one of the
two edges of the scar, a small incision is performed so that an undermining scissor can enter inside (Fig.2). The entire cicatricial area is
undermined on a subcutaneous plane which, by separating the deep scar from the superficial one, completely frees it from the present
adhesions so that the existing depression is totally eliminated (Fig.3). At the end of this manoeuvre, in order to avoid the recreation of
relapses, stitches formed in a U-shape are made in Nylon or Monocril 2-3/0 are made with a large needle and are placed close together so
that a wide aversion is achieved at the margins of the scar and a deep wound closure is obtained by adhering to the undermined tissue
(Fig.4). These stitches will then be removed about 2 weeks later. Afterwards, the patient should start to carry out massages on the entire
treated area using moisturizing cream to aid the mobility of the recuperated tissue. Subcision incision is a very effective technique for
correcting atrophic scars. Essentially, the physician inserts a needle and sweeps it back and forth repeatedly to free the skin from the
underlying scar tissue. Normally, the dissection plane of subcision is rather superficial: it is a subdermal dissection performed
successfully in the treatment of acne scars. In this novel technique, we perform a deeper dissection plane and it is designed in order to
remove adhesions that attach the skin to the floor below. Infact, the use of the stitches in depth is performed in order to prevent that the
adhesion can recreate again: this relapse could promote the formation of a layer of reactive collagen in the region below the treated area.
We therefore believe that this technique can be utilized as a simple and safe technique that brings great improvement to the treatment of
depressed scars. FI: participated in the surgical treatment and in the follow-up of this patient. MT: drafted the manuscript and reviewed
the literature. FMA: participated in the surgical treatment and in the follow-up of this patient. MM: participated in the design of this
case study and in the follow-up of this patient. ADI: revised the literature sources. RC: participated in the surgical treatment and in the
follow-up of this patient. AMI: documented this case report with digital pictures. GD: participated in the follow-up of this patient. All
the authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and accompanying images. An example of a depressed scar of the abdomen. A small incision with an undermining scissor inside it. The
scar is completely undermined The final result
