We report a case of a 59-year-old man with testicular germ cell tumor who showed new hypermetabolic lesions at the left axillary lymph nodes
on a post-treatment positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT) scan. The hypermetabolic lesions were found to be caused by an
influenza vaccination 10 days prior to the PET-CT scan and disappeared without additional treatment. To date, he is alive with complete
remission. Serum tumor markers and computed tomography (CT) are primarily used for patients with germ cell tumors to evaluate efficacy of
therapy, residual disease, or disease progression. Additionally, 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose (18F-FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET), which
measures glucose metabolism, can provide the advantage of identifying and predicting the viability of residual tumors, which cannot be
readily differentiated from non-viable tissue, such as necrotic or fibrotic tissue, in CT scans . Here, we report a case showing false-
positive hypermetabolic lesions caused by an influenza vaccination during evaluation of a post-chemotherapy PET-CT scan. A 59-year-old man
presented with a mediastinal mass on a chest roentgenogram. Chest CT demonstrated enlarged right hilar and paratracheal lymph nodes, which
were hypermetabolic on whole body 18F-FDG PET-CT (Fig. 1). However, the PET-CT scan showed no other hypermetabolic lesion. Bronchoscopy
revealed only extrinsic compression of the right bronchus with no endobronchial lesion. Thus, video-assisted thoracic surgery was performed
for a biopsy of the paratracheal lymph nodes. The histology was consistent with seminoma, which was supported by immunostaining results:
cytokeratin (+), placental alkaline phosphatase (+), alpha-fetoprotein (αFP) (-), beta-human choriogonadotropin (β-hCG) (-), leukocyte
common antigen (-), and CD30 (-). Ultrasound of the testicles showed microlithiasis in the right testis and serum αFP and β-hCG were in the
normal range. After being diagnosed with burned-out testicular seminoma with multiple mediastinal and hilar lymph node metastases, he
received four cycles of chemotherapy, consisting of ifosfamide, cisplatin, and etoposide. After completion of chemotherapy, he underwent
whole-body PET-CT to evaluate the response and residual masses. In the PET-CT scan, hypermetabolic lesions in right hilar and paratracheal
lymph nodes disappeared, while new multiple hypermetabolic lesions appeared in enlarged left axillary lymph nodes (Fig. 2). In-depth
questioning of the patient revealed that he received an influenza vaccination 10 days prior to the PET-CT scan in his left deltoid muscle,
an area that drains to the left axillary lymph node chain, at a primary care office. We decided to perform a chest CT 3 weeks thereafter and
the result revealed no lymphadenopathy in the left axillary area and no initial metastatic lymphadenopathy (Fig. 3). Since undergoing
planned left radical orchiectomy, which showed microcalcification without evidence of the tumor, he is now being followed up regularly with
no evidence of recurrence. The identification of viable tumor cells after systemic chemotherapy is very important in the management of
testicular cancer to avoid both unnecessary surgical exploration and additional unnecessary chemotherapy or radiotherapy, which can increase
short-term and long-term toxicities. However, after tumor markers, such as αFP and β-hCG, are found to be in the normal range, approximately
25-30% of patients with germ cell tumors will still be left with a residual mass, for which conventional imaging modalities-such as a CT
scan-cannot differentiate viable tumors from fibrotic or necrotic tissue . PET or PET-CT is useful in identifying the presence of viable
tumors in post-treatment residual tumors with higher sensitivities and specificities than CT . However, as with all modalities, PET or PET-
CT has some limitations. False-negative results can occur with the presence of a mature teratoma or a very small tumor, or if early scans
are performed within 10-14 days from commencement of chemotherapy . Conversely, false-positive results can be found with the presence of
inflammatory changes or infection . Importantly, the recognition of a false-positive result is very important to avoid unnecessary surgical
resection or other toxic treatment. Our patient showed very favorable radiologic and metabolic responses to chemotherapy, but also the new
appearance of hypermetabolic lesions in an unusual site. Fortunately, careful history documentation revealed the vaccination before PET
scanning, which might have caused inflammation, with local lymphocyte activation and proliferation for antigen processing. Additionally, we
showed spontaneous regression using CT after a 3-week observation period. However, no definite time-course of node activation was confirmed.
Waiting at least 4 weeks after vaccination could minimize false-positives from vaccine immunity to tumor involvement of lymph nodes . In
summary, we report the case of a man with testicular germ cell tumor whose response to treatment was complicated by false-positive findings
on a PET-CT scan caused by vaccination or inflammation. Recently, although PET or PET-CT studies are widely used to predict the response to
treatment in germ cell tumors as well as in lymphoma or lung cancer, precautions must be taken when interpreting the results of PET-CT
scans, particularly when they are not clinically correlated. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Chest
computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) before treatment. Chest CT shows enlarged right hilar and paratracheal lymph
nodes (A, solid arrow), which are hypermetabolic on 18F-fluoro-deoxyglucose-PET scans (B, empty arrow). Chest computed tomography (CT) and
positron emission tomography (PET) after treatment. Chest CT and PET scans show disappearance of previous lesions, but new appearance of
hypermetabolic enlarged axillary lymph nodes (A, solid arrow; B, empty arrow). Chest computed tomography 4 weeks after surveillance.
Axillary lymphadenopathy disappeared (solid arrow).
