Although renal involvement in advanced haematological malignancies is common, glomerulonephritis associated with lymphoproliferative
disorders is rare, and the related pathogenetic mechanisms are still poorly understood. We present a rare case of chronic lymphocytic
leukaemia(CLL)-associated focal segmental glomerulosclerosis with nephrotic-range proteinuria. A 53-year-old Caucasian man, previously
healthy, with no history of hypertension, alcohol use or smoking presented with rapid weight gain, massive peripheral oedema, and
hypertension. Laboratory findings included a white blood cell count of 49,800 cells/mm3 with an absolute lymphocyte count of 47,000
cells/mm3, serum albumin of 2.3 g/dL, urea 65 mg/dL, and creatinine 1.5 mg/dL. A 24-hour urine collection contained 7.1 g protein and
significant haematuria. A peripheral blood smear showed mature lymphocytosis and smudge cells. Diagnostic imaging showed mild paraaortic
lymphadenopathy with no renal abnormalities. Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy showed diffuse and focal infiltration with B-CLL
lymphocytes. Percutaneous renal biopsy revealed total sclerosis in 3/21(14%) of the glomeruli and focal and segmental solidification and
sclerosis in 4/21 (19%) glomeruli. A regimen of fludarabine, cyclophosphamide and rituximab was successful in inducing remission of the CLL
and clinical resolution of the nephritic-range proteinuria. A multidisciplinary approach to monitor both the malignancy and the glomerular
lesions is crucial for the optimal management of paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis. Although chemotherapy with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide
and rituximab successfully treated CLL-associated nephrotic syndrome in our patient, further studies are required to confirm efficacy in
this setting. Although renal involvement in advanced haematological malignancies is common, glomerulonephritis associated with
lymphoproliferative disorders is rare, and the related pathogenetic mechanisms are still poorly understood . Chronic lymphocytic leukemia
(CLL) is more commonly associated with membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and membranous nephropathy whereas minimal change disease is
the most common paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis associated with Hodgkin lymphoma, followed by focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) .
We report on a patient with CLL who presented with NS-associated FSGS - a rare association. A 53-year-old Caucasian man, 78 kg, 1.67 cm,
previously healthy, with no history of hypertension, alcohol use or smoking, presented with a rapid 5 kg weight gain in the past week,
massive peripheral oedema, hypertension (170/90 mmHg) and leukocytosis. He had no peripheral lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. A haemogram
showed a white blood cell (WBC) count of 49,800 cells/mm3 with an absolute lymphocyte count (ALC) of 47,000 cells/mm3 (Figure 1),
haemoglobin of 11.4 g/dL, and platelet count of 314,000 cells/mm3. A peripheral blood smear showed mature lymphocytosis and smudge cells.
Flow cytometry of peripheral blood lymphocytes showed a clonal B-cell population (CD20+, CD79b+, CD5+, CD23+, CD43+, CD11c-, FMC7-/+, CD38-,
ZAP-70 29%, ck/cλ = 66) consistent with CLL (CLL score 4). Serum albumin was 2.3 g/dL, urea 65 mg/dL, creatinine 1.5 mg/dL, cholesterol 348
mg/dL, and beta2 microglobulin 5.39 mg/L. Hypoglobulinaemia was present with IgG 307 mg/dL (normal range 847-1690 mg/dL), IgA 71 mg/dL
(normal range 99-300 mg/dL), IgM 59 mg/dL (normal range 64-249 mg/L. No monoclonal component was found in serum analysis (serum-free chain k
22.9 mg/L [normal range 3.3-19.4 mg/L], λ 16 mg/L [normal range 5.71-26.3 mg/L], k/λ-quotient 1.43 [normal range 0.26-1.65]). Urine
electrophoresis failed to identify monoclonal protein excretion (urine light-free chain k was 34.9 mg/L, and λ was 14.2 mg/L). Kidney
ultrasound showed no abnormal findings. 24-hour urine cyewqollection contained 7.1 g of protein and significant haematuria. Laboratory
values and white blood cell count before and after treatment with fludarabine, cyclophosphamide, and rituximab (FCR). A CT scan of the
thorax and abdomen showed mild paraaortic lymphadenopathy. Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy showed a diffuse and focal
infiltration with B-CLL lymphocytes. Percutaneous renal biopsy was performed with a 16-gauge needle. Twenty-one glomeruli were found in the
biopsy cylinder. Three of the glomeruli showed global sclerosis (14%) and 4 revealed segmental and focal solidification and sclerosis of the
glomerular tuft (19%), (Figure 2). The non-sclerotic glomeruli showed mild mesangial expansion, and mild to moderate mesangial
hypercellularity. The peripheral glomerular capillary wall appeared normal in thickness. The interstitium was expanded by diffuse fibrosis
and mild chronic inflammatory cell infiltrations primarily of benign-appearing lymphocytes (Figure 3). The immunofluorescence findings were
negative for IgA, IgG, IgM, C3, C4, C1q, kappa and lambda light chains. These findings were consistent with FSGS. Directly opposite to the
vascular pole (double arrow), a segmental lesion of sclerosis (single arrow) that adheres to Bowman's capsule, which shows significant,
wrinkling (Pas stain × 400). Chronic interstitial nephritis, interstitial fibrosis, mild chronic inflammation and tubular atrophy. The
glomerulus here is enlarged and shows diffuse, mild to moderate mesangial expansion and hypercellularity without segmental sclerosis.
(Masson trichrome stain × 200). After initial treatment with enoxaparin s.c., valsartan and a statin, the patient received six courses of
intravenous fludarabine (25 mg/m2 d1-3), cyclophosphamide (350 mg/m2 d1) and rituximab (375 mg/m2 d1). Each cycle was given every four weeks
under continuous prophylactic therapy with acyclovir and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. The patient showed a gradual response to therapy
(Figure 1). One month after the fourth dose, he had complete resolution of oedema, the WBC count had decreased to 3,500/mm3 (ALC: 0.98/mm3),
and urinary protein excretion had dropped to 0.7/g/day. Serum creatinine was normal at 1.0 g/dL, serum cholesterol had decreased to 195
mg/dL, and serum albumin had increased to 4.4 g/dL. Immunoglobulin and beta2 microglobulin values were normal. After completion of the 6
cycles of therapy, a CT scan of the thorax and abdomen was normal. Bone marrow aspiration and trephine biopsy showed normal haematopoietic
cells without clonal B cells. The patient continued to receive rituximab (375 mg/m2 every 3 months) as maintenance therapy for the next 24
months. At the last follow up 28 months after diagnosis the patient remains in complete remission and the urinary protein excretion is below
200 mg/day under antihypertensive treatment. Fludarabine, cyclophosphamide and rituximab (FCR) therapy is becoming the frontline treatment
for CLL, especially in younger patients. These agents act synergistically and are associated with high complete remission rates and long
durations of remission . Focal segmental glomerulosclerosis (FSGS) is a glomerular disease characterized by marked proteinuria,
hypertension, and a high incidence of progression to renal failure . The pathogenesis of primary FSGS remains unclear but several
observations support the hypothesis that there is a causative factor present in the circulation of some patients with FSGS . The
recommendations for initial immunosuppressant treatment with prednisone or cyclosporine are largely based upon small clinical studies. Data
on the use of cyclophosphamide and other cytotoxic drugs for steroid-dependent or steroid-resistant FSGS in adults are limited to a few
retrospective observational studies. The alkylating agent cyclophosphamide has been primary used in children with relapsing or steroid
resistant FSGS. Rituximab is a chimeric CD20-reactive monoclonal antibody with established efficacy in B-cell lymphomas. Binding of the
antibody to the CD20 antigen results in selective lysis of targeted B cells. Recently, several case reports demonstrated the successful use
of rituximab in a variety of systemic diseases with renal involvement and also in steroid resistant FSGS . In several recurrent post-
transplant FSGS cases, NS resolved after rituximab treatment . Fludarabine, a purine analogue with selective activity against both dividing
and resting lymphocytes, results in a profound decrease in CD4 lymphocytes that may last for years. Low-dose fludarabine treatment has been
used only in patients with membranous nephropathy . Since FSGS is not an antibody-mediated disease, improvement of NS with the FCR regime
may seem surprising. However, B cells play an important role as immunoregulatory cells through antigen processing and presentation,
recruitment of auto-reactive T cells, interaction with antigen presenting cells, and secretion of cytokines. B cell depletion under FCR may
affect T cell activation and downregulate the costimulation status . The primary site of glomerular injury in FSGS is the podocyte. A
variety of factors have been postulated to cause injury to glomerular cells, including circulating cytokines such as permeability altering
factor, angiotensin II, macrophage infiltration and other mediators of inflammation . Injury to the podocytes by a circulating toxin is
further supported by the rapidity and relatively high incidence of disease recurrence in some patients after renal transplantation.
Simultaneous presentation and long term remission of CLL and FSGS in our case is consistent with the interpretation that chemotherapy
prevented the synthesis of a nephrotoxic circulating lymphokine secreted by malignant cells. A potential paraneoplastic link between
malignancies and glomerulonephropathies is difficult to demonstrate, but is supported in our patient by the parallel improvement and
longterm resolution of the two conditions under treatment. A multidisciplinary approach to monitor both the malignancy and the glomerular
lesions is crucial for the optimal management of paraneoplastic glomerulonephritis . Although chemotherapy with FRC successfully treated
CLL-associated nephrotic syndrome in our patient, further studies are required to confirm efficacy in this setting. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. SA, NG, VL, ET, PK, PM and IS were the treating physicians. FK evaluated the renal biopsy. All of the
authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript and have read and agree to the manuscript as written. The pre-publication history
for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2369/12/33/prepub Written consent was obtained from the patient for
the publication of the case report. We thank Alistair Reeves for language editing.
