A 60-year old Muslim man was admitted to the Dhaka Hospital of ICDDR,B with an exacerbation of his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Incidental hyperpigmented skin lesions were noticed overlying the dorsum of his ankles, knees, and elbows. Such asymptomatic areas of
thickened, lichenified and hyperpigmented skin are called ‘prayer marks’ and are well-imprinted on the knees, ankles, and forehead. These
are secondary to prolonged periods of pressure over bony prominences during prayer. The patient's wife stated that the appearance of the
elbow marks had coincided with an increase in his breathlessness and subsequent use of his elbows to rise from daily prayers. Prayer marks
extending to the elbows could be a sign of worsening chronic disease. One of the five pillars of Islam is ‘Sallah’ which is the ritualized
performance of prayers five times a day. During ‘Sallah’, the devotee must perform ‘Sajdah’ which is a repeated prostration of the body
involving the placing of the bare forehead, palms of hands, both knees, and the base of the toes upon the ground. These repeated and
prolonged periods of pressure can lead to the appearance of asymptomatic, thickened, lichenified and hyperpigmented areas of skin. The usual
distribution of prayer marks is on the forehead, elbows, knees, and ankles (1). The extension of prayer marks on to the elbows, to our
knowledge, has not previously been described. A 60-year old man presented to the Dhaka Hospital of ICDDR,B with an increase in shortness of
breath. He had previously been diagnosed with chronic obstructive airways disease (COPD) for which he was taking inhaled salbutamol as
required. On examination, he was found to be febrile, tachypnoeic and had widespread, coarse and fine crackles with added wheeze throughout
both lung fields. His oxygen saturations were 80% on air and 92% on six litre per minute of oxygen via a face-mask. In addition, he was
found to be tachycardic and hypotensive; on auscultation, there was a third heart sound, and bilateral pitting oedema was present to the
level of the mid-shin. A provisional diagnosis of ‘acute exacerbation of COPD complicated by biventricular failure’ was made. Initial
treatment included intravenous antibiotics, oxygen, hydrocortisone, nebulized salbutamol, frusemide, and a dopamine infusion. Subsequent
management included aminophylline and captopril which was successful, and the patient was discharged from the hospital. During the treatment
of the patient, hyperpigmented skin lesions were noticed overlying the dorsum of his ankles, knees, and elbows (Fig. 1-3). On questioning of
the patient's wife, it was revealed that the appearance of the markings on the elbows had occurred over at least the last six months and
coincided with a severe deterioration of his COPD. As a result of the patient's increased breathlessness on exertion, he was using his
elbows to help himself rise from his daily prayers. Prayer marks at ankles Prayer marks at knees Prayer marks on elbows The taking of a
clear and detailed history is an essential part of any medical assessment. History-taking should not be confined to the initial consultation
but should be an ongoing process of learning—both about the patient and how they deal with the disease process during their daily life.
Salient points of the history may also be learnt from close family members as they have the advantage of viewing changes over time in a more
objective manner. In this case, the patient's wife had noted the skin changes on his elbows (Fig. 3) over the last six months and had
associated their appearance with a deterioration of his exercise tolerance. The skin lesions on his elbows were an extension of his prayer
marks into a position that is not normally described. Once noted by a thorough clinical examination, such a change in skin-markings may be a
sign of worsening chronic disease, and the taking of a careful history may reveal the temporal course of such deterioration.
