Bacillus Calmette-Guërin (BCG) has been traditionally used as a vaccine against tuberculosis. Further, intravesical administration of BCG
has been shown to be effective in treating bladder cancer. Although BCG contains a live attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis,
complications such as M. bovis BCG infection caused by BCG administration are extremely rare. Here, we report a case of BCG infection
occurring after intravesical BCG therapy. A 67-yr-old man presented with azotemia and weight loss. He had been diagnosed with bladder cancer
4 yr back, and had undergone transurethral resection of the bladder tumor and intravesical BCG (Tice strain) therapy at that time. An acid-
fast bacterial strain was isolated from his urine sample. We did not detect Mycobacterium tuberculosis protein 64 (MPT-64) antigen in the
isolates obtained from his sample, and multiplex PCR and PCR-reverse blot hybridization assay indicated that the isolate was a member of the
M. tuberculosis complex, but was not M. tuberculosis. Finally, sequence analysis of 16S ribosomal RNA and DNA gyrase, subunit B (gyrB)
suggested that the organism was M. bovis or M. bovis BCG. Although we could not confirm that M. bovis BCG was the causative agent, the
results of the 3 molecular methods and the MPT-64 antigen assay suggest this finding. This is an important finding, especially because M.
bovis BCG cannot be identified using common commercial molecular genetics tools. Bacillus Calmette-Guërin (BCG) has been traditionally used
as a vaccine against tuberculosis. Further, intravesical administration of BCG has been shown to be effective in treating bladder cancer .
BCG contains a live attenuated strain of Mycobacterium bovis (M. bovis BCG); however, complications after bladder instillation of BCG are
extreme-ly rare . The few complications reported to date include high temperature followed by hematuria or granulomatous prostatitis,
epididymo-orchitis, urethral obstruction, and systemic disease followed by dissemination of bacteria into other organs . Here, we report a
case of a M. bovis BCG infection that occurred after intravesical BCG therapy for bladder cancer. A 67-yr-old male patient presented at our
institution with azotemia. Three months before consulting our institute, he had visited a local clinic because he had been experiencing
general weakness and poor oral intake. Biochemical and ultrasonographic examinations performed at the clinic, revealed elevated serum
creatinine and obstruction of the left ureter, respectively. Other than a weight loss of 10 kg, the patient did not show any clinical
features associated with M. bovis BCG infection, such as fever, chills, and night sweats. Right antegrade pyelography showed mild
hydroureteronephrosis with focal stenosis in the ureteropelvic junction. The patient's history included diabetes mellitus and chronic renal
failure for which he had received intermittent hemodialysis. He had been diagnosed with bladder cancer 4 yr back, and he had undergone
transurethral resection of the bladder tumor (TUR-B), which was immediately followed by intravesical BCG therapy (Tice strain BCG; 12.5 mg
of intravesical BCG was injected through a catheter into the bladder once every week for 6 weeks). A year later, another TUR-B was performed
because atypical cells were observed in his urine, and a histological examination of his bladder indicated chronic granulomatous
inflammation. Although, a diagnostic work-up for mycobacterial infections was not performed at that time, mycobacterial infection was
suggested and the patient was administered isoniazid (300 mg/day), rifampicin (600 mg/day), ethambutol (800 mg/day), pyrazinamide (1 g/day),
and pyridoxine (50 mg/day) for 3 months. Laboratory testing performed upon admission at our institute yielded the following findings:
proteinuria and pyuria in urinalysis, no microorganisms in Gram's staining of the urine sample, and acid-fast bacteria (AFB) in AFB staining
of the voided urine. Mycobacteria were isolated by inoculating the patient's urine in Ogawa medium (solid egg-based medium) and by using the
BACTEC MGIT 960 mycobacterial detection system (BD, Franklin Lakes, NJ, USA). The colony morphology and staining results of the isolated
microorganism are shown in Fig. 1. To identify the mycobacterial species present in the patient's samples, the Mycobacterium tuberculosis
protein 64 (MPT-64) antigen assay, multiplex-PCR, and PCR-reverse blot hybridization assay (REBA) were performed. The MPT-64 antigen
detection assay was performed using samples obtained from liquid cultures by using the TB Ag MPT64 Rapid kit (SD, Yongin, Korea). Multiplex-
PCR and PCR-REBA were performed using the MTB-ID® V3 assay system (M&D, Wonju, Korea) and the REBA Myco-ID® assay system (M&D),
respectively. The MPT-64 antigen is typically detected in specimens containing members of the M. tuberculosis (MTB) complex, which includes
M. tuberculosis, M. bovis, Mycobacterium microti, Mycobacterium africanum, and other mycobacterial species. However, we did not detect this
antigen in specimens from this patient. Multiplex-PCR allows differentiation of M. tuberculosis and mycobacterium other than tuberculosis
(MOTT) on the basis of the band sizes (204 bp and 360 bp, respectively). In this study, we observed a band of 360 bp (Fig. 2). PCR-REBA
allows differentiation of the MTB complex and non-tuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) on the basis of the band position on a gel strip (refer to
http://www.mndkorea.co.kr for details). In this case, the band pattern obtained after PCR-REBA suggested that the isolate belongs to the MTB
complex. Thus, on the basis of the results obtained after performing multiplex-PCR and PCR-REBA, the microorganism isolated from the
patient's samples was suspected to be a member of the MTB complex, but not M. tuberculosis. However, the 2 PCR methods and the assay for
MPT-64 antigen yielded different results. Hence, in order to identify the causative agent we performed sequence analysis of 16S ribosomal
RNA (16S rRNA) and DNA gyrase, subunit B (gyrB). For sequence analysis, DNA was isolated using the MagNa Pure LC Total Nucleic Acid
Isolation Kit (Roche, Mannheim, Germany) as per the manufacturer's instructions. PCR for 16S rRNA and gyrB gene was performed in an ABI 9700
Thermal Cycler (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) using the appropriate primer sets suggested by the CLSI and Nakajima et al. . Bi-
directional sequence analysis was performed using the ABI Pri-sm BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing Ready Reaction kit (Applied Biosystems)
on an ABI Prism 3730 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems). Sequence analysis showed that the 16S rRNA (696 bp) of the isolate had 100%
similarity with that of M. bovis BCG (GenBank accession no. GU142938), M. tuberculosis (GenBank accession no. GU142936), M. caprae (GenBank
accession no. NR028879), M. africanum (GenBank accession no. NR-025238), M. microti (GenBank accession no. NR025234), and M. bovis (GenBank
accession no. BX248338). The analysis of the gyrB gene (479 bp) revealed a 100% similarity between the sequence of the isolate and the
sequence of M. bovis BCG (GenBank accession no. AM408590, AP010918) and M. bovis (GenBank accession no. BX248334). Complications caused by
M. bovis BCG administration have been rarely reported. A retrospective study by Lamm et al. suggests that local adverse effects, including
cystitis, fever, hematuria, and prostatitis, are the most frequent complications, whereas extravesical complications are rare. Other local
adverse effects include bladder contractures, epididymo-orchitis, ureteral obstruction, and renal abscesses with or without fistula
formation. Although this patient did not show any significant symptoms, the laboratory findings indicated renal dysfunction and the results
of right antegrade pyelography indicated mild ureteral stenosis. Mycobacterial infections occurring after intravesical administration of BCG
have been rarely reported from Korea. Most of the cases reported to date were based on the pathological findings, and to our knowledge,
there are no reports of cases in which the causative species of mycobacterium has been identified. To diagnose a mycobacterial infection,
Nam et al. and Jeon et al. examined infected tissue showing chronic granulomatous inflammation with caseous necrosis. Lee et al. and Kim et
al. used AFB staining to determine whether an infection was mycobacterial in nature. Son et al. used PCR to determine whether an infection
was caused by a mycobacterium but they were unsuccessful. Recently, Kim et al. reported that a molecular method using multiplex PCR for the
region of difference 1 (RD1), RD8, and RD14 can be used to confirm BCG infection. We hypothesized that M. bovis BCG was the causative agent
in this case and attempted to identify this organism by mycobacterial cultivation, MPT-64 antigen assay, and other molecular methods. MPT-64
is a 26-kDa secretory protein produced by M. tuberculosis, and the initially purified protein was a homolog from M. bovis BCG, MPB-64 [14,
15]. The MPT-64 antigen assay can specifically detect the MPT-64 antigen secreted by the tuberculosis-causing bacteria. Usually, detection
of MPT-64 antigen in this assay is suggestive of the presence of an organism of the MTB complex, which includes M. tuberculosis, M. bovis,
M. microti, and M. africanum. However, some strains of M. bovis BCG, such as Copenhagen, Glaxo, Pasteur, and Tice, do not express the MPB-64
gene [16, 17]. The absence of the MPT-64 antigen in our patient can be explained by the fact that the Tice BCG strain was injected into the
patient's bladder. The multiplex-PCR and PCR-REBA methods used were not helpful in confirming whether the causative agent was M. bovis
because these methods could not distinguish M. bovis from other members of the MTB complexes (Table 1). The sequence analysis of 16S rRNA
and gyrB gene was useful in distinguishing the members of the MTB complex, but this method had a limited ability in clearly distinguishing
between the M. bovis and M. bovis BCG strains. Although we could not confirm that M. bovis BCG was the causative agent in this case, the
methods employed, which included detection of MPT-64 antigen, PCR, and sequence analysis of 16S rRNA and gyrB gene, suggest that the
causative agent is the Tice strain of M. bovis BCG. This is an important finding since M. bovis BCG cannot be identified using common
commercial molecular genetics tools. The patient was treated with anti-mycobacterial agents for 3 months. Subsequently, AFB staining and
mycobacterial culture were performed to detect any residual mycobacterial infection, but no mycobacteria were seen in both assessments. No
potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Colony morphology on solid medium (A) and cord formation by acid-fast
bacillus (B) (Ziehl-Neelsen stain, ×1,000). The presence of cords is known to be a criterion for presumptive identification of the
Mycobacterium tuberculosis complex. Multiplex-PCR to identify the isolate. Products of the multiplex-PCR performed using DNA from the
isolates were separated on a 2.0% agarose gel using electrophoresis, and the gel was stained with ethidium bromide. The bands for the
isolates (S1-S3 and L1-L3) corresponded to that for NTM. IC, internal control (660 bp); NC, negative control; NTM, control non-tuberculous
mycobacteria; MTB, control Mycobacterium tuberculosis; S1-S3, isolates from solid media; L1-L3, isolates from liquid media; M, molecular
markers. Expected laboratory findings for different Mycobacterium species Abbreviations: MTB, Mycobacterium tuberculosis; MOTT,
mycobacterium other than tuberculosis; NTM, non-tuberculous mycobacteria; BCG, Bacillus Calmette-Guërin; PCR-REBA, PCR-reverse blot
hybridization assay.
