Ureteral obstruction may develop in immunocompromised patients with an Aspergillus fungal infection. Infections can progress to invasive
aspergillosis, which is highly lethal. We report a case of a 56-year-old man with alcoholic cirrhosis of the liver and diabetes. He had
ureteral aspergilloma, discovered as a saprophytic whitish mass. It was treated by ureteroscopic removal, however, he refused antifungal
treatment. His condition progressed to invasive aspergillosis, and died from sepsis and hepatorenal syndrome. Aspergillosis develops in
immunocompromised patients. Ureteral aspergilloma is a rare condition. We experienced a case of invasive aspergillosis arising from ureteral
aspergilloma. A 56-year-old man presented with complaints of right flank pain, fever, and chills for one month. He had alcoholic cirrhosis
of the liver with ascites (Child C) and hepatic encephalopathy, esophageal varicosis, and diabetes. A physical examination demonstrated
right flank tenderness and abdominal distension from ascites. Laboratory findings on blood samples showed a white blood cell count of
141.8×102/µL (80.9% neutrophils) and a serum creatinine of 1.12 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed the presence of red blood cells, white blood cells,
urobilinogen and leukocyte esterases, but the urine culture was negative. Previous urinalysis had showed the presence of red blood cells and
white blood cells, and it the earlier infection had been controlled by antibiotics. A transabdominal ultrasound image showed a 1.2 cm
hyperechoic polypoid mass with a lobulated margin in the dilated renal pelvis of the right kidney. An abdominopelvic computed tomography
(CT) scan showed a heterogenous attenuated lesion in the dilated right upper ureter with an enhancing wall. Ureteroscopic findings showed a
2 cm whitish mass in the edematous ureteral orifice. Another 3 cm sized, saprophytic mass was detected in the upper ureter (Fig. 1). Entire
mass was removed completely with ureteroscopic forceps and an NTrap™ basket (Cook Medical, Spencer, IN). After removal of the mass, turbid
urine came down from the kidney. Pathological results of the ureteral mass showed fruiting bodies and septate filaments, 5 to 10 µm thick,
branching at acute angles. It was confimed as a fungal hyphe which was consistent with aspergillosis (Fig. 2). Washing cytology showed the
presence of neutrophil as the dominant inflammatory cell. The patient refused antifungal pharmacotherapy and was discharged. Two months
later, he visited again with right flank pain, fever, and general weakness. A follow-up CT scan showed an infarcted right kidney with
multifocal necrotic lesions (Fig. 3). We also noticed an abrupt luminal obstruction of the right renal artery and thrombosis in the right
renal vein. Despite treatment with broad spectrum antibiotics and the antifungal drug (amphotericin B: 50 mg/day), his condition worsened
due to invasive aspergillosis. The laboratory finding on blood samples showed a white blood cell count of 173.3×102/µL, a serum creatinine
of 5.96 mg/dL, a serum albumin 1.9 g/dL, a serum total bilirubin 19.31 mg/dL, and a serum direct bilirubin 13.83 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed
the presence of a red blood cell, white blood cell and yeast. He was critically ill with aggravated condition of invasive aspergillosis
accompanied by alcoholic cirrhosis, despite an intravenous antibiotics and anti-fungal drug. He died from sepsis and hepatorenal syndrome.
Aspergillus, a filamentous fungus, was first described in 1729 and has been implicated in several clinical manifestations. It is easily
isolated from the air, soil, decaying vegetation, and even dust. Although there are more than 200 species of Aspergillus, the most common
infecting species are Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus flavus, and Aspergillus terreus. Aspergillosis is a common fungal infection
worldwide. There are three major categories of aspergillosis: allergic disease, including allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis,
noninvasive aspergilloma of classic fungus balls, and invasive aspergillosis.1 Invasive aspergillosis is a highly lethal infectious disease
that develops in immunocompromised patients, such as those with malignancy, immunodeficiency syndrome, immunosuppressive agents, or organ
transplantation. It also infects patients with alcoholism, chronic liver disease, diabetes and severe chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Although the primary site of Aspergillus infection is the lung, spores may also infect cutaneous, naso-orbital, and genitourinary regions.2
Invasive aspergillosis has several manifestations that depend on the organs involved. It manifests in pulmonary, neurologic, cutaneous,
naso-orbital, and disseminated forms. Disseminated aspergillosis has a predilection for vascular invasion, can spread hematogenously
throughout the body, and can lead to death.3 Antifungal pharmacotherapy with voriconazole, echinocandins, or amphotericin B, improves the
chance of survival. The drug of choice may be influenced by cost, intravenous access, drug toxicity, and patient comorbidities. The
mortality rate for untreated disseminated aspergillosis is 100%.4 Aspergillosis of the urinary tract is rarely reported, but may occur from
hematogenous spread, obstructive uropathy, or ascending infection.5,6 Ureteral aspergillosis may induce ureteral obstruction and
hydronephrosis. Early diagnosis and treatment is challenging. Although abdominal CT scan can reveal infection, it is not a confirmative
diagnostic tool.7 Urine cultures may not find Aspergillus. The fungal ball can be treated effectively by surgical resection and antifungal
pharmacotherapy. Endoscopic management through either an antegrade or a retrograde approach is also effective.8 Small fungal balls can be
treated with antifungal drugs before surgery.9 Initially, we did not suspect aspergilloma because of a negative urine culture and non-
specific CT scan findings, however, found that the ureteral obstruction was caused by aspergillosis in the operation. We suggested a course
of antifungal therapy to treat residual ureteral fungus in this immunocompromised patient. However, after removal of the fungal ball, the
patient refused systemic antifungal therapy. His condition worsened, leading to invasive aspergillosis and ended into the renal infarction.
He subsequently had renal infarction through vascular invasion of invasive aspergillosis and showed no response to antifungal
pharmacotherapy. His renal function deteriorated and the patient progressed to metabolic acidosis and septic shock. Our case illustrated
that a ureteral obstruction due to aspergilloma can progress to invasive aspergillosis and death. This paper was supported by Wonkwang
University in 2009. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Ureteroscopic findings show a whitish mass in the upper ureter
beside a guide wire edematous ureteral orifice. A histologic section of the specimen shows fruiting bodies and septate filaments, 5 to 10 µm
thick, branching at acute angles (H&E stain, ×400). A follow-up CT image shows an infarcted right kidney with multifocal necrotic low
attenuated lesions (arrow) in the renal parenchyma. CT, computed tomography.
