Poland syndrome (PS), which was first described in 1841 by Sir Alfred Poland, is characterized by the unilateral absence of the sternal head
of the pectoralis major muscle, hypoplasia of the rib cage and upper extremities, breast and nipple hypoplasia or aplasia, and scoliosis.1
The majority of the reported cases are sporadic; however, the disease may be inherited as an autosomal dominant trait.2 This disease tends
to occur more frequently in males and most often involves the right side of the body.3 Scapular winging is a rare but potentially
debilitating condition that impairs a person's ability to perform his or her activities of daily living.4 Postural deformities can also
negatively impact one's quality of life during childhood and adulthood.5 The current work presents the case study of an 18-year-old youth
with scapular winging that was associated with PS. In this work, we also describe the pain that was associated with PS, which is rarely
mentioned in cases of PS. An 18-year-old youth with no history of trauma presented with complaints of pain and limited left shoulder
activity over the previous two years. Upon physical examination, the left nipple and areola were observed to be hypoplastic and lightly
pigmented (Fig. 1). In addition, thoracic vertebral scoliosis and an elevated scapula were observed (Fig. 2). Active myofascial trigger
points were detected in the left upper trapezius, levator scapula, and infraspinatus muscles. The left shoulder exhibited a limited range of
motion and was painful during flexion and abduction when compared to the right shoulder. The laboratory findings were normal. Three-
dimensional thoracic (3-D) computed tomography (CT) revealed a sternal rotational anomaly, thoracic scoliosis, and an elevated scapula (Fig.
3). An axial sequence in the thoracic CT revealed the absence of the left pectoralis major and minor muscles (Fig. 4). The patient was
treated with an analgesic, a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug, and physical therapy (including exercises for the scapular stabilizer
muscles and the shoulder girdle muscles), which improved his clinical signs. At his two-month follow-up, the patient reported no recurrence
of pain or physical limitations. The present case study was a case of undiagnosed PS despite two years of severe shoulder and back pain and
functional limitations in the patient's left upper extremity. The thoracic anomalies of PS (an absent pectoral muscles, a hypoplastic or
absent breast and nipple, rib hypoplasia, pectus excavatum, pectus carinatum, elevated scapula, and scoliosis) have been previously reported
in the absence of hand anomalies.6 Isolated deformities occur with a greater frequency than the entire collection of anomalies that are
observed in PS patients.7 The patient in the present case exhibited an absence of the pectoral muscles, breast and nipple hypoplasia, an
elevated scapula, thoracic scoliosis, and a winging scapula due to serratus anterior muscle hypoplasia. 3-D thoracic CT is the modality of
choice in cases for which a correction of the chest wall deformity is necessary, especially in patients with missing ribs or sternal
rotational anomalies.8 In the present case, the absence of the pectoralis major and minor muscles, serratus anterior muscle hypoplasia,
sternal rotational abnormalities, an elevated scapula, and thoracic scoliosis were demonstrated using 3-D thoracic CT. The coexistence of PS
and scapular winging with severe shoulder and back pain has not been previously reported. In conclusion, the early detection of PS in
clinical practice is important because this disease can be associated with musculoskeletal pain, functional limitations, and developmental
defects. The absence of the pectoralis muscles and nipple hypoplasia on the left side. Also note the hypoplasia of the left serratus
anterior muscle. The scapula is displaced medially and superiorly during a push-up motion against a wall. This displacement represents the
loss of serratus anterior muscle function. A three-dimensional thoracic CT scan reveals a sternal rotational abnormality (black arrow),
thoracic scoliosis, and an elevated left scapula. An axial thracic CT scan reveals a defect in major and minor muscles of left pectoralis
(white arrow).
