Trans-oesophageal echocardiography is generally considered a safe procedure, but occasional life-threatening complications have been
reported. The aim of this clinical investigation is to outline the need of surgical management in cases of large retro-pharyngeal haematoma
following trans-oesophageal echocardiography. In the case reported here, a patient with cervical spondylosis on anti-coagulant therapy was
referred to the Head and Neck Department because of a retro-pharyngeal haematoma with severe upper airway obstruction following
transoesophageal echocardiography. Tracheotomy was required to guarantee respiratory function, while trans-cervical surgery was performed to
evacuate the haematoma. Total recovery was achieved within 10 days. In conclusion, the head and neck surgeon should consider the need of
surgical management in cases of retro-pharyngeal haematoma following trans-oesophageal echocardiography. Nonostante siano state descritte
complicanze potenzialmente letali, l'ecocardiografia transesofagea viene considerata una procedura diagnostica sicura. Scopo del presente
lavoro è sottolineare come, nei casi di voluminosi ematomi secondari a tale procedura, possa diventare indispensabile il ricorso alla
chirurgia per tutelare la vita del paziente. Nel caso qui descritto, un paziente affetto da spondilosi cervicale e in terapia anticoagulante
ha sviluppato, a seguito di un'ecocardiografia transesofagea, un ematoma retrofaringeo tanto voluminoso da determinare un'ostruzione delle
vie aeree superiori. Per assicurarne la pervietà è stato necessario ricorrere a una tracheotomia, l'ematoma, invece, è stato drenato per via
transcervicale. Il paziente è guarito completamente in 10 giorni. Il chirurgo otorinolaringoiatrico dovrebbe essere a conoscenza, non solo
di questa rara complicanza, ma anche della necessità di un suo trattamento chirurgico. Trans-oesophageal echocardiography (TEE) is a
diagnostic imaging technique for cardiac structures combining cardiac ultrasound (US) technology and endoscopy. To obtain a cardiac image,
the trans-oesophageal probe has to be positioned correctly within the oesophagus, providing views of cardiac structures that are not
adequately provided by transthoracic echocardiography. Although a semi-invasive procedure, TEE is generally considered a safe diagnostic
tool 1. Contraindications for a TEE examination are the presence of oesophageal diverticulum, varices, tumours or stenoses; furthermore, TEE
is contraindicated in patients who have received therapeutic thoracic radiations 2. Several studies have reported TEE-related morbidity
ranging from 0.18% to 2.8% with a 0.22% incidence of severe complications such as haematemesis, laryngospasm and hypo-pharyngeal tear 1-8.
Chan et al. 9 identified TEE complications in 7 out of 1500 adult patients (0.47%). In order to prevent pharyngeal complications, the idea
of directly visualizing the pharynx with an optical probe was suggested. Aviv et al. 8 reported hypo-pharyngeal lacerations or haematomas in
19/80 (23.8%) patients undergoing traditional TEE compared to an optical technique, in which complications were present in only 1/79
patients (1.3%). Oesophageal intubation was not achieved in 11 of these patients (0.73%) due to lack of experience of the operator, a
hypersensitive pharynx, and cervical spondylosis. According to the literature, only a few hypo-pharyngeal injuries resulting from TEE
require surgery, while management is usually carried out with medical or conservative measures 3. A case of TEE resulting in upper airway
obstruction, requiring surgical intervention, is described. A 77-year-old female with a history of chronic atrial fibrillation and short-
term onset of transient ischaemic attacks was sent to our institution for TEE to exclude the risk of further embolization. She was a non-
smoker, not overweight and had no vascular risk factors such as arterial hypertension, clotting deficiency, or abnormal cholesterol levels.
Upon physical examination, she presented no hemiparesis, weakness of an upper limb, vertigo or aphasia; heart rate was 72 bpm and blood
pressure 120/80 mmHg, being equal in both arms. Examination of the heart revealed a 2/6 systolic murmur at the apex. Electrocardiography
showed atrial fibrillation and a left bundle branch block. The patient presented some limitation in neck movement; none of the high-risk
conditions, such as presence of oesophageal diverticulum, varices or tumour, were referred. The anticoagulant therapy was interrupted by the
patient herself about one month before the examination. TEE was performed with a commercially available US system (Sonos 5500, Philips
Medical System, Andover, MA, USA) equipped with a 5-MHz multiplane transducer. A mild intravenous sedation with midazolam 15 mg, and a local
lidocaine spray anaesthesia were administered to the patient. Difficult progression of the instrument (four attempts) required
anaesthesiologic support and resulted in a minimal oral bleeding. TEE revealed a mild mitral regurgitation, a thrombus with a diameter of
about 1.0 × 0.8 cm at the bottom of the left atrial appendage. Twenty four hours after the procedure, the anticoagulant therapy was started
with 5,000 U of subcutaneous low-molecular-weight heparin. Two days after TEE, the patient complained of hoarseness, sore throat and mild
dysphagia. Five days thereafter a progressive severe dysphagia and dyspnoea appeared; a neck and thorax computed tomography scan (CT) showed
a retropharyngeal right haematoma (cm 7×3) with a pharyngeal and laryngeal mass effect (Fig. 1A). Severe cervical spondylosis was also
present (Fig. 1B). Trans-nasal upper airways endoscopy showed a hypo-pharyngeal swelling resulting in a severe reduction of the laryngeal
respiratory space. The anticoagulant therapy was discontinued and surgery for evacuation of the haematoma under general anaesthesia was
planned. Severe cervical spondylosis conditioned the failure of the oro-tracheal intubation attempts, even under endoscopic guidance, and
excluded the possibility of performing a traditional tracheotomy because of the lack of neck extension. Under local anaesthesia, a temporary
cricothyroidotomy was then performed allowing tracheal intubation. The patient then underwent left cervicotomy in order to evacuate the
airway-obstructing retro-pharyngeal haematoma under general anaesthesia. After exposure of the anterior border of the sternocleidomastoideus
muscle, the neurovascular bundle of the neck was exposed. The pharyngeal constrictor muscle was incised and the haematoma was evacuated,
while preserving the sub-mucosal and mucosal pharyngeal layers; a suction drainage was left in situ for 3 days. Clinical symptoms showed a
prompt improvement in the immediate post-operative period confirmed by daily endoscopic examinations showing a significant reduction of the
posterior wall bulge. Due to the subglottic stenosis risk, the status of cricothyroidostomy was assessed every day with endoscopic
examination. Cricothyroidotomy was removed as soon as the patient managed to maintain the tracheostomy tube closed (7 days) and 3 days
afterwards the patient was discharged. Computed tomography scan reveals right retro-pharyngeal haematoma (A) and massive cervical
spondylosis (white arrow in B). Retro-pharyngeal haematoma rarely occurs and fewer than 40 cases of traumatic origin have been reported in
the last 20 years 10-15. To the best of our knowledge, only two cases of airway obstruction, due to pharyngeal haematoma following TEE, have
been reported 3 4; however, both cases resolved within 24 hours without surgery. The surgical management of a life-threatening retro-
pharyngeal haematoma following TEE in a patient on anti-coagulant therapy with severe cervical spondylosis has been reported here for the
first time. Even though TEE is considered a safe procedure, upper airway complications may occur; pharyngeal and oesophageal
contraindications need to be carefully taken into consideration, including the risk of retro-pharyngeal haematoma. A review of the
literature suggests a variety of precipitating factors for retro-pharyngeal haematoma such as bouts of coughing, sneezing, straining, neck
trauma, foreign body ingestion, retropharyngeal infection and internal jugular vein cannulation 10-19; furthermore, retro-pharyngeal
haemorrhage may also be spontaneous 20. Therefore, in an unclear clinical situation, not only a barium X-ray of the oesophagus, but also
fiberoptic nasal-pharyngeal and laryngeal endoscopy, as well as cervical spine radiography should be performed before TEE. In our case, the
TEE procedure was complicated by the difficult progression of the instrument, conditioning the formation of a sub-mucosal haematoma; the
haematoma was probably triggered by probe injury and became more severe following anticoagulant therapy. In fact, it is not unusual to find
retro-pharyngea- haematoma in patients with abnormal platelet function or clotting factor deficiency 16. Severe cervical spondylosis
appeared to be an important factor in determining difficult probe introduction, due to the impossibility to achieve the optimal neck
extension for progression of the instrument. Head and neck CT scan was important to understand the role of cervical spondylosis and to
differentiate between oedema and haematoma and to study its dimensions and localization. In cases of retro-pharyngeal haematoma, both
airways stabilization and haematoma management are required. Endotracheal intubation would generally be sufficient in patients with
compromised upper airways; however, in cases of large haematomas like the one described, a tracheostomy would be more appropriate, avoiding
the risk of the haematoma rupture with bleeding and increasing oedema. The spontaneous resorption of a large haematoma is possible, but it
can take several weeks with the risk of infection or abscess; surgical evacuation seems, therefore, a better solution. The lateral cervical
approach was preferred in the reported case, because it prevented retropharyngeal contamination, as other Authors have already suggested 2.
In conclusion, TEE is feasible in most adult patients as an out-patient procedure, but proper patient selection and preparation is crucial
to avoid procedure complications. The otolaryngologist may play a significant role in the assessment of a patient considered at risk. In
cases of pharyngeal trauma, retro-pharyngeal haematoma may develop; in these cases, careful observation of the evolution is required, since
surgery may be necessary both for airway stabilization and haematoma evacuation.
