With a prevalence of 5-20%, erectile dysfunction (ED) is a very common disease compromising quality of life of the patient and his partner
alike.1 ED is mostly of multifactorial origin and principally psychogenic and organic causes can be discerned. Main risk factors are age,
cardiovascular disease, smoking, depression and diabetes mellitus. Therefore, ED might indicate an early manifestation of general disorders
and should thus be an inherent part in raising a medical history. In May 2006, a 37-year-old man presented in our outpatient clinic with
light ED that had prevailed since puberty. Penetration was possible only in a standing position, generally reaching nearly full erection.
Lowering the upper part of the body caused the erection to become weaker and sexual intercourse was hardly possible. Self-administered
phosphodiesterase type 5 inhibitors did not show any effect on the position dependence. The patient was distressed by this situation. In
other respects, he was healthy and there was no evidence of psychosomatic etiology. The only abnormal finding in routine diagnostic
investigation for ED consisted of congenital penoscrotal cavernous hemangioma (Figure 1a). As a vascular cause of the symptom was suspected,
we performed MRI angiography after intracavernosal application of 10 μg alprostadil (Figure 1b): a substantial arteriovenous malformation
showed symmetrical draining towards the internal iliac veins. As a result, the penile arteries appeared rarefied. A surgical approach was
judged not promising and too risky. Therefore, we recommended selective percutaneous retrograde venoocclusive therapy,2 which was performed
successfully in two sessions (Figure 1c). We assessed the International Index of Erectile Function (IIEF)3 and found a score of 18 at
baseline, 21 at 3-months' follow-up and 18 at 24-months' follow-up (no ED at IIEF score >21). To objectify the functional changes we
measured penis rigidity using RigiScan Plus® at baseline and 3-months' follow-up:4 after intracavernosal application of 10 μg alprostadil
and achieving maximal erection, data were acquired continuously while the patient alternated between standing and lying positions with a
minimum episode duration of 5 minutes. As rigidity on the penile tip has proved to be the best overall predictor of erectile dysfunction,4
we used this parameter as our main outcome criterion. Values for all useable lying and standing intervals were compared by applying a paired
samples t-test (Figure 2); p<0.05 was considered significant. At baseline, mean tip rigidity values differed significantly (p = 0.038) while
at 3-months' follow-up differences were no longer significant (p = 0.676). Although observed differences were small and there were no data
on long-term test-retest reliability for Rigiscan® measurements, these results are consistent with the patient's subjective view. Rigidity
had improved, especially in the distal part of the penis and was less dependent on body position. At 24-months' follow-up, the patient rated
therapeutic success to be very satisfying, although the IIEF score had returned to the baseline score of 18. We describe the diagnostic
work-up and treatment outcome in a young patient with position-dependent ED due to an arteriovenous malformation. Hemangiomas are rarely
found in the genitourinary tract5-12 and cause ED in only a few cases, dependent on their hemodynamic properties.5 In this case, the
congenital arteriovenous malformation drains arterious inflow directly to the internal iliac veins. Therefore, part of the arterial blood
supply bypasses the corpora cavernosa and leads to a special form of venous leakage. However, the extent of the venous leakage and hence the
erection rigidity depend on the intra-abdominal pressure, which alters with body position. For objectifying this anamnestic information and
monitoring treatment outcome the Rigiscan® device proved helpful. It is one of the diagnostic measures recommended when cases remain
ambiguous after basic investigation.1 Vascular conditions are the most common organic cause of ED.13 The vast majority of cases in this
group result from metabolic changes, increasing with age owing to cardiovascular disease and diabetes mellitus. By far less common, but more
important in younger men with ED are macroscopic arterial or venous pathologies, because once diagnosed, some of them can be treated
causally. Patients with a history of pelvic or perineal trauma causing arteriogenic ED can benefit from vascular surgery with a 60-70% long-
term success rate.14,15 However, the results are entirely different concerning surgery for venous leakage. The various types of venous
resection show discouraging long-term results and have therefore been abandoned in general.14 Only very occasionally, more durable
improvements have been reported in highly selected patients.16 Because surgical treatment outcomes are limited, minimal invasive approaches
like percutaneous embolization seem justified. This holds especially true as otherwise a penile prosthesis is the final option.17 After
interventional venoablative treatment initial response rates are around 70-80%, while lasting treatment success is found in <30%. The latter
is mainly due to venous collateralisation.2,18,19 Limited long-term success has also been found in the reported case. Nevertheless, the
subjective view of ED is not necessarily linked to objective measurements and our patient still feels satisfied. Ethics committee approval:
We performed all actions according to the “Declaration of Helsinki” in its latest version and respected usual data protection requirements.
Ethics committee approval was not needed because the routine treatment of an individual patient is described. The patient is aware of the
planned publication of his case. He agreed and documented his decision by signing a consent form after reading the manuscript including
figures. a, Penoscrotal hemangioma; b, 3D-view of MRI-angiography showing venous leakage*; c, state after radiologic intervention. Penis
mean tip rigidity at baseline and at 3-months' follow-up in lying (left bars) and standing (right bars) position. Whiskers represent two
standard deviations. n.s. = not significant.
