A 50-year-old man from Mymensingh district, Bangladesh, presented with a 3-month history of non-pruritic, painless hypopigmented papules,
and plaques, beginning on the face and subsequently spreading to the forearms, torso, and legs (Figures 1–4) Fifteen months before the onset
of skin lesions, the patient had visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar), successfully treated with 30 intramuscular injections of sodium
stibogluconate (SSG). Polymerase chain reaction showed Leishmania donovani DNA in a buffy coat specimen. The patient has hypopigmented
papules and plaques scattered over the face, most concentrated peri-orally and on the cheeks, common areas of involvement for post-kala-azar
dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL). The patient consented to having his picture published in the journal. Hypopigmented papules are seen on the
patient's back. The lesions are roughly symmetrical, a common characteristic of post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL), and are painless
and non- pruritic. Hypopigmented papules on the abdomen. The patient has hypopigmented papules and plaques on both forearms. The absence of
sensorineural changes helps to distinguish post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL) from leprosy, which commonly presents with
hypopigmented macules or patches associated with hypoesthesia or anesthesia, and neural thickening. Post-kala-azar dermal leishmaniasis
(PKDL) is a chronic skin rash usually seen in apparently cured kala-azar patients in East Africa and South Asia. In the Indian subcontinent,
the cumulative PKDL incidence after kala-azar is 5–10%.1 The PKDL usually presents with erythematous or hypopigmented papules or macules,
sometimes progressing to plaques or nodules. Kala-azar patients treated with antimonial drugs may have poorer immune recovery and a higher
risk of subsequent PKDL compared with those treated with amphotericin formulations.2 The only PKDL treatment regimens with proven efficacy
in South Asia consist of 120 SSG injections over 6 months or miltefosine 2.5 mg/kg/day for 12 weeks. The PKDL patients are infectious to the
sand fly vector and are thought to represent an important parasite reservoir in the anthroponotic transmission cycle of visceral
leishmaniasis in South Asia.1 Authors' addresses: Shamim Islam, Children's Hospital and Research Center Oakland, Oakland, CA, E-mail:
sizuba@yahoo.com. M. Ashraful Alam Bhuiyan, ICDDR,B, Dhaka, Bangladesh, E-mail: aabhuiyan@icddrb.org. Caryn Bern, Division of Parasitic
Diseases and Malaria, Center for Global Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta, GA, E-mail: cxb9@cdc.gov.
