Less than 1% of lung neoplasms are represented by benign tumors. Among these, hamartomas are the most common with an incidence between
0.025% and 0.32%. In relation to the localization, hamartomas are divided into intraparenchymal and endobronchial. Clinical manifestation of
an endobronchial hamartoma (EH) results from tracheobronchial obstruction or bleeding. Usually, EH localizes in large diameter bronchus.
Endoscopic removal is usually recommended. Bronchotomy or parenchimal resection through thoracotomy should be reserved only for cases where
the hamatoma cannot be approached through endoscopy, or when irreversible lung functional impairment occurred after prolonged airflow
obstruction. Generally, when endoscopic approach is used, this is through rigid bronchoscopy, laser photocoagulation or mechanical
resection. Here we present a giant EH occasionally diagnosed and treated by fiberoptic bronchoscopy electrosurgical snaring. Most tumors of
the tracheobronchial tree are malignant . Benign lung tumors represent less than 1%, and among these, hamartomas, with an incidence between
0.025% and 0.32%, are the most common . In relation to the localization, hamartomas are divided into intraparenchymal, generally
asymptomatic and with a radiological coin lesion appearance , and endobronchial, clinically manifesting as a result of tracheobronchial
obstruction . From a previous paper reviewing a total of 215 cases of hamartoma reported in the literature, the endobronchial location was
found in only 1.4% of cases . In contrast, other studies found an incidence of endobronchial location in 10 and 20% of all pulmonary
hamartomas . The endobronchial hamartomas (EH) usually localize in large diameter bronchus . Since these tumors are benign, endoscopic
removal is usually recommended, reserving lung resection to cases of longstanding bronchial obstruction with infection and irreversible lung
injury . We report the case of a giant hamartoma of the left main bronchus, diagnosed and removed by fiberoptic bronchoscopy electrosurgical
snaring. An asymptomatic 65 year old man, previously treated by rectum resection for adenocarcinoma, during follow-up examination for his
neoplastic disease underwent chest CT scan that documented a vegetating lesion of the left main bronchus with absence of extra-bronchial
infiltration (Figure 1). The patient underwent diagnostic bronchoscopy that confirmed the presence in the left main bronchus, at about 2.5
cm from the carina, of a vegetating, pedunculated lesion, mobile during breathing and nearly occluding the bronchial lumen (Figure 2).
However, despite the large tumor size, air entry into the left lung was allowed probably during the tumor movements inside the bronchial
lumen. Cyto-histological samples were suggestive of a hamartoma. Endoscopic resection of the lesion was then performed using fiberoptic
bronchoscopy electrosurgical snaring, obtaining macroscopic total removal (Figure 3). The definitive histological diagnosis returned as
"bronchial hamartoma with predominant fibrovascular structure" (Figure 4). Postoperative endoscopic control at 10 and 30 days showed good
re-epithelialization of the bronchial mucosa (Figure 5). Endoscopic control at the 6 month follow-up showed no recurrence. CT scan
demonstrating a vegetating neoplasm of the left main bronchus (white arrow) without signs of extrabronchial infiltration. Bronchoscopy
detects a vegetating lesion, moving during the act of breathing, nearly occluding the lumen of the left main bronchus. Result at the end of
the procedure: Macroscopically complete lesion resection by fiberoptic bronchoscopy electrosurgical snaring. Histological aspects: a) At low
magnification: absence of ulcerations. b) Fibro-vascular architecture. c) group of adipocytes. d) epithelial lining. Postoperative
endoscopic control at 30 days showing good epithelialization of the mucosa. The pulmonary hamartoma is a rare benign tumor, originating from
the bronchial primitive mesenchymal tissue, which can differentiate into various mature mesenchymal components . In fact, the hamartoma,
either intra-parenchymal or endobronchial, generally includes cartilage, bone, fat and muscle tissues . Usually, EH has a higher fat content
than intraparenchymal hamarthoma . Generally, the cartilaginous component prevails over others, even though forms with predominantly fatty
or bone components have been described as well . EH is frequently asymptomatic, at least in the preocclusive early stage . When present,
symptoms are secondary to tracheobronchial obstruction, resulting in recurrent pneumonias, and include fever, cough, hemoptysis, purulent
sputum, dyspnea and pain . Sometimes, recurrent pneumonias secondary to bronchial obstruction may irreversibly damage the lung or part of it
. On CT scan, the EH appears as an endobronchial mass with or without signs of obstructive pneumonia or atelectasia . CT scan is of
considerable diagnostic aid in cases of EH with high fat content . Stey et al. considered highly indicative the presence on CT scan of a
mass at high fat density without contrast uptake . At bronchoscopic examination, the EH appears as a polypoid or pedunculated neoplasm,
well-circumscribed, with a smooth and yellowish surface, without signs of submucosal infiltration . Biopsies are necessary for the
differential diagnosis from other benign neoplasms and from carcinoid . Histology would usually detect the coexistence of connective,
epithelial, bone, muscle, fat and cartilage tissues, the latter usually in high prevalence . The traditional treatment has been by
thoracotomy with broncotomy or lung resection (12). However, since this is a benign neoplasm, endoscopic treatment is now widely recommended
as the first line approach , also considering that malignant degeneration is extremely rare and the recurrence rate is low . Generally, the
endoscopic approach is through rigid bronchoscopy, laser photocoagulation or mechanical resection . Laser treatment through rigid
bronchoscopy is considered the gold standard treatment for symptomatic patients with bulky masses on radiological examination . However, in
selected cases, the use of electrocautery through flexible bronchoscopy may prove just as simple and effective . Endoscopic electrosurgical
snaring is widely used in gastroenterology , while its use in tracheobronchial endoscopy is rare. It is still not fully known the depth of
electrocauterization . Possible complications may include bleeding, perforation and burning lesions on the tracheobronchial tree . The
traditional surgical treatment (thoracotomy and bronchotomy) is currently indicated only in cases where the EH cannot be approached through
endoscopy, or when lung resection is indicated due to irreversible parenchymal damage from longstanding airway obstruction . The EH is a
rare benign tumor that can cause bleeding or obstruction of the tracheobronchial tree. For these reasons, treatment should be performed even
in asymptomatic patients. The choice of treatment should consider the location and extent of the tumor. Surgical therapy, by bronchotomy or
resection, should be reserved only for cases where the hamatoma cannot be approached through endoscopy, or when irreversible lung functional
impairment occurred after prolonged airflow obstruction. In all other cases, in consideration of the benign nature of the tumor, the gold
standard treatment is endoscopic laser resection. Fiberoptic bronchoscopy electrosurgical snaring may represent an alternative approach in
selected cases. Written informed consent was obtained from patients for publication of this report and accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor in chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
All authors: 1. have made substantial contributions to conception and design, or acquisition of data, or analysis and interpretation of
data; 2. have been involved in drafting the manuscript or revisiting it critically for important intellectual content; 3. have given final
approval of the version to be published.
