It is well known that physical activity can aggravate the intensity of the headache, but the pathophysiological relationship between
exertion and aura is still unknown. Anecdotal reports describe episodes of migraine preceded by head trauma and visual symptoms, migraine
prodrome symptoms after unusually strenuous running with no subsequent head pain or recurrent attacks of hemiplegic migraine induced only by
exertion. We describe the cases of three young men with recurrent episodes of migraine with aura occurring in the locker room shortly after
a football match. Since the symptoms could mimic important pathologies in approximately 10% of these of headaches, it was mandatory to
exclude a secondary form of headache in these patients. Several theories exist regarding the cause of primary exertional headache, but the
pathogenesis of migraine triggered by physical activity has still not been identified. The present International Classification of Headache
Disorders does not mention sport/exercise-induced migraine with aura episodes as primary headache. Since there are many cases described in
the literature of migraine with aura triggered only by exercise, it may be helpful to specify, in the typical aura with migraine headache
comments, that in some cases it can be exclusively triggered by sport/exercise. Aura is defined as attacks of reversible focal neurological
symptoms (visual, sensory and/or speech symptoms) that last more than 5 min and no longer than 1 h. Migraine-like headache usually occurs at
the onset, during or follows aura symptoms . Patients with motor weakness, according to the present classification, are classified
separately as hemiplegic migraine . It is well known that physical activity can lead to an aggravation of the intensity of the headache and
a primary exertional headache is described in the current IHS classification under other primary headaches as a migraine-like headache
unleashed by physical exertion . We describe the cases of three patients with recurrent episodes of migraine with aura induced by physical
activity. The relationship between exertion and aura is unknown and still debated; moreover, the International Classification of Headache
does not, at present, include this subtype of headache . Three young men (Case A 19 year-old, Case B 21 year-old, Case C 25 year-old) came
to our observation for recurrent attacks of migraine-like headache of a pulsating quality and severe intensity, with nausea, photo- and
phonophobia, that resolved spontaneously within 12 h if untreated. The attacks were preceded by reversible visual symptoms presenting as
fortification spectrum and ipsilateral cheiro-oral paresthesia (Cases B and C only), that lasted for 15–40 min. Onset of the symptoms
occurred a few years earlier: 4 years for Cases A and C, 2 years for Case B. In all cases the symptoms occurred when they were in the locker
room: in Cases B and C shortly after a football match, but never after training; whilst in Case A the symptoms occurred occasionally after
swimming pool and gym training or after participating in physical education activities at school. No other subtypes of headache, or head
trauma were reported by the patients. The father of Case A and the mothers of Cases B and C suffered from episodic attacks of migraine
without aura. The patients’ medical history, physical and neurological examination did not suggest any other secondary disorder (Cases A and
B are smokers). Case A also suffers from episodic migraine without aura according to the current International Classification of Headache
Disorders (ICHD-II) Criteria . The patients, however, underwent extensive diagnostic investigation: brain magnetic resonance with
angiographic sequences, electroencephalography, vertebral and carotid echo-doppler, complete ocular examination, electrocardiography,
transthoracic echocardiography and complete blood cell count, general chemistry profile, coagulation studies, protein C, protein S,
antithrombin III, anticardiolipin antibody, erythrocyte sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, antinuclear antibody and thyroid function
test. The results of the laboratory tests and determinations were normal. The prevalence of sport- and exercise-related headaches is
estimated to be about 30–35% (15% of which are migrainous headaches) [2, 3]. In the study of Williams and Nukada , the reported subtypes of
headache were: effort migraine, trauma-induced migraine, effort/exertion headache and post-traumatic headache; all effort and trauma-
triggered migraine patients (11 and 8, respectively, of 129 patients) reported aura symptoms before the headache (visual and/or sensory
disturbances). However, the precise epidemiology of this phenomenon is unknown . According to ICHD-II criteria, the headache subtype
presented by the patients fulfilled criteria for typical aura with migraine headache (ICHD-II code: 1.2.1) and for primary exertional
headache (pulsating headache, lasting from 5 min to 48 h, brought on by and occurring only during or after physical exertion; ICHD-II code:
4.3) . Since these symptoms could mimic, in approximately 10% of these headaches, important pathologies, such as carotid dissection, artero-
venous malformation, cerebral venus sinus thrombosis, seizures, subarachnoid or intraparenchymal haemorrhage , it was therefore mandatory to
exclude a secondary form of headache in these patients. There are anecdotal reports of episodes of migraine preceded by head trauma and
visual symptoms (with a past history of non-sports-related migraine) , migraine prodrome symptoms after unusually strenuous running with no
subsequent head pain or recurrent attacks of hemiplegic migraine induced only by exertion . To date, the pathogenesis of primary exertional
headache is unidentified and it is still under debate; several theories regarding the cause have been proposed, such as, migraine triggered
by physical effort particularly evident in aerobic exercise, altitude and hot weather, suggesting that low oxygen tension may trigger
migraine by an as yet unknown mechanism . Moreover, it has been postulated that a dilatation of pain-sensitive venous sinuses, at the base
of the brain, as a result of increased cerebral arterial pressure, is induced by the exertion. In contrast to the hypothesized
pathophysiology of the cough headache (ICHD-II code: 4.2), a similar vascular and hemodynamic pathogenesis is supposed to be shared by both
primary exertional headache and primary headache associated with sexual activity (ICHD-II code: 4.4) , due to the similar age at onset, male
predominance, pain characteristics and response to treatment . The pathophysiological correlate of migraine aura is cortical spreading
depression (CSD). In our patients, exertion seems to precipitate the aura. It has been suggested that the combination of exertion-induced
hyperventilation and the subsequent hypocapnia with respiratory alkalosis and hypomagnesemia predisposes these patients to cerebral
vasoconstriction during exertion lowering the threshold for the development of CSD or aura in migraineurs . The present ICHD-II
classification does not mention sport/exercise-induced migraine with aura episodes as primary headache, although there are many reports of
attacks of migraine with aura shortly after practicing. Therefore, in case of patients suffering from this particular type of headache,
there is currently the need to make a double diagnosis (typical aura with migraine headache and primary exertional headache; ICHD-II codes:
1.2.1 and 4.3), or to add a specifier (e.g. migraine with aura triggered by exercise). Since there are many cases described in the
literature of migraine with aura triggered only by exercise, to faciliate the diagnosis it may be helpful to specify, in the typical aura
with migraine headache comments, that in some cases it can be exclusively triggered by sport/exercise. The authors express their gratitude
to Mrs Marisa Morson for the technical assistance. Conflict of interest None. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
