A case of lipomatous tubular adenoma (LTA) with syringocystadenom papilliferum (SCAP) arising from the external auditory canal in a 25-year-
old man is described and to the best of our knowledge through literature review, this kind of morphologic entity has not been reported
before. Herein we reported the first case in the English literature in the world. Tumors arising from the external ear canal are extremely
rare. Exostosis and squamous cell carcinomas are the most commonly-encountered benign and malignant tumors, respectively. Tubular adenoma
(TA), also named as tubular apocrine adenoma, tubular syringoadenoma, or tubulopapillary hidradenoma , was first reported as a new entity by
Landry and Winkelmann in 1972 . Since then, less than one hundred cases of tubular adenoma were reported in the English literature . This
type of rare tumors was reported at the scalp, extremity, and eyelid . Tubular adenoma originated in the external auditory canal was first
reported by Lee and his colleague in 2005 . In Lee's report, he described a tubular apocrine adenoma with syringocystadenoma papilliferum.
Here we described the first case of a lipomatous tubular adenoma with syringocystadenoma papilliferum arising from the external auditory
canal. A 25-year-old male was referred for hearing impairment and discharge on and off from left ear for a period of time. Family history is
unremarkable and laboratory data is with normal limit. Pure tone audiometry evaluation was arranged and conductive hearing loss of left ear
was identified. A mass noted in the left external auditory canal. High resolution computed tomography showed an approximately 0.8 × 0.6 cm
soft tissue mass occupying within the left external ear canal near the opnening, without eroding canal wall. Tumor excision was performed
and the resected tumor was submitted for pathological examination. The patient recovered uneventfully without evidence of recurrence nine
months after operation. Section of the tumor shows circumscribed lobules of well-differentiated double-layered tubular structures located in
the deep dermis (Figure 1). The stroma is composed of fibrous tissue with intervening abundant adipocytes (Figure 2). The inner layers of
cylindrical cells of the tubules have apocrine features showing "decapitation" secretion (positive for cytokeratin-7 and GCDFP-15) (Figure
3A and 3B). The tubules are surrounded by the outer layers of cuboidal or flattened cells with myoepithelial differentiation (positive for
P63 and S-100) (Figure 3C and 3D). Abnomal mitotic figure, invasive border, and cellular atypia are not noted. No inflammatory cells are
noted in the tumor. Lipomatous tubular adenoma is diagnosed. Section of the upper part of the tumor shows features of syringocystadenoma
papilliferum with irregular papillary projections protruding into the invaginations of the surface epithelium. Transition from squamous
epithelium to double-layered cuboidal and columnar epithelium is seen. Plasma cells admixed with lymphocytes is noted in the stroma. No
nevus sebaceous is seen in the background of the tumor. Histologic examination shows two different portions of tumor. The left lesion of the
tumor shows syringocystadenoma papilliferum with papillomatous projection into the invaginations of the surface epithelium. The right lesion
of the tumor reveals lipomatous tubular adenoma composed of double-layered tubular structure. (H&E, original magnification × 40). The stroma
of lipomatous tubular adenoma is composed of hyalinized fibrous tissue with intervening abundant adipocytes. "Decapitation" secretion is
seen. (H&E, original magnification × 100). Immunohistochemical studies revealed bilayer different lining cells. Positivity for cytokeratin-7
(Figure 3A) and GCDFP-15 (Figure 3B) in the inner layers of cylindrical cells of the tubules were shown. Positivity for p63 (Figure 3C) and
S-100 protein (Figure 3D) in the outer layers of cuboidal or flattened cells with myoepithelial differentiation were shown.
(Immunohistochemical stain, original magnification × 100). TA is a rare entity and sometimes occurs with SCAP. SCAP was previously reported
to be often associated with pre-existing nevus sebaceous , and morphologic features of nevus sebaceous seldom existed in SCAP with TA . No
nevus sebaceous is seen in our case. Controversy about the relationship of TA and SCAP still exists. TA was considered as a minor variant of
SCAP by some scholars , but others have suggested that TA is a distinct clinical entity . In Kazakov's recently published study, 67 cases of
TA, SCAP, and their lookalikes were assessed by four dermatopathologists. Only 29 cases got concurrent agreement and interobserver variation
existed in other 38 cases. TA or SCAP was reported to have certain relationship with human papillomavirus infection and a human
papillomavirus induced non-neoplastic process leading to TA or SCAP was also speculated by some authors . Warty surface or koilocytotic
feature is not seen in our case. Immunohistochemical study may be useful in puzzling cases. S-100 protein was reported to be detected in the
peripheral myoepithelial cells in the TA and failed to be present in the SCAP , which was consistent with the immunohistochemical results of
our presented case. Treatment of LTA with SCAP includes careful preoperative evaluation and surgical resection with safe margin. Computed
tomography is useful in evaluating the tumor and surrounding tissue. Our case shows the characteristic SCAP and TA with abundant adipocytes
in the upper and the deeper portion, respectively. In a thorough research for PUBMED, this is the first reported case with LTA and SCAP
occurring in the external auditory canal. Although Lee at al published the first case of TA occurring in the external auditory canal, but
abundant adipocytes are mixed with fibrous tissue in the stroma of TA in our case, and this kind of morphologic presentation has not yet
reported in the external auditory canal. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal LTA: Lipomatous tubular
adenoma; SCAP: syringocystadenom papilliferum; TA: tubular adenoma. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. TS: wrote,
aligned and drafted the manuscript. KS participated in the collection of the data, literature review. HW: collected clinical and
pathological records. PC: took the pictures for this manuscript. MC: modified this manuscript and make and final approval. All authors read
and approved the final manuscript.
