Spontaneous intracranial hypotension (SIH) is caused by single or multiple cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) leaks in the spine with the
prototypical symptom of postural headache. One of the characteristic MRI features in SIH is intracranial venous engorgement. This report
presents a case of SIH with engorgement of the bilateral superior ophthalmic veins (SOVs) which resume their normal diameters by the third
day of successful epidural blood patches (EBPs). We define this phenomenon as the "reversal of the SOV" sign. Spontaneous intracranial
hypotension (SIH) is rare, with an estimated annual incidence of five per 100,000. The female : male ratio is about 2:1 and the peak
incidence is reached at the fourth decade (1). The pathogenesis remains unclear but is thought to be the result of spinal cerebrospinal
fluid (CSF) leaks (1). Although a definite diagnosis is made when CSF opening pressure is less than 60 mm H2O at the lumbar puncture (1, 2),
some authors have reported that the CSF leaks can be depicted on a MR myelography with the use of a heavily T2-weighted pulse sequence (3,
4). Clinical manifestations in SIH are widely variable with the most characteristic manifestation being a postural headache, which is
defined by the revised International Classification of Headache Disorders criteria as a headache occurring or worsening within 15 minutes
while assuming the upright position and gradually improving within 15 to 30 minutes after lying down (1, 5). Other commonly related symptoms
include a stiff neck, nausea, vomiting, diplopia, cranial neuropathies, and marked exacerbation of the headache by Valsalva maneuver (1, 5).
There are multiple available treatment options which include bed rest, analgesics, sedatives, oral caffeine, intravenous hydration, epidural
blood patch (EBP), epidural saline infusion, and direct surgical repair of spinal dura tear (1, 6). Among them, the mainstay of treatment is
EBP, a procedure to secure a CSF leak that in turn restores brain buoyancy (1). Surgical repair of a dura tear is reserved for a patient
with an identifiable site for a CSF leak that is refractory to EBP (1, 4, 7). The majority of patients with SIH have favorable outcomes and
the resolution of symptoms may be achieved in a period of weeks and months to years after treatments (1, 8-11). The advent of MRI has
revolutionized the understanding of SIH. Typical MR imaging features include subdural collections, dural thickening and pachymeningeal
enhancement, engorged venous structures, pituitary hyperemia, and sagging of the brain (1, 12). The superior ophthalmic vein (SOV) drains
into the cavernous sinus and is theoretically influenced by the alteration in intracranial pressure. However, the relationship between the
SIH and the SOV diameter, before and after EBP, was rarely investigated. Our case demonstrates a striking regression of the SOV diameter
three days after an EBP. The "reversal of the SOV" sign is introduced, which implies the reconstruction of intracranial pressure and is also
highly suggestive of a successful EBP procedure. A 65-year-old man began to suffer from an intermittent right fronto-parietal headache and
right neck soreness seven months prior to admission. The headache, as he described, was not related to his posture. He sought medical help
because of the development of an orthostatic headache a few days prior to admission. Brain and spinal MRI studies were performed. The brain
MRI revealed dural thickening with pachymeningeal enhancement, subdural effusion, pituitary hyperemia, and a slight brain sag (Fig. 1A, B),
which are typical findings of SIH. In addition, bilateral ophthalmic veins were significantly engorged (Fig. 1C). MR myelography, using the
heavily T2-weighted pulse sequence, revealed CSF leaks in the thoracic epidural space from the T1 to T6 levels (Fig. 1D, T4 level
illustrated). An EBP was performed the next day by injection of 30 c.c. of autologous blood into the T6 epidural space. The patient was kept
in the Trendelenburg position for two hours after the procedure to allow for the ascension of blood over several segments towards the sites
of CSF leaks. However, he did not experience instantaneous relief of the postural headache. The first follow-up MRI was performed on the
third day after the EBP, which showed the complete seal of spinal CSF leaks and a striking reversal of the bilateral SOV diameters (Fig. 1E,
F). The second follow-up MRI on the eleventh day after EBP failed to demonstrate any resorption of bilateral subdural collections or
regression of dural venous engorgement (Fig. 1G, H). The diameters of the bilateral SOVs were stable (Fig. 1I). The postural headache
persisted, but subsided dramatically about one and a half months later. Serial follow-up brain and spinal MRI studies at one-month intervals
in the following four months showed gradual resolution of the subdural collections (Fig. 1J) without recurrent spinal CSF leak. Of note, the
diameters of the bilateral SOVs were stable without further engorgement. The clinical manifestation, typical MRI features, and treatment
options in SIH have been well described in the literature (1-12). In this article, we introduce the "reversal of the SOV" sign following the
EBP procedure, which we believe may imply the reconstruction of intracranial pressure. According to the Monroe-Kellie hypothesis, the sum of
the volumes of intracranial blood, CSF, and cerebral tissue should be constant in an intact cranium (13). Both the clinical symptoms and MRI
features in SIH can be the result of a spinal CSF leak. The postural headache can be explained by CSF volume depletion with loss of CSF
buoyancy, which in turns leads to brain sagging and traction of various intracranial pain-sensitive structures (1). For pachymeningeal
enhancement, engorgement of the venous structures and pituitary hyperemia could be the results of compensatory effects for increasing the
vascular component (1). As for the subdural collection, it is intended for increasing the intracranial CSF component (1). The majority of
CSF is produced by the choroid plexuses in the brain. Circulating over the brain and spinal cord, the CSF provides the supporting buoyancy
for the central nervous system. The estimated CSF space is about 160 to 170 mL in a young adult and CSF is produced at a rate of 0.4 mL/min
(14). As a result, the turnover rate is about four times a day. Based on this inference, the CSF volume should become normal within one day
if the CSF leak has been secured by a successful EBP. Dural venous engorgement is one of the imaging features in SIH. In one series, the
authors observed that 14 of 15 (93%) patients with intracranial hypotension were associated with engorgement of the transverse sinus (15).
Since the cavernous sinuses are not completely isolated from the dura matter, they are easily influenced by alteration in intracranial
hydrodynamics (16). The SOV, which serves as one of the tributaries of the cavernous sinus and brings the venous flow from the orbit back to
the cavernous sinus, is theoretically also influenced by alteration in intracranial hydrodynamics. As can been seen in our case, the
diameters of bilateral SOVs had already returned to a normal status before the evolution of other imaging features were perceptible.
Therefore, the diameter of SOV may indirectly reflect the status of intracranial pressure. However, the relationship between the diameter of
SOV and the intracranial pressure has been rarely investigated. In one series, the authors measured the average diameter of SOV on MRI and
found that it was smaller in SIH where the term, "collapsed" SOV was used to describe this feature (17). In another study, the authors, by
color Doppler imaging, found both the mean diameter and the flow of the SOV were substantially greater in SIH (18). We cannot explain the
discrepancy in the aforementioned studies, but our case supports that an engorged SOV might be one of the features of SIH, a mechanism such
as an engorged dural vein in SIH. Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether the "reversal of the SOV" in our case definitely implies a
complete seal of the CSF leak and restoration of intracranial pressure or whether the finding was incidental. Therefore, further case
reports or studies are encouraged to further delve into this phenomenon. It is recommended that Color Doppler imaging be performed to access
the diameter of the SOV, because it can be done at bed side without the need for sending the patient to an MRI room, and thus helps to
prevent recurrent CSF leaks. In summary, a high index of clinical suspicion and familiarity with MRI features are essential for a diagnosis
of SIH to be made with confidence. Heavily T2-weighted MR myelography can benefit from its non-invasiveness. It is thus worth
recommendation, not only for localization of CSF leak, but also for evaluation of post-treatment efficacy. The "reversal of the SOV" sign
may provide adjunctive information for knowledge of post-treatment intracranial hemodynamic change. However, the application of "reversal of
the SOV" sign to patients with SIH, in whom the SOVs are collapsed, is uncertain and needs substantially greater investigation.
Characteristic MR imaging findings of spontaneous intracranial hypotension. A. Postcontrast coronal T1-weighted image shows thin and uniform
thickening of dura and tentorium (long arrows), as well as bilateral subdural effusion (short arrows). B. Postcontrast sagittal T1-weighted
image shows enlargement of pituitary gland with diffuse enhancement; so-called pituitary hyperemia (long arrow), and engorgement of superior
sagittal sinus, straight sinus and internal cerebral vein, as well as so-called engorgement of venous structures (short arrows). C. Coronal
T2-weighted image, obtained day before epidural blood patch after suffering from postural headache for few days, shows significant
engorgement of bilateral superior ophthalmic veins (arrows), which measure about 6 mm in diameter on both sides. D. Spinal MR myelography
(T2-weighted image, echo time = 750 ms, T4 level) disclosed abnormal fluid accumulation along nerve sheaths (more significant on left side),
which is suggestive of cerebrospinal fluid leaks (arrows). E. Coronal T2-weighted image obtained on third day after epidural blood patch
shows significant regression of bilateral superior ophthalmic vein diameters (arrows); approximately 2 mm in diameter on both sides compared
to 6 mm before procedure. F. Spinal MR myelography shows blockage of cerebrospinal fluid leak. G. Coronal fluid attenuation inversion
recovery image obtained on eleventh day after epidural blood patch shows mild dural thickening (short arrows) and persistent bilateral
subdural collections without regression (long arrows). H. Sagittal T2-weighted image shows persistent engorgement of superior sagittal
sinus, straight sinus, and internal cerebral vein (arrows) without regression. I. Coronal T2-weighted image shows stationary diameters of
bilateral superior ophthalmic veins (arrows) without further engorgement. J. Coronal fluid attenuation inversion recovery image obtained
about four months later after epidural blood patch shows complete resolution of bilateral subdural collections.
