Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) is characterised by asymmetrical parkinsonism and cognitive impairment. The underlying pathology varies between
corticobasal degeneration, progressive supranuclear palsy, Alzheimer’s disease, Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease and frontotemporal lobar
degeneration sometimes in association with GRN mutations. A 61-year-old male underwent neurological examination, neuropsychological
assessment, MRI, and HMPAO-SPECT at our medical centre. After his death at the age of 63, brain autopsy, genetic screening and mRNA
expression analysis were performed. The patient presented with slow progressive walking disabilities, non-fluent language problems,
behavioural changes and forgetfulness. His family history was negative. He had primitive reflexes, rigidity of his arms and postural
instability. Later in the disease course he developed dystonia of his left leg, pathological crying, mutism and dysphagia.
Neuropsychological assessment revealed prominent ideomotor and ideational apraxia, executive dysfunction, non-fluent aphasia and memory
deficits. Neuroimaging showed symmetrical predominant frontoparietal atrophy and hypoperfusion. Frontotemporal lobar degeneration (FTLD)-TDP
type 3 pathology was found at autopsy. GRN sequencing revealed a novel frameshift mutation c.314dup, p.Cys105fs and GRN mRNA levels showed a
50% decrease. We found a novel GRN mutation in a patient with an atypical (CBS) presentation with symmetric neuroimaging findings. GRN
mutations are an important cause of CBS associated with FTLD-TDP type 3 pathology, sometimes in sporadic cases. Screening for GRN mutations
should also be considered in CBS patients without a positive family history. Corticobasal syndrome (CBS) is characterised by progressive
asymmetric rigidity and apraxia, accompanied by additional signs of cortical and extrapyramidal dysfunction such as alien limb phenomenon,
cortical sensory loss, myoclonus, bradykinesia and focal dystonia unresponsive to dopaminergic treatment (Boeve et al. 2003). Although
corticobasal degeneration (CBD) is the most frequent underlying pathology of CBS, other neuropathological causes, including frontotemporal
lobar degeneration (FTLD), Alzheimer’s disease (AD), progressive supranuclear palsy (PSP) and Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease have been reported
(Boeve et al. 1999; Wadia and Lang 2007; Tartaglia et al. 2010). Although family history is usually negative in CBS (Spina et al. 2007), a
familial form has been described which can be caused by progranulin (GRN) mutations (Wadia and Lang 2007; van Swieten and Heutink 2008). GRN
mutations show a high phenotypic variability reflected by diagnoses of frontotemporal dementia, progressive non-fluent aphasia or AD within
the same families (Gass et al. 2006; Beck et al. 2008; Le Ber et al. 2008; van Swieten and Heutink 2008; Kelley et al. 2009). The underlying
pathology of GRN mutations is FTLD with TAR DNA-binding protein of 43 kDA (TDP-43) positive neuronal cytoplasmic and intranuclear inclusions
(Gass et al. 2006; Whitwell et al. 2007; Beck et al. 2008; Kelley et al. 2009) which is known as FTLD-TDP type 3 (Cairns et al. 2007). In
this report, we describe the clinical, radiological, pathological and genetic features of a 61-year-old patient with an initial presentation
of symmetric CBS caused by a novel GRN c.314dup mutation in the absence of a positive family history. A 61-year-old male was referred to the
outpatient clinic of our neurology department. On the basis of neurological examination, neuropsychological assessment, brain MRI and single
photon emission computed tomography with 99mTc-hexamethyl propyleneamine oxine–single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), he was
diagnosed with atypical parkinsonism with dementia. He died from bronchopneumonia at the age of 63. Brain autopsy was performed by the
Netherlands Brain Bank according to their legal and ethical code of conduct. Paraffin-embedded sections from all brain regions were stained
with haematoxylin and eosin, Bodian, methenamine silver, and Congo Red. Immunostaining with antibodies for tau (Innogenetics), ubiquitin
(DAKO), β-amyloid (DAKO), α-synuclein (Zymed Laboratories), p62 (BD Biosciences Pharmingen), FUS (Sigma-Aldrich anti-FUS) and TDP-43
(Biotech) was performed. Neuropathological diagnosis was made by a neuropathologist (A.J.M.R.). DNA was extracted from peripheral blood
using the DNA Blood Kit Special (Chemagen, Baesweiler), which is based on DNA extraction and purification with magnetic beads (Smit et al.
2000). All coding exons (2–13) and exon/intron boundaries of GRN (NM_002087.2) were amplified from genomic DNA by PCR and directly sequenced
in both strands using the ABI 3730XL automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). Data were analysed using SeqScape software
(version 2.6; Applied Biosystems). Total RNA was extracted from cerebellar brain tissue using the RNeasy Plus Mini Kit (Qiagen, Valencia,
CA), and quality and quantity was assessed on the 2100 Bioanalyzer (Agilent Technologies, Santa Clara, CA). RNA samples were normalised to
50 ng/μl, and using 200 ng as the template, a reverse transcription reaction was performed using a 1:1 mix of random hexamers and oligo(dT)
primers and the SuperScript III system (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). Gene expression assays were ordered from Applied Biosystems for GRN
(Hs00963703_g1) and GAPDH (Hs00266705_g1) as an endogenous control. Real-time PCR was performed on an ABI 7900 using the TaqMan method.
Reactions contained 1 μl of cDNA amplified with 0.25 μl primer/probe mix and 2.5 μl TaqMan 2× Universal PCR Master Mix (Applied Biosystems,
Foster City, CA). The cycling parameters recommended by the manufacturer were followed. All samples were run in triplicate and normalised to
GAPDH. The carboxyfluorescein (FAM)-fluorescent signal was analysed using the SDS2.2.2 software, and relative quantities of GRN mRNA were
determined using the ΔΔct method. A 61-year-old male barber presented with a 2-year duration of progressive walking disability, frequent
falls and difficulty with rising from a chair. This motor decline was later followed by loss of initiative, emotional lability, more
compliant behaviour and increasing forgetfulness. He made inappropriate sexual remarks, and his speech became non-fluent with
perseverations, word-finding difficulties and comprehension deficits. Financial matters were taken over by his wife. Furthermore, he needed
assistance for dressing and personal hygiene and was occasionally incontinent of urine and faeces. His symptoms were unresponsive to
galantamine and levodopa. The patient’s family history was negative for neurodegenerative disorders. His father died at the age of 72 from a
stroke and his mother at the age of 53 due to liver cancer. Initial neurological examination showed normal eye movements, a mask-like facial
expression, hypokinetic dysarthria, positive primitive reflexes, subtle axial rigidity, hypokinetic-rigid syndrome with cogwheeling of the
upper extremities, mildly increased tone of the lower extremities, postural instability and impaired tandem gait. Neuropsychological testing
revealed a Mini Mental State Examination score of 24/30 with intact orientation in time and place. The patient was highly distractible and
exhibited sparse spontaneous speech with stuttering and perseverations. Ideomotor and ideational apraxia were prominent, the patient did not
succeed in imitation, constructional tasks, and rapid alternating hand movements. Furthermore, he had severely impaired executive and memory
functions, poor semantic word fluency and naming deficits but intact visuospatial functions. Neuroimaging revealed mild symmetrical cerebral
atrophy, most prominent frontoparietal and perisylvian on MRI and symmetrical frontoparietal hypoperfusion on SPECT, which is shown in
Fig. 1.Fig. 1Mild symmetric frontoparietal atrophy on MRI (a) and symmetric parietal hypoperfusion on SPECT scan (b) Mild symmetric
frontoparietal atrophy on MRI (a) and symmetric parietal hypoperfusion on SPECT scan (b) The patient’s condition further declined over the
subsequent years. Neurological examination at a follow-up visit 1 year later revealed slowed saccadic eye movements, severe symmetrical
rigidity of the upper extremities, an increased tone with dystonic flexion posturing of the left leg and pathological crying. Finally, he
developed mutism and dysphagia, which did not respond to amitriptyline treatment, and he died from bronchopneumonia at the age of 63 years.
Gross brain (1,327 g) examination showed mild generalised atrophy of the cortex with atrophy of caudate nucleus and putamen and normal
pigmentation of the substantia nigra. Microscopic examination revealed moderate to severe neuronal loss, gliosis and spongiosis in the
frontal and parietal cortices but mild changes in the temporal cortex, hippocampus and basal ganglia. Immunohistochemistry showed
TDP-43-positive dystrophic neurites, neurocytoplasmatic and intranuclear inclusions most prominent in the second superficial layer of the
frontal and parietal cortices and to a lesser extent in the temporal cortex, hippocampus and basal ganglia, consistent with a diagnosis of
FTLD-TDP type 3 (Fig. 2) (Cairns et al. 2007).Fig. 2TDP-43-positive dystrophic neurites in the frontal cortex (a) a TDP-43-positive neuronal
intranuclear inclusion in the parietal cortex (b), and TDP-43-positive neuronal cytoplasmatic inclusions in hippocampus (c), and caudate
nucleus and putamen (d). Scale bar = 20 μm TDP-43-positive dystrophic neurites in the frontal cortex (a) a TDP-43-positive neuronal
intranuclear inclusion in the parietal cortex (b), and TDP-43-positive neuronal cytoplasmatic inclusions in hippocampus (c), and caudate
nucleus and putamen (d). Scale bar = 20 μm After receiving the autopsy results, we screened GRN and identified a novel c.314dup, p.Cys105fs
mutation. This frameshift mutation causes premature termination of the coding sequence, which is likely to result in loss of function of
Granulin. GRN mRNA expression analysis in cerebellar tissue from this patient showed a 50% decrease in GRN mRNA levels compared to a
pathologically-confirmed normal control, confirming the pathogenicity of the mutation. We described a patient with an atypical CBS
presentation with symmetrical neuroimaging findings with FTLD-TDP type 3 pathology due to a novel c.314dup, p.Cys105fs mutation in the
absence of a positive family history. The clinical presentation of our case showed strong similarities with the symmetric CBD described by
Hassan et al., except for the presence of ideomotor and ideational apraxia (Hassan et al. 2010). The symmetric rigidity and the absence of
alien hand phenomenon and myoclonus did not fit with the clinical diagnosis CBS in the initial phase of the disease (Boeve et al. 2003).
Moreover, the symmetric pattern of frontoparietal atrophy on MRI and parietal hypoperfusion on SPECT scan was inconsistent with the typical
asymmetric distribution in CBS but was in line with the observations in symmetric CBD (Boeve et al. 2003; Whitwell et al. 2010a; Hassan et
al. 2010). In a later stage of the disease, our patient developed dystonia in the left leg, which made the clinical diagnosis CBS more
likely (Boeve et al. 2003). However, we did not have the opportunity to visualize an asymmetric pattern of atrophy, as an attempt to obtain
additional neuroimaging was unsuccessful. The neuropathological findings of the present case were similar to those in the case by Spina et
al., which showed TDP-43 pathology most prominent in parietal and frontal cortex and to a lesser extent in the temporal cortex, with
involvement of the basal ganglia (Spina et al. 2007). Their patient had a more typical CBS presentation with an alien hand phenomenon and
marked asymmetry of symptoms as well as neuroimaging findings, which is more often seen in CBS patients with GRN mutations (Masellis et al.
2006; Spina et al. 2007; Benussi et al. 2008). The combination of parkinsonism, apraxia, behavioural changes, non-fluent speech and memory
impairment in our patient could retrospectively have indicated a GRN mutation because these symptoms have been more frequently observed in
FTLD patients with GRN mutations (Beck et al. 2008; Le Ber et al. 2008; Kelley et al. 2009). The absence of a positive family history in the
current case emphasises the possibility of reduced penetrance of GRN mutations or concealed family history due to the wide range in onset
age of GRN mutations (Gass et al. 2006; Le Ber et al. 2007; Whitwell et al. 2007; Seelaar et al. 2008). We only screened for GRN mutations
after the observation of FTLD-TDP type 3 pathology at autopsy. This case therefore underlines that genetic screening should be considered
even when family history appears to be negative. The novel GRN frameshift mutation in this patient led to a premature stop codon and thereby
to loss of function of Granulin, which was confirmed by reduced mRNA expression levels in the cerebellar tissue. Recent studies have shown
reduced Granulin levels in the serum of patients with GRN mutations (Coppola et al. 2008; Ghidoni et al. 2008; Finch et al. 2009; Sleegers
et al. 2009; Schofield et al. 2010). We could not confirm this in our patient, however, since his serum was not available. Based on the
clinical presentation of this patient, we did not predict FTLD-TDP pathology. Although non-fluent aphasia and parkinsonism can be seen in
FTLD-TDP, an asymmetric presentation and pattern of atrophy is associated with all underlying pathologies of CBS, including CBD, PSP, FTLD
and AD (Whitwell et al. 2010a). In addition, the extension of atrophy into the frontal cortex is typically asymmetric in patients with CBS
with FTLD-TDP pathology, including those with GRN mutations (Whitwell et al. 2010a; Beck et al. 2008; Le Ber et al. 2008; van Swieten and
Heutink 2008; Rohrer et al. 2010; Whitwell et al. 2010b). Therefore the present case is unique by its atypical CBS presentation and
symmetric atrophy pattern associated with FTLD-TDP type 3 pathology with a novel GRN mutation. To conclude, we found a novel GRN mutation in
a patient with an atypical CBS presentation with symmetric neuroimaging findings without a positive family history. GRN mutations are an
important cause of CBS associated with FTLD-TDP pathology. Genetic screening should also be considered in CBS patients with a negative or
concealed family history. Competing interests None. Funding This work was supported by Stichting Dioraphte grant 09-02-03-00 (to J.C.v.S.)
and NIH grant R01 NS065782-01 (to R.R.). Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution
Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and
source are credited.
