Everolimus, an mTOR inhibitor, which has been demonstrated to induce anti-tumour effects in different types of neuroendocrine tumours, has
never been evaluated in patients with medullary thyroid cancer (MTC). The aim of this study was to evaluate the in vitro and in vivo effects
of everolimus in combination with octreotide in MTC. Two patients with progressive metastatic MTC and high calcitonin levels were treated
with everolimus 5–10 mg/day. Both patients were under treatment with octreotide LAR at the study entry. An in vitro study was also performed
to assess everolimus effects on MTC cell lines (TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells). A tumour response was observed in both patients. Serum calcitonin
decreased by 86% in patient 1 and by 42% in patient 2. In TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells, everolimus induced a significant dose-dependent inhibition
in cell proliferation. This effect seems to be related to a cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase in both cell lines and to the induction of
cellular senescence in TT cells. Everolimus in combination with octreotide may be active as anti-tumour therapy in patients with progressive
metastatic MTC, suggesting to further evaluate this agent in MTC patients in a large prospective study. Medullary thyroid cancer (MTC) is a
neuroendocrine tumour originating from the C cells within the thyroid gland [1, 2]. Medullary thryroid cancer has been demonstrated to
express somatostatin receptors, which are the molecular target of somatostatin analogues [3, 4]. Octreotide and lanreotide, two somatostatin
analogues exerting both anti-secretory and anti-tumour activity in different types of neuroendocrine tumours, have shown low efficacy in MTC
. This is likely explained by the fact that octreotide and lanreotide, the currently available somatostatin analogues, act mainly through
the somatostatin receptor subtype 2 which seems not so relevant for obtaining anti-proliferative effects in MTC . Recently, the AKT-mTOR
pathway has been demonstrated to be overexpressed in neuroendocrine tumours [10, 11]. In addition, everolimus (RAD001), a novel agent that
antagonizes mTOR, has been reported to induce encouraging results in terms of neuroendocrine tumour control both in vitro [12, 13] and in
vivo [14, 15]. Everolimus is able to disrupt an important survival pathway of cancer cells thus triggering apoptosis in several tumour cell
models . However, alternative mechanisms of programmed cell death have been recently described in papillary thyroid cancer (PTC) cells
exposed to everolimus. In fact, it was demonstrated that everolimus can sensitize PTC cells to radiation and chemotherapy through the
induction of autophagic cell death . Medullary thyroid cancer may be an optimal model to evaluate the efficacy of everolimus for different
reasons: (a) this tumour expresses the specific molecular pathway targeted by everolimus; (b) newly discovered rearranged during
transfection (RET) and VEGF inhibitors are now under evaluation in clinical trials and promises to be effective in these patients. However,
there is no chemotherapy or biological therapy which is now available to effectively treat patients with metastatic or relapsing MTC; (c)
calcitonin and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) are highly sensitive and specific markers of MTC progression and both can help to reliably
evaluate the response to everolimus; (d) a recent in vitro study showed a potent inhibitory effect of everolimus on cell proliferation of
MTC cells . Nowadays no data are available concerning the activity of everolimus, either alone or in combination with octreotide, in
patients with MTC. The objective of this study was to assess the in vivo and in vitro efficacy of this drug in patients with progressive
metastatic MTC. Everolimus was obtained by Novartis Farma S.p.A. (Origgio, Italy) for compassionate treatment in two patients with
progressive metastatic MTC, according to Novartis guidelines for compassionate use. Everolimus was started at the dose of 10 mg a day in one
patient and 5 mg a day in one other and was lowered to 5 mg a day, 5 mg every other day or discontinued according to toxicity. Both patients
were under treatment with octreotide LAR 30 mg a month at the study entry and received everolimus in combination. Clinical symptom
evaluation and calcitonin and CEA measurement were performed monthly. Bone metastases were evaluated by contrast-enhanced MRI of vertebral
bodies in patients 1 and 2. Lymph node metastases were evaluated by contrast-enhanced CT scan and colour Doppler ultrasonography in patient
2. Fluoro-18 deoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) was also performed in both patients. Written informed consent of both
patients was obtained. The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration of Helsinki, adhering to all local regulatory guidelines.
Serum calcitonin concentrations, evaluated during clinical study, were determined by a commercially available IRMA (Byk Gulden Italia
S.p.A., Milan, Italy). The detection limit of the assay was <0.7 pg/ml. The intraassay conduction velocities (CVs) were 6.2% and 2.3% at
serum concentrations of 50 and 200 pg/ml, respectively. The interassay CVs were 6.9% and 4.2% at serum calcitonin concentrations of 50 and
200 pg/ml, respectively. Everolimus was kindly provided by Novartis Pharma (Basel, Switzerland), and dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
to yield a stock solution of 10 mM, which was stored at −20°C. TT and MZ-CRC-1, both human MTC cell lines, were obtained from Prof. Lips
(University of Utrecht, The Netherlands). TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells were grown at 37°C in F-12 with Kaighn’s Modification medium containing 10%
foetal bovine serum, 2 nM glutamine and 105 U/l penicillin–streptomycin and maintained in a humidified atmosphere of 5% CO2. The cells were
grown in 75 cm2 flasks and passaged once every 4–7 days on a 1:2 split. TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells were plated in 96-well plates at a density of
3.5 χ 104 per well. The following day, cell culture medium of both cell lines was replaced with medium containing various concentrations of
everolimus (range 0.1–50 nM for TT cells and 0.1–100 nM for MZ-CRC-1 cells). The plates were then placed in a 37°C, 5% CO2 incubator. After
3 days, medium was refreshed and everolimus was added again. After 6 days of treatment cells were harvested for cell viability assay. A
3-(4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide (MTT) assay was used to analyse the effect of everolimus on cell viability.
This assay is based on a colourimetric method in which tetrazolium salt MTT (5 mg/ml in PBS) is added in the plates for 3 hrs to be reduced
into coloured formazan compounds by mitochondrial enzymes. It is solubilized with ethanol:DMSO (1:1) solution, and the absorbance of the
converted dye is measured at a wavelength of 570 nm with background subtraction at 540 nm, using ELx800 Absorbance Microplate Reader (Bio
Tek Instrument, Winooski, VT, USA). All assays were performed in six replicates and were repeated at least three times. TT and MZ-CRC-1
cells were plated in 96-well plates at a density of 3.5 χ 104 per well. The following day, cell culture medium of both cell lines was
replaced with medium containing various concentrations of everolimus (0.5, 1, 2 and 10 nM for TT cells and 1, 10 and 50 nM for MZ-CRC-1).
After 3 and 5 days, medium was changed with fresh medium without (control group) or with everolimus. After 6 days conditioned medium was
collected to measure calcitonin levels through the CLT-LIAISON kit (DiaSorin Inc., Stillwater, MN, USA), which employs a chemiluminescent
immuno assay. The results were obtained by determining the mean value of six replicates, and the experiments were repeated at least three
times. The data were corrected for the effect of treatment on cell number. TT and MZ-CR-1 cells were plated in duplicates in six-well plates
at density of 3 χ 105 cell/well. The following day, cell culture medium of both cell lines was replaced with medium containing everolimus at
the concentration of 5 and 50 nM, respectively in TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells. After 3 days, medium was changed with fresh medium without (control
group) or with everolimus. After 6 days, cells were harvested by gentle trypsinization, washed three times with cold PBS (calcium and
magnesium free), and collected by centrifugation at 1200 g for 5 min. The pellets were resuspended in and directly stained with propidium
iodide (PI; Sigma-Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA) staining solution (50 μg/ml PI, 0.6 μg/ml RNase A and 0.05% Triton X-100 in 0.1% sodium
citrate) and incubated at 4°C for 30 min. To evaluate cell-cycle PI, for each tube, 10,000 cells were immediately measured and fluorescence
was collected as FL1-A with a FACScalibur flow cytometer (Becton Dickinson, Erembodegem, Belgium) using Cell Quest Pro Software, as
previously described . The effect of everolimus on apoptosis was analysed by AnnexinV-FITC and PI staining. TT and MZ-CRC-1 (3 χ 105
cells/well) were plated in six-well plates and treated with everolimus, as previously described in the section of cell cycle analysis. After
3 and 6 days cells were harvested by gentle trypsinization, washed three times with cold PBS (calcium and magnesium free; Sigma-Aldrich),
and collected by centrifugation at 1200 χ g for 5 min. The pellets were re-suspended in 1χ binding buffer (0.1M Hepes/NaOH (pH 7.4), 1.4M
NaCl, 25 mM CaCl2) at a concentration of 1 χ 106 cells/ml. Cells (1 χ 105 cells) were stained with 5 μl of Annexin V-FITC (BD Pharmingen,
San Diego, CA, USA) and 10 μl PI (50 μg/ml in PBS). After 15 min. of incubation at room temperature in dark, 400 μl of 1χ binding buffer
were added to each tube. The analysis was performed by FACScalibur at 10,000 events for each sample. With the use of CellQuest Pro Software,
three subsets of cells, based on intensity of staining with Annexin and PI, were identified: Annexin−/PI− (live cells), Annexin+/PI− (early
apoptotic cells), and Annexin+/PI+ (late apoptotic and necrotic cells). Subsequently, the percentage of each population was calculated, as
previously described . TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells after 3 and 6 days of incubation with everolimus, respectively at the concentration of 5 and 50
nM, were scraped, washed twice in cold PBS and resuspended in lysis buffer containing 150 mM NaCl, 10 mM Tris-HCl, 1 mM EDTA, 1% Triton
X-100, 10% glycerol, 5 μg/ml leupeptin, 2 μg/ml aprotinin, 5 mM Na4P2O7 and 1 mM Na3VO4. Cellular debris were pelleted by centrifugation at
13,000 χ g for 15 min. at 4°C and the supernatant was collected for protein analysis. Cell extracts (30 μg/lane) were resolved on a 10% SDS-
PAGE, transferred to nitrocellulose sheets at 100 mA for 1.5 hr, and probed with specific antibodies: anti-caspase 3, anti-caspase 8, anti-
caspase 9 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) (Cell Signaling Technology, Beverly, MA, USA). Blots were then developed using enhanced
chemo-luminescence detection reagents and exposed to X-ray film. TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells were plated in six-well plates at a density of 2.5 χ
105 per well. The following day, cell culture medium of both cell lines was replaced with medium containing everolimus at a concentration of
5 and 75 nM, respectively, in TT and MZ-CRC-1. After 3 days plates were refreshed and everolimus was added again. After 6 days of treatment,
cells were washed with PBS and fixed with 2% formaldehyde, 0.2% glutaraldehyde in PBS for 5 min. at room temperature. Then, cells were
washed twice with PBS and incubated at 37°C (no CO2) with fresh senescence-associated-β galactosidase stain solution: 1 mg/ml X-Gal, 5 mM
potassium ferricyanide, 5 mM potassium ferrocyanide, 150 mM NaCl, 2 mM MgCl2 and 30 mM citric acid/phosphate buffer (0.1M citric acid and
0.2M Na2HPO4). Staining was evident in 1.5 hr for TT and 3 hrs for MZ-CRC1. β-Galactosidase positive cells were detected and counted by
light microscopy. For each determination, in 30 randomly selected fields at 20χ magnification β-galactosidase positive and negative cells
were counted twice. The number of positive (blue) cells was divided by the total number of counted cells resulting in the percentage of
β-galactosidase positive cells. Values of experiments in triplicates were averaged. The comparative statistical evaluation among groups was
first performed by the ANOVA test. When significant differences were found, a comparison between groups was made using the Newman–Keuls
test. Student’s t-test was used to assess differences between two groups. In all analyses, values of P < 0.05 were considered statistically
significant. Data are reported as mean ± S.E.M. Patient 1 (a 60-yr-old male) had a clinical diagnosis of MTC in 1999 on the basis of
evidence of cervical enlargement, associated to high serum concentrations of calcitonin (185 pg/ml), thyroid nodules and cervical lymph node
enlargement at the neck ultrasonography. An intervention of thyroidectomy plus central and left latero-cervical lymph node dissection was
performed and histology confirmed the diagnosis of MTC with lymph node metastases. After surgery, there was persistence of high serum
calcitonin concentrations. In 2004, tumour progression occurred with appearance of bone metastases and, subsequently in 2006, with the onset
of palpable right latero-cervical lymph node enlargement leading to a second surgery for removal of lymph node metastases. Bone pain was
initially controlled by a treatment with zoledronic acid (4 mg a month i.v.) since September 2005. Because of the progressive worsening of
clinical symptoms related to bone metastases, a treatment with octreotide LAR 30 mg a month was started in 2006 with poor relief on
symptoms. Because an Indium-111-DTPA-Phe1-octreotide Octreoscan (Mallinckrodt Medical, Petten, The Netherlands; 120–200 MBq) was positive in
correspondence of vertebral metastases (Krenning score grade 3), three cycles of radio-labelled somatostatin analogue therapy with
90Y-Dotatate were performed in 2006–2007. No significant relief of bone symptoms was observed and a marked progression of vertebral
metastases with spinal cord compression and onset of paraplegia and parasthesia occurred in 2008. For this reason, 10 sessions of external
radiotherapy for a cumulative radiant dose of 30 Gy were performed in May and June 2008 to treat vertebral metastases of the dorsal tract
(D4–D6). However, bone symptoms and signs persisted unmodified and a further tumour progression at skeletal level was observed at the MRI
evaluation. In December 2008, everolimus was started at the dose of 10 mg a day per os under compassionate use. Patient 2 (a 74-yr-old male)
had a clinical diagnosis of MTC in 1974. Medullary thyroid cancer was revealed by appearance of cervical enlargement, associated to thyroid
nodules at the neck ultrasonography and high serum concentration of calcitonin (215 pg/ml). A total thyroidectomy was performed and the
diagnosis of MTC was confirmed at the pathological examination. After surgery, serum calcitonin levels were still positive and progressively
increasing. Two other operations were performed in 2001 and 2007 to remove lymph node metastases detected at the right and left latero-
cervical compartments. Post-operative follow-up revealed persistence of high serum calcitonin concentrations and evidence of cervical and
mediastinal lymph node metastases and bone metastases associated to clinical symptoms (diarrhoea, flushing and bone pain). In March 2008, a
treatment with octreotide LAR 30 mg a month was started resulting in mild improvement of diarrhoea and flushing but progressive worsening of
bone pain from vertebral metastases. A treatment with zoledronic acid (4 mg a month i.v.) was started in October 2008 and discontinued in
December 2008 because of insurgence of severe gastro-intestinal symptoms at each administration. In February 2009, everolimus was started at
the dose of 5 mg a day per os under compassionate use. Patient 1 had a rapid serum calcitonin decrease 1 month after the start of
everolimus, then the levels moderately raised again at 2 month follow-up, after 2 weeks of drug discontinuation for haematological toxicity
(grade 3 thrombocytopenia and grade 2 anaemia) and resumption of everolimus treatment at a dose of 5 mg a day for 2 other weeks (Fig. 1A and
C). Because the third month of treatment, everolimus was given at the dose of 10 mg a day resulting in a progressive decrease of calcitonin
until the 5-month follow-up. Since month 6, the dose was lowered to 5 mg a day for 2 months and then to 5 mg every other day because of
grade 2 thrombocytopenia and grade 3 abdominal toxicity, including nausea, diarrhoea and abdominal pain. This change in the dose of
everolimus resulted in a mild and progressive increase of calcitonin concentration. Serum CEA variations after treatment paralled at a lower
extent CT variations along the follow-up. Calcitonin and CEA serum concentrations in Patient 1 (A, C) and Patient 2 (B, D) because the start
of the treatment with octreotide LAR 30 mg a month and then during treatment with everolimus at different doses. At the morphological
evaluation, skeletal MRI was substantially unchanged after 6 months of treatment with everolimus; however, a mild decrease was reported for
vertebral lesions of the lumbar tract. Neurological symptoms were consistent with paraplegia and incapacity of bladder empting with
necessity of urinary catheterization at the beginning of everolimus treatment. Both paraplegia and bladder dysfunction markedly improved 1
month after treatment with partial recovery of walking and bladder function. This condition was maintained for 6 months. After everolimus
dose decrease and then discontinuation, paraplegia and bladder dysfunction relapsed and progressively worsened along the follow-up.
Everolimus was withdrawn by the patient himself in December 2009 after 1 year of treatment due to a further tumour progression at skeletal
level with involvement of all vertebral bodies and skull and consequent worsening of neurological symptoms. Patient 2 received initially
everolimus at the dose of 5 mg a day because of a mild chronic anaemia (haemoglobin: 10.5 g/dl) suggesting not to administrate the full dose
of 10 mg a day. As the drug was clinically and biochemically well-tolerated, since month 2 the dose was increased to 10 mg a day. This
change in the dose of everolimus resulted in a marked decrease of serum calcitonin, which was substantially unchanged after the first month
of treatment with 5 mg a day (Fig. 1B and D). Serum CEA levels were even increased under everolimus 5 mg a day as compared to baseline and
mildly decreased after increasing the dose to 10 mg. Then, because of insurgence of grade 2 anaemia and grade 3 neutropenia with fever and
need of antibiotic therapy, everolimus was discontinued until recovery to grade 1 haematological toxicity. Since month 6, everolimus was
restarted to 5 mg a day resulting in stable calcitonin concentrations and variable CEA concentrations with initial decrease and subsequent
regrowth. Since month 13, everolimus was increased to 10 mg a day resulting in a progressive decrease of calcitonin and CEA concentrations.
The treatment with everolimus was still ongoing at the last follow-up at the same dose with good tolerance. After the beginning of
everolimus, no diarrhoea and flushing were complained by the patient while bone pain was quite well-controlled only requiring short-time
treatment with oral analgesics. At the skeletal MRI, vertebral lesions were substantially unchanged after 6 months of treatment with
everolimus, then increased in number at 12-month follow-up but not further progressed at 18-month follow-up. At the multislice CT scan,
mediastinal lymph node metastases were unchanged in size along the follow-up; however, a large area of necrosis was evident within the
biggest lesion at pre-vascular level since the first CT evaluation 3 months after the beginning of everolimus treatment. At the colour
Doppler ultrasonography, a dramatic change of tumour vascularization was observed in the laterocervical lymph node metastases (Fig. 2), with
a mild decrease in the left laterocervical lymph node metastasis after treatment as compared to baseline (15 mm versus 22 mm, respectively).
Colour Doppler ultrasonography imaging of a laterocervical lymph node metastasis before (A) and after 3 months of treatment with everolimus
10 mg a day (B). Everolimus significantly suppressed the growth of TT cells [median inhibition concentration (IC50) 0.33 nM, maximal
inhibition of proliferation: −48%] in a dose-dependent manner after 6 days of incubation (Fig. 3A). The anti-proliferative effect of
everolimus was less prominent in MZ-CRC-1 cell line, as shown by the higher IC50 (2.3 nM) and lower maximal inhibition of proliferation
(−22.5%) compared to TT cells (Fig. 3B). Incubation of TT cells (Fig. 3C) and MZ-CRC-1 (Fig. 3D) with everolimus for 6 days did not
significantly affect calcitonin secretion. Effects of 6 days of incubation with or without everolimus on cell proliferation (A, B) and CT
secretion (C, D) in TT (A, C) and MZ-CRC-1 (B, D). Values are expressed as the percentage of control (untreated cells) and represent the
mean ± S.E.M. of at least three independent experiments in six replicates. *P < 0.001 and **P < 0.05 versus control. After 6 days of
incubation, everolimus (5 nM) induced a significant accumulation of TT cells in G0/G1 phase (+13%, P = 0.05; Fig. 4A) and decreased the
fraction of cells in S phase (−35%, P < 0.001; Fig. 4B) compared with the control. Similarly, everolimus (75 nM) increased the percentage of
MZ-CRC-1 cells in G0/G1 phase (+18%, P < 0.05; Fig. 4C) and decreased the fraction of cells in S phase (−40%, P < 0.001; Fig. 4D). Cell
cycle analysis of TT (A, B) and MZ-CRC-1 (C, D) cells after 6 days of incubation with everolimus, respectively at the concentrations of 5
and 75 nM. Data are expressed as mean ± S.E.M. of the percentage of cells in the G0/G1 (A, C) and S (B, D) phase of three independent
performed experiments, as compared with untreated control cells. Control values have been set to 100%. *P = 0.05, **P < 0.05 and ***P <
0.001 versus untreated control. In TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells, the effects on the apoptosis of 6 days of treatment with everolimus, respectively
at the concentrations of 5 and 75 nM, were examined by flow cytometry with Annexin V and propidium iodide. No significant change in the
percentage of early and late apoptotic cells was observed during incubation with everolimus compared to control in both cell lines. To
exclude any effect of everolimus on apoptosis, we investigated the activation of caspase-3, caspase-8, caspase-9 and PARP. After 6 days of
incubation everolimus did not modify the expression of cleaved caspases and PARP in both cells compared to untreated cells. Figure 5 shows
the effects of everolimus on apoptosis in MZ-CRC-1 after 6 days of incubation with everolimus, similar results were observed in TT cells and
after 3 days of incubation in both cell lines (data not shown). Effect of everolimus on apoptosis in human MZ-CRC-1 cell line. MZ-CRC-1
cells were incubated with 75 nM of everolimus for 6 days. Subsequently, the proportions of cells in early (A) and late (B) apoptosis were
analysed by flow cytometry. Values are demonstrated as average and S.E.M. of three independent performed experiments. During this experiment
total cell lysates were analysed by Western blot to detect the cleavage of caspases 3, 8, 9 and PARP (C). Actin was used as control for
equal lading. To evaluate the effects of mTOR inhibitors on cellular senescence, TT and MZ-CRC-1 cells were treated with everolimus at the
concentrations of 5 and 75 nM, respectively. As shown in Figure 6A, analysis of senescence based on cellular β-galactosidase activity
revealed that the percentage of senescent TT cells to be doubled after everolimus treatment compared to the control (14.6 ± 3.3% and 7.2 ±
1.3%, respectively, P < 0.001). Although in MZ-CRC-1 there was no significant increase of senescent cells after everolimus treatment (Fig.
6B). Effect of everolimus on cellular senescence. TT (A) and MZ-CRC-1 (B) cells were treated with everolimus for 6 days at the
concentrations of 5 and 75 nM, respectively, and then were stained for β-galactosidase. The results were reported as the percentage of
β-galactosidase positive cells. The experiments were repeated at least three times. *P < 0.001. Approximately 50% of the patients with MTC
has persistent or relapsing disease after surgery. Although MTC is a slowly growing tumour, more than half of patients with advanced MTC
will not survive beyond 10 years [1, 2]. Considering that surgery is the only curative approach for these patients and no effective therapy
exists for metastatic disease, a novel agent, with a potential anti-secretive and anti-proliferative activity in MTC, may represent a
consistent therapeutic advance. A new clinical scenario is now emerging because of the availability of different compounds, which target
specific molecular pathways. In the field of hereditary MTC, interesting data have been recently reported by using vandetanib, a selective
oral inhibitor of RET, vascular endothelial growth factor receptor, and epidermal growth factor receptor signalling . On the basis of
investigator assessments, 20% of patients (i.e. six of 30 patients) experienced a confirmed partial response (median duration of response at
data cut-off, 10.2 months). An additional 53% of patients (i.e. 16 of 30 patients) experienced stable disease at ≥24 weeks, which yielded a
disease control rate of 73% (i.e. 22 of 30 patients). The authors concluded that vandetanib may provide an effective therapeutic option in
patients with advanced hereditary MTC. Because MTC belongs to the family of neuroendocrine tumours, it has been also investigated for the
expression of somatostatin receptors, the key molecules allowing somatostatin analogues to exert their anti-tumour activity [3, 4]. However,
no anti-tumour effects have been observed in MTC patients treated with octreotide and lanreotide, the actually available somatostatin
analogues . AKT-mTOR pathway has been demonstrated to be overexpressed in neuroendocrine tumours as well as everolimus, a mTOR inhibitor,
was demonstrated to be effective in neuroendocrine tumour cell lines [10, 13]. In a recent in vitro study on MTC, everolimus significantly
inhibited cell viability in a dose- and time-dependent manner. It diminished phosphorylation of mTOR and p70S6K in both TT cells and
cultured human MTCs, induced cell cycle arrest in the G0/G1 phase in TT cells, but had no effect on apoptosis . Interestingly, another study
highlighted that the combination of everolimus with octreotide/pasireotide was significantly more anti-proliferative than either agent alone
in neuroendocrine tumour cell lines. The dose-dependent increase of Akt phosphorylation observed with everolimus was completely inhibited by
the combination therapy . Furthermore, in patients with digestive neuroendocrine tumours, the combination therapy everolimus/octreotide was
reported to have important effects on tumour proliferation, resulting in objective tumour response and stabilization in about 20% and 70% of
cases, respectively . In this study, everolimus showed to induce significant anti-proliferative effects in both TT and MZ-CRC-1 MTC cell
lines. This anti-tumour activity seems to be mediated by the induction of cell cycle arrest in G0/G1 phase, but not of apoptosis. Beyond the
apoptosis it is emerging recently that senescence could be a potential endpoint for tumour therapy . Cellular senescence is an irreversible
growth arrest, preferentially in G1 phase, that limits the lifespan of mammalian cells and prevents unlimited cell proliferation protecting
against the development and progression of cancer. Senescent cells are unable to divide, penetrate the surrounding tissues and metastasize .
In humans, the role of mTOR in longevity and cellular senescence is complex [24, 25]. It has been suggested that activation of p53 induces
cell cycle arrest, after which its ability to exercise senescence or quiescence is dependent on its interaction with the mTOR pathway . On
the other hand, Ota et al. recently described that everolimus induces senescence involving down-regulation of Sirtuin 1 in human endothelial
cells . In our study we showed that everolimus induced senescence exclusively in TT cells, as shown by the significant increase in
β-galactosidase positive cells during incubation with mTOR inhibitor. This could partially explain the better anti-proliferative activity of
everolimus in TT cells compared to MZ-CRC-1. However, we cannot exclude that additional indirect mechanisms (effects on growth factors
production, inhibition of angiogenesis, etc.) are involved in the anti-tumour activity of everolimus in MTC. Moreover, because we have
exposed MTC cells to everolimus for a long incubation time, we cannot exclude that secondary necrosis occurred aside senescence. However,
our findings suggest a relevant, even if not necessarily unique, role of senescence in the biological effects observed in our experimental
conditions. Finally, everolimus in combination with octreotide was evaluated for the first time in the treatment of patients with MTC. In
this preliminary observation, calcitonin hypersecretion was significantly decreased in both patients under study, while CEA decrease
paralleled calcitonin variations but at a lower extent. Since everolimus did not result in a significant inhibition of calcitonin secretion
on MTC cell lines, the decrease of serum calcitonin concentrations observed during treatment with everolimus may be explained by a potent
anti-tumour activity of this agent. In fact, a tumour response was observed in both patients, as expressed by indirect signs of inhibition
of bone metastases, such as decrease of nerve compression and improvement of paraplegia in patient 1, tumour necrosis and decrease in tumour
size and vascularization of lymph node metastases in patient 2. A relevant point is that all the anti-proliferative effects were observed
when everolimus was given at the full dose of 10 mg a day and not when a lower dose was administered. On the other hand, the continuous
administration of everolimus 10 mg a day resulted in grades 2–3 side effects which required dose reduction. Perhaps a helpful option could
be to start the treatment with lower dose of everolimus, less active on tumour growth but being able to induce a gradual patient adaptation
to the drug toxicity, and then to switch to the full dose to obtain prolonged anti-proliferative effects. In this study, patient 2
experienced more gradual but more durable anti-secretive and anti-proliferative effects than patient 1 and this may in part reflect the
different modality of administration of everolimus. It would be also crucial to introduce this treatment in a early stage of disease when
patient conditions are less compromised by tumour spread. The clinical results of this report are only preliminary and need to be confirmed
by clinical trials on a larger series of patients that we are beginning to enrol in an ongoing clinical trial in our institutions. In
conclusions, this study reports for the first time that everolimus in combination with octreotide may be effective as anti-tumour therapy in
patients with progressive and metastatic MTC, suggesting to perform further larger studies to confirm these potential effects. This study
was partially supported by a grant from the Italian Minister of Research and University in Rome (No. 2008LFK7J5). We thank F. Caraglia for
his useful technical support. The authors declare that there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the
impartiality of the research reported.
