Context: Exposure to air pollution can result in the onset of arrhythmias. Case presentation: We present a case of a 58-year-old woman who
volunteered to participate in a controlled exposure to concentrated ambient particles. Twenty minutes into the exposure, telemetry revealed
new onset of atrial fibrillation. The exposure was discontinued, and she reverted to normal sinus rhythm approximately 2 hr later. No
abnormality was evident on the volunteer’s laboratory examination or echocardiography that could explain an increased risk for
supraventricular arrhythmia. Discussion: Epidemiologic evidence strongly supports a relationship between exposure to air pollutants and
cardiovascular disease, but population-level data are not directly relevant to the clinical presentation of individual cases. To our
knowledge, this is the only case report of an individual suffering an episode of atrial fibrillation after exposure to an air pollutant. The
resolution of the arrhythmia with termination of the particle exposure further supports a causal relationship between the two. Relevance to
clinical practice: Exposure to air pollution, including particulate matter, may cause supraventricular arrhythmias. Epidemiologic
investigation supports a positive relationship between exposure to air pollution and cardiovascular disease (Rich et al. 2006), with the
number of deaths from such illness estimated to exceed that for respiratory disease after exposures to elevated levels of pollutants
(Dockery 2001). Air pollutants have been associated with acute cardiac events, including myocardial infarctions and cardiac arrests
(Forastiere et al. 2005; Rosenthal et al. 2008; Zanobetti and Schwartz 2005). In addition, air pollution has been associated with the
incidence of cardiac arrhythmias (Link and Dockery 2010; Peters et al. 2000; Routledge and Ayres 2005). Studies have demonstrated that
discharges by implantable cardioverter defibrillators (ICDs) for ventricular arrhythmias increase with higher levels of black carbon, fine
particles, coarse particles, nitric oxide, ozone, nitrogen dioxide, nitric oxide, carbon monoxide, and sulfur dioxide (Metzger et al. 2007;
Peters et al. 2000; Rich et al. 2005, 2006; Santos et al. 2008). Evidence also supports an association between measures of air pollution and
the incidence of supraventricular arrhythmias. In an ICD study, Rich et al. (2005) found a statistically significant relationship between
the incidence of supraventricular arrhythmias and increased ozone concentrations in the hour preceding the arrhythmia. Holter examinations
revealed an increased risk of supraventricular arrhythmias in association with 5-day moving averages of fine particles ozone, and sulfate in
nonsmoking adults (Sarnat et al. 2006). In yet another Holter study, Berger et al. (2006) found that both supraventricular and ventricular
arrhythmias increased in association with PM and nitrogen dioxide exposures (in the previous 24–72 hr and with 5-day moving averages) among
men with coronary artery disease. These arrhythmias developed within a few hours of increased levels of air pollution (Ljungman et al.
2008). Although epidemiologic data strongly support a relationship between exposure to air pollutants and cardiovascular disease, this
methodology does not permit a description of the clinical presentation in an individual case. To our knowledge, this is the first case
report of cardiovascular disease after exposure to elevated concentrations of any air pollutant. A 58-year-old Caucasian female visited the
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s Human Studies Facility in Chapel Hill, North Carolina, to participate in a study requiring sequential
exposures to filtered air and concentrated ambient particles (CAPs). Protocols and consent forms were approved by the University of North
Carolina (UNC) School of Medicine Committee on the Protection of the Rights of Human Subjects, and the subject provided informed consent.
Two years previously, she had participated in an identical exposure protocol without any complication. At that time, two 24-hr Holter
examinations obtained during the exposures to filtered air and CAPs demonstrated 29 and 54 episodes of supraventricular ectopy,
respectively. On the day of exposure to CAPs, the volunteer had no symptoms. The participant had a history of osteoarthritis and
hypertension, and she was being treated with an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor and a diuretic (10 mg lisinopril and 12.5 mg
hydrochlorothiazide, respectively) for the hypertension. Previous surgeries included a hernia repair, a cholecystectomy, and a total left
knee arthroplasty. Her family history was significant due to the death of her father at 57 years of age from a myocardial infarction. The
volunteer was a lifetime nonsmoker. On physical examination, she was 173 cm tall and weighed 104.4 kg (body mass index, 34.9; waist, 45
inches). Her pulse was regular at 66/min, and her blood pressure was 144/61 mmHg. The baseline electrocardiogram (ECG) showed normal sinus
rhythm (Figure 1A). A Holter monitor demonstrated evidence of increased supraventricular ectopy, with 157 ± 34 premature atrial contractions
per hour during the 3 hr immediately preceding the exposure to CAPs. The volunteer’s ECG (12 lead and rhythm strip) before (A) and
immediately after (B) exposure to concentrated ambient particles. The ECG before the exposure (A) reveals a regular sinus rhythm with
defined P waves (arrows); the ECG after the exposure (B) is irregular, with “flutter” waves (arrows). Twenty-three minutes into the exposure
to CAPs (filter weight, 112 μg/m3; particle number, 563,912/cc), the telemetry monitor revealed that the subject had nonsustained atrial
fibrillation that quickly organized into atrial flutter. She was immediately removed from the exposure chamber. The volunteer reported no
symptoms, and there was no change in the physical examination. The 12-lead ECG verified that she remained in atrial flutter (Figure 1B). Her
serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, and complete blood count were all normal. Creatine kinase and the MB fraction
were also normal. During the transfer to the UNC Medical Center (~ 2 hr after the onset of the arrhythmia), she spontaneously reverted to a
normal sinus rhythm. The patient was admitted to the hospital overnight for observation and telemetry. The next morning, the ECG documented
normal sinus rhythm. Her serum electrolytes, blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, glucose, creatine kinase, and the MB fraction were again
normal, and her complete blood count was normal except for a hematocrit of 35.7% (the lower limit of normal is 36.0%). Resting transthoracic
echocardiography demonstrated normal right ventricular contraction with an ejection fraction of 55–60%, aortic sclerosis, and diastolic left
ventricular dysfunction. The left atrium was considered mildly dilated; all other chambers of the heart were normal in size. She was
discharged and was not prescribed a new medication. Approximately 6 weeks later, she underwent electrophysiology study, which did not
provoke atrial fibrillation or significant atrial ectopy. The study did indicate a reentrant circuit of the cavotricuspid isthmus, which was
ablated to prevent potential future episodes of atrial flutter. The volunteer demonstrated evidence of increased supraventricular ectopy
immediately preceding her exposure to CAPs, but there was no evidence of atrial arrhythmias. She then suffered the onset of atrial
fibrillation a very short time after being exposed to CAPs. Within 2–3 hr after the exposure stopped, the arrhythmia resolved and she
returned to normal sinus rhythm. Atrial fibrillation is the most common supraventricular arrhythmia, affecting 1–2% of the general
population (Falk 2001). This arrhythmia is uncommon in people < 60 years of age, but it afflicts about 10% of the population by 80 years of
age. Risk factors for atrial fibrillation include hypertension (especially uncontrolled), coronary artery disease, heart failure,
cerebrovascular disease, diabetes, thyroid conditions, sleep apnea, obesity, a past history of rheumatic heart disease and congenital heart
defects, pericarditis, sick sinus syndrome, a family history of atrial fibrillation, and echocardiographic abnormalities (Kannel and
Benjamin 2008, 2009). In addition, cigarette smoking, alcohol use, caffeine consumption, and stimulant drugs can help trigger atrial
fibrillation. Of these defined risk factors, the volunteer had a history of well-controlled hypertension, and her body mass index was
consistent with obesity. Her history of premature atrial contractions may also have increased her risk for atrial fibrillation (Binici et
al. 2010). In a similar manner, preexisting cardiovascular disease, diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease, and current cigarette smoking all increase susceptibility for cardiovascular disease associated with air pollution (Chen et al.
2006; Liao et al. 2009; Mills et al. 2007; Wheeler et al. 2006; Whitsel et al. 2009; Zareba et al. 2009). There was no obvious explanation
for her onset of a supraventricular arrhythmia during the exposure. Although coincident atrial fibrillation cannot be excluded, the onset of
her arrhythmia was associated with her exposure to ambient air pollution particles. The correlation between the resolution of the arrhythmia
and the termination of the CAP exposure further supports a causal relationship between the two. Systemic inflammation and underlying
oxidative stress may increase the risk of atrial fibrillation (Kumagai et al. 2004). Patients with atrial fibrillation demonstrate evidence
of inflammation, with elevated levels of inflammatory markers, including C-reactive protein, interleukin-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α
(Chung et al. 2001; Gaudino et al. 2003). Some evidence suggests that statin treatment may potentially alter the risk for this arrhythmia by
modifying oxidative stress (Siu et al. 2003). The specific association between increased arrhythmia induction and air pollution may reflect
oxidant generation and inflammation after exposure, consistent with mechanisms involved in the initiation and maintenance of some other
forms of atrial fibrillation (Mazzoli-Rocha et al. 2010). The oxidative stress and inflammation associated with the pollutant have been
postulated to affect coronary perfusion and consequently enhance the propensity for such arrhythmias through tissue ischemia. However, the
rapid onset of this volunteer’s atrial fibrillation after CAP exposure suggests that the basis for the arrhythmia may be a disruption of the
normal cardiac autonomic control rather than a systemic inflammation, because the latter would require a longer period of time to develop
(Routledge and Ayres 2005). In an animal model, diesel exhaust increased the sensitivity of the heart to triggered arrhythmias via an
activation of airway sensory receptors [e.g., TRPA1 (transient receptor potential cation channel A1)] (Hazari et al. 2011). Several
researchers have suggested that this leads to autonomic imbalance and a predisposition for arrhythmia development. A comparable mechanism
has been proposed to explain the cardiac response to ozone and cigarette smoke (Joad et al. 1998; Mutoh et al. 2000). This report has been
reviewed by the National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, and approved for
publication. Approval does not signify that the contents necessarily reflect the views and policies of the agency, nor does mention of trade
names or commercial products constitute endorsement or recommendation for use. The authors declare they have no actual or potential
competing financial interests.
