This report concludes that there is no evidence to recommend routine closure of 5-mm trocar incisions; the choice should be left to the
discretion of the individual surgeon. To evaluate the evidence for fascial closure of 5-mm laparoscopic trocar sites. We conducted
electronic database searches of PubMed and the Cochrane Library for articles published between November 2008 and December 2010. We used the
keywords trocar hernia, trocar-site hernia, laparoscopic hernia, trocar port-site hernia, laparoscopic port-site hernia. Prospective and
retrospective case series, randomized trials, literature reviews, and randomized animal studies of trocar hernias on abdominal wall defects
from gynecologic, urologic, and general surgery literature were reviewed. The Cochrane Database was reviewed for pertinent studies.
Metaanalysis was not possible due to the significant heterogeneity between studies and lack of randomized trials large enough to assess the
incidence of this rare complication. Trocar-site hernias are a rare but known complication of laparoscopic surgery. Trocar size ≥10mm is
associated with an increased rate of hernia development. Currently, the accepted gynecologic surgical practice is closure of fascial
incisions ≥10mm, while incisions <10mm do not require closure. However, large prospective and retrospective case series reports from general
surgery and urology literature support nonclosure of blunt or radially dilating trocars in paramedian sites. Expert opinion and small case
reports suggest that in cases of prolonged manipulation of 5-mm trocar sites the surgeon should consider fascial closure, because extension
of the initial incision may have occurred. There is no evidence to recommend routine closure of 5-mm trocar incisions; the choice should
continue to be left to the discretion of the individual surgeon. The case presented herein is of a 5-mm trocar-site incisional hernia. This
is a rare complication, because most trocar-site hernias reported in the gynecologic, urology, and general surgery literature have developed
at incisions ≥10mm. The incidence of trocar hernias ranges from 0.2% to 3.1% in large case series and reviews (Table 1) 1–5 and has been
correlated to trocar size.1,4,5 Trocar hernias at a 5-mm port site are infrequently reported in the literature. There have been 10 published
case reports in adults of 5-mm trocar hernias (Table 2).6–9 The largest number of 5-mm cases was published by Nezhat2 in 1997 for a total of
5 of 11 trocar-site hernias in a retrospective case review of approximately 5300 patients. Factors that may be involved in the development
of hernias that were addressed in the literature include trocar size, location, trocar type, trocar manipulation, entry and closure
techniques, and preexisting fascial defects. The objective of this review was to analyze the evidence for closure of 5-mm fascial incisions.
5-mm Trocar Hernia Case Reports A 43-year-old gravida 2 para 2 woman underwent a laparoscopic hysterectomy with removal of a 20-week size
fibroid uterus. An 11-mm umbilical radially expanding trocar was placed using the Veress needle, followed by 3 accessory 5-mm ports in the
right, left, and suprapubic regions under direct visualization. The umbilical port site was expanded to 14-mm for morcellation, and the
fascia was later closed with 2 interrupted 0 polygalactin suture using the Carter-Thomason. The 5-mm fascial incisions were not closed. The
uterine weight was 1505g. The patient's recovery was unremarkable. She did have nausea and vomiting in the immediate recovery period that
resolved with medication and went home the evening of post-operative day one. On postoperative day 4, she developed nausea and vomiting and
presented to the gynecology clinic having passed one bowel movement. Upon examination, she was found to be afebrile, have a soft, mildly
distended abdomen with normal bowel sounds and tenderness over the right lower quadrant incision. The incisions were intact without drainage
or erythema. She had a normal leukocyte count. Computed tomography of her abdomen and pelvis showed a spigelian hernia in the right lateral
abdominal wall at the level of the iliac crest, with a herniated loop of small bowel (Figure 1). She was immediately taken to the operating
room. Herniated loop of small bowel through Spigelian fascia. Intraoperatively, the herniated small bowel was found to be viable and was
manually reduced into the abdomen. The peritoneum and fascia were closed with a 3-0-polygalactin running stitch. The patient did well and
went home the next morning. This patient's hernia development may have been related to the extensive trocar manipulation that was required
to operate on a 1505g myomatous uterus that resulted in expansion of the fascial incision. Prospective and retrospective case series,
randomized trials, literature reviews, and randomized animal studies of trocar hernias on abdominal wall defects from gynecologic, urologic,
and general surgery studies were reviewed. Metaanalysis was not possible due to the significant heterogeneity between studies and lack of
randomized trials large enough to assess the incidence of this rare complication. The studies were organized by (1) incidence of incisional
hernia development via large case series, (2) hernia development by trocar type and location, (3) animal studies on abdominal wall defects
from trocar types, (4) pre-existing fascial defects, and (5) trocar manipulation. Para-median locations versus median locations (including
the umbilicus) have been associated with conflicting rates of trocar hernias reported in the literature (Table 1).1–5 The linea alba,
including the umbilicus, lacks the muscle support in spontaneous fascial closure due to the lack of rectus muscle. Paramedian incisions have
been shown in animal studies to be supported by muscle re-opposition after blunt trocars were used (Table 3).10,11 Para-median incisions
have also been shown in Level 2 general surgery studies not to require fascial closure when blunt trocars are used (Table 4).12–17 The
arcuate line may also demarcate an inherent weakness of the abdominal fascia. It is the place where the fascia of the internal oblique and
the transversus abdominus of the posterior rectus sheath migrate to join the anterior sheath, leaving only the transversalis fascia and
peritoneum for closure support deep to the rectus muscle (Figures 2 and 3). Abdominal fascia above the arcuate line. The posterior rectus
sheath is made up of the internal oblique, transversus abdominous, and transversalis fascia. Image reprinted from Netter's, public domain
courtesy of Wikipedia.com. Abdominal fascia below the arcuate line. The posterior rectus sheath is made up of only the transversalis fascia.
Image reprinted from Netter's, public domain courtesy of Wikipedia. com. Blunt (conical, pyramidal, radially dilating, nonbladed) have been
shown to have the benefit of decreased length and surface area of fascial defects over bladed or cutting trocars in animal studies with
muscle splitting instead of cutting (Table 3). This evidence supports nonclosure of 5-mm fascial defects made with blunt trocars. Extensive
manipulation of the trocar port site may widen a port-site incision beyond the initial length. Fascial and peritoneal stretching of the
original incision may occur from several causes: specimen removal, multiple reinsertions of the sheath, advanced surgical difficulty
requiring increased force and torque on the fascia, and prolonged operative time. Nezhat's review2 reported that the substantial
manipulation of the 5-mm operative port sites required for the surgeries resulted in trocar-site hernias. All 5 cases were associated with
advanced surgical complications: extensive adhesions, severe endometriosis, large uterine leiomyomata.2 All cases occurred in the left
supra-pubic location where the bulk of manipulation was performed and no closure was performed. Ramachandran18 found an 18% incidence of
pre-existing umbilical fascial defects in 2100 patients undergoing laparoscopic surgery for various gynecologic and general surgery
indications. All identified defects were repaired, and a relationship was not found between the repaired pre-existing fascial defect and the
development of a hernia.18 In contrast, in a report on 1300 laparoscopic cholecystectomies, Azurin3 reported 9 of 10 trocar hernias
developed in patients who had been diagnosed with a pre-existing hernia preoperatively despite intraoperative repair. Trocar incisions at
sites of pre-existing hernias should be carefully evaluated to confirm adequate closure. A Cochrane review from 2008 that evaluated
different entry techniques reported no advantage in using any single technique over another to prevent major complications.19 They did not
report data relating to laparoscopic trocar hernias. Only one randomized trial20 conducted an intraoperative evaluation of laparoscopic
closure techniques. Elashry et al20 looked at closure of 95 twelve-mm trocar port sites in 32 patients and compared the Carter-Thomason (CT-
NP) needle point suture device (CooperSurgical, Inc, Trumbull, CT) with the Maciol suture needle set (Specialty Surgical Instrumentation,
Nashville, TN), eXit disposable puncture closure device (Progressive Medical, St. Louis, MO), the Endoclose device (Covidien Surgical,
Norwalk, CT), a 14-gauge angiocatheter, Lowsley retractor (CS Surgical Inc, Slidell, LA) with hand-sutured closure, and standard hand-
sutured closure. They found that the CT-NP device was faster (mean time 2.5 minutes) and had secure closure confirmed digitally and
endoscopically, but they did not follow their patients for hernia development.20 This study was underpowered, so no definitive conclusions
can be made about the benefit of one closure type over another in hernia development. Trocar-site hernias are a known complication related
to laparoscopic surgery. Trocar size is the primary measure by which most gynecologic surgeons decide to close fascial incisions;
conventional practice is closure of 10-mm incisions and nonclosure of 5-mm incisions. Fascial closure does not prevent incisional hernia
development. Paramedian location and blunt type trocars are 2 factors that have been extensively reported on in general surgery and urologic
surgery Level II studies as measures by which fascial closure is not required 10-mm and 12-mm incisions. We would recommend surgeons
consider fascial closure in 5-mm incisions where extensive, prolonged manipulation occurred that may have extended or widened the initial
defect. The authors wish to thank Dr. Misa Perron-Burdick and the Kaiser Permanente Oakland Library staff, Mare Gehrke and Angela Hudson,
for their assistance.
