A laparoscopic approach is recommended for the complication of prolapsed sigmoid colon epiploica after total laparoscopic hysterectomy.
Prolapsed epiploica of the sigmoid colon through the vaginal cuff is a rare finding that has never been reported after total laparoscopic
hysterectomy. We encountered a case of prolapsed epiploica of the sigmoid colon in a 40-year-old female, 4 months status after total
laparoscopic hysterectomy. Diagnostic laparoscopy demonstrated prolapsed epiploica of the sigmoid colon through a dehisced vaginal cuff.
Vaginal cuff dehiscence and evisceration of abdominal contents after hysterectomy is a rare complication that was first described in the
early 1900s.1 The incidence ranges from 0.03% to 0.3% after abdominal or vaginal hysterectomy. This number has recently been reported to be
approaching 5% after total laparoscopic or robotic-assisted hysterectomy.2–4 Herein, we report the first known case of prolapsed epiploica
of the sigmoid colon after total laparoscopic hysterectomy. A 40-year-old woman, gravida 4, para 3, underwent total laparoscopic
hysterectomy for a symptomatic fibroid uterus. The procedure was performed in the usual fashion as described by Sokol et al.5 Colpotomy was
performed utilizing the Harmonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) and the KOH Colpotimizer (Cooper Surgical, Trumbull, CT).
Electrocautory was not used during the colpotomy. The vaginal cuff was closed with interrupted figure-of-eight stitches of delayed
absorbable sutures on CT-1 needles. The knots were secured extracorporeally. The procedure was uncomplicated with an uneventful
postoperative course. The patient was discharged after a 23-hour observation. Four months postoperatively, the patient presented as an
outpatient complaining of diffuse abdominal discomfort, postcoital bleeding, and vaginal discharge. On physical examination, the abdomen was
benign. Speculum examination revealed a 3cm×3cm soft tissue mass, firm and globular, protruding from the vaginal apex consistent with
prolapsed viscera. Upon obtaining further history, the patient reported resuming sexual activity 2 weeks postoperatively. She was scheduled
to undergo a diagnostic laparoscopy the following day. Intraoperatively, a moderate amount of dense adhesions of the small and large bowel
to the vaginal cuff was noted. Sharp enterolysis was carried out laparoscopically to obtain visualization of the vaginal cuff. A soft tissue
mass, deemed to be prolapsed epiploica of the sigmoid colon, was subsequently reduced from the vaginal cuff (Figure 1). The cuff appeared
completely dehisced. No signs of cuff cellulitis or pelvic infection were noted. Inspection of the bowel revealed no evidence of ischemia or
serosal injury. The Harmonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH) was used to transect the fatty appendage from the sigmoid colon.
The vaginal cuff was reapproximated laparoscopically with interrupted figure-of-eight stitches by using 2-0 polydioxanone suture (Ethicon,
Somerville, NJ). The patient's recovery was uncomplicated, and she was discharged on postoperative day 2. The final pathology revealed “fat
pad” of the large intestine with acute inflammation. Epiploica originating from the sigmoid colon prolapsed through vaginal cuff. Nezhat et
al6 described the first cases of small bowel evisceration after total laparoscopic hysterectomy in 1996. Small bowel remains the most common
organ, with the ileum being the most common segment of the small bowel, to eviscerate through the vaginal cuff.1 Prolapse cases involving
the omentum, colon, and fallopian tube have also been described after hysterectomy.1,7 We present the first known case of prolapsed
epiploica of the sigmoid colon through the vaginal cuff after total laparoscopic hysterectomy. The only other case of prolapsed epiploica
after hysterectomy was described by Lane in 1965,8 which involved appendiceal epiploica in a 73-year-old patient, 6 years after concurrent
vaginal hysterectomy and repeat enterocele repair. Compared with abdominal and vaginal approaches, laparoscopic hysterectomy appears to have
an increased incidence of cuff dehiscence. The contributing factors to cuff dehiscence are thought to be thermal tissue damage during
colpotomy, suboptimal cuff closure, and early resumption of intercourse.3,4,6,7 Recent reports seem to suggest that robotic-assisted
hysterectomy may share a similarly increased risk of cuff dehiscence,2,9 which further underscores the possible role of thermal tissue
necrosis and devascularization in this complication, as monopolar electrocautory is the main energy modality used during colpotomy in the
robotic approach. In this case, we believe early resumption of intercourse was a significant contributing factor to the cuff dehiscence
along with ultrasonic-induced tissue damage of the Harmonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, OH). Prolapse of the epiploica of the
sigmoid colon is a rare and potential complication of total laparoscopic hysterectomy. A laparoscopic approach may be successfully used in
the management of such a complication. As encountered in this case, visceral prolapse through the vaginal cuff does not always present
acutely after laparoscopic hysterectomy. Gynecologic surgeons performing laparoscopic hysterectomy should be intimately familiar with
different clinical scenarios in which such complications can present. In addition, in-depth knowledge of possible causes of cuff dehiscence
in laparoscopic hysterectomy is a prerequisite to prevention and accurate diagnosis of such complications. This is especially important as
laparoscopic hysterectomy continues to sideline conventional hysterectomy via the abdominal route.
