Minimally invasive techniques may be used in combination to manage difficult problems in general surgery leading to shorter hospital stays
and improved patient satisfaction. Smooth muscle tumors of the stomach, especially when benign, are a common clinical entity and can
represent a therapeutic challenge. Classically the removal of such a tumor requires open laparotomy. We sought to perform this surgery
utilizing minimally invasive technology. We describe a minimally invasive technique combining laparoscopy with endoscopy to remove a
submucosal leiomyoma at the gastroesophageal junction. A 3.3-cm smooth muscle tumor of the gastroesophageal junction was removed completely
and safely with the described procedure and thus saved the patient from requiring a laparotomy. Minimally invasive techniques can be used in
combination to tackle difficult problems in general surgery leading to shorter hospital stays and improved patient satisfaction. Smooth
muscle tumors of the stomach are common and typically grow within the wall of the stomach. The clinical presentation varies depending on
location. Nearly two-thirds of benign smooth muscle gastric tumors are found within the submucosa along the greater curvature.1 Although
laparoscopic approaches to these tumors are not new,2 tumors in the gastroesophageal (GE) junction prove to be more difficult to resect in
the standard wedge fashion creating a therapeutic challenge. Classically, patients with tumors in this area would require an open operation.
Herein, we report a combined laparoscopic and endoscopic approach to the removal of a submucosal smooth muscle gastric tumor near the GE
junction that is both minimally invasive and safe, with the added benefit of avoiding an open operation. This procedure was performed on a
64-year-old female who initially presented with complaints of dysphagia. Preoperative CT scan and upper endoscopy diagnosed a pedunculated
3x3-cm mass near the GE junction. She otherwise had a history of diabetes, hypothyroidism, and hypertension. After gaining pneumoperitoneum
in the left upper quadrant, a 5-mm, 30-degree scope was introduced into the abdominal cavity. Additional ports used included a 5-mm
epigastric port, a 5-mm port in the right subcostal margin, anterior axillary line, and a 12-mm port at the base of the falciform ligament.
A complete diagnostic laparoscopy was performed to rule out any additional disease. Endoscopy was then performed and the stomach was
insufflated. A gastrotomy was made laparoscopically by using electrocautery and dilated with a Maryland dissector. A 12-mm Applied Medical
Kii trocar was placed into the abdominal cavity under direct laparoscopic guidance and then manipulated into the stomach using both
laparoscopic and endoscopic guidance. The 5-mL balloon on this trocar was then inflated allowing us to seal the stomach and tent it to the
anterior abdominal wall along with the trocar's outer device (Figures 1 and 2). Two additional 5-mm Kii trocars were placed into the abdomen
and subsequently into the stomach in a similar fashion. The stomach is tented to the anterior abdominal wall after placement of intragastric
trocars. Endoscopic view of 2 intragastric trocars. The endoscope was left in place to define the GE junction. The submucosal tumor was
grasped and retracted away from the GE junction (Figure 3) while a 30-mm endo-GIA stapler was used to divide the mucosa just below the tumor
separating it from the stomach (Figure 4). There was no full-thickness injury to the stomach, and following the removal of the tumor the
mucosa was noted to be intact. A small, bleeding vessel along the staple line was oversown with an intracorporeal silk suture to achieve
hemostasis. Retracting the submucosal tumor while the endoscopic defines the GE junction. Resection of the tumor with an endo-GIA stapler.
The specimen was removed using an EndoCatch bag. The endoscope was retroflexed, and the GE junction was intact. The trocars were removed
from the stomach. The 2 port-site gastrotomies were resected by stapling a portion of the greater curvature with an endo-GIA stapler. The
remaining gastrotomy was closed in 2 layers via intracorporeal suturing. The stomach was placed under saline to ensure no leaks were
present. Lastly, the residual air was evacuated, and the endoscope was withdrawn. The remaining laparoscopic ports were removed and an
endoclosure device was used to close the fascia at the 12-mm port site. The patient stayed in-house for 3 days postoperatively. She was
started on a regular diet on postoperative day 2 and was discharged without incident a day later. She reported no additional symptoms at her
2-week follow-up. Pathology showed a leiomyoma with a maximal diameter of 3.3cm along with oxyntic type mucosa with chronic gastritis. There
was no evidence of a GIST tumor or a schwannoma. There are both benign and malignant varieties of smooth muscle tumors of the gastric wall.
Because the majority of these tumors, when benign, grow within the submucosa,1 this offers an opportunity to perform a minimally invasive
resection as opposed to the standard laparotomy with similar long-term outcomes.3 With recent advances, many groups have completed these
operations laparoscopically4 or even thoracoscopically5 with good results. The earlier described laparoscopic approaches to gastric tumors
were wedge resections, which work well for tumors in the body of the stomach,6,7 but do not address tumors in the antrum or the GE junction.
Song et al8 recognized the problem with wedge resections of tumors close to the GE junction and reported a transgastric approach where the
tumor was everted through a gastrotomy created laparoscopically. While this allows minimal trauma to the stomach, it requires careful
preoperative planning and patient selection to ensure proper gastrotomy placement. A group from Seoul then reported performing resection of
GE junction tumors laparoscopically via a transgastric approach where the stomach was opened with a linear stapler, the tumor resected using
cautery, and the gastrotomy closed again using a stapling device. They noted that distal tumors could not be done this way due to the
proximity to the pylorus.9 This approach allows more adequate visualization of the gastric mucosa but obviously requires a larger
gastrotomy. Another option to these approaches would be to utilize endoscopy in addition to laparoscopy to assist in resection. Granger et
al10 used endoscopy in this manner to assist with localization and verify margins, but no interventions were performed via the intragastric
approach in this setting. However, other groups have utilized endoscopy to guide intragastric port placement in resecting tumors in this
manner.11 This group resected the tumor with cautery (enucleation) and used anchoring stitches around the ports (versus the balloon ports
presented here) to keep them in place. Another group12 advocates endoscopic submucosal injection of saline and epinephrine to minimize blood
loss during enucleation. They also raise the possibility of using 2-mm trocars to eliminate the need of closure of the gastric wall port
sites.12 Still other groups13 utilize the endoscope even more, advocating dissection into the submucosa endoscopically using both an Argon
laser and a diathermic electrosurgical knife followed by inverting the tumor away from the stomach and removing it with a laparoscopic
stapler. Our technique involved removal of the specimen through one of the trocar sites which, depending on the tumor's size, may involve
enlarging the opening. Another option would be to remove the specimen transorally via the endoscope.14 Though not used here, endoscopic
ultrasound (EUS) has been used by others to identify lesions as benign or malignant15 and could be considered in a case such as this one for
not only this purpose but also to assess the depth of a leiomyoma. It has been suggested that subepithelial tumors are more easily
resectable via an endoscopic route when underlying muscle layers were seen on EUS.16 Lesions involving the muscularis propria can easily be
identified with EUS and have been known to harbor malignancy.17,18 Though EUS can guide fine needle aspiration, malignancy cannot often be
determined by cytology.17 Malignancy is usually determined by pathologic examination. Grossly negative margins are needed. Positive
microscopic margins do not seem to influence outcomes, though re-excisions done with a minimally invasive technique has been described.19
Our technique offers the advantage of being minimally invasive while having excellent visualization of the tumor from both inside and
outside of the stomach. Additional advancements could include utilizing the endoscope in a more active role, perhaps by providing retraction
endoscopically, resulting in fewer ports being used and, subsequently, fewer gastrotomies. Further, while we closed 2 port-site
gastrostomies using a stapler, these areas could also be closed with an endosuture technique as was done with the third gastrostomy site.
Entirely endosutured closure may be more favorable if the gastrostomies are remote from one another or if closure with a stapling device
would either limit the stomach's volume too severely or interfere with the GE junction or pylorus. Certainly a wide variety of advanced
laparoscopic and endoscopic skills may be required for these types of procedures. However, once these techniques are mastered they can be
applied to this and other gastric pathology requiring surgical resection.
