Tracheal agenesis (TA) is a severe congenital disorder with often an unexpected emergency presentation. There is complete or partial absence
of the trachea below the larynx, with presence or absence of a tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF). A neonate with TA is described, and another
48 cases found in literature are reviewed. Due to absence of a TOF, five cases were diagnosed prenatally because of congenital high airway
obstruction syndrome (CHAOS). When a TOF is present, polyhydramnion and several other congenital malformations seen on the ultrasound
examination should alert clinicians of potential tracheal problems. Prenatal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may provide a definitive
diagnosis. Postnatal diagnosis is based on recognition of specific clinical signs in the newborn with TA: respiratory distress with
breathing movement without appropriate air entry, no audible cry, and failed endotracheal intubation. Despite progress in surgical
interventions, mortality remains high. Prenatal diagnosis of TA is possible, but only if a TOF is absent resulting in CHAOS. Prenatal
diagnosis of polyhydramnion and other congenital malformation should alert clinicians of potential tracheal problems. Prenatal MRI may
provide a definitive diagnosis. Tracheal agenesis (TA) is a rare congenital defect that confronts obstetricians, neonatologists, and
anesthesiologists with an unexpected emergency presentation. This usually lethal defect has an incidence of 1 per 50,000 newborns and
consists of complete or partial absence of the trachea below the larynx, with or without a concomitant tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF). In
the third week of gestation, the layngotracheal groove in the proximal foregut progresses caudally, where it develops two primordial buds,
which will develop into the bronchi and lungs. Complete separation of the trachea and esophagus occurs by the sixth week. These relatively
separate processes allow for malformations of the trachea in the presence of a normal larynx, bronchi, and lungs. Different theories have
been suggested to explain the cause of tracheoesophageal anomalies [12, 13, 25, 27, 34, 39, 41]. Besides environmental factors, animal
models of different genetic defects, such as (conditional) inactivation of Gli2, Gli3, Shh, Foxf1, and b-catenin, show TA or incorrect
septation of the foregut. A major role for the BMP type I receptor genes in mouse models is suggested . However, no causal gene has been
identified in human TA patients yet. TA was first described in 1900 by Payne and was classified based upon the presence and length of the
tracheal remnant. Floyd’s classification of TA is used more often than the classification by Faro et al. (Fig. 1) . We describe a case of TA
Floyd Type II with a TOF in a male newborn with dysmorphic features and additional congenital malformations. Furthermore, we review the
recent literature on cases of TA published between January 2005 until December 2010 taking into account the prenatal diagnosis, clinical
presentation, management, and outcome of TA.Fig. 1Classification system of tracheal agenesis (TA). (1) Faro type A: total pulmonary
agenesis. (2) Faro type B/Floyd type III: complete TA with a separate origin of the main bronchi from the esophagus. (3) Faro type C: total
TA with normal main bronchi fusing in the midline at the carine; a trachea-esophageal fistula (TOF) is present. Floyd type II: total TA with
normal main bronchi fusing in the midline at the carine; a TOF may or may not (not shown) be present. (4) Faro type D: larynx joined by
atresic strand to distal trachea with a TOF present. (5) Faro type E/Floyd type I: agenesis of the proximal trachea with a normal caudal
segment of the distal trachea and a TOF. Faro type F: agenesis of the proximal trachea with a normal caudal segment of the distal trachea
and no TOF is present (not shown). (6) Faro type G: TA in a short segment Classification system of tracheal agenesis (TA). (1) Faro type A:
total pulmonary agenesis. (2) Faro type B/Floyd type III: complete TA with a separate origin of the main bronchi from the esophagus. (3)
Faro type C: total TA with normal main bronchi fusing in the midline at the carine; a trachea-esophageal fistula (TOF) is present. Floyd
type II: total TA with normal main bronchi fusing in the midline at the carine; a TOF may or may not (not shown) be present. (4) Faro type
D: larynx joined by atresic strand to distal trachea with a TOF present. (5) Faro type E/Floyd type I: agenesis of the proximal trachea with
a normal caudal segment of the distal trachea and a TOF. Faro type F: agenesis of the proximal trachea with a normal caudal segment of the
distal trachea and no TOF is present (not shown). (6) Faro type G: TA in a short segment A healthy 34-year-old woman, gravida 2, para 1, was
referred to our hospital at 22 + 2 of 7 weeks of gestation because of a double bubble sign on the standard anomaly scan. Third level
ultrasonography revealed furthermore a single umbilical artery, postaxial polydactyly of the left hand combined with a polyhydramnion.
Amniocentesis showed a normal male karyotype (46,XY), and no subtelomeric and interstitial deletions and/or duplications were found with
multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) analysis. At 34 + 5 of 7 weeks of gestation, an emergency delivery by cesarean
section was performed because of fetal distress. A hypotonic boy was born with no audible cry. The birth weight was 2,255 g (weight for
gestational age, p25–50). Apgar scores were 5, 5, and 4 after 1, 5, and 10 min, respectively. His heart rate was 70 bpm. Spontaneous
breathing movements were absent, and bag and mask ventilation was started. Several attempts for intubation failed, although there was clear
vision of the vocal cords. Laryngoscopy by the ear–nose–throat surgeon showed no tracheal opening. Esophageal intubation improved oxygen
saturation to 100%, suggesting the presence of a TOF. Tracheotomy was attempted, but no trachea could be identified. The tube was found in
the esophagus, confirming TA. The boy died shortly after attempted tracheotomy. Clinical examination showed a premature boy with mild
dysmorphic craniofacial features consisting of low implantation of both ears, a small folded right ear, flat face with small forehead, a
relatively small head circumference of 23.7 cm (head circumference for gestational age, <p5), and microretrognathy. Furthermore, he had
hypertrichosis, unilateral postaxial polydactyly type 1, hypoplastic toenails, and deep-seated hyperconvex finger nails (Fig. 2). At
autopsy, the boy had a TA Floyd type II with a TOF (Fig. 3). Both lungs were bilobed with no other signs of left atrial isomerism. Total
body X-ray showed fusion of the ninth till 12th rib and hemivertebra of the ninth thoracic vertebra. Furthermore, a duodenal atresia, an
arteria lusoria, and a single umbilical artery were diagnosed. Postnatal array-based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) showed no
microdeletion or microduplication in the genome.Fig. 2Postaxial polydactyly type 1 of the left hand of the current caseFig. 3Autopsy
specimen of the current case. Showing a tracheoesophageal fistula (arrow) and bifurcation to the left (L) and right lung (R). Es esophagus
Postaxial polydactyly type 1 of the left hand of the current case Autopsy specimen of the current case. Showing a tracheoesophageal fistula
(arrow) and bifurcation to the left (L) and right lung (R). Es esophagus A Medline (PubMed) literature search was performed for all articles
published between January 2005 until December 2010 with MeSH terms and key words including “tracheal/abnormalities,” “tracheal agenesis,”
“tracheal aplasia,” “tracheal atresia,” “prenatal diagnosis,” “fetus,” and “newborn.” Titles and abstracts were examined to select
potentially relevant studies specific about TA. Statistical analysis was performed using SPSS 17.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). If data
relevant for this review was missing, additional information was requested from the authors by e-mail. Forty-nine cases of TA, including our
case, were found [1, 2, 4–7, 9–11, 14, 17, 18, 20, 23, 24, 26, 29–33, 35–38, 40, 42]. The perinatal characteristics, diagnostic
investigations, and management are summarized (Table 1). In this review, diagnosis of TA was presumed prenatally in five cases based on
congenital high airway obstruction syndrome (CHAOS). In four cases, CHAOS was seen on prenatal ultrasonography [7, 26, 38, 42]. Pregnancy
was selectively terminated in two cases. Two newborns died shortly after birth. In one case, initially congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation (CCAM) was suspected on ultrasound; however, after fetal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), TA was suspected, and an ex utero
intrapartum therapy (EXIT) procedure was performed. The child died at the age of 3 months . In another case, CCAM was also suspected, but
fetal MRI was not carried out because of a non-reassuring cardiotocogram. The child died shortly after birth . All five prenatal diagnosed
cases of TA had no TOF; therefore, they presented as a classic CHAOS. In the cases without prenatal diagnosis, prenatal ultrasonography
showed altered amniotic fluid status, mainly polyhydramnion. In 11 of 28 (39%) cases of polyhydramnion, no other malformations besides TA
were found. Commonly, clinical symptoms were respiratory distress with breathing movements without appropriate air entry, no audible cry,
and failed intubation. In 18 of 31 cases (58.0%), chromosomal analysis was done, but in only two cases, an abnormal karyotype was found: mos
47,XY +mar (43,3)/46,XY (56,5) and 5q11.2 deletion [7, 32]. Associated anomalies were found in 32 (80%) of the cases (Table 2). Most
frequent anomalies were cardiac septum defect, laryngeal defect, duodenal atresia, imperforate anus, and kidney and finger malformations. In
the remaining eight (20%) cases, no associated malformations were identified by autopsy or computed tomography (CT scan). Mortality was
high, as 34 of 40 (85%) children died within 2 days. After surgery, two children are still alive at 10 months and 4 years, respectively [37,
40].Table 1Perinatal characteristics, diagnostic investigations, and managementOutcomenTotal (x (%))49 (100)49Boy/girl (x (%))33 (69)/15
(31)48Classification (x (%))45 Floyd type I11 (24) Floyd type II17 (38) Floyd type III10 (22) Faro’s classification5 (11) No specificationa2
(5)Perinatal characteristics Mean maternal age (years (range))27.5 (18–40)28 Primigravida (x (%))14 (58)24 Twin pregnancy5
(12)42 Polyhydramnion (x (%))28 (72)39 Anhydramnion (x (%)2 (5)38 IUGR (x (%))4 (11)38 CHAOS (x (%))5 (13)38 CCAM suspicion (x (%))b2
(5)38 Caesarean section (x (%))16 (38)42 Vaginal delivery (x (%))26 (62)42 Median GA (weeks (range))34 (28–41)45 Mean BW (gram (range))2,048
(830–3,250)38 Median AS (1/5 min)3/525 Abnormal karyotype (x (%))c2 (11)18Diagnostic investigations (x (%)) Laryngo-bronchoscopy24
(57)42 X-thorax11 (26)42 CT scan6 (14)42 Fetal MRI1 (2)42 Karyotyping18 (58)31Management (x (%)) Tracheotomy18 (38)48 Surgery after
tracheotomy10 (21)48Range: minimum–maximum; AS (1/5): Apgar score after respectively 1 and 5 minn total amount of cases, x amount of
selected cases, CHAOS congenital high airway obstruction syndrome, CCAM congenital cystic adenomatoid malformation, GA gestational age, BW
birth weightaA patent segment of trachea which ended as a tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF) or blind without a TOF . In both cases, the
esophagus continued as the only structure and then was totally replaced by the distal trachea and main bronchibSuspected CCAM with
ultrasonographic examination and suspected CHAOS on fetal MRI cmos 47,XY +mar (43,3)/46,XY (56,5) and 5q11.2 deletion Table 2Associated
malformationsMalformationsn(x/n (%))CardiovascularODB214/32 (43.8)Hypoplastic left heart syndrome1ODB, TrA, transposition of the great
arteries, pulmonary atresia, VSD, ASD, left superior vena cava to coronary sinus drainage1VSD4ASD2ASD and VSD1TOF1Truncus arteriosus type
11Persistent vena cava superior, ASD1RespiratoryIncorrect amount of lung lobes315/32 (46.9)Laryngeal cleft4Laryngeal stenosis4Choanal
atresia1Bronchial hypoplasia1Enlarged lungs1Laryngeal stenosis and bilobed right lung1Gastro-intestinalDuodenal atresia217/32
(53.1)Imperforate anus and recto-urethral fistula2Imperforate anus and esophageal atresia1Imperforate anus6Esophageal atresia2Duodenal
atresia, pancreas annulare, malrotation of the bowel2Duodenal atresia, gallbladder agenesis, Meckel’s diverticulum2GenitourinaryHorseshoe
kidney, hydroureters19/32 (28.1)Ureteral duplication left, hydronephrosis, and hydroureter right1Atrophic cystic kidney left en cystic
kidney right1Horseshoe kidney with hypoplasia right side and multicystic dysplasia with dilated ureters, undescended testis1Horseshoe
kidney1Multi-dysplastic kidney1Recto-vesical-urethral fistula1Undescended testis2MusculoskeletalClubfoot114/32 (43.8)Clubfoot,
micrognathia1Hemivertebra2Hemivertebra, rib anomaly1Skull asymmetry1Fingers malformations5Micro/retrognathia1Micro/retrognathia, postaxial
polydactyly, hemivertebrae, fused ribs1Micrognathia and muscular hypertrophy1NervousMacrocephaly12/32 (6.3)Microcephaly1OtherThymus
agenesis119/32 (59.4)SUA2Low ear implant1Malformed left ear2Uterus agenesis1SUA, thymus agenesis, polysplenia2Arteria lusoria,
hypertelorism2Four finger line1SUA, low ear implant, left ear malformation1Low ear implant, arteria lusoria1Low ear implant, small right
ear, hypertrichosis, arteria lusoria, SUA, nail deformity1Low ear implant, alopecia in left temporal area1Prune belly like skin on
abdomen2Small left ear with closed meatus1n total amount of cases, x amount of selected case, ODB open ductus of Botalli, TrA tricuspid
atresia, VSD ventricular septal defect, ASD atrial septal defect, TOF tetralogy of Fallot, SUA single umbilical artery Perinatal
characteristics, diagnostic investigations, and management Range: minimum–maximum; AS (1/5): Apgar score after respectively 1 and 5 min n
total amount of cases, x amount of selected cases, CHAOS congenital high airway obstruction syndrome, CCAM congenital cystic adenomatoid
malformation, GA gestational age, BW birth weight aA patent segment of trachea which ended as a tracheoesophageal fistula (TOF) or blind
without a TOF . In both cases, the esophagus continued as the only structure and then was totally replaced by the distal trachea and main
bronchi bSuspected CCAM with ultrasonographic examination and suspected CHAOS on fetal MRI cmos 47,XY +mar (43,3)/46,XY (56,5) and 5q11.2
deletion Associated malformations n total amount of cases, x amount of selected case, ODB open ductus of Botalli, TrA tricuspid atresia, VSD
ventricular septal defect, ASD atrial septal defect, TOF tetralogy of Fallot, SUA single umbilical artery TA is rarely suspected before
birth; prenatal findings leading to the diagnosis of TA are only found when no TOF is present, consistent with the definition of CHAOS.
CHAOS is characterized by enlarged hyperechogenic lungs, fluid filled dilated trachea, and bronchi demonstrating an absent flow in the
trachea during fetal breathing, and in some cases, even the visualization of the obstruction, compression of the heart, with or without
cardiac dysfunction, flattened diaphragm, and/or massive ascites. The classical signs of CHAOS are absent if a TOF is present because lung
fluid can pass through the TOF to the stomach or amniotic sac. Therefore, the pressure in the lungs is normal, and the lungs will have a
normal ultrasonographic appearance. In the present study, five of 49 cases were diagnosed prenatally because of symptoms related to CHAOS.
Prenatal diagnosis in these five cases of TA was confirmed by fetal MRI or detailed ultrasound examination. Detailed ultrasound examination
should be focused on abnormal fluid accumulations in the larynx or trachea. If uncertainty remains, fetal MRI can provide additional
information . If CHAOS is suspected, absence of amniotic phospholipids in amniotic fluid may support the diagnosis of TA because normally
phospholipids are secreted into the amniotic fluid by the respiratory tract . If TA is prenatally suspected, an EXIT procedure can be
planned in a tertiary hospital as described by Vaikunth et al. . They also suggested that infants with TA and a TOF may also benefit from
the EXIT procedure by preventing hypoxia, but this has not been described as prenatal diagnosis of TA, and a TOF is still not yet possible.
In this review, polyhydramnion was reported in 72% of the cases. The presence of TA and a TOF may interfere with fetal swallowing because in
39% of the cases with polyhydramnion, no other congenital abnormalities interfering with fetal swallowing and/or absorption of fluid, such
as gastrointestinal obstruction, were present. Development of polyhydramnion, particularly in combination with other frequent associated
anomalies with TA, should alert clinician of the possibility of TA. Prenatal MRI may provide a definitive diagnosis. Postnatal diagnosis can
be established by recognition of the specific combination of clinical signs in the newborn: respiratory distress with breathing movements
without appropriate air entry, no audible cry, and failed endotracheal intubation. Preterm labor and low birth weight (<2,500 g) and an
Apgar score below 7 at 5 min are also common characteristics. If TA is accompanied by a TOF, bag and mask ventilation and (accidental)
esophageal intubation may temporarily improve the respiratory status. After esophageal intubation, marked abdominal distension develops, and
air passes through the fistula into the lungs that will give cycles of stabilization and deterioration. Laryngo-bronchoscopy can diagnose TA
and a possible TOF. Radiographic findings may include posterior location of the endotracheal tube (esophageal intubation) and absence of the
tracheal shadow. A CT scan is the procedure of choice for delineating the anatomy in newborns with suspected TA . Contrast material may
demonstrate a blind laryngeal sac and a TOF but are difficult to perform and unreliable due to potential airway compromise. In this review,
tracheotomy was attempted in 38% of the cases to explore the options of surgical reconstruction. Often, no surgery could be performed
because of severe asphyxia or death of the infant. Surgical management consists of esophageal ligation at the site distal to the TOF. This
results in more effective ventilation because the esophagus can be used as a pseudo-trachea. The proximal part of the esophagus has to be
taken out as a double barrel esophagostomy, with the distal end for intubation and the proximal end for salivary drainage. An external
esophageal stent can prevent the esophagus from collapsing. Gastrostomy for feeding should be performed next. Reconstruction with small
intestine, colon interposition, or gastric pull-up has been demonstrated to be feasible and compatible with survival . Despite progress in
surgical management, only two children are still alive and have a normal neurodevelopment after surgery [37, 40]. Both the classifications
of Floyd and Faro are inappropriate for all types of TA. This is due to the fact that a TOF, crucial for decision making, can not always be
correctly classified, e.g., a Floyd type I without a TOF described in this review does not exist in the Floyd classification. Likewise,
Floyd type II without a TOF is missing in the Faro’s classification. We propose to use the Faro’s classification system and add a Faro Type
C without a TOF to it. In the present review, Floyd type II was identified as the most common type of TA in line with the literature. The
male:female ratio in this review was 2:1, similar to the literature [22, 39]. Further research is necessary to explain this male
predominance of TA. Associated malformations can be part of the VACTERL association (Vertebral Defects, Anal Atresia, Cardiovascular
Defects, Tracheoesophageal Fistula and/or Esophageal Atresia, Renal Defects, and Limb Defects) or TARCD association (Tracheal
Agenesis/Atresia, Radial Ray Defects, Complex Congenital Cardiac Abnormalities, and Duodenal Atresia)15 . Although TA and duodenal atresia
are not part of the acronym of VACTERL, tracheal stenosis and tracheal atresia have been described in fetuses with features of VACTERL , and
duodenal atresia was found in 6.3% of children diagnosed with VACTERL association . So far, no causal genes for these associations have been
identified yet. TA can also be a part of Fraser syndrome, which is caused by mutations in FRAS1 and FREM2 genes . Abnormal development of
the larynx in combination with or without a TOF or other tracheal problems is also observed in several rare syndromes and in cases of
chromosomal aneuploidy or interstitial (micro)deletions or (micro)duplications . In one case, a de novo abnormal karyotype was found (mos
47,XY + mar (43,3)/46,XY (56,5)) as both parents had a normal karyotype. The marker chromosome was identified by FISH as a derivate from
chromosome 22 and 15 . This abnormal karyotype could contribute to the TA and associated malformations and may help to unravel the origin of
the genetic cause of TA. A deletion on 5q11.2 region was found in another case, whose mother had normal karyotype while no paternal material
was available . Because TA is associated with other congenital anomalies, it is important to perform standard karyotyping as well as array-
based comparative genomic hybridization (array-CGH) to detect microdeletions or duplications in the genome. Autopsy provides more details
especially on malformations that cannot be detected by fetal ultrasound. TA is a severe congenital defect with an unexpected emergency
presentation. Prenatal diagnosis of TA is only possible in case of CHAOS. If a TOF is present, polyhydramnion and other congenital
malformations on ultrasound should alert clinicians of potential tracheal problems. Prenatal MRI may provide a definitive diagnosis.
Postnatal symptoms suggestive of the diagnosis are respiratory distress with strong respiratory efforts without good air entry, no audible
cry, and failed endotracheal intubation. Associated malformations are often found and include cardiac septum defects, laryngeal defects,
duodenal atresia, imperforate anus, kidney defects, and finger malformations. The diagnosis TA is often confirmed by laryngo-bronchoscopy,
CT scan, and tracheotomy. Despite progress of surgical developments, the prognosis is poor. CGH array or genome wide assays, in addition to
routine cytogenetic analysis, and autopsy are important to detect associated malformations and elucidate the cause(s) of TA. Conflicts of
interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative
Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author(s) and source are credited.
