Corresponding Author: Ikuko Sato, MD, PhD Department of Endocrinology and Diabetes, Tosei General Hospital, 160 Nishioiwake-cho, Seto
489-8642, Japan Phone: +81-561-82-5101, Fax: +81-561-82-0756, E-mail: isato1204@gmail.com A 58-year-old woman was referred to our hospital
because of liver dysfunction. Her serum levels of AST (619 IU/l) and ALT (603 IU/l) had increased. Histological findings in the liver biopsy
were compatible to autoimmune hepatitis (AIH), and the diagnosis of AIH was confirmed by the diagnostic criteria. She was admitted to a
nearby hospital 3 years ago, and diagnosed with Graves’ disease. She received methimazole (MMI) at first, which was discontinued due to
liver injury in one month, then propylthiouracil (PTU) was administered. One year later, transaminase increased and was decreased by
stopping PTU administration. PTU was restarted after her transaminase decreased, but a recurrence of hepatotoxicity was observed, and she
was referred to our hospital. Oral prednisolone decreased liver function immediately. In this case, PTU-induced liver injury was suspected
as a possible trigger of AIH. While PTU remains a commonly used drug in the treatment of hyperthyroidism, severe liver injury is reported in
some cases. If liver injury is observed in patients treated with PTU, rechallenge is not recommended in order to avoid severe
hepatotoxicity. Propylthiouracil (PTU), a thiourea derivative, is widely used for the treatment of Graves’ disease. The adverse effects of
PTU include rash, arthralgia, fever, and transient leukocytopenia.1) Although elevated transaminases are usually transient by discontinuing
medication, severe liver dysfunction is reported in some cases.1,2) Autoimmune hepatitis (AIH) is generally a progressive chronic hepatitis
with increased immunoglobulins and auto antibodies, which primarily responds to immunosuppression.3) Some cases with Graves’ disease
concomitant with AIH have been reported in the literature.4-6) and PTU-induced liver injury is suggested to be a possible trigger of
AIH.7,8) A 58-year-old woman was referred to our hospital because of liver dysfunction. She was admitted to a nearby hospital three years
ago, and diagnosed with Graves’ disease. She started methimazole (MMI) at first, which was discontinued in one month due to elevation of
serum transaminase. A drug-stimulated lymphocyte test (DLST) showed positive for MMI, and drug-induced hepatitis by MMI was suspected. MMI
was discontinued, and she was further treated by PTU. During the following month, liver function test results returned to normal, and PTU
administration was continued. One year later, her transaminases increased again. As her thyroid function was within the normal range, PTU
administration was discontinued, and her transaminases returned to the normal range at that time, suggesting liver injury was induced by
PTU. Two months later, PTU was rechallenged because of a recurrence of hyperthyroidism. A recurrence of hepatotoxicity was observed, and she
was referred to our hospital. Her height was 163 cm and body weight was 52 kg. Blood pressure was 120/70 mmHg. She had no history of alcohol
intake. Her serum IgG concentration increased. She exhibited positive anti-nuclear antibody, and negative anti-mitochondria antibody. Her
hepatitis virus markers were negative. Other laboratory data on admission are summarized in Table 1. As her transaminases increased further
even after discontinuing PTU administration, drug-induced liver injury was not suspected (Fig. 1). She was then referred to the Department
of Gastroenterology. 40 mg/day oral prednisolone was started after liver biopsy, and her liver function test results decreased immediately
(Fig. 1). The histologic features of liver biopsy were compatible with AIH, and the diagnosis of AIH was confirmed by the criteria of the
International Autoimmune Hepatitis Scoring System.9) Laboratory Data on Admission Clinical course of serum AST level of the present case.
PTU administration increased AST level, and PSL decreased AST level. PTU, propythiouracil; KI, potassium iodide; PSL, prednisolone AIH is an
autoimmune disease with unresolving hepatocellular inflammation of unknown cause. While some cases of AIH are associated with autoimmune
diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis and Sjogren’s syndrome,10) AIH associated with Graves’ disease is rare. On the other hand, certain
drugs, including methyldopa, interferon, minocycline, and atorvastatin are known to induce hepatocellular injury that mimics AIH.3) Elevated
transaminase are a common side effect in patients treated with PTU. While the pathogenesis of PTU-induced liver injury is not known,
immunologic mechanisms have been suspected to be responsible. At this point, the pathogenesis of PTU-induced liver damage and AIH are
thought to be similar, and it is difficult to make a differential diagnosis between the two.7) Liver dysfunction in our case was reversed by
discontinuing PTU the first time. This suggests drug-induced liver injury. However, rechallenge of PTU worsened liver function again, and
was not reversed by discontinuing PTU a second time. Thus, drug-induced liver injury was not suspected. Given a compatible histologic
picture, the diagnosis of AIH is based on characteristic clinical and biochemical findings, circulating autoantibodies, and abnormal levels
of serum globulins.3) In our patient, elevation of serum IgG concentration and high titer of anti-nuclear antibody are characteristic
laboratory features of AIH. Such features are not explained by drug-induced liver injury, and the histological findings of high activity
hepatitis (A3) obtained by liver biopsy 2 months after quitting medication, were not similar to drug-induced liver injury. As shown in
Figure 2, histological findings show interface hepatitis and rosette formation, which demonstrate AIH. There are also few plasma cells and
some eosinophils among the findings. Although these are different from diagnostic criteria and the findings may suggest that allergic
response might play an important role of pathogenesis as usual, Manns et al. demonstrated that plasma cells and eosinophils may be present
in the histological sample of an AIH patient.11) Our patient was then diagnosed with AIH, suggesting the possibility that PTU-induced liver
injury triggered AIH. Histological findings of liver biopsy. a) Portal areas are expanded by fibrosis and infiltration. b) Explant reveals
bridging necroses and inflammatory infiltration, including lymphocytes, plasma cells and some eosinophils. c) interface hepatitis findings
and rossette formation. When treating patients with PTU, occasional monitoring of liver function is needed, and if liver injury is
suspected, it is important to promptly discontinue PTU therapy. Rechallenge of affected individuals is not recommended to avoid severe
hepatotoxicity.
