Corresponding Author: Yasuzumi Kishimoto Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Hamamatsu Medical Center, 328 Tomitsuka-cho, Hamamatsu, Shizuoka
432-8580, Japan Telephone: +81-53-453-7111, Fax: +81-53-451-2768, Email address: halfgodhasgone@msn.com A 61-year-old woman presented with
acute pain of the right thigh after falling on a public street. She had been diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer and bisphosphonate
therapy along with zoledronic acid. Radiographs demonstrated transverse subtrochanteric femoral fracture with thickening of the lateral
cortex and spike of the medial cortex at the site of fracture. The contralateral femur showed thickening of the lateral cortex at the same
site. This type of stress fracture is related to severe suppression of bone turnover (SSBT) under bisphosphonate therapy. Our patient had
been receiving zoledronic acid therapy for 3.6 years, and the radiographic findings were typical of stress fracture associated with
bisphosphonate. Therefore, the facture in our patient was considered related to SSBT under zoledronic acid therapy. Zoledronic acid is
administered to patients with osteoporosis or complications due to cancer such as hypercalcemia of malignancy. Recently stress fractures
associated with zoledronic acid therapy for osteoporosis have attracted attention. However, there are few reports of fracture associated
with zoledronic acid therapy for cancer. Doses of zoledronic acid recommended for cancer patients are much greater than those for patients
with osteoporosis. Clinicians treating such cancer patients need to cautiously manage stress fractures as a complication of zoledronic acid
therapy. Zoledronic acid, a third-generation bisphosphonate, is widely administered to patients with osteoporosis or complications due to
cancer such as hypercalcemia of malignancy. Recently stress fractures associated with zoledronic acid therapy for osteoporosis have
attracted attention. However, there are few reports of fracture associated with zoledronic acid therapy for cancer. Herein we report a
patient with subtrochanteric fracture while receiving zoledronic acid therapy for metastatic breast cancer. A 61-year-old woman presented
with acute pain of the right thigh after falling on a public street. She had been diagnosed with metastatic breast cancer five years earlier
and then started on chemotherapy with capecitabine and hormonotherapy with medroxyprogesterone for cancer. She was also started on
bisphosphonate therapy with incadronate (250mg/2 weeks) for hypercalcemia due to malignancy. After three months of incadronate
administration, the regimen was changed to pamidronate (90mg/month), and then 3.6 years before the fracture, the regimen was changed from
pamidronate to zoledronic acid (4mg/month). Radiographs demonstrated transverse subtrochanteric femoral fracture with thickening of the
lateral cortex and spike of the medial cortex at the site of fracture (Figure 1A). The contralateral femur showed thickening of the lateral
cortex at the same site (Figure 1B). Findings on magnetic resonance imaging before surgery demonstrated a tumorous lesion of the right
trochanter, but did not involve the fracture site. The tumorous lesion showed a low intensity on T1WI and iso intensity on T2WI (Figure 2).
A: Subtrochanteric transverse fracture. Lateral cortical thickening (arrow) and medial spike at the edge of the cortex (arrow head) were
seen. B: Lateral cortical stress reactions in the subtrochanteric region of the contralateral femur. Magnetic resonance imaging before
surgery demonstrated a tumor lesion at the trochanter (arrows). The lesion was demonstrated a low intensity on T1WI and iso intensity on
T2WI. The patient underwent osteosynthesis for subtrochanteric femoral fracture with a long gamma nail (Stryker Osteosynthesis, Kiel,
Germany) and radiotherapy for tumorous lesion of the right femur. One month postoperatively, zoledronic acid therapy was discontinued. Five
months later, we found slight callus formation as a sign of fracture healing at the medial femoral cortex. Zoledronic acid is a third-
generation bisphosphonate and has 10,000- to 100,000-fold greater antiresorption potency than the previous generations of agents, such as
etidronate1). In 2002, the US FOOD and Drug Administration approved an expanded indication for zoledronic acid that included its use in
patients with metastatic breast cancer and myeloma. American Society of Clinical Oncology (ASCO) has also recommended zoledronic acid for
breast cancer patients2). In many other countries, zoledronic acid is administered to cancer patients with complications such as
hypercalcemia of malignancy. Bisphosphonates are frequently administered for osteoporosis as well as for complications of cancers. However,
stress fractures related to severe suppression of bone turnover (SSBT) under bisphosphonate therapy have attracted attention recently3).
There were previous cases of atypical femoral fractures associated with alendronate therapy4) or risedronate therapy5). Concerning
zoledronic acid therapy for osteoporosis, there was a report in the Health Outcomes and Reduced Incidence with Zoledronic Acid Once Yearly
Pivotal Fracture Trial (HORIZON-PFT)6,7). However, there have been few reports of fracture associated with zoledronic acid therapy for
complications of cancer. Only a few reports have described subtrochanteric fractures in myeloma patients under pamidronate and zoledronic
acid therapy8). Concerning stress fractures under bisphosphonate therapy, Kwek et al. found typical fracture findings in all of the patients
they observed9): (a) cortical thickening in the lateral subtrochanteric region; (b) transverse fracture; and (c) medial cortical spike. They
also found lateral cortical stress reactions on the subtrochanteric region of the contralateral femur in some patients. Lenart et al.
defined a positive X-ray pattern in patients on long-term bisphosphonate administration with cortical thickening and a beak in the cortex of
the subtrochanteric/shaft fracture10). Radiographs of our patient showed both the typical fracture findings described by Kwek et al. and the
positive X-ray patterns defined by Lenart et al. We demonstrated magnetic resonance imaging before surgery in order to determine whether
this was a pathological fracture due to cancer, but there was no sign of metastatic breast cancer at the fracture site. Odvina et al.
reported histological findings of stress fracture related to SSBT under bisphosphonate therapy for osteoporosis11). These findings were
suppression of bone formation with a low osteoblastic surface or diminished matrix synthesis with absence of double-tetracycline labeling.
In our case, there was no histomorphometric analysis because we did not perform a bone biopsy at the fracture site. Our patient was under
zoledronic acid therapy for 3.6 years, and the radiographic findings were typical of stress fracture associated with bisphosphonate.
Therefore, the facture in our patient was related to SSBT under zoledronic acid therapy. Because our patient experienced thigh pain only
after the fall, we thought the fracture occurred at the pathological lesion, which had become weakened by SSBT. Sayed-Noor and Sjödén
described a patient with a subtrochanteric fatigue fracture after surgery for contralateral subtrochanteric fatigue fracture related to the
bisphosphonate therapy12). Radiographic findings in our patient showed thickening of the cortex at the contralateral femur. Therefore, the
risk of contralateral femoral fracture was increasing and further follow-up should be performed. Hillner et al. recommended that
bisphosphonate should be continued until evidence of substantial decline in a patient’s general performance2). Odvina et al. reported that
fracture healing was absent or incomplete in patients who continued alendronate therapy after onset of fractures11). It is true that this
therapy is needed for patients with complications of cancers, but bisphosphonate therapy should be stopped after the onset of fractures
associated with this treatment. Park et al. reported prescribing bisphosphonate for more than five years to older women who showed increased
risk of subtrochanteric or femur shaft fracture13). However, Black et al. reported the risk associated with bisphosphonate including
zoledronic acid was not increased significantly in HORIZON-PFT6). In this trial, patients received 5mg zoledronic acid once a year. However,
cancer patients are recommended to receive 4mg zoledronic acid once every three or four weeks. Therefore they receive significantly higher
doses of zoledronic acid than patients with osteoporosis. We emphasize that clinicians treating such cancer patients need to cautiously
manage stress fractures as a complication of zoledronic acid therapy. We present a patient with subtrochanteric fracture after 3.6 years of
zoledronic acid therapy for metastatic breast cancer. The fracture was thought to be associated with severe suppression of bone turnover due
to zoledronic acid therapy.
