Decreased in vitro susceptibility to dihydroartemisinin (21.2 nM) and artesunate (16.3 nM) associated with decreased susceptibility or
resistance to quinine (1131 nM), mefloquine (166 nM), lumefantrine (114 nM), pyronaridine (70.5 nM) and piperaquine (91.1 nM) is reported in
a patient returning from South-East Asia after trekking along the Mekong from the south of Laos to the north of Thailand. Decreased in vitro
susceptibility to artemisinin derivatives did not appear to be mediated by the number of copies of pfmdr1 or pfATPase6, pfcrt, pfmdr1 or
pfmrp polymorphism. The high IC50 to mefloquine of this Asian isolate was not associated with pfmdr1 copy number. Pfnhe-1 microsatellite
ms4760 showed a profile 7 (ms4760-7) with three repeats of DNNND and one repeat of DDDNHNDNHNN, which is associated with high quinine
reduced susceptibility. The patient recovered in three days without relapse after treatment with the association of quinine and doxycycline.
Decreased in vitro susceptibility to quinine and the delayed effect of doxycycline may both have contributed to the delayed parasite
clearance time, D4 (0.5%) and D7 (0.004%). The in vitro data, with IC50 for dihydroartemisinin and artesunate were up to ten times those of
the reference clone W2, which suggests that this isolate may be resistant to artemisinin derivatives, associated with a decreased
susceptibility to quinine. Artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT) is now recommended by the World Health Organization as first-line
treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria in all areas in which malaria is endemic. However, recent reports from Cambodia of delayed
parasite clearance after treatment by ACT have now been confirmed . The resistant phenotype is not yet reflected by the results of
conventional in vitro drug susceptibility assays. Parasites with slow clearance rate after ACT did not show in vitro decreased
susceptibility . In vitro decreased susceptibility to artemisinin derivatives was never or very rarely reported in Cambodia . No molecular
marker has been identified, which impedes surveillance studies to monitor the spread of artemisinin resistant phenotype. Decrease of in
vitro susceptibility to dihydroartemisinin and artesunate, associated with reduced susceptibility to standard anti-malarials, such as
quinine, mefloquine and lumefantrine, and new drugs, such as pyronaridine and piperaquine, is reported here. A 52-year old female visited
rural areas in Laos (Nov 9 to 12, 2009), Cambodia (Nov 12 to 29) and Thailand (Nov 29 to Dec 1). She took part in trekking along the Mekong
from the south of Laos to the north of Thailand. The patient presented with fever since November 29 and was hospitalized (Dec 2) in
intensive care unit (Centre Hospitalier Universitaire l'Archet, Nice, France) for complicated malaria (15% parasitaemia and altered
consciousness). The patient used irregularly doxycycline (100 mg/day) as chemoprophylaxis. The patient was treated by intra-venous quinine
chlorhydrate (25 mg/kg/day) and doxycycline (200 mg/day) for seven days. The patient recovered in three days without relapse and was
discharged. Plasmodium falciparum parasites were identified at Day 0 (15%), D4 (0.5%) and D7 (0.004%) but were not detected at D43. In vitro
testing of drug susceptibility was performed by the standard 42-hour 3H-hypoxanthine uptake inhibition method . Susceptibility to
dihydroartemisinin, artesunate, and ten standard or new anti-malarial drugs, ie chloroquine, quinine, mefloquine, lumefantrine,
monodesethylamodiaquine (biologically active metabolite of amodiaquine), pyronaridine, piperaquine, atovaquone, doxycycline and
pyrimethamine, was assessed. The laboratory-adapted clone W2, tested on the same day, was used as a reference. Isolates from imported
malaria, tested on the same batch of plates, were used as comparators. Polymorphisms of pfcrt, pfmdr1, pfmrp and pfnhe-1, involved in
quinoline resistance, and in pfATPase6, postulated to be involved in artemisinin resistance, and the copy number of pfmdr1 were assessed .
The French malaria consensus and the WHO recommend to clinically examine patient and control parasitaemia at D0, D3, D7 and D28 to evaluate
anti-malarial efficacy. Blood controls were performed at D0, D4, D7 and D43. The genotyping of parasites was assessed at D0, D4 and D7 using
six microsatellite loci (microsatellites 7A11, pf2689, pf2802, C4M79, TRAP, C4M69) , msp1 and msp2 . Informed consent was not required as
the sampling procedures and testing are part of the French national recommendations for the care and surveillance of malaria. This isolate
showed decreased susceptibility to dihydroartemisinin (21.2 nM) and artesunate (16.3 nM) associated with decreased susceptibility or
resistance to quinine (1131 nM), mefloquine (166 nM), lumefantrine (114 nM), pyronaridine (70.5 nM) and piperaquine (91.1 nM) with high
ratio in comparison with W2 (Table 1). These IC50 and W2 ratios were higher than those of other imported isolates. In vitro susceptibility
to standard antimalarial drugs of the multidrug-resistant isolate in comparison with P.falciparum W2 clone and P. falciparum isolates tested
with the same plate batches * The laboratory-adapted clone W2, tested on the same day, was used as a reference. ** Values are geometric mean
and 95% confidence interval of 16 isolates from imported malaria, tested on the same batch of plates, and used as comparators. ND: not
determined Mutations were not identified in pfmdr1, pfcrt and pfmrp genes. Only one copy of pfmdr1 was found. Two synonymous mutations were
detected in pfATPase6 (N460N and I898I), which were previously described . Pfnhe-1 microsatellite ms4760 showed a profile 7 (ms4760-7) with
three repeats of DNNND and one repeat of DDDNHNDNHNN, which is associated with high quinine reduced susceptibility . Parasitaemia was
controlled at Day 0, D4, D7 and D43. Monoclonal and identical parasites were identified at D0 (15% of parasitaemia), D4 (0.5%) and D7
(0.004%) by using microsatellites 7A11, pf2689, pf2802, C4M79, TRAP, C4M69 and msp1 and msp2. No parasite was detected at D43. This isolate
showed reduced susceptibility to artemisinin derivatives, but also to other ACT components commonly used in Asia or in clinical trials, such
as mefloquine, lumefantrine, pyronaridine or piperaquine. Surprising, this isolate was susceptible in vitro to chloroquine and
monodesethylamodiaquine. It was also susceptible to doxycycline. Plasmodium falciparum parasite with high IC50 to artemisinin and artemether
(20.1 nM and 21.4 nM, respectively), but with low IC50 to dihydroartemisinin and artesunate (1.8 nM and 6.2 nM, respectively) was recently
isolated in a traveller returning from Nigeria, who took artesunate prophylactically (two 50 mg tablets weekly for 4 weeks) . Yet, recent
clinical trials of oral artesunate monotherapy suggest that the loss of ACT efficacy might result from decreased efficacy of artemisinin
derivatives . The median parasite clearance time was 36 hours longer in patients from Western Cambodia, where the efficacy of ACT is
decreasing . Nevertheless, this phenomenon was not correlated with artemisinin derivatives IC50. Only one copy of pfmdr1 was found. The high
IC50 to mefloquine of this Asian isolate was not associated with pfmdr1 copy number. Pfnhe-1 microsatellite ms4760 showed a profile 7
(ms4760-7) with three repeats of DNNND and one repeat of DDDNHNDNHNN, which is associated with high quinine reduced susceptibility . Two
repeats of DNNND were seen to be associated with high IC50 in quinine clinical failure in traveller from Senegal . The persistence of
parasites seven days after the start of treatment with quinine chlorhydrate and doxycycline, but without clinical signs, is consistent with
the high IC50 and with the profile ms4760 of pfnhe-1. The action of doxycycline is delayed. There is a relationship between the amount and
duration of exposure and the effect of doxycycline on the erythrocytic stages with an increased activity during the second cycle.
Doxycycline has been shown to exert its effect during the first 48 h, but is only detectable in second-generation parasites near the 96 hour
time point . The French malaria consensus recommends quinine associated with doxycycline for Asian and South-American P. falciparum (and not
only quinine as for African parasites). Clinical failure with quinine has been shown in a patient returning from French Guiana treated by
quinine only . The patient recovered in three days without relapse and left intensive care due to the treatment she received, the
association of quinine and doxycycline, as recommended by the French malaria consensus. In vitro quinine IC50 and pfnhe-1 ms4760 analysis
suggest a reduced susceptibility to quinine. This decreased susceptibility to quinine and the delayed effect of doxycycline may both have
contributed to the delayed parasite clearance time, D4 (0.5%) and D7 (0.004%). Decreased in vitro susceptibility to artemisinin derivatives
did not appear to be mediated by the number of copies of pfmdr1 or pfATPase6 polymorphism. The in vitro data, with IC50 for
dihydroartemisinin and artesunate up to ten times those of the reference clone W2 or the geometric mean of the other isolates, suggest that
this isolate could be resistant to artemisinin derivatives, even if there is no evidence that this isolate was clinically resistant to ACT,
associated with decreased susceptibility to quinine. And its association with the other in vitro decreased susceptibilities is alarming,
especially with the components of ACT used in Asia. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. BP carried out in vitro
testing of drug susceptibility and drafted the manuscript. LB carried out the molecular genetic studies. CP, PD and PM carried out
diagnostic, monitoring of the patient, collection of clinical and epidemiological data and drafted the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The authors thank R Amalvict, E Baret, N Benoit, H Bouchiba, S Charras, J Cren and D Travers from IRBA and E
Cua, H Hyvernat, C Dubois, S Melhem from CHU Nice for technical support. This study was supported by the Institut National de Veille
Sanitaire.
