An 18-year-old male was referred to us for chest discomfort. A physical examination showed normal findings. The chest X-ray was also normal.
ECG showed sinus rhythm and ischaemic changes in apico-infero-posterior myocardium. Two-dimensional-TTE (2DTTE) (Supplementary data online,
Movie S1) showed a single, large oval cyst (39 × 56 × 38 mm). The edge was well defined (Panel A), it was intramyocardial and fluid-filled.
It was located in the infero-postero-apical segment, protruding into the pericardium but mainly bulging into the left ventricular cavity
(Supplementary data online, Movie S2). L3DTTE (Supplementary data online, Movie S3) allowed cropping of this cystic mass in transverse,
sagittal (Panel B), and oblique planes, showing an apico-infero-posterior intramyocardial ellipsoid cystic mass with liquid content and
well-defined edges. These data showed a life-threatening mass, mainly due to the possibility of intrapericardial and/or left ventricular
rupture as well as systemic embolization. Chest computed tomography (CT) (Panel C) confirmed the presence of a left ventricular
intramyocardial cyst and also a multivesicular hepatic cyst. The patient was referred to cardiac surgery. Surgical findings (Panel D)
confirmed the accuracy of the preoperative echocardiography. The postoperative course was uneventful and the patient was discharged in
stable condition. Three months later, his hepatic cyst was removed with no complications. Two-dimensional TTE remain the widely used imaging
modality in cardiac echinococcosis, L3DTTE was shown to complement 2DTTE by displaying the 3D volume of the cyst and spatial relation to the
neighbouring cardiac structures. This information is vital, especially since surgical removal of the cyst is the treatment of choice for
this uncommon, but life-threatening disease. (Panel A) TTE: zoomed apex with egg-shaped hydatid mass. (Panel B) Live three-dimensional
transthoracic echocardiogram, zoomed and cropped view. (Panel C) CT scan revealed a well defined, non-enhancing, oval hypodense mass. (Panel
D) Intraoperative situs. The cystic mass is seen in the muscle of the left ventricular apex. The cyst was opened and its content aspirated.
Cystic material removed. A large defect before its reconstruction. Supplementary data are available at European Journal of Echocardiography
online.
