A 54-year-old woman was diagnosed with infiltrative ductal breast carcinoma. Two years after treatment, the patient developed an acute
myeloid leukemia (AML) which harbored del(11q23) in 8% of the blast cells. The patient was submitted for allogeneic stem cell
transplantation (aSCT) from her HLA-compatible sister. Ten months after transplantation, she relapsed with an AML with basophilic maturation
characterized by CD45low CD33high, CD117+, CD13-/+, HLA Drhigh, CD123high, and CD203c+ blast cells lacking expression of CD7, CD10, CD34,
CD15, CD14, CD56, CD36, CD64, and cytoplasmic tryptase. Karyotype analysis showed the emergence of a new clone with t(2;14) and FISH
analysis indicated the presence of MLL gene rearrangement consistent with del(11q23). Interestingly, AML blast cell DNA tested with
microsatellite markers showed the same pattern as the donor's, suggesting that this AML emerged from donor cells. Additionally,
polymorphisms of the XPA, XPD, XRCC1, XRCC3 and RAD51 DNA repair genes revealed three unfavorable alleles with low DNA repair capacity. In
summary, we report the first case of AML involving XPD and XRCC3 polymorphisms from donor origin following allogeneic stem cell
transplantation and highlight the potential need for careful analysis of DNA repair gene polymorphisms in selecting candidate donors prior
to allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Breast cancer is the most frequent malignancy in women . Over recent decades overall survival of
breast cancer patients has increased considerably as a result of earlier diagnosis and increasing use of adjuvant therapies . Nevertheless,
the risk of developing a secondary cancer increases as a long-term complication related to the use of cytotoxic DNA-targeted
antiproliferative drugs and hormone therapy with or without radiotherapy . Among other complications, a small proportion of all breast
cancer survivors subsequently develop acute myeloblastic leukemia (AML), preceded or not by a preleukemic myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) .
Secondary AML has many morphological and cytogenetic variants because transforming mutations leading to the disease are heterogeneous and
occur in an early multipotential hematopoietic cell that retains the potential to differentiate into virtually every hematopoietic lineage .
Here we report a rare case of a donor-related secondary AML with basophilic maturation post-allogeneic stem cell transplantation in a
patient with prior history of secondary AML derived from primary breast cancer chemotherapy. To our knowledge this is the first case
reported in the literature of a donor cell-derived AML secondary to breast cancer treatment and allogeneic stem cell transplantation
associated with unfavourable DNA repair gene polymorphisms. A 54-year-old woman was submitted for mastectomy in May 2004 because of an
infiltrative ductal breast carcinoma, with negative nodal infiltration and without expression of hormone receptors. After surgery, she was
treated with cyclophosphamide (600 mg/m2) and doxorubicin (60 mg/m2; 4 cycles) followed by adjuvant radiotherapy. In December 2006, the
patient presented with fever, anemia, and gingival bleeding. Peripheral blood data revealed anemia (hemoglobin level of 7.7 g/L) and
thrombocytopenia (12 × 109 platelets/L) with an increased white blood cell count (35.4 × 109 leucocytes/L), with 70% blasts. A bone marrow
aspirate sample showed diffuse infiltration by blast cells and diagnosis of AML M5 according to the French-American-British (FAB)
classification was made. On immunophenotypic criteria, blast cells were positive for CD33, CD117, CD13, and HLA-DR. Cytogenetic studies
performed on a bone marrow aspirate sample using standard culture methods and GTG banding revealed a normal 46, XX karyotype at the time of
the diagnosis of secondary AML prior to allogeneic stem cell transplantation (allo-SCT). Cytogenetic markers for secondary AML
[del(11)(q23), del(5q)/-5 or del(7q)/-7] were further investigated by interphase fluorescence in situ hybridization (iFISH) using the LSI
MLL (11q23) dual color, LSI D7S486 spectrum orange/CEP7 spectrum green, LSI EGR1 spectrum orange/LSID5S23:D5S721 spectrum green, and LSI CSF
1R spectrum orange/LSID5S23:D5S721 spectrum green (Vysis, Abbott Laboratories, USA) iFISH probes and showed 8% cells carrying del(11q23) in
the absence of abnormalities of both chromosomes 5 and 7. The patient was treated with AraC and idarrubicin and complete remission was
attained. Consolidation was performed with cytarabin-arabinose (high dose Ara-C) plus filgrastin, as prophylaxis for leucopenia. After two
cycles of consolidation, she was submitted to an allo-SCT from her HLA-compatible sister. The conditioning regimen for the allo-SCT
consisted of bussulfan and cyclosphosphamide. At day +48, she developed acute graft versus host disease (aGVHD), and was treated with
corticosteroids and cyclosporine (CSA). At day +280, an inguinal 4 × 3 cm mass appeared and the presence of malignant cells was revealed
upon biopsy. At day +300, a bone marrow aspirate showed 50% blasts. Cellular and molecular analyses were performed in parallel on this
sample. Immunophenotyping of bone marrow cells confirmed the presence of CD45low CD33high, CD117+, CD13-/+, HLA Drhigh CD123high blast
cells, lacking expression of CD7, CD10, CD34, CD15, CD14, CD56, CD36, and CD64 (Figure 1A-F), suggesting maturation into the basophil vs.
mast cell lineages. Further immunocytochemical stainings were performed showing CD203c expression in the absence of cytoplasmic tryptase
(Figure 2A and 2B); these together with the high expression for CD123 were consistent with basophilic maturation. Bivariate flow cytometry
dot plots showing the immunoreactivity pattern of blast cells (gated on CD45 vs. SSC) for CD45low = 25% (panel A), CD33 = 24% (panel B),
CD117 = 24% (panel C), CD13 = 16% (panel D), HLA-DR = 25% (panel E), and CD123 = 25%(panel F). Bone marrow smear after allo-SCT relapse. A-
Note the presence of basophils with CD203c+in the sample with approximately 20% of blasts being CD203c+. B- Note the absence of tryptase
staining. Microsatellite and PCR-RFLP analyses were performed on genomic DNA from mononuclear cells of the patient pre-transplant, of the
AML blast cell sample obtained after transplantation, and of the donor bone marrow cells. The 11 tested microsatellite markers are often
used in forensic medicine for individual identification. As displayed in Table 1, 7 of the analyzed loci (D21S11, D7S820, CSF1PO, D3S1358,
Vwa, D13S317, and TPOX) were informative and showed the coincidence of profile between AML blasts after transplantation and the donor's
cells, supporting full engraftment of the stem cell transplant as well as the donor cell-origin of the AML blasts. Microsatellite markers in
the patient's pre and post-transplant haematopoietic cells compared with the donor's Informative and coincident markers are identified in
bold. Genetic polymorphisms of five relevant human DNA repair genes (XPA, XPD, XRCC1, XRCC3, and RAD51) were further analyzed by PCR-RFLP on
the secondary AML blast DNA and compared to a pre-transplant DNA sample from the patient and to DNA from the donor. Analysis of leukemia-
prone polymorphic alleles (XPA A23G, XPD Lys751Gln, XRCC1 Arg399Gln, XRCC3 Thr241Met, and RAD51 G135C) revealed an XPD and XRCC3-deficient
heterozygous pre-SCT patient with normal alleles for XPA, XRCC1, and RAD51 DNA repair functions (Table 2 and Figure 3). Donor polymorphisms
were different, harboring both XPD- and XRCC3-deficient homozygosis. Once microsatellite analysis indicated post-transplant total chimerism,
post-SCT patient cells were shown to have acquired the genotypic markers of the donor's poorer DNA repair functions (Table 2 and Figure 3).
DNA repair polymorphisms in the patient's pre- and post-transplantation (AML) cells and donor's cells DRC - DNA repair capacity NER -
Nucleotide Excision Repair BER - Base Excision Repair HRR - Homologous Recombination Repair RFLP analysis of DNA generated by digestion of
XPA (3A), XPD (3B), XRCC1 (3C), XRCC3 (3D), and RAD51 (3E) PCR products digested with or without their specific RFLP diagnostic restriction
enzymes. M = 50 bp ladder marker; Lane 1 = non-digested PCR amplification of normal allele; Lane 2 = digestion pattern from the positive
control K562 myeloid cell line alleles; Lane 3 = digestion pattern from patient alleles before transplantation; Lane 4 = digestion pattern
from patient alleles from AML cell DNA after transplantation; Lane 5 = digestion pattern from donor cell alleles. The patient was then
treated with idarubicin, cytosine arabinoside (ARA-C) with no response. At that time the immunophenotypic study showed the same profile, but
conventional cytogenetics revealed the emergence of a new clone: 46, XX, t(2;14)(q37;q22) /46, XX (Figure 4). Treatment was modified and
FLAG [fludarabin, ARA-C, and granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF)] was started. After 18 days the patient had hematopoietic
recovery with 3% blasts. Twenty-one days after FLAG, a donor lymphocyte infusion (DLI) was given, which was followed by GVHD, and the
patient was treated with corticosteroids. The patient was submitted to a second DLI four months later. At day +14 after this second DLI, the
karyotype post-DLI was normal, 46, XX, but FISH analysis indicated the presence of MLL gene rearrangements consistent with del(11q23) in 5%
of the cells. The myelogram showed 62% blasts. Rescue therapy with high dose topotecan and ARA-C was started and administered for five days
without haematologic response; peripheral blood infiltration by blast cells rose to 80% after 14 days. Palliative support began and the
patient died after 17 months of stem cell infusion. Illustrating metaphase (G-banding) of AML cells obtained after initial therapy of AML:
46, XX, t(2;14)(q37;q22)/46, XX. Arrows denote the chromosomes assumed to be involved in t(2;14)(q37;q22). Here we report a case of a
secondary AML developing from donor-derived cells in a breast cancer patient who underwent allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Donor cell
leukemia is a rare although well-recognized disease entity following SCT that occurs as the result of oncogenic transformation of apparently
normal donor hematopoietic cells in the transplant recipient. Many studies have reported an increased risk of breast cancer patients to
develop leukemia after chemotherapy, radiotherapy and G-CSF administration . Because of this, risk estimates on the eventual development of
post-treatment AML/MDS have to be cast when deciding a patient's treatment. In these studies, increased risk of AML/MDS has been reported
for cases treated with alkylating agents and anthracyclines. Post-treatment secondary leukemias associated with prior administration of
alkylating agents (e.g., cyclophosphamide) typically differ from those arising after treatment with DNA topoisomerase II inhibitors, such as
anthracyclines. Accordingly, AML's developing after topoisomerase II inhibitors are given typically show an early onset, and display
monocytic and myelomonocytic features in association with abnormalities of chromosomes 11 and 21 (especially balanced translocations
involving the 11q23 and 21q22 regions). Whereas those arising after treatment with alkylating agents frequently show neutrophil/granulocytic
maturation together with abnormalities of chromosome 5 and 7. These changes are seen in the absence of chromosomal translocations and the
leukemias emerge much later after therapy . Exposure to radiotherapy may further increase the risk for AML . In turn, Smith et al. found the
M4/M5 subtypes to be more frequent in patients receiving intense treatment regimens and concluded that this could be the result of
cyclophosphamide-induced promotion of a doxorubicin-associated leukemogenic effect. In the case reported here, the association of
chemotherapy and radiotherapy protocols most probably played a role in the development of AML. Secondary AML outcomes are thus believed to
arise from genomic instability (i.e., deletions, mutations, translocations) induced by therapy-associated DNA damage . Two different
hypotheses remain which could contribute to explain the development of secondary AML: a truly stochastic event, or individual differences on
cancer susceptibility . The latter appears to better explain the case reported here. In this regard, previous reports have described
polymorphisms conferring sensitivity to chemotherapy, which may contribute to the incidence of secondary AML outcomes . Alternatively, it is
possible that germline variations in DNA repair genes may also enhance the risk of therapy-induced secondary AML in patients carrying DNA-
repair deficient genes . In fact it has also been shown that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) in DNA repair genes may code
malfunctioning proteins, in association with an increased predisposition to cancer and the response of leukemia patients following
chemotherapy . Here we investigated five alleles of DNA repair genes already ascribed to susceptibility to leukemia (XRCC1, XPA, XPD, XRCC3
and RAD51). As expected, polymorphic alleles found by genotyping in both the patient post-SCT hematopoietic cells and the donor's cells were
the same, revealing successful transplant, which could also explain the otherwise observed resistance to treatment and clinical evolution.
In turn, pre-SCT patient cells were heterozygous for allelic variants in the XPD and XRCC3 genes that are associated with lower repair
capacity, conspicuously bearing on susceptibility to breast cancer and chemotherapy-related leukemia (AML) in this patient. Consistent with
our observations, Allan et al. showed that individuals carrying at least one XPD- Lys751Gln allele were more likely to have an adverse
prognosis following chemotherapy. The XPD Gln751 polymorphic protein was shown to fail in engaging apoptosis in chemotherapy-damaged cells,
thus avoiding elimination of mutated myeloid precursors. In order to search for an association of the poor outcome of the patient's
secondary post-SCT leukemia, the same gene set of polymorphisms was screened for in the donor's DNA. Remarkably, donor DNA genotyped
homozygous not only for the XPD (Lys751Gln) suboptimal allele, but also for the XRCC3-deficient allele (Thr243Met). Both post-SCT blast
cells and donor DNA were coincident in XPD- and XRCC3-deficient homozygosity, supporting a donor origin for the leukemic blasts. The XRCC3
protein plays a critical role in Homologous Recombination Repair (HRR) accounting for repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB). Whenever it
is deficient, unsealed or misrepaired breaks can generate oncogenic chromosomal translocations. When found together, allelic variants in
Lys751Gln XPD and Thr241Met XRCC3 polymorphisms have been associated with both a worse repair capacity and resistance to apoptosis . Once
introduced into the patient's drug-intoxicated bone marrow, disrupted DNA repair and apoptosis pathways in the donor's cells may have
accumulated unrepaired damages while escaping apoptosis, thus boosting aggressiveness. Indeed, this is further supported by the observation
of a switch from normal to highly abnormal post-SCT of the patient's karyotype and FISH analysis. This supports the theory that in donor
origin leukemia, the host environment in which the original malignancy developed could trigger an oncogenic process in donor cells, favored
by the immunosuppressive status after transplantation, especially because the donor is still healthy . An additional interesting finding is
the maturation observed phenotypically towards the basophilic versus mast cell lineages based on coexpression of CD203c and both CD123,
CD117 . Cases of de novo AML with predominant basophilic and/or mastocytic, cell phenotypes are uncommon and they account for only 4-5% of
all cases of acute nonlymphocytic leukemia . Although acute basophilic leukemia (ABL) has been long diagnosed as such, current knowledge of
this specific AML subtype remains limited . In conclusion, here we describe a very rare case of donor origin AML from a sibling who harbored
germline XPD and XRCC3 homozygous polymorphisms in a breast cancer patient following chemotherapy. The blasts showed SNP profiles of the
donor including susceptible alleles for unfavorable genotypes in DNA repair genes. Determination of the donor's DNA repair genotype, capable
of stimulating genetic instability in a diseased recipient, could be important for future transplantation procedures and therefore should be
investigated further. DNA repair mechanisms are responsible for maintenance of the genome integrity avoiding additional mutations in key
cell cycle regulation genes which are responsable for "leukemization". To ensure that DNA repair mechanisms are properly working, more donor
cell gene polymorphisms or mutations should be studied. After the interpretation of results, a reference panel of low DNA repair capacity
polymorphisms or mutations should be included in the international guidelines for screening donor DNA before SCT. The Ethics Committee of
the National Cancer Institute performed in accordance with the ethical standards laid down in the 1964 Declaration of Helsinki, approved
this study (# of registration 41/11). The written informed consent was obtained from the sister's patient. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HRD, designed the
paper and wrote the paper. AO, performed immunocytochemical stainings and reviewed the manuscript. BEG and MMC, performed flow cytometric
immunophenotyping. TSF performed cytogenetic and FISH analysis. RIS, GA, CL and DAS, performed the molecular biology studies. AM-C and GSC,
were responsible of the patient's treatment and conceived the study. GSC and MHO, carried out acquisition of data's patient. CL, GA and MHO
were responsible for manuscript review. EA and LFB carried out their critical interpretations. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. Ministério da Saúde/INCA, FAPERJ.
