Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection The aim of
our study was to analyze spectral optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) findings in a patient with clinical signs of sialidosis. Fluorescein
angiography and spectral optical coherence tomography was performed in a 37-year-old woman using a SD-OCT device with axial resolution of 6
μm. Enzyme assay followed. The patient was diagnosed with type I sialidosis by enzymatic assay. Besides a normal angiogram, a thickened
nerve fiber layer was observed on spectral optical coherence tomography. The thickened nerve fiber layer was probably caused by accumulation
of metabolic products such as sialylated oligosaccharides and glycopeptides, suggesting that SD- OCT, due to its enhanced resolution, can be
a useful tool for diagnosis of rare neurological conditions. Cherry-red spots in the macula may be observed in several lysosomal storage
disorders, including sialidosis, a rare autosomal recessive disease caused by isolated deficiency of neuraminidase (sialidase) 1. Sialidosis
type II is the early-onset variant with dysmorphic changes. Type I sialidosis, rare compared to type II, is a relatively mild disease with
onset in the second or third decades of life and slower progression. It manifests with myoclonus syndrome, ataxia, gait abnormalities,
epilepsy and impairment of vision. We present a case study, including spectral optical coherence tomography, in 38-year-old female affected
with type I sialidosis. A previously healthy 15-year-old girl developed sudden, jerky movements of the upper limbs. She was born to non-
consanguineous parents and her early development and progress in school was normal. She had no siblings and her family history was
unremarkable. The jerkiness gradually generalized to the lower extremities. Her gait was disturbed and her speech became slurred. At the age
of 20, myoclonus of the face was present and ophthalmography revealed the opsoclonus. When she was 22-years-old generalised clinic-tonic and
partial seizures occurred. The epilepsy was well controlled with valproate. Between 20 and 31 years she was several times evaluated
ophthalmologically and fundus examination did not reveal any abnormalities. However, corneal opacities were noted at that time. Visual
acuity dropped from 1.0 to 0.7 on Snellen charts during that time. Intraocular pressure was normal. At the age of 35 cherry-red spots in the
maculae were observed for the first time (Figure 1) suggesting diagnosis of type 1 sialidosis. Around the cherry-red spots in the macula we
observed a slightly oval, pale perimacular area, about 1.5 disc diameters in size. Besides this finding, the clinical examination was
normal. Fluorescein angiography was also performed and no abnormal leakage was observed. Neurological examination at age 38 years revealed
severe myoclonus and dystonic movements of the trunk, exaggerated by voluntary movements and emotion, in all 4 extremities, head and face.
Generalised ataxia was present. Her speech was dysarthric and explosive. Horizontal nystagmus was observed. Deep tendon reflexes were
hyperactive. Because of involuntary movements and ataxia she was unable to feed and dress herself and she was wheelchair-bound.
Neuropsychological evaluation revealed mild impairment of cognitive functions and adaptive depressive reaction. The brain MRI was normal.
EEG occasionally showed discharges of sharp waves and diffuse theta waves. Visual acuity dropped to 0.1 in both eyes at that time. During
the fundus examination, the cherry-red spots on the macula and a normal optic nerve head were observed. Fluorescein angiography was
unremarkable (Figure 1). Spectral optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT, Spectralis, Heidelberg Engineering, Germany) was additionally
performed (Figure 2). SD-OCT is a novel technique providing information about the internal structure of an object by measuring the
interferometric signal detected as a function of optical frequencies. This allows for high speed and high resolution cross-sectional imaging
of the human retina, enabling more exact visualization of retinal layers, especially photoreceptors and external limiting membrane. The SD-
OCT used in this study provides 3.9 μm axial and 12–18 μm transverse resolution, and 3-dimensional scanning is also possible. The
examination revealed increased paracentral retinal thickness with normal central retinal thickness. All retinal layers seemed normal except
the thickened nerve fibre layer, including an intact photoreceptor layer and external limiting membrane. Sialidase activity in blood
leucocytes was measured against artificial fluorogenic substrate 2′-(4-methylumbelliferyl)-α-D-N-acetylneuraminic acid (4MU-NeuAc; Sigma).
Isolated cells (2–5×106) were homogenized by sonication in 0.20 ml of 0.05 M sodium acetate buffer, pH 4.4 and incubated with 0.125 mM 4MU-
NeuAc at 37°C for 1 h. The reaction was terminated by addition of 1.9 ml of 0.4 m glycine buffer, pH 10.5. Liberated 4-methylumbelliferone
was measured using a Shimadzu RF-5301 spectrofluorometer with excitation at 355 nm and emission at 460 nm. Protein concentration was
measured using a protein assay kit (Bio-Rad). The measured sialidase activity 0.08 nmol/hr mg of protein was approximately 10-fold less than
the level detected in normal controls (from 0.07 to 2.1 nmol/hr mg, n=56). Beta galactosidase activity was in the normal range, which
excluded diagnosis of galactosialidosis. There have been few descriptions of patients with cherry-red spot syndrome with a normal optic disc
in adult patients with myoclonus, without mental retardation. First it was reported by Anderson et al in 2 sisters, ages 16 and 19,
manifesting adult-onset myoclonus with bilateral cherry-red spot syndrome and diagnosed with mucolipidosis type I . Titarelli et al further
reported a 24-yea-old man with similar symptoms, additionally presenting a visual field impairment. A few years later several more studies
were published, confirming increased levels of sialylated oligosaccharides in urine and defects of acid sialidase (neuraminidase) in skin
fibroblasts and leukocytes in patients with similar symptoms . O’ Brien and Lowden classified those symptoms as sialidosis type I, or the
cherry-red spot myoclonus syndrome, characterized with normal intelligence and a defect of neuraminidase 1. This report describes the first
spectral optical coherence tomography performed in a patient diagnosed with sialidosis type I. The whitish perimacular region in sialidosis
patients was until now explained as a thickening of the retina. SD-OCT, presenting high-resolution images of the retinal structure, brings
new insight into understanding the morphology of the thickened retina. As can be seen on the images, not all retinal layers are thickened,
only the nerve fibre layer. Some authors have stated that changes in brain MRI may correspond to nerve fibre layer thickness, for example in
sclerosis multiplex . As the eye is an extension of the brain, some products that accumulate in the brain may be visible in the eye. We
believe that the thickening of the nerve fibre layer observed in SD-OCT in the presented case of sialidosis could be due to accumulation of
metabolic products, as sialic-acid-containing oligosaccharides and glycopeptides. SD-OCT is an easy and non- invasive approach to confirm
metabolic diseases such as sialidosis. In particular, multiple eye-tracking systems such as the one used in this study help to achieve high-
quality images even in patients with heavy nystagmus and involuntary movements. SD-OCT images therefore not only help to suggest or confirm
correct diagnosis, but it additionally brings new insight into our understanding of the pathological changes in the retinal structure
occurring in sialidosis patients. Conflict of interest We declare no proprietary interest of any author. Source of support: This paper was
awarded during the Case Reports Conference Network in Ophthalmology Conference 12–13.11.2010 Spectral Domain Optical Coherence Tomography.
Right eye on the right side and left eye on the left side. A normal fovea contour and thickened nerve fibre layer are visible. Fundus
photograph and fluorescein angiography of both eyes. Cherry-red spots are visible on both fundus images. Fluorescein angiography is normal.
