We describe the interdisciplinary management of a 34-year-old woman with dilated cardiomyopathy three months postpartum on a cardiac
biventricular assist device (BVAD) as bridge to heart transplantation with delayed onset of intracardial shunting and subsequent hypoxemia
due to massive pulmonary embolism. After emergency surgical embolectomy pulmonary function was highly compromised (PaO2/FiO2 54) requiring
bifemoral veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. Transesophageal echocardiography detected atrial level hypoxemic right-to-left
shunting through a patent foramen ovale (PFO). Percutaneous closure of the PFO was achieved with a PFO occluder device. After placing the
PFO occluder device oxygenation increased significantly (Δ paO2 119 Torr). The patient received heart transplantation 20 weeks after BVAD
implantation and was discharged from ICU 3 weeks after transplantation. An increase in pulmonary vascular resistance in patients on BVAD can
reopen a PFO resulting in atrial right-to-left shunting and subsequent hypoxemia. The case demonstrates the usefulness of transesophageal
echocardiography examinations in the detection of this unexpected event. Percutaneous placement of a PFO occluder device is an appropriate
strategy to stop intracardiac shunting through PFO in fixed elevation of pulmonary vascular resistance. In a literature review, few cases of
atrial level right-to-left shunt in patients with left ventricular assist devices are described. All these cases were detected either
intraoperatively or within the first postoperative days . We describe a case of delayed onset of atrial level right-to-left shunt after
massive pulmonary embolism on biventricular assist device (BVAD) support. A 34 year old female patient was admitted to our hospital with
dilated cardiomyopathy three months after birth of her third child. She had a known history of familial dilated cardiomyopathy.
Recompensation was not achieved despite maximum medical therapy and insertion of an intra-aortic balloon pump. BVAD [Excor, Berlin Heart,
Berlin, Germany] was implanted using a bi-atrial cannulation technique as bridge to heart transplantation. Perioperative transesophageal
echocardiography did not show a patent foramen ovale (PFO). Postoperative recovery was immediate and the patient was discharged from the ICU
on the third postoperative day. Four weeks after device implantation the patient developed fulminant pulmonary embolism despite therapeutic
anticoagulation. Emergency surgical embolectomy for massive pulmonary embolism was performed since thrombolysis was not an option after
recent implantation of an artificial heart (Figure 1). Pulmonary function was highly compromised after embolectomy and veno-venous
extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO) [Bio-Console, Medtronic, Minneapolis, USA] was established using a bifemoral venous access.
Weaning from veno-venous ECMO was achieved over the following week but after removal oxygenation failure reoccurred. FiO2 of 1.0 was
necessary to achieve sufficient oxygen saturation (paO2/FiO2 54). Modification of ventilator setting with adjustments of PEEP and peak
inspiratory pressure did not lastingly improve oxygenation. Transesophageal echocardiography detected atrial level intracardial shunting
(Figure 2). There was no improvement after application of inhaled pulmonary vasodilatators. CT-scan after surgical embolectomy showed
residual emboli in the pulmonary vascular system. Invasive procedures such as re-embolectomy, topical thrombolysis or catheter fragmentation
were considered as too harmful or not effective. Since right heart function was secured even with high pulmonary vascular resistance,
percutaneous placement of a PFO occluder device [Amplatzer PFO Occluder®, AGA Medical, Plymouth, USA] was performed (Figure 2, Additional
file 1). Oxygenation increased significantly after placement without change of respirator settings (Δ paO2 119 Torr). Weaning from
mechanical ventilation was successful after 15 weeks. CT-Scan: A & B before surgical embolectomy. C & D directly after surgical embolectomy.
Transesophageal echocardiography: A & B before, C & D after patent foramen ovale closure with a PFO occluder device [Amplatzer PFO
Occluder®, AGA Medical, Plymouth, USA]. After 5 weeks of therapeutic anticoagulation the residual emboli diminished and pulmonary vascular
resistance was measured at 184 dyne•s/cm5 with activated assist device and 160 dyne•s/cm5 with deactivated assist device. Heart
transplantation was performed 20 weeks after implantation of the BVAD and 16 weeks after pulmonary embolism and placement of the PFO
occluder device. Discharge from ICU was 3 weeks after transplantation. Informed consent for publication was obtained from the patient. The
problem with PFO and left ventricular assist device leading to atrial level right-to-left shunt with consecutive hypoxemia is well described
. PFO has an incidence up to 27% in normal healthy adults as well as in adult cardiac surgical patients . If left ventricular assist device
(LVAD) is activated, left atrial unloading leads to a decrease in left atrial pressure . Right atrial pressure exceeds left atrial pressure
and with PFO atrial level right-to-left shunt occurs. Depending on the shunt fraction hypoxemia may occur . Therefore, intraoperative
transesophageal echocardiography with colour Doppler imaging and contrast with agitated saline is highly recommended before cardiopulmonary
bypass and after LVAD activation . Alternatively, manual occlusion of the pulmonary artery shortly before activation of the LVAD by the
surgeon and transesophageal echocardiography studies as described are performed . If PFO is detected before weaning from cardiopulmonary
bypass, immediate operative closure is recommended. If shunting is detected after weaning from cardiopulmonary bypass, delayed
interventional closure after stabilization is preferred if oxygenation failure is tolerable, since failure of the right heart in LVAD
implantation or bleeding complications due to coagulopathy after reapplied bypass can deteriorate outcome . PFO closure improved oxygenation
in all known cases as it did in our patient. There is only one other case of delayed onset of atrial level right-to-left shunt in patients
on ventricular assist device . In this case report, atrial level right-to-left shunt with hypoxemia occurred after replacement of the valves
of a LVAD [LVAS, Novacor, Salt Lake City, USA] which had been implanted one year before. The management consisted of reduction of right
atrial pressure by conservative means. Persisting elevation of right atrial pressure due to persisting change of the pulmonary vascular
resistance in a patient with a BVAD has not been described. An etiologic reason for persisting elevation of pulmonary vascular resistance
can be massive pulmonary embolism as described in our case. Our report is the first description of a patient surviving massive pulmonary
embolism while on BVAD, followed by successful orthotopic heart transplantation. To the best of our knowledge there is only one other
published case of pulmonary embolism in a patient with a BVAD. This patient died shortly after the event . Emergency surgical embolectomy is
recommended in hemodynamic unstable patients with massive pulmonary embolism in a facility with cardiac surgical capabilities . Catheter
embolectomy should be performed in absence of cardiothoracic surgical backup . In our case, thrombolysis was contraindicated. Therefore
emergency surgical embolectomy was the treatment of choice. The reported median reduction of pulmonary vascular resistance achieved by
surgical embolectomy is from 893 ± 443.5 dyne•s/cm5 to 285 ± 214 dyne•s/cm5 , a result that was achieved in our patient. With regard to the
planned heart transplantation, chronic thromboembolic pulmonary hypertension would have been an exclusion criterion. Diagnostic
transesophageal echocardiography must be performed with relevant change in the hemodynamic situation and recurring hypoxemia in patients
with VAD since increase in pulmonary vascular resistance can reopen PFO resulting in atrial level right-to-left shunting and consecutive
hypoxemia. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. TW reviewed the case, conducted a review of the literature and drafted the manuscript. TW and MI performed the echocardiographic
studies and participated in the design of the case report. RS and PB performed the operation and intervention described. MD, LF and DB
confirmed the patient's diagnosis and revised the manuscript, contributing important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. Transesophageal echocardiogram. Transesophageal echocardiogram before and after patent foramen ovale closure with a PFO
occluder device [Amplatzer PFO Occluder®, AGA Medical, Plymouth, USA]. Click here for file
