Hypodontia is the congenital absence of one or more teeth and may affect permanent teeth. Several options are indicated to treat hypodontia,
including the maintenance of primary teeth or space redistribution for restorative treatment with partial adhesive bridges, tooth
transplantation, and implants. However, a multidisciplinary approach is the most important requirement for the ideal treatment of
hypodontia. This paper describes a multidisciplinary treatment plan for congenitally missing permanent mandibular second premolars involving
orthodontics, implantology and prosthodontic specialties. The congenital absence of teeth can seriously affect a young person, both
physically and emotionally, especially when the missing tooth is located in the anterior region of the mouth. Hypodontia is the congenital
absence of teeth and refers to the condition where there is an absence of one or a few teeth21. In addition, hypodontia of permanent teeth
is fairly common in contemporary populations11 and is the most common human malformation. It occurs without any other signs or symptoms of
developmental disorders7,17,22. Both genetic4,9 and environmental2,10 components are involved in the etiology of hypodontia3, and several
genetic and syndromic conditions are currently known to increase the risk of hypodontia19; nonetheless, congenitally missing teeth are
commonly found in healthy people17,22. The prevalence of hypodontia ranges from 1% in African Negroes and Australian aborigines to 30% in
Japanese people21, and studies of white subjects have reported higher frequencies of hypodontia among females (a female-to-male ratio of
approximately 3:2)11. The third molars are the most frequently missing teeth, but they do not need to be replaced; however, mandibular
second premolars (2.8%), maxillary lateral incisors (1.6%), and maxillary second premolars and mandibular incisors (0.23%-0.08%)5 are the
most frequently missing teeth that require some type of treatment. Hypodontia usually requires extensive and complex treatments, ranging
from single restorations to surgery and multiple restorations, associated with lifelong maintenance12. Several treatment solutions have been
presented in the dental literature1,16,20,23. In broad terms, the necessary treatment depends on the pattern of tooth absence, the amount of
residual spacing, the presence of malocclusion and patient attitudes. One of the key factors for the successful treatment of patients with
hypodontia is the interdisciplinary intervention, which involves the close work of a committed team (general dental practitioner, pediatric
dentist, orthodontist, implantologist and prosthodontist), where each member contributes with a different expertise to achieve an optimal
outcome for the patient21. The purpose of this article is to present a case of hypodontia in which the treatment plan consisted of the
association of orthodontic, implantology, and prosthetic specialties. A 17-year-old male patient in the final stage of orthodontic treatment
presented with the primary second molars in position for space maintenance. Hypodontia had been previously diagnosed by the orthodontic team
(Figure 1), and the patient was referred to the Oral Rehabilitation Clinic (FOB/USP) for extraction of those teeth and rehabilitation of the
area. Analyses of the occlusal condition revealed the presence of both canine and protrusive guidance achieved by orthodontic therapy and
that the deciduous second molars were in infraocclusion (Figure 2). The patient did not present with any systemic or genetic disorder that
could be associated with hypodontia, and the oral hygiene status was satisfactory. Preorthodontic panoramic radiograph Initial aspect
showing infra-occlusion of the primary mandibular right and left second molars Several treatment options were considered, including adhesive
or conventional fixed bridges and implants, because there were radiographic signs of root resorption in the primary teeth. Considering the
consecutive cephalometric analyses, which demonstrated that the patient had reached physical maturity, the bone availability, the absence of
medical contraindications, and the patient consent, the treatment comprised the extraction of primary teeth and placement of immediate load
implants. However, the mesiodistal dimensions of the primary teeth were larger than that required to restore the anatomy of the mandibular
second premolar but insufficient to restore the dimensions of a mandibular first molar. Thus, the only option was to reduce the mesiodistal
distance by orthodontic therapy before implant placement. To plan the prosthetic space and at the same time to guide the orthodontic
movement, the occlusal surfaces of the primary teeth were marked according to the mesiodistal dimension of a mandibular second premolar
(Figure 3), and the distal surfaces were reduced without changing the infraosseous anatomy to acquire space to fabricate the provisional
crowns with anatomic characteristics of mandibular second premolars (Figure 4). This step of prosthetic planning was fundamental to the
accomplishment of the orthodontic treatment. Occlusal view of the mandibular primary teeth showing the delimitation mark for the proximal
reduction Occlusal view showing the distal space after cementation of the provisional crown After the planned space closure (Figure 5), the
teeth were extracted, and external hex implants with a 4.1 mm rectangular platform were immediately placed (Master Porous Grip, Conexão
Sistemas de Implante, São Paulo, SP, Brazil) with immediate load (Figures 6). The Ceraone abutment was selected (Conexão Sistemas de
Implante) and placed at a torque of 32 N. The provisional crown was then adapted, cemented with temporary cement (RelyX Temp; 3M ESPE, St.
Paul, MN, USA) and maintained in infra-occlusion for 4 months. During this period, the orthodontic appliance was maintained for retention of
the orthodontically moved mandibular molars. The implants were considered clinically acceptable after clinical (absence of pain, infection,
mobility, or any other signal of pathology into the soft tissues) and radiographic (no signs of periimplant radiolucency) examinations.
Occlusal view after the planned space closure between the molars and the provisional crowns Occlusal view of the provisional crowns after
placement of the immediate load implants An impression of the Ceraone abutment was taken with the emergence profile customization technique
with silicone (Optosil® and Optosil Xantopren®; Heraeus Kulzer GmbH & Co. KG, Germany). The metal-ceramic crowns were cemented with glass-
ionomer cement (Relay X Luting 2; 3M ESPE). The patient was given maintenance therapy every 6 months during a 2-year period. The final
outcome reflected the care taken, especially during the planning of the prosthetic space to be restored (Figure 7). The 2-year follow-up
revealed maintenance of orthodontic treatment, occlusal plane and oral hygiene, esthetics (Figures 8a and 8b), and the stability of the bone
level (Figure 9). No mechanical (ceramic fracture, screw loosening, and loss of retention) and/or biological complications (periimplantitis)
were recorded. Final occlusal aspect after cementation of metal-ceramic crowns of the mandibular right and left second premolars Proximal
view after 2 years of follow-up Panoramic radiograph after 2 years of follow-up The multidisciplinary approach associated with early
diagnosis in individuals with hypodontia of permanent teeth is related to treatment success14. However, definitive treatment of the missing
teeth is often performed only after eruption of all permanent teeth or completion of orthodontic treatment. The oral patient's hygiene
status and socioeconomic conditions as well as the maintenance therapy should also be considered6. Multidisciplinary treatment is usually
initiated upon the diagnosis of hypodontia, often by the pediatric dentist or general practitioner. The main contribution of these
professionals is the prevention of carious lesions and maintenance of the primary teeth in the oral cavity for space maintenance and
preservation of alveolar bone for future implant therapy6. Orthodontic treatment allows for the creation or redistribution of spaces for
later rehabilitation8. If the primary teeth had not been maintained in the present case, the final prosthetic spaces would not have been
large enough for the placement of crowns with the dimensions of mandibular second premolars. The greatest challenge in the treatment of
hypodontia is related to treatment planning, which usually depends on the severity of the hypodontia6. The treatment options available for
these cases are the maintenance of the primary teeth; orthodontic space closure; space maintenance; restoration with adhesive or fixed
dentures, tooth transplantation or dental implants; or orthodontic space redistribution to facilitate the prosthetic treatment13.
Maintenance of the primary teeth should be considered if root resorption has not affected their stability24. When extraction of the primary
teeth is indicated, orthodontic treatment should be performed to prevent migration of the adjacent and antagonist teeth and to allow for
adequate space for prosthetic rehabilitation. In the present case, besides the maintenance of the primary teeth throughout the orthodontic
treatment, the prosthetic spaces preserved by provisional crowns were also important because if they had not been completely closed, the
Class I angle could not have been achieved, possibly causing occlusal and facial alterations14, while the maintenance of the original space
would require prosthetic crowns with different characteristics than those observed on either first molars or second premolars. The treatment
with dental implants may be the best option for patients with hypodontia because this procedure is predictable, stable and provides
excellent esthetic results18. Other treatment options, such as conventional partial fixed dentures, may cause biological damage due to the
need to reduce the intact tooth structure; in young patients, the risk of pulp damage is high due to the large volume of the pulp
chamber8,15. When treatment with dental implants is indicated, the possible postpubertal vertical growth of the facial skeleton should be
considered14, and consecutive cephalometric analyses should be performed to establish the period of growth. These analyses revealed
completion of physical growth of our patient; thus, restoration of the prosthetic space with implants was the treatment of choice. The
implant therapy in individuals with hypodontia may be complex due to the limitations caused by the reduced bone thickness8,15, impairing the
ideal positioning of implants or requiring the use of implants with a small platform. For this reason, bone grafting is often indicated to
compensate for this deficiency. Implants with a small platform prevent the achievement of an adequate emergence profile for wide teeth, such
as the posterior teeth. In this case, the maintenance of the primary teeth during orthodontic treatment favors the maintenance of the bone
architecture, allowing for the placement of implants with a regular platform. The successful management of hypodontia in this case was
achieved by a multidisciplinary treatment. Maintenance of the primary teeth combined with orthodontic treatment allowed for the placement of
endosseous implants to replace the missing teeth, enhancing the esthetics and function.
