Typhoid fever is a very common infectious disease, particularly in developing countries such as Sri Lanka. Although multiple organs are
known to be affected by the disease, hepatic involvement could be considered the most important as studies have showed that it is associated
with a higher relapse rate. We report a young patient who presented with fever and jaundice and found to have cholestatic hepatitis
secondary to typhoid fever. Typhoid fever is known to cause a wide range of hepatic complications . However, cholestasis secondary to
typhoid fever has only been reported in a few instances . The pathophysiology of liver dysfunction due to typhoid infection is not yet fully
understood. Demonstration of intact Salmonella typhi in liver tissue of patients with typhoid fever suggests that there is an interplay of
the micro organism factors and the immunity which cause liver injury . A 33 year old male sought hospital care after anorexia, and fever for
10 days followed by a vague right hypochondrial discomfort, vomiting and jaundice for 3 days with dark urine and some reduction in urine
output. There was an associated diarrohoea with yellow stools. He did not complain of pruritus. He did not give a contact history with muddy
water and denied blood transfusions, promiscuity or intravenous drug abuse. He had been employed as a driver and had no significant past
medical history or travel history to a malarial endemic area. He consumed alcoholic beverages only at social functions and denied any recent
binges. He was not using any medication prior to this admission including antibiotics. Examination revealed an ill looking patient with deep
icterus with mild dehydration but without any scratch marks. He had no stigmata of chronic liver disease or evidence of encephalopathy.
Fever was documented and no lymphadenopathy was detected. There was tender firm hepatomegaly with moderately enlarged soft spleen. The gall
bladder was not palpable. Cardiovascular, respiratory and neurological examination was normal. The urine full report showed bile in the
urine with normal levels of urobilinogen. Full blood count showed a borderline leucopaenia - 4.8 × 103/μl with 51% neutrophils and 44%
lymphocytes. The platelet count was 175 × 103/μl and never dropped significantly throughout his hospital stay. The initial ESR was 35 mm/h
and the CRP was elevated 96 mg/l. The blood picture showed only mild rouleaux formation. The liver biochemistry showed normal albumin levels
with elevation of AST and ALT which were 120 units/l and 240 units/l respectively The alkaline phosphatase was 1500 units/l, Indirect
Bilirubin was 1 mg/dl and the Direct Bilirubin was 10 mg/dl (Table 1). The serum electrolytes and renal function were within normal limits.
Liver biochemistry time-line (Normal values - AST < 45, ALT < 50, ALP < 200, Direct bilirubin < 0.6, Albumin 35-50) The ultrasound scan of
the abdomen showed an enlarged liver at 17.5 cm with a coarse echo pattern and a markedly dilated gall bladder with normal wall thickness.
The intra and extra-hepatic bile ducts were not dilated nor were any calculi visualized. There was splenomegaly at 15.5 cm. Blood culture,
urine culture, serology studies for viral hepatitis, leptospirosis and dengue ere dispatched and, he was empirically treated with IV
crystalline penicillin as leptospirosis was endemic in the region despite the negative contact history. His fever continued for four days
post-hospital admission and the icterus progressively worsened despite treatment for suspected leptospirosis. On serial monitoring the liver
biochemistry showed further derangement with marked increase of direct bilirubin to a maximum of 16 mg/dl and alkaline phosphatase to a
maximum of 1600 Units/L and mild increase of transaminases, with a maximum AST of 125 Units/L and ALT of 255 units/L (Table 1). The
Leptospira microscopic agglutination test was equivocal and hepatitis serology was negative for Hepatitis A, B and C. The Dengue IgG was
positive in low titres however with a negative IgM. The patient refused to give consent for a percutaneous liver biopsy. His blood culture
yielded a growth of Salmonella typhi after 5 days incubation, with antibiotic sensitivity to Ciprofloxacin (MIC < 0.5 mg/L) and Cefotaxime
(< 0.25 mg/L). The strain was resistant to Ampicillin (MIC > 1 mg/L) and Chloramphenicol (MIC > 2 mg/L) He was started on IV Cefotaxime 2 g
three times a day for 3 days. Oral Azithromycin 1 g daily for 7 days was also added. This combination of antibiotics is the usual
recommendation by the department of microbiology of our hospital. He demonstrated marked clinical improvement with defervescence in 48 hours
and gradual resolution of jaundice and constitutional symptoms over the next 7 days. The liver biochemistry subsequently showed decline of
cholestasis with improvement of transaminases (Table 1) by day 30. The persistence of mild enzyme derangement at this stage could be due to
residual hepatic damage. Further monitoring of liver enzymes was planned to detect chronic liver disease. He was discharged after seven days
of hospital treatment with oral Cefixime and Azithromycin. He returned one week later and was clinically well with just a tinge of jaundice
with absence of hepatomegaly and splenomegaly. The liver biochemistry was gradually improving and by day 30 of the illness was just about
baseline. Typhoid fever or enteric fever is a major health burden in developing countries. It is caused by Salmonella typhi and Salmonella
paratyphi. The faeco-oral route is the commonest mode of transmission and poor sanitation and reduced access to clean drinking water
increases its prevalence and incidence. The absence of any other underlying cause for the cholestasis in our patient, including alcohol,
medication, other viral causes of hepatitis as well as the prompt response to treatment suggests that the cholestatic hepatitis in this
instance was indeed due to typhoid fever. Our patient had certain similarities with the previously reported cases of typhoid cholestatic
hepatitis, including presentation and resolution of liver derangement with treatment. Although third generation Cephalosporins are not used
commonly in treating typhoid fever in most developed countries, its use in developing countries is highlighted in our case as well as in one
other case . It can spontaneously resolve after a subclinical course of event or proceed to cause mainly constitutional symptoms and even
complications such as bowel perforation which can lead to haemorrhage, peritonitis and even death. Rare complications whose incidences are
reduced by prompt antibiotic treatment include disseminated intravascular coagulation, hemophagocytic syndrome, pancreatitis, hepatic and
splenic abscesses and granulomas, endocarditis, pericarditis, myocarditis, orchitis, hepatitis, glomerulonephritis, pyelonephritis and
hemolytic uremic syndrome, severe pneumonia, arthritis, osteomyelitis, and parotitis . Hepatic involvement of typhoid fever was reported by
William Osler in 1899 . The pathophysiological mechanism by which Salmonella produces hepatic dysfunction, although not fully known as yet
is postulated to be either due to direct invasion or by endotoxaemia with immune mediated liver damage . The liver involvement can vary from
mild elevation of aminotransferases and alkaline to a levels indistinguishable from acute viral hepatitis . A predominantly cholestatic
picture however has been only documented in literature very rarely . The exact pathophysiology of cholestasis in preference to hepatitis
needs a deeper evaluation and tissue studies of patients with Typhoid fever with hepatitis and cholestasis are necessary. The treatment of
typhoid is governed by antibiotic sensitivity and local resistance patterns . There is an alarming rise of Salmonella typhi strains which
are considered Multi-Drug Resistant, particularly in the Indian Subcontinent . Stringent adherence to local microbiological protocols would
go a long way in preventing the worsening of this catastrophic phenomenon. Although rare, cholestatic hepatitis should be recognized as an
associated manifestation of typhoid fever, especially in typhoid endemic countries such as those in South Asia. Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief
of Annals of Clinical Microbiology and Antimicrobials. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. REC carried out the
literature search and drafted the manuscript; WBC did the critical revision for important intellectual content in the manuscript and given
the final approval of the version to be published; SC helped substantially in literature search and drafting the manuscript. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript The authors thank the departments of microbiology and biochemistry at the National Hospital of Sri
Lanka for providing help in diagnosing and managing the patient mentioned in the case report
