These authors suggest that laparoscopic heminephrectomy is a feasible option in the surgical management of diseases of the horseshoe kidney
and can be performed safely using a transperitoneal or retroperitoneal approach. Minimally invasive surgery has revolutionized surgery for
urologic disorders, and laparoscopic procedures have become widely available for several different ablative and reconstructive operations.
Laparoscopic heminephrectomy in patients with horseshoe kidney can be a technically challenging procedure due to aberrant vessels,
functional parenchyma in the isthmus, and abnormal location. We report the management of a case of symptomatic nonfunctioning left moiety of
a horseshoe kidney with emphasis on its surgical technique combined with a review of the literature. Laparoscopic heminephrectomy is a
feasible option in the surgical management of benign and malignant conditions of the horseshoe kidney and can be performed safely using a
transperitoneal or a retroperitoneal approach. It has been nearly 2 decades since the first description of a laparoscopic nephrectomy by
Clayman et al.1 Since then, laparoscopy has revolutionized the minimally invasive management of benign and malignant renal disease.
Congenital renal anomaly may pose a technical challenge during laparoscopic nephrectomy due to complex vascular anatomy. Horseshoe kidney,
the most common fusion anomaly, occurs in up to 0.25% of the general population. Although most horseshoe kidneys are asymptomatic, calculi,
pelvic ureteric junction obstruction and renal masses are most frequent findings that require surgery.2 Since the initial report of a
laparoscopic nephrectomy, few authors have advocated the laparoscopic approach for benign and malignant conditions associated with a
horseshoe kidney.3–25 We searched previous reports using the PUBMED database and the specific key words “horseshoe kidney,” “laparoscopy,”
“nephrectomy,” “heminephrectomy,” and “congenital kidney anomaly.” All articles identified in the English language were reviewed, and 2 non-
English reports were excluded.24–25 We describe our experience and a detailed review of the literature. A 32-year-old male presented
initially with a history of intermittent left loin pain. He was obese with a BMI of 39. He was advised to lose weight before surgery, but
because pain was affecting his work and mobility, he opted to have surgery without any delay. He smoked 10 cigarettes a day and drank 15
units of alcohol per week. His blood biochemistry including urea and electrolytes was satisfactory. An abdominal examination showed mild
tenderness over the left renal angle. An intravenous urogram (IVU) demonstrated a horseshoe kidney with poor excretion on the left side. He
underwent a retrograde ureterogram, and ureteroscopy was attempted. It was felt he had a possible stricture at the ureteropelvic junction. A
double-J stent was placed; however, it was removed 48 hours later due to stent symptoms. A CT scan showed a horseshoe kidney with a normal-
functioning right moiety and hydronephrotic left moiety with a very thin cortex and no evidence of any renal tract calculus (Figure 1).
Computed tomography demonstrates the large hydronephrotic left moiety (arrow) of the horseshoe kidney. Subsequently, the patient underwent a
MAG3 scan, which showed a nonfunctioning left moiety. The options of an open or laparoscopic nephrectomy were discussed, and the patient was
scheduled for a transperitoneal, laparoscopic nephrectomy. During pre-assessment, it was noted that he had symptoms suspicious of sleep
apnea syndrome. His Epworth sleepiness score26 was 16 (>10 is abnormal). He underwent a formal sleep study and was diagnosed with sleep
apnea syndrome. He was commenced on continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) ventilation at night. At surgery, the patient was placed in a
right lateral position, and 5 ports were placed. The camera port was placed lateral to the umbilicus followed by two 5-mm ports above and
below the camera port (∼5cm) along the lateral border of the rectus muscle. Two 12-mm ports were in the anterior axillary line. A 10-mm
(ENDO RETRACT™II, Auto Suture, Norwalk, CT). A 5-prong fan retractor was used to facilitate blunt dissection. The colon was mobilized, and
the upper pole of the kidney was dissected. Multiple vessels were clipped with a Hem-o-lock and divided. The upper pole was freed laterally
and posteriorly. Gonadal vessels were identified and traced upwards. The kidney was mobilized at the lower pole. The kidney was dissected
medially, and the upper part of the isthmus was identified. The ureter was identified and divided after clipping. Gonadals were identified
and divided after clipping. The upper and lower poles of the kidney were lifted to visualize the isthmus. The isthmus was isolated and
clipped with a 15-mm Hem-o-lok (and was divided with a Harmonic scalpel (Figure 2). A PDS Endoloop was also tied around the isthmus. The
kidney was freed, bagged, and removed through the extended lower port site. A drain was placed and was removed after 24 hours. The total
operating time was 180 minutes, and estimated blood loss was 200mL. The patient spent 1 night in the intensive care unit due to his sleep
apnea. He subsequently recovered well and was discharged home on postoperative day 4. The isthmus (arrow) of the horseshoe kidney is clipped
with a 15-mmHem-o-lok and transacted with a Harmonic scalpel. The histopathology revealed chronic pyelonephritis most likely attributable to
pelviureteric junction obstruction. He was symptom free at discharge from the clinic 9 months after surgery with no evidence of port-site
hernia. The horseshoe kidney is probably the most common of all renal fusion anomalies. In this anomaly, 2 distinct renal units lie
vertically on either side of the midline and are connected at their respective lower poles by a bulky parenchymatous or fibrous isthmus that
crosses the midplane of the body. Generally, the isthmus is bulky and consists of parenchymatous tissue with its own blood supply.27 The
isthmus is located adjacent to the L3 or L4 vertebra just below the origin of the inferior mesenteric artery from the aorta. As a result,
the horseshoe kidneys tend to be somewhat lower than normal in the retroperitoneum. The isthmus most often lies anterior to the aorta and
vena cava but very rarely may pass between the inferior vena cava and the aorta or even behind both great vessels.28,29 Often, one-third of
all patients with a horseshoe kidney are asymptomatic, and the anomaly gets noticed incidentally on radiologic examination. The most common
associated finding in horseshoe kidney is ureteropelvic junction obstruction, which occurs in up to 35% of cases and is often the cause of
problems. Kidney stones develop in 20% to 60% of patients and may be associated with obstruction and recurrent infections. Urinary stasis
and urolithiasis also predispose the horseshoe kidney to infection, which occurs in 27% to 41% of patients. The frequency of certain
neoplasms is higher. Renal cell cancer, the most common, accounts for 45% of all tumors. The risk of Wilms’ tumor is 2-fold in a horseshoe
kidney and accounts for 28% of malignant lesions. Transitional cell cancer and sarcoma account for 20% and 7% of tumors, respectively.30
Various authors have demonstrated that a laparoscopic approach to urologic disease of the horseshoe kidney is an effective and equivalent
minimally invasive alternative to traditional open surgery. Depending on the surgeon's expertise, different approaches have been used.2–25
These include transperitoneal, retroperitoneal, and hand-assisted. Anatomic variations like lower renal location, aberrant vessels, and the
isthmus necessitate special consideration during laparoscopic surgery. There is a wide variation in horseshoe kidney vascular supply.2 In
30% of the cases, it consists of one renal artery for each kidney,31 but the blood supply may be atypical, with 1 to 8 renal arteries
supplying one or both kidneys.32 The isthmus and adjacent parenchymal masses may receive a branch from each main renal artery, or they may
have their own arterial supply originating from the aorta (65%) either above or below the level of the isthmus.2 Not infrequently, this area
is supplied by branches from the inferior mesenteric artery, the common or external iliac arteries, or the sacral arteries.33 Appropriate
imaging is crucial in presurgical planning to identify the renal vasculature and orientation of the collecting system. An aberrant vascular
supply is one of the major anatomic features in horseshoe kidneys; thus, the vascular supply cannot be easily predicted during intervention.
Therefore, angiography is indispensable in the preoperative planning, especially in patients with renal cancer. A MEDLINE search revealed 23
(27 patients) case reports of nephrectomy for horseshoe kidney with laparoscopy, published between 1995 and 2010. Two of these reports
published in French and Japanese were excluded. Patient data are summarized in Table 1. Flank pain was the most common presentation, and 4
patients had renal mass. Most authors used computerized tomography to assess vascular anatomy. Summary of Patients Demographics and
Treatment Data NR=not reported, USS=ultrasound, CT=computed tomography, IVU=intravenous urography. A transperitoneal approach was used in
the majority (15) of cases, while a retroperitoneal route was used in 5 cases, and 6 patients were treated with a hand-assisted approach.
This procedure can be technically demanding due to variable vasculature and abnormal anatomy; therefore, a few simple steps may facilitate a
good outcome. First, identification of the ureter is important as is insertion of a double J stent or ureteric catheter. Second, to start
dissection of the upper pole, it is helpful to first identify the vasculature. In a horseshoe kidney, most of the vessels are above the
isthmus. Next, we recommend releasing the lower pole; this maneuver will allow lifting the kidney thereby isolating the isthmus very
clearly. At this stage, it is critical to look for a direct blood supply to the isthmus. The isthmus can be divided in a variety of ways
(Table 2), but in our case a 15-mm Hem-o-lok clip was used followed by a PDS Endoloop. In our case, no major problems were encountered
during dissection. Summary of Treatment Data. aNR=not reported. Laparoscopic nephrectomy seems technically feasible, safe, and reliable for
benign and malignant diseases in a horseshoe kidney. Anatomic variations necessitate proper imaging and special consideration for a
successful outcome.
