This study aimed to describe an unusual case of metachronous isolated inguinal lymph nodes metastasis from sigmoid carcinoma. A 62-year-old
man was referred to our department because of an obstructing sigmoid carcinoma. Colonoscopy showed the obstructing lesion at 30 cm from the
anal verge and abdominal CT revealed a sigmoid lesion infiltrating the left lateral abdominal wall. The patient underwent a colonic
resection extended to the abdominal wall. Histology showed an adenocarcinoma of the colon infiltrating the abdominal wall with iuxtacolic
nodal involvement. Thirty three months after surgery abdominal CT and PET scan revealed a metastatic left inguinal lymph node involvement.
The metastatic lymph node was found strictly adherent to the left iliac-femoral artery and encompassing the origin of the left inferior
epigastric artery. Histology showed a metachronous nodal metastasis from colonic adenocarcinoma. Despite metastastic involvement of inguinal
lymph node from rectal cancer is a rare but well known clinical entity, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of inguinal
metastasis from a carcinoma of the left colon. Literature review shows only three other similar reported cases: two cases of inguinal
metastasis secondary to adenocarcinoma of the cecum and one case of axillary metastasis from left colonic carcinoma. A metastatic pathway
through superficial abdominal wall lymphatic vessels could be possible through the route along the left inferior epigastric artery. The
solitary inguinal nodal involvement from rectal carcinoma could have a more favorable prognosis. In the case of nodal metastasis to the body
surface lymph nodes from colonic carcinoma, following the small number of such cases reported in the literature, no definitive conclusions
can be drawn. Inguinal lymph nodes metastasis from colorectal adenocarcinoma is considered as an uncommon clinical occurrence . We report
the case of a metachronous isolated inguinal lymph node metastasis from an adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first report of inguinal metastasis arising from a carcinoma of the left colon. In December 2007, a 62-year-old
Caucasian man was referred to our surgical department because of an obstructing sigmoid carcinoma. Otherwise, his previous medical history
was unremarkable. On examination the abdomen was soft, but distended. Laboratory data on admission were as follows: white blood cell count
82 × 109/L; haemoglobin 11.0 g/dL; and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) 10.10 μg/L (normal range <2.50 μg/L). Colonoscopy showed the
obstructing lesion located at 30 cm from the anal verge and the enhanced abdominal CT revealed a locally advanced obstructing sigmoid lesion
infiltrating the left lateral abdominal wall (Figure 1a, thin red arrow). The patient underwent a colonic resection extended to the
infiltrated abdominal wall. Postoperative hospital stay was uneventful. Histology showed an adenocarcinoma of the colon infiltrating the
abdominal wall with iuxtacolic lymph node involvement (pT4N1M0). Afterward, the patient was treated with adjuvant chemotherapy which was
performed using the FOLFOX regimen (Folinic acid: leucovorin; 5-fluorouracil: 5-FU; oxaliplatin) for 12 cycles over the 6 months after the
operation. The patient entered a scheduled clinical and instrumental follow up program which included: regular physical examinations and CEA
tests every 3 months, colonoscopy after 6 months and chest/abdominal/pelvic CT on yearly basis. The abdominal CT at 24 months showed no
recurrence and CEA level was within normal range. Thirty three months after the operation, CEA level was 6.86 μg/L. Abdominal CT and
positron emission tomography (PET) revealed a metastatic left inguinal lymph node involvement (Figure 1b-c, thick red arrow). The patient
noticed a mild tenderness in the left inguinal region without swelling. On admission, physical examination showed an induration with mild
tenderness in the left inguinal region but there was no clinical evidence of a mass as the metastatic lymph node was deeply located under
the left inguinal ligament. Physical examination and diagnostic work up excluded any concurrent malignancies both in the perineal region and
in the scrotum. After the diagnosis of metachronous inguinal lymph node metastasis was made, a colonoscopy was performed showing normal
findings in the colon and at the anastomotic site which was found at 13 cm from the anal verge. The patient was scheduled for an inguinal
lymphadenectomy. The metastatic lymph node of 4.5 cm in diameter was found under the left inguinal ligament strictly adherent to the iliac-
femoral artery, encompassing the origin of the left inferior epigastric artery. Postoperative hospital stay was uneventful.
Histopathological findings were consistent with the diagnosis of metachronous nodal metastasis from colonic adenocarcinoma (Figure 1d, HE, ×
40). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the positive expression of cytokeratin 20 (CK20+) and the absence of cytokeratin 7 (CK7-)
substantiating its gastrointestinal origin (Figure 1d, anti-CK20 monoclonal antibody staining, × 100). After recovery the patient was once
more subjected to adjuvant chemotherapy. Inguinal lymph node recurrence was regarded as systemic disease by the oncologists and the FOLFIRI
regimen (Folinic acid: leucovirin; 5-fluorouracil: 5-FU; irinotecan) was started. This cycle was repeated every two weeks for 6 months.
Cetuximab, a monoclonal antibody to epidermal growth factor receptor, was added to FOLFIRI. No major side effects of chemotherapy were
observed and eight months after lymph node removal the patient is surviving apparently disease free. CT-scan showing the obstructing sigmoid
carcinoma infiltrating the left lateral abdominal wall (a, thin red arrow), with a 4.5 cm metachronous left inguinal lymph node metastasis
at PET-scan (b) and CT-scan (c, thick red arrow), which was histologically consistent with inguinal nodal metastasis from colonic carcinoma
(HE, x 40) and positive expression of cytokeratin 20 at immunohistochemistry (anti-CK20 monoclonal antibody staining, x 100), (d).
Metastastic involvement of inguinal lymph node from rectal cancer is a rare but well known clinical entity . However, detecting inguinal
metastasis from a colonic carcinoma is extremely uncommon even in patients with advanced cancer stage. We have described the first reported
case in which an isolated inguinal lymph node metastasis originated from an adenocarcinoma of the sigmoid colon infiltrating the abdominal
wall. The most interesting aspect of the present case is the atypical lymphatic route the sigmoid carcinoma followed to metastasize to the
inguinal lymph nodes. The usual pattern of regional lymph nodes metastasis in colorectal carcinoma follows the vascular distribution in the
mesocolon. Tumors originating from the cecum spread to the ileocolic nodes, whereas tumors of the ascending and the proximal transverse
colon drain in lymph nodes of the right colic and middle colic arteries reaching the superior mesenteric artery lymph nodes. Tumors
originating from the descending colon spread to the left colic artery nodes, whereas those of the sigmoid colon reach the sigmoid arteries
nodes ending in the inferior mesenteric artery lymph nodes. Both the inferior and the superior mesenteric arteries nodes belong to the pre-
aortic nodes. Tumors in the rectum can spread by two different routes. The lymphatic drainage of tumors of the upper rectum reaches the
inferior mesenteric artery lymph nodes via the superior rectal arteries. Metastases of tumors originating from the lower rectum reach the
internal iliac nodes by following the pathway of the middle and the inferior rectal arteries and then the common iliac and the para-aortic
nodes. The lymphatic drainage of all colorectal tumors ends in the cisterna chyli that drains into the thoracic duct. Tumors of the anal
region spread to the superficial inguinal lymph nodes ascending along the femoral vessels to the deep inguinal nodes and along the iliac
vessels to the para-aortic nodes . In the present case, as the sigmoid carcinoma invaded the abdominal wall, the most likely hypothesis is
that the tumor metastasized to the deep inguinal lymph nodes through a lymphatic pathway along the left inferior epigastric artery being its
origin encompassed by the tumor . Moreover, after radical surgery for carcinoma of the rectum with interruption of the normal pathway of
lymphatic drainage, recurrent disease may find an alternative retrograde route to the superficial and deep inguinal nodes Literature review
shows only three other similar reported cases of colonic carcinoma with solitary nodal metastasis to the body surface lymph nodes: one case
of metastatic inguinal lymphadenopathy secondary to adenocarcinoma of the cecum ; another case of isolated right external iliac lymph node
recurrence from a primary cecum carcinoma and the axillary localization of nodal metastasis from left colonic carcinoma In the case of
metachronous isolated right external iliac lymph node recurrence from cecum carcinoma reported by Uehara et al., tumor invasion into the
abdominal wall was suspected macroscopically at the time of the first operation. In this case the authors supposed a lymphatic pathway along
the right inferior epigastric artery to explain this unusual metastatic occurrence . A similar lymphatic pathway could be possible in the
case reported by Hakeem et al. of a synchronous contralateral inguinal lymph nodes metastasis from an adenocarcinoma of the cecum with
infiltration into the adjoining peritoneal fat . In the case of left metachronous axillary lymph node metastasis from an obstructing and
invasive carcinoma of the left colon, the authors hypostasized a metastatic lane through superficial abdominal lymphatic vessels, the
periumbilical ones, then to the parasternal lymph nodes and then to the internal mammary nodes, finally reaching the axillary ones .
Lymphadenectomy followed by chemotherapy seems to be the preferred treatment of isolated inguinal metastasis from rectal carcinoma, and the
solitary nodal involvement could have a more favourable prognosis . However, in the case of nodal metastasis to the body surface lymph nodes
arising from colonic carcinoma, following the small number of such cases reported in the literature, no definitive conclusions can be drawn.
CEA: carcinoembryonic antigen; CK: cytokeratin; CT: computer tomography; FOLFOX: Folinic acid; 5-fluorouracil; oxaliplatin; FOLFIRI: Folinic
acid; 5-fluorouracil; irinotecan; 5-FU: 5-fluorouracil; HE: hematoxylin & eosin; PET: positron emission tomography. Written informed consent
was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available
for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal The authors declare that they have no competing interests. AP: conception and study design
and manuscript writing and drafting the article and revising for intellectual content. DD and IR: acquisition of data and manuscript writing
and revising for intellectual content. GP: revising the manuscript for intellectual content and supportive work. AU: revising the manuscript
for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by a grant - quota ex 60% -
from the University of Cagliari, Italy
