Lymph node metastasis from cutaneous squamous cell carcinoma is uncommon. The popliteal fossa is rarely involved with metastasis. Popliteal
lymph node dissection is uncommonly performed and not frequently discussed in the literature. We present a case of squamous cell carcinoma
of the heel with popliteal and inguinal metastasis. This is followed by a description of the relevant anatomy of the popliteal fossa and the
technique of popliteal lymphadenectomy. Regional lymph node (LN) metastasis is an important prognostic factor for skin cancers like
melanomas and squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) . The usual nodal basins involved are the cervical, axillary and inguinal regions. However,
metastasis can involve other areas, like the epitrochlear and popliteal regions. The use of preoperative lymphoscintigrapy (LS) has allowed
the detection of interval or in-transit LN, which can also be involved with metastatic disease . Skin cancers of the lower limb below the
knee mainly metastasise to the groin. Metastasis to the popliteal LN is much less common. In melanoma, the incidence of popliteal metastasis
ranges from 0.3% to 7% . For SCC the incidence is not known, but appears to be less than these figures. Lymph nodes in this region should be
managed as those in any other nodal basin. They should be looked for, and if involved, they should be resected. Due to the fact that
popliteal node metastasis is uncommon and that many surgeons lack the experience in popliteal dissection, this issue is infrequently
discussed in the literature. The wider adoption of sentinel lymph node (SLN) biopsy for skin cancer is causing more surgeons to deal with LN
in this region. We present a case of SCC with popliteal LN metastasis. This is followed by a review of the relevant anatomy and the surgical
technique of popliteal lymphadenectomy. In 2008, a 41-year-old lady developed an ulcer on her left heel. This was excised by a general
surgeon at another hospital. Pathological examination revealed a 3.8 cm, moderately differentiated SCC; the margins were involved. No
further treatment was offered to the patient. A year later, in June 2009, the tumor recurred and was excised again; the margins were
negative this time. Two months later she was referred to our center for further management. On examination she had a small non-healing ulcer
on the left heel. There were palpable LN in the popliteal and inguinal regions of the same limb. An MRI was done for the popliteal and
inguinal regions (Figure 1). It showed multiple inguinal LN and a 3-cm popliteal mass partially encasing the popliteal artery. A CT scan of
the chest and liver did not reveal any distant metastasis. A biopsy was taken from the heel ulcer, and it confirmed the presence of residual
SCC. An MRI showing the popliteal metastasis. A wide local excision of the tumor as well as popliteal and groin dissections were performed.
The ulcer was excised with a wide margin including part of the calcaneus. The resulting defect was covered with a flap. The patient
underwent popliteal dissection in the prone position. The popliteal mass and LN were removed together with the adherent segment of the
popliteal artery (Figure 2). A reconstruction was then undertaken with an autologous saphenous vein graft. The groin dissection was
performed with the patient in supine position and it included the femoral, iliac and obturator LNs. The patient recovered well, and aside
from a small seroma in the groin, she had no complications. The histopathologic examination revealed an ulcerated, moderately differentiated
squamous cell carcinoma showing moderate atypia, few mitotic figures and keratin pearls (Figure 3). The tumor was completely excised with
negative margins. There were 3 involved popliteal LNs, one of them completely replaced by tumor, and 13 involved inguinal LNs out of the 32
removed. The tumor in the LN showed similar morphology to the primary tumor (Figure 4). Because of the extensive lymphatic involvement, the
patient was offered radiotherapy to the region. As expected, she developed significant lymphoedema, but remained ambulatory without
assistance when she was last seen 11 months after the operation. This picture shows the dissected popliteal fossa. The popliteal artery is
excised together with the tumor mass. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) slide showing the primary tumor (see text). H&E slide showing a tumor
deposit in a LN (see text). The popliteal fossa is a diamond-shaped area bound superiorly by the heads of both the Biceps Femoris and
Semimembranosus muscles and inferiorly by the 2 heads of Gastrocnemius muscle (Figure 5). This space is covered by the tough popliteal
fascia and contains the popliteal LNs in addition to the popliteal neurovascular bundle. The neurovascular structures pass through the fossa
in the middle. The LNs are contained in the fatty tissue that lies along the vessels. For adequate LN dissection, all of the fatty content
should be removed. There is usually 1 LN in the subcutaneous tissue, usually in relation to the site where the small saphenous vein crosses
the fascia. Making extra-fascial skin flaps ensures excision of this LN. The popliteal LNs are usually 2 to 7 in number . Anatomy of the
left popliteal fossa. In general there are 2 steps to popliteal LN dissection. The first step is adequate exposure of the diamond shaped
fossa. This should include careful identification and preservation of the neurovascular structures. Once that is done, dissection of the fat
pad should be performed thoroughly. The patient is positioned prone with the knees slightly flexed on a pillow. The posterior approach
offers the best exposure for this procedure . The skin is incised in an S-shaped fashion, with the transverse limb over the posterior knee
crease (Figure 6). The cranial extension is made laterally and the caudal extension medially. It is imperative that the incision does not
cross the transverse crease; doing so might lead to some contracture of the knee joint, especially if the patient is to receive
postoperative radiotherapy to the region. This incision can be modified in some cases to incorporate a preceding scar of the SLN biopsy
procedure; that's why the incision for a SLN biopsy should be carefully planned. Skin flaps are dissected down to the popliteal fascia.
During dissection of the lower part of the flaps 2 structures are found: the small saphenous vein and the medial Sural nerve. The vein is
usually ligated and divided. Preservation, however, is sometimes possible. In some cases the vein will not be encountered at this stage
because it crosses the fascia at a lower level. The medial Sural nerve, which arises from the Tibial nerve, usually passes behind the vein
and it should be preserved if possible. In some cases this is not possible, and this results in an area of cutaneous anesthesia on the
lateral aspect of the foot and ankle. Incision for popliteal lymph node dissection. Subsequently, the popliteal fossa is entered by opening
the popliteal fascia vertically in the midline. The first structure to appear is the Tibial nerve, which crosses vertically and disappears
between the 2 heads of Gastrocnemius. Lateral to it is the Peroneal nerve, which courses laterally along the biceps femoris tendon and then
turns obliquely towards the fibula. Both nerves should be retracted laterally with vessel loops to allow adequate and safe exposure of the
vessels and the LNs. Dissection deep to the Tibial nerve will reveal the popliteal vein. The popliteal artery passes deep and slightly
medial to the vein. It is the deepest structure in the popliteal fossa and lies on the femur and capsule of the knee joint. The LNs are
contained within the fatty tissue that is found superficial, alongside and deep to the popliteal vessels. LN dissection should include,
therefore, all the fatty tissue in the popliteal fossa till reaching the posterior aspect of the knee joint. It should be noted that the
popliteal fossa is wider in the deeper part than in the superficial part. Adequate retraction of the Gastrocnemius muscle heads, therefore,
is essential to ensure adequate exposure and dissection of all the LNs. After securing hemostasis, the fascia is approximated and the wound
is closed over a negative suction drain. A knee splint or back slab is preferably applied at this stage and left in for the first few
postoperative days. Postoperative Lymphoedema is expected in some patients . The incidence of lymphoedema is expected to increase
dramatically with the addition of inguinal dissection and or radiotherapy. We describe an unusual case. The incidence of LN metastasis from
SCC is relatively uncommon. It ranges from 0.5% to 16% , with most series reporting a rate of < 5% . Usually this occurs in tumors with poor
prognostic factors such as larger size, poor differentiation, presence of perineural invasion or recurrent tumors. Popliteal metastasis is
quite rare. In a series of 1, 118 patients, with localized squamous cell carcinoma of the extremity, treated at M.D. Anderson Hospital and
Tumor Institute in Houston, Texas, only 16 patients (1.4%) developed recurrence . Of the 106 treated patients who had regional or distant
metastasis, only 2 patients had popliteal metastasis, and both had inguinal metastasis as well. Although SLN biopsy is mainly indicated for
melanomas, it is gaining wider application in the management of other skin tumors, like SCC . Still, the indications for SLN biopsy in SCC
are not clear. Its' use in lower extremity tumors will allow the detection of more patients with popliteal LN metastasis, many of those will
probably be micrometastases. The procedure of popliteal lymphadenectomy was first described by Karakousis in 1980. Most later descriptions
are based on it. Knowledge of the relevant anatomy and the surgical technique of popliteal LN dissection is important to avoid injury to
important structures and to allow adequate LN dissection. Popliteal metastasis from skin SCC is quite uncommon. It usually occurs in
patients with advanced or recurrent tumors. Appropriate management is not clear, but surgical dissection, in the absence of distant
metastasis, is indicated since there is no known effective adjuvant treatment for skin SCC. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. FA has reviewed and written part of the case
report. SH arranged and provided the artwork and picture. BM conceived of the study and wrote the majority of the paper. All were involved
in the design and review of the paper and all read and approved the final manuscript.
