In Parkinson’s disease (PD), nonmotor symptoms manifest before motor symptoms. In this report, we present a remarkable case of a
semiprofessional painter with PD whose painting style dramatically changed from abstract painting to realism before he developed motor,
psychiatric, and autonomic nerve disorders. This case suggests that certain types of visual creativity may be impaired in the very early,
presymptomatic stages of PD. Paintings represent the mindset, mood, skills, and preoccupations of a painter. Production of a novel,
motivated, or useful material defines creativity, which is one of the higher, specific, human brain functions. Although creativity can be
expressed in virtually any domain, art, in particular, illustrates how creativity may be modulated by normal or pathological brain
functions. The effects of neurodegenerative diseases on artistic expression may vary depending on the extent of cognitive, behavioral, and
motor dysfunction. Neurodegenerative disorder patients typically become artistically unskilled during disease progression. In contrast, some
patients may achieve new artistic expressions. In patients with frontotemporal dementia, new or improved creativity emerges in the context
of degeneration of language areas . In Alzheimer disease with corticobasal degeneration , increasing abstraction with no deliberate
stylistic effort has been associated with global cognitive impairment and visuospatial deficits. The majority of Parkinson’s disease (PD)
patients cannot sketch due to diminished motor skills. Changes in the artistic expression of PD patients during the course of the illness
have been previously reported [1, 6]. However, to our knowledge, there are no reports of neurodegenerative disease patients exhibiting
drastic changes in their artistic skills before the onset of other symptoms. Here, we present our observations of a semiprofessional painter
with PD whose style changed dramatically from abstract to realism before the appearance of classic parkinsonian symptoms such as movement,
psychiatric, and autonomic nerve disorders. Thus, this case represents alterations in the visual creativity occurring in the early
presymptomatic stages of PD. Our patient was a 68-year-old, right-handed, semiprofessional painter with a 7-year history of PD. In 2005,
tremor and rigidity of the left arm appeared as his initial motor symptoms without psychiatric, autonomic, and sleep disorders. He started
taking levodopa (300 mg/day). His parkinsonian symptoms gradually worsened, but he continued painting. In 2009, he started taking levodopa
(600 mg/day), pramipexol (3 mg/day), and entacapone (400 mg/day). He was alert, oriented, and did not show symptoms of dementia or agnosia.
He scored 30/30 in the Mini-Mental State Examination and 0 in the Hamilton Depression Rating Score. Visuospatial system assessments
including a geometric drawing task, judgement of visual and horizontal, and the Benton Visual Retention Test were normal. His speech was
fluent and comprehension good. He had a mask-like face and exhibited resting tremor of the left upper and lower limbs. He showed bilateral
bradykinesia, most prominent in the left upper limb, and his writing was micrographic and tremorous. He had cogwheel rigidity of both the
upper limbs and could rise from a chair with some difficulty. He accomplished activities of daily living slowly with his wife’s assistance.
He was judged as having Hoehn and Yahr stage 3 PD. His tremor disappeared when he painted. His brain magnetic resonance imaging and
electroencephalography scans were normal in 2005 and 2009. His (99 m) Tc-ethylcysteinate dimer brain perfusion single-photon emission
tomography (SPECT) results in 2006 were analyzed with a qualitative analysis program, easy Z score imaging system (eZIS), and an automated
quantitative analysis program, 3DSRT. eZIS demonstrated severe occipital hypoperfusion. Our patient began to paint full-scale paintings at
20 years of age. He frequently exhibited his abstract paintings at Japanese art shows (Fig. 1a–f). Beginning in 2000, he gradually found it
difficult to paint abstracts as it was difficult for him to deconstruct a realistic image and reconstruct it into an abstract image.
Instead, he modified old drafts and exhibited them as original new works. In 2004, 1 year before the onset of PD-related movement disorders,
he was unable to paint abstracts. His painting style gradually transformed into realism. Meanwhile, he felt his artistic creativity diminish
to the point where he could only use half of his imagination (Fig. 1g, h) and he was not satisfied with those. He, however, continued to
paint realistically (see Fig. 1i–n). He maintained the quality of realistic paintings until forced to cease painting in September 2009 due
to worsening right-hand movement. Currently, he remains interested in art and indulges in photography.Fig. 1a–f Abstract paintings from
1994–2004; date of completion. g and h Semi-abstract paintings from 2004–2005. i Radish; j horse mackerel; k sweet potato; l lily; m
arrowhead; and n pacific saury are realist paintings from 2005–2009 a–f Abstract paintings from 1994–2004; date of completion. g and h Semi-
abstract paintings from 2004–2005. i Radish; j horse mackerel; k sweet potato; l lily; m arrowhead; and n pacific saury are realist
paintings from 2005–2009 We present the first report showing changes in artistic expression—from abstract painting to realism—as an initial
symptom in a PD patient, apparently caused by the lack of ability to reconstruct visual images. Premotor symptoms are involved in olfactory
deficit, rapid eye movement behavior disorder, excessive daytime somnolence, depression, constipation, and erectile dysfunction . Hence,
this case is remarkable as it involves higher visual creativity before the onset of motor symptoms. The majority of PD patients experience
diminished motor skills and gradually lose their ability to draw pictures. Chatterjee et al. described a PD patient who demonstrated
remarkable creativity and productivity well into the disease course. Kulisevsky described an amateur artist whose painting style, talent,
and drive changed notably in association with dopaminergic treatment . They argue that these cases illustrate two separate phenomena
associated with long-term dopaminergic replacement in PD: (1) clinical events linked to plastic changes in frontolimbic basal ganglia
circuits and (2) stimulation with long-acting drugs constraining the already narrow range of adequate dopaminergic stimulation that is
necessary for optimal function of the neural systems related to the pursuit of reward. The changes in our patient’s artistic ability
occurred before the initiation of dopamine replacement therapy and are unlikely to have been its side effects. Certainly, dopamine
replacement therapy did not cure his artistic creativity. Recently, there has been an increasing recognition of PD features unrelated to
nigrostriatal dopamine deficiency. Increasing evidence suggests that the first neurons affected in PD are nondopaminergic and that SNc may
become involved only after the disease is well established in other regions of the nervous system . Therefore, affected nondopaminergic
neurons first disturbed his ability to reconstruct and deconstruct an image, but the exact brain lesion associated with the limitation in
visual creativity reported in the present study is unknown. Skillful creation of abstract paintings requires advanced brain functions. Our
patient had difficulty deconstructing and reconstructing objects into an abstract form. This dysfunction may have been overlooked had the
patient not been an abstract painter. However, regardless of the mechanism, this case represents a remarkable example of the involvement of
high-level visual creativity before the onset of parkinsonian symptoms such as movement, psychiatric, and autonomic nerve disorders. None.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
