Two cases of Plasmodium knowlesi infection in humans were identified in Cambodia by 3 molecular detection assays and sequencing. This
finding confirms the widespread distribution of P. knowlesi malaria in humans in Southeast Asia. Further wide-scale studies are required to
assess the public health relevance of this zoonotic malaria parasite. In Cambodia, malaria ranks among the leading causes of illness and
death. Mostly affecting the ≈3 million persons (23% of Cambodia’s population) who live near forested areas, malaria remains an occupational
disease in specific high-risk groups, such as forestry workers and migrant populations who have come into forested areas. However, for the
past decade, the number of reported malaria cases has generally decreased but in a sawtooth pattern of periodic increases (1). Four of the 5
Plasmodium species known to cause malaria in humans have already been described in Cambodia (2,3). P. falciparum remains the most frequent
cause of malaria (83,777 cases in 2009, prevalence of 70%) (1). However, distributions of Plasmodium species are changing, with a
particularly substantial increase of P. vivax malaria cases, from 4,105 (8%) cases in 2000 to 6,250 (25%) in 2009. In several areas of low
transmission, the proportion of P. vivax infections has increased up to 50% (2). This trend is probably related to various effective control
strategies implemented in Cambodia against P. falciparum malaria. No studies in humans (3) and monkeys in Cambodia have identified the
simian malaria parasite, P. knowlesi, which is causing human disease in some other countries in Southeast Asia (4). P. knowlesi parasites
were not detected in blood samples collected during 2004–2007 for 138 monkeys (102 Macaca fascicularis monkeys; 13 M. leonina monkeys; 20
Hyobates pileatus monkeys; 2 Presbytis cristata monkeys; and 1 Pongo pygmaeus monkey) by using PCR (cytb and cox1 genes) (L. Duval, unpub.
data). Because these animals were confiscated by Wildlife Alliance rescue patrols from illegal traders, the locations where they were
trapped in Cambodia are unknown. We undertook a cross-sectional prospective study in 3 sites in Cambodia (Figure, panel A) (5). The main
objective of this study was to develop evidence to guide the management of malaria parasite–negative persons with acute febrile illness and
to determine whether such persons were infected with P. knowlesi. A) The 3 sites involved in the epidemiologic study of Plasmodium knowlesi
malaria, Cambodia, 2007–2010. B) Villages in Pailin Province in which the 2 P. knowlesi malaria case-patients lived. C) Thin blood film
slide of 1 PCR-confirmed P. knowlesi single infection (case C2611). Original magnification ×1,000. We enrolled all patients >7 years of age
with acute (<8 days) febrile illness in selected outpatient clinics, where they had been tested for malaria by using rapid diagnostic test
(CareStart, Access Bio Inc, Somerset, NJ, USA). A subset of nonfebrile patients were used as controls; patients in a critical clinical
condition were excluded. After we obtained informed consent, each patient’s history was taken, a physical examination was conducted, and
blood and throat swab samples were collected. The defined test battery, including the following pathogens, was performed by using a
PCR/sequencing approach: Plasmodium spp., Leptospira spp., Rickettsia spp. (including Orientia tsutsugamushi), dengue viruses, Japanese
encephalitis virus, and influenza viruses. HIV infection and tuberculosis were not evaluated. DNA and RNA from the erythrocyte pellet or
throat swab were extracted by using the QIAamp kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Malaria
parasites were detected by using a Plasmodium spp.–specific nested PCR based on the cytb gene followed by sequencing (6). During December
2007–December 2010, a total of 1,475 patients were enrolled (621 in Soun Kouma; 650 in Ou Chra, Pailin Province; and 204 in Snoul, Kratié
Province), comprising 1,193 febrile and 282 nonfebrile persons. For 564 (38.2%) patients, no pathogens were detected. A total of 754
patients (51.1%; 676 cases, 78 controls) were infected with malaria parasites, and the distribution of Plasmodium spp. was as follows: P.
vivax, 51.6%; P. falciparum, 40.6%; P. vivax/P. falciparum, 7.4%; P. knowlesi, 0.3%; and P. ovale, 0.1%. We detected P. knowlesi infections
in 2 patients from Ou Chra health center in Pailin Province (Figure, panel B). The first patient was a 41-year-old man from Borhuytbong
village. He came in April 2010 to the health center with fever (38.5°C), chills, and headache. Rapid diagnostic test and microscopy were
negative for malaria; PCR/sequencing was positive for P. knowlesi. No other pathogen was found. The patient was originally from Thailand and
reported that he had not returned to Thailand since getting married in Cambodia in 1989. He reported self-treatment with mefloquine (Lariam
[Roche, Basel, Switzerland]) and was cured in 3 days. He further added that he used to hunt and spent most of his time in forests around
Pailin, where long-tailed macaques, the natural hosts of P. knowlesi (7), are usually found. The second patient was a 40-year-old Khmer man
from Phnomdambang village. He came in September 2010 to the health center because of chills and headache. No fever (36°C) was detected by
the medical staff, but the patient reported a history of fever and had self-treated with acetaminophen. Results of rapid diagnostic test
were negative, but microscopy results were positive (33 parasites/µL) (Figure, panel C). PCR amplification followed by sequencing confirmed
P. knowlesi infection. No other pathogen was found. The patient reported having lived in this same village since 1995, and he frequently
went to the forests around Pailin for hunting and collecting valued wood. Both patients’ P. knowlesi infections were confirmed by additional
PCR amplification and sequencing of the ldh, tufA, and cox genes (8) at the Genomic Platform, Institut Pasteur, Paris, France. Blood spots
on filter paper were also sent blinded to the Malaria Research Centre, Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, University Malaysia,
Sarawak, Malaysia, where they were identified as P. knowlesi single infections by real-time PCR (9) and by nested PCR with the primers Pmk8
and Pmkr9 (10) and PkF1140 and PkR1550 (11). The nucleotide sequence determined in this study has been deposited in the GenBank database and
assigned accession nos. JF419317–JF419323. Our findings confirm that P. knowlesi infections occur in humans in Cambodia, thereby increasing
the number of countries in Southeast Asia with cases in humans (10). However, further wide-scale studies are required to assess the
prevalence and distribution of P. knowlesi malaria cases in humans and monkeys. Such studies would enable an assessment of the public health
relevance of this zoonotic malaria parasite and characterization of P. knowlesi malaria epidemiology in this region. They would be
particularly useful in determining whether this simian species has been imported from neighboring countries by humans or whether P. knowlesi
parasites are already circulating and are transmitted from monkey reservoir hosts to humans. Moreover, to address this issue, development of
new tools, such as specific serologic markers, is urgently needed, in addition to molecular biology methods. Suggested citation for this
article: Khim N, Siv S, Kim S, Mueller T, Fleischmann E, Singh B, et al. Plasmodium knowlesi infection in humans, Cambodia, 2007–2010. Emerg
Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Oct [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1710.110355 These authors contributed equally to
this article. We thank all the patients and their parents or guardians for participating in the study. We also thank all the health workers
at the health centers of Soun Kouma, Ou Chra, and Snoul and the staff of the Ministry of Health of Cambodia. We are grateful to Iveth J.
González, David Bell, Mark Perkins, Eva-Maria Christophel, Bayo Fatunmbi, Franz-Josef von Sonnenburg, Philippe Buchy, Bertrand Guillard,
Abdur Rashid, and Steven Bjorge for their assistance with this study. We thank the Wildlife Alliance for their support and for providing the
primate blood specimens. This work was supported by grants from World Health Organization Regional Office for the Western Pacific,
Foundation for Innovative New Diagnostics, and University of Munich. Dr Khim is an engineer and head of the molecular biology platform in
the Malaria Molecular Epidemiology Unit at Pasteur Institute of Cambodia. Her research interests include developing molecular tools for
improving the surveillance of resistance to antimalarial drugs in Cambodia.
