Cervical adenoid basal carcinoma (ABC) rarely can harbor associated malignancies like adenoid cystic carcinoma or squamous cell carcinoma
(SCC), which express markedly different prognosis from a pure ABC, making an appropriate biopsy essential to provide a clear diagnosis and
therapeutic plan. We report a 64-year-old asymptomatic lady with an abnormal cervical cytology, who underwent a conization to reveal an ABC
with overlying microinvasive SCC. Doubtful resection margins led us to perform radical hysterectomy with lymph node dissection. Subsequent
pathological examination showed a true invasive SCC co-existing with ABC, with invasion of the parametrium. Unlike the indolent course of
many pure ABC patients, the prognosis of 11 previously reported co-existing invasive SCC with ABC patients appears to depend on the SCC
component. Our case reiterates the importance of adequate biopsy with careful interpretation to cover the possibility of a co-existent
malignancy. Besides, it presents an argument in favor of radical surgery for the primary treatment of suspicious associated malignancy, and
supports adjuvant treatment according to the unfavorable extent of the co-existent invasive carcinoma. Adenoid basal carcinoma (ABC) is a
rare cervical malignancy accounting for less than 1% of all cervical cancers . This tumor closely resembles adenoid cystic carcinoma (ACC),
and in fact has been reported as the same entity in some early reports , till the first description by Baggish and Woodruff in 1966. The
indolent clinical course and an excellent prognosis unique to typical or pure ABC are well recognized. Most patients are asymptomatic,
without a detectable cervical mass and are successfully treated by a non-radical surgery with excellent results. In contrast, ACC and
basaloid squamous cell carcinoma (BSCC), which morphologically closely resemble ABC, have an aggressive clinical course often associated
with recurrence and metastasis . This makes accurate distinction between ABC and its morphological counterparts fairly important. The
association of ABC with other malignancies has been inconstantly reported . As the ABC rarely showed malignant behavior, the prognosis
appears to depend on the associated malignancy component which also decides the treatment protocol . Although the association of ABC with
other malignancies has been reported from time to time, there is paucity of data regarding the specific clinical course, the appropriate
diagnostic procedure and the recommended treatment approach. We report an uncommon association of an invasive squamous cell carcinoma (SCC)
with an ABC. The clinical and histological features with the specific immunostains for histogenetic studies are described. Simultaneously,
literatures for all reports of these rare co-existent malignancies are reviewed. A 64-year-old Korean female, presented with abnormal
cervical cytology screening compatible with "squamous cell carcinoma", no visible cervical lesion was noted on the pelvic examination and
the subsequent colposcopy. She has been menopause for 8 years ago and had no history of other gynecologic problem. She therefore underwent a
cone biopsy of the cervix with loop electrosurgical excisional procedure (LEEP), which revealed ABC associated with microinvasive SCC with
the tumors presented at endocervical margin. The remaining cervix was too small to do a repeat cone biopsy, so a pelvic magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI) was proposed to find out an occult malignancy. MRI revealed an enhancing mass (2.0 × 0.6 cm) involving posterior lip of the
cervix with a conclusion of cervical carcinoma (Figure 1). There is no evidence of distant metastasis or any suggestive metastatic lymph
node by a positron emission tomography-computed tomography (PET-CT). Clinically stage IB was suggested and following radical hysterectomy,
bilateral adnexectomy with pelvic and para-aortic lymph node dissection was undertaken uneventfully (Figure 2A). The pathologic diagnosis
was adenoid basal carcinoma co-existing with invasive squamous cell carcinoma. The majority of tumor was ABC component (about 85%) merged
with the minor areas of invasive SCC component (about 15%). There was no evidence of tumor in sections taken from 40 lymph nodes. The
removed vagina and all resection margins were clear. Due to deeply infiltration into the stroma and invasion through the right parametrium
mostly by the ABC component, post-operative cisplatin-containing chemoradiation was prescribed to limit the risk of recurrence. After that,
she was clinically monitored and stated as no evidence of disease for up to 6 months interval. T2-weighted pelvic magnetic resonance images
on the axial plane (A) and sagittal plane (B). T2-weighted pelvic magnetic resonance images on the axial plane (A) and sagittal plane (B).
Note the cervical mass-like lesion (infiltrative wall thickening with signal enhancement, 2.0 × 0.6 cm) at posterior portion of the uterine
cervix with likely posterior vaginal fornix involvement. (arrows point to cervical lesion) Radical hysterectomy. Radical hysterectomy. (A)
Whole fresh gross specimen (cervix was opened at 12 o' clock position). (B) The cervix, showing ragged avulsion status post conization, no
gross definite mass (x1.5 relatively magnified from Figure 2A). On pathological examination, the LEEP specimen contained no gross definite
lesion. Microscopically, there was diffuse infiltration of small basaloid nests and overlying cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) grade
3. The CIN lesion showed a focus of microinvasion, compatible with microinvasive SCC. The discrete nests composed of small and uniform
basaloid cells with scanty cytoplasm and minimal nuclear atypia. The peripheral palisading morphologic pattern of the tumor nests was
typically found and consistent with ABC lesion. The endocervical resection margin was extensively involved by tumor. The subsequent radical
hysterectomy specimen showed ulceration due to previous conization without definite mass formation (Figure 2B). However, a transection of
posterior cervix revealed a 2.1 × 1.8 × 0.9 cm growth infiltrated through the stroma. There was also diffuse infiltration of small basaloid
nests without stromal desmoplastic reaction (Figure 3A). Merging with the multi focal areas of ABC component was the invasive SCC component,
which is characterized with irregularly shaped larger nests and occasional central necrosis (Figure 3B). Nuclear atypia and high mitotic
figures were noted (Figure 3C). Both components showed up to 0.9 cm stromal invasion within the total 1.2 cm stromal depth while focally
involvement of right parametrium mainly by ABC was observed. The immunohistochemical stains were parallelly performed. A stain for p63 and
Bcl-2 showed diffuse positive in both ABC and SCC components (data not shown). While a higher index of Ki-67 staining was observed with
squamous cell carcinoma component (40%) than adenoid basal cell carcinoma component (25%) (Figure 3D). Microscopic findings of the cervical
co-existent tumors. Microscopic findings of the cervical co-existent tumors. (A) The cervical stroma with infiltrated small basaloid nests
of adenoid basal carcinoma component without stromal desmoplastic reaction (hematoxylin and eosin, ×200). (B) The admixed larger nests of
squamous cell carcinoma component with central necrosis, and (C) severe nuclear atypia (hematoxylin and eosin, ×200). (D) The Ki-67
immunohistochemical stain, showing a higher index of staining in squamous cell carcinoma component than adenoid basal carcinoma component
(×200). Among different malignancies in the classification of basaloid lesions of the uterine cervix proposed by Grayson and Cooper , there
was a spectrum of basaloid carcinomas which were stated of histopathologic similarities. Many literatures of ABC have focused on diagnostic
distinction from other mimicked aggressive malignancies such as ACC, BSCC and small cell (neuroendocrine) carcinoma and to elucidate its
histopathogenesis. Meanwhile some reports also revealed valid evidences of the associated malignancy within morphologically pure ABC . Since
this association was initially documented in 1971 , most of the associated malignancies have been reported mixedly with pure ABCs in the
early literatures. The concept of co-existence was then clarified by the divergent epithelial differentiation of the ABC lesion producing
associated squamous, adenosquamous or rarely adenomatous malignant components which support the histogenetic pluripotent reserve cell origin
of ABC . The co-existing ABC with occasionally identified transitional areas to other malignancy mainly ACC, also showing the potential
precursor concept . Additionally, an associated malignancy could occur by the co-incidence of transformed tumor by the common pathogenetic
high-risk human papillomavirus (HPV) integration in both components . Although the precise frequency of these rare co-existences is hampered
by the selection bias on the case-report evidences, it has shown a substantial account and thus stresses the significance of careful
approach with a suspect of associating malignancy in any provisional diagnosed ABC. Recently, including our case, there are total 98
reported morphologically diagnosed ABCs . Apart from the pure lesions, there are 27 cases (27.5%) described by ABC associated with other
invasive malignancy in a single neoplasm. Regarding to this review, we firstly determine the common clinicopathological features of these
specified cervical co-existent tumors which were sequentially summarized in the Additional File 1 table 1. Most of the patients were
menopausal non-Caucasian women. The mean age was 66.7 years (44-84). The most frequent co-existing histology was SCC which accounts for 12
cases, ACC as second most found was co-existed in 9 cases while only 2 associated adenocarcinomas had been specified. Typically, pure ABCs
are asymptomatic, frequently presented by abnormal Pap smear which often associated with high grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (> 90%)
. These patients have been successfully treated by non-radical surgery such as simple hysterectomy without documented recurrence or tumor-
related death. While if associated with other malignancy, 11 (52.6%) in 19 assessable presentations were asymptomatic with abnormal cervical
cytology and most of these had no gross cervical lesion, implying that an associated invasive carcinoma is possibly presented by inactive
clinical features. Two patients with co-existent malignancy including our case reported malignant cytology which less likely occurred in the
pure ABC group. Moreover, even on comprehensive colposcopy, unusual ulcerative lesion of ABC or other infiltrative malignancy may not be
detected. Thus, a cone biopsy is recommended to cover the most represented site of entire cervical tumors . It was recorded that this
procedure yielded a high definite diagnosis rate for the co-existent malignancy especially for these asymptomatic undetectable mass patients
(6 in 9 patients, 66.6%). Comparing this data, the reviewed co-existent cases with a cervical mass at the presenting time showed its poorer
outcome. It would be explained by undiagnosed associated SCC component resulted from an only cervical biopsy and inadequate treatment course
for the real status of the associated invasive carcinoma. In the LEEP specimen, only a focus of microinvasive SCC overlying multiple small
nests of ABC was diagnosed. Suggesting that theoretically, area of true invasive carcinoma may not represent in all tumor area or generally
admixed with ABC component, but can produce a distinct infiltrate through the deep part of stroma and that resulted in possibility of
inadequate assessment by an excisional biopsy. The endocervical resection margin which markedly positive mostly by ABC indicated that we
could not exclude a hiding admixed ACC or a further invasive SCC accompanied in the remaining cervix and a repeat conization would be
recommended . Considering small residual cervix in the after-conization menopausal patient, a re-conization may be at risk of accidental
injury to bladder or rectum with remarkable bleeding or subsequent infection . High accuracy imaging to detect cervical tumor or local
invasion by MRI (77-90% accuracy) was a reasonable option and was again proved by our case. Also with concern on a risk of para-aortic lymph
node spreading at a rate of 2-4% for this clinical stage IB1 cervical cancer , we additionally performed para-aortic lymph node dissection
at the time of radical hysterectomy, bilateral salpingooophorectomy and pelvic lymph node dissection. The final revealed co-existence
compiling ABC associated with truly invasive SCC supported our idea to treat this initially indefinite invasive diagnosed patient as a
patient with locally invasive malignancy instead of doing simple hysterectomy which is described as the recommended operation for a typical
ABC or even with microinvasive SCC. The pathological diagnosis was obtained by a matching with the described morphologic criteria based on
the current World Health Organization histological classification of tumors of the uterine cervix . The infiltrating foci of the ABC
component showed typical small uniform basaloid cell nest without desmoplastic stromal reaction. Squamous differentiation was diffuse and
more frequently detected at the superficial area and focal area adjacent to the SCC component, forming cellular transition to the associated
carcinoma . These histomorphological findings were clearly distinct the ABC component from the other tumors with basaloid feature like ACC
and BSCC which commonly presented with high nuclear pleomorphism, mitotic figure and cribriform or solid growth pattern . Occupying at the
most central part of tumors was the invasive squamous component which was deeply infiltrating tumor composed of larger nests of pleomorphic
large, non-keratinized squamous differentiated cells with severe nuclear atypia and frequent mitotic features. Obviously this tumor
presented a high growth appearance and highly invasive pattern by showing central necrosis and extensive stromal desmoplastic reaction
respectively . The result of p63 stain was typical in our case which showed diffuse expression in both ABC and SCC components intensively by
the palisading basaloid cells and suprabasal squamous differentiated cells in the central area of the superficial nests, while markedly
reduced reaction in focal glandular (adenoid) differentiated area. The selective Bcl-2 positive reaction in basaloid tumor and SCC shown in
our sections helpfully confirmed the basaloid squamous histogenesis and supported their neoplastic natures by showing anti-apoptotic genetic
alteration in both components . Moreover, for the cell cycle activity correlated Ki-67 stain which generally reduced expression in the
basaloid and adenoid area , it was similar to our low index for ABC component and different to a well-defined stronger Ki-67 expression by
SCC component. This was implied to higher proliferative activity and indicated distinct malignant potential of the invasive SCC, which
corresponded to the central necrosis finding observed on the morphologic exam. Likewise report of pure ABCs, almost all patients in co-
existence group were clinically stage I which primarily treated by a type of hysterectomy. Along with 19 sufficient treatment data, the
specific treatments were prescribed mostly depend on nature and stage of the revealed associated invasive malignancy either before or after
primary surgery. Obviously different from the pure ABCs, only 3 co-existent cases (15.7%) have been treated by exclusively non-radical
hysterectomy. Postoperative adjuvant therapies mainly by radiation were given to 5 cases (26.3%) with 2 of these had received adjuvant
treatment after inadequate simple hysterectomy. This data would suggest that a primary radical treatment according to the extension of
associated malignancy formally by radical hysterectomy with lymphadenectomy should be recommended and may prevent unnecessary exposures to
radiotherapy and/or chemotherapy. Including our case with 6 months disease-free interval after postoperative chemoradiaton, the reviewed
treatment outcomes of the ABC with associated malignancy patients had mean follow-up time of 31.1 months (0-120) with no evidence of disease
in overall 13 of 20 retrievable cases (65.0%). Unlike the favorable outcome of pure ABCs, recurrences were found in 4 cases (20.0%) and 3 of
these died of disease. An invasive malignancy may simultaneously associated with any cervical ABC, that need an adequate diagnostic cone
biopsy which can provide clear diagnosis and would serves both needs of proper radical therapy if a likely ABC with co-existent malignancy
is diagnosed and also to prevent the over treatment of a pure ABC. Occasionally, if indefinite tissue diagnosis, an acceptable diagnostic
option like MRI may be in preference. Through a decision with suspicious occult invasive carcinoma, the primary radical surgery should be
considered. In advance, proper adjuvant treatment such as post-operative radiotherapy would be suggested according to the extent of the
associated invasive malignancy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. BV contributed mainly in designing, literature review and writing work. SYH, the corresponding author who
provided the case, planed and approved the written work. STP helped in correction of the manuscript. AWL performed the histopathologic
process and described all findings and JSP gave advices and edited the discussion. CWL and MJS worked on the clinical presentation. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. Table 1. Literature summary of reported cases of diagnosed adenoid basal carcinoma with
associated invasive malignancy of the uterine cervix. Click here for file We thank our oncologic nurses(Kyung Suk Min & Su Min Jung) and
pathologic technicians for many kind helps throughout the specimen and pathological processes.
