The case of a 20-year-old female who presented with refractory coccydynia and sternal pain is described. She was immunocompetent, and had no
systemic features. She was diagnosed with tuberculosis of the sternal and coccygeal regions based on magnetic resonance imaging and
histopathology of biopsy specimens. Conservative management with oral multidrug antituberculous therapy completely cured the patient, and
she had not suffered any recurrence after three years of follow-up. This case highlights the possibility of the multicentric presentation of
tuberculosis at two rare sites in the same immunocompetent patient, even though the differential diagnosis was coccydynia. Tuberculosis
remains one of the leading killer diseases in countries where it is endemic. There were 9 million new TB cases and approximately 2 million
deaths from TB in 2004. More than 80% of all TB patients live in sub-Saharan Africa and Asia . With the advent of HIV, tuberculosis is
posing a serious health hazard, even in regions of the world where tuberculosis is not endemic. The sternal and coccygeal regions are rare
sites for tuberculosis, and require a high degree of suspicion for diagnosis, especially when they occur in combination in an
immunocompetent patient. A 20-year-old female presented with a history of pain in the chest and coccygeal region for 1 year. There were no
systemic symptoms of fever, weight loss, or loss of appetite. Physical examination revealed tenderness and irregularity over the sternum and
tenderness over the coccyx. She was negative for HIV based on an ELISA method, and her erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 40 mm/h.
Radiograph of the sternum and coccyx revealed an osteolytic lesion in the sternum and a similar lesion in the coccyx. An MRI of the sternal
and sacrococcygeal regions was obtained which revealed a destructive lesion in the sternum and destruction of the coccyx with an abscess
extending into the left gluteal region (Fig. 1). Technetium-99m MDP bone scintigraphy was performed, which revealed photopenic areas with
mildly increased tracer uptake surrounding the photopenic areas in the sternum and coccyx, with no other bony lesions
(Fig. 2).Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging of the sternal and sacrococcygeal regions. i Destructive lesion in the sternum, ii destructive
lesion in the coccyx with an abscess, iii abscess extending into the left gluteal regionFig. 2Technetium-99m MDP bone scan of the patient. a
Photopenic area with surrounding increased tracer uptake in the sternum. b Photopenic area with surrounding increased tracer uptake in the
coccyx Magnetic resonance imaging of the sternal and sacrococcygeal regions. i Destructive lesion in the sternum, ii destructive lesion in
the coccyx with an abscess, iii abscess extending into the left gluteal region Technetium-99m MDP bone scan of the patient. a Photopenic
area with surrounding increased tracer uptake in the sternum. b Photopenic area with surrounding increased tracer uptake in the coccyx Tru-
Cut needle biopsies were obtained from the sternal and coccygeal lesions and sent for Gram staining, AFB staining, histopathology, and
cultures, including a tubercular culture. The histologic picture was that of chronic inflammation with a caseating granuloma compatible with
tuberculosis. A diagnosis of tuberculosis of the sternum and coccyx was established, based on the histopathology. The patient was started on
antitubercular therapy in the form of a four-drug regimen consisting of rifampicin (10 mg/kg), isoniazid (10 mg/kg), pyrazinamide
(35 mg/kg), and ethambutol (30 mg/kg) for 2 months, followed by rifampicin (10 mg/kg) and isoniazid (10 mg/kg) for 4 months, as per the
national government’s guidelines. Along with this, local support for the coccygeal region was provided and supportive measures to improve
the nutritional status were taken. The culture reports, which were obtained after 8 weeks, were positive for Mycobacterium tuberculosis
bacilli. The patient showed progressive improvement within 1 month of starting the therapy, and was completely relieved of her complaints
after 3 months. After successfully completing the therapy for 6 months, the patient was followed up for 3 years, and showed no recurrence of
symptoms. Multicentric tuberculosis is usually seen in immunocompromised patients; other predisposing factors are intravenous drug use,
diabetes mellitus, alcohol abuse, and hepatic cirrhosis . Sternal osteomyelitis caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis is a rare entity,
accounting for less than 1% of all cases of osteoarticular tuberculosis, and coccygeal tuberculosis is an even rarer entity, with only one
reported case in the English literature . Tuberculosis at both of these sites at the same time has also not been reported in the English
literature previously. A painful coccyx is a common complaint in women due to the posterior prominence of the coccyx anatomically in the
female pelvis, meaning that it is exposed to multiple traumas. However, physicians should also consider atypical conditions such as
tuberculosis in patients presenting with coccygodynia, especially those who are refractory to treatment with conservative measures, and in
association with HIV. Most sacral and sacrococcygeal lesions heal with adequate local support and antitubercular therapy, but coccygectomy
may be essential in refractory cases. Sternal tuberculosis usually presents as tuberculous osteomyelitis or rarely as a tuberculous
granuloma, or remotely as metastatic disease [4, 5]. There have also been reports of tuberculosis of the sternum after open heart surgery.
Plain radiographs are usually insufficient, and further imaging in the form of CT or MRI is usually required . Most of these lesions heal
with oral antitubercular therapy. However, surgical intervention in the form of resection may be required on rare occasions, followed by
local rotation flaps. Although no primary focus of infection could be located in our patient, the mode of involvement is most likely
hematogenous, as suggested by its multicentric nature. Other routes of tuberculous involvement are direct inoculation, extension from
adjacent bones or joints, and lymphogenous spread. To conclude, tuberculosis can present in any form or organ of the human body. In spite of
the great strides made in its management, tuberculosis continues to baffle clinicians with its varied presentations. Therefore, it is
essential for all physicians to keep tuberculosis in the differential diagnosis of patients with atypical presentations in atypical
locations, thus enabling its early diagnosis and better treatment. The patient gave consent to the publication of this case report. None.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution and reproduction
in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
