We report the case of a 56-year-old man with acute onset of de-novo stabbing, pulsating and diffuse headache with subsequent appearance
(within few minutes) of posterior fossa symptoms (vomiting, postural instability, anisocoria, incoordination, dysarthria, retropulsion)
lasting 9–12 h. Recurrent hypertensive crises were detected during the acute observation in the Emergency Room, even in the absence of
previous history of hypertension. Once subarachnoid hemorrhage and focal lesions (vascular and non-vascular) were excluded, brain
computerized tomography-angiography and digital subtraction angiography disclosed the presence of left persistent primitive hypoglossal
artery with bilateral vertebral artery hypoplasia and a slight aneurysmal dilation of the anterior communicating artery. Brain magnetic
resonance study performed 24 h after onset of symptoms was negative for recent ischemic lesions. The clinical features of this rare vascular
condition are discussed as a possible cause of magnetic resonance (diffusion weighted imaging) negative vertebro-basilar transient ischemic
attack. A 56-year-old man was observed in the Emergency Room (ER) 40–50 min after the onset of acute de-novo stabbing, pulsating and diffuse
headache with subsequent appearance (within few minutes) of dysarthria, postural instability with retropulsion, mild objective vertigo and
vomiting, acral paresthesias of upper limbs, minimal confusional state without loss of consciousness or seizures. Neurological examination
was relevant for reagent anisocoria (left smaller than right), slight speech disorder (dysarthria), retropulsion, moderate bilateral
incoordination at the index-nose test, absence of fever and meningeal signs. Blood pressure (BP) was unstable with recurrent hypertensive
crises (200/120 mmHg) during observation, in the absence of definite previous history of hypertension as well as of diabetes, headache, or
cardiovascular problems. Electrocardiographic monitoring excluded paroxysmal arrhythmias, while cardiac enzymes and creatine-kinase were
negative. In the ER, he was started on intravenous (i.v.) nimodipine (2 mg/hour) with progressive normalization of BP values within 4 h.
Urgent brain computerized tomography (CT) was negative for hemorrhage and focal lesions. Considering the unstable BP and the low NIHSS
(National Institutes of Health Stroke Scale) score (=3) at presentation, i.v. thrombolysis for possible brainstem ischemia was excluded, and
the patient was put on antiplatelet therapy with salicylic acid (i.v. 250 mg for 24 h, followed by oral administration) as for a minor
ischemic events. Under i.v. salicylic acid, headache severity gradually decreased over the next 3 h, leaving only a slight diffuse,
pulsating pain which remitted over the next 6 h. All the neurological signs and symptoms had completely recovered within 12 h. In order to
investigate the vertebro-basilar (VB) district, the patient also underwent urgent brain CT-angiography with maximum intensity projection
(MIP), multiplanar (MP) and three-dimensional (3D) reconstructions, with the detection of left persistent primitive hypoglossal artery
(PPHA) as a large vessel originating from the internal carotid artery (ICA) at the C2 vertebral level, entering the posterior cranial fossa
through an enlarged hypoglossal canal and thus joining the lower portion of the basilar artery (Fig. 1). The study was then completed
through 3D volume-rendering (VR) reconstructions for a better definition of the anatomical details (Fig. 1). Collateral findings were
represented by bilateral vertebral artery hypoplasia together with a small saccular aneurysm (not-surgical) of the anterior communicating
artery, confirmed by digital subtraction angiography (DSA) which revealed no additional vascular abnormalities. Brain magnetic resonance
(MR) with MR-diffusion weighted imaging (MR-DWI) was performed 24 h after onset of symptoms and did not show recent ischemic lesions. The
electroencephalogram—performed 12 h after admission—did not record epileptic/focal abnormalities. Uncommon causes of stroke (thrombophilia,
patent foramen ovale and other relevant metabolic risk factors for stroke) were excluded during the course of the observation.Fig. 1a Axial
brain CT-angiography, b, c MIP and 3D-reconstruction CT-angiography showing left PPHA (arrows). d Three-dimensional-VR CT-angiography
showing PPHA (arrow) entering the posterior cranial fossa through an enlarged hypoglossal canal and thus joining the lower portion of the
basilar artery, and in e PPHA (arrow) as a large vessel originating from the internal carotid artery at the C2 vertebra level a Axial brain
CT-angiography, b, c MIP and 3D-reconstruction CT-angiography showing left PPHA (arrows). d Three-dimensional-VR CT-angiography showing PPHA
(arrow) entering the posterior cranial fossa through an enlarged hypoglossal canal and thus joining the lower portion of the basilar artery,
and in e PPHA (arrow) as a large vessel originating from the internal carotid artery at the C2 vertebra level The patient was then
discharged with ramipril (5 mg per day) plus oral salicylic acid (100 mg per day) and at the 6-month control no further episode of
headache—with or without neurological symptoms—was reported. The clinical spectrum of acute “vascular” headache associated to VB signs and
symptoms, once excluded critical conditions, could suggest at least four possible diagnoses: (1) basilar-type migraine, (2) posterior
reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), (3) headache attributed to benign (or reversible) angiopathy of the central nervous system, and
(4) headache attributed to transient ischemic attack (TIA) or minor stroke, whose diagnostic criteria are summarized in
Table 1.Table 1Diagnostic criteria for basilar-type migraine, posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), headache attributed to
benign (or reversible) angiopathy of the central nervous system, and headache attributed to transient ischemic attack (TIA)Basilar-type
migraine Migraine with aura symptoms clearly originating from the brainstem and/or from both hemispheres simultaneously affected, but no
motor weakness(A) At least 2 attacks fulfilling criteria B–D(B) Aura consisting of at least two of the following fully reversible symptoms,
but no motor weakness: dysarthria, vertigo, tinnitus, hypacusia, diplopia, visual symptoms simultaneously in both temporal and nasal fields
of both eyes, ataxia, decreased level of consciousness, simultaneously bilateral paraesthesias(C) At least one of the following: (1) At
least one aura symptom develops gradually over ≥5 min and/or different aura symptoms occur in succession over ≥5 min (2) Each aura symptom
lasts ≥5 and ≤60 min(D) Headache fulfilling criteria B–D for 1.1 Migraine without aura begins during the aura or follows aura within
60 min(E) Not attributed to another disorderPosterior Reversible Encefalophathy Syndrome (PRES) Acute or subacute neurologic presentation of
headeache, nausea, vomiting, altered mental function, seizures, stupor, visual disturbancesRadiological hallmarks: reversible bilateral
subcortical and cortical edema with a predominantly posterior distribution (parieto-occipital) at Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery
(FLAIR) MRI imagingHeadache attributed to benign (or reversible) angiopathy of the central nervous system (A) Diffuse, severe headache of
abrupt or progressive onset, with or without focal neurological deficits and/or seizures and fulfilling criteria C and D(B) “Strings and
beads” appearance on angiography and subarachnoid hemorrhage ruled out by appropriate investigations(C) One or both of the following: (1)
headache develops simultaneously with neurological deficits and/or seizures (2) headache leads to angiography and discovery of “strings and
beads” appearance(D) Headache (and neurological deficits, if present) resolves spontaneously within 2 monthsHeadache attributed to transient
ischemic attack (TIA) (A) Any new acute headache fulfilling criteria C and D(B) Focal neurological deficit of ischemic origin
lasting < 24 h(C) Headache develops simultaneously with onset of focal deficit(D) Headache resolves within 24 h Diagnostic criteria for
basilar-type migraine, posterior reversible encephalopathy syndrome (PRES), headache attributed to benign (or reversible) angiopathy of the
central nervous system, and headache attributed to transient ischemic attack (TIA) According to the current criteria of the International
Classification of Headache Disorders—2nd Ed. (ICHD-II) , our case potentially fulfills only some of the diagnostic criteria for basilar-type
migraine (“1.2.6”): headache, dysarthria, vertigo (with onset/worsening in few minutes), ataxia, decreased level of consciousness and
simultaneous bilateral paraesthesias. However, the neurological symptoms have lasted over 60 min and were associated with de-novo headache
(first episode), thus excluding the above hypothesis (Table 1). The second diagnosis we have considered, is PRES, a rare and still poorly
understood condition characterized by acute or subacute headache (usually thunderclap type), nausea, vomiting, altered mental function,
seizures, stupor and/or visual disturbances, with the radiological hallmarks of reversible bilateral subcortical and cortical edema with a
predominantly posterior distribution (parieto-occipital) at Fluid-Attenuated Inversion Recovery (FLAIR)-MR sequences . PRES has been
described in association with hypertensive encephalopathy, immunosuppressive and cytotoxic medications, puerperal eclampsia, collagen
disease, renal failure, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura, human immunodeficiency virus infection, acute intermittent porphyria, and organ
transplantation . In our case, the lack of the typical MR findings and the negative electroencephalogram tend to rule out this diagnosis.
The third possible diagnosis is represented by “Headache attributed to benign (or reversible) angiopathy of the central nervous system”
(ICHD-II “6.7.3”). In our case, despite the complete reversibility of all neurological signs, the lack of the radiological hallmarks
“strings and beads” and the full headache recovery within 12 h, excludes this nosological entity (Table 1). The last possible and more
suitable diagnosis is that of “Headache attributed to transient ischemic attack (TIA)”—ICHD-II “6.1.2” (Table 1). In fact, headache occurs
frequently in patients with acute cerebrovascular disorders with a frequency—according to different studies—ranging from 7 to 65% . Several
authors have stressed the greater incidence of headache among patients with ischemic events, particularly VB infarcts, due to the anatomical
relationship between the posterior circulation and the trigeminal system . Although relatively less frequent during TIA, sudden and acute
headache of unknown cause, associated to dizziness or loss of balance, may represent a warning sign of VB failure. The most common symptoms
of extracranial vertebral artery involvement are represented by dizziness, blurred vision and imbalance, while vertigo is more typical of
intracranial vertebral artery disease. On the other hand, TIA due to basilar artery failure produces, more frequently, dizziness, double
vision, dysphagia, slurred speech and unilateral/bilateral weakness . Symptoms and signs due to TIA (either carotid or VB) must resolve—by
definition—within 24 h but sometimes they may be very brief—lasting few minutes—probably due to sudden and temporary BP failure . In this
perspective, Sacco et al. have suggested to review the ICHD-II diagnostic criteria for “6.1.2” in the agreement with the new definition of
TIA proposed by the American Heart Association Study Group. Accordingly, TIA is now defined as “a transient episode of neurological
dysfunction caused by focal brain, spinal cord or retinal ischemia, without acute infarction” thus reducing the importance of the
traditional temporal criterion for the definition of TIA (duration <24 h). As a consequence, brain-MR imaging becomes now the crucial
recommended tool for TIA diagnosis . Besides the above conditions discussed in the differential diagnosis versus the most probable
hypothesis of “headache attributed to transient ischemic attack (TIA) or minor stroke”, we can also exclude ICHD-II “10.3.2” (Headache
attributed to hypertensive crisis without hypertensive encephalopathy), due to the presence of long-lasting focal neurological signs. In the
present case, de-novo acute headache and transient ischemia in the posterior circulation are associated with the evidence of PPHA, a rare
vascular anomaly of the posterior circulation that ensures a pathological anastomosis between carotid and basilar system. At the
intracranial level, four embryonic arteries (trigeminal, otic, hypoglossal and proatlantal) participate to the VB development: once
completed, these vessels gradually regress, but in some cases they may persist . The detection is often fortuitous during angiographic
examination. The trigeminal artery is generally associated with disorders of the 3rd, 4th, 5th and 6th cranial nerves, while the otic artery
may cause acoustic or facial nerves palsy . The hypoglossal artery may lead to 12th nerve palsy, glossopharingeal neuralgia or vascular
disorders in the posterior circulation. The estimated incidence of PPHA is 0.02–0.1% . It originates as a branch of the cervical part of the
ICA between C1 and C3 levels, passes through the hypoglossal canal and joins the lower portion of the basilar artery after a tortuous
course. The vertebral arteries are usually hypoplastic and the ipsilateral to PPHA may be absent. Collateral vascular abnormalities are
often represented by arteriovenous malformations or saccular aneurysms . Consequently, any significant alteration of the blood flow in the
proximal ICA may affect the posterior circulation with possible reversible VB symptoms. Conversely, thromboembolism from PPHA/carotid
atherosclerotic plaques—less frequent—is usually associated to ischemic lesions . From a pathogenetic point of view, it seems therefore
reasonable to consider, in our case, the particular vulnerability of the posterior circulation due to the PPHA, the associated vascular
abnormalities, and its possible secondary, transient, hemodynamic failure during hypertensive phases. Our clinical picture may be classified
as a real TIA of the posterior circulation, also considering the complete clinical recovery within 24 h and the absence of ischemic lesions
(including lacunar events) on MR investigations. Moreover, the headache presented by the patient, meets the ICHD-II diagnostic criteria for
“Headache attributed to transient ischemic attack (TIA)”—subgroup “6.1.2”. In conclusion, the persistence of carotid-basilar anastomoses,
although rare entities, must be considered not only in patients with isolated or combined cranial nerve deficit, but also in the presence of
cerebrovascular events involving the VB system. Their association with other vascular abnormalities (hypoplasia) can confer increased
vulnerability to other factors (hypertension) as in the present case. Conflict of interest None. Open Access This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution and reproduction in any medium, provided the
original author(s) and source are credited.
