To the Editor: Sporotrichosis is a subcutaneous fungal infection present worldwide that is caused by traumatic inoculation or inhalation of
spores of the dimorphic fungus Sporothrix schenckii complex (1–3). However, molecular studies have shown that the S. schenckii complex
constitutes several cryptic infectious species (i.e., S. albicans, S. brasiliensis, S. globosa, S. luriei, S. mexicana, and S. schenckii).
Marimon et al. (4) demonstrated 3 major clades grouped into 6 putative phylogenetic species. The natural habitats of these species are soil
and plants. The species showed distinct pathologic behavior, antifungal responses, and phenotypes, which suggests that optimal clinical
treatment may depend on the taxon involved in the sporotrichosis (1). Human infections have been reported primarily from the Americas,
including Latin America (3,5). Asia (e.g., Malaysia, India, Japan), Africa, and Australia are also regions where infections are endemic (6).
Although infections are rare in Europe, a case of human infection (7) and a case of an animal infection (8) have been described in southern
Italy. We report a case of human sporotrichosis in which S. mexicana was isolated from a patient in Portugal. A 34-year-old man sought care
at a podiatry clinic in Vila Nova de Famalicão, Portugal, in 2009 for multiple polymorphous eruptions and ulcers on both feet. There was no
obvious cause of the disease. Although the patient had traveled to Malaysia in 2003 and had worn open footwear every day, he did not recall
receiving a skin wound. In 2004 in Portugal, subcutaneous nodules appeared in both feet, became ulcerated, and spontaneously healed. By
2005, more severe lesions had appeared and became a chronic infection in both feet and lower limbs. The symptoms were diagnosed erroneously
as dyshidrotic eczema, and treatment with topical corticosteroids was unsuccessful. Several skin fragments of the lesions were submitted for
mycological assessment. Fungi were not found on potassium hydroxide slides of all samples. Filamentous fungal colonies were observed after 7
days of culture on Sabouraud dextrose agar slopes at 25°C. The fungus had hyaline septate hyphae, with hyaline and dematiaceous conidia
compatible with Sporothrix spp. The isolate was accessed and preserved in the Micoteca da Universidade do Minho (MUM, Braga, Portugal)
fungal culture collection and given the accession code MUM 11.02. The macroscopic features and sporulation were analyzed by using cornmeal
and potato dextrose agars. Clusters of intercalary or terminal conidia were formed by sympodial growth from differentiated conidiophores on
both media. Sympodial conidia were hyaline or slightly pigmented. Sessile conidia were predominantly subglobose, obovoidal or ellipsoidal,
and 3.35 ± 0.41 µm long by 2.30 ± 0.32 µm wide (Figure, panel A). A teleomorph was not observed. The colony diameter on potato dextrose agar
after 21 days of incubation attained 40 mm at 30°C and 5 mm at 37°C. The yeast form was achieved by incubating the isolate on brain heart
infusion agar on slants at 35°C ± 2°C for 7 days in a single subculture. A) Photomicrograph of sympodial and sessile conidia of Sporothrix
mexicana obtained by using a transmitted differential interference contrast microscope. The isolate was obtained from a patient in Portugal
in 2009 and archived in the Micoteca da Universidade do Minho (MUM) under accession no. MUM 11.02. Scale bar = 10 μm. B) Neighbor-joining
tree showing relatedness of MUM 11.02 isolate with other species of the S. schenckii complex. The percentage of replicate trees in which the
associated taxon clustered in the bootstrap test (1,000 replicates) is shown next to the branches. All positions containing gaps and missing
data were eliminated from the dataset (complete deletion option). There were 537 positions in the final dataset. Scale bar indicates
nucleotide substitutions per site. Dextrose, sucrose, and raffinose assimilation tests were performed in triplicate by using yeast nitrogen
base medium. The strain assimilated dextrose, sucrose, and raffinose, showing phenotypic characteristics typical of S. mexicana and S.
schenckii (2). In contrast, type reference strain S. brasiliensis CBS 120339 was included in the test, and it was able to assimilate only
dextrose. A presumptive identification based on phenotypic characteristics allowed us to classify this fungus as S. mexicana, although this
species has an atypical morphologic profile. The diameter of colonies grown at 30°C and 37°C are smaller than those proposed by Marimon and
collaborators but much closer to those of S. schenckii (2). These differences could be attributable to the intraspecific variation of this
single isolate. Genomic DNA was obtained from the yeast phase of S. mexicana MUM 11.02, and the partial sequencing of the nuclear calmodulin
gene was based on the amplicon generated by PCR reaction by using CL1 and CL2A primers (2,3). Sequencing was performed at Fundação Oswaldo
Cruz, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. A BLAST analysis (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/BLAST) comparing the sequence of the calmodulin gene with sequences
AM398382, AM398393, AM117444, AM116899, and AM116908 in the GenBank database confirmed the identity of this isolate as S. mexicana. The MUM
11.02 isolate showed 99% similarity with the sequences of S. mexicana (i.e., GenBank accession no. AM398393) with high bootstrap support
values (Figure, panel B). The calmodulin sequence of MUM 11.02 was deposited in GenBank as JF970258. In vitro susceptibility tests with
fluconazole, itraconazole, and terbinafine were performed by the microdilution method (9) and revealed MICs of 128 µg/mL, 32 µg/mL, and
0.5–1.0 µg/mL, respectively, which corresponds to the findings of Marimon et al. (1) for S. mexicana. Thus, S. mexicana is an emerging cause
of human sporotrichosis. Suggested citation for this article: Dias NM, Oliveira MME, Portela MA, Santos C, Zancope-Oliveira RM, Lima N.
Sporotrichosis caused by Sporothrix mexicana, Portugal . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Oct [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1710.110737 Financial support for this work was provided by Fundação Carlos Chagas Filho de Amparo à Pesquisa
do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (Grant Proc. E-26/111.619/2008). R.M.Z.O. is in part supported by Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento
Científico e Tecnológico 350338/2000-0.
