Loss of heterozygosity (LOH) in chromosome 6p has been reported in a number of tumors and some hematologic malignancies, including ALL. LOH
in chromosome 6p, on which the HLA genes are located, can give rise to false homozygosity results in HLA genotyping of patients with
hematologic malignancies. Here we report false homozygosity results in HLA genotyping due to the loss of whole chromosome 6 in the
neoplastic cells of a patient with ALL. A 33-yr-old Korean female patient was admitted for the evaluation of leukocytosis detected during a
workup for headache. Her initial white blood cell count was 336.9×109/L with 84% of blasts in the differential count. Precursor-B
lymphoblastic leukemia was diagnosed from a subsequent bone marrow study. HLA high-resolution genotyping of the patient was requested at the
time of diagnosis for possible hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Homozygosity results (A*02:01, B*54:01, C*08:01, DQB1*04:01) were
obtained, except for the DRB1 locus (DRB1*04:05, DRB1*11:01), in sequence-based typing. Conventional karyotyping of bone marrow metaphase
cells revealed chromosomal abnormalities, with loss of multiple chromosomes including chromosome 6, and reduplication of the remaining
chromosomes: 29,X,+X,+8,inv(9)(p11q13),+10,+14,+18,+21. LOH at the HLA region was suspected and HLA genotyping was repeated with the
peripheral blood in remission state after induction chemotherapy. All 5 HLA loci were typed as heterozygous (A*02:01, A*02:06, B*40:01,
B*54:01, C*03:04, C*08:01, DRB1*04:05, DRB1*11:01, DQB1*03:01, DQB1*04:01). To avoid false HLA typing results in patients with hematologic
malignancies, clinicians, as well as laboratory personnel, need to be aware of such problems and take appropriate precautions. The MHC is a
genomic region located on the short arm of chromosome 6 (6p), encoding HLA molecules. Loss or down-regulation of MHC class I expression in
cancer cells is a major immune escape route used by a large variety of human tumors to evade anti-tumor immune responses mediated by
cytotoxic T lymphocytes . Multiple mechanisms are responsible for such HLA class I alterations . Among them, loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of
chromosome 6p has been reported in a number of solid tumors and some hematologic malignancies, mainly in ALL [12, 13]. In patients with
leukemia, LOH at the MHC region can give false homozygosity results in HLA typing when the typing is performed using peripheral blood
containing a high proportion of leukemic cells. However, such a problem has rarely been reported because HLA typing is not usually carried
out on a blood specimen containing a high proportion of neoplastic cells. A case of a CLL patient has been reported involving LOH at the MHC
region at the initial HLA typing, which was then detected at confirmatory typing for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation . Here we
report false homozygosity results in HLA genotyping due to LOH associated with the loss of whole chromosome 6 in an adult Korean patient
with ALL. A 33-yr-old Korean female was admitted to the hemato-oncology ward of Seoul National University Hospital on October 4, 2010 for
the evaluation of leukocytosis found during a workup for headache. A complete blood cell count showed a hemoglobin level of 7.8 g/dL, a
platelet count of 15×109/L, and a white blood cell count of 336.9×109/L, of which 84% were blasts. Bone marrow aspirates showed
hypercellularity with 99.6% of blasts. The blasts were homogeneously small sized with high nuclear/cytoplasmic ratio and inconspicuous
nucleoli. Flow cytometric analysis revealed that the neoplastic cells were positive for TdT, CD19, CD34, and cytoplasmic CD79a, and a
diagnosis of precursor-B ALL was made. On October 7, 2010 (the third day of hospitalization), before initiation of induction chemotherapy,
high-resolution HLA DNA typing of the patient was performed using the peripheral blood sample. For future hematopoietic stem cell
transplantation, HLA class I (A, B, and C) serological typing of her 2 siblings was also carried out. High-resolution HLA typing was
performed by sequence-based typing (SBT) using the AlleleSEQR® HLA Sequencing kit (Atria Genetics, South San Francisco, CA, USA). HLA
genotyping of the patient revealed homozygosity at class I and II loci, except for the DRB1 locus: A*02:01, B*54:01, C*08:01, DRB1*04:05,
DRB1*11:01, DQB1*04:01 (Table 1, Fig. 1). One of the deduced HLA haplotypes (A*02:01-B*54:01-C*08:01-DRB1*11:01-DQB1*04:01) of the patient
was a fairly unusual one for Korean ethnicity. Moreover, homozygosity at the HLA-B locus (B*54:01) in the patient could not be explained,
considering the HLA-B types of her 2 siblings (B51, B54 in one and B60, B62 in the other). Retyping of the patient's DNA for HLA-A, -B, and
-DR loci by the sequence specific oligonucleotide (SSO) method using Dynal RELI™ SSO HLA-B, -DRB, and -DQB1 kits (Invitrogen, Wirral, UK)
also revealed homozygosity at the following loci: HLA-B*54:01 group, DRB1*04:05 group (DRB4*01:01 group), and DQB1*04:01 group. A
retrospective review revealed that the patient's HLA genotyping had been requested when she had a high blast count in the peripheral blood,
with a white blood cell count of 91.7×109/L, of which 87% were blasts. Conventional karyotyping performed on a bone marrow aspirate sample
obtained on October 11, 2010 (the seventh day of hospitalization) revealed chromosomal abnormalities with loss of multiple chromosomes,
including chromosome 6, and reduplication of the remaining chromosomes: 29,X,+X,+8,inv(9)(p11q13),+10,+14,+18,+21 (Fig. 2). Retrospective
analysis of short tandem repeat (STR) markers revealed LOH in the STR markers on chromosomes 3, 4, 5, 7, 12, and 13 (Table 2), which was in
accordance with conventional karyotyping results. Minor alleles due to loss of pertinent chromosomes in neoplastic cells comprised on
average 4.1% (range 2.9-6.9%). False homozygosity results due to LOH at the HLA region were suspected. HLA genotyping was repeated on
December 13, 2010, with the peripheral blood in a remission state, 67 days after the initiation of induction chemotherapy. A complete blood
cell count showed a hemoglobin level of 10.0 g/dL, a platelet count of 160×109/L, and a white blood cell count of 2.3×109/L, of which 0%
were blasts. All of the HLA-A, -B, -C, -DRB1, and -DQB1 loci were typed as heterozygous: A*02:01, A*02:06, B*40:01, B*54:01, C*03:04,
C*08:01, DRB1*04:05, DRB1*11:01, DQB1*03:01, DQB1*04:01 (Table 1, Fig. 1). Karyotyping performed on a peripheral blood sample obtained on
the same date (in a remission state) revealed a normal karyotype: 46,XX,inv(9)(p11q13). STR analysis performed on the same blood sample also
revealed heterozygosity results in all 9 markers. Thus the heterozygosity results of HLA-A, -B, -C, -DR, and -DQ loci were confirmed and
finally used to search for an unrelated donor for bone marrow transplantation. HLA class I antigens are vital in the recognition of tumor
cells by tumor-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes. Loss or down-regulation of HLA class I antigens, therefore, represents a way by which
tumors can escape T-cell surveillance, adversely affecting the course of disease and the outcome of T-cell-based immunotherapy . This can
have several causes: absence of β2-microglobulin or transporter associated with antigen processing (TAP) expression ; loss of
heterozygosity, large deletions, or mitotic recombination in chromosome 6 [4, 8, 9]; transcriptional down-regulation ; or point mutation,
partial deletion, or somatic recombination [4, 7, 11]. LOH in chromosome 6p has been detected in about 10-55% of solid tumors such as those
of the colon or larynx, melanoma, and breast cancer [12, 15]. Previously reported frequencies of LOH in 6p in hematologic malignancies are
variable according to the detection method and definition of LOH. Masuda et al. reported loss or down-regulation of HLA class I expression
in only 4 out of 43 freshly isolated adult hematologic malignancy samples and no haplotype loss in the HLA genome . In childhood ALL, the
frequency of LOH in 6p has been reported to be 7-8% [17, 18]. In contrast, McEvoy et al. reported a high frequency of MHC LOH in ALL
patients (19/56), which was usually associated with whole chromosome 6 loss (13/19) . LOH in chromosome 6p in hematologic malignancies can
cause false homozygosity results in HLA genotyping when the typing is performed with leukemic blood samples. This can give rise to a serious
problem in hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in that the patient would be at a risk of being transplanted from a falsely matched donor
if the false typing results are not properly recognized. Serologic typing of HLA antigens with blood samples containing high blast counts is
difficult, and therefore, typing is usually not attempted. Nowadays DNA typing is increasingly used for HLA typing, and such problems may
occur if clinicians inappropriately order HLA genotyping with leukemic blood samples, and the HLA typing laboratory is not aware of the
problem in the blood sample requested for typing. False homozygosity results for HLA class I due to LOH at the MHC region has been reported
in a CLL patient, which was detected at confirmatory typing for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation . In this patient, LOH in chromosome
6p was confirmed by microarray-based comparative genomic hybridization of tumor cells. In our case, whole chromosome 6 loss in leukemic
cells caused false homozygosity results in HLA-A, -B, -C, and -DQB1 SBT and HLA-B, -DRB, and -DQB1 SSO typing. Retesting with a peripheral
blood sample in a remission state using SBT revealed heterozygosity results in all of the 5 HLA loci tested. In HLA-DRB1 typing in the
initial sample, a heterozygosity result was obtained by SBT and homozygosity result by SSO typing. A sequencing electropherogram showed
amplification peaks of the minor allele (DRB1*11:01, present only in a small fraction of normal leukocytes) which were much lower than those
of the major allele (DRB1*04:05, present in both leukemic blasts and normal leukocytes) (Fig. 1). As for the discrepancy in HLA-DRB1 typing
results between the 2 typing methods, differences in the primers used for these methods might be the cause. For HLA-DRB1-specific
amplification, different HLA-DRB1 alleles cannot be amplified by a single pair of primers and thus several different primer pairs amplifying
different groups of DRB1 alleles are used in HLA-DRB1 SBT. The primer pairs that can amplify each of the 2 DRB1 alleles (DRB1*04:05, *11:01)
in this patient are expected to be different and the minor allele could thus be amplified in SBT. In HLA-DRB SSO typing, using a Dynal RELI™
SSO kit, single primer pairs amplifying DRB1/DRB3/DRB4/DRB5 genes are used, and the minor allele in this patient seems not to have been
effectively amplified to be detected. Likewise, minor alleles in HLA-A, -B, -C, and -DQB1 loci in this patient seem not to have been
effectively amplified to be detected by SBT. Thus, when HLA typing is performed on blood samples containing a high proportion of blasts with
LOH in chromosome 6p, typing results may differ between different typing methods according to differences in their detection sensitivity. In
the PCR-sequence specific primer (SSP) method, different primer pairs amplify different HLA alleles, and this method is expected to detect
minor alleles with higher sensitivity than the SSO or SBT methods. We later performed PCR-SSP typing (AllSet Gold SSP HLA typing kit,
Invitrogen, Brown Deer, WI, USA) for HLA-B (48 primer pairs) and -DR loci (24 primer pairs) using the DNA sample from our patient at the
time of diagnosis. As expected, the PCR-SSP method detected heterozygosity for both HLA-B and -DR loci, although the minor alleles showed
much weaker amplification bands on the electropherogram than the major alleles. To avoid false HLA typing results in patients with
hematologic malignancies, clinicians as well as laboratory personnel need to be aware of such problems and take appropriate precautions. In
leukemia patients, HLA typing is usually performed at the time of diagnosis or during the first complete remission . Clinicians should not
request HLA typing using blood samples at the time of diagnosis if patients have blasts in the peripheral blood. There is no data available
on what percentage of blasts or neoplastic cells in the white cell differential count of a peripheral blood sample can be present without
affecting the HLA molecular typing results in patients with LOH in 6p. Because blasts generally have considerably larger nuclei than normal
leukocytes, the DNA fraction from blasts would comprise a much larger portion of total DNA extracted from leukocytes than that simply
calculated from the percentage of blasts in the blood sample. This is evidenced in our case; whereas the blood sample used for HLA DNA
typing contained 87% blasts, the minor alleles detected by STR analysis comprised a much lower percentage (average 4.1%) than expected
(above 10%). If HLA typing is required in such patients before remission is obtained, alternative samples, such as a buccal swab or hair
follicles, should be considered for HLA typing. HLA typing laboratories involved in the typing of patients with hematologic malignancies
should be aware of such problems and should check patients' hematologic data whenever they have unusual HLA typing results or discrepancies
between different typing methods. In addition, the patients' HLA typing results should be reconfirmed by confirmatory typing. For
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation, confirmatory HLA typing using newly collected samples should be performed not only for donors but
also for patients [20, 21]. However, confirmatory HLA typing of patients is not reimbursed by the national medical insurance system and is
not routinely carried out as a standard clinical practice in this country. We have described a case of false homozygosity results in HLA
genotyping in a patient with precursor-B ALL due to the loss of whole chromosome 6 in the neoplastic cells. To avoid false HLA typing
results in patients with hematologic malignancies, clinicians and HLA typing laboratory personnel need to be aware of the problem and take
appropriate precautions. HLA typing should not be performed with blood samples containing a high proportion of neoplastic cells, and
alternative samples of buccal swab or hair follicles should be used if needed. In addition, confirmatory HLA typing should be routinely
performed for hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sequence-
based typing of HLA-B and -DRB1 genes at the time of diagnosis (A, B) and at remission (C, D). HLA alleles detected were: (A) B*54:01; (B)
DRB1*04:05, *11:01; (C) B*40:01, *54:01; (D) DRB1*04:05, *11:01. At the time of diagnosis, the minor HLA-B allele (B*40:01) shows
amplification peaks indistinguishable from background noise (A), whereas the minor HLA-DRB1 allele (DRB1*11:01) shows lower but discernible
amplification peaks (B). At remission, both HLA-B and -DRB1 loci show heterozygosity with similar amplification peaks for the 2 alleles. E2F
and E2R represent exon 2 forward and exon 2 reverse, respectively. Initial karyotyping of G-banded bone marrow metaphase cells showing loss
of multiple chromosomes including chromosome 6 (A) and reduplication of the remaining chromosomes (B). HLA sequence-based typing results of
the patient using blood samples obtained at the time of diagnosis and in a remission state, and serotyping results of her 2 siblings
*Initial blood sample (87% blasts) obtained before induction chemotherapy; †Blood sample (0% blasts) obtained in a remission state after
chemotherapy. HLA alleles that were falsely not detected in the initial blood sample are in bold. Results of the short tandem repeat (STR)
analysis of 9 loci using patient's DNA at the time of diagnosis and in a remission state *Initial blood sample (87% blasts) obtained before
induction chemotherapy. Minor alleles (average 4.1%, range 2.9-6.9%) due to loss of pertinent chromosomes in neoplastic cells (Fig. 2) are
in bold; †Blood sample (0% blasts) obtained in a remission state after chemotherapy.
