Mucosal atrophy as a potential cause of impaired colonic compliance has not yet been described as a complication in Collagenous Colitis
(CC). We present a 51-year-old female patient with a 20-year history of diarrhea and diagnosed with CC ten years prior to her presentation.
We reviewed reports from three colonoscopies performed after the diagnosis. Overall 12 biopsies obtained in the last two colonoscopies were
re-analyzed by two pathologists blinded to the aim of the study. Besides the typical histological findings of CC, the endoscopic appearance
was normal, and no histological signs of atrophy were found during the first colonoscopy. Surprisingly, the second and third colonoscopy
revealed a region of advanced segmental mucosal atrophy in the cecum with the mucosal height normalizing toward the transverse colon. This
pattern of atrophy was inversely related to the pattern of sub-epithelial collagen deposition, which increased toward the rectum. If no
chance occurrence, our observation supports the idea that additional factors, probably luminal in nature, may be co-responsible for the
mucosal atrophy in this case. Thus, mucosal atrophy in the proximal colon appears to be a new candidate among the growing list of rare
complications associated with long standing CC. Collagenous colitis (CC) is a chronic inflammatory bowel disease characterized by chronic
watery, non-bloody diarrhea in the context of macroscopically normal appearing colonic mucosa on endoscopic examination. CC was first
described in 1976 . Although it was initially underestimated, it became apparent that CC may be responsible for up to 5% of the cases
investigated for chronic, watery diarrhea . The disease affects middle-aged and elderly women with a peak incidence around 65 years and a
female:male ratio of approximately 7:1 . Over the last few years, several complications of CC have been reported , and some of these have
been related to the impaired integrity of the colonic wall. Lesions have been described ranging from surface epithelial cell sloughing to
sub-mucosal "dissections" and colonic wall tears after endoscopic instrumentation . In a systematic review, Wickbom and co-workers
postulated that the impaired compliance of the collagen-containing mucosa was responsible for the tearing of the mucosa by air distension
during colonoscopy . Mucosal atrophy, another potential cause of impaired colonic compliance, was neither reported in these cases nor
described as a complication of CC . Herein we report for the first time the development of an almost fully established mucosal atrophic
lesion in the proximal colon of a patient with long standing CC. A 51-year-old female with a 20-year history of chronic diarrhea was
admitted to our gastroenterological rehabilitation center in 2008. Her stool consistency was described as pulpy, and neither blood nor mucus
was reported. Her weight (body mass index (BMI): 19 kg/m2) had remained constant during the prior months. The physical examination revealed
no further specific findings. Routine laboratory tests were within normal values with the exception of decreased serum ferritin levels
measured at 9.1 ng/ml (normal: 25 to 120 ng/ml). The diagnosis of CC had been established 10 years prior in 1998 at our center. At the time
of diagnosis, the patient's weight was 43 kg (BMI: 16.2 kg/m2). She had a history of radioiodine therapy for hyperthyroidism. Three years
prior, invasive tubulo-ductal breast cancer (pT1c, grade I-II) was diagnosed in her left breast, and a breast saving R0 resection was
performed. Postoperative radiotherapy followed by anti-estrogen therapy with leuporelin and tamoxifen was delivered. Family history was
notable for one of her three sisters who had developed Crohn's disease. After the diagnosis of CC was made, she was initially treated with
Plantago ovata. In 2002, the patient's weight decreased again by 4 kg to 44 kg (BMI: 16.6 kg/m2). One year later, in 2003, a diagnosis CC
was corroborated by endoscopic findings at another center and treated with budesonide for two years, resulting in a weight gain of
approximately 4 kg. Budesonide was then gradually switched to mesalamine due to the development of osteoporosis. The presence of celiac
disease was excluded with normal duodenal biopsies and negative serologic testing. During her inpatient rehabilitation, the third
colonoscopy was performed. Parts of the endoscopic and histologic results are shown in Figures 1 and 2. In summary, an advanced mucosal
atrophic lesion was diagnosed in the proximal colon, and typical signs of CC were still present. In addition, we examined the reports and
endoscopic images obtained from the colonoscopies in 1998, 2003 and 2008. Two pathologists re-analyzed all available biopsies independently
and blinded to the aims of the study. The 2003 specimens revealed a medium height of 188 μm of the cecal and a 260 μm height of the rectal
mucosa, while 172 μm and 262 μm were measured in the corresponding 2008 specimens (Figure 3). Signs of mucosal atrophy were not present on
the histological-reports or protocols from the 1998 colonoscopy nor were they apparent in the available photographic documentation of the
1998 procedure (Figure 1). Budesonide, calcium and vitamin D were prescribed, and the patient was released in a subjectively improved
clinical condition with a goal to taper budesonide as fast as possible due to her developing osteoporosis. The 2008 endoscopic image
displays a pale, translucent mucosal region from the cecum with prominent a submucosal vascular pattern indicating advanced atrophy. For
comparison the endoscopic image form 1998 displays a normal aspect of cecal mucosa. Please note, the digitally reproduced instant camera
image from 1998 displays a somewhat lower resolution. The corresponding histology (hematoxilin and eosin staining) corroborates the
endoscopic impression. The height of the cecal mucosa (138 μm [range: 128 - 146 μm]) was dramatically reduced in 2008. Almost no significant
sub-epithelial collagen band thickening could be demonstrated in the atrophic cecal mucosa. The normal-appearing rectal mucosa from 2008 is
shown. A small part of the muscular mucosal layer is indicated by the arrowhead at the right side of the low-magnified image. In contrast,
extensive collagen band thickening could be seen in the rectal biopsies (arrowhead in the high-magnified image of the sub-epithelium beneath
a vertically-cut crypt). Of note, amyloidosis was excluded with special staining (results not shown). The mucosal height and the thickness
of the sub-epithelial collagen band are shown as assessed by two observers who were blinded to the aim of the study (observer ratings
indicated as black squares and dots). The results obtained in specimens from the 2003 colonoscopy are connected with dotted lines and those
from the 2008 procedure with continuous lines. The semi-quantitative assessment of the lymphocytic infiltrate is shown as table at the
bottom of the figure. The results on the semi-quantitative analysis of intraepithelial plasma cells, eosinophils and neutrophils are not
shown as they parallel the results for the lymphocytic infiltrate. We have described a patient with greater than a 10-year history of CC who
developed segmental mucosal atrophy involving the ascending colon while sparing the terminal ileum and the remaining segments of the colon.
Although, we were not able to obtain a clear-cut and internationally accepted definition of mucosal atrophy, the presence of advanced
atrophy in the cecal region of our patient is beyond any reasonable doubt (Figure 1, 2008 endoscopic image and corresponding histology on
the bottom). According to established histological textbooks and also according to our own long-time experience, the normal mucosal
thickness is between 400-500 μm . In our opinion, these data correspond well to our morphometric finding with a median 188 μm mucosal height
in the overtly "atrophic" cecum (Figure 3). However, from Figure 3 it also appears that the apparent mucosal height in the non-atrophic
rectum as shown in Figure 2 was rather low with a median height of 262 μm in 2008. This may be explained by that in areas with relatively
intact mucosa standard biopsies with limited penetration may not allow for a reliable assessment of mucosal heights beyond a certain
threshold. To our knowledge, such a development of advanced colonic mucosal atrophy has not been documented in the CC literature thus far .
Prior to this report, microscopic signs of atrophy in the mucosal lining of the colon were described in only one CC patient by Otegbayo and
co-workers . With respect to the time course of the development of mucosal atrophy we observed almost stable mucosal heights comparing cecal
and rectal biopsies from 2003 and 2008 (Figure 3). This suggests that cecal atrophy may have evolved before 2003. On the other hand, the
1998 photo documentation (Figure 1) and the endoscopical and histological reports do not support presence of clinically apparent cecal
atrophy in 1998. Please note, that comparing the 1998 and 2008 endoscopical images in Figure 1 is somewhat compromised by different
resolutions owned to digital reproducing the 1998 original instant camera image. So one may be tempted to pin the start of atrophy to
sometime between 1998 and 2003. As the biopsies from 1998 were not available for re-analysis, we cannot rule out that incipient histological
signs of cecal atrophy may have been present already at that time. However, it seems to be more likely that evolvement of clinical relevant
mucosal atrophy may be better described as late-term sequela of CC. As expected the number of intraepithelial lymphocytes (IELs) was
increased in all parts of the colon (Figure 3). Notably, in ulcerative colitis, Crohn's colitis and infectious colitis IELs are usually not
increased. However, a lymphocytic colitis-like pattern in Crohn's disease has been described and may precede the eventual diagnosis of
Crohn's disease . In our case the initial symptoms go back into the year 1998, i.e. a 12-year-follow-up. In three endoscopic and
histological examinations, the clinico-pathological features of Crohn's disease were not fulfilled, by this rendering the diagnosis of
Crohn's disease highly unlikely. In addition, we excluded other concurrent diseases associated with segmental mucosal atrophy, such as
ischemic colitis. Although not in the colon, advanced mucosal atrophy has been observed in the duodenum and ileum of patients with CC and
celiac disease . However, our patient's duodenal and ileal biopsies did not display any signs of mucosal atrophy. In addition, her serologic
tests for celiac disease were negative. A chance occurrence would be another explanation for the presence of mucosal atrophy with CC in our
patient. This type of bias is always relevant for case reports, especially if findings that display a high prevalence are reported in
patients with rare diseases. However, after excluding patients with inflammatory bowel disease, the population based prevalences of CC and
advanced mucosal atrophy of the proximal colon are comparatively low . Thus, the probability of a random coincidence of these entities seems
to be small, although not nil. Regarding the rather profound mucosal atrophy observed in our patient (Figure 1, 2008 endoscopical image and
histology), it is noteworthy to mention that additional more extensive damage of the colonic mucosa, such as ulcerations, have also been
described in CC patients. Some observations indicate a possible relationship with the concomitant use of medications, such as non-steroidal
anti-inflammatory drugs . However, our patient took neither nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs nor did she receive chemotherapy or drugs
postulated to be associated with CC or mucosal atrophy . Beside drug-induced aggravation of mucosal damage, several other observations
indicate a more profound impairment of the colonic wall integrity in some patients with CC. Rarely, sub-mucosal dissections have been
described probably alongside the collagen band, and Wickbom and colleagues reviewed a total of 12 patients with mucosal tears and CC .
Interestingly, in 10 patients, the mucosal lacerations involved the ascending or the transverse colon, the same exact segments that we
observed in the advanced mucosal atrophy in our patient. Considering that the histopathological abnormalities in CC are believed to be most
prevalent in the proximal colon and that the sigmoid colon and rectum may be spared in up to 73% of cases, it has been speculated, that the
integrity of the proximal colonic wall may be predominantly compromised owing to the extent of sub-mucosal collagen deposition . Although,
we were not able to identify any relation between the inflammatory cellular infiltrates and mucosal atrophy in the 2003 and 2008 specimens,
we have clearly demonstrated that the sub-epithelial collagen band thickening was consistently described to be maximal in rectal biopsies
from all three colonoscopies in our patient (Figure 2). This was corroborated by the morphometric re-analysis of the biopsies from 2003 and
2008 (Figure 3). Additionally, despite there being areas of less collagen band thickening for many years, the cecum and ascending colon were
the segments where we observed the maximum atrophy of the colonic mucosa (Figure 1 and 3). This mismatch does not support a direct
relationship between the extent of collagen deposition and the development of atrophy in our patient. Rather, our findings foster the
assumption, also shared by others , that at least sometimes additional luminal factors in combination with the collagen deposits probably
influence the activity of CC and thereby propagate mucosal atrophy and colonic wall friability in susceptible patients. Our observation
introduces the mucosal atrophy of the proximal colon as a novel candidate complication that may be associated with long-standing CC. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient to publish this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is
available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CC: collagenous colitis; BMI: body mass index; IELs: intraepithelial
lymphocytes The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MM wrote the pathology aspects of the manuscript, provided important
input for the interpretation of the histological findings and helped select the histologic specimens that were appropriate for presentation.
SW cared for the patient, performed the third colonoscopy, collected the clinical data and prepared the initial presentation of the case. BB
prepared the histologic samples and the histologic photographs in Figure 1 and provided important details about their interpretation. H-PF
supervised MM with regard to the pathological interpretation and provided fruitful input for the pathological sections of the discussion. CR
conducted the entire project, developed the concept and wrote the manuscript. All authors approved the final version of the manuscript. The
pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-230X/11/114/prepub The authors wish to
express their gratitude to Dr. Ronald Berndt from the pathology department in Ansbach, Germany for sending the histologic specimens from the
second colonoscopy.
