Both authors equally contributed to the paper Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation
Literature Search Funds Collection To describe Rituximab associated neutropenia (RAN), and to explore its underlying mechanism. We describe
three patients with RAN. The effect of patient’s plasma on colony forming unit, Granulocyte-Monocyte (CFU-GM) was measured by the addition
of plasma to the culture of a healthy bone-marrow. Repeated tests were performed after recovery of white count. In the leukopenic period the
patient’s plasma inhibited CFU growth completely. Control plasma did not have such an effect. Addition of patient’s cell supernatant to bone
marrow cells did not change the number of CFU. The same effect was demonstrated in normal control. After recovery the patient’s plasma did
not inhibit colony formation, similar to control. RAN is a clinically significant side effect. It may take place during treatment or several
months afterwards. Circulating antibodies in the plasma may be responsible for this unique BM toxicity. Rituximab is a genetically
engineered monoclonal antibody directed against the CD20 antigen found on the surface of both normal and malignant B lymphocytes. Its
possible mechanisms of cell lysis include complement dependent cytotoxicity and antibody-dependent cell mediated toxicity. It has been
wildly used in the treatment of B-lymphocytic malignancies that express CD20. The toxicity of rituximab is generally mild and transient; the
most common side effects are fever, hypotension and hypersensitivity reactions . Recently, awareness has grown regarding an unusual
complication of rituximab therapy, rituximab associated neutropenia (RAN). Reports of the incidence of this phenomenon were mostly derived
from series describing delayed RAN, ie RAN-occuring after completion of treatment with this agent. Most studies reported an incidence
ranging from 0.02% to 6% . A recent report suggested this event to be more frequent, with an incidence as high as 25% . The pathogenesis of
RAN is unknown, although some suggested that antibody-associated mechanisms play a role in this condition . We present three cases of
neutropenia related to rituximab therapy: One case occurred during rituximab treatment, and two patients presented with delayed onsent
neutropenia. We analyzed the serum of one of these patients, both during the neutropenia and afterwards, in an attempt to shed light on the
underlying mechanism of RAN. A 33 year old woman suffering from diffuse large B-cell mediastinal non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL) performed a
complete blood count (CBC) on a routine follow up 78 days after completing treatment of chemotherapy and Rituximab, and was in complete
clinical remission. Results revealed leukopenia of 800/mm3 and neutropenia of 100/mm3. Hemoglobin and thrombocytes levels were normal (12.4
gr/dL and 332,000/ml, respectively). Glucose, electrolytes, kidney and liver function tests were all within normal range. Serology for
Parvovirus B19 was negative. A subsequent CBC two days later was similar (Figure 1). A few hours later she developed fever of 40°C and was
admitted. The patient had previously received weekly chemotherapy according to the VACOB-P protocol, composed of intravenous
cyclophosphamide, adriamycin, vincristine, bleomycin, etoposide, prednisone, and rituximab. Neutropenia developed after each treatment cycle
and was consistent with the expected side effects of chemotherapy. The patient was treated with granulocyte colony stimulating factor
(G-CSF) after each cycle, and had normal CBC following termination of treatment (Figure 1). The last treatment with chemotherapy and
rituximab was given 78 days before the present neutropenia. Upon evaluation, BM biopsy demonstrated all three hematopoietic lines with a
left shift of the white line, no maturation of granulocytes, normal eosinophils, with average cellularity of 50% and no involvement by
lymphoma. Chest X-ray was normal. She received antibiotics and 300 μg/d G-CSF for 7 days and the neutrophil count increased to 7,900/mm3.
Follow up neutrophil level revealed persistent neutropenia. She received 300 μg/d G-CSF each time the neutrophil count decreased below
1500/mm3. Neutrophil levels at different time points are shown in Figure 1. The protracted neutropenia lasted five months and recovered
spontaneously. During this period she was hospitalized once more due to neutropenic fever and development of severe facial abscesses
infected by Pseudomonas aeruginosa. She was treated with antibiotics and G-CSF, with complete resolution of all signs and symptoms. This
patient is now well, in complete clinical remission for over two years. Blood was drawn from this patient for analysis when she was first
diagnosed with RAN, and two months after recovery. The results of this analysis are described separately (see “Plasma analysis from case
1”). A 37 year-old woman with mediastinal diffuse large B-cell NHL was admitted because of fever and neutropenia. She completed six courses
of chemotherapy and rituximab according to the R-CHOP protocol (rituximab 600 mg, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine and prednisone)
and radiation to the mediastinum (a total dose of 30 Gy, in fractions of 1.5 Gy), and was in complete clinical remission for the previous 3
months. Upon admission, laboratory results revealed leukopenia of 1,680/mm3 with a neutrophil count of 50/mm3. The hemoglobin level and
platelet count were unremarkable (11.7 g/dL and 229,000/mm3, respectively). Blood chemistry was unremarkable and chest X-ray was normal. BM
aspiration revealed myeloid cells in all stages of maturation, relatively few stab cells and abundant promyelocytes and myelocytes.
Erythropoiesis and megakaryogenesis appeared normal. BM biopsy showed no evidence of lymphoma. The patient was treated with 300 μg/d G-CSF
with a recovery of the leukocyte count and neutrophil count to 8,240/mm3 and 4,040/mm3, respectively, within four days. The patient’s follow
up was uneventful and she remains in complete remission with normal CBC for more than 12 months. A 57 year old woman suffering from diffuse
large B-cell NHL with BM involvement was admitted with neutropenic fever. She completed three out of six courses of chemotherapy and
rituximab according to the R-CHOP protocol. The previous courses were uneventful. Laboratory results revealed leukopenia of 770/mm3 with
neutrophil count of 0/mm3. The hemoglobin level and platelet count were 10.8 g/dL and 154,000/mm3, respectively, and blood chemistry was
normal too. BM biopsy revealed all three hematopoietic lines, absence of mature granulocytes, and no evidence of lymphoma. The patient was
treated with 300 μg/d G-CSF with recovery of the white count within three days. She continued to receive the same regimen of chemotherapy
but without rituximab, without any subsequent episodes of neutropenia. Her treatment resulted in complete clinical remission and her follow-
up was unremarkable, for more than 4 months. As described, the patient’s plasma and leukocytes were collected after diagnosis but before
treatment for leukopenia, and in the recovery period, when she was no longer treated with G-CSF. BM and plasma from a healthy donor were
used as a negative control. Heparinized blood from the patient (P) and a healthy donor (D) were centrifuged for 10 min, in 1500 RPM (round
per minute) at 4°C. Plasma was separated from the cells and saved at −70°C. Cells were hemolysed by the addition of RBC lysing buffer (8.33
g NH4Cl; 1g KHCO 3; 0.2ml 0.5M EDTA pure water added up to 1L; pH 7.4), and centrifuged for 10 min, at 2000 RPM, 4°C. Cell pellets
(leukocytes) (P) and (D) were washed twice with Dulbecco’s Phosphate Buffered Saline (PBS) and were resuspended (5×106 cells/ml) in RPMI
medium-1640 (Roswell Park Memorial Institute) with 5% Foetal Bovine Serum (FBS), (Beit Haemek cat.# 04-121-1A), supplemented with 2.5%
Phytohemagglutinin (PHA), (PHA-M Beit Haemek cat.# 12-006-1H) and incubated at 37°C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator for 72 hrs. Supernatant
was collected and stored at −70°C. Mononuclear cells from the bone morrow of a healthy donor were separated over Ficoll-Hypaque (Sigma cat.
# 1077-1) and washed twice with RPMI medium. Washed cells were plated in triplicate at a concentration of 2×105 cells in 0.5 ml
methylcellulose (Stem Cell Technologies MethoCult H4531 cat.# 04531) in 17 mm diameter wells (Nunc culture plates, cat.# 134673). The
patient’s plasma was added to 50 μl/well. The plasma of a healthy donor was used as a control. In order to investigate the effect of cell
secretion on the colony formation, the patient’s and healthy donor’s supernatants with and without PHA (see above), aliquots of 10 μl/well,
were added to triplicate wells containing methylcellulose with a final BM cell concentration of 105 per well. The cultures were incubated
for 14 days in a humidified incubator with 5% CO2, 37°C. Aggregates of >20 cells (colony forming unit – CFU) were scored as colonies, using
an inverted microscope (Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The tests were repeated three times. The same process was performed after the patient’s
recovery, when her WBC counts were normal. The effect of the patient’s plasma on CFU growth was measured by the addition of 50 μl plasma to
the culture of a healthy BM immersed in methylcellulose. In the leukopenic period (WBC 790/mm3), the patient’s plasma inhibited CFU growth
completely (0 colonies), whereas the addition of healthy plasma did not change the number of colonies grown spontaneously from a healthy BM
(125±4.3) (Figure 2). In order to investigate the role of cell secretion in CFU inhibition, the patient’s cells and donor’s cells were
incubated for 72 hours in the presence of 2.5% PHA. As a baseline (control), PHA supplemented medium was also incubated with the cells. The
addition of 10 μl/well of the supernatants to the methylcellulose culture of 105 per well BM cells, did not change the number of CFU, which
resembled their quantity in all cases: patient’s plasma, donor’s plasma and PHA (116±17, 114±12 and 115±5.2 CFU, respectively). This
observation suggests that the secretion of cells do not have any function in the inhibition of colony formation (Figure 3). Two months after
the spontaneous recovery of the patient’s white count, the test (see above) was repeated. Her serum did not inhibit colony formation. The
test results of the healthy donor and the patient were similar (Figure 2), (128±13 and 133±12.6 colonies, respectively). The patient’s PHA
supernatant (152±10.2) had the same effect as the donor’s (143±12.9), similar to the PHA colonies (160±16.4) (Figure 3). In this article we
presented three cases of grade 4 neutropenia associated with rituximab treatment for diffuse large B-cell NHL. One patient developed this
complication during treatment, while the two others developed it approximately three months after its completion; in one of these the
neutropenia lasted five months. We demonstrated that the plasma of one of our patients inhibited cellular growth of the white line of a
healthy bone marrow, while supernatant of cells from the patient did not have such effect. We therefore propose a humoral (immunoglobulin-
mediated) mechanism as the pathophysiology of this phenomenon. Previous cases of RAN have been reported. Whereas some authors described the
appearance of RAN during treatment , this phenomenon was usually reported after the completion of treatment, generally within 28 to 204 days
afterwards . The duration of RAN varies between four days and one year . In our patients, RAN started during treatment or three months after
its completion. It had both an acute clinical course, lasting several days (two patients), and a protracted course, lasting 5 months (one
patient). The largest study of RAN was reported by Nitta at al. They analyzed 24 out of 107 patients who received rituximab and developed
RAN, being the highest incidence ever reported. Contrary to our patients who developed neutropenic fever, none of their patients had serious
infections during the neutropenia. A multivariate analysis done suggested several risk factors for RAN: intensive chemotherapy, including
ablative therapy followed by hematopietic stem cell transplantation and high dose methotrexate-containing regimens . None of our patients
underwent stem cell transplantation, and the patient that did receive high dose methotrexate developed neutropenia before that treatment.
Similarly, other reports described RAN following standard regimens for lymphomas . The etiology of RAN is still obscure. A direct toxic
effect of rituximab on neutrophils is highly unlikely since the mean serum half-life of rituximab ranges from 31 to 407 hours, and therefore
a direct toxic phenomenon cannot explain RAN appearing three months after treatment . Furtheremore, granulocytes and uncommitted
hematopoietic precursors do not express CD20, and therefore should not be directly affected by rituximab. We tried to evaluate the mechanism
by which neutrophil precursors of one of our patients were inhibited and demonstrated that her plasma completely inhibited CFU growth of a
healthy BM. We also demonstrated that the supernatant of her leukocytes did not have such effect, similarly to supernatant of leukocytes
from a healthy donor. This suggests that the secretion of cells do not have a role in the inhibition of colony formation, implying a
mechanism of antibody-mediated toxicity. A similar mechanism was suggested by Voog et al. , in their study on eight patients with severe
RAN. They demonstrated IgG-type antibodies bound to the surface of neutrophils by immunofluorescence but no antibodies were found in the
serum by flow cytometry or granulocyte agglutination test. They hypothesized that rituximab treatment depleted the normal B-lymphocyte
populationt, which recovered within 3 to 9 months. During recovery, transient production of autoantibodies may occur, some of which may be
directed against neutrophils or hematopoietic precursors6. This hypothesis may explain delayed RAN, but fails to explain RAN occuring during
or shortly after the sessation of treatment. Another etiology was hypothesized by Otroc et al. , who described two patients with rituximab
induced acute thrombocytopenia. They suggested that the presence of CD20 antigen on platelets themselves or a soluble CD20 antigen in the
circulation may cause an antigen-antibody reaction and immune-mediated cell lysis . On the other hand Fukuno et al. , analyzed plasma and BM
of three patients with RAN and did not find circulating immune complexes nor anti-neutrophil antibodies . A different mechanism was
suggested by Terrier et al. , who assessed serum, peripheral blood and BM of a patient with neutropenia associated with rituximab for
Waldenstrom macroglobulinemia. They found lack of granulopoiesis in the BM with a high level of BAFF, a strong stimulator of B-cell
recovery. They hypothesized that the RAN is caused by competition by promotion of B-cell lymphopoiesis over granulopoiesis in the BM . In
summary, RAN may be more frequent and more clinically significant than previously thought. It may take place during treatment or several
months afterwards. Circulating antibodies in the plasma may be responsible for this unique BM toxicity. Once confirmed, such antibodies may
shed light on the exact mechanism by which rituximab induces its toxicities and more importantly, its therapeutic effects. Source of
support: Departmental sources Total leukocytes and the number of neutrophils. The patient no’ 1 blood count (CBC) showed variable number of
leukocytes and neutrophils in different periods of treatment. The number of these cells at the dates of blood count is shown. The arrows
show: 1: The last chemotherapy. 2: The last Rituximab. 3, 4,6: Patient’s plasma collection before Neopogen (G-CSF) administration. 4,5, 6,7:
Neopogen (G-CSF) administration. 8: Patient’s plasma collection after recovery. The effect of patient’s plasma (P plasma) on colony
formation (CFU-GM). The patient’s plasma (P plasma) during neutropenia and after recovery was tested on a healthy BM for GM colony
formation. The plasma of a healthy donor was used as control. The results are expressed as percent of control and mean of three independent
experiments, each of them performed in triplicate. D plasma: Donor’s plasma, P plasma: Patient’s plasma. The effect of patient’s cell
supernatant (s) on colony formation. The effects of patient’s mononuclear cells supernatant, induced by PHA at neutropenia and after
recovery, were tested on a healthy BM for (GM) colony formation. The cell supernatant of a healthy donor was used as control. The results
are expressed as percent of control and mean ±SD of three independent experiments, each of them performed in triplicate. Ps: Patients’s
cells supernatant, Ds: Donor’s cells supernatant, s: PHA supernatant (without cells).
