Classically presenting with multiple or single peripheral cytopenias of variable severity, the myelodysplastic syndromes may occasionally
present with bizarre manifestations that confuse the clinical picture and result in significant delays in making the correct diagnosis. We
describe the case of an elderly male patient whose presentation with prolonged unexplained fever coupled with cutaneous, pulmonary and other
systemic features of inflammation was finally diagnosed as having a primary myelodysplastic syndrome with associated vasculitis after a
delay of 4 years. Das klassische myelodysplastische Syndrom ist gekennzeichnet durch multiple oder vereinzelte Cytopenien verschiedener
Schweregrade. Das myelodysplastische Syndrom kann bisweilen abweichende Manifestationen aufweisen, die das klinische Erscheinungsbild
ungewöhnlich verändern und damit die Stellung der korrekten Diagnose wesentlich verzögern. Wir beschreiben den Fall eines älteren männlichen
Patienten, der mit langandauernden, unerklärlichen Fieberzuständen zusammen mit systemischen Entzündungserscheinungen auch an der Haut und
in der Lunge vorgestellt wurde. Nach 4 Jahren Verzögerung wurde die Diagnose eines primären myelodysplastischen Syndroms mit begleitender
Vasculitis gestellt. The myelodysplastic syndromes (MDS) comprise a heterogeneous group of pre-malignant marrow stem cell disorders
characterized by cellular dysplasia and ineffective erythropoieis associated with increased apoptotic cell death , . These syndromes may
arise de novo (primary) or occur years after exposure to potentially mutagenic therapy (secondary) e.g. after radiation exposure or
following cytotoxic chemotherapy . As well as presenting with cytopenias of various degrees (anemia, bleeding and infections), some patients
with the myelodysplastic syndromes have recently been shown to develop significant rheumatic and immunological manifestations , . We
describe a middle-aged man whose primary presenting features of an underlying myelodysplastic syndrome were related to widespread vasculitis
namely pyrexia of unknown origin, pneumonitis, bilateral pleural effusion, recurrent deep venous thrombosis, recurrent lobular panniculitis,
facial urticaria, and epididymo-orchitis. A 65 year old Caucasian male was admitted acutely complaining of generally feeling unwell with
fever, painful skin swellings over his arms and legs, headache and epigastric pains. He had a complex 4 years history when he presented with
intermittent fever and chills, arthralgia of large joints, painful skin nodules of arms and legs, dry cough, shortness of breath, redness of
his right eye, painful right testicle, anorexia and weight loss of two months duration. He denied oral or genital ulcers. Over the ensuing
two months he was extensively investigated to define the underlying disease. The main abnormalities on previous investigations were as
follows: Complete blood count: Hemoglobin 106 gram per litre, mean corpuscular volume (MCV) 97.5, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 134
mm/Hr, C-reactive protein (CRP) 135 mg/dl (normal less than 3.5). Normal total white blood cell (WBC) count and differential. Rouleoux, oval
macrocytes. Pseudo Pelger-Huet cells and occasional myelocytes on film. Platelet and reticulocyte counts were normal. Liver function test:
gamma-glutamyl transferase 172 (7–64 iu/l), alkaline phosphatase 399 (42–121 iu/l), albumin 16 (32–55 iu/l), bilirubin and alanine
aminotransferase normal. Urea 10.2 (3–6 mmol/l), creatinine137 (53–115 umol/l). Normal sodium and potassium. Immunoglobulin (IG) G level was
raised (polyclonal) 19.1 (8–18 gm/l). Normal IgM, IgA and IgE levels. Complete blood count: Hemoglobin 106 gram per litre, mean corpuscular
volume (MCV) 97.5, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 134 mm/Hr, C-reactive protein (CRP) 135 mg/dl (normal less than 3.5). Normal total
white blood cell (WBC) count and differential. Rouleoux, oval macrocytes. Pseudo Pelger-Huet cells and occasional myelocytes on film.
Platelet and reticulocyte counts were normal. Liver function test: gamma-glutamyl transferase 172 (7–64 iu/l), alkaline phosphatase 399
(42–121 iu/l), albumin 16 (32–55 iu/l), bilirubin and alanine aminotransferase normal. Urea 10.2 (3–6 mmol/l), creatinine137 (53–115
umol/l). Normal sodium and potassium. Immunoglobulin (IG) G level was raised (polyclonal) 19.1 (8–18 gm/l). Normal IgM, IgA and IgE levels.
Chest X-ray: Bilateral patchy basal consolidation and mild bilateral pleural effusions which were confirmed on computerized tomographic
scans. Ultrasound scan of scrotal sac showed changes consistent with epididymo-orchitis. CT scan of the abdomen: normal. The following
serological tests were done and found to be negative: Hepatitis B & C screen, HIV test, anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-DNA antibodies,
rheumatoid factor, anti-cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-cardiolipin antibodies, Coomb's test, ASO titre, cryoglobulins, Brucella serology,
complement levels, C1-esterase level. Other negative tests done for a possible infective agent: malaria film, Brucella culture, Mantoux
test, sputa for acid fast bacilli, leprosy nasal smears, urine microscopy. Two skin biopsies were taken: Sample 1: Summary of findings: Skin
showing extravasation of erythrocytes in the upper dermis. Deeper down there is a panniculitis, mainly of lobular type. The inflammation
consists of histiocytic cells, lymphocytes, and granulocytes. There is a large vessel with thickened muscular wall containing granulocytes
and lymphocytes. Picture of panniculitis with vasculitis. Sample 2: Summary of findings: Skin fragment shows rather normal epidermis. Upper
dermis shows extravasation of erythrocytes. Capillary blood vessels show sometimes thickened walls, containing leukocytes. Picture
consistent with leucocytoclastic vasculitis. Sample 1: Summary of findings: Skin showing extravasation of erythrocytes in the upper dermis.
Deeper down there is a panniculitis, mainly of lobular type. The inflammation consists of histiocytic cells, lymphocytes, and granulocytes.
There is a large vessel with thickened muscular wall containing granulocytes and lymphocytes. Picture of panniculitis with vasculitis.
Sample 2: Summary of findings: Skin fragment shows rather normal epidermis. Upper dermis shows extravasation of erythrocytes. Capillary
blood vessels show sometimes thickened walls, containing leukocytes. Picture consistent with leucocytoclastic vasculitis. Other biopsies
taken and found to be negative/normal were: Bilateral temporal artery biopsies Conjuctival biopsy Liver biopsy Bronchoscopy and
bronchoscopic samples Bilateral temporal artery biopsies Conjuctival biopsy Liver biopsy Bronchoscopy and bronchoscopic samples Bone marrow
aspirate/biopsy: Unsuccessful initial attempt. Patient declined a repeat. The patient was empirically treated with broad spectrum
antibiotics, anti-malarial therapy followed by treatment for tuberculosis and brucellosis, without improvement. Treatment with oral
prednisolone 60 mg a day resulted in prompt improvement in his well-being, subsidence of his fever and normalization of his ESR. Over the
subsequent years, he was maintained on prednisolone therapy. However, it became apparent that reducing his prednisolone dose or non-
compliance on the patient’s part resulted in the prompt recurrence of his painful nodular skin lesions, fever, arthralgia, urticarial facial
swellings, lung infiltrates (pneumonitis), and increase in both C-reactive protein and ESR (above 100 mm/hr). His general condition usually
worsened during these episodes, resulting in frequent hospital admissions. Unfortunately, high dose prednisolone led to the development of
diabetes mellitus which necessitated using oral hypoglycemic agents. A brief trial of azathioprine as a steroid-sparing agent worsened his
anemia and it was discontinued. Bone marrow examination at another hospital showed myelodysplasia but with no cytogenetic abnormalities.
Over the years, in addition to myelodysplasia, he was given various diagnoses including Behcet's disease, anti-phospholipid syndrome, and
pyrexia of unknown origin responsive to steroids. These included warfarin for two previous confirmed episodes of deep venous thrombosis
(left leg and right leg), glibenclamide for diabetes mellitus and prednisolone 10 mg per day. He looked ill and pale. He had an urticarial
right peri-orbital swelling as well as several tender 0.5–1.0 cm subcutaneous nodules felt over the extensor and flexor surfaces of both
upper and lower limbs. There was no lymph node enlargement and no oral, respiratory, cardiovascular, abdominal, neurological,
musculoskeletal or genital abnormalities. Hemoglobin 9.1, MCV 101.3, WBC 9.9, platelets 152, ESR 133, CRP 103, international normalized
ratio (INR) 3.1. Renal and liver function and urinalysis were normal. Chest X-ray – normal. Electrocardiogram – normal. The patient was
given intravenous hydrocortisone 100 mg three times a day with a quick resolution of his symptoms and disappearance of his painful skin
swellings. Within few weeks his ESR dropped to 33 mm/hr. On reducing his steroid dose to 10 mg per day of prednisolone, his facial urticaria
recurred and he developed a left sided pleuritic chest pain. A chest radiograph confirmed a new left basal infiltrate and an associated
small effusion. These again promptly resolved (within 48 hours) on increasing his steroid dose. Cyclosporin was then added as a possible
steroid-sparing agent. A repeat bone marrow examination was performed. Salient features of bone marrow aspirate: multilineage dysplasia
involving the granulocytic, erythroid and megakaryocytic cell lines. Erythroid dysplastic features including: increased mitosis, nuclear
lobulation and extensive vacuolation. Myeloid dysplastic features were found in at least 19% of the precursors. These features included
pseudo Pelger-Huet anomaly, misshapen nuclei and increased vacuolation. Blasts made up about 2% of all nucleated cells. Normal amounts of
stainable iron were present with normal numbers of sideroblasts. Pathologically ringed sideroblasts were not present. Salient features of
bone marrow core biopsy: Pronounced hypercellularity (98–100%). The tri-lineage dysplasia was confirmed; the presence of
micromegakaryocytes, the megalobastoid erythropoiesis and the presence of numerous mitotic figures. Especially noteworthy was the abnormal
localization of immature myeloid precursors (ALIP). Lymphocytes and plasma cells were normal. Reticulin fibrosis was mildly increased and
thinned-out bony trabeculae confirmed osteoporosis. Abnormal non-haemopoietic cells and/or granulomata were not present. The bone marrow
findings were consistent with a myelodysplastic syndrome best classified as Refractory Cyctopenia with Multilineage Dysplasia (RCMD) The
presence of ALIP is a negative prognostic feature although the low number of myeloblasts is prognostically favourable . Cytogenetic studies
were not available and this seriously hampered further characterization and prognostication in this patient. A primary myelodysplastic
syndrome is favoured over myelodysplasia secondary to azathioprine because dysplastic features preceded azathioprine exposure. We based our
conclusion on the presence of abnormal oval macrocytic red cells, persistent and worsening anemia and recurrent thrombocytopenia (counts as
low as 67,000/cmm were documented with no clear precipitant); abnormalities that were evident on his serial blood counts even before the
azathioprine trial. The patient has been very healthy prior to his presentation and denied exposure to any chemicals or cytotoxic drugs.
Presumably he suffers from a “benign” form of primary myelodysplasia considering that he has had it for more than four years so far and has
still not developed any life threatening cytopenia. Cytogenetic analysis of the bone marrow would have been helpful to support a primary
myelodysplastic syndrome by confirming the absence of multiple and/or complex cytogenetic abnormalities . Although not all patients with MDS
will exhibit genetic abnormalities, three types of gene mutations are noted in this illness : (1) tyrosine kinase–RAS/BRAF signal
transduction pathway genes activating mutations, leading to increased cell proliferation (Class I mutations); (2) hematopoietic
transcription factors genes inactivating mutations resulting in disturbed cell differentiation (Class II mutations); and (3) inactivating
mutations of the tumor suppressor gene p53. These mutations are associated with complex balanced or unbalanced chromosomal material
deletion, gain or translocation and are an essential component in disease pathogenesis, classification and therapy , . Patients with de novo
MDS in contrast to therapy-related MDS are more likely to have a normal karyotype (50–60% versus 5–10%) and less likely to have unbalanced
chromosome 5 or 7 aberrations (15–25% versus 50–70%) . The protean nature of this patient’s signs and symptoms coupled with the complex
clinical history made it difficult to find a unifying underlying diagnosis. Myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) is that underlying pathology to
explain the immunological steroid-responsive disease in this patient. The association between MDS and clinical immune dysfunction is well
recognized , . Our patient showed a relapsing-remitting disease pattern typical of autoimmune disease particularly on tapering down his
immunosuppressive therapy. Multiple organ systems were involved including skin, lung parenchyma and serous cavities. In a series of 221
cases, 30 patients (14 percent) experienced autoimmune phenomenon of whom 7 patients had an acute systemic illness with fever, cutaneous
vasculitis, arthritis and pulmonary infiltrate – a syndrome similar to that of our patient. Other autoimmune associations of the
myelodysplastic syndrome include pericarditis, pleural effusions, skin ulcerations, iritis, myositis, glomerulonephritis and peripheral
neuropathy. Furthermore specific autoimmune diseases have also been reported including relapsing polychondritis, polymyalgia rheumatica,
Raynaud phenomenon and Sjögren's syndrome, inflammatory bowel disease, pyoderma gangrenosum and Sweet's syndrome , , . The pathophysiology
of these autoimmune phenomena is not well understood. Organ specific as well as immune-complexes and generic auto-antibodies (apart from
antinuclear antibodies in a minority of patients) are classically undetectable . A broad disturbance of self-recognition mechanisms seems to
be a general feature of patients with MDS . A deficiency in the regulation of self-reactivity may thus contribute to the disease
pathogenesis . Fortunately, these so-called paraneoplastic autoimmune complications mostly respond to immunosuppressive agents (steroids,
cyclosporin) with the occasionally non-responsive syndromes contributing to early patient mortality , , . The management of the
myelodysplastic syndrome is otherwise supportive with transfusions with packed red blood cells and platelets, as needed, and antibiotics for
infective complications. However, newer approaches such as growth factor therapy (recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor
(G-CSF), recombinant human granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF), and recombinant human erythropoietin-EPO),
interleukin-11 therapy, thalidomide, tumour necrosis factor inhibitors (infliximab), cytotoxic agents (for blastic/acute myeloid leukaemia
transformation) and bone marrow transplantation may be tried in selected patients , , , , . In the myelodysplastic syndrome, DNA methylation
curtails suppressor genes (p53 tumour suppressor gene) activity and increase the risk for acute myeloid leukaemia transformation. Use of
powerful DNA hypomethylating pyrimidine analogue azacytidine and other recently FDA approved agent, decitabine, may reduce hypermethylation
and induce re-expression of key tumor suppressor genes in myelodysplastic syndrome thus improving the long-term prognosis . The authors
declare that they have no competing interests.
