In this article, we present our experience with a piezoelectric-assisted surgical device by resection of a benign fibrous histiocytoma of
the mandible. A 41 year-old male was admitted to our hospital because of slowly progressive right buccal swelling. After further
radiographic diagnosis surgical removal of the yellowish-white mass was performed. Histologic analysis showed proliferating histiocytic
cells with foamy, granular cytoplasm and no signs of malignancy. The tumor was positive for CD68 and vimentin in immunohistochemical
staining. Therefore the tumor was diagnosed as primary benign fibrous histiocytoma. This work provides a new treatment device for benign
mandibular tumour disease. By using a novel piezoelectric-assisted cutting device, protection of the dentoalveolar nerve could be achieved.
According to the WHO histological classification of tumors, primary benign fibrous histiocytoma (BFH) of bone is defined as a benign lesion
composed of spindle-shaped fibroblasts, arranged in a storiform pattern, with a variable admixture of small, multinucleated osteoclast-like
giant cells. Foamy cells (xanthoma), chronic inflammatory cells, stromal haemorrhages and haemosiderin pigment are also commonly present .
According to this classification, there are less than 100 reported cases of BFH worldwide and only six reported cases in the mandible . It
is usually found in long bones, especially femur and tibia, and the pelvic bone, but may occur in virtually any bone. However, the precise
removal especially in close vicinity to nerval structures is challenging. In our case resection of a mandibular tumor by preventing injury
to the dentoalveolar nerve is difficult. The presented case enlarges the indications for the use of ultrasonic devices in tumor surgery and
thus emphasizes the beneficial effects of this technique in bone cutting close to nerval structures. A 41-year old Caucasian man was
referred to our clinic for evaluation of a slowly progressive swelling of his right mandible. A panoramic radiograph (Figure 1) showed a
well-demarcated multilocular radiolucent lesion with a reactive hyperostotic border in the right mandibular molar region. No other symptoms
had been noted before. Preoperative panoramic radiograph. A computed tomography (CT) scan was obtained, which showed a heterogeneous soft-
tissue mass (Figure 2). There was vertical expansion more prominent of the lingual side with thinning of the cortex and two small spots of
cortical destruction. No lymph node involvement was observed. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan was performed to exclude the presence
of a haemangioma prior to osseous biopsy (Figure 2). Preoperative CT and MRI scans showing the heterogeneous lesion in the right mandible
with no vascular signs. Histopathological examination (Figure 3, 4) and immunohistochemical staining (Figure 5, 6) confirmed the diagnosis
of primary benign fibrous histiocytoma. Histopathological examination of the obtained tissue showing spindle-shaped fibroblasts, arranged in
a storiform pattern (hematoxylin-eosin-staining, magnification 25×). While in other parts of the specimen proliferating histiocytic cells
with foamy, granular cytoplasm and no signs of malignancy dominate (hematoxylin-eosin-staining, magnification 100×). Immunohistochemical
staining positive for CD68 (magnification 100×). mmunohistochemival staininga also positive for vimentin (magnification 100×), and negative
for sm-actin, desmin, cytokeratin, S-100 protein or CD-56. The patient was treated definitely via an extraoral submandibular approach
(Figure 7). Simple cyst-like excochleation of the tumor in one piece was not possible due to different consistencies of the lesion. Rubber-
like soft tissue parts of the tumor could be removed by curettage and excision, while bone-like hard tissue parts had to be removed using a
bone drill. To prevent any nerve damage, bone-like hard tissue parts in the vicinity of the dentoalveolar nerve were removed exclusively by
using the piezoelectric device (Figure 8). Despite the cortical destruction of lingual and buccal bone, the surrounding tissue was not
affected. The lower rim of the right mandible could be preserved, stabilized with a osteosynthesis plate for fracture prevention. In order
to achieve complete resection of the tumor, the teeth 46 and 47 were extracted and neurolysis of the inferior alveolar nerve was performed
(Figure 9). Intraoperative image of the original mandible. Intraoperative image showing the removal of the bone with the piezosurgery
device. Intraoperative image after removal of the tumor. The neurological analysis was performed bilaterally. It was used to evaluate nerve
dysfunctions. The skin of the mental region, upper and lower lip were checked using a cotton test for touch sensation, a pinprick test using
a needle for sharp pain and a blunt instrument for testing pressure. Additionally, a two point discrimination test was executed on these
regions. The same procedure was accomplished for the lower lip and the mental nerve skin region. The results were recorded on a score that
ranges between 0 and 13, with 13 being the worst neurological score. The neurological score was assessed at 4 points in time: on the 1st (T1
= 9), the 10th (T2 = 7), the 22nd (T3 = 3), the 184th (T4 = 1) postoperative day. Piezosurgery® (Mectron®-Germany, Cologne, Germany) is an
ultrasound device introduced in medical practice in 1988 for different procedures in application to hard tissues, including periodontal
surgery, periapical surgery, the removal of impacted teeth, implant surgery for facilitating bone ridge expansion or in bone regeneration
techniques, inferior dental nerve lateralization and transpositioning. Furthermore ultrasound has lately been used for osteotomies as well
as for dental implant bone preparation and thus presents an additional option for cutting bone beside the classic osteotomy techniques using
rotating burs or oscillating saws . With this new option, the bone is cut almost without pressure through piezoelectrically induced
oscillations. Micro-movements of 60-200 μm ensure that only the mineralized hard tissue is cut. The frequency of the oscillations applied in
osteotomies lies between 22 and 29 kHz. This makes it possible to reliably prevent damage to soft tissue and nerve tissue during an
osteotomy . Trauma to these types of tissue is only likely to occur at frequencies of 50 kHz or more . A primary benign fibrous histiocytoma
in the mandible is extremely rare with only six reported cases in the literature . The etiology of BFH is not yet clear. It may be a
neoplasm consisting of fibroblasts and histiocytic-like cells or a regression phenomenon of giant cells tumors . BFH is mainly found in the
pelvic bone, femur and tibia. Patients often report a history of pain or swelling over a long period of time, sometimes years. A sclerotic
rim around the osteolytic defect is common . The histologic appearance of BFH is identical to non-ossifying fibroma, making a clinical
radiographic evaluation indispensable. The non-ossifying fibroma typically occurs during growth. BFH on the other hand is found in older
patients, presenting with swelling or pain but usually no presence of complicating fractures. Non-ossifying fibroma is limited to the
metaphysis of mainly the lower extremities, whereas BFH is found in the epi- or diaphysis or in flat bones . To distinguish BFH from giant
cell tumors can be challenging. On the one hand giant cells can be numerous in BFH, even if the mononuclear cell component is more spindled
and associated with collagen formation . On the other hand focal or extended fibrous tissue with lipid-bearing histiocytes can be found in
giant cell tumor specimens . It was suggested to differentiate the two diseases radiologically due to the fact that most giant cell tumors
are very much vascularized. The presence of a sclerotic rim in BFH could also be used to differentiate these two diseases . One of the
microscopic features is the presence of lipid-bearing histiocytes - also called xanthoma cells - sometimes dominating the histological
picture in BFH. As there are at least three reports of xanthomatous lesions in the mandible , a comparison with BFH seems reasonable.
Xanthomas of the bone are tumor-like accumulations of lipid-bearing histiocytes, either in combination with hyperlipoproteinemia or as part
of other lesions like BFH. Xanthomas are no tumorous proliferation of any cellular element of the bone . Therefore it is not listed in the
WHO histological classification of bone tumors . Radiographically, xanthomas lack a sclerotic rim. In contrast to BFH, extension into the
adjacent soft tissue is reported in xanthomas . In our case no extension in the surrounding soft tissue was detected, although there was
cortical disruption at the lingual and buccal bulging. The prognosis for BFH seems to be excellent with almost no recurrence after complete
surgical resection. Due to the dominance of the bone mass close to the dentoalveolar nerve, the piezoelectric unit was a usefull tool to
prevent nerve injury. Ultrasonic waves are used in oral and maxillofacial surgery for various diagnostic and therapeutic procedures. They
are applied in diagnostics, endodontics, the removal of calculus from the teeth and, most recently, osteotomies . Depending on the
indication, the oscillation amplitude and frequency vary in accordance with the power transmitted to the tissue. Special presets are
indicated for bone cutting procedures. In the presented case the neurological scores from T1 to T4 demonstrate no dental nerve injury. No
damage to the nerve was detectable even though direct contact of the working tip with the alveolar nerve was to be assumed. This is in line
with experimental in vitro studies where no damage even in direct contact to the nerve was analyzed . Follow-up examinations were obtained 3
and 6 months after surgery with no clinical and radiological evidence of recurrence (Figure 10). Postoperative CBCT showing the defect and
the titanium plate. The purpose of the present article was to show the advantages of the piezoelectric-assisted surgical removal of a rare
benign fibrous histiocytoma of the mandible and give a precise description of the experience with protecting dentoalveolar nerve. BFH must
be distinguished from non-ossifying fibroma or giant cell tumors by clinical appearance as well as histopathological appearance. As far as
we know, the prognosis of BFH seems to be excellent after complete removal. There is a therapeutical potential and benefit of the
Piezoelectric-assisted surgical saw in dentoalveolar surgery. Piezosurgery® vibrates with a modulated ultrasonic frequency. Because the
vibration frequency of Piezosurgery is optimal for mineralized tissue it does not cut soft tissue and therefore provides a technique for
osteotomy to remove bony mass of the mandible and prevent anatomic soft tissue injuries like dentoalveolar nerve even in rare and
complicated cases like this. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MW and MR contributed equally to this work. MW, MR,
WT, HK, AME and NCG conceived of the study and participated in its design and coordination. MW and MR drafted the manuscript. AME and NCG
were involved in revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. The article processing charges are funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG), "Open Access Publizieren".
