Haemangiopericytoma is a rare soft tissue tumour, with great histological variability and unpredictable clinical and biological behaviour.
The precise cell type origin is uncertain. One third of haemangiopericytomas occur in the head and neck area, but only a few cases have been
reported regarding localization at the parapharyngeal space. Herewith, case is presented of a 54-year-old female, referred to our Department
due to a parapharyngeal space tumour with non-specific imaging characteristics. The patient underwent radical excision of the tumour with a
trans-cervical sub-mandibular approach. The histolopathologic examination revealed a neoplasm with the characteristic features of
haemangiopericytoma. One year later, during the scheduled follow-up, the computerized tomography scan showed no evidence of recurrence or
residual disease. The pre-operative evaluation of a haemangiopericytoma must include a thorough imaging evaluation with computerized
tomography and magnetic resonance imaging, even if results may not be specific for haemangiopericytoma. Angiography and pre-operative
embolization may be performed in cases of large tumours with significant vascularity. The treatment of choice is radical excision. The
follow-up includes clinical evaluation every 6 months and annual magnetic resonance imaging for at least 3 years. L'emangiopericitoma è un
raro tumore delle parti molli di origine cellulare incerta, con alta variabilità istologica ed un comportamento clinico e biologico
imprevedibile. Solamente un terzo dei casi esordisce nella regione cervico-facciale, mentre solo pochi casi sono stati riportati per quanto
riguarda la localizzazione nello spazio parafaringeo. Presentiamo il caso di una paziente di 54 anni che è stata riferita al nostro
Dipartimento con un tumore vascolare dello spazio parafaringeo di dimensioni 3,5 × 2,8 × 3 cm. Le caratteristiche fornite dalla diagnostica
per immagini del tumore non erano specifiche. La paziente è stata sottoposta alla completa e radicale escissione del tumore tramite un
approccio transcervicale-sottomandibolare. L'esame istopatologico ha rivelato una neoplasia con le caratteristiche dell'emangiopericitoma.
Un anno dopo l'intervento, il follow-up effettuato con tomografia computerizzata ha dimostrato l'assenza di malattia ricorrente o residua.
La valutazione preoperatoria dell'emangiopericitoma deve includere una dettagliata valutazione con diagnostica per immagini (tomografia
computerizzata e risonanza magnetica), anche se i risultati possono non essere specifici. L'angiografia e l'embolizzazione preoperatoria
possono essere eseguiti in casi di grossi tumori altamente vascolari. Il trattamento di elezione è l'asportazione radicale. Il follow-up
comprende una valutazione clinica ogni 6 mesi e l'esecuzione di una risonanza magnetica annuale almeno per 3 anni. Haemangiopericytoma (HPC)
is a rare soft tissue tumour, which was first described, in 1942, by Stout and Murray 1 2 and was thought to originate from the pericyte, a
specific cell type which surrounds the capillary vessels. However, the variable immunohistochemical profile of this tumour and its
overlapping features with solitary fibrous tumours, created the belief that these two tumours are the two ends of one process, the origin of
which is still unclear, according to WHO endorsement. Despite the dispute, some investigators believe that HPCs arise from pluri-potential
peri-vascular cells 3. Approximately one-third of all HPCs occur in the head and neck 4 and, according to the literature, only a few cases
of HPCs, in the parapharyngeal space, have been described 5 6. HPCs are classified as benign, borderline, and malignant, depending on their
histopathologic (mitotic activity, cellularity, and nuclear atypia) and clinical features (necrosis and tumour size) 7 8. However, histo-
pathological distinction between benign and malignant HPCs may be difficult. Furthermore, the biological behaviour of these neoplasms is
rather peculiar, as benign-looking, non-mitotic HPCs have been reported to metastasize. Given the high variability and the unpredictable
pattern of the clinical and biological behaviour of HPCs, the treatment of choice is radical surgical excision. A 54-year-old female was
referred to our Department from a Hospital of a neighbouring country with the diagnosis of a para-pharyngeal space tumour. The presence of
the tumour had been detected 2 years previously in a CT scan, during the investigation of chronic headaches from which the patient suffered.
It was located at the para-pharyngeal space and, according to the patient, the tumour had grown in size during the last 2 years. Six months
before the patient's admission to our Department, an incisional biopsy was attempted, in a hospital, in her country, but the operation was
not completed due to severe bleeding. The clinical examination revealed a neck mass behind the angle of the left mandible, which caused
significant displacement of the soft palate and the left tonsillar and peritonsillar region towards the midline. Upon palpation, the mass
was fixed, soft, painless and non pulsatile. Except for a retracting scar, at the site of the attempted biopsy, the rest of the clinical
examination was normal. The MRI revealed an ovoid, well-defined tumour in the left parapharyngeal space 3.5 × 2.8 × 3 cm in size, which
compressed and narrowed the oropharyngeal opening. The tumour showed low signal intensity, on T1 sequences, mild dyshomogeneous
hyperintensity on T2 sequences, inhomogenous low diffusivity, on diffusion weighted images (Fig. 1), as well as intense enhancement after
intravenous Gadolinium administration (Fig. 2). The mass also compressed the adjacent pterygoid muscles, but no evidence of an anatomic
relationship with the major vascular branches of the neck was detected. MRI revealed an ovoid, well-defined mass in the left parapharyngeal
space with mild inhomogeneous hyperintensity on T2 sequences (A), low signal intensity on T1 sequences (B) and inhomogeneous low diffusivity
on diffusion weighted images (C) and ADC map (D). The tumour compressed and narrowed the oropharyngeal opening, characterized by intense
enhancement after intravenous Gadolinium administration (A, B), implying high vascularization. The imaging characteristics of the tumour
were non-specific. The differential diagnosis included highly vascularized parapharyngeal space masses, like mesenchymal tumours
(angiosarcoma, leiomyosarcoma) or neurinogen tumours. After a thorough pre-operative evaluation, the patient underwent complete excision of
the tumour, via a transcervical- submandibular approach. A lateral neck incision was made just medially to the anterior margin of the
sternocleidomastoid muscle, which was extended to the level of the left parotid gland. Then, an anterior dislocation of the mandible through
stylo-mandibular tenotomy was performed, in order to provide sufficient exposure and ensure an adequate surgical field and the mass was
removed to the level of the pharyngeal musculature. Particular concern was focused on the site of the attempted biopsy, as the post-
traumatic fibrosis and adhesions made the excision particularly difficult. After haemostasis, a Penrose drainage was placed and suture
closure was performed. The post-operative recovery was uneventful and the Penrose drainage was removed on the 2nd post-operative day. The
patient was finally dismissed on the 4th post-operative day. The histolopathologic examination revealed a neoplasm with the
histolopathological and immunohistochemical features of HPC, consisting of spindle and ovoid cells with mild nuclear atypia and low mitotic
rate (up to 1 mitosis/ 10 H PF). The neoplastic cells showed extensive reactivity for CD34 and bcl2 and they were negative for SMA, S100,
chromogranin and synaptophicine (Figs. 3, 4). As the tumour was removed in pieces, due to the presence of adhesions and particular
friability of the mass, evaluation of the surgical margins was not possible. Microscopic view of haemangiopericytoma showing a circumscribed
lesion, with the characteristic vascular pattern and a partial "staghorn" configuration and spindle cell areas. (H&E, X 20) High power view
of the spindle cell areas. The spindle cells show no atypia, mitosis or necrosis. (H&E, X 400). The spindle cells express cytoplasmic
positivity in CD34 (immunohistochemistry, X 400). One year later, during scheduled follow-up, the CT scan showed no evidence of recurrence
or residual disease (Fig. 5). CT scan performed one year after the operation. No evidence of recurrence. A wide variety of benign and
malignant tumours can occur in the parapharyngeal space. The management of a patient with such a tumour, represents a challenge for the Head
and Neck Surgeon. HPC is a neoplasm of uncertain cell type origin. It is an uncommon spindle cell tumour, constituting 2.5% of soft tissue
neoplasms and occurs primarily in adult life (median age 45 yrs, with peak prevalence in the sixth to seventh decade of life), appearing
with an equal sex distribution 9-11. It is frequently aggressive and has a tendency to recur and metastasize. Approximately one-third of all
HPCs occur in the head and neck. Primary parapharyngeal space HPCs are very rare neoplasms and, according to the international literature,
only a few cases have been reported, with some of them referring to tumours that invade the parapharyngeal space from other sites of the
head and the neck 12. A painless mass is the most common presentation of head and neck HPCs. The clinical behaviour varies depending on the
different grading of each case. The diagnosis cannot be made on the basis of clinical and gross morphologic characteristics. Definitive
diagnosis of HPC is provided by the accurate histopathologic assessment, which determines the accurate management and prognosis 13. The
prediction of the clinical behaviour of HPC is not always clear and does not always correlate with the histolopathologic features of the
tumour. Strict universal histopathologic criteria, for malignancy, have not been identified and vary between different studies. Generally,
large size (> 5 cm), increased mitotic rate (> 4 mitosis/10 H PF), with the presence of atypical mitosis, high cellularity, pleomorphic
tumour cells and foci of haemorrhage and necrosis predict a highly malignant course 8 13. The correct pre-operative imaging evaluation of
HPCs is of great importance for scheduling the surgical plan. The tumour usually appears as a solid mass, hypodense on CT and isointense on
T1-weighted images on MRI. On T2- weighted images, the tumour shows equal or lower signal intensity compared with the surrounding
structures, although, in some cases, hyperintense signals have been described 14. Due to better contrast resolution, MRI is superior
compared to CT in demonstrating the morphological characteristics of these tumours, as well as their extension to the contiguous anatomical
structures, especially at the base of the skull. In these highly vascularized tumours, vessels could also be seen as signal voids, on MRI,
but not on CT. Although MRI is essential for accurate surgical planning and should be referred as the "gold standard", the imaging
characteristics of the HPCs may be non-specific, demanding a differential diagnosis from other types of vascular or non-vascular tumours,
especially those with prominent vascularization, such as juvenile haemangioma, glomus tumour, angiosarcoma, leiomyoma, leiomyosarcoma,
schwannoma, mesothelioma, liposarcoma, benign and malignant histiocytoma, synovial sarcoma, chondrosarcoma, neuroblastoma, adenoid cystic
carcinoma and mixed cell tumour 15 16. Conventional angiography may be helpful for pre-operative differential diagnosis and is useful for
the possibility of pre-operative embolization 5 17, which has been suggested as an option for decreasing tumour vascularity and size.
Moreover, some Authors use routine angiography and peri-operative embolization in order to reduce intra-operative haemorrhage 18. In our
patient, there was no need for such a procedure due to the small size of the tumour. Although histopathology of HPCs has been well
documented, fine-needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) findings have rarely been described in the literature 19-21. A primary diagnosis of HPC is
difficult to make with the use of FNAB. Cytologic analysis may allow the diagnosis of a recurrent or metastatic HPC 20. In our Department,
we do not advise incisional biopsy for tumours with considerable vascularity, due to the fear of bleeding and consequent fibrosis.
Furthermore, we do not use FNAB because, these tumours will eventually be treated surgically, regardless of the pre-operative cytologic
findings. FNAB may be particularly helpful in cases in which the suspicion of harbouring a malignancy is high. The treatment of choice is
radical excision of the HPC with a sufficient cuff of healthy tissue. Unfortunately, this is not always possible for para-pharyneal space
tumours, making the need of adequate exposure mandatory, which is accomplished by stylo-mandibular tenotomy. Adjuvant radiotherapy and
chemotherapy may be employed, although the literature is not quite clear about their results. HPCs are considered to be relatively resistant
to radiotherapy. Radiotherapy is reserved only as adjuvant therapy in cases of incompletely excised lesions, recurrent tumours, and tumours
with high-grade histopathologic features. Although chemotherapy may have a role in the treatment of distant metastatic disease, its role in
the primary treatment remains to be clearly defined. Vincristine, Adriamycin, and Cyclophosphamide have all been used with variable success
in cases of aggressive HPCs (8Y10). Some additional reports show that the use of interferon may be of benefit in patients with pulmonary HPC
metastases 22. HPC appears to present a survival rate that may vary from an overall 10-year rate of 70% 8 to a considerably reduced 10-year
survival rate in cases of > 4 mitosis/10 H PF (9%) or necrosis (29%) or tumour size > 6.5 cm (63%) 9. Some studies report local recurrence
rates as high as 40%, with metastatic disease in 15% of the cases 23 reported to have a latency period which varies from 63 to 107 months
24. No clear consensus, regarding the follow-up planning, seems to exist. In our case, we propose clinical evaluation every 6 months and an
annual imaging study for at least 3 years. In our case, the patient performed a CT scan 1 year after the operation with no evidence of
recurrence or residual disease Haemangiopericytoma is a rare soft tissue tumour of uncertain cell type origin, with high histological
variability and unpredictable clinical and biological behaviour. One third of HPCs occur in the head and the neck and only a few cases have
been reported regarding localization in the parapharyngeal space. Pre-operative evaluation must include a thorough imaging evaluation (CT
and MRI scan), even if the results may not be specific for haemangiopericytoma. Angiography and pre-operative embolization may be performed
in large tumours with significant vascularity, in order to decrease the size and vascularity of the tumour. The treatment of choice is
radical excision, and the follow- up we propose includes clinical evaluation every 6 months and an annual MRI for at least 3 years.
Incisional biopsy and pre-operative FNAB is not routinely used in our Department, due to the high incidence of bleeding and fibrosis and
because, regardless of the histo-pathological pattern, total excision will eventually be performed. FNAB is advised when high suspicion of
malignancy exists.
