Natalizumab is an approved medication for highly active multiple sclerosis (MS). Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) may occur
as a severe side effect of this drug. Here, we describe pathological and radiological characteristics of immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome (IRIS), which occurs in natalizumab-associated PML after the cessation of therapy, and we differentiate it from ongoing PML. Brain
biopsy tissue and MRI scans from five MS patients with natalizumab-associated PML were analyzed and their histology compared with non-MS
PML. Histology showed an extensive CD8-dominated T cell infiltrate and numerous macrophages within lesions, and in nondemyelinated white and
grey matter, in four out of five cases. Few or no virally infected cells were found. This was indicative of IRIS as known from HIV patients
with PML. Outstandingly high numbers of plasma cells were present as compared to non-MS PML and typical MS lesions. MRI was compatible with
IRIS, revealing enlarging lesions with a band-like or speckled contrast enhancement either at the lesion edge or within lesions. Only the
fifth patient showed typical PML pathology, with low inflammation and high numbers of virally infected cells. This patient showed a similar
interval between drug withdrawal and biopsy (3.5 months) to the rest of the cohort (range 2.5–4 months). MRI could not differentiate between
PML-associated IRIS and ongoing PML. We describe in detail the histopathology of IRIS in natalizumab-associated PML. PML–IRIS, ongoing PML
infection, and MS exacerbation may be impossible to discern clinically alone. MRI may provide some clues for distinguishing different
pathologies that can be differentiated histologically. In our individual cases, biopsy helped to clarify diagnoses in natalizumab-associated
PML. Natalizumab is a humanized anti-alpha4-integrin antibody. Binding of the antibody on T cells, B cells, and monocytes inhibits the entry
of inflammatory cells into the brain . In phase III studies, natalizumab has been shown to significantly reduce the relapse rate as well as
disability progression, and was approved as therapy for active relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis (MS) . However, so far, 170 cases
(June 2011) of therapy-associated progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML) have been documented . PML is an opportunistic viral
brain disease caused by a reactivation of latent JC virus (JCV) infection. This infection is increasingly recognized in patients treated
with monoclonal antibody therapies [1, 2]. Histologically, JCV leads to a demyelinating disease with ground glass oligodendrocytes
(oligodendrocytes with viral nuclear inclusions), bizarre astrocytes, and a low inflammatory infiltrate. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
typically presents with focal or multifocal high signal abnormalities on T2-weighted images, which become confluent and larger with
progression of the disease. The lesions are diffuse and mainly located in subcortical areas that tend to involve U fibers. In general, they
do not enhance after contrast injection . The overall PML risk for MS patients treated with natalizumab is about 1:1,000 . Patients with
preceding immunosuppression, therapy duration >2 years, and presence of anti-JCV antibodies have the highest risk of developing PML
(8.3:1,000; ). MRI shows new lesions typically in areas not previously affected by MS that may present gadolinium enhancement . The only
known effective therapy for PML is reconstituting the immune system. Natalizumab therapy is therefore stopped. Elimination of the antibody
can be accelerated by plasmapheresis or immunoadsorption [8, 27]. However, patients regularly develop an exacerbation of symptoms or
enlarging lesions or increased gadolinium enhancement on MRI, indicative of immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome (IRIS) . IRIS
describes a clinical worsening in patients with opportunistic infections due to recovery of the immune system. This syndrome is known from
HIV patients receiving highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART). The histopathological hallmark in HIV patients with PML is an
inflammatory lesion with a dense T cell infiltrate dominated by CD8+ cells and numerous macrophages [15, 19, 25]. Within lesions, the JC
virus may be detected, but it may also be cleared . We describe here the histological and MRI characteristics of five MS patients with
natalizumab-associated PML, and compare histological results with non-MS PML cases. We investigated biopsy tissue from five MS patients who
had been treated with natalizumab for different periods of time ranging from 13 to 40 infusions. In cases 1 and 5, natalizumab-associated
PML was diagnosed before biopsy by JCV polymerase chain reaction (PCR) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Patient 1 presented three months after
PML diagnosis and >8 weeks after the last plasma exchange (PLEX)/immunoadsorption (IA) with an enlarging, faintly gadolinium-enhancing
lesion. He was clinically stable at this time. Biopsy was performed to distinguish between re-emerging PML, late development of PML-
associated IRIS, or a rebound of MS after cessation of natalizumab treatment. Patient 5 was biopsied 3.5 months after the last natalizumab
infusion because of continuous clinical progression. This patient had received immunosuppressive therapy with cyclosporin (serum
concentrations 50–100 ng/ml started two months before biopsy) as well as repeated intravenous methylprednisolone (6 × 500–1,000 mg for
five days, last infusion four days before biopsy) to combat suspected IRIS. Gadolinium-enhancing as well as nonenhancing lesions were
present on MRI. Biopsy was performed to distinguish between PML-associated IRIS or ongoing PML. PML was suspected in cases 2–4, but CSF PCR
for JCV was initially negative. Thus, biopsies were performed to diagnose PML. Results received after biopsy showed low CSF copy numbers in
case 3, but remained negative for patients 2 and 4. Biopsies had been performed at different centers for diagnostic reasons and were sent to
the Department of Neuropathology in Göttingen for a second opinion. Specimens were sent from Würzburg (Germany), Santander (Spain), Hamburg
(Germany), Basel (Switzerland), and Munich (Germany). Stereotactically guided needle biopsies were performed in three patients (patients 1,
4, and 5) and open biopsies in two patients (2 and 3). We detected single JCV-positive cells by either immunohistochemistry (IHC) or in situ
hybridization (ISH) in two cases (cases 2 + 3). JCV infection in case 4 was assumed due to positive JCV PCR from brain tissue (9.31 × 104
Geq/ml, H. H. Hirsch, Institute for Medical Microbiology, University of Basel; confirmation by E. O. Major, NIH, Bethesda, MD, USA).
Sequencing revealed a rearranged, noncoding control region, as is typical for PML. Moreover, an intrathecal JCV-specific antibody production
was found, which argues in favor of the diagnosis of PML. The characteristics of this patient have been published without a detailed
histological analysis . IHC in case 5 showed numerous JCV-infected cells. Clinical and laboratory data are summarized in Table 1. Patients
gave written informed consent for participation in this study.Table 1Clinical characteristics and laboratory data for MS patients with
natalizumab-associated PMLCase no.Age/sexNTZ infusions (n)Time interval between last NTZ infusion and biopsyTreatment of suspected
IRIS/between last NTZ infusion and biopsyTime interval between last IA/PLEX and biopsyJCV in CSFaJCV in biopsy tissue149/m29~4 monthsIA,
PLEXIvIgRepeated IV MP3 monthsPre bx: 26 copies/ml (NIH, USA)IHC and ISH neg.b250/f134 monthsRepeated IV MP–Pre bx: neg. (Centro Nacional de
Microbiología, Madrid, Spain). Post bx: n.a.IHC: single pos. cells343/m402.5 monthsIV MPPLEX1 monthPre bx: 12 copies/ml (NIH, USA)ISH:
single pos. cells449/f154 monthsIV MPPLEX3 monthsPre bx: neg. (NIH, USA) Post: n.a.PCR CNS tissue: 9.31 × 104 JCV Geq/ml (University of
Basel, Switzerland); ISH and IHC neg.c558/f333.5 monthsIA (5 cycles), IvIg (2 × 25 g 2 months before bx)dRepeated IV MP (6 × 500–1,000 mg
for 5 days, last infusion 4 days before bx)Cyclosporin (serum concentrations 50–100 ng/ml started 2 months before bx and stopped after brain
bx results)2 monthsPre bx: 2,214 copies/ml (Düsseldorf, Germany)One month before bx: 1,858 copies/ml (NIH, USA); 660 copies/ml (Düsseldorf,
Germany)IHC: numerous pos. cellsNTZ natalizumab, n number, IRIS immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome, JCV JC virus, CSF cerebrospinal
fluid, m male, f female, IA immunoabsorption, PLEX plasmapheresis, IV MP intravenous methylprednisone, IvIg intravenous immunoglobulin, bx
biopsy, IHC immunohistochemistry, ISH in situ hybridization, n.a. not available, PCR polymerase chain reaction, CNS central nervous system,
Geq gene equivalentsa The viral load closest to biopsy is indicatedb Biopsy included the lesion edge that shows the highest viral activity
in generalc Biopsy included white and grey matter without demyelinationd Detailed therapeutic regimen is shown because of ongoing, active
PML Clinical characteristics and laboratory data for MS patients with natalizumab-associated PML NTZ natalizumab, n number, IRIS immune
reconstitution inflammatory syndrome, JCV JC virus, CSF cerebrospinal fluid, m male, f female, IA immunoabsorption, PLEX plasmapheresis, IV
MP intravenous methylprednisone, IvIg intravenous immunoglobulin, bx biopsy, IHC immunohistochemistry, ISH in situ hybridization, n.a. not
available, PCR polymerase chain reaction, CNS central nervous system, Geq gene equivalents a The viral load closest to biopsy is indicated b
Biopsy included the lesion edge that shows the highest viral activity in general c Biopsy included white and grey matter without
demyelination d Detailed therapeutic regimen is shown because of ongoing, active PML Follow-up of patients showed clinical stabilization in
patients 1 and 3. The Expanded Disability Status Score (EDSS) in patient 1 was 4.0 and in patient 3 was 8.5 at biopsy and last follow-up.
Patients 2 and 4 showed clinical improvement after biopsy (patient 2: EDSS at biopsy 8.0, EDSS at last follow-up 6.5; patient 4: EDSS at
biopsy 4.0, EDSS at last follow-up 3.5). Unfortunately, patient 5 deteriorated steadily even after biopsy and was discharged from hospital
to a nursing home with an EDSS of 9.5 (EDSS at biopsy 5.5). Follow-up periods ranged between 6 and 27 months. Four patients with low-
inflammation PML not related to natalizumab were considered controls. Previous diseases were HIV in two cases, suspected mastocytosis or
lymphoma, and CD4 T-cell deficiency of unknown etiology. Diagnosis was confirmed by IHC for JCV. Moreover, three cases of “inflammatory”
PML, characterized by an unusually high inflammation, were included: (1) an HIV patient initially published by Vendrely et al. ; this
patient developed an IRIS after PML and initiation of HAART therapy (HIV–PML–IRIS); (2) a 67 year-old male patient with rheumatoid arthritis
as well as prostate cancer and preceding chemotherapy; (3) a 62 year-old female without previous illnesses. As there is currently no exact
definition of inflammatory PML, we used this term for patients with more than 500 T cells/mm2 within PML lesions. T cell and plasma cell
numbers for MS plaques were taken from the literature . Specimens were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde and embedded in paraffin. Slices 4 μm
thick were stained with hematoxylin and eosin (HE), Luxol fast blue/periodic acid–Schiff (LFB/PAS), and Bielschowsky’s silver impregnation.
Immunohistochemical staining was performed with a biotin–avidin technique. The following primary antibodies were used: anti-CD3 (clone
CD3–12, Serotec, UK), anti-CD8 (clone C8/144B, Dako, Denmark), anti-CD20 (clone L26, Dako, Denmark), anti-CD138 (clone M/15, Dako, Denmark),
and for JCV detection anti-SV40 (clone PAb416, Merck, Germany) and PAb 2003 (kindly provided by Dr. R. J. Frisque, Pennsylvania State
University, USA) . A JCV biotinylated probe corresponding to the entire JCV genome was used for DNA–DNA ISH (Enzo Diagnostics, Farmingdale,
NY, USA). The number of inflammatory cells and virally infected cells (PAb2003) was counted in at least ten standardized microscopic fields
each of size 0.0625 mm2, defined by an ocular morphometric grid. Demyelinated areas as well as nondemyelinated white and grey matter were
counted separately. In the text and figures, the median number of positive cells/mm2 is given. The nonparametric Spearman rank correlation
test was performed. Tests were classified as significant if the p value was <0.05 (GraphPad Software, Inc., San Diego, CA, USA). Routine
brain MRI using 1.5 or 3.0 T machines with the standard protocol for MS was performed for the five biopsied patients and consisted of the
following scans: axial dual fast spin-echo T2/proton density-weighted images, spin echo T1-weighted images with and without gadolinium
contrast, and fluid inversion recovery (FLAIR) scans. Acquisition parameters were not exactly the same in all cases, as scans were performed
in different centers. All images were reviewed at the same reading center by expert neuroradiologists (EWR, MAS). Four out of the five
analyzed biopsy cases showed a pronounced inflammatory infiltrate. Of these, three patients showed brain tissue with inflammatory
demyelinating lesions (patients 1–3; Fig. 1a, b) and two displayed adjacent nondemyelinated white (patients 1 + 4) or grey matter (patients
2 + 4); e.g., one patient (4) showed only inflamed nondemyelinated white and grey matter.Fig. 1Histology of IRIS is characterized by
extensive T-cell inflammation in natalizumab-associated PML. An inflammatory demyelinating lesion with pronounced inflammation is shown (a
H&E, b LFB/PAS). T cells are dominated by CD8+ T cells (c CD3, d CD8). Inflammation is also evident in adjacent nondemyelinated white and
grey matter (e + f CD3). Original magnifications: a + b ×40; c–f ×100. Scale bars 200 μm. Patient 2 Histology of IRIS is characterized by
extensive T-cell inflammation in natalizumab-associated PML. An inflammatory demyelinating lesion with pronounced inflammation is shown (a
H&E, b LFB/PAS). T cells are dominated by CD8+ T cells (c CD3, d CD8). Inflammation is also evident in adjacent nondemyelinated white and
grey matter (e + f CD3). Original magnifications: a + b ×40; c–f ×100. Scale bars 200 μm. Patient 2 The inflammatory demyelinating lesions
showed a pronounced T cell infiltrate (1,319 T cells/mm2, Fig. 1c) as well as numerous macrophages. CD8+ T cells dominated, with the CD8/CD3
ratio ranging from 0.5 (patient 3) to 0.7 (patient 2) (Figs. 1d, 2). Nondemyelinated grey and white matter presented a pronounced T cell
infiltrate as well (grey matter (GM): 315 T cells/mm2, white matter (WM): 819 cells/mm2; Fig. 1e, f).Fig. 2Quantification of inflammation
and virally infected cells within demyelinating lesions in MS–PML–IRIS, ongoing MS–PML, and non-MS PML. Numbers of T cells (CD3), CD8+ T
cells (CD8), B cells (CD20), plasma cells (CD138), and virally infected cells (PAb2003) were analyzed within demyelinating lesions in
MS–PML–IRIS, ongoing MS–PML, and control groups. The median and range are indicated Quantification of inflammation and virally infected
cells within demyelinating lesions in MS–PML–IRIS, ongoing MS–PML, and non-MS PML. Numbers of T cells (CD3), CD8+ T cells (CD8), B cells
(CD20), plasma cells (CD138), and virally infected cells (PAb2003) were analyzed within demyelinating lesions in MS–PML–IRIS, ongoing
MS–PML, and control groups. The median and range are indicated Thus, histology—with pronounced, CD8-dominated inflammation in lesions as
well as nondemyelinated white and grey matter—was compatible with IRIS as known from HIV–PML–IRIS patients [15, 19, 25]. The fifth patient
showed typical PML pathology, with ground glass oligodendrocytes, bizarre astrocytes, high numbers of virally infected cells, as well as a
low inflammatory infiltrate. All patients showed T2 and FLAIR lesions characteristic of MS that were nonenhancing after gadolinium
application. Moreover, all patients showed lesions compatible with PML at the time point of first PML symptoms. These lesions were enlarged
and showed new or pronounced gadolinium enhancement at biopsy 2.5–4 months later, characterized as follows. Patient 1 showed bilateral
occipital, diffuse abnormalities with little mass effect and fuzzy borders (Fig. 3a). T1 post-contrast images revealed hypointense lesions
with faint linear peripheral enhancement surrounding the lesions (Fig. 3b, arrows).Fig. 3MRI characteristics of patients with natalizumab-
associated PML and histologically confirmed IRIS. Axial FLAIR images (a, c, e) of MS patients, cases 1, 2, and 3, with corresponding
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (b, d, f) are shown. Different patterns of enhancement in IRIS can be seen, ranging from faint
peripheral enhancement to intense enhancement of the lesions (open arrows in b, d, and f). The area of biopsy is indicated (closed arrows in
a, c, and e) MRI characteristics of patients with natalizumab-associated PML and histologically confirmed IRIS. Axial FLAIR images (a, c, e)
of MS patients, cases 1, 2, and 3, with corresponding contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (b, d, f) are shown. Different patterns of
enhancement in IRIS can be seen, ranging from faint peripheral enhancement to intense enhancement of the lesions (open arrows in b, d, and
f). The area of biopsy is indicated (closed arrows in a, c, and e) Patient 2 revealed a large frontoparietal hyperintense area with typical
destruction of U fibers almost exclusively confined to the white matter (Fig. 3c). The lesion was hypointense in postcontrast T1-weighted
images, with some tiny, speckled enhancement at the lesion edge without any mass effect (Fig. 3d, arrow). An extensive lesion involving
mainly the frontoparietal region was observed in case #3 (Fig. 3e). The pattern of enhancement in this case differed, as it showed intense
enhancement at the medial border and inside the lesion (Fig. 3f, arrows), suggesting a diagnosis of IRIS. A large, diffuse lesion in the
parietooccipital area with tiny, speckled enhancement within the lesion and linear enhancement at the lesion edge was seen in patient #4
(not shown). The fifth patient with histologically confirmed, active PML displayed multiple lesions, with the biopsied lesion revealing
linear and irregular gadolinium enhancement at the lesion edge. Other lesions showed diffuse and speckled enhancement within lesions
(Fig. 4a, b).Fig. 4MRI characteristics of a patient with histologically confirmed active natalizumab-associated PML. Axial FLAIR (a) and
corresponding contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (b) are shown (case 5). Linear enhancement at the lesion edge as well as diffuse and
speckled enhancement within lesions are found (open arrows in b). The enhancement pattern does not allow differentiation between active PML
and IRIS. The biopsied area is indicated (closed arrow in a) MRI characteristics of a patient with histologically confirmed active
natalizumab-associated PML. Axial FLAIR (a) and corresponding contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (b) are shown (case 5). Linear
enhancement at the lesion edge as well as diffuse and speckled enhancement within lesions are found (open arrows in b). The enhancement
pattern does not allow differentiation between active PML and IRIS. The biopsied area is indicated (closed arrow in a) In conclusion, MRI in
patients with pronounced inflammation shows different enhancement patterns with (a) faint enhancement, located mainly in the periphery of
PML lesions (Fig. 3b), (b) linear and speckled enhancement at the grey and white matter junction or within the grey matter (Fig. 3d), and
(c) intense focal or linear enhancement inside PML lesions and in the periphery (Fig. 3f). These characteristics are compatible with IRIS .
However, as the fifth patient also showed MRI characteristics compatible with PML-IRIS, MRI did not allow a clear differentiation between
PML and IRIS and active PML. Taking the histological and MRI results together, we assume that the four analyzed cases with pronounced
inflammation (patients #1–4) represent the histopathology of IRIS in natalizumab-associated PML (called MS–PML–IRIS from here on). In
MS–PML–IRIS, the numbers of CD3-positive T cells as well as CD8-positive T cells were approximately eight times higher than in patients with
PML not related to natalizumab therapy (Fig. 2). Patients with inflammatory PML showed high numbers of T cells, with the median reaching
about two-thirds of MS–PML–IRIS (Fig. 2). Comparing single patients, case 3, with natalizumab-associated PML and IRIS, showed a lower T-cell
infiltrate (CD3+ T cells: 435 cells/mm2) compared to the HIV–PML–IRIS patient (853 cells/mm2), indicating an overlap of MS–PML–IRIS and
inflammatory PML with respect to the T-cell inflammation. Inflammatory cells were found in PML controls in grey and nondemyelinating white
matter as well (data not shown). T-cell numbers were compared with data from actively demyelinating MS lesions from the literature . T-cell
numbers in MS–PML–IRIS were nine times higher than in MS controls, taking the published number of approximately 150 cells/mm2. Strikingly
high numbers of plasma cells were found in lesions from patients with MS–PML–IRIS (Figs. 2, 5a). The median was 752 plasma cells/mm2; thus,
every third inflammatory cell within the lesion represented a plasma cell. Plasma cells were evenly distributed within the parenchyma. B
cells were found predominantly in perivascular spaces and in lower numbers (Fig. 2). Plasma cells were also present in nondemyelinated white
and grey matter (WM: 156 cells/mm2, GM: 41 cells/mm2; Fig. 5c, d).Fig. 5High numbers of plasma cells are evident in natalizumab-associated
PML with IRIS. Strikingly high numbers of plasma cells are found in MS–PML–IRIS lesions (a). Lower numbers are present in inflammatory PML
cases (b). In MS–PML–IRIS, plasma cells are also evident in nondemyelinated white and grey matter (c, d) (a–d CD138). Original
magnifications: a–d ×100. Scale bars 200 μm. a + d Patient 2, b inflammatory PML control, c patient 1 High numbers of plasma cells are
evident in natalizumab-associated PML with IRIS. Strikingly high numbers of plasma cells are found in MS–PML–IRIS lesions (a). Lower numbers
are present in inflammatory PML cases (b). In MS–PML–IRIS, plasma cells are also evident in nondemyelinated white and grey matter (c, d)
(a–d CD138). Original magnifications: a–d ×100. Scale bars 200 μm. a + d Patient 2, b inflammatory PML control, c patient 1 In contrast, no
plasma cells and B cells were found in low-inflammatory PML not related to natalizumab therapy. Inflammatory PML lesions showed 242 plasma
cells/mm2; thus, approximately every fifth inflammatory cell represented a plasma cell (Figs. 2, 5b). Comparing single patients, plasma
cells showed consistently higher values in MS–PML–IRIS (lowest value 751 plasma cells/mm2) compared to non-MS PML cases (highest value 320
plasma cells/mm2). In MS biopsies, approximately six plasma cells/mm2 were found within lesions . Thus, plasma cell numbers in MS–PML–IRIS
were approximately 125 times higher than in MS plaques. Single cells positive for JCV–DNA or protein were found in two cases with
MS–PML–IRIS (Fig. 2). Typical ground glass oligodendrocytes at the lesion edge were not found. In non-MS PML, virally infected cells were
detected in high numbers in lesions (Fig. 2), as well as in nondemyelinated grey matter (45 PAb2003 + cells/mm2, three cases) and white
matter (56 PAb2003 + cells/mm2, two cases). The inflammation correlated negatively with the number of virally infected cells. This holds
true for CD3+ T cells (Spearman r = −0.46, p = 0.03), CD8+ T cells (r = −0.53, p = 0.01), plasma cells (r = −0.45, p = 0.04), and B cells
(r = −0.43, p = 0.048). We describe in detail the histopathological features and MRI correlates in five MS patients following natalizumab-
associated PML. Our study was limited by the amount of tissue available for investigations and the small number of patients investigated.
Additionally, the different time frames between the end of natalizumab treatment, diagnosis of PML, CSF tests, and IRIS may affect the
pathology of the lesions, and must be taken into account when interpreting the data. Nevertheless, the homogeneous pathology in four out of
five cases presented here gives a comprehensive picture of MS–PML–IRIS. Histology reveals strikingly pronounced inflammation and no or only
low numbers of virally infected cells in four out of five patients, indicating a strong immune response. The inflammation is dominated by
CD8+ T cells; the abundance of plasma cells is remarkable. MRI shows enlarging and gadolinium-enhancing lesions, compatible with IRIS .
Thus, we interpret the histopathology demonstrated here as PML-associated IRIS, as known from HIV-associated PML [15, 19, 25]. However,
inflammation in our study is even more pronounced than in HIV–PML–IRIS. This might be explained by the effectively reconstituted (and in MS
patients otherwise intact) immune system after the withdrawal of natalizumab. MS–PML–IRIS was detectable in our analyzed patients even
three months after PLEX/IA, and also occurred in patient 2, who had received neither of these therapies. IRIS typically occurs about
2–5 weeks after PLEX, necessitates repeated courses of intravenous steroids (suggesting that IRIS persists for several months), and has been
described as occurring without PLEX/IA three months after the withdrawal of natalizumab [2, 23]. CD8+ cytotoxic lymphocytes (CTLs) are known
to be the main effector cell in viral infection . In PML, an association between JC virus-specific CTLs and early control of the disease was
shown . Moreover, CD4+ cells seem to play a critical role in viral defense. The occurrence of PML in HIV patients with low CD4 counts might
be taken as an argument. JCV-specific CD4+ T-cell responses are found in PML survivors, but not in patients with active PML . A striking
observation in our cases was the high number of plasma cells in MS–PML–IRIS. Interestingly, natalizumab treatment increases circulating
pre-B and B cells in MS patients . The mobilization of JCV carrying pre-B cells from the bone marrow may play a role in natalizumab-
associated PML pathogenesis . The role of plasma cells for viral defense in PML is debated. On the one hand, as PML develops despite the
presence of JCV-specific immunoglobulin G (IgG), the humoral immune response seems incapable of preventing PML . An intrathecal synthesis of
IgG-antibodies directed against the JCV viral protein 1 (VP1) is found in 76% of PML patients, but is not correlated with clinical outcome .
On the other hand, a strong correlation between the plasma cell count in brain tissue and the humoral intrathecal immune response to the VP1
was found, suggesting a role for B cells/plasma cells and JCV antibodies in PML . Inflammatory PML with extensive mononuclear inflammatory
infiltrates, including numerous plasma cells, was associated with a less severe neurologic illness . Finally, PML survivors also showed
significant increases in JCV-specific IgG responses . In summary, a specific cellular as well as humoral immune response seems to be
relevant for viral defense. In our study, CD3- and CD8-positive T cells, B cells, as well as plasma cells were negatively correlated with
the number of virally infected cells, underlining their potential role in PML infection. We find higher plasma cell numbers in MS–PML–IRIS
patients than in non-MS inflammatory PML cases, even when T-cell numbers are similar. Thus, we cannot rule out the idea that a least part of
the plasma cell population is pre-existent and related to the natalizumab treatment. The clinician who cares for an MS patient with PML who
is deteriorating clinically and radiologically after stopping natalizumab therapy is faced with the differential diagnosis of PML–IRIS,
ongoing PML, and MS exacerbation. Histologically, in MS exacerbation, actively demyelinating lesions that are otherwise typical of MS are
expected . MRI is expected to show either homogeneously or ring-shaped enhancing lesions in typical periventricular or subcortical
localizations. The histological characteristics of MS–PML–IRIS are clearly different from typical PML, as found in our fifth patient with
natalizumab-associated PML. This patient was treated with immunosuppressive therapy before biopsy to combat IRIS. This case demonstrates the
difficulty involved in finding the balance between suppressing clinical deterioration due to PML–IRIS, which may even lead to death, and
halting the progression of PML . Our patient with active PML (patient 5) showed higher viral gene copies than the patients with PML–IRIS
histopathology (see Table 1). However, paraclinical parameters such as CSF JC virus load and peripheral CD4/CD8 cell counts do not help the
clinician, as increasing viral titers as well as normal CD4/CD8 ratios can be found in both PML–IRIS and active PML . JC viral load is
increased by greater than tenfold in MS patients with PML–IRIS and early MRI gadolinium enhancement . Although it seems unlikely, we cannot
rule out that our patient with active PML showed IRIS histopathology in nonbiopsied lesions. MRI shows enlarging and gadolinium-enhancing
lesions in both conditions. Contrast enhancement is a nonspecific sign of an impaired blood–brain barrier and can be seen with different
patterns in inflammatory conditions of the brain. So far, it has not appeared possible to distinguish MS–PML–IRIS from ongoing PML in MS
patients using only imaging data. However, PML lesions tend to show faint enhancement in the periphery of the lesion. More cases with
confirmed pathology are needed to identify MRI patterns that differentiate these two entities. In order to clarify the immunopathogenesis of
MS–PML–IRIS, further investigations should focus on the role of plasma cells in JCV infection, as well as the effect of natalizumab on
immune surveillance and inflammation within the CNS. In summary, we report IRIS histopathology in four MS patients with natalizumab-
associated PML. Histopathology is characterized by a pronounced inflammatory infiltrate with a predominance of CD8+ T cells and high numbers
of plasma cells within lesions as well as adjacent grey and white matter. A biopsy was helpful in our cases to either establish the
diagnosis of PML infection or to differentiate between ongoing PML, MS–PML–IRIS, and MS exacerbation. This guided the clinician to either
stop medication (steroids, immunosuppressive therapy) in active PML or to further suppress inflammation with steroids in MS–PML–IRIS. This
work was supported by grants from the Heidenreich von Siebold Program of the University Medical Center Göttingen (I.M.) and the German
Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF, “German Competence Network Multiple Sclerosis” (KKNMS), UNDERSTANDMS, 01GI0910) (W.B. and H.W.).
We thank Jasmin Held and Sven Müller for expert technical assistance. Open Access This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
