Deep neck space infections can occur at any age but require more intimate management in the paediatric age group because of their rapidly
progressive nature. Concurrent abscess in distinct neck spaces has rarely been reported in healthy children. Herewith, a rare case of
bilateral neck abscess is reported in a 16-month-old female and the clinical presentation and management are discussed with a review of the
literature. Le infezioni delle logge profonde del collo possono verificarsi a qualsiasi età ma richiedono particolare attenzione quando si
manifestano in età pediatrica anche a causa della loro rapida evoluzione. Un ascesso bilaterale del collo è stato descritto raramente in un
bambino. Questo articolo descrive il caso di un ascesso cervicale profondo bilaterale in una bambina di 16 mesi; la presentazione clinica ed
il trattamento del caso vengono discussi e viene riportata una revisione della letteratura sull'argomento. Deep neck space infections
(DNSIs) are known to spread along facial planes and potential spaces of the neck. They can occur at any age but the paediatric deep neck
infections require more intimate management because of their rapidly progressive nature 1. Delays in diagnosis and treatment may lead to
life-threatening complications. When the diagnosis of abscess is confirmed clinically or radiologically, prompt surgical drainage can
prevent morbidity and mortality. Concurrent abscess in distinct neck spaces has rarely been reported in healthy children. Here a rare case
of bilateral neck abscess, in a 16-month-old female, is reported and the clinical presentation and the management are discussed with a
review of the literature. A 16-month-old female presented with a 2-day history of fever, progressive left and right sided neck swelling.
Physical examination showed a non-toxic appearance with low grade fever. There were bilateral firm, tender swellings located in the right
parotid region and the left submandibular region measuring 3×2 cm and 5×5 cm, respectively. Limited mouth opening was inspected. Chest
radiography revealed no abnormality, but the laboratory studies showed a leukocyte count of 24190/μl with neutrophil dominance and
haemoglobin level of 9.7 g/dl. The sedimentation rate and C-Reactive protein (CRP) were 90 mm/h and 4.19 mg/dl, respectively. Neck
ultrasound (US) identified bilateral abscess formation. In addition to adequate hydration, intravenous Ceftriaxone and Metranidazole were
started immediately. There was no adequate clinical improvement under medical management within the first 48 hours. To identify the extent
of the disease a contrast enhanced magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was obtained which demonstrated a pre-auricular mass adjacent to the
parotid measuring 35 × 29 mm on the right side and a submandibular mass measuring 54 × 30 mm on the left side. Both masses were enhanced
with contrast peripherally which led to suspected abscess formation. Subsequently, the patient underwent external drainage of the abscess.
Bilateral pus was encountered and the abscess diagnosis was confirmed. Fever and mass subsided after surgery and treatment with antibiotics.
Methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus was isolated from the pus culture. Pathologic examination was concordant with abscess. Bilateral
course of the disease led us to search for an underlying aetiology. The parents of patient denied any systemic disease. Peripheral blood
lymphocyte subtypes and Ig A, Ig M, Ig G, Ig E levels were within normal limits. Serologic studies for TOR CH, EBV, hepatitis and HIV were
negative. Evaluation for tuberculosis did not show any abnormality. No clinical evidence of an underlying immunocompromisation was detected
and the patient was discharged from the hospital with complete recovery after 2 weeks. DNSIs are infections in the potential spaces and
facial planes of the neck which could be lymphadenitis, cellulitis, necrotic node or abscess in nature 1 2. Although the increased use of
antibiotics has reduced the incidence of DNSIs, they still remain an important clinical entity with serious potential complications, such as
airway obstruction, jugular vein thrombosis, carotid artery aneurysm or rupture, mediastinitis and sepsis 3. Infection of the ears, nose, or
throat may spread to deep neck spaces by direct continuity or by lymphatic drainage to lymph nodes in these spaces 4. The facial layers of
the neck and natural defense mechanisms help to prevent spread of these infections 5. However, if the infection is not adequately treated, a
severe lymphadenitis in the lymph nodes draining the primary infection site or cellulitis in the soft tissues may progress to a purulent
fluid collection called abscess 2 6 7. Abscesses of the neck may involve many spaces simultaneously through the potential pathways of
extension illustrated in Figure 1. In the pre-antibiotic era, pharyngo- tonsillitis was the most common cause of deep neck abscesses whereas
dental infection was the second factor. With the wide-spread use of antibiotics, the role of pharyngo-tonsillitis has declined 7 8. Among
infants and children, upper respiratory tract infections are still a primary cause of deeper infections 7. Network of patterns of infectious
extension within the potential spaces of the neck (from Gadre et al. 2006 15, mod.). Bilateral neck abscess in right parotid and left
submandibular region. Coronal magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated abscess in right parotid region. Coronal magnetic resonance imaging
demonstrated abscess in left submandibular region. While adults often have numerous localizing signs and symptoms, children with DNSIs tend
to have a more subsubtle presentation in that they are seldom able to verbalize their symptoms or cooperate with the physical examination 4.
The most common signs and symptoms are a neck mass or swelling, fever, poor oral intake and prior symptoms of an upper respiratory infection
such as rhinorrhoea or cough. Other symptoms include: neck pain, irritability, decreased neck mobility, sore throat, upper airway
obstructive symptoms and febrile seizures 4 9. In our case, the patient presented with bilateral soft swelling and low grade fever but no
history of preceding upper respiratory infection. Computerized tomography (CT) scanning is the most widely used modality for diagnosing deep
space neck infections because it is less expensive and readily available 10. Although CT is helpful both in determining the presence and
location of neck infections in children, it is less helpful in differentiating abscess from lymphadenitis and cellulitis 11. On the other
hand, use of MRI gives improved soft tissue definition without the use of radiation but its use is limited due to the lack of availability
and cost 10 11. US also seems more effective than CT in identifying abscess versus cellulitis and can be helpful to avoid incision and
drainage in cellulitis 10. We preferred MRI as a diagnostic tool because of its superiority in determining the type of soft-tissue
infection. Contemporary reports from different countries or areas may reveal different common pathogens 1. Most studies have determined the
predominance of streptococcus and Staphylococcus aureus as a causative organism although often infections are polymicrobial. On the other
hand, the presence of anaerobes may be underestimated because of the difficulty in culturing them 2. Streptococcus and normal oropharyngeal
flora were more common in retropharyngeal and parapharyngeal abscesses because these organisms are found in the oropharynx. Likewise, one
would expect Staphylococcus aureus to be more common in anterior and posterior triangle and submandibular and submental abscesses because
this organism is a common skin contaminant and these regions are more distant from the oropharynx 4. Consistent with the literature, culture
of the obtained pus resulted methicillin-sensitive Staphylococcus aureus. In a study reported by Coticchia et al., the most commonly
encountered sites of abscesses in the head and neck region of paediatric patients were retropharyngeal or parapharyngeal spaces followed by
anterior or posterior triangle and submandibular or submental regions, respectively. Parotid space abscess constituted only 1% of children.
Retropharyngeal or parapharyngeal involvement was more common in one-year-old children, or older, whereas submandibular or submental
involvement was more common in children younger than one year. However, there are different results, in different studies, in the literature
regarding the distribution of abscesses among the spaces of the neck 4. Multiple and recurrent abscesses are often seen in immuno-
compromised and debilitated patients 12. The ability of infections to spread from deep neck spaces is well known anatomically and clinically
13. Since the spread of the infection from the parotid space to the contralateral submandibular space or vice versa is very unique, this
unexpected directed led us to search for an underlying aetiology. But there was no clinical evidence of an underlying systemic disease or
any immunocompromisation. According to us, subclinical extension of the infection through the retropharyngeal space to the contralateral
side might have been the aetiology of this extraordinary condition. Prompt starting of treatment with broad-spectrum antibiotics might have
masked the retropharyngeal abscess formation but failed to prevent the spread of the infection. Likewise, a retropharyngeal infectious
focus, which had been resolved at the time of presentation, might have resulted in an infection with a bilateral course. Treatment with
antibiotics and surgical drainage with securing the airway are the mainstays of treatment 1. Although various studies have reported success
in treating deep neck abscess medically with parenteral antibiotics, most still consider incision and drainage as the gold standard for the
majority of paediatric deep neck abscesses 14. Because of the different causative organisms, broad-spectrum antibiotics are advocated in
treating deep neck infections 1. Empirical parenteral antibiotics should be started before the culture results become available and then
tailored to the culture results when available. Fortunately, most paediatric DNSIs are located either in the anterior or posterior triangle
of the neck or in the retropharyngeal area. Surgical drainage of these abscesses is usually direct and effective 3. Alternatively, needle
aspiration can be another choice in the treatment of some abscesses. But it is less reliable and may require recurrent aspirations. Since
there was no clinical improvement during intravenous antibiotic treatment, we decided to perform external incision and drainage and
eventually confirmed the abscess diagnosis. The intra- and post-operative courses were uneventful. Infections in the deep neck spaces may
result in mortality if they are not diagnosed early and promptly. Since the recommended treatment for lymphadenitis and cellulitis is
medical, differentiating this abscess from the other forms of DNSI avoids unnecessary surgical interventions. Clinical evidence with
radiological evaluation provides precious information in determining the origin and extension of the disease and increases the accuracy of
diagnosis. Although the anatomic relationships and pathways of extension of infections between the neck spaces are a well known entity,
especially under broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment, subclinical retropharyngeal spread of the infections or retropharyngeal infectious
foci which had been resolved at the time of presentation may result in unexpected involvement of distinct neck spaces.
