In the present paper, we report an extremely rare case of a 4-year-old girl who developed a frontal lobe intracerebral abscess following
adenotonsillectomy. This was diagnosed by computerised tomography at scan 21 days post-tonsillectomy when she presented with bilateral sixth
nerve palsies. We believe that intracranial complications should be considered in any patient who present with headache or vomiting
following tonsil surgery, especially if the patient has a spiking pyrexia. Nel presente lavoro, riportiamo il caso estremamente raro, di una
bambina di 4 anni, la quale a seguito di un intervento di adenotonsillectomia ha sviluppato un ascesso intracerebrale del lobo frontale.
Tale condizione è stata diagnosticata attraverso Tomografia Computerizzata (TC) eseguita dopo 21 giorni dall'intervento chirurgico, quando
la paziente ha manifestato paralisi bilaterale del sesto nervo cranico. Riteniamo che la possibilità di una complicanza intracranica post-
tonsillectomia debba essere presa in considerazione in caso di cefalea e vomito nel post-operatorio in particolare se associati a picchi
febbrili. Approximately 52,000 tonsillectomies were performed in England according to the NHS in the years 2003/2004; despite a decline in
the number of tonsillectomies, which in England has decreased by one third since 1995-1996, it still remains one of the most common surgical
interventions 1. Serious complications are rare, with haemorrhage being the most common cause of death. The National Prospective
Tonsillectomy Audit carried out in 2003-2004 in England and Northern Ireland studied 40,514 operation records, and only one death was
reported 2. Intracranial complications are extremely rare, but have very serious implications. We report a frontal lobe intracerebral
abscess that occurred 21 days following a tonsillectomy. A four-year-old girl underwent adenotonsillectomy for obstructive sleep apnoea.
There was no history of recent tonsillitis. Postoperative recovery was uneventful, no antibiotics were given pre- or post-operatively and
she was routinely discharged the following day. She presented 9 days post-operatively with general malaise, reduced oral intake, sore
throat, dehydration and vomiting. Her temperature on admission was 37.8°C. Clinical examination, including neurological assessment, was
normal. A few spots of white exudate were visible in the left tonsillar fossa. There was no history of haemorrhage. Her white cell count
(WCC) was 15 × 109/l and C-reactive protein (CRP) was 30 mg/l. During the first night, her temperature varied between 37.7 and 38.5°C.
Following 24 hours of intravenous antibiotics and fluids, her temperature returned to normal and she was clinically satisfactory. She was
observed for a further 48 hours on a normal diet and oral antibiotics (Co-amoxiclav) and had apparently made full recovery. She was
discharged with oral antibiotics for a presumed post-tonsillectomy infection. Twenty-two days after the intervention she was again
readmitted with general irritability, headaches and vomiting. She was noted to have lost 2 kilograms in weight since her tonsillectomy, and
was spiking temperatures up to 38.5°C. Examination of the nervous system was normal, apart from new bilateral sixth nerve palsies. Her
inflammatory markers now showed a WCC of 21.8 × 109/l and CRP of 180 mg/l. An urgent CT scan showed a solitary 6 cm cerebral abscess within
the posterior aspect of her left frontal lobe with an associated mass effect (Fig. 1). CT scan at 21 days post-tonsillectomy showing a 6 cm
solitary cerebral abscess within the posterior aspect of her left frontal lobe with an associated mass effect. She was immediately
transferred to a neurosurgical unit and 60 ml was aspirated stereotactically, but it recollected and a further 30 ml was similarly drained 4
days later. Microbiology grew Bacteroids and non-haemolytic streptococci. Following microbiology advice, she was treated with two weeks of
intravenous cefotaxime and metronidazole and then a further four-week course of oral cefixime. Follow-up CT scans done at 19 days and 8
weeks following her second aspiration, confirmed no fluid re-collection. She made a good recovery and clinical examination a year later
revealed no residual deficits. Cerebral abscess is a recognised complication of tonsillitis 3, but cerebral abscess following tonsillectomy
is virtually unheard of today. Indeed, it is so rare that clinicians may not consider it in the differential diagnosis of complications
following tonsillectomy. This in turn may potentially lead to a delay in diagnosis. In the UK, we believe there has only been one previously
reported case of cerebral abscess arising as a complication of tonsillectomy. The patient had acute tonsillitis at the time of surgery and
this was the indication for the operation. This case was reported as a post-mortem diagnosis in 1930 by Johnson in the "British Medical
Journal" 4. The most recent case of a post-tonsillectomy intracerebral abscess reported in the world literature was in 2006. This article
was from Iran and the patient was successfully treated with a frontal craniotomy and broad spectrum antibiotics 5. Multiple intracerebral
abscesses have also been reported. In 1962, a case report from Russia documented a patient with multiple brain abscesses following
tonsillectomy 6. A similar patient was described in 1985 by Pilgramm et al. who reported on a patient in the German literature with multiple
intracerebral abscesses following tonsillectomy. This patient received hyperbaric oxygen as part of their successful treatment regimen 7.
Because of advancing medical therapies, such as broad spectrum antibiotics, improved bacteriological identification and improved imaging
techniques, the very high mortality rate in the 1930's appears to have been reduced (Table I). Review of world literature. Previous case
reports of intracerebral abscess following tonsillectomy. Patient noted to have papilloedema with a raised white cell count and erythrocyte
sedimentation rate. A left frontal burr hole was performed and the diagnosis was confirmed; 25-year-old male successfully treated with
craniotomy and broad spectrum antibiotics. The greatest number of intracranial complications occur as a result of infection extending by
some route to the brain from the tonsillar fossa. There are four possible routes for tonsillar infection to spread into the cranial cavity
5: This may occur either through intact bone of the skull base, erosions or congenital defects. This may be by direct invasion or if via the
perivascular sheaths, indirect. One notorious example of retrograde venous spread is Lemierre's syndrome, in which spread occurs from the
internal jugular vein. Contamination from whatever source, of the friable vascular tissue, coupled with surgical trauma provide an ideal
environment in which infections can cultivate. It is perhaps surprising, therefore, that infections do not occur more frequently. Review of
the world literature for intracranial complications found reports following tonsillectomy to be extremely rare (Table I). In 1942, Hara and
Courville were one of the first to recognise that cerebral abscesses can occur as a complication solely from an acute tonsillar infection
12. Witchell reported a patient with a retropharyngeal abscess following acute tonsillitis who, in addition, went on to develop four
cerebral abscesses 13. A case of cerebral abscess has even been reported secondary to implantation via a local anaesthetic needle injection
of novocaine into the paratonsillar space 14. In summary, cerebral abscesses have been recognised in the literature to occur following
paratonsillar injections, acute tonsillitis and surgery to the tonsils, but are extremely rare. Over 50,000 tonsillectomies are performed in
England as reported by the NHS each year. Deaths are fortunately rare. Intracranial complications should be considered in any patient who
presents with a headache or vomiting following tonsil surgery or acute tonsillitis, particularly if the patient has a spiking pyrexia. Rare
diagnoses should be considered in any patient who presents to the clinician with an atypical history. We would like to thank Dr. Hector
Arthur for his help in translating the Russian reference articles.
