Haemangiomas are benign vascular tumours relatively common in the head and neck district but very rare in the temporal bone. Depending on
its clinical presentation, haemangioma can be mistaken for other vascular masses such as glomus tumour or other lesions of the middle ear.
Unfortunately, clinical and radiological evaluation may be insufficient to make a pre-operative diagnosis and the diagnosis is often based
upon intra-operative biopsy specimen findings. Gli emangiomi sono tumori vascolari benigni relativamente comuni nel distretto testa-collo ma
molto rari nell'osso temporale. In base alla sua presentazione l'emangioma può essere confuso con un'altra massa di origine vascolare, con
un tumore glomico o con un'altra lesione dell'orecchio medio. Sfortunatamente la valutazione clinica e radiologica può essere insufficiente
per fare una diagnosi preoperatoria, la quale è spesso ottenuta durante l'intervento chirurgico previa biopsia. Haemangiomas are benign
vascular lesions and they are very common in children and infants. They can occur in any region of the human body in which vasoformative
tissue is represented 1. These lesions are relatively common in the head and neck district but they have rarely been reported in the middle
ear 2. Haemangiomas are usually present during the first month of life and they are characterized by a rapid growth period, defined
proliferative phase, followed by a slow period of involution 3. This behaviour differentiates these lesions from vascular malformations
which are always present at birth, grow in proportion to the body and do not have an involution period 4. Moreover, North et al., in a
study, in 2000, emphasized that the haemangiomas, upon immuno-histochemical assessment, have been shown to stain positively for Glucose
Transporter Protein Isoform 1 (GLUT-1) and Lewis Y antigen (LeY) in a sensitive and specific manner. This aspect seems to be typical of
these tumours since the vascular malformations have not shown the same positivity to GLUT-1 and to LeY 5. Since middle ear haemangiomas are
rare, little has been published in the Literature regarding their diagnosis and management and this may lead to confusion in choosing an
appropriate therapeutic strategy. However, haemangiomas must be considered in the differential diagnosis of any vascular lesion, above all
of glomus tumour which is the most frequent vascular mass of the middle ear 6 with a clinical presentation similar to that of haemangioma.
In this report, a case of haemangioma involving the middle ear, in a 77-year-old male is presented and the correct diagnosis and management
of this rare lesion are discussed. Herein, the case is described of a 77-year-old Caucasian patient, a pacemaker bearer, who came to our
attention with a 10-year history of bilateral fullness and hearing loss which were more marked in the right ear. The clinical history was
positive for an episode of right aural bleeding which had occurred the previous year. He did not complain of either vertigo or pulsatile
tinnitus. There were no signs of facial nerve dysfunction. Otomicroscopic examination revealed a reddish-blue compressible retro-tympanic
mass in the right mesotympanum and hypotympanum. A pure tone audiogram (PTA) revealed a moderate to severe mixed right hearing loss (PTA =
80 dB). A non-contrasted multi-slice computed tomography (CT) showed a low-density area completely occupying the mastoid and the right ear
with no signs of erosion of the ossicular chain (Fig. 1). Axial CT showed a low-density mass completely occupying the mastoid and the right
middle ear with no signs of erosion of the ossicular chain. Unfortunately, the clinical history of the patient does not allow us to refer
the patient for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) examination. Since a glomus tumour was suspected, a standard retroauricular approach to the
middle cavity was adopted, where a violet multi-lobulated mass, completely occupying the middle ear and mastoid cavity, was identified (Fig.
2). No deficits in continuity and mobility of the ossicular chain were recognized. Granulation tissue was present in the sinus tympani and
facial recess. No signs of erosion of the fallopian canal were found at surgery. Intra-operative view: a violet multilobated mass involved
the middle ear but the ossicular chain was intact. An intra-operative biopsy ruled out a glomus tumour, in the differential diagnosis,
suggesting the presence of a vascular malformation or haemangioma. A canal wall up tympanoplasty was then performed which allowed,
macroscopically, radical resection of the lesion (Fig. 3). The lesion was totally removed after a canal wall up tympanoplasty. The
histological examination revealed aggregates of capillary micro-vessels in a lobular arrangement. Architecture of blood vessels showed that
they were incomplete and were surrounded by hyperplastic cells. These aspects, together with the positivity to GLUT-1 at the immuno-
histochemical evaluation, confirmed the diagnosis of capillary haemangioma. The post-operative course was uneventful and post-surgical
audiometry examination showed resolution of the air bone gap (PTA = 45dB). The patient is still free of disease at 3 years' follow-up.
Haemangiomas are benign vascular tumours relatively common in the head and neck district but very rare in the temporal bone. In 1981,
Mangham et al. showed that, in a retrospective review of 1430 intra-temporal tumours, only 3 were haemangiomas (0.21%) 7. The most frequent
sites of occurrence are the geniculate ganglion region, the distal portion of internal auditory canal and the mastoid segment of the facial
nerve 6. Since 2000, only 7 haemangiomas of the middle ear have been published in the Literature 1 8-11, for a total of 13 lesions reported.
Based on the Mulliken and Glowacki classification, approved by the International Society for the Study of the Vascular Anomalies, there are
three variant forms of haemangioma: capillary, cavernous and combined 12. Capillary haemangioma consists of closely arranged capillary-like
channels and it tends to be superficial in location, while the cavernous type is composed of large cavernous vascular spaces and it is
deeper 13. Combined haemangioma presents features of both the capillary and cavernous form; it usually originates from the papillary and
reticular dermis of subcutaneous tissue 14. This classification, although commonly used, is object of debate 15. In fact, histological
evaluation of cavernous haemangioma does not show the endothelial hyperplasia and an increase in mast cell number during the proliferative
phase, followed by fibrosis, fatty infiltration, decreased cellularity and normalization of mast-cell number during the involution period.
It therefore follows that cavernous haemangiomas are more like vascular malformations and represent errors in morphogenesis rather than
proliferative cellular processes. Conversely, the capillary form, in our patient, represents a true haemangioma with a typical histological
feature characterized by the proliferative and involution phase. Recently, Buckmiller, in a 2010 review, referring to North's study, pointed
out that only immuno-histochemical staining of GLUT-1 and LeY offers the possibility to identify a true haemangioma from a vascular
malformation 16. Positive GLUT-1 staining, seen in our tumour, confirmed the presence of a true haemangioma in our patient. A variety of
signs and symptoms have been reported for haemangiomas of the middle ear. They may be asymptomatic but the most common clinical
manifestations are a retro-tympanic reddish-blue mass, accompanied by pulsatile tinnitus, hearing loss, aural bleeding, otorrhoea, vertigo
and presence of a polypoid mass in the external auditory canal 8. In fact, in our patient, the haemangioma caused an episode of otorrhagia
associated with persistent hearing loss in the affected side, while otoscopy showed a typical retro-tympanic mass. Despite the fact that
accompanying signs and symptoms are well known, they are common to nearly all vascular pathological conditions and this requires a correct
differential diagnosis. Glomus tumour is the most common vascular mass in the middle ear but other lesions should be included in
differential diagnosis. In fact, a high jugular bulb, an aberrant intra-tympanic internal carotid artery, meningiomas and other tumours
(e.g., rhabdomyosarcoma) and inflammatory processes, such as cholesterol granulomas and aural polyps, are some of the lesions that may mimic
a haemangioma according to Dayal et al. 17. Pre-operative high-resolution CT is the procedure of choice for radiological evaluation 18.
Diagnosis can be obtained evaluating the size or the location site of the mass and the presence or absence of bone destruction. Middle ear
haemangiomas appear radiographically as soft tissue densities with or without associated ossicular or bone erosion. MRI and angiography or
magnetic resonance angiography allow more definitive identification of the nature of a vascular mass in the middle ear. On MRI, T1-weighted
images show a lesion of moderate intensity and T2-weighted images show a high intensity, while the tumour is clearly enhanced. Glomus tumour
shows similar MRI features but sometimes in large masses multiple areas of slow and high signal intensity (so-called "salt and pepper") can
be seen within the lesion 6. Angiography shows a vascular blush similar to that of a glomus, but the stain associated with a haemangioma
persists late into the venous phase whereas it dissipates rapidly in a patient affected by glomus tumour. In our case, the absence of bone
destruction was evident on CT images but this has not enabled us to make a correct diagnosis while the clinical history of the patient does
not provide MRI and angiography evaluation. However, the radiological features of haemangiomas can resemble many other middle ear lesions
and they are not pathognomic. In fact, definitive diagnosis can be obtained by exploration surgery, biopsy or excision of the mass and
subsequent histological and immunochemical examinations 19 20 such as in our patient. In conclusion, we report on the fourteenth case of
haemangioma of the middle ear and demonstrate that, although rarely, haemangioma can occur in the middle ear space. Depending on its
clinical presentation, this mass can be mistaken for other vascular masses such as glomus tumour or other lesions of the middle ear.
Unfortunately, radiological evaluation can be insufficient to make a preoperative diagnosis and the diagnosis is often based upon intra-
operative biopsy.
