Since 1987, dura mater graft-associated iatrogenic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (dCJD) has been reported in many countries. We report the first
case of dCJD in Korea. A 54-yr-old woman, who underwent resection of the meningioma in the left frontal region and received a dura mater
graft 23 yr ago presented with dysesthesia followed by psychiatric symptoms and ataxia. Her neurological symptoms rapidly progressed to such
an extent that she exhibited myoclonus, dementia, and pyramidal and extrapyramidal signs within 8 weeks. The 14-3-3 protein was detected in
her cerebrospinal fluid; however, an electroencephalogram did not reveal characteristic positive sharp wave complexes. Diffusion-weighted
magnetic resonance images, obtained serially over 64 days, revealed the rapid progression of areas of high signal intensity in the caudate
nucleus and cingulate gyrus to widespread areas of high signal intensity in the cortex and basal ganglia. Pathological examination of brain
biopsy specimens confirmed the presence of spongiform changes and deposition of prion protein in the neurons and neuropils. Creutzfeldt-
Jakob disease (CJD) is a fatal, transmissible, neurodegenerative disorder that causes spongiform changes in the brain. CJD has 4 clinical
forms: sporadic, genetic, iatrogenic, and variant. Sporadic and genetic CJD appear to occur in people from all countries and ethnic groups.
Furthermore, to date, more than 400 cases of iatrogenic CJD have been reported in 20 countries (1). No studies have reported cases of
iatrogenic CJD in Korea. Iatrogenic CJD results from the inadvertent transmission of CJD during the course of medical or surgical treatment.
The sources of infection reported in iatrogenic CJD were cadaveric dura mater grafts (2), human cadaveric pituitary hormone (3), corneal
transplants (4), and neurosurgical equipment (5, 6). Since the first identification of dura mater graft-associated CJD (dCJD) in 1987,
almost 200 cases of dCJD have been identified worldwide (1). Here, we report the first case of dCJD in a patient in Korea, who had received
a dura mater graft with Lyodura速 23 yr ago. A 54-yr-old woman was referred to a tertiary referral hospital because of ataxia and myoclonus
in June 2010. She was diagnosed with meningioma in the left frontal area, and the meningioma was excised in 1987. One month before visiting
the tertiary referral hospital, she first began experiencing general weakness and dysesthesia on the left side of her face and in the toes
of her right foot. The findings of the brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) (T1-weighted, T2-weighted, and FLAIR images without diffusion-
weighted images ) performed at a neurology outpatient clinic were not remarkable, except for encephalomalacic changes that occurredas a
sequela of brain surgery. Subsequently, her neurological symptoms and signs progressed further to such an extent that she developed
dysarthria and could not stand up without assistance. Immediately after admission to the tertiary referral hospital, she exhibited phobia,
marked mood fluctuations, and insomnia. The first DWIs in the second MRI, performed 24 days after the first MRI, revealed slightly increased
signal intensity in the cingulate gyrus and caudate nuclei (Fig. 1). Discrete decreases in signal intensity were observed in the
corresponding area in analog to digital converter aliasing (ADC) maps (data not shown), indicating reduced diffusivity. Five days after
admission, she could not walk alone because of ataxia. Ten days after admission, she exhibited multifocal generalized myoclonus without
seizures. During the next 2 weeks, her motor symptoms worsened further to such an extent that she developed anarthria and severe dysphagia.
The higher cortical function test could not be performed because she could not speak. However, she could understand simple commands and was
partially communicable. She complained of fear due to visual hallucinations and diplopia. The third follow-up MRI, performed 1 month after
the second one, revealed areas of increased signal intensity in the right and left basal ganglia, insular cortex, primary motor cortex, and
right and left medial frontal cortex (Fig. 1). One and a half months after the initial admission, she was confined to bed with frequent
myoclonus. Her mental status had changed to a drowsy or stuporous state, and she slept during most of the day. An electroencephalogram (EEG)
revealed moderate diffuse slowing of background activity without periodic sharp wave complexes. The 14-3-3 protein was detected in her
cerebrospinal fluid. There was no mutation in PRNP, and the genotype of codon 129 was methionine homozygote. She was tentatively diagnosed
with CJD and referred to our CJD surveillance center for confirmative diagnosis. A careful review of her past medical records revealed that
Lyodura速 had been used to repair her dura in 1987. The fourth MRI, performed 1 month after the third MRI, revealed a high signal intensity
lesion in both basal ganglia, both insulae, and the right and left frontotemporoparietal cortices (Fig. 1). A brain needle biopsy was
performed at the right frontal region. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of biopsy specimens revealed neuronal loss and astrocytosis with
spongiform changes (Fig. 2). Immunostaining with a monoclonal antibody (1C5) against prion protein revealed deposition of prion protein in
the peri- and intraneuronal areas. We did not observe florid plaques in the biopsy specimens. The patient was discharged from the hospital
to receive supporting treatment. She died after an overall disease course of 3 months. To date, nearly 200 cases of iatrogenic dCJD have
been reported worldwide (1). In this patient, CJD, confirmed by examination of brain biopsy specimens, was related to a dura mater graft.
She underwent a dura mater graft performed using Lyodura速, a brand of dura mater linked to an ongoing international outbreak of most of the
reported cases of dCJD (1, 2). In this patient, the latent period between Lyodura速 grafting and the onset of CJD was 23 yr, which is within
the range observed in the reported cases of dCJD (16 months-31 yr) (1, 7-11). More than 50% of the cases of dCJD have been identified in
Japan. dCJD constitutes 6.2% of all CJD cases reported in Japan, and 135 cases of dCJD have been reported since November 2009 (12). However,
this is the first case of iatrogenic dCJD in Korea. The estimated risk for dCJD after exposure to human dura mater was reported to be 1 per
500 to 2000, depending on the study population and the year when the dura mater graft was performed (8, 13, 14). However, an accurate
estimation of the use of human dura mater grafts in Korea is not available. Studies have suggested that ataxia and psychiatric symptoms or
signs are among the earliest symptoms of dCJD and are followed by visual symptoms, dementia, myoclonus, and extrapyramidal or pyramidal
signs (7-9, 11). The clinical course of our patient followed this pattern. The MRI findings in our case resembled those observed in sporadic
CJD in other studies (7-9, 11). We were able to review serial MR images obtained 4 times over 64 days when the patient was transferred to
our center. While she was symptomatic, the areas of high signal intensity on DWIs progressed rapidly from suspicious changes in the
cingulate gyrus and caudate nucleus to extensive cortical and basal ganglia involvement. Given the long latency of dCJD, the occurrence of
these MRI changes within a short period in this case is remarkable. Although needle biopsy specimens may not represent the entire brain, we
believe that our patient presented with neuropathologically non-plaque typed CJD (10). In a study of non-plaque type dCJD reported in Japan,
all cases exhibited positive sharp wave complexes on EEG, unlike in our case (9). This might be explained by differences in the time between
symptom onset and EEG investigation. In a Japanese non-plaque typedCJD series, a case with positive sharp wave complexes was detected 5
months after symptom onset.However, the last EEG followup for our patient was 2.5 months after symptom onset. In conclusion, we report the
first case of dura mater-graft associated iatrogenic CJD in Korea. We observed a long incubation period in our patient, similar to that
observed in other countries, and thus, iatrogenic CJD cases due to dura mater transplants still can be expected in the future. Serial DWIs
taken during the course of dCJD. The first DWI (left column), taken almost 6 weeks after her first neurological symptoms, revealedslightly
increased signal intensity in the cingulate gyrus and the caudate nucleus. In the second DWI (middle column), taken 10 weeks after her first
neurological symptoms, high signal intensity in both insulae, the caudate nucleus, and the medial frontal cortical region became obvious. In
the third DWI (right column), taken 12 weeks after her first neurological symptoms, extensive high signal intensity was observed in the both
basal ganglia and the cortex. Microscopic findings. (A) Neuronal loss and spongiform change (hematoxylin and eosin stain). (B) Astrocytosis
detected using an anti-GFAP antibody. (C) Deposition of prion protein monoclonal antibody (1C5) for prion protein (arrow).
