Osteomas as well as exostoses of the internal auditory canal are rare, benign, usually slow-growing lesions. The most common localizations
of these temporal bone lesions are the mastoid cortex and the external auditory canal. A rare case is reported of bilateral osseous stenosis
of the internal auditory canal, in the absence of clinical (auditory, vestibular and facial nerve) symptoms. In the absence of auditory,
vestibular and/or facial nerve symptoms, long-term follow-up should be assessed; surgical intervention may be warranted only if symptoms are
present. Gli osteomi e le esostosi del condotto uditivo interno rappresentano una condizione patologica di raro riscontro, benigna e di
solito caratterizzata da un lento accrescimento. Le localizzazioni più frequenti di tali lesioni dell'osso temporale sono la corticale
mastoidea e il condotto uditivo esterno. Gli autori riportano un raro caso di stenosi bilaterale ossea del condotto uditivo interno, in
assenza di sintomi o segni audiologici. In assenza di sintomatologia uditiva, vestibolare o deficit del faciale, è necessario sottoporre il
paziente a follow-up a lungo termine, mentre l'opzione chirurgica è da considerarsi solo qualora vi siano manifestazioni cliniche
importanti. Osteomas and exostoses have distinct clinical and histopathologic features 1. Osteomas are usually solitary, pedunculated, bony
growths attached to the tympanosquamous or tympano-mastoid suture line, characterized histologically by an internal structure of abundant
discrete fibrovascular channels surrounded by irregularly oriented lamellated bone. Exostoses are usually multiple, bilaterally symmetrical,
broad based elevations of bone involving the tympanic bone 1 2. Osteomas are uncommon, slow-growing lesions that can develop in the cranium.
They represent a localized hamartomatous proliferation of a usually dense, although otherwise normal, intra-membranous bone, while exostoses
are histologically composed of parallel layers of sub-epithelial bone 1. The most common localizations of temporal bone osteomas are the
mastoid cortex and the external auditory canal 1. These benign neoplasms have also been described within the mastoid air cells, middle ear,
but rarely in the internal auditory canal (IAC) 1 3. Exostoses are observed in the external auditory canal even four times more frequently
than osteomas 1, but have very rarely been described in the tympanic cavity or in the internal auditory canal 1 4. B.P. is a 32-year-old
caucasian male, addressed to the Audiology Department of the University Hospital of Ferrara due to the incidental finding of bilateral
stenosis of the internal auditory canals. His past medical history was unremarkable, with the exception of an acute episode of "vertical
diplopia" which occurred 6 months prior to our evaluation. He was examined in the Emergency Room by the neurologist and the ophthalmologist;
both evaluations resulted negative, and cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans were ordered. The diplopia spontaneously recovered;
MRI were normal except for the incidental report of bilateral stenosis of the internal auditory canals. At this point, a computed tomography
(CT) scan was performed in order to complete the internal auditory canal evaluation (Fig. 1A, B). A. CT Scan, axial image. Bilateral
stenoses of internal auditory canal (black arrows). B. T2-weighted MRI axial image showing bilateral stenosis of the internal auditory canal
(black arrows). Upon examination, there was no history of hearing loss, vertigo, tinnitus or facial nerve weakness. Moreover, there was no
history or evidence of other bone disease (such as hereditary multiple exostoses HME). The ENT status and particularly the microtoscopical
examination resulted normal. Pure tone audiograms showed a bilateral normal hearing; vestibular testing was normal (Fig. 2A, B) and there
were no signs of facial nerve weakness. Also the auditory brainstem responses (ABR) resulted normal in terms of latency values as well as
latency intervals (Fig. 3). Audiogram (A) and vestibular caloric tests (B) showing a bilateral normal hearing and vestibular function. At
the A.B.R., latency values as well as latency intervals were found to be normal. So far, after 12 months of close follow-up, the patient has
no clinical signs of auditory vestibular and/or facial nerve disease. Osteomas, as well as exostoses of the internal auditory canal, are
rare, benign, usually slow-growing lesions. Reported aetiological factors contributing to the formation of these lesions include injury,
inflammation, developmental disorders, and genetic defects 5. These entities are usually asymptomatic, as in the case presented here, but
might cause symptoms attributable to a local compressive effect, depending on their specific location. As far as concerns their exact
position and dimensions, internal auditory canal lesions might manifest as sensorineural hearing loss, vertigo, tinnitus, or even cause
brainstem compression 2 6 7, thus mimicking symptoms of vestibular schwannomas 7 8. Bilateral internal auditory canal lesions are typical of
neurofibromatosis type 2 and are usually vestibular or facial nerve schwannomas 9. Although the presence of internal auditory canal
narrowing upon MRI scan might aid in its detection, the diagnosis of internal auditory canal osteoma or exostosis relies entirely upon high-
resolution CT scanning, which demonstrates well demarcated, dense bone outgrowth 6. A stenosis of the internal auditory canal may be seen as
a congenital anomaly in conjunction with eighth-nerve aplasia or in disorders of bone, including osteopetrosis, Paget disease, otosclerosis,
or fibrous dysplasia 2 10. The present report refers to a rare case of bilateral stenosis of the internal auditory canal, in the absence of
clinical (auditory, vestibular and/or facial nerve) symptoms. The vertical diplopia was judged as an occasional event, and, therefore, not
related to the internal auditory canal findings, as both the neurological and the ophthalmological evaluation, as well as the cerebral MRI
were negative. Moreover, no correlations have been reported, so far, in the literature, between internal auditory canal stenosis and the
occurrence of diplopia. It has not been possible to definitely differentiate between osteoma and exostosis, on the basis of the
neuroradiological features (both CT and MRI scans); the fact that the lesion is bilateral argues in favour of an exostosis, whilst the CT
dishomogeneous density advocates an osteoma feature. Even if the neuroradiological characteristics of the case presented are not unlike
those of osteomas, previously described, and also histologically defined in other clinical reports 2 9, clearly only the histological
features could differentiate between these two entities. Nonetheless, most of the internal auditory canal lesions reported in the literature
are based on the radiological appearance alone 2 6 11. The natural evolution of osteomas and/or exostoses is unpredictable; however, they
usually grow slowly and remain stable for many years. Due to the paucity of reported cases of osteoma and exostoses of the internal auditory
canal, as well as the variability of the clinical course and treatment, it is impossible to draw any definite conclusions regarding the
natural history of this lesion and the appropriateness of the therapeutic approach (please refer to Table I for a list of bony internal
auditory canal lesions reported in the literature, so far) 2. Internal auditory canal bony lesions reported in the literature, available
through a "Pubmed database" search, performed in June 2010. Symptomatic has been used to define those cases affected by one of the
following: hearing loss, vertigo, or facial nerve palsy. N/A: data not available. Authors listed in Table can be found in Reference section
2 5-9 11 12-21. In conclusion, it is necessary to accept that, today, a correct assessment of bony internal auditory canal lesion is
necessary using both, MRI and CT scans. As in our case, clinically asymptomatic lesions should be assessed by regular clinical
audiovestibular examinations and eventually with regular CT monitoring. Surgery is the reported treatment of choice only in the presence of
symptomatic or enlarging internal auditory canal exostoses/osteomas 9. Hopefully, in the near future, as more case reports with longer
follow-up become available, it will be possible to better understand the natural history of these lesions and, therefore, to standardize the
clinical treatment.
