Longhi BS, Marini R, Appenzeller S, Centeville M, and Gusmão RJ were responsible for the revision of the charts and manuscript preparation.
Sjögreńs syndrome (SS) is a chronic autoimmune disease primarily affecting the lachrymal and salivary glands with varying degrees of
systemic involvement. SS can be isolated (primary SS or pSS) or associated with other autoimmune diseases, such as rheumatoid arthritis,
systemic lupus erythematosus, or scleroderma (secondary SS). pSS predominantly affects middle-aged women and is uncommon in childhood.1-4 In
addition to being underdiagnosed, clinical manifestations are often different in children when compared to adults. Recurrent parotid
swelling is a common feature observed in children with pSS (37, 5–100%).2 Oral and ocular involvement, however, is present in a minority of
children, especially at the onset of disease (23–80%).2 Pathologic and laboratory findings are similar to those found in adults and include
characteristic lymphocytic infiltration of the exocrine glands, the presence of hypergammaglobulinemia, an elevated erythrocyte
sedimentation rate (ESR), and the presence of autoantibodies (such as anti-Ro/SSA, anti-La/SSB, antinuclear antibody (ANA), and rheumatoid
factor (RF)4-6). Although pSS is an autoimmune disease, familial incidence of pSS is infrequently reported.6-8 We report the occurrence of
pSS in two siblings and in their mother and review the literature on multiplex pSS families. Patient 1 - A 9-year-old girl with a one-year
history of bilateral recurrent enlargement of the parotid gland was sent to the rheumatology unit. She denied having dry mouth, dry eyes, or
any systemic symptoms. Upon examination, she was healthy with a weight in the 75th percentile and a height in the 90th percentile. Her
physical examination was unremarkable, except for the presence of a bilateral, painful parotid enlargement. The physician also identified
sialadenitis upon sialography and a positive Schirmeŕs test upon ophthalmological evaluation. The patient was negative for RF and
antinuclear antibodies (ANA), but positive for anti-Ro. Antibodies against La, double-stranded DNA (anti-dsDNA), and Sm were also negative.
Her white blood cell counts (WBCs) and ESR were normal, and no hypergammaglobulinemia was observed. A minor salivary gland biopsy showed
diffuse lymphocytic infiltration. Patient 2 - During medical evaluation, the mother of the patient mentioned that her other 8-year-old
daughter also had a two-year history of recurrent parotid gland swelling. The patient denied having dry mouth, dry eyes, or any systemic
symptoms. Her physical exam was unremarkable. The patient had a normal Schirmer's test and did not have any evidence of chronic sialadenitis
upon sialography. Her laboratory test results revealed that she was positive for RF, ANA, Ro, and La antibodies as well as negative for
anti-dsDNA and anti-Sm. The patient displayed normal WBC and ESR, but exhibited polyclonal hypergammaglobulinemia. A salivary gland biopsy
revealed lymphocytic sialadenitis with more than four lymphoid foci (4 mm2 in size), which was compatible with SS. Patient 3 - The mother
was 28 years in age and complained of persistent dry mouth, photophobia, and dry eyes after two years of her daughters' follow-up. Her
physical exam was unremarkable. She was negative for RF, positive for ANA, and anti-Ro, had a normal WBC and ESR, and presented no
hypergammaglobulinemia. Ophthalmological examination revealed positive results both on Schirmer's test and the Rose Bengal test. Her
salivary gland scintigraphy revealed deficient drainage of her left parotid gland, and her salivary gland biopsy showed no evidence of
diffuse lymphocytic infiltration. pSS is a well-known autoimmune disease that predominantly affects middle-aged women. pSS is diagnosed
following the Revised International Classification Criteria for Sjögren's Syndrome from the American-European Group and includes six items:
(I) presence of ocular symptoms, (II) presence of oral symptoms, (III) evidence of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, (IV) focal sialadenitis upon
minor salivary gland biopsy, (V) instrumental evidence of salivary gland involvement, and (VI) presence of SSA or SSB autoantibodies.
Diagnosis of pSS requires 4 of the six criteria.5,9 As there are no specific diagnostic criteria for pSS in children, and the adult criteria
are often used. The diagnosis of childhood SS may be difficult because the classical diagnostic criteria that are successfully used for
adults are often not fulfilled by children at disease onset. The onset of disease may not only be different in children, but also
characterized by nonspecific symptoms. Frequently, salivary gland enlargement or recurrent parotitis is observed; sicca symptoms are rarely
referred.2 Laboratory signs are present early during the course of disease and include hypergammaglobulinemia, positive tests for anti-SS-A
and/or anti-SSB, a high titer of speckled antinuclear antibodies, and/or the presence of rheumatoid factor.10 pSS is rare in children and
adolescents.4,6,11 During a three-year study, Cimaz et al.2 collected data on 40 patients from ten different centers worldwide. The most
common manifestation reported in their study was recurrent parotid swelling (72.5%) at the onset of disease, whereas ocular and/or oral
symptoms were only found in a minority of children. Other clinical signs and symptoms observed at disease onset were arthritis (10%), fever
(10%), fatigue (7.5%), and submandibular swelling (5%). Similar results were observed in other reports.6,12 The differential diagnosis of
recurrent parotitis is broad in children and includes mechanical, infectious, malignant, and inflammatory etiologies.6 It is important to
note that in both the children in this case study, recurrent parotitis was the initial clinical manifestation of pSS. Therefore, recurrent
parotitis should alert the clinician to the possibility of pSS.6,12 Familial cases of pSS are rare (Table 1).6,8, Lichtenfeld et al.
described one patient with SS in whom a primary parotid gland lymphoma subsequently developed.8 Moreover, two of four siblings had evidence
of SS, and the authors suggested that genetic influences may facilitate the development of SS. Houghton et al. reported pSS in dizygotic
adolescent twins; recurrent parotitis was the initial clinical manifestation in both parents.6 The authors proposed that pSS is likely a
polygenic disorder resulting from several genes interacting with environmental factors. Some studies of pSS showed that it has a strong
association with HLA-DR3.6,13,14 However, recent studies have suggested that pSS is a complex, polygenic disorder sharing common genetic
determinants with related autoimmune diseases, such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA).14 Recent advances
in SLE and RA provide valuable insights into the potential genetic complexity of SS.14 Several families with multiplex SS have also been
described,6,15,16 and relatives often have other autoimmune diseases, such as SS (12%), autoimmune thyroid disease (AITD) (14%), RA (14%),
and SLE (5%–10%).17,18 In conclusion, although pSS is a complex genetic disorder, familial cases of SS are rarely reported. In children, pSS
may be underdiagnosed because of the lack of classic sicca symptoms. However, pSS should be included in the differential diagnosis of
recurrent parotid swelling, and when diagnosed, siblings should be evaluated. Fundação Amparo à Pesquisa Estado São Paulo-Brasil (FAPESP
2008/02917-0, Conselho Nacional Pesquisa Desenvolvimento-Brasil CNPq (300447/2009-4). No potential conflict of interest was reported. Case
reports of familial Sjögren's Syndrome. Ks: keratoconjunctivitis sicca; X: xerostomia, PS: parotid swelling; RP: Raynaud's phenomenon.
