Vocal fold lesions related to autoimmune diseases are rheumatoid nodules and, to a lesser extent, bamboo nodes. Mostly transverse, they are
located in the middle third of the vocal cord and exhibit a yellowish appearance. The characteristic shape of these lesions led to their
name. These vocal fold deposits may interfere with the normal vibratory cycle during phonation and thus may be an unusual cause of
hoarseness. We present a 43-year-old woman with known mixed connective tissue disease and a dysphonia. Laryngostroboscopy showed bamboo
nodes as described above. We applied several laryngeal injections of cortisone as described previously in the literature. Since this
treatment did not lead to a sufficient voice improvement, we attempted to surgically remove the deposits. After the surgery, the voice
improved considerably. In all patients with rheumatic diseases who suffer from a rough, breathy, or unstable voice, a laryngostroboscopic
examination should be done. If, however, a bamboo node lesion of the vocal folds is found by the laryngologists, an associated autoimmune
disorder must be assumed, and adequate diagnostic procedures have to be initiated. Local laryngeal injections (1–3 times) with steroids
should be the first line of therapy. In unsuccessful cases, subsequent surgery can be a useful treatment of bamboo nodes to stabilize and
improve voice quality. So far, there are relatively few published cases of rheumatoid nodule formation involving vocal folds or other parts
of the larynx. Raven et al. were the first to describe small submucous rheumatoid nodules in the larynx and epiglottis. In 1993, Hosako
described a case of systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) in which the submucosal lesions in the vocal folds did not resemble the rounded
nodules, and he described these unusual lesions as “bamboo-joint-like” . Murano used the term “vocal fold bamboo nodes” to simplify the
nomenclature of the same feature . Here we present symptoms, clinical findings, and histopathology in a patient with bamboo nodes, which are
associated with mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD). Therapeutic procedures of bamboo nodes are discussed. In June 2004, a 43-year-old
female primary school teacher had a sudden onset of hoarseness. She consulted an otolaryngologist and received antibiotics, which did not
improve her voice quality. In November 2004, she was first examined in our Department of Pedaudiology and Phoniatrics at the Medical School
Hannover. A mixed connective tissue disease (MCTD) had been diagnosed in 1998. Raynaud’s phenomenon has been present until today. The blood
examination had revealed antinuclear (ANA) and ribonuclease-sensitive (RNP) antibodies. Recent X-ray of the thorax showed subpleural
emphysematous signs in the upper lung and basal interstitial reticular changing. As recommended by her immunologist, she did not receive
prednisolone as a maintenance dose. The most prominent perceptual feature was an unstable voice with intermittent roughness. She also
complained that an increased effort was required to produce voice. The rigid laryngeal endoscopy revealed bilateral whitish transverse band
stripes in the submucosa, which lent a slightly protruded aspect to the vocal folds. One lesion was found at the junction of the middle and
posterior thirds of the right vocal fold, and another one was observed in the middle of the left vocal fold (Fig. 1). The site of the
bilateral lesion became more evident during the stroboscopic examination. Moreover, the stroboscopic view during chest voice phonation
showed a decreased amplitude vibration throughout the vocal folds except for the lesion, where no vibratory pattern between the portions
anterior and posterior to the transverse lesion in the vocal fold was visible in the continuous image of the
videostroboscopy.Fig. 1Endoscopic view of larynx before surgical therapy: bilateral whitish transverse band stripes on both sides of vocal
folds Endoscopic view of larynx before surgical therapy: bilateral whitish transverse band stripes on both sides of vocal folds Maximum
phonation time was 12.9 s (mean 21 s, normal ≥ 7 s). Real-time analysis of connected speech during reading a short text (“Der Nordwind und
die Sonne”; a German equivalent to the Rainbow passage) showed a mean fundamental frequency of 167 Hz (adult women range 190–240 Hz) and an
interperiodic irregularity of 26.57% (normal < 11%). On the basis of other case reports in the literature, we suggested an intralesional
steroid injection. This was applied four times using prednisolone (5 mg) in both vocal folds. Inter-injection interval was 1 week. After the
second injection, the voice improved. Since the patient still wished further improvement, we injected steroids for the third time, but
unfortunately the voice became hoarse again. We decided to apply a fourth injection, but the voice quality did not change after that.
Finally, we decided to perform an excision of the lesions. Microlaryngoscopic surgery was done under general anesthesia in January 2005. The
surgical technique consisted of an incision lateral to the lesion on the superior surface of the vocal fold, followed by exploration of the
mucosal layer along and under the lesion. A hard and crumbly whitish substance without an encapsulating structure was found under the
mucosal layer, which joint the vocal ligament transversally. Because of the infiltration depth, the substance could not be removed
completely on both sides without endangering the m. vocalis. The histopathologic examination of vocal cord biopsies (hematoxylin–eosin
staining) revealed an extensive fibrinoid necrosis surrounded by a rim of histiocytes in a palisading fashion. The histiocyte-rich
granulomatous infiltrate with a necrotic core closely resembled rheumatoid nodules. On morphologic grounds, a connective tissue disease was
suspected in the histopathology report (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Pathology of vocal fold lesion: fibrinoid necrosis surrounded by a rim of histiocytes
in a palisading fashion. Histiocyte-rich granulomatous infiltrate with a necrotic core close. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain ×20) Pathology of
vocal fold lesion: fibrinoid necrosis surrounded by a rim of histiocytes in a palisading fashion. Histiocyte-rich granulomatous infiltrate
with a necrotic core close. (Hematoxylin and eosin stain ×20) In March 2005, 2 months after surgery, the patient’s voice was better than
before surgery and acceptable for normal and professional voice use. She returned to her teaching activities. Following surgery, the patient
received speech training for several months (20 times) in order to stabilize voice quality. One month after surgery, a laryngoscopic
examination showed reduced bilateral whitish transverse band stripes in the submucosa (Fig. 3). The stroboscopic view during chest voice
phonation demonstrated the already-known decreased amplitude vibration throughout the vocal folds with the exception of the lesion on the
left side. On the right side, a small vibratory pattern between the portions anterior and posterior to the transverse lesion in the vocal
fold was visible again in the continuous image of the videostroboscopy. Maximum phonation time was 14.5 s. Real-time analysis of speech
showed a mean fundamental frequency of 195 Hz and an interperiodic irregularity of 10.9% (normal < 10%). In comparison with data from before
the first conservative treatment, there is an improvement in all aspects of voice quality as measured by objective means.Fig. 3Endoscopic
view of larynx after surgical therapy: bilateral reduced whitish transverse band stripes on both sides of vocal folds Endoscopic view of
larynx after surgical therapy: bilateral reduced whitish transverse band stripes on both sides of vocal folds In August 2010, the
stroboscopic view during chest voice phonation demonstrated the already-known decreased amplitude vibration throughout the vocal folds with
the exception of the lesion on the left side. On the right side, a small vibratory pattern between the portions anterior and posterior to
the transverse lesion in the vocal fold was visible again in the continuous image of the videostroboscopy. Maximum phonation time was
15.0 s. Real-time analysis of speech showed a mean fundamental frequency of 205 Hz and an interperiodic irregularity of 11.84%
(normal < 11%). With an average follow-up period of 6 years, we noted a long-term stabilization of her voice quality. Short intervals of
speech therapy for a year now have been helping to keep good laryngeal function. At the moment, she is working full-time as a teacher.
Laryngeal manifestations in autoimmune diseases have been known for a long time and may include cricoarytenoid arthritis, mucous
inflammation, subglottic stenosis, vasculitis, laryngeal edema, vocal fold paralysis, infection, or vocal fold lesions such as vocal fold
rheumatoid nodules . Especially bamboo nodes are poorly recognized as a laryngeal manifestation of autoimmune disease. Rheumatoid nodules
are most likely to appear in areas subject to repeated micro trauma. It is at the midpoint of the membranous vocal folds that the contact
forces are greatest during vibration . This possibly explains why rheumatic deposits develop at this specific site and not elsewhere . In
many cases of bamboo nodes, a systemic lupus erythematous (SLE) was diagnosed, but these lesions have also been described in patients with
rheumatoid arthritis, Sjögren’s syndrome, Hashimoto’s thyroiditis, and progressive systemic sclerosis . Occasionally, bamboo nodes appear in
advance of other symptoms [2, 10] with serologic abnormalities as the only associated findings. These may include elevations in the
sedimentation rate, rheumatoid factor, Sjögren’s antibodies, and antinuclear antibody titers, as well as hypergammaglobulinemia. Progression
to multisystemic connective tissue disease after the diagnosis of bamboo nodes is not inevitable, and in some patients, bamboo nodes appear
to remain the only sign of disease for years . Follow-up over several years also suggests that bamboo nodes are related to autoimmune
activity [3, 12]. In literature review, all patients were women, and in most of the cases, an autoimmune disease had been diagnosed before
the presence of bamboo nodes. Although the number of the cases described in the literature is still scarce, bamboo nodes are most frequently
described in SLE patients (Table 1).Table 1Review of the literature on bamboo nodesNo.Sex/ageDiseaseTreatment1F28Hosako SLESteroid
drugs1F51Nishinarita et al. UCTS, autoimmune hepatitisSteroid drugs1F/51Tsunoda et al. SLE, autoimmune hepatitisSteroid drugs4F/28Hosako-
Naito et al. SLESurgeryF/48HashimotoSurgeryF/32Progressive systemic sclerosisSurgeryF/27High ANASurgery2F/28Murano et al.
SLESurgeryF/36Sjögren’s diseaseSurgery and steroid drugs19F/?Perouse et al. 2x RA3x SLE2x Sjögren’s diseaseMCTD11 no autoimmune diseaseAll
patients surgery11All FYlitalo et al. 5x RAAge 16–60, mean 37 yearsSLEProgressive systemic sclerosis2x Sjögren’s diseaseMCTDArthralgia,
myalgiaMedical treatment unknownProteinuria5 of all patients surgery4F/36Ramos et al. MCTDSteroid drugsF/31MCTDSteroid drugsF/46SLESteroid
drugsF/35SLESteroid drugsF/28SLESteroid drugs1F/24Immerman et al. RASteroid drugs1F/46Schwemmle et al. MCTDSteroid drugs (lar.
injection)2F/29Hilgert et al. MCTDSpeech therapyF/31MCTDSpeech therapy and steroid drugs1F/38Li et al. Elevated ANA, no clinical
signsSurgerySLE systemic lupus erythematosus, UCTS undifferentiated connective tissue syndrome, RA rheumatoid arthritis, MCTD mixed
connective tissue syndrome, lar Laryngeal Review of the literature on bamboo nodes SLE systemic lupus erythematosus, UCTS undifferentiated
connective tissue syndrome, RA rheumatoid arthritis, MCTD mixed connective tissue syndrome, lar Laryngeal Murano believes that bamboo nodes
are a sign of activity of the autoimmune disorder . Thus, he and others believe that clinical treatment with (systemic) steroids should be
tried first [3, 8, 11] Murano also recommended voice rest. Hosako-Naito described a postoperative treatment with oral steroids, which helped
to reduce recurrence . In general, the aim of conservative therapy of rheumatoid nodules with local injection of prednisolone in the lesions
is a reduction of the lesion masses and the inflammatory process. In addition to previous reports, we believe that local corticoid injection
into the vocal folds does have a precise effect and should be tried first . In contrast to other reports, Hilgert proposed a speech therapy
first without additional laryngeal injection steroid therapy . Perouse described the possibility of a speech therapy after laryngeal surgery
to retrain normal laryngeal function . We recognized improved voice, endoscopic results, and voice range profiles after surgery. Speech
therapy after surgery may have been stabilizing voice quality until today. Murano recommended careful surgery without harming the vocal
ligament, if there is an incomplete disappearance of the lesion or if the patient has an urgent reason to improve voice quality, and if the
underlying disease is well controlled . In contrast, Hosako-Naito discussed a complete excision of the lesion to reduce a recurrence .
Perouse reported 19 cases treated by surgery with a favorable outcome . The recommended extent of surgery was not described. In general, the
aim of surgery in these patients is to diminish instability and to recreate a better vibratory pattern. In our case, careful surgery with
reduction of the lesion on both sides was done. After this treatment, the voice’s stability and clearness improved so much that the patient
could carry on her teaching activities. Nevertheless, it is not yet clear which treatment leads to the best outcome. This requires further
investigation. Rheumatologists and otolaryngologists both play an important role in the care and the clinical investigation of patients with
autoimmune diseases and hoarseness, as the disorder may manifest itself with hoarseness before the diagnosis of an autoimmune disease can be
established. Although the pathophysiology is not yet clear, highly demanding voice use may be related to the appearance of bamboo nodes in
autoimmune disease patients. This case report may add some leads how to treat patients with bamboo nodes:Laryngeally injected steroids
should be tried in the first place. They seem to be effective in achieving a good outcome, resulting in voice improvement and alleviation of
clinical symptoms, but they should not be applied more than three times, with a 14-day interval between injections.As the second line, after
ineffective laryngeal injection of steroids, surgery with careful partial excision and reduction of the lesions is recommended.A speech
therapy as an adjunct should be considered to further stabilize voice quality after laryngeal steroid injection/surgery or as a compensation
procedure in cases that cannot be treated sufficiently with either steroid injections or surgery. Laryngeally injected steroids should be
tried in the first place. They seem to be effective in achieving a good outcome, resulting in voice improvement and alleviation of clinical
symptoms, but they should not be applied more than three times, with a 14-day interval between injections. As the second line, after
ineffective laryngeal injection of steroids, surgery with careful partial excision and reduction of the lesions is recommended. A speech
therapy as an adjunct should be considered to further stabilize voice quality after laryngeal steroid injection/surgery or as a compensation
procedure in cases that cannot be treated sufficiently with either steroid injections or surgery. None. This article is distributed under
the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use, distribution, and reproduction in
any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
