To the Editor: Diseases caused by nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) in patients with Sjögren syndrome have rarely been reported (1,2). In
addition, showerheads in residential bathrooms as a source of Mycobacterium abscessus–induced disseminated disease have never been reported
(3–5). A 65-year-old woman with Sjögren syndrome sought treatment at National University Taiwan hospital with fever (38.6°C) and a 3-month
history of lymphadenopathy over the left neck, left submandibular, and bilateral inguinal areas. Active Sjögren syndrome with lymphadenitis
was considered because of progressive hypergammaglobulinemia (IgG 3,030 mg/dL, reference range 700–1,600 mg/dL) and high titers of
anti–Sjögren syndrome (SS) A (561 AU/mL) and anti-SSB antibodies (220 AU/mL; positive >120 AU/mL). A chest radiograph obtained 1 month
before admission showed no active lung lesions; however, cultures of 3 samples of sputum all yielded M. abscessus bacteria (isolate A).
Pathologic examination of excised lymph nodes of the bilateral inguinal area showed reactive lymphoid proliferation and granulomatous
inflammation with multinucleate giant cell formation, suggestive of mycobacterial disease; however, there was no evidence of caseating
necrosis or acid-fast bacilli. ELISA results were negative for antibodies to HIV-1, HIV-2, HTLV-1, and HTLV-2. Parenteral antimicrobial
drugs (imipenem, 500 mg every 8 h) and amikacin (250 mg 2×/d) along with oral clarithromycin (500 mg 2×/d) were administered. Fever subsided
3 days after lymph node excision with concomitant administration of antimycobacterial agents. The patient was treated successfully with
intravenous antimicrobial drugs for a total of 14 days, followed by oral clarithromycin (500 mg 2×/d) and doxycycline (100 mg 2×/d) therapy
for 4 months. Follow-up blood cultures 10 weeks after initiation of antimycobacterial agents were negative for the organism. M. abscessus
bacteria grew on cultures of the excised lymph nodes (isolate B) and 2 sets of blood cultures (isolate C). A total of 6 swab specimens taken
from the interior surface of the showerheads from the 6 bathrooms of the patient’s 2 houses (3 in each house), 1 in Taichung (central
Taiwan) and the other in Taipei (northern Taiwan), and 6 shower water samples of the 6 bathrooms were submitted for mycobacterial cultures.
Four of the 6 swab samples (isolates D–G), 2 (isolates D and E) from Taichung and 2 (isolates F and G) from Taipei, grew M. abscessus
bacteria. Cultures of shower water from the 6 bathrooms were all negative for the organism. These isolates were identified as M. abscessus
by conventional biochemical methods and confirmed by 16S rRNA gene sequencing analysis and a PCR–restriction fragment length
polymorphism–based method targeting a 439-bp fragment of the 65-kDa HSP gene as previously described (6,7). Random amplified polymorphic DNA
patterns of these isolates (isolates A–G) as determined by means of arbitrarily primed PCR using 3 different random primers were identical
(i.e., they shared every band) (Figure). Three unrelated isolates of M. abscessus recovered from cutaneous lesions of 3 patients who were
treated at the same hospital in 2010 had distinct random amplified patterns that differed from those generated from isolates A–G (Figure).
Random amplified polymorphic DNA patterns of 8 isolates of Mycobacterium abscessus generated by arbitrarily primed PCR with the primers
OPA2, OPA18, and M13 (Operon Technologies, Inc., Alameda, CA, USA). Lanes: M, molecular size marker (1-kb ladder; Gibco BRL,
Gaithersburg,MD, USA); 1, isolate A; 2, isolate B; 3, isolate C; 4, isolate D; 5, isolate F; 6–8, three unrelated isolates of M. abscessus
recovered from cutaneous lesions of 3 patients who were treated at National Taiwan University hospital in 2010 (see text for designation of
isolates). A previous study in Taiwan showed that the incidence (no. cases/100,000 inpatients and outpatients) of all pulmonary disease
caused by NTM increased significantly from 2.7 (1.26) in 2000 to 10.2 (7.94) in 2008 (6). The most common organism in localized pulmonary
infection and disseminated infection was Mycobacteriam avium cellular complex, and M. abscessus predominated in skin and soft tissue
infection and lymphadenitis (6,8). The rise in pulmonary infections or colonization by NTM over recent decades, particularly among
immunocompromised populations, is reported to be partly associated with the increased use of showers (3–5,9). Recently, a few studies have
shown a link between pulmonary M. avium complex infections and home showerhead water microbiology (3,4). Although pulmonary disease caused
by M. abscessus did not develop in the patient reported here, multiple respiratory specimens showed evidence of pulmonary colonization. The
fact that cultures of the swabs taken from the interior surface of 4 showerheads were positive for M. abscessus but that cultures of the
shower water were negative for the organism support previous findings that assemblages of NTM can occur inside biofilm that forms on the
interior surface of showerheads (5). The same strains of M. abscessus isolated from different showerheads suggested the possibility of
contamination in the environment by the aerosolized microorganism from respiratory secretions of the patient. The mechanisms of
susceptibility to mycobacterial infection in the patient with Sjögren’s syndrome remain unknown (1,2). Previous studies suggest that toll-
like receptor 2, dectin-1, tumor necrosis factor–α, interferon-γ, leptin, T-cells, and possibly neutrophils are major components in the host
defense of HIV-noninfected patients against rapidly growing mycobacterial infections, including those caused by M. abscessus (10). In
summary, we report a case of bacteremic lymphadenitis caused by M. abscessus in a patient with Sjögren syndrome. Our data provide evidence
that the interior surface of showerheads may serve as a source of infection by this waterborne and aerosolized microorganism. Suggested
citation for this article: Kuo Y-M, Cheng A, Po-Chang W, Hsieh S-C, Hsieh S-M, Hsueh P-R, et al. Disseminated Mycobacterium abscessus
infection and showerheads, Taiwan . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2011 Nov [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1711.110050
