Hypertension is associated with atherosclerosis and cardiac and vascular structural and functional changes. Myocardial ischemia may arise in
hypertension independent of coronary artery disease through an interaction between several pathophysiological mechanisms, including left
ventricular hypertrophy, increased arterial stiffness and reduced coronary flow reserve associated with microvascular disease and
endothelial dysfunction. The present case report demonstrates how contrast stress echocardiography can be used to diagnose myocardial
ischemia in a hypertensive patient with angina pectoris but without significant obstructive coronary artery disease. The myocardial ischemia
was due to severe resistant hypertension complicated with concentric left ventricular hypertrophy and increased arterial stiffness.
Hypertension is associated with atherosclerosis and cardiovascular structural and functional changes predisposing hypertensive patients to
myocardial ischemia also in the absence of significant epicardial coronary artery disease through a number of pathophysiological mechanisms.
Increased arterial stiffness is common in hypertension, and associated with structural changes in the left ventricle, typically concentric
hypertrophy or concentric remodelling . Increased arterial stiffness may also contribute to myocardial ischemia as a consequence of the
earlier return of reflection waves in stiff arteries and hence a reduction in diastolic myocardial perfusion pressure . The combination of
muscle-capillary mismatch due to concentric left ventricular hypertrophy and reduced diastolic myocardial perfusion pressure due to
increased arterial stiffness may lead to severe myocardial ischemia. Typically these patients develop myocardial fibrosis with subsequent
deterioration of diastolic and systolic function and finally clinical heart failure . In addition, coronary microvascular dysfunction is
common in hypertension and contributes to left ventricular ischemia . Recently the diagnostic and prognostic value of Doppler derived
coronary flow reserve measurement by vasodilator stress echocardiography was demonstrated . However, myocardial hypoperfusion may also be
directly visualized by contrast stress echocardiography . This case report demonstrates the usefulness of including contrast stress
echocardiography in multimodality cardiovascular imaging in diagnostic work-up of a patient with refractory hypertension presenting with
exercise induced chest pain. A 42-years old African man was referred for stress echocardiography due to exercise induced chest pain.
Clinically he had resistant hypertension based on sitting blood pressure (140/100 mmHg) in spite of treatment with 4 different
antihypertensive drugs, including a β-blocker, calcium-blocker, diuretic and angiotensin-2 blocker . Twenty-four hour ambulatory blood
pressure was on average 127/85 mmHg, but 39% of systolic and 64% of diastolic measurements were elevated, and the diurnal variation was
reduced. Further diagnostic work-up did not reveal any signs of secondary hypertension. His medical history included complete recovery after
coiling of a cerebral aneurysm associated with subarachnoid bleeding in 2004. There was a family history of hypertension and the patient had
undergone coronary angiography in 2006 which was reported as normal. The electrocardiogram was consistent with left ventricular hypertrophy
by Sokolow-Lyon criteria. The renal function was slightly reduced with elevated serum creatinine level (112 μmol/l, normal reference range
60-105 μmol/l) but normal estimated glomerular filtration rate >60 ml/min/1.73 m2. No micro albuminuria was present (albumin/creatinine
ratio 1.2 mg/mmol, normal reference < 2.5 mg/mmol). Echocardiography demonstrated concentric left ventricular hypertrophy with left
ventricular mass index 215 g/m2 (normal reference value in men <116 g/m2) and relative wall thickness 0.52 (normal reference value <0.43)
(Figure 1). Left ventricular ejection fraction was normal, but longitudinal function was reduced, consistent with reduced systolic left
ventricular myocardial function and diastolic dysfunction grade 1 with normal filling pressure was also found. Left ventricular end-
diastolic pressure and peak systolic left ventricular wall stress was in high normal range, 12 mmHg and 440 kdynes/cm2 (normal range 275-451
kdynes/cm2), respectively Echocardiography demonstrating concentric left ventricular hypertrophy in parasternal long-axis and apical
4-chamber view. Pulse wave analysis by aplanation tonometry (SphygmoCor®, AtCor Medical Pty. Ltd, Sydney, Australia), of carotid and femoral
arterial pressure waves demonstrated that central aortic systolic blood pressure and pulse pressure were in the normal range on current
medication (143 mmHg and 41 mmHg, respectively) (Figure 2) . The augmentation pressure was elevated (12 mmHg) and the augmentation index was
in the upper normal range (12 mmHg or 25% when adjusted for heart rate). Both ejection duration (31%) and sub-endocardial viability ratio
(198%) were normal. However, age adjusted pulse wave velocity was high (11.6 ± 1.1 m/s) consistent with increased arterial stiffness (Figure
2) . Carotid and aortic pulse wave analysis and carotid-femoral pulse wave velocity assessed by SphygmoCor®. Contrast stress
echocardiography with real-time low-mechanical index imaging and destruction replenishment, using Luminity® (Lantheus Medical Imaging, North
Billerica, Massachusetts, USA) ultrasound contrast agent and a standardized dobutamine atropine stress protocol, was performed. At rest wall
motion score in all 17-segments of the left ventricle was normal, while globally delayed contrast enhancement in the left ventricular
myocardium was found, in particular in the apical septum (Figure 3, Additional file 1). During dobutamine-atropine stress the patient
experienced chest pain. No stress induced wall motion abnormalities were detected. However, the contrast enhancement was further delayed
during stress, in particularly in the apical septum and anterior wall (Figure 3, Additional file 2). Awaiting further examination with
coronary angiography he was hospitalized with acute chest pain without electrocardiographic changes, but slightly elevated serum troponin T
level (18-19 mmol/l, reference value <15 mmol/l) without typical rise and fall pattern. Coronary angiography demonstrated non-obstructive
coronary artery disease with non-significant changes in the left anterior descending coronary artery (Figure 4). Contrast echocardiography
in apical 4-chamber view at rest and during peak dobutamine-atropine stress demonstrating delayed contrast enhancement in left ventricular
myocardium. Coronary angiography demonstrating left dominant coronary artery circulation and a hypoplastic right coronary artery, both
without significant epicardial coronary artery stenoses. This case report demonstrates how contrast stress echocardiography may be used in
cardiovascular multimodality imaging work-up of hypertensive patients with chest pain and non-obstructive coronary artery disease. The
present patient had symptomatic severe myocardial ischemia documented by contrast echocardiography in the absence of significant
angiographic coronary artery disease . Myocardial ischemia was induced through an interaction between non-obstructive coronary artery
disease, increased arterial stiffness and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy, three well known types of cardiovascular end-organ damage
in hypertension . Hypertension is recognized as a risk factor for development of atherosclerosis including vascular smooth muscle growth and
lengthening of arteries (depicted as tortuous coronary arteries in Figure 4) and endothelial dysfunction . Non-obstructive coronary artery
disease is not uncommon in hypertensive patients undergoing coronary angiography due to chest pain, and detection of reduced Doppler derived
coronary flow reserve during vasodilator stress echocardiography, reflecting microvascular disease and endothelial dysfunction in such
patients, has been shown to predict worse prognosis in spite of normal wall motion score during conventional stress echocardiography .
Increased arterial stiffness is a well-known marker of cardiovascular risk and disease in hypertension . Current guidelines recommend
assessment of arterial stiffness from carotid-femoral artery pulse wave velocity, and this was high for age in this patient consistent with
increased arterial stiffness . The increased stiffness causes refection waves to return earlier to proximal aorta and thereby reduce the
myocardial diastolic perfusion pressure. The myocardial diastolic perfusion pressure is of crucial importance to the perfusion of the
myocardium, particularly during exercise, due to increased heart rate and hence shortening of the diastole. Concentric left ventricular
hypertrophy is the prognostically most unfavourable geometric pattern found in hypertension and particularly common in hypertensive patients
of African origin . Hypertension increases the left ventricular workload and thereby the oxygen demands of the myocardium. In particular
concentric hypertrophy is also associated with a muscle-capillary mismatch as well as high endocardial wall stress which may contribute to
the diagnosed myocardial ischemia in our patient . Chronic ischemia may promote structural changes in the myocardium and development of
fibrosis that together with functional myocardial impairment due to ischemia induced metabolic changes causes heart failure, the end stage
of hypertensive heart disease. Contrast stress echocardiography is particularly suited to detect myocardial ischemia. In accordance with
current guidelines a contrast agent should be added during stress echocardiography when 2 or more left ventricular segments cannot be
sufficiently evaluated . This does not only improve wall motion assessment but allows simultaneous evaluation of myocardial ischemia as
contrast microbubbles are isolated intravascular tracers directly reflecting myocardial perfusion and capillary density . Even if direct
quantification of myocardial perfusion has proven difficult so far, qualitative detection of delayed contrast enhancement has been shown to
be more sensitive to detect coronary artery disease than wall motion alone . As ultrasound contrast often is indicated due to image quality,
simultaneous assessment of myocardial perfusion adds important information on regional myocardial ischemia with high spatial resolution
without extra cost. Furthermore, the safety of contrast echocardiography and potential side effects are well documented . Also in
hypertensive patients, development of wall motion abnormalities during stress echocardiography is associated with increased cardiovascular
event rate . Hypertension is associated with both increased prevalence of severe coronary artery disease as well as increased prevalence of
non-obstructive ischemic heart disease. Echocardiographic diagnosis of microvascular disease should not be made unless obstructive coronary
artery disease has been ruled out by coronary angiography or coronary computer tomographic angiography . Diagnosis of non-obstructive
ischemic heart disease is challenging and requires use of multimodality imaging as demonstrated by the present case. In particular
vasodilation stress echocardiography assessing coronary flow reserve and myocardial perfusion assessment by contrast stress echocardiography
or magnetic resonance imaging have proven useful in diagnosis of non-obstructive ischemic heart disease, while this diagnosis may often be
missed on conventional stress echocardiography assessing only wall motion abnormality . Coronary flow reserve <1.91 during adenosine stress
has been associated with increased cardiovascular risk in hypertensive patients independent of the presence of wall motion abnormalities .
Furthermore, a coronary computer tomographic angiography study recently documented reduced prognosis in women with non-obstructive ischemic
heart disease . Therefore, diagnosing symptomatic myocardial ischemia in hypertensive patients without significant coronary artery disease
has important clinical implications and should initiate aggressive anti-hypertensive and anti-ischemic treatment as well as risk factor
modification to improve symptoms and prognosis. In particular, performing 24 hour ambulatory blood pressure recording for optimal assessment
of blood pressure is important in resistant hypertension. Improved blood pressure control in resistant hypertension may be obtained by
adding a small dosage of an aldosterone blocker or amiloride, the latter particularly effective in hypertension in Africans . Furthermore,
treatment with angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors or statins improves microvascular function and symptoms in non-obstructive ischemic
heart disease . Chronic uncontrolled hypertension is associated with development of cardiovascular complications including atherosclerosis,
left ventricular hypertrophy, arterial stiffening and microvascular dysfunction. This can cause symptomatic myocardial ischemia even in the
absence of significant epicardial coronary artery stenoses. In hypertensive patients with exercise induced chest pain and non-obstructive
coronary artery disease, additional multimodality imaging including contrast stress echocardiography and assessment of vascular function is
useful to identify the cause of symptoms and optimally manage such patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MTL has performed the
contrast stress echocardiography and drafted the manuscript. ÅER and EG have critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. Contrast echocardiography at baseline demonstrating the delayed contrast enhancement, in particularly in the
distal part of intraventricular septum in an apical 4-chamber view. Click here for file Contrast echocardiography at peak dobutamine-
atropine stress demonstrating the globally delayed contrast enhancement in apical 4-chamber view. Click here for file We want to thank Britt
Gjellefall for assessment of vascular function.
