Primary spinal melanomas are extremely rare lesions. In 1906, Hirschberg reported the first primary spinal melanoma, and since then only 40
new cases have been reported. A 47-year-old man was admitted suffering from low back pain, fatigue and loss of body weight persisting for
three months. He had a 17-year-old history of an operated primary spinal melanoma from T7-T9, which had remained stable for these 17 years.
Routine laboratory findings and clinical symptoms aroused suspicion of a metastatic disease. Multislice computed tomography and magnetic
resonance imaging revealed stage-IV melanoma with thoracic, abdominal and skeletal metastases without the recurrence of the primary process.
Transiliac crest core bone biopsy confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic melanoma. It is important to know that in all cases of back ore
skeletal pain and unexplained weight loss, malignancy must always be considered in the differential diagnosis, especially in the subjects
with a positive medical history. Patients who have back, skeletal, or joint pain that is unresponsive to a few weeks of conservative
treatment or have known risk factors with or without serious etiology, are candidates for imaging studies. The present case demonstrates
that complete surgical resection alone may result in a favourable outcome, but regular medical follow-up for an extended period, with the
purpose of an early detection of a metastatic disease, is highly recommended. Malignant melanoma is an aggressive tumour with a variable
prognosis: that depends on tumour site and the extent of surgical resection. According to epidemiological data, its annual incidence has
increased significantly in recent years . Primary melanoma of the central nervous system (CNS) is rare and accounts for approximately 1% of
all cases of melanoma . They are either intradural, extradural or have both intra and extradural components. However, primary spinal
extradural melanoma is extremely rare . It is a solitary lesion associated with leptomeninges and neural crest, the tissue source of its
precursory melanocytes. In 1906, Hirschberg reported the first primary spinal melanoma, and since then only 40 new cases have been reported
. We present a case of primary thoracic extradural spinal melanoma occurring with low back pain and metastatic disease 17 years after the
initial surgical resection. In 1993, a 30-year-old man without accompanying comorbidity, was hospitalized for a sudden bilateral spastic
paraparesis. General physical examination revealed progressive bilateral lower extremity weakness associated with hypoesthesia distal of the
dermatome level of T9. A plain myelography showed epidural block of contrast flowing along the spinal canal from the level of T7. Therefore,
laminectomy was performed at the T7-T9 level which revealed a dark, pigmented, extradurally located tumour measuring 2.5 × 1 cm., without
infiltration of dura and spreading through vertebral foramina. Histopathologic and immunohistochemical analysis confirmed a malignant
melanoma (Figure 1A and 1B). The patient did not receive any radiotherapy because surgical resection appeared completely without opening the
dura. The patient was also subjected to further clinical and oncological evaluation which did not reveal any other melanoma lesions or
metastases and other primary process could not be established. With these data and according to Hayward's criteria , the diagnosis of
primary spinal melanoma was established. He was discharged from the hospital in a good general condition with the recommendation for a
regular follow-up and he was cleared disease-free a few years after the operation without any need for specific oncological treatment.
Histopathological evaluation. Hematoxylin and eosin histologic analysis revealed a highly cellular malignant tumour with prominent nucleoli
(image A 100×, images B and C 200×, image D 400×). Immunohistochemical study shows that the tumour cells stained diffusely positive for
Melan-A and HMB-45, consistent with the diagnosis of melanoma (images E 200×, image F 400×). In 2010, 17 years later, the same patient was
admitted to our rheumatology department with a three-month history of low back pain, fatigue and loss of body weight. He was treated with
medication and physiotherapy, but his symptoms did not subside. Physical examination showed a right sacroiliac joint tenderness on palpation
with a positive Mennel's sign, Lasègue's sign was bilaterally negative and the lumbar vertebral segment motility was very painful. In this
period he had no history of fever or pain in other joints, bones and muscles. He did not notice any skin lesions and he didn't have any
other problems other than the above. The stool and urine were normal. General physical examination revealed no signs of lymphadenopathy,
splenomegaly, hepatomegaly or other abnormalities. Routine laboratory tests showed anemia (hemoglobin 102 g/L, range 138-175),
thrombocytosis (641 × 109/L, range 158-424), low serum iron concentration (3 μmol/L, range 8-30), high serum ferritin concentration (790
μg/L, range 15-150), high serum lactate-dehydrogenase activity (745 U/L, range 1-241) and high erythrocyte sedimentation rate (96 mm/h,
range 3-23). Further laboratory studies and blood chemistry including serum glucose level, alkaline phosphatase, renal and hepatic
parameters, electrolytes, protein electrophoresis, coagulogram, tumour markers, urinanlysis, were all within normal limits. We suspected he
had developed a metastatic disease because the patient had a history of primary spinal melanoma. Chest radiography showed a right hilar
lymphadenopathy and pulmonary metastatic lesions. Pelvis and thoracolumbosacral plain radiographs revealed multiple metastatic lesions.
Tc-99 m bone scintigraphy showed increased osteoblastic activity, which predominantly affected the axial skeleton. (Figure 2). Transiliac
crest core bone biopsy showed tumour tissue composed of large melanocytes with prominent nucleoli, which makes up 90% of all bone marrow
cells (Figure 1C and 1D). Immunohystochemically, tumour cells give a positive reaction to Melan-A and HMB-45 consistent with the diagnosis
of metastatic melanoma (Figure 1E and 1F). A staging contrast enhanced multislice computed tomography (MSCT) of the chest, abdomen and
pelvis revealed stage-IV melanoma with thoracic lymphadenopathy, multiple osteolytic lesions and numerous metastases within lung parenchyma,
liver and spleen (Figure 3C-3G). The control magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the thoracic spine showed no recurrence of the primary
process (Figure 3A and 3B). The patient was seen by a medical oncologist with a view to chemotherapy. We have decided to start with
Dartmouth regimen (dacarbazine, cisplatin, carmustine, and tamoxifen) which has been reported to induce major tumour responses in 40% to 50%
of stage-IV melanoma patients . He has received only three cycles of Dartmouth regimen and he tolerated the treatment very well.
Unfortunately, during his next hospitalization he died as a result of febrile neutropenia, sepsis and multiple organ failure. Bone
scintigraphy. Bone scintigraphy with Tc-99 m demonstrates extensive osteoblastic activity, predominantly located in the axial skeleton
within the spine, pelvis and ribs. Radiological evaluation. Magnetic resonance sagittal T2 weighted image (image A) and postcontrast
sagittal T1 image (image B) of the thoracic spine shows millimetric hyperintense metastases with no residual-recurrent tumor. Multislice
computed tomography of the chest and abdomen demonstrated osteolytic (image G) and parenchymal metastases (arrows) in lungs (images C and
D), liver and spleen (images E and F). Melanomas could occur in any tissue in which melanocytes can normally be found. Primary spinal
melanomas are exceedingly rare malignant tumours whose origin can be illustrated by embriology. In 1859, Virchow showed that primary
melanomas of the CNS developed from melanocytes located in the leptomeninges. Melanoblasts, the precursors of melanocytes are belived to be
derived from the neural crest during early embrionic development. The presence of melanocytes in neural tissue can be explained by the fact
that these melanocytes accompany blood vessels to the leptomeninges and can proliferate in the neural parenchyma . They can also be
precursors to benign melanocytoma, pigmented schwannoma and pigmented medulloblastoma, which is relevant for differential diagnosis . A big
difficulty when discussing melanoma of the CNS is to decide which cases represent primary growths and which are metastatic disease. In
general, melanocytic mass in the CNS is known to be the result of metastasis. Only after detailed clinical work-up including dermatological,
ophtalmological and endoscopic examination, a solitary melanotic lesion of the CNS can be identified as a primary tumour. The following
criteria should also be considered: no melanoma tumour outside the CNS and involvement of the meninges and/or neural tissue . In all cases
of primary spinal melanoma, the clinical presentation suggests progressive spinal cord compression with clinical signs and symptoms of
compressive myelopathy. The neurosurgical treatment is the method of choice, but in some cases where surgery is not possible, radiotherapy
also may be used. Larson et al. showed an average life expectancy of approximately seven years after surgery with radiotherapy. As opposed
to that, the survival time with melanoma of the skin with metastases to CNS was only six months . Considering the well-known metastazing
potential of melanomas, it may seem surprising that primary CNS melanomas do not spread for a long time and may have a favourable outcome
after complete neurosurgical excision. Clinically, this is the main reason why distinction between primary and metastatic melanoma is
important. In the present case, progression of melanoma was controlled for 17 years, which is an unusually long time. The key factor in this
successful, long survival remains unclear. The characteristics of the CNS probably contribute to the nature of this disease and contrary to
melanoma of the skin, lymphatic spread would be impossible because there are no lymphatic vessels in the neural tissue. The blood-brain
barrier of the neural parenchyma probably also prevents the hematogenous spreading. At present, MRI has a leading diagnostic role in
patients with serious spinal pathology but distinction of tumour type based on MRI findings remains difficult. The MRI findings of melanoma
vary deeply depending on the amount of melanin-containing cells and on the presence or absence of hemorrhage . The paramagnetic effect that
derives from the presence of organic radicals from melanin is responsible for hyperintensity on T1 weighted images and hypointensity on T2
weighted images. Although MRI is the primary imaging modality in diagnosis of spinal tumors, histopathologic diagnosis is required to
differentiate benign pathologies from malignant disease. Bony metastases of melanoma exhibit a predilection to spread in the axial skeleton
with an incidence of 70-86% . Plain radiography findings of bony metastasis of melanoma are ostelytic lesions, which can not be
distinguished from other osteolytic metastases on the basis of imaging criteria. Conventional plain radiographs have been reported to
identify approximately 40% of metastatic bone lesions . Radionuclide imaging of bone marrow metastases with a Tc-99 m is very effective,
simple and safe method for the detection of melanoma metastases or recurrent disease . Bone scans remain the study of choice for initial
screening, because of their overall sensitivity, lower cost and ability to assess the entire body conveniently . Since computed tomography
(CT) facilitates simultaneous examination of multiple sites at risk for metastatic disease and may allow earlier detection of metastatic
disease, CT is being used with an increasing frequency for clinical staging of melanoma. It is also being used to monitor clinical response
of patients to different therapy . Whole body positron-emission tomography-CT (PET-CT) was found to be capable of uncovering metastases not
seen with conventional CT alone and could also be used for initial staging . Thus, the ultimate diagnosis can only be made on the basis of
histopathological and immunohystochemical examination. Melanoma is considered a relatively radioresistant tumour . However, some studies
have shown that patients with spinal cord compression may achieve shrinkage of the tumor with radiation therapy . Radiotherapy is reserved
for palliation of symptoms due to local tumour growth , as sole decompressive modality or as an adjuvant to laminectomy . Irradiation
regimens should be selected on the basis of patient long-term or short-term prognosis, and on spinal cord tolerance which limits the
utilisation of high dose per fraction schedules (30 Gy at 2-3 Gy per day in 15-20 days). In 1995, Hamilton and colleagues first described
the use of linear-accelerator-based spinal stereotactic radiosurgery. Most radiosurgical departments currently utilize doses of 12-24 Gy to
the margin of the treatment volume and deliver spinal radiosurgery in 1-5 fractions . The prescription dose depends in part upon the tumor
location and volume as well as the fractionation scheme, surrounding organs at risk, and prior radiotherapy. Melanoma has also been
refractory to most standard systemic therapy for decades. Single-agent or combination chemotherapy drugs in use at this time are of limited
value. The two approved treatments, dacarbazine and interleukin-2, have not demonstrated an impact on overall survival. Some novel regimens
(multiagent chemotherapy, biochemotherapy, biotherapy with interferon-γ and interferon-α, antisense bcl-2 oligonucleotide oblimersen, a
reactive-oxide species inhibitor or a combined approach) have also not significantly impacted overall survival . However, evidence of tumor
regression with prolonged time to progression has been seen in patients with melanoma who received cytotoxic T lymphocyte antibodies
(CTLA-4) . Combination of chemotherapy and/or new monoclonal antibody that overcomes CTLA-4-mediated T-cell suppression (ipilimumab)
improved overall survival . Phase 1 and 2 clinical trials of the BRAF kinase inhibitor vemurafenib produced improved rates of overall and
progression-free survival in patients with previously untreated melanoma with the BRAF V600E mutation . Our understanding of the biology of
melanoma is steadily increasing and there will be a number of new agents in the future which have already entered clinical trials and are
promising combined approaches targeting melanoma by different molecular mechanisms. Finally, early detection of melanoma through patient
education regarding clinical characteristics of melanoma, counselling on the risk of developing a metastatic tumor, self-examination and
medical examination continues to be of the utmost importance. During melanoma follow-up, patients are clinically monitored in order to
detect a relapse. There is currently no scientific consensus on the frequency of follow-up after initial surgical treatment and the use of
imaging techniques. Typically patients will be seen every 3-6 months during the first 3 years and every 6-12 months thereafter. Routine
laboratory tests, tumor markers (S 100B, tyronsinase), ultrasound of lymph nodes, chest radiography, CT or whole body PET/PET-CT scans may
be used in the follow-up of patients with primary melanoma or following treatment of metastases . This case remind us how little we truly
know about the biological behavior of melanoma and the patient's inherent biological response to the tumor. It is important to know that in
all cases of back ore skeletal pain and unexplained weight loss, malignancy must always be considered in the differential diagnosis,
especially in the subjects with a positive medical history. Patients who have back, skeletal, or joint pain that is unresponsive to a few
weeks of conservative treatment or have known risk factors with or without serious etiology, are candidates for imaging studies. Melanomas
are unpredictable tumours with a different clinical course. The present case also demonstrates that complete resection alone may result in a
favourable outcome, but regular medical follow-up for an extended period, patient education and councelling with the purpose of an early
detection of a metastatic disease, is highly recommended. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CNS:
central nervous system; MSCT: multislice computed tomography; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging (MRI); CT: computed tomography; PET-CT:
positron-emission tomography; Gy: gray; CTLA-4: cytotoxic T lymphocyte antibodies; BRAF: proto-oncogene BRAF Each coauthor certifies that he
ore she has no commercial association that might pose a conflict of interest in connection with the submitted article. DK, BA and MM carried
out the study design and writing. MS and NC participated in the data collection and interpretation and drafted the manuscript. RSP, KZ and
SD participated in the design of the study and the figure design. SP participated in the literature search and helped to draft the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The Authors wish to thank Mr. Kristijan Nikolic and Mr. Marko Cip for
technical suggestions in preparation of this manuscript.
