Therapeutic paracentesis is considered to be a relatively safe procedure and is performed commonly for the control of massive ascites in
patients with liver cirrhosis. The commonest puncture site, approximately 4 or 5 cm medial of left anterior superior iliac spine, can be
located across the route of the inferior epigastric artery, which is one of the sites of potential massive bleeding. In a 46-year-old woman
with liver cirrhosis and refractory ascites, a huge abdominal wall hematoma developed after therapeutic paracentesis. The patient was not
stabilized by conservative treatment, and inferior epigastric artery injury was confirmed on angiography. Angiographic coil embolization of
the inferior epigastric artery was conducted, after which the bleeding ceased and the hematoma stopped growing. This case indicates that
physicians performing paracentesis should be aware of the possibility of inferior epigastric artery injury and consider early angiographic
coil embolization when a life-threatening abdominal wall hematoma develops. During the paracentesis, left lower quadrant of abdomen,
especially the site 4 or 5 cm medially apart from anterior superior iliac spine, is a common site used for needling.1,2 If the paracentesis
is performed under the sterile condition with appropriate manner, complications such as infection, bleeding and perforation rarely occur and
usually have relatively good prognosis which need only supportive care.3,4 Inferior epigastric arteries originated from external iliac
artery go up to umbilicus and across the inguinal ring. It can be often injured by invasive procedure, like as paracentesis, retension
suture, or peritoneal dialysis catheter insertion or removal. Once the inferior epigastric arteries and its branches are injured by invasive
devices, direct hematoma or hemoperitoneum can occur in an instant or late pseudoaneurysm formation and its rupture. Although the
paracentesis is considered a less invasive method comparing with other procedures, it is the second most common reason for inferior
epigastric artery injury following abdominal retension suture.5 Main reasons can be suspected following two; first, paracentesis is
performed repetitively at the similar site, left lower quadrant which might be the course of inferior epigastric artery. Second,
paracentesis is mainly indicated for the patients with advanced liver cirrhosis who could have sufficient collateral vessels with increased
chance of injury and coagulopathy with thrombocytopenia. To date, the cases of the injury and rupture of inferior epigastric arterial
pseudoaneurysm owing to repetitive paracentesis have been reported. However, the case of bleeding by direct injury of native inferior
epigastric artery without aneurismal formation has not been reported.6 We here report a case of patient with advanced liver cirrhosis who
was developed a huge abdominal wall hematoma by therapeutic paracentesis and was treated successfully with transcatheter coil embolization
of left inferior epigastric artery. A 46 year-old-female patient with advanced liver cirrhosis and refractory abdominal ascites visited
Hepatology Department because of progressive abdominal distension and 4 kg weight gain accompanying orthopnea. She was diagnosed with
chronic hepatitis B and liver cirrhosis 8 years ago. In recent years, according to progression of liver cirrhosis, ascites could not be
easily controlled by intensive diuretics and low salt diet. She had drunk 80g of alcohol per day. At the admission, the vital signs were
stable with 120/70 mmHg of blood pressure, 80 beat per minute of heart rate, 20 per minute of respiration rate and 36.2℃ of body
temperature, in spite of chronically ill looking appearance. Physical examination showed icteric sclera and jaundiced face and body and
inspiratory rale on chest. Abdomen was severly distended with the shifting dullness and easily restored omphalocele. Tenderness on
epigastrium and pretibial pitting edema were also observed. Laboratory findings showed white blood cell 4,070 /mm3, hemoglobin 11.1 g/dL,
platelet 54,000 /mm3, prothrombin time INR 1.66. Biochemical tests showed sodium 136 mEq/L, potassium 3.8 mEq/L, aspartate aminotransferase
201 IU/L, accelerated life test 53 IU/L, total bilirubin 7.14 mg/dL, direct bilirubin 4.42 mg/dL, total protein 8.0 g/dL, albumin 2.7 g/dL,
and ammonia 44 umol/L. Roentgenograms of chest and abdomen showed mild pulmonary congestion and abdominal distension. She was diagnosed with
diuretics refractory ascites and planned to be performed the therapeutic paracentesis on the day of visiting. After the percussion and
palpation of left lower abdomen, the site medially 4 to 5 cm apart from the anterior superior iliac spine was punctured by 18 gauge needle
catheter which is inserted with drawing imaginary Z-line, following the runs of abdominal muscle fibers. Initially approximately 20 mL was
aspirated by syringe, after the assurance of the serous ascites, catheter was connected with infusion set, and about 6 liters of ascites
were naturally drained. Right after the drainage, vital signs were stable and there was no complication including bleeding. For
stabilization of hemodynamics, a bottle of 20 percent albumin solution 100 cc was infused, immediately. At the one day after the
paracentesis, the patient complained the severe lower abdominal pain. The left lower quadrant of abdomen was discolored to slight bluish and
huge abdominal mass like lesion around the puncture site was palpated without pulse or tenderness. Vital signs were blood pressure 100/60
mmHg, pulse rate 100 beat per minute, respiration rate 24 per minute, body temperature 36.7℃. Laboratory findings revealed hemoglobin down
to 7.1 g/dL, suggesting the acute bleeding. Under the suspicion of paracentesis induced hemoperitoneum or hematoma of abdominal wall,
abdominal computed tomography (CT) was performed with transfusion of packed red cells and fresh frozen plasma. The abdominal CT showed
massive ascites without the evidence of hemoperitoneum (Fig. 1A). About 22 cm × 16 cm sized hematoma at left lower abdominal wall was
detected (Fig. 1B). A contrast enhancement seen in the abdominal wall suggested muscular arterial injury with contrast leak (Fig. 1C). Two
days after paracentesis, despite massive transfusion, with the 3 pints of packed red blood cells and 2 pints of fresh frozen plasma,
hemoglobin was still 7.2 g/dL and the abdominal hematoma seemed to be more expanded than the day before. An urgent transcatheter angiography
with embolization was performed. After the puncture of right femoral artery, the introducer sheath was located on abdominal aorta. When the
contrast media passed the left external iliac artery and its daughters, left inferior epigastric artery and left circumflex artery via the
pig tailed catheter (Fig. 2A), the extravasation from left inferior epigastric artery and its branches was detected (Fig. 2B). Through the
superselection with microcathter, two of 3 mm × 2 cm sized coils, one of 5 mm × 2 cm sized coil and one of 6 mm × 2 cm sized coil were
implanted at the branches of left inferior epigastric artery. The leak of contrast media was not observed after the procedures (Fig. 2C).
Two days after the coil embolization, the vital signs and hemoglobin level were stabilized, and the size of the hematoma was decreased.
However, total bilirubin increased up to 10.0 mg/dL, serum ammonia was 66 umol/L, the grade I hepatic encephalopathy was developed and the
patient was treated with lactulose enema and nutritional support. At the 13th day after embolization, the patient was discharged with
improvement of hepatic encephalopathy. Treatment of ascites in liver cirrhosis is mainly a medical therapy, such as salt restriction and
diuretics. Refractory ascites in advanced stage of liver cirrhosis is indicated for repetitive therapeutic paracentesis, transjugular
intrahepatic shunt (TIPS), or liver transplantation. However, under the donor limitation for liver transplantation and the risk of hepatic
encephalopathy of TIPS, repetitive paracentesis is a practical option for the control of a refractory ascites.1-2,7,8 The left lower
quadrant of abdomen 4 or 5 cm medially apart from anterior superior iliac spine is commonly used for needling in paracentesis. Besides left
lower quadrant of abdomen, the center of median line from umbilicus to pubis and right lower quadrant of abdomen would be used for puncture
site, but left lower quadrant is more preferred than the other sites owing to low vascularity of the lesion and relatively thin abdominal
wall, comparing with the right side.1-2,7-10 Needling should be entered according to the direction of abdominal muscle fiber, with drawing a
imaginary Z-line.11 After the large volume paracentesis above 6 liter, parenteral fluid should be resuscitated as volume expander, such as
albumin. Generally, under the sterile condition and appropriate manner, paracentesis induced complications are rare with relatively good
prognosis. Only in extremely rare cases, complications can be progressed scathingly. The incidence of fatal bleeding defined as the
situation needs special procedure, intervention or urgent operation is approximately 0.2 percent per procedures, and the incidence of
mortality due to bleeding complication is lower than 0.01 %.7 In a prospective study of De Gottardi et al1, the incidence of massive
bleeding was approximately 1.0% (5/515), the patients of massive bleeding was treated with embolization or emergent operation. In univariate
analysis, most important factor for massive bleeding is the disease status of patient with liver cirrhosis, especially Child-pugh class C
and thrombocytopenia lower than 50,000 /mm3. In our case, the Child-pugh class of the patient was also class C and platelet count was
initially 54,000 /mm3. Anatomically inferior epigastric arteries are originated from external iliac artery and across the inguinal ring and
go up to umbilicus. Within abdominal muscle, inferior epigastric arteries go by transversalis fascia and linea semicircularis, ultimately
arrived between rectus abdominis muscle and posterior lamella.11 Because the inferior epigastric arteries locate in a relatively superficial
layer of abdominal muscle, these are fragile to injury by invasive procedures of abdomen, such as suture, paracentesis. Distinctively the
paracentesis is usually performed based on physician's subjective decision under own physical examination, erroneous procedure and
malposition of catheter can occur. Therefore one of the efforts to minimize the complications should be "awareness of run of epigastric
artery and consideration about the possible injury of inferior epigastric arteries". Before paracentesis, careful physical examination
should be conducted; by palpation of the rectus abdominis muscles, the runs of epigastric arteries should be estimated and by inspection,
grossly larger ones of collateral vessels putted superficially should be avoided. Besides, in the patients with prior abdominal wall
hematoma or hemoperitoneum, as the paracentesis complications, ultrasound guided paracentesis would be more proper procedure for the
avoidance of large, torturous inferior epigastric arteries and pre-formed pseudoaneurysm.6 In the situation that either inferior epigastric
arteries or preformed pseudoaneurysms are injured, typically pulseless abdominal mass with tenderness would appear accompanying the
significant change of hematocrit, suggesting the vessel injury and hematoma. However, in the majority of the cases, specific signs for
bleeding would not appear except nonspecific abdominal pain and often make the clinicians misdiagnose subcutaneous hematoma which is simply
developed. For diagnosis of injury of inferior epigastric arteries including pseudoaneurysm, Doppler ultrasonography (US), spiral abdomen
CT, and transcatheter angiography are available. Doppler US has several advantages for excluding the pseudoaneurysm by estimation of the
blood flow velocity, its origin. Moreover, Doppler US is used for treatment by compression of the lesion during sonographic examination.
However, the objective information for hematoma, pseudoaneurysm might not be offered by Doppler US, it would be indicated in limited cases.
Comparing with Doppler US, spiral abdomen CT has much of strength for the assessment of size and status of hematoma or hemoperitoneum and
for excluding other complications. Transcatheter angiography is usually performed after other noninvasive imaging modality such spiral CT or
Doppler US for achieving of both of diagnosis and therapeutic goal. However, when the single modality among spiral abdomen CT, Doppler US
and transcatheter angiography is even performed, it is often difficult to diagnose the atypical case or small sized pseudoaneurysm.
Therefore several modalities including Doppler US, spiral CT and transcatheter angiography are needed for accurate diagnosis.6 Depending the
severity of bleeding, inferior epigastric arterial injury and pseudoaneurysmal bleeding can be treated with all of vessel ligation under the
open laparatomy, transcatheter coil embolization, percutaenous thrombin injection via Doppler US and US guided compression against the
lesion.6 In the treatment of relatively small sized hematoma of pseudoaneurysm, Doppler US guided thrombin injection or direct compression
seemed to be safe and efficient. Virtually the risk for failure is relatively high due to the difficulty of targeting and insufficient
compression. Ferrer et al11 recommended vessel ligation under the open laparatomy for the case of huge hematoma with massive bleeding and
transcathter coil embolization for the case of small sized hematoma. However in such our case of advanced liver cirrhosis, risk for
operation would be high due to deterioration of liver function even if huge hematoma or hemoperitoneum. Seo et al12 has reported the case of
pseudoaneurysm of circumflex iliac artery and inferior epigasatric artery induced by paracentesis in a patient with advanced liver cirrhosis
and recommended that the the transcatheter coil embolization is proper for therapeutic modality. Unlike that case, we report the case of
huge hematoma induced by injury of native inferior epigastric artery and its branches was treated with transcatheter coil embolization. Even
a few cases of inferior epigastric artery related bleeding, in the cases of massive bleeding in the patient with advanced liver cirrhosis,
transcatheter coil combolization is more useful and safer than open laparatormy in the view of complications from general anesthesia,
exploration failure, operation related infection. In this case, a huge abdominal wall hematoma developed by therarpeutic paracentesis in the
patient with advanced liver cirrhosis, was diagnosed with spiral abdomen CT and treated with transcatheter coil embolization. Our case
suggests the importance of anatomical information and run of abdominal wall vessels. The prognosis of the complication can be poor depending
the coagulopathy, thrombocytopenia and degree of the portal hypertension, even the risk of procedure related complication is relatively low.
In conclusion, physicians performing paracentesis should be aware of its bleeding complication would manifest fatal condition and should
struggle for prompt diagnosis and adequate treatment like as transcathter embolization. computed tomography ultrasonography transjugular
intrahepatic shunt (A) Abdomen computed tomography (CT) imaging after paracentesis showed severe shrinkage and irregular nodularities of the
liver contour and massive ascites without evidence of hemoperitoneum. (B) Coronal abdomen CT imaging showed a large hematoma of the left
abdominal wall from the margin of the rib to the inguinal area. (C) Transverse spiral abdomen CT imaging revealed a large hematoma of the
left abdominal wall and focal extravasation of the contrast medium (arrow), suggesting bleeding of an abdominal wall arterial branch.
Transcatheter angiography revealed the abdominal aorta (a), the left external iliac artery (b), the deep iliac circumflex artery (c), and
the left inferior epigastric artery (d). (B) Extravasation of contrast medium was observed from the left inferior epigastric artery and its
branches. Leakage of contrast medium from the left inferior epigastric artery and its branches disappeared after microembolization (C).
