Hepatocellular carcinoma may develop from multistep carcinogenesis via dysplastic nodules in the cirrhotic liver. The first stage between
high-grade dysplastic nodule to overt hepatocellular carcinoma is vaguely nodular, early hepatocellular carcinoma. The consensus on the
nomenclature and pathologic characteristics of both entities were recently established by an international consensus group for
hepatocellular neoplasia,1 and were adopted in the recent World Health Organization series of tumor classification.2 We present herein a
case of early hepatocellular carcinoma in a 58-year-old man with B-viral macronodular cirrhosis. We discuss the histopathologic features and
differential diagnosis from high-grade dysplastic nodule of the liver. A 58-year-old male was transferred to our hospital for surgery to
remove a recently found liver mass. The liver nodule was found on abdominal ultrasound during a regular checkup. The hepatocellular
carcinoma was suspected after subsequent abdominal computed tomography (CT) at a private clinic. The initial hematologic and blood chemistry
data were as follows: white blood cell count, 6,000/µL; hemoglobin, 14.6 g/dL; platelet count, 81,000/µL; blood urea nitrogen, 13 mg/dL;
creatinine, 0.7 mg/dL; albumin, 3.5 g/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 44 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 32 IU/L; and total bilirubin, 0.8
mg/dL. He was positive for hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and anti-hepatitis B envelop (HBe), and negative for anti-HBs, HBeAg, and
hepatitis C virus. His alpha-fetoprotein and cancer antigen 19-9 levels were elevated, at 20.4 ng/mL and 65.3 U/mL, respectively. He was
negative for both protein-induced by vitamin K absence or antagonist II and carcinoembryonic antigen, 21 mAU/mL and 0.6 ng/mL, respectively.
The preoperative work-up revealed a slightly enhancing and delayed washout nodule of about 1.1 cm in segment (S) 6 of the liver on liver
dynamic magnetic resonance imaging with enhancement. It was not well delineated on T1- or T2-weighted images and exhibited opposing signal
intensities on in and out phases. Hepatocellular carcinoma was suspected, and a S6 segmentectomy was performed. The resected portion of the
left liver weighed 82 g and measured 10×6×3.5 cm. Gleason's capsule was smooth and intact. Sectioning revealed an ill-defined, vaguely
nodular, and somewhat yellow-brown solid mass measuring 1.2×1.0 cm (Fig. 1). The surrounding liver parenchyma had been replaced by large
cirrhotic nodules. Microscopic examination of the nodule disclosed proliferation of well-differentiated hepatocytes in a microtrabecular
pattern, accompanied by diffuse macrovesicular fatty metamorphosis (Fig. 2). The hepatic cords were irregular in arrangement, and on
average, two cells thick. They spread laterally in a replacing growth pattern without a surrounding tumor capsule or pseudocapsule. Residual
portal tracts could be observed within the nodule (Fig. 3A). The nuclear density was variably increased, mostly more than twice that of
normal hepatocytes. The cell size was constant, but smaller than usual and with an increased nuclear cytoplasmic ratio, consistent with
small-cell change (Fig. 3B). A few foci of stromal invasion were noted within and around the portal tract (Fig. 4A). These findings were
highlighted by immunohistochemistry for cytokeratin 7 (Fig. 4B). Sinusoidal capillarization was not evident and was rather focally localized
in the periphery of the dysplastic portion. Foci of portal vein invasion was not found. Ultrasound screening allows the early detection of
small hepatocytic lesions, and the progress of radiologic techniques has meant that pathologists experience a greater number of smaller
lesions in the liver. Any hepatocytic nodules in cirrhotic liver tissue, including large regenerative nodules, low-grade dysplastic nodules,
high-grade dysplastic nodules, and small hepatocellular carcinomas, can present similarly. A small hepatocellular carcinoma is defined as
being less than 2 cm in diameter, and can be divided into two types: vaguely nodular early hepatocellular carcinoma and distinctly nodular
progressed hepatocellular carcinoma. Early hepatocellular carcinoma cannot be easily differentiated from the high-grade dysplastic nodules
on either macroscopic or microscopic examination. Although there are some differences in nuclear density (1.3-2 times greater in high-grade
dysplastic nodules vs. 2 times greater in hepatocellular carcinoma than in adjacent hepatocytes), the two lesion types share many common
features, such as an indistinct margin, no capsule, increased cell density, irregular thin-trabecular pattern, intratumoral portal tracts,
pseudoglandular pattern, diffuse fatty change, nodule-in-nodule appearance or subnodules with an increased Ki-67 proliferation index, and
varying numbers of unpaired arteries or a varying extent of sinusoidal capillarization.3 Masking of the cytologic atypia of malignant cells
by fatty change renders it more difficult to recognize them. The characteristic features of definite malignancy seen in progressed
hepatocellular carcinoma, such as portal vein invasion or metastasis, are not usually seen in early hepatocellular carcinoma.3 The only
convincing helpful finding of malignancy in early hepatocellular carcinoma is stromal invasion.1-3 Stromal invasion is invasion of tumor
cells into the intratumoral portal tracts. The liver is different from other organ sites, which have a well-developed basement membrane
structure, and because of this anatomic difference, the foci of destruction of the stromal-parenchymal interface must be recognized by
invading growth. The identification of stromal invading foci is not easy and can be frequently missed in needle biopsy of the liver, where
the portal tracts might not be included in the small specimen, although it can be assisted by special staining or immunohistochemistry.
Victoria blue or reticulin stains help to discriminate the residual portal tracts, while imunohistochemical stains for cytokeratin 7 and 19
can help to determine whether the equivocal lesion of stromal invasion is true tumor cell invasion or ductular reaction of pseudoinvasion
around nonmalignant nodules.4 Other biomarkers have been applied to the differential diagnosis of high-grade dysplastic nodule from well-
differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. A panel of triple immunohistochemical markers-glypican-3, heat shock protein 70 (HSP70), and
glutamine synthetase (GS)-can increase the sensitivity and specificity to 72% and 100%, respectively, in cases where there is positivity for
any two markers.5 However, it is recognized that the interpretation of theses markers should be made with caution, and some helpful tips
have been suggested. The characteristic staining pattern of glypican-3 is usually focal cytoplasmic staining; its application as a sole
marker of malignancy is thus not recommended, and it should be remembered that it can yield a positive reaction in other lesions and in
regenerating hepatocytes. HSP70 can be approved in cases of simultaneous positivity in both the nucleus and cytoplasm, with the internal
positive control of hepatobiliary cells of ductular reactions. GS should be accepted in cases of diffuse, intense positivity because of the
stepwise increasing pattern from dysplastic nodules through to well-differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma and further to poorly
differentiated hepatocellular carcinoma. Another, recently introduced marker, clathrin heavy chain, reportedly exhibits a very promising
specificity and positive predictive value.6 However, there is no perfect single marker or panel that allows a confirmative diagnosis of
malignancy. The use of these markers may help to discriminate the equivocal nodule, but may also lead to false confidence, particularly in
the case of limited samples, such as those obtained by needle biopsy. Therefore, a final decision of early hepatocellular carcinoma can only
be drawn on the basic findings of routine hematoxylin-and-eosin staining, such as abnormal-appearing cytologic and architectural findings,
with meticulous effort to find the foci of stromal invasion. Cut surface of the liver. An ill-defined, vaguely nodular, solid, yellow-to-
brown nodule with a largest dimension of 1.2 cm is seen against the cirrhotic background. Low-power view of the liver mass. Diffuse fatty
change is evident throughout the nodule (H-E, ×12.5). Microscopic findings of the liver mass. (A) A replacing growth of microtrabecular
pattern is observed without a tumor capsule. A few portal tracts are noted in the lower portion. (B) The nuclear density is increased to
more than twice that of the surrounding nonneoplastic liver (A: H-E, ×100; B: H-E, ×400). Microscopic findings of stromal invasion. (A) A
focus of tumor cell invasion can be seen within an intratumoral portal tract. (B) This is not associated with ductular reaction on
immunohistochemistry (A: H-E, ×200; B: cytokeratin 7, ×200).
