Snapping knee associated with biceps femoris tendon that caused lateral knee pain is reported. The long head of the biceps femoris tendon
had an anomalous tibial insertion in addition to the direct arm and anterior arm on the fibular head. Resection of both the anomalous tibial
insertion and the anterior arm was necessary to resolve the snapping. Level of evidence IV. Snapping knee due to the biceps femoris tendon
can be caused by tendon injury or various anatomical pathologies, including anomalous insertion of the long head of the biceps femoris
tendon and fibular head deformity. In a case of symptomatic snapping, operative management may be necessary [1–9, 11]. In previous cases
associated with anomalous tibial insertion of the long head of the biceps femoris tendon reported by Kissenberth and Wilckens and Bansal et
al. , the snapping phenomenon was resolved by repositioning of the anomalous tibial component to the posterolateral portion of the fibular
head. In the present case, repositioning of the anomalous tibial insertion and anterior arm of the biceps femoris tendon to the
posterolateral portion of the fibular head was necessary to resolve the snapping. A 15-year-old male patient presented with a history of
increasing snapping and pain on the lateral side of his right knee over a two-year period. There was no history of trauma, and he had not
engaged in continuous athletic exercise. On physical examination, an audible and painful snapping was elicited over the fibular head at 100°
knee flexion and was increased by internal rotation of the tibia. All other aspects of the knee examination were normal; however, a similar
snapping was apparent for the contralateral knee, but without pain. Routine radiographs were normal. Magnetic resonance imaging and computed
tomography did not demonstrate any abnormalities. In surgical exploration, it was found that insertion of the long head of the biceps
femoris tendon had divided into three tendinous components. One component was inserted on the anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia,
and the others were located on the lateral edge and posterolateral portion of the fibular head (Fig. 1). The biceps femoris tendon displaced
over the fibular head during knee flexion and extension without an apparent anatomical anomaly of the fibular head. Resection of the tibial
component did not resolve the snapping phenomenon. After additional resection of the anterior arm on the lateral edge, snapping was removed
during knee flexion and extension. The resected components were each sutured with three stitches using size 0 Surgilon directly against the
periosteum and direct arm on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head (Fig. 2). Immediately after the operation, the patient had
relief from snapping.Fig. 1Intraoperative photograph showing anomalous tibial insertion on the anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia.
*anomalous tibial insertion, ITT iliotibial tract, GT Gerdy tubercle, LHBFT long head of biceps femoris tendon, FH fibular
headFig. 2Intraoperative photograph after reattaching of the anomalous tibial component and anterior arm, each sutured with three stitches
on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head. *anomalous tibial insertion, **anterior arm of biceps femoris tendon, ITT iliotibial
tract, LHBFT long head of biceps femoris tendon, FH fibular head Intraoperative photograph showing anomalous tibial insertion on the
anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia. *anomalous tibial insertion, ITT iliotibial tract, GT Gerdy tubercle, LHBFT long head of biceps
femoris tendon, FH fibular head Intraoperative photograph after reattaching of the anomalous tibial component and anterior arm, each sutured
with three stitches on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head. *anomalous tibial insertion, **anterior arm of biceps femoris tendon,
ITT iliotibial tract, LHBFT long head of biceps femoris tendon, FH fibular head The principal finding in this case was that the insertion of
the long head of the biceps femoris tendon was divided into three tendinous components. One component was inserted on the anterolateral
aspect of the proximal tibia, and the others were located on the lateral edge and posterolateral portion of the fibular head. In previous
cases, snapping knee associated with the biceps femoris tendon has been found to be due to anomalous insertion of the long head of the
biceps femoris tendon [2, 3, 6, 8–10], fibular head deformity [1, 5], tendon injury , and normal anatomy without trauma . Terry and LaPrade
described the normal anatomy of the biceps femoris tendon complex in detail. The long head of the tendon divides into two tendinous
components, a direct arm and an anterior arm, and three fascial components that fan out to the anterior and distal tibia. The direct arm
inserts on the posterolateral edge of the fibular head lateral to the fibular styloid, and the anterior arm insertion is located along the
lateral edge of the fibular head. In the present case, the two components located on the lateral edge and posterolateral portion of the
fibular head were identified as the anterior arm and direct arm, respectively, and the component inserted on the anterolateral aspect of the
proximal tibia was an anomalous insertion. Kristensen et al. , Hernandez et al. , and Bagchi and Grelsamer reported snapping knee due to the
insertion of the entire tendon of the long head on the anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia. Adequate partial resection of the fibular
head resolved the symptoms [2, 9], and reinsertion of the entire tendon on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head gave a good
outcome . Lokiec et al. described the insertion of the entire tendon of the long head on the anterior portion of the fibular head.
Resolution was accomplished by reinsertion of the anterior half of the tendon on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head. Kissenberth
and Wilckens and Bansal et al. reported cases with location of part of the long head on the anterolateral aspect of the proximal tibia.
Repositioning of the anomalous tibial insertion on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head resolved the symptoms in both cases. In
cases with fibular head deformity, Fung et al. described a case caused by an exostosis, and Bach and Minihane found that a prominent fibular
head elicited snapping. Snapping in these cases was resolved by resection of the exostosis and partial resection of the fibular head,
respectively. Bernhardson and LaPrade reported three cases of direct arm injury with normal anatomy, in which repair of the injured direct
arm resolved the symptoms. Vavalle and Capozzi described a case with normal location of the long head on the fibular head that presented
with a snapping phenomenon. Partial resection of the fibular head resolved the symptoms. The present case involved an anomalous tibial
component of the biceps femoris tendon, as also seen in previous cases [3, 8]. However, in contrast to the previous cases, resection of the
anomalous tibial insertion alone did not remove snapping and additional resection of the anterior arm was necessary to resolve the snapping.
Therefore, snapping may have been caused by anterior arm insertion of the biceps femoris tendon, in addition to anomalous tibial insertion.
In a case of snapping knee due to semitendinosus and gracilis tendons, in contrast to the biceps femoris tendon, Karataglis et al. reported
a good outcome without functional loss after tenotomy and resection of the tendons, which are also hamstrings and medial stabilizers of the
knee. The biceps femoris is the strongest hamstring responsible for knee flexion and external rotation and plays an important role in knee
stabilization, making it necessary to repair the resected tendons firmly for the prevention of tendon rupture. In repair of the biceps
femoris tendon, Kissenberth and Wilckens and Bernhardson and LaPrade described reattachment of resected or injured tendons on the fibular
head using bone suture anchors. Recently, Tsai et al. have described a strong repair technique for a ruptured biceps femoris tendon using a
suture anchor and reverse fascia flap. In the present case, the resected components were sutured with stitches only directly against the
periosteum and direct arm on the posterolateral portion of the fibular head, whereas firm fixation of the resected tendons using a suture
anchor may have been preferable. Operative management for this condition primarily includes the repositioning of the snapping tendon and
partial resection of the fibular head. In a case with no fibular head deformity, resection of the snapping tendon is technically
straightforward and repositioning on the posterolateral fibular head should resolve the symptoms of pain and snapping effectively. This
article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Noncommercial License which permits any noncommercial use,
distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and source are credited.
