Well-differentiated neuroendocrine tumors (NETs) of the lung occur as typical and atypical carcinoids. Little is known about the biology of
these tumors in respect of their ability to metastasize or the probability of development of concomitant neuroendocrine tumors. Here we
report a patient diagnosed with a second neuroendocrine tumor of the ileum 4 years after curative resection of a typical carcinoid of the
left lung. The intestinal neuroendocrine tumor was successfully detected by gallium-68 based somatostatin receptor positron emission
tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) and surgically removed using gamma probe detection based on the same labeling. This case report
underlines the utility of somatostatin receptor PET/CT based detection and follow-up of NETs. Neuroendocrine tumors of the lung include
atypical and typical carcinoids, large cell neuroendocrine carcinomas and small cell lung carcinomas. Typical carcinoids (TCs) and atypical
carcinoids (ACs) of the lung have rapidly increased in the last 30 years with an incidence of 1.57/100.000 in 2003. TCs are often regarded
as benign due to their low proliferation rate (Ki-67 <2%). They demonstrate an excellent prognosis with a 5-year survival rate of 88%. The
treatment of choice is surgery, which can be curative in most cases. Although TCs share histologic features with gastroenteropancreatic
neuroendocrine tumors (GEP-NETs), they exhibit a lower tendency to form secondary tumors. The immunohistochemical patterns of GEP-NETs and
TCs may be different. TCs express thyroid transcription factor-1 (TTF-1) and CD56, whereas GEP-NETs do not. Despite their low proliferation
rate, TCs may recur and metastasize. Currently, there are no specific guidelines for preoperative staging or follow-up of typical lung
carcinoids. Follow-up of these patients is often individualized and somatostatin receptor (SSTR) based positron emission tomography
(PET)/computed tomography (CT) is rarely performed. A 1.4-cm nodule in the lingula (Fig. 1A) was detected in a 68-year-old woman. This
nodule showed criteria of malignancy by thoracic CT (Fig. 2). Bronchoscopy was normal. Preceding surgery, a fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-PET/CT
scan was performed as recommended for staging of pulmonary tumors. It demonstrated diminutive glucose uptake without suspicion for
mediastinal lymphadenopathies. Figure 1(A) FDG PET/CT located a tumor with low glucose uptake in the lingula. (B) SSTR-PET/CT detected
somatostatin receptor positive lesions in the terminal ileum and peripancreatically. Figure 2Thoracic CT (lung window). (A) FDG PET/CT
located a tumor with low glucose uptake in the lingula. (B) SSTR-PET/CT detected somatostatin receptor positive lesions in the terminal
ileum and peripancreatically. Thoracic CT (lung window). The resection of the lingula and the mediastinal lymphadenectomy was performed in
January 2007. Pathology demonstrated a 12 mm typical carcinoid (Ki-67 <5%, see Fig. 5B) with positive expression of chromogranin A,
synaptophysin (see Fig. 4D) and TTF-1 (see Fig. 5D). None of the lymph nodes removed were invaded; the final staging was pT1 pN0 cM0. After
surgery, follow-up was performed every 3 months by CT of the chest. It was noted that tumor marker chromogranin A was increasing in December
2010 and the patient was complaining about recurrent abdominal pain. SSTR-PET/CT with DOTA-Tyr3-octreotide PET/CT (DOTATOC) was performed
and demonstrated a tumor in the terminal ileum associated with an enlarged parapancreatic lymph node (Fig. 1B). No other suspicious lesions
were found. A radical right hemicolectomy encompassing lymphadenectomy was performed in February 2011, using gamma probe detection after
DOTATOC was given as tracer. The gamma probe located the single peripancreatic lymph node during surgery. Pathology revealed a well-
differentiated NET from the ileocecal valve (size 10 mm, Fig. 3A) with a single lymph node metastasis (Fig. 3B). The final Union for
International Cancer Control (UICC) staging was pT2, pN1, pM0, G1, L0, V0, R0, pN0. The immunohistology was positive for chromogranin A,
synaptophysin (Fig. 4C), somatostatin receptor 2A and CDX-2, but negative for TTF1 (Fig. 5C) indicating an intestinal origin without any
relation to the TC removed 4 years earlier. Figure 3(A) NET of the ileum (1.0 cm) after ileotomy. (B) Right hemicolectomy compound with a
single lymph node metastasis. Figure 4(A) Hematoxylin–eosin stained light microscopy: ileum. (B) Hematoxylin–eosin stained light microscopy:
lung. (C) Synaptophysin: ileum. (D) Synaptophysin: lung. Figure 5(A) MIB1: ileum. (B) MIB1: lung. (C) TTF-1: ileum. (D) TTF-1: lung. (A) NET
of the ileum (1.0 cm) after ileotomy. (B) Right hemicolectomy compound with a single lymph node metastasis. (A) Hematoxylin–eosin stained
light microscopy: ileum. (B) Hematoxylin–eosin stained light microscopy: lung. (C) Synaptophysin: ileum. (D) Synaptophysin: lung. (A) MIB1:
ileum. (B) MIB1: lung. (C) TTF-1: ileum. (D) TTF-1: lung. This case report describes the occurrence of two non-related well-differentiated
NETs in a single patient detected within 4 years. The first NET demonstrated pathologic features of a pulmonary TC and the second, also a
well-differentiated NET, originated from the ileocecal valve. This second NET was detected by DOTATOC. The intraoperative exertion of a
gamma probe often results in the extension of the planned surgical procedure, especially in an extended lymph node resection. It permits the
identification of previously occult metastases and the localization of hidden lymphatic lesions. Although little is known about development
of second NETs in patients without multiple endocrine neoplasia syndromes, follow-up of patients with NETs using SSTR-PET/CT will help in
the detection of tumor recurrence or other non-related NETs. In our patient, the second NET was only detected by a somatostatin receptor
PET/CT 4 years after curative surgery of the TC of the left lung. Due to a slow proliferation rate of this second NET (Fig. 5A), it can be
assumed that this tumor was already present in 2007, however FDG/PET usually does not detect GEP-NETs with a low proliferation rate. In our
case, after removal, we performed only local staging using thorax CT and bronchoscopy. If the NET diagnosis is discovered after surgery,
similar to GEP-NETs, systemic molecular imaging (SSTR-PET/CT or octreotide scintigraphy) must be performed postoperatively. This rules out
occult metastases and provides reference imaging for further comparative follow-up studies. However, because of the limited availability of
this molecular imaging technique, it does not allow routine staging after surgery. In our opinion, this imaging procedure should be reserved
for when increasing levels of biomarkers or clinical symptoms indicate a recurrence. SSTR-PET/CT has excellent sensitivity. If the NET
diagnosis is known or presumed preoperatively, accurate preoperative staging and a postoperative comparative study from the resection
results are enabled through this imaging technique. This case report illustrates the clinical utility of SSTR-PET/CT for the detection and
follow-up of patients with NETs of the lung and gastroenteropancreatic system. This paper is available online at
http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL address, please use the DOI provided to locate the paper. We thank Maria
Spiegler for editorial assistance.
