Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) are mesenchymal tumors occurring anywhere along the gastrointestinal tract and are believed to
originate from the interstitial cells of Cajal. They commonly arise in the stomach or small intestine. The usual growth pattern is exophytic
invading adjacent organs or perforation into the peritoneal cavity which may result in bleeding or obstructive symptoms. Intussusception and
obstruction is a very uncommon presentation of these lesions because of their tendency to grow in an extraluminal fashion. We report an
unusual case of 59 yrs old man presenting with acute small bowel obstruction, which on exploration was found to be due to ileo-ileal
intussusception and the lead point of intussusception was a tumor, which was histologically diagnosed as GIST Gastrointestinal stromal
tumors (GIST) are mesenchymal tumors occurring anywhere along the gastrointestinal tract and are believed to originate from the interstitial
cells of Cajal. They commonly arise in the stomach or small intestine. The usual growth pattern is exophytic invading adjacent organs or
perforation into the peritoneal cavity which may result in bleeding or obstructive symptoms. Intussusception and obstruction is a very
uncommon presentation of these lesions because of their tendency to grow in an extraluminal fashion. We report an unusual case of 59 yrs old
man presenting with acute small bowel obstruction, which on exploration was found to be due to ileo-ileal intussusception and the lead point
of intussusception was a tumor, which was histologically diagnosed as GIST. A 59 yrs. old man was admitted in the surgical emergency with 3
days history of abdominal pain, distension and multiple episodes of bilious vomiting. He also had complaint of constipation lasting for the
previous 2 days. There was no significant past medical history. On physical examination, he had tachycardia and hypotension; temperature was
normal. The abdomen was distended with visible peristalsis. There was generalized tenderness on deep palpation. No palpable mass was
identified. Bowel sounds were exaggerated. Digital rectal examination was unremarkable. Laboratory investigations showed leukocytosis and
raised blood urea (52mg/dl) but serum creatinine was within normal range. Liver function tests were normal. Plain x-ray abdomen showed
multiple air fluid levels. Ultrasonography abdomen showed dilated bowel loops, with no evidence of any mass or free fluid in the peritoneal
cavity. With all these findings suggestive of acute intestinal obstruction, patient was planned for urgent exploratory laparotomy. Intra
operatively ileoileal intussusception was present two and half feet proximal to ileo-ceacal junction. The bowel proximal to this area was
dilated. There was an intramural mass arising from the wall of ileum making the lead point of intussusceptions (Figure 1). There were no
signs of bowel gangrene. Mesenteric lymph nodes were enlarged. There was no free fluid and inter bowel adhesions. Resection of the ileal
segment bearing the mass with end-to-end ileoileal anastomosis was done along with excision biopsy which was taken from the mesenteric lymph
node. Histopathological diagnosis turned out to be gastrointestinal stromal tumor (Figure 2), which was positive for c-kit and CD 117.
Mesenteric lymph node biopsy showed chronic non specific inflammation. Patient recovered well in postoperative period and was discharged on
8th postoperative day. Patient was referred to Oncology clinic for chemotherapy. Intussusception, defined as the telescoping of a segment of
the gastrointestinal tract into an adjacent one, is extremely rare in the stomach, but more common in the small intestine, ileocecal
junction and colon. Intussusception is correctly diagnosed preoperatively in only one-third of cases. An accurate diagnosis of
intussusceptions should include a good history, a thorough physical examination, radiography, CT, MRI and enteroclysis or even an endoscopic
ultrasound or capsule endoscopy . Ultrasound is useful in confirming obstruction and may sometimes identify the cause. Few reports are
available which shows that Ultrasonography should be the initial diagnostic investigation in which they have found a typical multilayered
bowel wall (“target-like sign” or “bull´s eye sign”) . It has been recently reported that CT and MRI offer great help in establishing the
preoperative diagnosis of intussusception. In our case, ultrasound was not diagnostic of intussusception and CT could not be done because of
unstable vitals of the patient. In contrast to childhood where intussusception is idiopathic in 90% of cases and the basic underlying cause
of intussusception is the hypertrophy of Payer’s patches activity, adult intussusception has a definable pathologic lesion in over 90% of
cases, with neoplasms considered to be the cause in 65% of them [3, 4]. Any intraluminal lesion, especially polyps, which irritates and
alters normal peristaltic activity, is able to trigger an intraluminal invagination finally causing an intussusception. Subsequent
peristaltic bowel activity produces an area of sequence constriction and relaxation, thus telescoping the leading point through the distal
bowel lumen. The malignancy is more likely to be located in the colon rather than in the small bowel. Less common etiologies of
intussusception in adults include postoperative factors (adhesions, suture lines, etc.), polyps, Meckel’s disease, sprue, cecal duplication
and intramural hematoma. The presentation of adult intussusception is usually subacute or chronic. Only up to 20% of all cases present with
complete bowel obstruction and acute onset. In the literature, very few cases of small bowel intussusceptions from a stromal tumor in adults
have been described [5, 6]. Gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GISTs) are a subset of mesenchymal tumors of varying differentiation. They are
rare clinical entities, constitute less than 3% of all gastrointestinal malignant neoplasms and represent only 20% of small-bowel malignant
neoplasms (excluding lymphoma) . They are typically defined as a tumor whose behavior is driven by mutations in the Kit gene or PDGFRA gene,
and may or may not stain positively for Kit. 95% of all GISTs are CD117-positive (other possible markers include CD34, DOG-1, desmin,
vimentin and others). Other cells that show CD117 positivity are mast cells . If the CD117 stain is negative and suspicion remains that the
tumor is a GIST, the newer antibody DOG-1 (Discovered on GIST-1) can be used. Also sequencing of Kit and PDGFRA can be used to prove the
diagnosis. Patients present with trouble in swallowing, gastrointestinal hemorrhage or metastases (mainly in the liver). Intestinal
obstruction is rare, due to the tumor’s outward pattern of growth. Surgery is the primary therapeutic option with the goal being complete
resection for non metastatic tumors. Lymph node metastases are rare and routine removal of lymph nodes is typically not necessary . Until
recently, GISTs were notorious for being resistant to chemotherapy, with a success rate of < 5%. The discovery of activating mutations in
the tyrosine kinases kit and more recently platelet-derived growth factor receptor alpha has stimulated development of therapeutic agents
targeting these moieties. Imatinib mesylate is a tyrosine kinase inhibitor, being routinely used routinely in the management of GIST. This
oral agent is well tolerated and highly effective for patients with metastatic GIST . Adjuvant treatment with imatinib following surgical
resection of GIST tumors can significantly reduce the risk of disease recurrence (6% recurrence on imatinib vs. 17% without therapy at 12
months). GIST are a subset of mesenchymal tumors and represent the most common mesenchymal neoplasms of Gastrointestinal tract. The clinical
presentation of GIST is erratic. Furthermore, only 70% of the patients are symptomatic, while 20% are asymptomatic and 10% are detected at
autopsy. The symptoms and signs are not disease - specific and as a consequence, about 50% of GISTs have already metastases at the time of
diagnosis. Only up to 20% of all cases present with complete bowel obstruction and acute onset. In the literature, very few cases of small
bowel intussusceptions from a stromal tumor in adults have been described. We reported intussusceptions as an unusual presentation of GIST.
The authors declare no competing interests. All the authors have contributed to the management of the write up of the manuscript. All
authors have read and approve the final version of the manuscript. Amit Gupta had operated the case and made the diagnosis. He was assisted
in the operation by Ashutosh Tandon. Mrinalini Kotru has given the histopathological consultation.
