Calcinosis cutis involves the inappropriate deposition of calcium within the dermis layer of the skin, and is often associated with
rheumatoid disease. A 42-year-old woman presented for evaluation of a hard palpable mass on the left upper eyelid. After everting the
eyelid, a large papillomatous mass with a broad base was identified on the superior area of the tarsus. The lesion was partially excised
posteriorly under local anesthesia, and pathologists identified the mass as calcinosis cutis. The patient had no systemic or trauma history,
and the serum levels of calcium and phosphorous were normal. Idiopathic calcinosis cutis should be included in the differential diagnosis
for a protruding papillomatous mass of the tarsal plate, and surgical debulking could be a viable option for large protruding lesions,
although more follow-up is necessary to monitor regrowth. Calcinosis cutis is a recognizable disorder characterized by the deposition of
amorphous calcium and phosphate salts under the epidermal layer . This condition is frequently associated with rheumatoid disease, and can
lead to pain and disability in these patients . Calcinosis cutis can be divided into four types: dystrophic, metastatic, iatrogenic, and
idiopathic. The dystrophic type is observed in damaged or devitalized tissues, while the metastatic type is associated with high serum
levels of calcium or phosphate, as can be seen with various systemic diseases. The iatrogenic type of calcinosis cutis is generally
associated with calcium-containing medical devices or medications , and the idiopathic type occurs in the absence of tissue injury or
detectable disease in otherwise healthy individuals. Several cases of idiopathic calcinosis cutis involving the scrotum, penis, vulva,
breast, or extremities have been described . A subepidermal calcified nodule, which is a form of calcinosis cutis, on the eyelid beneath the
skin has also been reported . There is a case of ossification of the eyelid and orbit in a patient with pseudo-pseudohypoparathyroidism .
However, there has been no report of idiopathic calcinosis cutis protruding from the tarsus. This is the first case report of idiopathic
calcinosis cutis occurring at the upper tarsus in a healthy woman. A 42-year-old woman presented for evaluation of a slow-growing, painless,
palpable mass on the left upper eyelid, which initially developed several years earlier. She was a hepatitis B virus carrier, but otherwise
in a healthy condition. No history of orbital trauma or filler injection was reported. At the time of her first visit, her uncorrected
vision was 1.0 for both eyes. Under slit-lamp examination, slight conjunctival injection of the left eye was noted, but the cornea was
clear. The laboratory data showed no abnormalities. Serum calcium and phosphorous levels were also normal. On inspection, the left eyelid
was slightly elevated, and a hard, palpable mass was detected in the upper eyelid. Everting the upper eyelid revealed a large papillomatous
mass attached to the upper margin of the tarsus (Fig. 1). As the patient did not want to risk possible disfigurement with a complete
excision, the protruding mass above the tarsal border was partially debulked at the conjunctival side under local anesthesia, and was sent
to the pathology department where it was identified as calcinosis cutis. Fig. 2 shows a massive amorphous calcium material beneath the
epithelial lining and basophilic-stained crystallized calcification deposits. The normal tarsus tissue was scarcely present. Calcinosis
cutis is pathologically defined as the deposition of calcium material beneath the epithelial lining. It mostly affects patients with
connective tissue disorders, such as dermatomyositis, systemic lupus erythematosis, or systemic sclerosis . Other types of calcifications,
such as band keratopathy, bulbar calcification, or palpebral, conjunctival, or eyelid calcification, have been reported in patients with
ocular inflammation, systemic hyperparathyroidism, or hyperphosphatemia . However, in this case, the patient had normal serum levels of
calcium and phosphate, and no previous systemic or trauma history. Based upon this information, this case represents the first incidence of
idiopathic calcinosis cutis affecting the tarsus of the eyelid. No standard treatment has been recommended for the removal or reduction of
the lesion in cases of calcinosis cutis . Colchicine, warfarin, bisphosphonates, probenecid, and diltiazem have been used with varying
degrees of success . Carbon dioxide laser therapy, minocycline , salicylates, and aluminum hydroxide could also be used. The aforementioned
treatments were only used for skin lesions, demonstrating limited efficiency. Therefore, surgical excision for a large protruding mass of
calcinosis cutis might be the best option. In this case, we performed partial debulking of the lesion, and more follow-up is required to
monitor for regrowth. If the regrowth occurs rapidly, complete excision with free margin control will be necessary. However, such a decision
would not be easy, as the base of the lesion is quite broad, including the normal tissue of the tarsus, and more importantly, the patient
does not feel much irritation from this lesion. Complete excision might cause a serious cosmetic disfigurement or discomfort. Clinicians
should consider calcinosis cutis in the differential diagnosis of papillomatous mass lesions involving the tarsus. No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article was reported. Papillomatous mass involving the tarsus is shown in the left eye. Histopathologic finding of
the tarsal lesion. (A) Low power view of the lesion (H&E, ×12) with a significant amount of amorphous calcium material (stained pink) and
multiple calcium crystals (stained purple). (B) High power view showing the calcium crystals in the lesion (H&E, ×100). Arrow, calcium
crystal; arrow head, tarsal epithelium.
