While initiation of highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) during primary HIV-1 infection occasionally results in transient control of
viral replication after treatment interruption, the vast majority of patients eventually experience a rebound in plasma viremia. Here we
report a case of a patient who was started on HAART during symptomatic primary infection and who has subsequently maintained viral loads of
< 50 copies/mL for more than nine years after the cessation of treatment. This patient had a high baseline viral load and has maintained a
relatively high frequency of latently infected CD4+ T cells. In addition, he does not have any known protective HLA alleles. Thus it is
unlikely that he was destined to become a natural elite controller or suppressor. The mechanism of control of viral replication is unclear;
he is infected with a CCR5/CXCR4 dual-tropic virus that is fully replication-competent in vitro. In addition, his spouse, who transmitted
the virus to him, developed AIDS. The patient's CD4+ T cells are fully susceptible to HIV-1 infection, and he has low titers of neutralizing
antibodies to heterologous and autologous HIV-1 isolates. Furthermore, his CD8+ T cells do not have potent HIV suppressive activity. This
report suggests that some patients may be capable of controlling pathogenic HIV-1 isolates for extended periods of time after the cessation
of HAART through a mechanism that is distinct from the potent cytotoxic T lymphocyte (CTL) mediated suppression that has been reported in
many elite suppressors. HIV-1 infection results in extensive viral replication and progressive CD4+ T cell depletion in the vast majority of
patients. However, rare subjects, known as elite controllers or suppressors (ES), spontaneously control viral replication without
antiretroviral treatment . The mechanisms involved in elite control are not fully understood, but some ES appear to be infected with fully
replication-competent virus that continues to evolve during chronic infection . Thus infection with attenuated virus does not appear to be a
common cause of elite control. In contrast, many studies looking at host factors have shown that the HLA-B*27 and 57 alleles are
overrepresented in ES . This has strongly suggested a role for CD8+ T cell responses in elite control, and indeed, potent HIV-specific CD8+
T cell responses that are capable of inhibiting viral replication have been documented in many ES. It is not clear whether it will be
possible to elicit similar levels of immune control in patients with progressive HIV-1 disease. However, some studies have suggested that
rare individuals who are treated early in primary infection with highly active antiretroviral therapy (HAART) are able to control viral
replication when therapy is discontinued. Rosenberg and colleagues demonstrated that five of eight patients who were treated before or
shortly after seroconversion were able to suppress HIV RNA levels to below 500 copies/mL for a median of 6.5 months after therapy was
interrupted . However, a follow up study showed that this control was of limited duration as only three of 14 patients who started HAART
during primary infection maintained viral loads of < 5000 copies/mL two years after treatment interruption . In another study, a patient who
was started on HAART a month after seroconversion was treated for four years prior to a treatment interruption which resulted in a rapid
rebound in viremia. HAART was reinitiated and ultra-low doses of interleukin-2 (1.2 mIU/m2/day) were added to the regimen. Interestingly, he
maintained viral loads of < 50 copies/mL for 14 months after both HAART and IL-2 were discontinued . In a recent study, five of thirty-two
patients treated during primary HIV-1 infection maintained control of viral replication for more than six months after treatment was
interrupted . While this phenomenon is not routinely seen with early treatment , these cases strongly suggest that the immune system can be
manipulated to control HIV-1 replication in some patients. Thus, this could be the basis for the design of a successful therapeutic vaccine.
We present a case of a patient infected with a replication-competent, dual-tropic HIV-1 isolate who was started on treatment during primary
infection. He has maintained stable CD4+ T cell counts and viral loads of < 50 copies/ml for more than nine years since HAART was
discontinued. To our knowledge, this represents the longest period of control of HIV-1 replication in a patient after the cessation of
treatment. We performed detailed analyses of the patient's viral isolates and looked at multiple aspects of his HIV-specific immune
response. While no clear mechanism of immune control was identified, this case suggests that long term control of pathogenic HIV-1 isolates
is possible in some patients who were destined to become chronic progressors (CP). Patient 169 is a 57 year old male who was diagnosed with
primary HIV-1 infection when he admitted to the intensive care unit at Johns Hopkins Hospital in 1999 with severe HIV-1 meningoencephalitis
that resulted in intubation for airway protection . He was found to have an indeterminate Western blot (only bands to p24 were present) and
an HIV-1 viral load of > 750,000 copies/mL. He reported having tested negative for HIV-1 two years prior to admission. He was enrolled into
the Acute Infection and Early Disease Research Program (AIEDRP) study and started on a regimen of zidovudine, lamivudine, and indinavir
within 48 hours of admission. This regimen was changed to abacavir, lamivudine and efavirenz at week four and by week 16, his viral load was
< 50 copies/ml. He stopped taking his antiretrovirals at week 36 for a 2 week period, and his viral load rebounded to 22,000 copies/ml. The
same regimen was re-initiated, and he was adherent until week 92 at which time he stopped taking all of the antiretroviral drugs. His CD4+ T
cell count, which was 412 cell/μL at the time of diagnosis, has been stable at greater than 1000 cells/μL over the last five years, and his
viral load, which has been consistently less than 50 copies/ml since the discontinuation of HAART, was measured at 1 copy/mL in 2011 using a
highly sensitive single copy assay (Figure 1). The patient was incarcerated between 2004 and 2005, and medical records confirmed that he was
not on antiretroviral therapy at this point. Furthermore, qualitative testing for antiretroviral drugs on plasma samples from 2009, 2010 and
2011 was performed to rule out surreptitious use of antiretroviral therapy. All samples were negative whereas nevirapine and lamivudine were
detected in a plasma sample from his spouse. Clinical characteristics of Patient 169. The patient's CD4 counts and viral load are shown.
Viral load measurements below the limit of detection are denoted by open symbols. The time on HAART is denoted by the shaded region. The
patient's spouse was diagnosed with HIV-1 infection 3 years before subject 169 was admitted with acute retroviral syndrome. Her CD4+ T cell
count nadir was 84 cells/μL, and her baseline viral load prior to the initiation of HAART was 122,000 copies/ml. In order to determine
whether the patient was infected with a defective virus and whether his spouse transmitted the virus to him, we amplified virus from a
plasma sample from the time of diagnosis. In addition, virus was cultured from CD4+ T cells isolated from PBMCs obtained from the patient
and his spouse in 2010. The frequency of latently infected resting CD4+ T cells in patient 169 was 1.61 infectious units per million, which
is more than a log higher than the frequency found in our cohort of ES and similar to the frequencies found in chronic progressors on
suppressive HAART regimens . We next analyzed the fitness of isolates obtained from patient 169 and his spouse. For patient 169, full genome
sequencing of replication-competent virus cultured from 1999 plasma and three independent replication-competent isolates obtained from CD4+
T cells in 2010 was performed. One of the isolates from 2010 (2B) was identical to the 1999 isolate with the exception of a single
nucleotide difference in the HIV-1 LTR. The two other isolates from 2010 (1A, 1B) were identical although they were isolated from
independent culture wells. The differences between the identical 2010 isolates and the 1999 isolate are summarized in Table 1. For the
patient's spouse, full genome sequencing of two independent isolates cultured from her resting CD4+ T cells in 2010 was performed. No large
deletions were found in any gene and no drug resistance mutations were found in any of the isolates obtained from either patient.
Phylogenetic analysis of the env gene showed that the isolates from 169 and his spouse were more closely related to each other than to any
other isolate in the Los Alamos database, confirming that the two patients were a transmission pair [Figure 2]. Differences in sequence of
replication-competent 1999 and 2010 isolates. Isolate 2B from 2010 is identical to the 1999 isolate with the exception of a single
nucleotide in the LTR. Isolates 1A and 1B are identical to each other. * The triangle denotes deletions in the 2010-1A/1B isolates.
Phylogenetic Analysis: An alignment of the variable regions of env is shown for replication-competent isolates obtained from Patient 169 and
his spouse. Numbering is from the first amino acid in gp120. (A). The sequences are also compared to other Clade B sequences(B). Phylogenies
were estimated by using a classical approach, functioning under a maximum-likelihood (ML) optimality criterion. Sequence analysis of the env
gene suggested that all isolates cultured from both patients were CXCR4- tropic (data not shown). To confirm this, we amplified and cloned
the env gene from the 1999 and 2010 isolates from patient 169, and made GFP-expressing NL4-3 pseudotyped virus as previously described .
Infection studies were then performed with GHOST cells expressing CCR5 and/or CXCR4. As shown in Figure 3A, pseudotyped virus containing env
from 1999 and 2010 was able to infect GHOST cells expressing either co-receptor, demonstrating that each viral clone was dual-tropic (Figure
3A). Phenotypic analyses of viral isolates from Patient 169. (A) Viral tropism was determined using GHOST cells expressing CCR5 and/or
CXCR4. Open bars were below the limit of the detection (B) Replication kinetics was determined in primary CD4+ T cells (left) and the MT-2
cell line (right). We next compared the replication capacity of virus cultured from patient 169 to that of CCR5-tropic (Ba-L) and
CXCR4-tropic (IIIB) laboratory isolates. As shown in Figure 3B, the isolates from 1999 and 2010 replicated as well as IIIB in MT-2 cells
whereas Ba-L did not replicate in these cells, which do not express the CCR5 co-receptor. In primary CD4+ T cells, the two isolates from
Patient 169 replicated as well as Ba-L. Thus control of viral replication in this patient was not due to infection with an attenuated virus,
and viral fitness was stable over time. Having ruled out viral attenuation, we focused on host factors as potential causes of the observed
virologic control. Heterozygosity for the 32 base pair deletion in CCR5 has been associated with slow HIV-1 progression . This gene was thus
analyzed by PCR, and patient 169 was determined to have two wild type CCR5 alleles. The most consistent finding in different cohorts of ES
has been the over-representation of protective HLA alleles such as HLA-B*27 and B*57 . In addition, genome wide association studies have
documented a protective single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) in the HLA-C promoter . Furthermore, HLA-Bw4-80Ile alleles have been shown to
be associated with slowly progressive disease when inherited in conjunction with the KIR3DS1 and/or KIR3DL1 natural killer cell receptor
alleles . Patient 169 does not have an HLA-Bw4-80Ile allele or any other HLA allele that has been previously associated with attenuated
HIV-1 disease. He also does not have the protective C/C HLA-C SNP (Table 2). Analysis of genetic factors associated with protection in HIV-1
infection Some studies have suggested that ES CD4+ T cells that have been activated ex vivo are resistant to viral infection while others
have shown that unstimulated CD4+ T cells from these patients are fully susceptible to viral entry and productive infection . In order to
determine whether CD4+ T cells from patient 169 were resistant to infection, we purified primary CD4+ T cells from 169 and five HIV-1
seronegative donors and infected them directly ex vivo by spinoculation with CCR5 (Ba-L) and CXCR4 (NL4-3) tropic isolates as previously
described. As shown in Figure 4, CD4+ T cells from 169 were as susceptible to infection with both types of isolates as were the CD4+ T cells
from the seronegative donors. In order to determine if spinoculation was masking subtle differences in the susceptibility to infection, we
infected CD4+ T cells with CXCR4-tropic virus without spinoculation and again found that CD4+ T cells from patient 169 were fully
susceptible to infection. We also looked at susceptibility to infection with serial dilutions of both lab strains and a pseudotyped virus
containing dual tropic envelope that was amplified from the patient in 1999. In all cases, patient 169's cells were found to be as
susceptible to infection as cells from HIV-negative donors. CD4+ T cell susceptibility assay. CD4+ T cells from five healthy donors (grey
columns) and Patient 169 (shaded column) were infected with CCR5 tropic (Bal) and CXCR4 tropic (NL43) pseudotypevirus by spinoculation (A)
or with NL43pseudotype virus without spinoculation (B). Infection with serial dilutions of CXCR4-tropic (C), CCR5-tropic (D) and dual-tropic
virus (E) was also performed by spinoculation. The percent of infected cells (GFP positive) are shown. To determine whether a robust humoral
response was playing a role in the control of viral replication, we compared reciprocal IC50 titers of neutralizing antibodies (Nab) in
patient 169 to titers in viremic patients and ES as previously described . Patient 169 had the lowest titers of Nab to laboratory strain
SF162 Env as shown in Figure 5. To determine how well the patient neutralized autologous virus, we measured titers of Nab to pseudotyped
virus expressing Env cloned from the 1999 and 2010 replication-competent isolates. His reciprocal IC 50 titers of Nab to autologous Env from
1999 was 1:195 which is comparable to the titers seen in ES, but lower than the titers seen in viremic patients . In contrast, his Nab titer
to contemporaneous Env was >1: 4 (Figure 5B). Thus it appears that neutralizing antibodies were not the cause of control of viral
replication in this patient. Titers of HIV-specific neutralizing antibodies. (A) Neutralizing activity of plasma from viremic patients, ES,
and patient 169 against recombinant virus with Env from the laboratory strain SF162. The open symbols denote titers that were greater than
1:4. (B) Neutralizing activity of plasma from Patient 169 against recombinant virus with Env from 1999 and 2010-1A isolates. Relative
infection of TZMb1 cells by the recombinant isolates is shown in the presence of four fold dilutions of plasma. Many ES have been found to
possess potent HIV-specific CD8+ T cell activity . We thus looked at CD8+ T cell responses in Patient 169. An ELISPOT assay was performed
following stimulation with Gag and Nef peptides. As shown in Figure 6, two independent non-overlapping epitopes were targeted in Nef, and
and six such epitopes were targeted in Gag. Escape mutations in certain Gag epitopes have been associated with viral attenuation , and we
therefore examined sequences in targeted epitopes to look for signs of virologic escape. A comparison of the sequences from the 1999 and
2010 isolates showed an R18G substitution in a Nef epitope and a G17W substitution in a Gag epitope in isolates 1A and 1B. Both
substitutions were absent in isolate 2B, and thus even if these mutations caused a reduction in viral fitness in some isolates, escape
mutations would not explain virologic control in this patient. CD8+ T cell epitope analysis. Epitopes in Nef (A) and Gag (B) targeted by
CD8+ T cells as determined by an IFN-g ELISPOT assay using overlapping 15 mers. Open boxes represent actual peptides targeted in the assay
whereas the shaded boxes represent predicted optimal HLA-B*42 restricted epiotpes which were not targeted. To determine whether CD8+ T cells
were involved in the direct control of viral replication, we attempted to culture autologous virus from Patient 169 with and without the
depletion of CD8+ T cells. As shown in Figure 7A, virus culture was successful only when CD8+ T cells were depleted, but the same phenomenon
was seen in chronic progressors who had substantial levels of viremia and in patients on suppressive HAART regimens. There was no viral
outgrowth from ES CD4+ T cells consistent with the low frequency of infected CD4+ T cells in these patients . We next compared the
respective abilities of CD8+ T cells from Patient 169 and ES in HIV-1 inhibition assays in which pseudotyped virus was used to superinfect
autologous CD4+ T cells. As shown in Figure 7B, while primary CD8+ T cells from most ES caused a significant reduction in virus replication,
CD8+ T cells from Patient 169 had very little effect in this assay. CD8+ T cell functional analysis. The effect of CD8+ T cell depletion on
autologous virus outgrowth is shown by a comparison of virus replication in activated unfractionated PBMC or activated PBMC from which CD8+
T cells were depleted (A). The ability of CD8+ T cells to inhibit replication of GFP expression virus in activated autologous CD4+ T cells
is shown. Open bars were below the limit of the detection. (B) by comparing the percentage of infected CD4+ T cells (GFP positive) in the
absence and presence of CD8+ T cells. We present here a patient who has controlled HIV-1 replication for more than nine years after the
cessation of HAART. While some studies have reported that initiation of HAART during primary infection can lead to the control of viral
replication once therapy is discontinued, most of these patients eventually experienced a rebound in viremia . To our knowledge, the nine
years of control seen in patient 169 is the longest period of control reported in a patient who was treated in primary infection and who
subsequently underwent treatment interruption. We extend prior studies by performing full genome sequence analysis and phenotypic studies of
viral isolates obtained at the time of infection and eight years after the cessation of HAART. We show that Patient 169 was infected by
virus from a patient with AIDS, and we demonstrate that the viral isolates from patient 169 are dual-tropic and replication-competent, which
makes it unlikely that an attenuated virus was transmitted. It should be noted that infection with dual-tropic virus is associated with more
rapid progression than infection with CCR5-tropic virus . Thus the long term control seen in this patient is even more remarkable. We
hypothesized that the patient's virus may have developed drug resistance mutations or escape mutations that led to viral attenuation later
in his disease course. However sequence analysis did not reveal any drug resistance mutations, and potential escape mutations in Gag and Nef
were seen in only some isolates. While it is possible that escape mutations in other viral genes caused a reduction in viral fitness, the
fact that isolates obtained from 2010 replicated as well in vitro as viral isolates present during primary infection makes this unlikely. We
considered the possibility that this patient was destined to become a natural ES. However several observations suggest that this is not the
case. He had a viral load of > 750,000 copies/mL and was very symptomatic during seroconversion. Studies have shown that patients with
severe acute retroviral syndrome have a more rapid rate of disease progression . In contrast, natural ES tend to have limited symptoms and
low viral loads during primary infection . ES also invariably have extremely low frequencies of latently infected CD4+ T cells whereas
Patient 169 had a very large number of HIV-1 infected CD4+ T cells during primary infection , and his current frequency of latently infected
cells is currently similar to that seen in patients with progressive disease on HAART. Finally, he did not have any of the HLA alleles that
are overrepresented in ES. We show here that CD4+ T cells from Patient 169 are fully susceptible to infection and that he had very low
titers of neutralizing antibodies to heterologous and autologous virus. Interestingly, depletion of CD8+ T cells resulted in efficient
outgrowth of virus from CD4+ T cells. While this suggests that CD8+ T cells are playing a role in the control of viral replication, it is
unlikely to be the only mechanism involved as CD8+ T cells from patients with progressive disease were also effective at preventing
outgrowth of autologous virus. In contrast, CD8+ T cells from Patient 169 were not as effective as those from ES at inhibiting replication
of recombinant virus carrying GFP. Thus it appears that this patient is controlling replication of pathogenic dual-tropic virus by a
mechanism that is distinct from the CD8+ T cell mediated control that is seen in many ES. This unknown mechanism may be similar to the
mechanisms present in ES who do not possess protective HLA alleles or potent HIV-specific CD8+ T cell responses , but it is still unique in
that control is being maintained over a much larger number of infected CD4+ T cells in Patient 169. The data presented here suggest that
early treatment in some patients infected with fully pathogenic virus can lead to control of viral replication for extended periods of time.
Understanding the mechanisms involved in this control may lead to vaccine development and effective immunotherapy in patients with
progressive disease. The data sets supporting the results of this article are available in the Gen Bank repository (accession numbers
JN599164 and JN599165) Culture of replication-competent virus from CD4+ T cells was performed as previously described . Replication-
competent virus from 1999 was obtained by spinoculating CD4+ T cells from an uninfected donor with the patient's plasma. Full genome
sequence analysis of viral isolates was performed as previously described . Classical, maximum likelihood and Bayesian phylogenetic analysis
were performed as described previously . 100 μl of patient serum were treated with 300 μl of cold acetonitrile, stored at -20°C for 20
minutes and subsequently centrifuged at 12,000 × rpm for 5 minutes. Specimen supernatants were evaporated to dryness and reconstituted with
100 μl water. 10 uL of each treated sample were injected onto the liquid chromatography system equipped with Transcend pumps (Thermo Fisher
Scientific) for analytical separation. The chromatographic run began with 60 seconds of 5% methanol containing 10 mM ammonium acetate
(mobile phase B), followed by a 10 minute ramp to 95% B. Analytes were eluted from a Hypersil Gold 50 × 2.1 mm; 3 μm particle size HPLC
column (ThermoFisher Scientific) during this gradient and the column was washed for 60 seconds with 2:2:1 acetonitrile:isopropanol:acetone
and re-equilibrated with 5% mobile phase B for 180 seconds. Analytes were detected over a 14.9 minute run using the Exactive Orbitrap mass
analyzer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) with a heated electrospray ionization (HESI) source. The source parameters were as follows: sheath gas:
40, auxillary gas: 10, sweep gas: 0, spray voltage: 3.5 kV, capillary temperature: 270 °C, capillary voltage: 60 V, tube lens voltage: 120
V, skimmer voltage: 15 V, heater temperature: 350 °C. The mass spectrometer method included two positive-mode scan events: one full scan
event with ultra-high resolution (100000 @ 1 Hz) and one in-source collision-induced dissociation (CID) event with enhanced resolution
(25000 @ 4 Hz) and collision energy of 45 eV. Both scan events were programmed for 100 ms maximum inject time and balanced ACG targets. The
analytical method was found to have a limit of detection of <20 ng/ml for amprenavir, atazanavir, darunavir, efavirenz, emtricitabine,
indinavir, lamivudine, lopinavir, nelfinavir, nevirapine, ritonavir, saquinavir, tenofovir and tipranavir. Positive identification was
determined by exact mass detection at 5 ppm discrimination, analyte retention time and identification of mass transitions when possible. RFP
expressing recombinant pseudotype virus was made with env genes amplified from 1999 and 2010 isolates. These viruses were used to infect
GHOST cell lines transfected with CCR5 and/or CXCR4 (obtained from the NIH AIDS Research and Reference Program) and the percentage of RFP
positive cells was determined in triplicates on day three. GHOST cells express low levels of endogenous CXCR4 and therefore infection of
cells transfected with CCR5 alone was performed in the presence of the CXCR4 antagonist AMD 3100 at a dose of 1 uM (obtained from the NIH
AIDS Research and Reference Program). Viral fitness was analyzed as described previously . PBMCs from healthy donors were activated for two
days with IL-2 and PHA. CD4+ T cells were isolated (MACS, CD4+ T cell isolation Kit) and infected by spinoculation (1200 × g for 2 hours)
with equal quantities (200 ng/mL) of p24 from primary patient isolates, or with Ba-L or IIIB laboratory HIV-1 strains as controls.
Supernatant samples were taken over the course of 7 days. Viral replication was quantified using p24 ELISA (Perkin Elmer). HLA-A, B, and C
allele identification was performed at the Johns Hopkins University Immunonogenetics laboratory. CCR5 was amplified from genomic DNA using
gene specific primers. The presence or absence of the CCR5 Δ32 mutation was determined by relative size of the resulting PCR fragment. HLA-C
single nucleotide polymorphism genotyping (rs9264942) was performed utilizing the Applied Biosystems 7300 real-time PCR System allelic
discrimination assay, following the manufacturer's guidelines. Primers and probes were developed by Custom TaqMan SNP Genotyping assays
(ABI). Determination of the HLA-B Bw4-80Ile allele was performed using the Olerup SSP 104.101 KIR Genotyping 12 Lot71E and 104.201 KIR
ligand genotyping Lot85E kits, following the manufacturer's guidelines. CD4+ T cells from the patient and five healthy donors were purified
by negative selection using Miltenyi beads and were infected directly ex vivo. Spinoculation was performed with pseudotyped CCR5 and CXCR4
tropic viruses and GFP expression was measured in triplicates as previously described . Infection without spinoculation was also performed
with CXCR4 tropic virus. Neutralization assays were performed as described previously . Briefly, recombinant pseudoviruses containing SF162,
or Patient 169 env were titrated on TZM b1 cells to determine a linear range of infection for each pseudovirus. Infections were then
performed in duplicate with a concentration of virus within this linear range, along with serial dilutions of patient plasma that had been
heat inactivated at 56°C for 60 min. All assays were performed in the presence of 10% total human plasma. Each virus was pre-incubated with
5% test plasma and with four-fold serial dilutions of test plasma in normal human plasma. To determine neutralization, each test plasma well
was compared to wells containing an equal concentration of normal human plasma. Reactive CTL epitopes were defined by IFN-γ Elispot. As
previously described , whole blood was taken from each patient and PBMCs were isolated by Ficoll gradient centrifugation. PBMCs were
aliquoted into each well of 96 well MultiScreen (Millipore) plates with conjugated IFN-γ antibody. Cells were activated with overlapping
peptides spanning the entire amino acid sequence of B clade consensus gag and nef at a concentration of 5 μg/ml (obtained from the NIH AIDS
Research and Reference Program). PBMCs were cultured overnight, and subsequently analyzed. Quantification of spot forming units (SFU) was
performed in a blinded fashion by Zellnet Consulting (Fort Lee, NJ). Positive responses were defined as greater than 50 SFU per million
PBMCs. Negative controls (wells with medium alone) routinely had less than 15 SFU per million PBMC. The effect of CD8+ T cells on autologous
virus outgrowth was determined by measuring p24 values on unfractionated PBMC and PBMC depleted of CD8+ T cells. The cells were stimulated
for 48 hours with PHA at 1 μg/ml and culture supernatant was obtained on day 10. The cytolytic T cell effect was determined by a CD8
suppression assay. PBMCs were isolated from patients, and CD8+ T cells were positively selected using Miltenyi magnetic beads (MACS, CD8+ T
cell Isolation kit). CD8+ T cells were depleted of CD16+ cells (Invitrogen, Dynal Beads) to remove contaminating NK cells. CD4+ T cells were
isolated by negative selection using Miltenyi magnetic beads. Purity of depletion was analyzed by flow cytometry. CD4+ T cells were infected
by spinoculation at 1200 × g for two hours with replication competent NL4-3 virus, in which GFP is engineered into nef. Flow cytometry was
performed five days after infection to assess the percentage of GFP positive cells. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. MS, SAR, KOC, and RWB performed all the experiments and helped draft the manuscript. JRB helped to design the neutralization
antibody assay. ARB, MAM, and WC tested plasma samples for antiretroviral drugs. AAC and JBM provided clinical samples and helped draft the
manuscript. RFS participated in the study design and helped to draft the manuscript. JNB conceived of the study, participated in its design
and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Supported by HHMI (RFS) and NIH
grants R01AI056990-01A1 (JBM) and R01 AI080328 (JNB)
