Symptomatic severe aortic stenosis carries a two year survival of only 50%. However many patients are unsuitable for conventional aortic
valve replacement as they are considered too high risk due to significant co-morbidities. Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation (TAVI)
offers a viable alternative for this high risk patient group, either by the femoral or apical route. This article reports a case of a
pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle following an apical approach TAVI in an elderly lady with severe aortic stenosis. To our knowledge
pseduoaneuryms of the left ventricle have been reported infrequently in the literature and has yet to be established as a recognised
complication of TAVI. Symptomatic severe aortic stenosis carries a two year survival of only 50%. However many patients are unsuitable for
conventional aortic valve replacement as they are considered too high risk due to significant co-morbidities. Transcatheter Aortic Valve
Implantation (TAVI) offers a viable alternate for this high risk patient group, either by the femoral or apical route. The procedure was
first described in 2002 by Cribier et al and several registries have subsequently been established that indicate a procedural success rate
of over 90%. This has allowed TAVI to become a viable treatment of aortic stenosis in a carefully selected group of patients where the risks
of conventional surgery are thought to be too high. This article reports a case of a pseudoaneurysm of the left ventricle (LV) following an
apical approach TAVI in an elderly lady with severe aortic stenosis. To our knowledge pseduoaneuryms of the left ventricle have been
reported only infrequently in the literature and it has yet to be established as a recognised complication of TAVI . We report the case of
an 86 year old British Caucasian lady with severe aortic stenosis (peak gradient 62 mmHg, mean gradient 32 mmHg, valve area 0.4 cm2) who
described worsening dyspnoea and chest discomfort on minimal exertion. Her past medical history included coronary artery bypass grafting,
hypertension and diabetes mellitus type 2. She was deemed too high risk for conventional surgery and therefore underwent transapical
approach TAVI with the implantation of a 23 mm Edwards Scientific Sapien XT valve prosthesis (a bovine tissue valve inserted on a cobalt
chromium frame). Immediate transoephageal echocardiography and fluoroscopic imaging demonstrated excellent seating of the valve,
subsequently confirmed angiographically. Two days later the patient developed isolated electrocardiographic evidence of pericarditis with
minimal associated chest pain. Transthoracic echocardiography demonstrated a well seated aortic prosthesis and a 0.8 cm pericardial effusion
with no tamponade. The effusion was not drained and her electrocardiographic changes settled over the next few days. Three months later,
transthoracic echocardiography showed an abnormal bidirectional signal at the apex (Additional File 1). Peak velocity was 139.4 cm-1.
Cardiovascular magnetic resonance (CMR) showed a discrete pseudoaneurysm with late gadolinium myocardial enhancement (Additional Files 2 and
3). The decision was made to treat her conservatively and keep her under regular surveillance. The 30 day mortality of tranapical approach
TAVI is reported by various registries at just over 10% . Well recognised complications of TAVI via the transapical approach include
bleeding, cerebral vascular events and septal haematomas. However there are few reports of pseudoaneuryms and this case helps to reinforce
this outcome as a recognised complication of this procedure. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of
this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CMR:
Cardiac Magnetic Resonance; LV: Left Ventricle; SSPF: Steady State Free Precession imaging; TAVI: Transcatheter Aortic Valve Implantation.
The authors declare that they have no competing interests. APV was the primary author of the text. TM conceived of the report, acted as
chief editor, provided the images and was the primary physician during the patient's inpatient stay. MKB, IMM, MS, SKN and RAH were involved
in the patient's care as well as editing and overseeing of the text. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. 4 chamber view
transthoracic echocardiogram of the LV showing colour flow in and out of the pseudoaneurysm. Click here for file CMR steady state free
precession (SSFP) sequence showing pseudoaneurysm of the LV apex at the incision site. Click here for file First pass gadolinium scan
showing flow into the pseudoaneurysm. Click here for file Nil funding
