Subcutaneous fat necrosis of the newborn (ScFN) is an uncommon condition caused by generalized and/or local tissue hypoperfusion. The skin
lesions of ScFN tend to improve spontaneously. However, ScFN may also lead to complications which cause serious problems. The severity of
the etiologic factors contributing to the development of the disease determines the severity of complications. Therefore, these patients
should be closely monitored for complications, especially for hypercalcemia which may be life-threatening. The severity and duration of
hypercalcemia are associated with the extensity of skin lesions. We present a newborn who developed ScFN as a result of systemic
hypotension. The ScFN resolved after the first few weeks of life, but the patient developed mild hypercalcemia during the 4-month follow-up
period. The infant was breast-fed during follow-up, and vitamin D prophylaxis was not initiated. The hypercalcemia resolved within four
months without any complications. We would like to draw attention to the need to monitor serum calcium levels in these infants and to
refrain from initiating vitamin D prophylaxis in the first months of life. Conflict of interest:None declared. Subcutaneous fat necrosis of
the newborn (ScFN) is a rare condition and its pathophysiology is unknown. It is usually reported in term newborns, but may occur in
preterms as well (1,2,3,4). The skin lesions of ScFN can be described as firm and painful subcutaneous nodules, the appearance of which may
vary from an erythematous to a violaceous lesion. Typical lesions are mainly localized on the back, buttocks, shoulders, and the cheeks. In
general, they are self-limiting and resolve spontaneously within a few weeks to months after the onset (1,2,3). Hypercalcemia, occurring
after healing of skin lesions, is the most dangerous complication of ScFN. It can be life-threatening if not treated adequately (1,2,3). We
present the case of a newborn with uncomplicated hypercalcemia resulting from ScFN and its management during the 4 months of follow-up. A
3-day-old female newborn was transferred to our hospital due to suspected neonatal sepsis and presence of a small omphalocele. She was born
at term by spontaneous vaginal delivery. We learned that she had undergone transient tachypnea as well as upper gastrointestinal bleeding
and hypotension after birth. On admission, physical examination revealed mild tachypnea, an omphalocele, and multiple erythematous skin
lesions. Her skin lesions were located on the back, shoulders, the lateral surfaces of the arms, and on the anterior medial side of the
right thigh. Laboratory investigations, including complete blood count, serum calcium (Ca), phosphorus (P), alkaline phosphatase (ALP),
blood urea nitrogen, creatinine, electrolytes, blood sugar, aspartate transaminase, alanine transaminase, acid-base values, and C-reactive
protein levels as well as urinalysis were all normal. Antibiotic therapy was initiated because infection could not be ruled out and
terminated after three days when blood cultures were reported to be sterile. The patient’s tachypnea resolved on oxygen therapy within 24
hours and the omphalocele was corrected surgically on the fifth day of admission. On the first week of admission, the skin lesions
transformed into red-purple, firm and painful subcutaneous nodules (Figure 1). These findings were consistent with the early lesions of fat
necrosis of the newborn, and a skin biopsy was performed. Pathological examination of the biopsy material obtained from the lesion border
revealed a small number of lymphocytes and focal inflammatory areas consisting of histiocytes (Figure 2a). Additionally, there were radial
eosinophilic crystals in the fat cells (Figure 2b). Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed as ScFN. Spontaneous improvement was
observed in the lesions during the first two weeks following the diagnosis. The baby’s parents were informed about the risk of hypercalcemia
and its signs and symptoms. The patient was discharged on the 15th day of admission. Vitamin-D prophylaxis was not initiated. The lesions
progressively disappeared over the following four weeks without any complication. Serum Ca and P levels were monitored twice per month after
discharge. Serum Ca, P, ALP, and parathyroid hormone (PTH) levels during admission and follow-up were all within normal ranges and are given
in Table 1. A slight increase was noted in serum Ca levels during the follow-up period. The patient was breast-fed throughout the follow-up
period. ScFN is a rare condition which can be self-limiting in its early period, but which can be life-threatening in its late period.
Usually, the history of ScFN patients reveals a systemic and/or local hypoxia-hypoperfusion episode during the perinatal period. Possible
risk factors for ScFN are perinatal asphyxia, meconium aspiration, cord accidents, hypothermia-cold exposure, hypoglycemia and lactic
acidosis (1,2,3). ScFN may also develop as a complication of therapeutic hypothermia applied either in newborns with perinatal asphyxia or
in newborns undergoing surgical procedures (5,6,7). Maternal conditions which lead to disrupted placental perfusion such as pre-eclampsia,
smoking, cocaine exposure, and diabetes may also cause ScFN (1,2,3,7). Our patient had no history of perinatal asphyxia or obstetric trauma
and there were no maternal risk factors. However, she had undergone a systemic hypotension episode in the first days of life. In ScFN
patients, typical skin lesions appear any time after birth up to four weeks after delivery and begin with edema in the affected skin area.
The swelling is followed by hard nodules and plaques (1,2,3). The lesions are very painful (2,8) and, as was also the case in our patient,
they resolve spontaneously within a few weeks. In some cases, as the skin lesions heal, they lead to fat tissue atrophy, fibrosis, scarring
or ulcers (1,2,3). At admission, our patient had erythematous lesions that transformed into red-purple, firm and painful subcutaneous
nodules at the end of the first week (Figure 1). Deep hemangioma, lipoedema (cellulite), erysipelas, histiocytosis, fibromatosis,
rhabdomyosarcomas and neonatal sclerema must be considered in the differential diagnosis of ScFN. Neonatal sclerema may occur concomitantly
with ScFN (1,2,3,7). Definitive diagnosis of ScFN requires histopathological assessment, which will reveal radially arranged fat cells seen
as needle-shaped crystals, multinucleated giant cells forming the granulomatous structure, fibroblasts, numerous histiocytes, and small
amounts of lymphocyte infiltration (1,2,3,7,9). In our patient, also the diagnosis of ScFN was confirmed by skin biopsy. The size and
severity of the lesions as well as the complications depend on the etiologic factors. Conditions accompanied by generalized hypoxia-
hypoperfusion cause the most serious problems (1,2,3). Other than local skin problems, thrombocytopenia, hypoglycemia, hypertriglyceridemia
and hypercalcemia constitute the expected complications of ScFN. All complications, except hypercalcemia, are self-limiting disorders and
rapidly respond to treatment. There were no complications except for mild elevation of blood calcium level in our patient. Hypercalcemia is
the most frequently reported and frightening complication in ScFN, occurring in 28-69% of the cases (1,2,3). The pathogenesis of the
hypercalcemia is attributed to the necrosis that occurs in the damaged immature fat tissue caused by granulomatous cell infiltration. These
macrophages in the area of infiltration lead to increased 1,25-dihydroxyvitamin D3 production, which, regardless of PTH level, leads to
increased intestinal absorption of calcium (1,2,3,7). Release of calcium from necrotic fat cells, increased osteoclastic activity due to
elevated PTH and effect of local prostaglandins (PgE2) have been reported as other suspected mechanisms leading to hypercalcemia (1,2,3).
The severity and duration of hypercalcemia are related to the severity and duration of skin lesions. Hypercalcemia usually develops in the
4th to 6th weeks of life, when the skin lesions begin to resolve and may last up to the 6th month. If the duration of hypercalcemia is
prolonged, metastatic calcifications, nephrocalcinosis and renal failure may develop and may lead to life-threatening cardiac problems
(1,2,3,7,9). The close monitoring of serum calcium levels is imperative in ScFN patients and their parents should be informed about the
symptoms of hypercalcemia, such as irritability, anorexia, constipation, and failure to thrive (7,8). In conclusion, patients with ScFN
should be followed closely in the first months of life, since the complications can be life-threatening. Also, these infants should not
receive vitamin D for rickets prophylaxis in the first 6 months.
