We report a case of toxic epidermal necrolysis with ocular involvement following vaccination for hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome. A
healthy 20-year-old male soldier presented with confluent purpuric and erythematous dusky red macules evolving to flaccid blister and
epidermal detachment on the whole body with conjunctival injection. The patient had no antecedent medical or surgical conditions except for
two doses of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome vaccination. With supportive care, skin lesions were improved. Ophthalmic examinations
revealed conjunctival injection with epithelial defects in both eyes. Ocular complications were resolved after amniotic membrane
transplantation. Toxic epidermal necrolysis may be considered as a possible complication of hemorrhagic fever with renal syndrome
vaccination. Toxic epidermal necrolysis (TEN) is an acute and severe skin reaction characterized by widespread erythema, blisters, and
sheet-like skin loss, often associated with a systemic toxic condition and mucous membrane involvement including the ocular tissues.1-6 TEN
is assumed to be related to hypersensitivity reactions to drugs and infections.1-6 Vaccination has been reported as a rare triggering factor
for erythema multiforme (EM), Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), and TEN.7-10 To date, there is no report of EM/SJS/TEN related to hemorrhagic
fever with renal syndrome (HFRS) vaccination. We report herein a case of TEN with ocular involvement following vaccination for HFRS. A
healthy 20-year-old male soldier presented with confluent purpuric and erythematous dusky red macules evolving to flaccid blister and
epidermal detachment on the whole body with extensive erosions and necroses of the oral mucosa (Fig. 1). Nikolsky sign was positive on
erythematous zones. The patient had no antecedent medical or surgical conditions or medications including NSAID except for two doses of HFRS
vaccination (Hantavax®; Korea Green Cross, Seoul, Korea) at one month interval. The first symptom of bilateral conjunctival injection and
tearing developed one day after second vaccination. And then, other symptoms such as swelling of lips, malaise, headache, pharyngeal
irritation, and conjunctival itching sense developed. However, there were no symptoms such as fever, myalgia, nausea, diarrhea, and
arthralgia. Skin vesicles and papules quickly developed and became widespread involving oral mucosa, neck, and upper extremities followed by
dissemination to the trunk and legs. The palms and soles were unaffected. Laboratory findings including complete blood cell count,
electrolyte/BUN/Cr analysis, liver function test, urine analysis, and tests for autoimmune diseases (anti-nuclear antibody, anti-Smith
antibody, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and smooth muscle antibody) were within normal range. Because the total area of epidermis
detachment was greater than 30% of total body surface, the patient was diagnosed as TEN and high dose systemic corticosteroid and
prophylactic antibiotics with supportive treatment were administered. Skin lesions improved slowly with these methods. Ophthalmic
examinations revealed visual acuity of 20/40 and conjunctival injection with medial, inferior, and temporal conjunctival epithelial defects
in both eyes at presentation (Fig. 2). Topical steroid (PredForte®; Allergan, Irvine, CA, USA), antibiotics (Vigamox®; Alcon, Fort Worth,
TX, USA), and lubricant ointment (Duratears®; Alcon, Fort Worth, TX, USA) were applied in both eyes. To minimize ocular complication
associated with ocular surface inflammation, bilateral amniotic membrane transplantation (AMT) was performed covering whole ocular surface
including cornea, lid margins, bulbar and tarsal conjunctivas 5 days after admission. After the surgery, symblepharon rings and therapeutic
contact lenses were applied in both eyes. Three weeks after the operation, the ocular complications disappeared, and visual acuity was 20/20
in both eyes without any symblepharon formation. Various factors have been reported to be associated with TEN. Among them, the most frequent
causes were drugs and infections.1-6 Vaccination for human papillomavirus, hepatitis B, smallpox, anthrax, tetanus, mumps, measles, rubella,
and influenza has been reported as a rare cause of EM/SJS/TEN.7-10 To date, there has been no published case of TEN related to HFRS
vaccination. HFRS is a life-threatening disease presented by sudden fever, chills, nausea, petechiae, headache, and backache; the most
serious aspect of the disease is vascular leakage, acute shock, and renal failure.11-13 Mortality ranges of HFRS have been to be estimated
up to 15%.11-13 Approximately 150,000 to 200,000 patients with HFRS are hospitalized each year throughout the world and many of the patients
are solders and farmers because HFRS is transmitted by rat.12 In Asia, Hantaan virus and Seoul virus have been identified and known as
important causative agents for HFRS in Korea and China.13 The first Hantaan virus vaccine (Hantavax®) was developed from suckling mouse
brain and inactivated with 0.05% formalin.12 The recommended immunization schedule of Hantavax® is a series of two doses one month apart
with one booster 12 months later.12 From 1990 to 1998, 5,690,000 doses of Hantavax® were used in Korea (1,162,000 doses to soldiers,
20.4%).12 However, little is known about the complications related to Hantavax® vaccination. Verification of causes of TEN is difficult.
Therefore, temporal relationship and absence of other known causal events have been considered as proofs of causal relationship in the
previous studies.1-10 Considering the temporal relationship between the development of TEN and vaccination, the HFRS vaccination was the
most possible cause in the present case, without any other known causes of TEN including infections and drugs. Bilateral conjunctival
injection and tearing developed as the first symptom one day after the second HFRS vaccination followed by whole body skin eruptions in our
case, in good accord with the previous studies. Time interval between the administration of the vaccine and EM/SJS/TEN development varied
between 1 day and 3 weeks,7-10 and acute conjunctivitis occurred several hours to 4 days before skin eruptions in many cases.5 The mechanism
of TEN following HFRS vaccination is not clear. It has been hypothesized that the protein components of vaccine act like keratinocyte-
expressed antigens, thus triggering immune reactions.7,12 Ocular involvement of TEN occurs in 50% to 88% of cases and can cause severe
complications.1-6 Ocular management includes application of lubricant ointment, antibiotics to prevent infection, steroids to control
inflammation, and periodic lysis of symblepharon.14 AMT is known as a recent strategy to suppress inflammation, prevent ulcer formation, and
promote healing during the acute stage of TEN, thus preventing sight-threatening cicatrical complications.14 In the present case, ocular
complications were recovered after AMT with supportive care with eye drops. The AMT in acute stage of TEN would be an effective strategy to
facilitate epithelial healing and reduce inflammation as reported previously.14 In conclusion, we experienced the first case of TEN with
ocular involvement developed after HFRS vaccination. TEN may be considered as a possible complication of HFRS vaccination. The study was
supported by the Korean Military Medical Research Project from the ROK Defense Ministry. The funding sources had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, manuscript preparation, or the decision to submit the manuscript for publication. The authors have no
financial conflicts of interest. Photograph of the patient at the first visit. Confluent purpuric and erythematous dusky macules evolving to
flaccid blister and epidermal detachment on the whole body predominating the trunk and upper limbs with extensive erosions and necroses of
the lower lip were shown. Slit-lamp biomicroscopic finding of the right eye at the first visit. Conjunctival injection with widespread
epithelial defects (area between arrows) was revealed.
