Santos-Pontelli TEG and Pontes-Neto designed and conceived the study, collected, analyzed, interpreted the data, and drafted the manuscript.
Araujo DB and Santos AC designed the study, analyzed, interpreted the data and revised the manuscript. Leite JP designed and conceived the
study, analyzed and interpreted the data, and revised the manuscript. Pusher behavior (PB) is a postural control disorder characterized by
actively pushing away from the nonparetic side and resisting passive correction with a tendency to fall toward the paralyzed side.1 These
patients have no awareness that their active pushing is counterproductive, which precludes the patients from standing without assistance.
Several studies have already demonstrated that PB can occur in patients with lesions in both hemispheres, and PB is distinct from neglect
and anosognosia.2-8 The high frequency of the association between PB and neurophysiological deficits might reflect an increased
vulnerability of certain regions to stroke-induced injury rather than any direct involvement with the occurrence of PB.9,10 Traditionally,
PB has only been reported in stroke patients; however, it has also been described under non-stroke conditions.8 Previous imaging studies
have suggested the posterolateral thalamus as the brain structure that is typically damaged in pusher patients.4,11 Nevertheless, other
cortical and subcortical areas, such as the insular cortex and post-central gyrus, have also been highlighted as structures that are
potentially involved in the pathophysiology of PB.2,12-16 The mechanisms underlying PB have been attributed to vertical perception
dysfunction that leads to postural reactive behavior.3,14, Nevertheless, the true changes in the verticality perception of these patients
are still unclear. In this context, Karnath et al. identified five patients with severe PB who experience their body (subjective postural
vertical ) as oriented “upright” when it is actually tilted approximately 18° toward the side of the brain lesion and with no subjective
visual vertical (SVV) bias.3 Johansen et al. also found no SVV bias in 15 PB patients.20 In contrast, Pérrenou et al. found SPV, SVV, and
subjective haptic vertical (SHV) biases toward the side opposite the brain lesion in six pusher patients.21 It is clear that, to state which
vertical perception is disturbed in PB patients, the studies' designs require a meticulous methodology, including the analysis of neglect
and the influence of haptics on SVV in a large sample of PB patients. Until now, PB has only been reported as a temporary and transitory
phenomenon with a maximum recovery time of six months.8, Moreover, it has been suggested that PB does not negatively influence the
functional outcomes of rehabilitation.10,22 Nevertheless, those assumptions have primarily emerged from case series of stroke patients
admitted to stroke units or followed in rehabilitation centers in developed countries.10, Therefore, the actual impact of the disorder on
stroke patients in developing countries may be underestimated. Here, we report three cases of stroke patients that had persistent PB with
important disabling consequences on their functional outcomes. Patient 1: A 77-year-old right-handed male with a history of hypertension was
admitted after being found confused and left-hemiparetic with an NIH stroke scale25 score of 20. Cranial CT revealed a right-middle cerebral
artery ischemic stroke (Figure 1a; Table 1). The PB was identified 10 days after the onset of ictus with a Scale for Contraversive Pushing
(SCP)3 score of 6, and he was discharged 10 days later. The patient was reevaluated 318 days after the onset of ictus and still presented
severe PB (SCP = 6) and a Barthel Index25 score of zero. He died because of pneumonia a few weeks after his last reevaluation. Patient 2: A
74-year-old right-handed male with a history of alcohol and tobacco abuse was admitted with right hemiparesis and aphasia. A CT scan
revealed ischemic strokes in the branches of his left-anterior and middle cerebral arteries (Figure 1b; Table 1). PB was identified nine
days after the onset of ictus (SCP = 6). He was discharged after 20 days. Upon his last reevaluation 763 days after the onset of ictus,
severe PB was still present, and he had a Barthel Index score of zero. Patient 3: A 65-year-old right-handed man with a history of a
ruptured right-middle cerebral artery aneurysm treated by surgical clipping in another institution was referred to our outpatient stroke
clinic 1.6 years after the onset of ictus when severe PB was identified (Figure 1c; Table 1). Severe PB was still present 729 days after the
onset of ictus, and he had a Barthel Index score of 10. (The patient had occasional bladder and bowel incontinence.) He was found dead by
his family members a few weeks after his final evaluation. In all of the cases, after the identification of PB, the patients were referred
to public rehabilitation centers, but their adherence to their rehabilitation programs was neither optimized nor controlled. All of the
patients had restricted access to physiotherapy (the mean number of sessions per week was less than 1) and remained lying in bed almost the
entire day. Furthermore, upon their final reevaluations, all of the patients were completely dependent on their activities of daily living
with a modified Rankin scale score of 5, the strengths of their arms and legs opposite their brain lesions did not change over time, and
they had a persistent fear of falling. This is the first demonstration that PB can persist for more than two years, with disastrous impacts
on functional outcomes. Certainly, the factors that negatively influenced the duration of PB were the limited frequency of physiotherapy and
the absence of specific strategies for treating PB. In fact, some well-described physiotherapy approaches have been proposed,23, but there
have been no randomized control trials that have confirmed their effectiveness. Still, there is strong evidence that stroke rehabilitation
that is initiated early after onset and sustained across the healthcare continuum significantly reduces the probability of disability within
the first year.30,31 Furthermore, the poor socioeconomic conditions of the patients restricted their home care and led to the patients lying
in bed almost the entire day, despite their physiotherapeutic recommendations. Thus, the privation of experience in the vertical position
after their strokes could have negatively influenced the patients' prognoses. This observation raises the question of whether the duration
of PB could be shortened by the simple attitude of remaining in a vertical position for several daylight hours. PB has been considered to be
a neurological behavior that is not strongly associated with the recovery of motor control in the upper and lower limbs.24,32 Nevertheless,
we observed poor concomitant PB recovery and other neurological deficits, which might reflect the maladaptive mechanisms underlying the lack
of plasticity. Additional studies will be needed to understand the neuroplastic mechanisms of PB recovery using brain-activation techniques
(functional magnetic resonance, single-photon emission computed tomography, positron emission tomography, magnetoencephalography, and event-
related potential) and transcranial magnetic stimulation techniques. Spatial neglect has been identified as a factor that worsens the
prognosis of PB,6,10,24 and this clinical characteristic was found in two of our patients. Thus, we cannot suggest that the poor recovery
observed in our patients could be entirely due to the presence of spatial neglect. Moreover, we were unable to evaluate the perception of
verticality. Future studies should explore whether the vertical misperceptions of the pusher patients influence the duration and severity of
PB. The absence of sitting balance soon after stroke has consistently been shown to predict a poor recovery.33 Moreover, predicting the
outcome of a stroke is important for triage decisions, prognostic estimates for the family, and the appropriate utilization of resources.34
It is noteworthy that while the patients presented PB, all of their daily life activities were compromised. Thus, this study highlights that
PB can be much more incapacitating than generally believed. The authors acknowledge CAPES (Coordenação de Aperfeiçoamento de Pessoal de
Nível Superior) and FAPESP (Fundação de Amparo à Pesquisa do Estado de São Paulo) for their financial support. No potential conflict of
interest was reported. a. CT scan from patient 1. Note an ischemic stroke of the M1 segment of the middle cerebral artery with a small
hemorrhagic transformation in the perforating arteries territory. b. CT scan from patient 2 showing infarcts in branches of left anterior
and middle cerebral arteries. c. MRI scan from patient 3 with an area of right frontotemporal encephalomalacia, 1.6 years after the surgical
clipping of a right middle cerebral artery aneurysm. The demographic and clinical data of the patients. PB, pusher behavior; NIHSS, National
Institutes of Health Stroke Scale;25 BI, Barthel Index;25 SCP, Scale for Contraversive Pushing.3 Spatial neglect was evidenced by typical
clinical behavior and positive results on the “clock-drawing”, “cancellation” and “line-bisection” tests.35
