Although many treatments have been applied to treat hormone-refractory prostate cancer (HRPC), therapeutic outcome is not altogether
satisfactory. In the case of locally recurring HRPC, uncontrolled gross hematuria, dysuria, and scalding are often experienced. We report a
patient who improved following intra-arterial infusion of cisplatin (CDDP) and ifosfamide (IFM) to treat urinary retention caused by locally
recurring HRPC. After chemotherapy, cancer volume was remarkably reduced and symptoms improved. It is well known that most prostatic
carcinomas are androgen dependent. Therefore, androgen deprivation therapy (ADT) is one of most effective systemic palliative treatments for
such carcinomas. Although ADT is initially extremely effective, serum prostate-specific antigen (PSA) levels increase over time, and the
disease eventually becomes characteristic of hormone-refractory prostate cancer (HRPC). Several types of treatment have been applied to
treat HRPC, including antiandrogen alternation , supplemental steroid therapy , and generalized chemotherapy with docetaxel hydrate (DTX)
[3, 4]. However, these therapeutic modalities have only a short-term effect. In addition, HRPC is occasionally encountered with locally
recurring carcinoma and uncontrolled gross hematuria, dysuria, and scalding. These symptoms adversely affect the quality of life of HRPC
patients. We report a patient with HRPC with locally recurring HRPC accompanied by urinary retention. Treatment with intra-arterial infusion
chemotherapy using cisplatin (CDDP) and ifosfamide (IFM) removed the symptom for a considerable period. A 64-year-old Japanese man was
admitted to hospital with lower urinary tract symptom (LUTS) and a high PSA level (180 ng/ml) in April 1997. He was diagnosed with prostate
cancer (moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, T3bN1M0, stage D1) and was started on combined androgen blockade (CAB) with leuprorelin
acetate (11.25 mg/3 months) and flutamide (375 mg/day). Two months later, flutamide was discontinued because of liver damage, and treatment
was switched to estramustine phosphate (EMP) sodium (626.8 mg/day). Six months after starting hormonal therapy, metastatic lymph node lesion
and seminal vessel invasion was no longer visible on computed tomography (CT). Therefore, we performed radical prostatectomy (moderately
differentiated adenocarcinoma, Gleason score 4 + 3 = 7, ly+, v+, pn+, sv−, pw−, dw−, cap+, n+) and obturator lymph node excision to
completely remove the cancerous lesion. The patient received adjuvant radiation therapy (60 Gy) to the pelvic cavity postoperatively because
pathological findings showed the prostatic carcinoma had extended beyond the prostate capsule. Additionally, a course of chemotherapy with
cyclophosphamide (CPM), doxorubicin hydrochloride (ADM), and CDDP (CPM 500 mg, ADM 50 mg, CDDP 100 mg) was performed. Thereafter, the
patient was followed up with hormonal therapy consisting of leuprorelin acetate (11.25 mg/3 months) and EMP (626.8 mg/day). In June 2002,
PSA value decrease 1.35 ng/ml. However, PSA value continued to increase (13.74 ng/ml) in December 2004; magnetic resonance imaging (MRI,
Fig. 1) and transrectal ultrasonography (TRUS) revealed abnormal findings in the anastomotic area. Transrectal biopsy was performed, and we
diagnosed a recurrence of prostatic carcinoma (moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, Gleasen score, 4 + 4 = 8). The patient complained
of dysuria that eventually progressed to urinary retention. Whole-body CT and bone scintigraphy showed no abnormal findings. As a result,
the final diagnosis was HRPC with local recurrence.Fig. 1Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) shows anastomotic recurrence after radical
prostatectomy and radiation therapy Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) shows anastomotic recurrence after radical prostatectomy and radiation
therapy We then decided to attempt intra-arterial infusion chemotherapy to treat the local recurrence. An indwelling catheter was placed in
the bilateral internal iliac artery, and the pump was placed in a subcutaneous pocket in February 2005. The combination chemotherapy
consisted of CDDP (20 mg/m2) (days 1–5) and IFM (1.2 mg/m2) (days 1–3), and its regimen cycle was every 21 days. The patient received two
courses of chemotherapy, after which his PSA value decreased to 1.94 ng/ml, the tumor showed a remarkable reduction in size (Fig. 2), and
the symptom improved. In this case, grade 3 neutropenia (which was improved by granulocyte-colony stimulating factor), vomiting, general
fatigue, and grade 3 alopecia were observed. However, other serious side effects that could pose a risk to continued intra-arterial infusion
chemotherapy were not observed. Therefore, we were able to continue chemotherapy according to schedule. However, PSA value gradually
increased to 4.61 ng/ml in April 2006. We once again attempted intra-arterial infusion chemotherapy of CDDP and IFM with the same dose as
previously used (Fig. 3). At a later time, the PSA value once again rose from the value in May 2007. However, the patient had no symptoms of
LUTS for 45 months after the first chemotherapy treatment.Fig. 2Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI shows disappearance of the anastomotic tumor
after intra-arterial infusion chemotherapyFig. 3Progress of PSA treatment and transition values Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI shows
disappearance of the anastomotic tumor after intra-arterial infusion chemotherapy Progress of PSA treatment and transition values Treating
HRPC is troublesome for a urologist because the standard treatment has not yet been established. The prognosis of patients with HRPC is
commonly thought to be unfavorable . In addition, HRPC patients occasionally have LUTS, such as urinary retention and dysuria accompanied
with gross hematuria, which adversely affects quality of life. Here, we reported a case of urinary retention due to locally recurrent HRPC
in which retention was improved by intra-arterial infusion of CDDP and IFM. According to the established criteria for evaluating outcomes of
nonsurgical therapy for prostate cancer, the prostatic lesions of the case showed a partial response (PR). However, on the basis of PSA
responses, the patient showed complete response (CR). At present, HRPC treatments, such as antiandrogen alteration, systemic chemotherapy
with DTX [3, 4], and low-dose steroids , are effective in the short term, but their effectiveness decreases over time. Various generalized
combination chemotherapies have been tried for HRPC, but no reports of their long-term efficacy are available . In the 1990s, intra-arterial
chemotherapies for HRPC were reported, which indicated that, whereas they were effective for local carcinostatics, they were not effective
as a generalized treatment modality . In the study reported here, because we encountered locally recurring HRPC with LUTS, we thought it may
be worthwhile to try intra-arterial chemotherapy for relieving LUTS caused by HRPC. Our cases suggest that intra-arterial chemotherapy may
be a good choice for treating HRPC with locally recurring HRPC only. However, the problem with this therapy is that it does not radically
treat the cancer. In addition, it should not be administered in cases with poor performance status or prognosis. DTX could be used as a
second-line intra-arterial chemotherapy treatment after CDDP and IFM, because intra-arterial DTX accompanied with CDDP for oropharyngeal
cancer is reported to result in an excellent primary response rate and acceptable acute toxicity . In conclusion, intra-arterial
chemotherapy with CDDP and IFM can alleviate LUTS caused by locally recurrent HRPC. Furthermore, this therapy could maintain patients’
quality of life for relatively long periods. Accordingly, this regimen should be seen as a treatment option for locally recurrent HRPC. As
the number of prostate cancer cases increases, urologists are likely to encounter more patients who are suitable for such treatment.
