A 70-yr-old woman visited our hospital for shortness of breath. Chest CT showed ground glass opacity and traction bronchiectasis at right
middle, lower lobe and left lingular division. Video-assisted thoracic surgical biopsy at right lower lobe and pathologic examination
revealed mixed dust pneumoconiosis. Polarized optical microscopy showed lung lesions were consisted of silica and carbon materials. She was
a housewife and never been exposed to silica dusts occupationally. She has taken freshwater snails as a health-promoting food for 40 yr and
ground shell powder was piled up on her backyard where she spent day-time. Energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy of snail shell and scanning
electron microscopy with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy of lung lesion revealed that silica occupies important portion. Herein, we
report the first known case of silicosis due to chronic inhalation of shell powder of freshwater snail. Silica is the second most common
mineral on earth. Chronic inhalation of silica causes silicosis (1). Inhalation of crystalline silica occurs mostly in occupational
settings, particularly such occupations as mining, sandblasting, stone cutting, surface drilling, pottery making, silica flour mill
operations and other occupations in which silica dust exposure occurs. Herein, we report the first known instance of a case of silicosis due
to chronic inhalation shell powder of freshwater snail. A 70-yr-old woman visited our hospital for shortness of breath at October 18th,
2008. Chest CT showed ground glass opacity and traction bronchiectasis at right middle, lower lobe and left upper lobe lingular division
(Fig. 1). Other laboratory analysis revealed nothing of note and spirometry data (FVC, FEV1 and DLCO) was within normal limits. She lived in
a remote mountain village located 40 kilometer away from the nearest city. She was a housewife and did not smoke at all. During her
lifetime, she had never been employed where silica dusts might be inhaled. She has been taking aspirin, olmesartan medoxomil,
hydrochlorothiazide and paroxetine due to hypertension and a major depressive disorder. She has taken about 400-500 mg of freshwater snails
as a health-promoting food on average per month for 40 yr (Fig. 2). She used a small millstone to grind their shells. After then, resultant
mixture of snail meat and ground shell powder was flushed with water over a fine mesh. Once the meat had been collected, the filtered, shell
powder was piled up on her backyard where she spent a lot of time doing house chores. A video-assist thoracic surgical (VATS) biopsy was
performed at right lower lobe. A pathologic examination revealed mixed dust pneumoconiosis. The multiple fibrotic nodules were distributed
in the perivascular and peribronchiolar interstitia and were composed of mixtures of fibroblasts and dust-laden macrophages. Polarized
optical microscopy revealed that these lesions were consisted of silica and carbon materials (Fig. 3). We analyzed the shells of snail by
energy dispersive X-ray spectroscopy (EDX), which were sent by a daughter of the patient. It was one of the Semisulcospira libertina,
Pleuroceridae family. The shell was composed of 52.9% CaO, 0.77% SiO2, 0.36% Na2O, 0.06% Al2O3, 0.05% Fe2O3, 0.01% MgO and 0.01% P2O5.
Mineral composition of the lung lesion was analyzed by scanning electron microscopy with energy dispersive x-ray spectroscopy (EDX) (Fig.
4). The lesion was made up of 34.12% Ca, 32.93% Fe, 23.81% Si and 9.13% Al. Because she did not present airflow limitation, we decided to
follow up without specific therapy. And she was recommended to avoid ongoing exposure to the snail shell powder. Ingestion of an extract of
freshwater snails is one of Korean folk remedies. In oriental medicine, fresh water snails are believed to be good for the liver and
stomach. The meat of freshwater snails is usually extracted by grinding the shell and flushing it with water. In the present case, chronic
inhalation of shell powder appears to cause a problem. Three types of lesions are typically seen in individuals who are exposed to dusts
containing a mixture of crystalline silica and silicates. These include macules, mixed-dust fibrotic lesions (MDFs) and silicotic nodules
(2). Macules are nonpalpable lesions consisting of interstitial accumulation of dust-laden macrophages without obvious collagenization. MDFs
are palpable, irregularly contoured, stellate lesions with varying degrees of collagenization. Silicotic nodules are essentially the
pathologic lesions due to silicosis, and are composed of refractile particles of silica surrounded by whorled collagen in concentric layers
with macrophages, lymphocytes, and fibroblasts around the periphery (3). In the present case, there were nodules composed of dust-laden
macrophages and collagen with fibroblasts, which is known as mixed dust fibrosis. Silicosis refers to a spectrum of respiratory diseases
caused by inhalation of free crystalline silica. It encompasses such diseases as acute silicosis, accelerated silicosis, chronic silicosis
and conglomerate silicosis. In addition, silica exposure is associated with autoimmune diseases and nephropathy. A common complication is
tuberculosis and chronic obstructive lung disease and it is related with increased lung cancer formation (4). Silica is the most abundant
mineral on earth. Thus, silicosis can occur in many industries such as mining or sandblasting (5). Silica can become airborne in dry and
windy conditions or during urban activities when the soil contains abundant crystalline silica. Indeed, pulmonary changes and lung fibrosis
associated with environmental silica and mixed dust exposures have been observed in the lungs of farm humans and animals (6, 7). There were
no mining or abrasive production industries near from patient's house. Considering her environmental situation, inhalation of the shell
powder of the freshwater snails when it was made airborne by the breeze appears to be the cause of her affliction. Analysis of composition
of shell of freshwater snails retrieved from the same river and sent to us by her daughter and electron microscopic examination with
elemental analysis of lung lesion were consistent with our hypothesis. Taken together, authors concluded that her silicosis was derived from
chronic inhalation of powder of ground freshwater snails. Herein we report the first known case of silicosis due to non-occupational
exposure to shell powder of freshwater snail. Radiologic findings of the patent. (A) Chest PA demonstrates peribronchial infiltrations at
middle and lower lung zones. (B, C) Chest CT shows ground glass opacity and traction bronchiectasis at right middle & lower lobe and left
upper lobe lingular division. Korean freshwater snails, Semisulcospira libertina, which the patient has taken for 40 yr (The reference of a
scale bar is cm). Pathologic examination of lung sample taken by video-assisted thoracic surgery. (A) The multiple fibrotic nodules are
distributed in perivascular and peribronchiolar interstitia on low power view (H&E, original × 40). (B) The nodules are composed of mixtures
of collagenized fibroblasts and dust-laden macrophages (H&E, original × 400). (C) Partial polarization of mixed dust fibrotic nodules
demonstrates brightly bi-refringent silicate particles (polarized optical microscopy, original × 400). The scattered platy and polymorphous
silicate particles are observed by the scanning electron microscopic examination.
