*Jong-Hwa Lee and Yeon-Jung Lim contributed equally to this work. The triad of rash, arthritis, and uveitis seems to be characteristic for
early-onset childhood sarcoidosis. We describe an interesting case of early-onset childhood sarcoidosis coexisting enchondromatosis, which
clinically masquerade as Langerhans cell histiocytosis. A 33 months old girl presented with skin rash, subcutaneous nodules with
polyarthritis, and revealed the involvement of lymph nodes as well as spleen during work-up. She also presented with multiple osteolytic
lesions which pathologically proven enchondromatosis. Oral prednisone was prescribed at 2 mg/kg/day for 2 months until when subcutaneous
nodules and joint swellings almost disappeared, and then slowly tapered over a period of 5 months. We report an unusual case of early-onset
childhood sarcoidosis presented with osteolytic bone lesions which were irrelevant to sarcoidosis. Sarcoidosis is a multisystem
granulomatous disease of unknown cause (1). There are two distinct forms of childhood sarcoidosis. In older children, clinical
manifestations are similar to the adult, such as frequent lymphadenopathy and pulmonary involvement. The early-onset form exhibit unique
clinical triad of arthritis, rash, and uveitis, which typically presented in the first year of life (2-5). The early-onset childhood
sarcoidosis may be overlooked due to its similarity to juvenile rheumatoid arthritis (JRA) (6). Both entities may be associated with
arthritis and skin rashes. Arthritis of sarcoidosis is characterized by painless boggy effusions of synovium without limitation of motion
(2, 7). Although painful and destructive polyarthritis with functional impairment indistinguishable from that associated with JRA has been
described in sarcoidosis (3), bone involvement is quite rare in sarcoidosis and JRA patients. In contrast, osteolytic bone lesions without
synovial involvements usually develop in children with Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH), enchondromatosis, leukemia/lymphoma, and
metastatic neuroblastoma. Here we report a child presented with polyarthritis, subcutaneous nodules, skin rashes, and osteolytic bone
lesions. Although the clinical presentation was masqueraded as LCH, the biopsy findings were compatible with sarcoidosis for skin rash,
subcutaneous nodule, synovium and coexisting enchondromatosis for bone lesion. A 33-months old girl with limping gait and multiple joint
swelling was referred to our hospital in November, 2008. She was born in Korea and has stayed at the Philippines for several months with her
parents. She presented knee joint swelling since 2 months ago, when visited clinic in the Philippines and received simple radiographic
evaluation which revealed no definite abnormalities. However, her joint swelling has been persisted and accompanied by intermittent skin
rashes, and she referred to our hospital with the radiologic evidence of osteolytic lesions on the fibula which taken in another hospital of
Korea. Physical examination revealed diffuse swellings on the wrist, ankle, and knee joints with tenderness. The palpable multiple nodular
lesions on the both wrists, and the maculopapular skin eruptions on the trunk and extremity were noted. The multiple bean-sized lymph nodes
were palpable only on the cervical area, not on the axillar and inguinal area. The liver tip was palpated just below the right costal margin
and spleen was not. Cardiac, respiratory, ocular, and neurological examinations were unremarkable. Routine blood tests revealed hemoglobin
9.3 gm/dL, white blood cell 8,600/µL, platelet 309,000/µL, ESR 62 mm/hr, CRP 3.5 mg/dL, AST 23 U/L, ALT 15 U/L, total bilirubin 0.1 mg/dL,
LDH 226 U/L, alkaline phosphatase 104 U/L. In the plain radiographies, the osteolytic lesions surrounded by a thin sclerotic rim were noted
on the both femoral necks, both proximal fibula, right distal fibula, and left distal tibia (Fig. 1). MRI demonstrated diffuse synovial
enhancement in left knee and right ankle joints. In addition, there were signal intensity alterations on the distal femur, proximal/distal
fibula, proximal/distal tibia, as well as 2nd metatarsal bone, 2nd to 4th proximal phalanges, and tarsal bones (Fig. 2). The whole body bone
scan showed no definite abnormal focal uptakes except mildly increased soft tissue uptake on the bilateral suprapatellar bursa area (Fig.
3). We also performed PET-CT scan which demonstrated hypermetabolic soft tissue uptakes around both knee and ankle joints. In addition,
hypermetabolic lymph nodes were also noted in bilateral cervical, parapharyngeal, and mid-abdominal area as well as palatine tonsils (Fig.
4). Multiple biopsies were done on the skin rash, subcutaneous nodule, synovium, and bone. The biopsy findings revealed the non-caseating,
sarcoidal granulomas in the skin rash and subcutaneous nodule, as well as synovium of knee joint. However, the pathologic finding of right
tibia was compatible with enchondroma (Fig. 5). We diagnosed this patient with early-onset childhood sarcoidosis accompanied by incidentally
noted enchondromatosis. We also performed direct gene sequencing analysis for nucleotide binding oligomerization domain 2 (NOD2) which
revealed no genetic mutation and there is no family history of early-onest sarcoidosis. Oral prednisone was initiated at 2 mg/kg/day for 2
months until when subcutaneous nodules and joint swellings almost disappeared, and then slowly tapered over a period of 5 months.
Hypermetabolic lesions in cervical area, nasopharynx, both palatine tonsils were also almost disappeared in the PET-CT scan during induction
treatment of oral prednisone. Sarcoidosis is a systemic granulomatous disease of unknown etiology. Because sarcoidosis affects most organs,
the clinical presentation can vary greatly. The disease frequently involves the lungs, lymph nodes, eyes, skin, liver, and spleen (8-11).
There are two distinct forms of childhood sarcoidosis. In older children, multisystem manifestations similar to the adult usually develop,
such as frequent lymphadenopathy and pulmonary involvement as well as generalized signs and symptoms. In contrast, early-onset childhood
sarcoidosis, i.e., with onset in the first 5 yr of life differs from sarcoidosis in older children and adults. Patients with early-onset
childhood sarcoidosis exhibit unique clinical triad of arthritis, rash, and uveitis, which typically presented in the first year of life (5,
8). In our patient, clinical diagnosis at presentation was very difficult because osteolytic lesions on the long bones were coexisted with
the evidence of arthritis. Several disease categories including early-onset sarcoidosis, Langerhans cell histiocytosis, JRA, lymphoma,
should be considered, although the synovial involvement in LCH and osteolytic bony lesions in JRA and sarcoidosis are extremely rare (12,
13). Particularly, systemic LCH coexisting with polyarthritis was highly suspected before performing biopsy in consideration of the age of
patient, multiple osteolytic lesions, and skin rashes. We could confirm the diagnosis of early-onset childhood sarcoidosis with
enchondromatosis by the histologic findings. Uveitis, which occurs in about in more than half the children with early-onset childhood
sarcoidosis (3), was not developed in our patient. However, hypermetabolic lesions on PET-CT scan were noted in the reticuloendothelial
systems including lymph nodes and spleen, which almost disappeared after induction therapy. Although we did not perform the biopsy on the
lymph nodes or spleen, we could suspect that the reticuloendothelial systems were also affected in our patient, since PET-CT scan can be
used to assess the extent and metabolic response to systemic treatment of inflammatory diseases, such as sarcoidosis (14-16). Bone
involvement is quite rare and its frequency varies from 1% to 13% in large published series of sarcoidosis patients. Furthermore, bone
involvement is rarely reported in early-onset childhood sarcoidosis because it usually occurred in patients with chronic course or known
multisystem sarcoidosis (13). In our patient, initial osteolytic bone lesions were proved as enchondromatosis by the pathology. In
conclusion, we report an unusual case of early-onset childhood sarcoidosis presented with osteolytic bone lesions which were irrelevant to
sarcoidosis. Therefore, despite the rare occurrence of early-onset childhood sarcoidosis, it should be considered in the differential
diagnosis when a child presents with arthritis, skin rashes, and even bony lesion. However, pathologic confirmation would be also needed to
confirm diagnosis because the incidental bony lesions could coexist like our case. PET-CT scan may be used to identify the extent of
sarcoidosis and the treatment response. This paper was supported by a grant from Wonkwang University in 2009. Radiological images of the
patient. (A) Multiple, small and elongated osteolytic lesions with thin sclerotic rims are noted in the both femoral necks (arrows). Both
knee AP (B) and lateral views (C, D) show small, eccentric osteolytic lesions involving right proximal fibula and left proximal fibula
(white arrows). Large amount of suprapatellar effusions are also noted in the both sides of knee (black lined white arrows). Both ankle AP
(E) and right lateral views (F) show well-defined osteolytic lesions with thin sclerotic rim involving right distal fibula (white arrows)
and left distal tibia (black lined white arrows). MR scan images of low extremity. Contrast enhancement T1-weighted axial (A) and sagittal
scans (B) with fat-suppression show diffuse synovial enhancement (white arrows) and tenosynovitis (black lined white arrows) around right
ankle joint. Abnormal enhancement lesion is also noted in the right 2nd metatarsal shaft (black arrow). Contrast enhancement T1-weighted
sagittal scans (C) with fat-suppression show joint effusion with diffuse synovial enhancement (white arrow) in the left tibia MR scans. The
whole body bone scan showed no definite abnormal focal bony uptake lesions except mildly increased soft tissue uptake on the bilateral
suprapatellar bursa area (arrows). PET/CT images. (A) Whole body MIP (maximum intensity projection) image. (B) Regional images demonstrating
hypermetabolic activity in nasopharynx, bilateral tonsils and cervical lymph nodes. (C) Mid abdominal lymph nodes. (D) Thickened synovial
lining of both knee joints. Histopathological findings of the biopsied tissue. Non-caseating, sarcoidal, chronic granulomatous inflammation
is observed in the skin rash (A) and subcutaneous nodule, and synovium of knee joint (B, C). However, the pathological finding of right
tibia is compatible with enchondroma (D). (H&E stained, A × 200; B, × 100; C and D, × 200).
