Please cite this paper as: Bearden et al. (2012) An outbreak of the 2009 influenza a (H1N1) virus in a children’s hospital. Influenza and
Other Respiratory Viruses 6(5), 374–379. Context Preventing nosocomial transmission of influenza is essential to reduce the morbidity and
mortality associated with this infection. In October 2009, an outbreak of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus occurred in a hematology ward of
a children’s hospital over a 21‐day period and involved two patients and four healthcare workers. Objective To investigate nosocomial
transmission of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus in patients and healthcare workers. Design, setting, and participants An outbreak
investigation was initiated in response to suspected nosocomial transmission of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus during the peak of the
2009 pandemic. Cases were confirmed using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test specific for the 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus. Viruses
isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs were genetically characterized using Sanger sequencing of uncloned “bulk” PCR products. Main outcome
measures Virus sequencing to investigate nosocomial transmission. Results Two immunocompromised patients and four healthcare workers were
found to be part of a nosocomial outbreak of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus. One immunocompromised patient had a second episode of
clinical influenza infection after isolation precautions had been discontinued, resulting in additional exposures. Strain‐specific PCR
showed that all cases were caused by infection of the 2009 H1N1 virus. Sequencing of viral genes encoding hemagglutinin and polymerase basic
subunit 2 (PB2) revealed that all viruses isolated were genetically identical at these loci, including the two episodes occurring in the
same immunocompromised patient. Conclusions Prompt institution of isolation precautions is essential in preventing nosocomial outbreaks of
the 2009 novel influenza A (H1N1) virus. Our data suggest that isolation precautions may need to be continued for a prolonged period of time
in immunocompromised patients with influenza infection. The recent pandemic of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus presented significant
challenges to healthcare institutions with large numbers of patients requiring hospitalization. 1 , 2 , 3 Although the virus proved to cause
mild, self‐limited disease in most cases, risk for severe disease, including death, was much higher in certain groups, including those with
underlying illness or immune compromise. 1 Nosocomial transmission of influenza has been well described, but the duration of time that
hospitalized patients need to stay in isolation has not been well characterized, and prolonged shedding of virus in hospitalized patients
with the 2009 Influenza A (H1N1) infection has been described. 4 Infection control recommendations from the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention included the use of N‐95 respirators for healthcare workers caring for patients with suspected pandemic influenza, in addition to
eye protection, gowns, and gloves (enhanced respiratory precautions). These recommendations represented a departure from the droplet
precautions used for typical seasonal influenza. Institutions faced challenges in timely and continued healthcare worker (HCW) compliance
with the use of these enhanced isolation precautions. 5 We report an outbreak of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus that occurred in a
children’s hospital and involved transmission of infection from an immunocompromised patient to healthcare workers and another patient. In
October 2009, suspected transmission of the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus from a patient to a HCW prompted an investigation on the
hematology–oncology floor of a children’s hospital, with identification of additional cases. In each suspected case, a nasopharyngeal swab
was obtained within 1–2 days of onset of symptoms and tested for influenza A (H1N1) by PCR at our institution (GenProbe/Prodesse, San Diego,
CA, USA) and confirmed as the 2009 Influenza A (H1N1) by the Wisconsin State Laboratory of Hygiene. To confirm nosocomial transmission,
medical records of contact patients were reviewed to determine underlying co‐morbid illnesses, treatment, timing of institution of isolation
precautions, and outcomes. Testing was based on clinical symptoms and continued until no further symptomatic patients or healthcare workers
were identified. To sequence hemagglutinin (HA) and PB2 genes, viral RNA (vRNA) was isolated from nasopharyngeal swabs from all four
subjects, using the MinElute virus spin kit (Qiagen, Germantown, MD, USA). Sequence gaps in the samples from the second timepoint from
Patient no. 2 were filled using a third‐passage virus stock grown from the original nasal wash. Sequence of this expanded virus matched
available contemporaneous ex vivo virus sequences (data not shown). vRNA from the in vitro‐expanded stock was amplified using Qiagen’s
One‐Step RT‐PCR kit with PB2 and HA gene‐specific primer sets developed by the WHO Collaborating Center for Influenza at the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC; primer sequences and protocol published at:
http://www.who.int/csr/resources/publications/swineflu/sequencing_primers/en/index.html). vRNA from patient samples was amplified using a
nested approach: first, cDNA was generated using Invitrogen’s SuperScript™ (Carlsbad, CA, USA) III First‐Strand Synthesis kit with primer 5′
NCR 3′ (5′‐AGCGAAAGCAGG‐3′). Each RT reaction was followed by two 45‐cycle PCR. The first PCR was performed using BioRad’s (Hercules, CA,
USA) iProof High‐Fidelity DNA Polymerase, primers MBtuni‐13 and MBtuni‐12a (MBtuni‐13 – 5′‐ACGCGTGATCAGTAGAAACAAGG‐3′ and MBtuni‐12a –
5′‐ACGCGTGATCAGCGAAAGCAGG‐3′; originally described by Zhou et al., 6 and the following cycling conditions: 98°C for 30 seconds, 45 cycles of
98°C for 15 seconds, 62°C for 30 seconds, 72°C for 2 minute, and a final extension time of 10 minute at 72°C. The second PCR was performed
using Qiagen’s HotStarTaq polymerase and the WHO PB2 and HA gene‐specific primer sets. The cycling conditions for the second PCR were as
follows: 95°C for 15 minute, 45 cycles of 94°C for 30 seconds, 56°C for 30 seconds, 72°C for 40 seconds, and a final extension time of
10 minute at 72°C. Both strands of each amplicon were sequenced on a 3730 DNA Analyzer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). Sequences
were assembled using CodonCode Aligner version 3·5·6 (CodonCode Corporation, Dedham, MA, USA) and analyzed in MacVector 11·1·1 trial version
(Accelrys, San Diego, CA, USA). Phylogenetic analyses were performed using mega5 software (Tamura et al., 2011, Mol Biol Evol). Trees were
constructed using the neighbor‐joining method (Saitou and Nei, 1987, Mol Biol Evol, 4, 406–425) with a Tamura/Nei maximum composite
likelihood distance correction. Accession numbers for these sequences are pending. This investigation was initiated in response to a
nosocomial outbreak of the 2009 novel influenza A (H1N1) virus and was conducted using standard infection control practices. Confidentiality
of patient information, in accordance with HIPAA guidelines, was maintained at all times during the investigation. In preparation for
publication, institutional review board consultation was obtained and verbal permission obtained from the patients’ legal guardians. Table 1
shows the clinical characteristics of the patients. We did not collect data on the healthcare workers involved other than treatment and
outcomes. The timeline of the outbreak is shown in Figure 1. The presumed index patient (Patient no. 1) was a 6‐year‐old immunocompromised
boy who presented to an outpatient clinic with respiratory symptoms. Influenza was suspected, a nasopharyngeal swab was obtained and the
decision for hospitalization was made later that evening when at home, the patient’s fever and symptoms worsened. The patient was
hospitalized on the pediatric hematology–oncology unit, but was inadvertently not placed in isolation immediately. Isolation was instituted
upon confirmation of the diagnosis a day later. Clinical characteristics of the patients involved in a nosocomial outbreak of the 2009
influenza A (H1N1) virus Epidemiologic curve. X‐axis: day of outbreak, Y‐axis: number of individuals infected per day. HCW, Healthcare
worker. Two days following admission of the index case, a healthcare worker (HCW no. 1) who took care of Patient no. 1 at the time of
admission contracted the 2009 H1N1 influenza A virus and developed symptoms while at work. HCW no. 1 also cared for a 2‐year‐old
immunocompromised child. This child subsequently developed H1N1 infection (Patient no. 2). Patient no. 2 had no contact with visitors nor
any sick contacts. Two additional staff members (HCW no. 2 and no. 3) who were involved in the care of Patient no. 2 also developed
influenza‐like illness while at work, which was subsequently confirmed (HCW no. 2) or presumed (HCW no. 3) to be H1N1 infection. HCW no. 3
was presumptively treated without microbiologic confirmation. The patients were present on the same inpatient unit at the same time, but did
not share rooms. Patient no. 1 had a history of sickle cell anemia complicated by previous stroke, asthma with a concurrent prednisone
treatment burst at the time of admission (15 mg × 5 days), and was being treated for suppurative otitis media with oral antibiotics and otic
antibiotic drops. On the day before admission, the patient presented to the pediatric hematology clinic complaining of 1 day of fever to
103°F/39·4°C, abdominal pain, headache, body pain, cough, wheezing, and several days of nasal congestion. A chest radiograph showed no
abnormalities. A nasopharyngeal swab for viral culture and H1N1 PCR testing was obtained, and he was started on oseltamivir and ceftriaxone
(one dose) and given a previously scheduled blood transfusion. The patient returned home, but the fever worsened to 104°F/40°C (axillary),
and the patient was admitted. After admission, all symptoms improved, the patient was afebrile by hospital day no. 2 and was discharged home
approximately 48 hours after admission and completed 5 days of therapy. Patient no. 2 was a 2‐year‐old boy, present on the inpatient
pediatric hematology–oncology floor for over a month, receiving inpatient care for hepatoblastoma and associated complications. This patient
was likely exposed to the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus by HCW no. 1, on day 4 of the outbreak, and became febrile on day 6. Staff and
family noted increased fussiness and a runny nose prior to development of fever, but otherwise no new symptoms. Nasopharyngeal swabs were
obtained within 24 hours of the onset of fever, and oseltamivir therapy and isolation precautions were initiated. The patient initially did
well, was without fever after 48 hours, and isolation precautions were discontinued after 7 days (on day 13 of the outbreak). On day 13 of
the outbreak, Patient no. 2 began a new cycle of chemotherapy and developed new fevers beginning on day 20 of the outbreak with no new
symptoms noted other than nasal congestion on exam. Testing for respiratory viruses, including H1N1, was performed that same day, isolation
and treatment with oseltamivir were reinitiated, and the patient gradually improved with resolution of fever after 4 days. In response to
the outbreak, emphasis was placed on enhanced respiratory precautions. The nursing staff were cohorted and vaccinated with inactivated
pandemic H1N1 vaccine. Other exposed patients, many of whom were immunocompromised, received oseltamivir prophylaxis. The prophylactic
treatment was well tolerated, and no additional patients developed symptoms. Initially, the outbreak appeared to be successfully contained
and Patient no. 2, who had recovered well, was taken out of isolation precautions after 7 days. Approximately 1 week after the
discontinuation of isolation precautions (14 days following the initial positive test), Patient no. 2 underwent chemotherapy, developed
fever, and a second nasopharyngeal swab tested positive for Influenza A (the 2009 pandemic H1N1 virus) by RT‐PCR. Testing for other
respiratory viruses was negative. A chest radiograph was normal. The patient remained hospitalized throughout this course of events. While
it is possible that the second episode represented new nosocomial acquisition, given lack of evidence of ongoing transmission, reactivation
is a more likely explanation of the patient’s recurrent infection. A healthcare worker (HCW no. 4) caring for Patient no. 2 between
episodes, while no isolation precautions were in place, subsequently developed H1N1 infection as well. Observations to determine HCW
compliance with isolation precautions were undertaken during the period of the outbreak and increased over the course of a few days from 80%
to 98%. However, observations were not undertaken routinely prior to the outbreak. Three of the four healthcare workers tested positive for
H1N1 at onset of symptoms – one was treated presumptively and did not undergo testing. All four healthcare workers were treated with
oseltamivir for 5 days and responded to treatment. They returned to work 1 week after treatment was initiated. A follow‐up nasopharyngeal
swab was not required or obtained, but all were free of symptoms at the time of returning to work. To determine whether these
epidemiologically linked cases of influenza were initiated by a single source patient, we performed genetic analyses on viruses isolated
from nasopharyngeal swabs taken from both patients and from the two healthcare workers who were tested. We first isolated influenza vRNA
from each sample and determined its concentration using a quantitative reverse‐transcription (QRT‐) PCR assay. The concentration of viral
vRNA ranged from 70 000 to 51 million copies/ml. Because of the relatively low concentration of vRNA in Patient no. 2’s samples, we chose to
focus our genetic analysis on two of the eight segments of the influenza virus RNA genome. The highly variable HA gene encodes the viral
attachment protein and is the major target of virus‐specific antibodies, which can drive diversification of virus sequences. 7 We reasoned
that if the nosocomial outbreak was initiated by more than one virus, then sequence differences distinguishing the strains would be most
apparent in HA. We also analyzed the basic polymerase subunit 2 (PB2) gene, which is more tightly conserved than HA, but encodes
well‐characterized pathogenicity determinants. 8 We were able to sequence full‐length HA and PB2 genes directly from all available samples
except for Patient no. 2’s second sample; sequence data from this sample was, therefore, derived from an in vitro‐expanded virus stock. The
HA and PB2 segments of viruses isolated from all patients were completely identical to each other (Figure S1). blast database searches
revealed no previously identified influenza viruses that matched these sequences exactly at the nucleotide level, but both the HA and PB2
genes in viruses isolated from these patients showed 99% identity to contemporaneous viruses isolated in Southeastern Wisconsin
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/nuccore). To estimate the genetic distance of viruses in this outbreak from the contemporaneous virus
population, we performed a phylogenetic analysis of HA and PB2 genes using the vaccine strain A/California/07/2009 (CA07; H1N1), isolated
early in the pandemic, as an outgroup (Figure S2). Although the topologies of the HA and PB2 trees differed slightly, in both trees, the UW
Hospital isolates clustered together, as expected for identical sequences. Indeed, the CA07 sequences, isolated in April 2009, clustered
closely together with Southeastern Wisconsin isolates from September to December 2009, suggesting that all these viruses are closely
related. Our results are consistent with the conclusion that Patient no. 1 had a community‐acquired infection with 2009 influenza A (H1N1)
virus and was the sole source of this nosocomial outbreak. The arrival of the 2009 novel influenza A (H1N1) pandemic posed several
challenges to healthcare institutions. 3 , 9 , 10 , 11 , 12 , 13 , 14 , 15 More transmissible than seasonal influenza, 16 the large numbers
of patients requiring hospitalization and ICU care strained available resources. 17 , 18 The addition of the N‐95 respirator recommendation
for healthcare workers to the usual droplet precautions employed for seasonal influenza also posed challenges in terms of tolerability and
compliance. 19 This was particularly important when caring for small children in whom the potential for transmission to other individuals is
heightened because of close contact, and patient compliance with a mask to contain secretions is highly variable. We found, as anticipated,
that nosocomial cases of infection with the 2009 influenza A (H1N1) virus occurred with great ease in the absence of prompt implementation
and strict adherence to isolation precautions. Although nosocomial transmission of influenza has been well described, not many studies have
undertaken strain sequencing to confirm circulation of the same strain. These data were instrumental in motivating staff to improve
adherence to influenza precautions. There is considerable variation in the preparedness of healthcare facilities for the detection and
containment of influenza. In a survey of Infectious Diseases Society of America, Emerging Infections Network members, Ortiz et al. 20 found
that only 10% of EIN respondents indicated that their principal hospital had a written policy to screen patients with febrile respiratory
illnesses for influenza during the winter months. Overall, 35% of the EIN respondents indicated that their principal hospital had a written
policy for controlling outbreaks. Of these policies, 22% reported the use of droplet precautions for confirmed cases, 23% undertook
cohorting of patients, and 13% employed chemoprophylaxis for patients or staff. The HA and PB2 segments of viruses isolated in this study
were genetically identical and clustered together in phylogenetic trees of closely related viruses circulating contemporaneously in the same
geographic area. This finding suggests nosocomial transmission of the same virus strain among patients and healthcare workers. It is
important to note, however, that Sanger sequencing cannot reliably detect minor population variants present at <20–25% of viral sequences.
21 , 22 In contrast, a recent study of a 2009 H1N1 influenza infection clusters showed that “next‐generation” sequencing methods can detect
oseltamivir resistance mutations present in 9% of sequences in a clinical isolate. 22 Similarly, pyrosequencing of an oseltamivir‐resistant
H1N1 isolate revealed the presence of the canonical neuraminidase H275Y substitution in 19% of virus sequences, which Sanger sequencing
could not detect. 23 Indeed, it appears likely that “next‐generation” sequencing will reveal levels of intrahost influenza virus diversity
that cannot be detected by conventional Sanger sequencing. 24 Thus, it is possible that the composition of virus populations in each patient
and HCW in this study differed, and we cannot exclude the possibility that healthcare workers could have acquired very similar viruses from
the community and not all transmissions in this cluster were nosocomial. However, we can conclude that the dominant virus populations
(75–100% of viruses) in each subject in this cluster were completely identical. Moreover, no other completely identical sequences were
detected in a survey of viruses circulating contemporaneously in Southeastern Wisconsin. The most parsimonious explanation of these data is
that this cluster represents nosocomial transmission of a single virus “swarm” among patients and healthcare workers. Our containment of the
outbreak emphasizes several important points. A stringent policy should be in place to screen patients for respiratory symptoms at the point
of entry into the healthcare institution and appropriate precautions should be undertaken immediately. In addition, our results and those of
others suggest that reactivation and prolonged shedding occurs commonly in immunocompromised patients, especially children and the elderly,
and isolation precautions should be prolonged, probably for the duration of hospitalization, far beyond the typical requirement for
immunocompetent patients. 25 , 26 , 27 In this respect, it is perhaps surprising that the HA and PB2 sequences of the viruses isolated from
Patient no. 2’s first and second episodes of illness were identical. Such cases of prolonged virus shedding are likely to be particularly
conducive to the emergence of immune‐adapted virus variants, although few studies have examined this possibility in humans. Finally,
cohorting of staff and the judicious use of chemoprophylaxis have been found to effectively interrupt influenza transmission and should be
employed in outbreak situations. 18 Our study has several limitations. Given the small numbers of affected patients and healthcare workers,
we cannot draw conclusions regarding the route of transmission and the relative importance of each (airborne, droplet, fomites, or all). We
did not undertake susceptibility testing of the virus. However, all the affected individuals responded to oseltamivir, and resistance to
oseltamivir has been reported only rarely for the 2009 Influenza H1N1 strain, whereas resistance is common among recently circulating
seasonal H1N1 strains. 28 Also, we did not sequence the entire genome of the virus isolated from these individuals, or use “next‐generation”
sequencing approaches, so it is possible that these viruses could harbor undetected sequence differences. Indeed, it is perhaps surprising
that no sequence differences, even in HA, were seen after what were likely several serial passages, or after prolonged shedding in an
immunocompromised host. This observation is in contrast to another recent study of a hospital outbreak in which a single amino acid
substitution was detected in HA in the virus isolated from at least one patient. 29 Finally, we undertook several concurrent interventions
to contain the outbreak, and it is not possible to arrive at conclusions regarding the utility of each individual intervention. Figure S1.
Results of sequencing data show that the HA and PB2 segments of viruses isolated from patients and healthcare workers in this study were
completely identical to each other. Figure S2. Phylogenetic analysis of HA and PBP2 genes. Supporting info item Click here for additional
data file. Supporting info item Click here for additional data file. Supporting info item Click here for additional data file. Supporting
info item Click here for additional data file. Supporting info item Click here for additional data file. Supporting info item Click here for
additional data file. We thank Enrique León and Jasmyni Dias for technical assistance. All authors have no conflicts and financial
disclosure.
