An 18-year-old male presented with complaints of sudden onset pain in epigastrium and left-sided lower chest followed by nausea and
vomiting. Attempts to drink caused retching within 5 to 10 minutes. There was no history of trauma. Patient had a pulse rate of 100/min,
blood pressure of 116/76 mmHg and respiratory rate of 22/min. Chest examination revealed markedly decreased air entry on left side. Patient
had upper abdominal distension and tenderness. There was no guarding, rebound tenderness or organomegaly. Patient chest X-ray [Figure 1] and
Barium study [Figure 2] was done. Chest X-ray Barium study Q1. What is the diagnosis? Diaphragmatic hernia with herniation of stomach into
left thorax and mesentroaxial volvulus. Chest X-ray [Figure 1] shows air fluid level in left hemithorax, collapsed lung and mediastinal
shift to right. Barium study [Figure 2] shows herniation of stomach into left thorax and mesentroaxial volvulus. Short arrow shows the
gastro-esophageal junction and the long arrow indicates the pyloro-duodenal junction. Patient underwent emergency exploration by thoraco-
abdominal incision. Stomach was found to be viable and it was reduced in the abdominal cavity and the repair of diagphragmatic defect with
anterior gastropexy was done. Patient had uneventful postoperative recovery. Borchardt's triad of vomiting, epigastric pain and inability to
pass a nasogastric tube should warn clinician to consider a diagnosis of acute gastric volvulus. In gastric volvulus, the etiology of
rotation is either primary or secondary. Primary gastric volvulus is mainly idiopathic. Laxity of the ligaments which anchors the stomach in
its normal position is a common cause of primary gastric volvulus. Secondary gastric volvulus occurs mainly in the presence of diaphragmatic
defects such as: Congenital or traumatic diaphragmatic hernias, hiatal hernia, diaphragmatic eventrations. Anatomically, gastric volvulus
can be classified into three types as proposed by Singleton: Organoaxial, mesentroaxial and combined-unclassified. In organoaxial, the
stomach rotates around longitudinal axis with the greater curvature rotating most often anteriorly. In mesentroaxial volvulus, rotation
occurs around the transgastric line-a-line connecting the middle of lesser curvature with middle of the greater curvature. The treatment is
surgical; consisting of laparotomy, derotation of stomach, anterior gastropexy and repair of diaphragmatic hernia. Source of Support: Nil
Conflict of Interest: None declared.
