Urinary C-peptide (UCP) is one of the most popular indicators of insulin secretion by pancreatic β-cells (1,2). However, there are no
previous reports discussing the relationship between UCP and neobladder, a new, reconstructed bladder using the ileum after radical
cystectomy (3,4). We report a patient with neobladder in whom, among parameters of endogenous insulin production, only the 24-h UCP level
was extremely decreased. A 61-year-old Japanese man with diabetes and atrial fibrillation was hospitalized because of left-sided hemiplegia
and motor aphasia caused by thrombotic cerebral infarction. The patient had undergone bladder reconstruction with 66 cm of the ileum after
radical cystectomy as the result of cancer 10 years ago. Only a lineal operation scar was found on the middle lower abdominal wall. After
surgery, insulin therapy had been initiated on the basis of decreased UCP levels and hyperglycemia. However, his glycemic condition on
admission was poor (hemoglobin A1C , 10.4%). In addition to overt glycosuria, urinalysis revealed urinary tract infection. Although insulin
resistance was absent, assessment of insulin secretory capacity revealed contradictory results: good response to glucagon tolerance test
(4.99 ng/mL of serum C-peptide [after 5 min], increase in serum C-peptide of 3.00 ng/mL [Δ5 min]) and normal homeostasis model assessment of
β-cell function index (43.7), but extreme decrease in 24-h UCP levels (<0.1–0.2 μg/day) at five different times. Since the patient's
endogenous insulin secretion was thought to be reserved, glimepiride (2 mg, o.p.d.) and sitagliptin (50 mg, o.p.d.) were administered,
resulting in better glycemic control (HbA1c 7.3–8.2%). The extreme decrease in UCP levels may be associated with the ileal neobladder.
During prolonged contact with the neobladder wall, UCP might be degraded by peptidases present at the brushing boarder of the ileum
constituting the neobladder or by bacteria present in the neobladder on the background of a fragile defense system after urinary tract
diversion (4) or high susceptibility in diabetic patients. Unlike peptides, e.g., C-peptide that consists of 31 amino acid residues (2),
protein is probably not affected by the ileal neobladder, since the patient presented proteinuria (approximately 0.4 g/day). This is
because, before peptides are degraded in the small intestine, protein needs to be digested into peptides by gastric acid, trypsin, and
proteases in the stomach and duodenum. With recent technical advances in urological surgery, an ileal neobladder can be archived, which
leaves only operation scars on the abdominal wall instead of cutaneous urinary stoma. In addition, the patient's quality of life is highly
improved (3,4). However, as shown in this case, physicians must still pay careful attention not to overlook urinary tract diversion or
neobladder. To confirm degradation of C-peptides in the ileal neobladder, it is necessary to compare the peptide/amino acid composition in
the urine before and after neobladder passage or to demonstrate localization and activity of peptidases in the mucosa of an ileal
neobladder. The present case demonstrates that UCP evaluation alone is not a reliable parameter in patients who underwent urinary tract
diversion involving the small intestine. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. T.Z. and M.M. cared for
the patient and researched data. T.Z. wrote the manuscript. T.M. contributed to the urological discussion. S.K. contributed to the
discussion on protein digestion in the gastrointestinal tract. T.Z. takes all responsibility for the contents of the article as a guarantor.
