A 71-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital with asthenia, weight loss, fever, cognitive impairment and shortness of breath. Physical
examination showed hemiparesis and cerebellar ataxia. There was no superficial lymphadenopathy. Blood tests showed raised levels of
C-reactive protein and lactate dehydrogenase. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy were negative. fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission
tomography (PET)/computed tomography (CT) showed intense uptake within a right apical nodule and intense and diffuse uptake of FDG in the
lungs without corresponding structural CT abnormality. Lung biopsy showed intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL). FDG-PET findings in
IVLBCL and causes of diffuse FDG lung uptake with and without CT abnormalities are discussed. Intravascular large B-cell lymphoma (IVLBCL)
is a rare subtype of extranodal diffuse large B-cell lymphoma in which the lymphoma cells proliferate exclusively in the lumina of small
vessels. It was first described by Pfleger and Tappeiner in 1959. It usually occurs in elderly patients, with a gender ratio close to 1 and
a small preponderance in males. The most frequent presenting symptoms are fever and general fatigue, neurological symptoms and skin
eruptions. Other common clinical findings at initial diagnosis are very heterogeneous and include gastrointestinal symptoms, dyspnea and
oedema. Subclinical respiratory involvement is found in 60% of patients at autopsy. Lymphoma cells are usually not found in the lymph nodes
and in the reticuloendothelial system. Diagnosis is often delayed due to the non-specific symptoms and diagnosis of IVLCBL at autopsy is not
uncommon. Therapy usually consists of chemotherapy and rituximab. A 71-year-old woman was admitted to the internal medicine department of
our hospital because of a 3-month history of deterioration of general condition. She had been hospitalized twice before in the previous 3
months before because of fever and raised inflammatory markers that persisted despite antibiotic therapy. A first thoraco-abdomino-pelvic
computed tomography (CT) scan had not shown any abnormality and a second scan 2 months later demonstrated hepatosplenomegaly without
lymphadenopathy. Brain CT scan with contrast showed focal enhancement in the right frontal lobe, the right occipital lobe and the
cerebellum. Other investigations such as echocardiography, CT scan of the sinuses, colonoscopy, temporal artery biopsy and bone marrow
aspiration did not show significant abnormalities. She was then admitted to our department for further investigation. She presented with
marked deterioration of general condition, asthenia, 5 kg weight loss, high-grade fever with shivering, shortness of breath and cognitive
impairment. Physical examination showed hemiparesis and cerebellar ataxia of the right side. No superficial lymphadenopathy was found. Blood
tests showed normocytic anaemia, normal white blood cell count and raised inflammatory markers. Fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission
tomography (PET)/CT scan showed bilateral high-grade diffuse homogeneous FDG uptake in the posterior and inferior aspect of the lungs,
without corresponding CT abnormality (Fig. 1). There was also focal intense FDG uptake within a right apical nodule. Brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated disseminated ischemic lesions of different age. Figure 1(a) Intense and diffuse lung uptake without CT
structural abnormality on FDG-PET/CT. Accumulation of FDG within the lungs is homogeneous, with bilateral high-grade uptake in the posterior
and inferior aspect of the lungs and diffuse low-grade uptake in the remainder of the lungs. (b) Intense and focal FDG uptake in a right
apical nodule on a background of diffuse low-grade FDG uptake in normally aerated lungs. (c) maximum intensity projection (MIP) image
demonstrating diffuse lung FDG uptake and focal uptake in a right apical lung nodule. (a) Intense and diffuse lung uptake without CT
structural abnormality on FDG-PET/CT. Accumulation of FDG within the lungs is homogeneous, with bilateral high-grade uptake in the posterior
and inferior aspect of the lungs and diffuse low-grade uptake in the remainder of the lungs. (b) Intense and focal FDG uptake in a right
apical nodule on a background of diffuse low-grade FDG uptake in normally aerated lungs. (c) maximum intensity projection (MIP) image
demonstrating diffuse lung FDG uptake and focal uptake in a right apical lung nodule. The FDG-PET/CT findings led to pulmonary endoscopy
with biopsy. No macroscopic endobronchial abnormality was visualized. Pathologic examination of the biopsies showed large atypical lymphoid
cells entirely located in the lumina of the septal capillary bed in the lung. These lymphoid cells had irregular nuclear contours, coarse
chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and relatively abundant basophilic cytoplasm. The neoplastic cells in the lung were strongly and diffusely
positive for CD20 and demonstrated a high proliferation index as revealed by MIB-1 (Ki-67). Diagnosis was IVLBCL. R-CHOP therapy was started
and FDG-PET/CT evaluation after 2 cycles of chemotherapy showed resolution of the right apical nodule and marked decrease in lung uptake
bilaterally with a persistent low-grade homogeneous uptake, consistent with partial metabolic response (Figs. 2–4). It was therefore assumed
that IVLBCL involvement in the lung presented as diffuse lung uptake in areas without CT abnormality and as focal uptake in a nodule. Figure
2FDG-PET/CT evaluation after 2 cycles of chemotherapy demonstrated a marked decrease in bilateral lung uptake with a persistent low-grade
homogeneous uptake and resolution of the right apical nodule. Top row is a fused image transverse section of the lungs and MIP, status post-
chemotherapy. Bottom row is a fused image transverse section of the lungs and MIP, status pre-chemotherapy. Figure 3(a) The large atypical
lymphoid cells are entirely located in the lumina of the septal capillary bed in the lung (hematoxylin–eosin, original magnification ×400).
These lymphoid cells have irregular nuclear contours, coarse chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and relatively abundant basophilic cytoplasm.
(b) Immunohistochemical features of the IVLBCL. The neoplastic cells in the lung are strongly and diffusely positive for CD20 (original
magnifications ×200). (c) The neoplastic cells demonstrate a high proliferation index as revealed by MIB-1 (Ki-67) (original magnification
×200). Figure 4Brain MRI with axial diffusion-weighted images (b, e), axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) weighted images (a,
d), and axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (c, f) showed subacute bilateral scattered brain infarcts affecting multiple vascular
territories, carotid (a–c arrows) and vertebro-basilar (d–f), with cortical, subcortical and deep lesions (a, d arrows). Note the high
signal of the left middle cerebellar peduncle without restriction of the apparent diffusion coefficient testifying to the different age of
the ischemic lesions (d arrowhead, e). Strong scattered abnormal gyriform (c, empty arrows) and nodular (c, white arrow) enhancement is
seen. FDG-PET/CT evaluation after 2 cycles of chemotherapy demonstrated a marked decrease in bilateral lung uptake with a persistent low-
grade homogeneous uptake and resolution of the right apical nodule. Top row is a fused image transverse section of the lungs and MIP, status
post-chemotherapy. Bottom row is a fused image transverse section of the lungs and MIP, status pre-chemotherapy. (a) The large atypical
lymphoid cells are entirely located in the lumina of the septal capillary bed in the lung (hematoxylin–eosin, original magnification ×400).
These lymphoid cells have irregular nuclear contours, coarse chromatin, prominent nucleoli, and relatively abundant basophilic cytoplasm.
(b) Immunohistochemical features of the IVLBCL. The neoplastic cells in the lung are strongly and diffusely positive for CD20 (original
magnifications ×200). (c) The neoplastic cells demonstrate a high proliferation index as revealed by MIB-1 (Ki-67) (original magnification
×200). Brain MRI with axial diffusion-weighted images (b, e), axial fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) weighted images (a, d), and
axial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted images (c, f) showed subacute bilateral scattered brain infarcts affecting multiple vascular
territories, carotid (a–c arrows) and vertebro-basilar (d–f), with cortical, subcortical and deep lesions (a, d arrows). Note the high
signal of the left middle cerebellar peduncle without restriction of the apparent diffusion coefficient testifying to the different age of
the ischemic lesions (d arrowhead, e). Strong scattered abnormal gyriform (c, empty arrows) and nodular (c, white arrow) enhancement is
seen. This case report illustrates the added value of FDG-PET/CT in managing patients with general symptoms and no obvious diagnosis,
leading here to the diagnosis of IVLCBL. In particular, the most striking aspect of the PET/CT scan in this patient was the intense and
diffuse bilateral FDG lung uptake without pulmonary parenchymal abnormality on CT. This pattern has been described before in patients with
IVLCBL. Miura et al. described diffuse bilateral FDG uptake in the lungs, in the bilateral renal cortex and in the bones in 4 consecutive
patients. No lung CT abnormality was reported in at least one of the patients but no information on the lung CT is provided for the 3
remaining patients. No follow-up imaging was mentioned. Kotake et al. described bilateral and diffuse FDG accumulation in the lungs without
CT abnormality and in the spleen in a patient with pulmonary hypertension. Follow-up with PET/CT showed resolution of the lung and spleen
uptake after 2 cycles of chemotherapy. Kitanaka et al. reported bilateral lung uptake on FDG-PET in a patient with fever and splenomegaly
who had negative 67Ga scintigraphy and high-resolution chest CT scan. Follow-up PET showed resolution of the lung uptake after 6 cycles of
chemotherapy. Our case report was different from the cases described above as it had an association of focal FDG accumulation within a lung
nodule and diffuse accumulation in areas of normally ventilated lung on CT. Various FDG-PET findings have been depicted in patients with
IVLCBL (Table 1). Rare involved organs include the stomach, lymph node and meninges. Two published articles mention negative FDG-PET
findings in IVLBCL. Shimada et al. found only 2 FDG-positive lesions out of 7 pathologically confirmed lesions. Table 1Sites of IVLBCL
involvement with positive FDG-PET findings in the literatureSiteBoneKidneyLungSpleenAdrenal glandsBrainUterusArticle(s)Number of
patients11766322 Sites of IVLBCL involvement with positive FDG-PET findings in the literature There have been a number of reports of diffuse
lung uptake (Table 2). Yamane et al. have described bilateral diffuse FDG lung uptake in a case of drug-induced pneumonitis in a patient
treated with chemotherapy, where high-resolution CT (HRCT) performed on the same day did not show any abnormality. Three days later, a
repeat HRCT showed disseminated patchy ground-glass opacities and interlobular septum thickening, in keeping with pneumonitis. Von Rohr et
al. reported a case of bleomycin-induced pneumonitis. FDG-PET showed unilateral diffuse FDG lung uptake corresponding with HRCT abnormality
in keeping with bleomycin-induced pneumonitis. Rodrigues et al. studied 8 patients at risk of acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS)
following blunt thoracic trauma and pulmonary contusion. All patients had FDG-PET 24–72 h after admission and did not meet the criteria for
ARDS. Four patients went on to develop ARDS; 3 of these 4 patients had diffuse bilateral FDG lung uptake with increased FDG uptake in areas
of normally aerated lung on CT scan. Yu et al. reported a case of bilateral diffuse intense FDG uptake in posterior lower lungs in a patient
with aspiration pneumonia. CT scan demonstrated a patchy area of consolidation in both posterior lower lungs. Prakash et al. have described
bilateral diffuse lung uptake in lymphangitic carcinomatosis. Groves et al. have described diffuse bilateral lung FDG uptake in 2/36
patients with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and diffuse parenchymal lung disease. FDG uptake corresponded to abnormality on HRCT with the
most intense areas of uptake corresponding most often to regions of honeycombing. Table 2Reported causes of FDG-PET diffuse lung
uptakeArticlesDiffuse lung uptakeCauseCT findingsYamane et al.BilateralChemotherapy-induced pneumonitisNegative at first, positive 3 days
laterVon Rohr et al.UnilateralBleomycin-induced pneumonitisPositiveYu et al.BilateralAspiration pneumoniaPositivePrakash et
al.BilateralLymphangitic carcinomatosisPositiveRodrigues et al.BilateralAcute respiratory distress syndromeNegative then positiveGroves et
al.BilateralIdiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and diffuse parenchymal lung diseasePositive Reported causes of FDG-PET diffuse lung uptake From
our search of the literature, it seems that bilateral diffuse FDG lung uptake with negative CT can be caused by chemotherapy-induced
pneumonitis, ARDS or IVLBCL; and the only aetiology where CT remains negative after a few days is IVLBCL. Diffuse bilateral FDG lung uptake
with persistent normal lung CT scan must raise suspicion of IVLBCL. In the absence of other targets for tissue sampling, random lung
biopsies may lead to a diagnosis. This paper is available online at http://www.cancerimaging.org. In the event of a change in the URL
address, please use the DOI provided to locate the paper.
