Conceived and designed the experiments: MC. Performed the experiments: MC JR. Analyzed the data: MC CV. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: MC. Wrote the paper: MC CV CS FP. The phenomenon of blindsight has been largely studied and refers to
residual abilities of blind patients without an acknowledged visual awareness. Similarly, “deaf hearing” might represent a further example
of dissociation between detection and perception of sounds. Here we report the rare case of a patient with a persistent and complete
cortical deafness caused by damage to the bilateral temporo-parietal lobes who occasionally showed unexpected reactions to environmental
sounds despite she denied hearing. We applied for the first time electrophysiological techniques to better understand auditory processing
and perceptual awareness of the patient. While auditory brainstem responses were within normal limits, no middle- and long-latency waveforms
could be identified. However, event-related potentials showed conflicting results. While the Mismatch Negativity could not be evoked, robust
P3-like waveforms were surprisingly found in the latency range of 600–700 ms. The generation of P3-like potentials, despite extensive
destruction of the auditory cortex, might imply the integrity of independent circuits necessary to process auditory stimuli even in the
absence of consciousness of sound. Our results support the reverse hierarchy theory that asserts that the higher levels of the hierarchy are
immediately available for perception, while low-level information requires more specific conditions. The accurate characterization in terms
of anatomy and neurophysiology of the auditory lesions might facilitate understanding of the neural substrates involved in deaf-hearing.
Extensive bilateral lesions of the primary auditory cortex can produce a complete loss of hearing, known as cortical deafness. Bitemporal
damage required to produce this deficit is rare and is most frequently caused by ischemic cerebrovascular accident , . There is a relatively
limited research on this condition, likely because cortical deafness is typically transient and rapidly resolves in more selective hearing
disorders, such as auditory agnosia or word deafness . In some isolated cases, however, cortical deafness may be permanent . Generally,
cortical deafness is characterized by the complete disruption of central auditory processing, despite intact peripheral auditory function .
However, from the limited literature available, several authors have described the presence of residual auditory behaviors in completely
deaf patients , , . Relatives reported occasional unexpected reactions of patients to environmental sounds despite they denied hearing. This
phenomenon has been likened to blindsight, referring to residual visual abilities of individuals without acknowledged awareness . Similarly,
“deaf-hearing” seems to imply a dissociation between detection and perception of sounds. In the present report, we had the opportunity to
study a patient with severe persistent cortical deafness caused by two consecutive strokes. The lesions extended into both Heschl's gyri,
insulae and superior temporal gyri. Surprisingly, the patient showed some reactions to unexpected sounds, despite the lack of any startle
response to loud noises. We adopted an electrophysiological approach involving auditory evoked potentials (AEPs) and event related
potentials (ERPs) to assess auditory processing and perceptual awareness. Generally, auditory potentials are characterized by a time-
resolution on the order of milliseconds and can therefore provide temporal correlates of the stages of information processing between
stimulus and response. AEPs reflect the activation of auditory nerve and central auditory pathways up to the primary auditory cortex .
Differently, ERP recordings represent a valuable method to provide quantitative information about the perception and higher order processing
of acoustic stimuli , . On the basis of these assumptions, the present study should provide a procedure by which electrophysiological
methods can be used to study auditory unawareness or deaf-hearing. The present study was approved by the Research Ethics Committee (REC) of
the Scientific Foundation “San Camillo” and was compliant with the declaration of Helsinki guidelines. Written informed consent to
publication for case details was obtained from the patient and the healthy volunteers that participated in the study. CDB, a 55-year-old,
right-handed female with previously normal hearing was admitted to our Neurorehabilitation Unit for two consecutive strokes. The first
ischemic attack occurred in December 2007 and involved the territories of the middle cerebral artery of the right hemisphere. A week later,
a second infarction affected the areas of the middle artery of the left side of the brain. On admission, the patient was alert and oriented
in space and time, but often appeared agitated and perplexed. Neurologic examination showed no sensorimotor deficits, but she complained a
complete loss of hearing. Her speech was characterized by a severe dysarthria; she was unable to respond to verbal questions or
environmental sounds and startle response to loud noises could not be detected. She could understand and execute complex written
instructions and recognize and use gestures for communication. Writing was performed hesitantly with much persuasion and showed graphemic
errors and agrammatism. The T1-weighted MRI scan showed bilateral lesions of the superior temporal gyrus and its subregions (planum polare,
Heschl gyrus, planum temporale), the inferior parietal lobe and angular gyri and the insular cortex. On the right, the lesion extended into
the inferior frontal gyrus. During the first year in our Neurorehabilitation Unit, CDB showed consistent evidence of cortical deafness.
Language functions were measured with the Aachen aphasia test (AAT) and revealed that the patient could not understand speech, repeat words
and write to dictation. She could recognize and name pictures and match written words with objects. She showed a good visual-spatial memory
and the Weigl's test revealed normal executive functions. She presented with buccofacial and constructional apraxia. There were, however, no
signs of ideomotor apraxia. The patient mood progressively improved. She appeared to become aware of her deafness and was distressed by
this. The agitation that the patient showed a few days after the lesion, tended to resolve gradually. Occasionally, her relatives reported
that she unconsciously manifested some startle reactions with blinking and head-turning in the direction of unexpected sounds. In two-year
follow up we did not find improvements in the clinical features of the patient. She complained complete loss of hearing and she could only
communicate through reading and writing. Three years after stroke, CDB showed substantially unchanged clinical and neuropsychological
features, confirming a persistent cortical deafness. However, sporadic startle responses were reported. The MRI scan confirmed the extensive
area of infarction in the territory of the bilateral middle cerebral artery. MRI sections of the lesion are shown in Fig. 1. In addition, we
compared the voxel-based structural data of the patient with the T1-weighted MRI scans of ten age-matched healthy controls. We used an
automated technique of statistical parametric mapping (SPM) to the analysis of gray matter (GM) to detect functional abnormalities that were
not accounted for by either visible or unsuspected structural abnormalities. At the corrected threshold of p<0.05, the SPM-based
morphometric comparison revealed that the patient had a decrease of GM distribution in the bilateral caudate nucleus and the pulvinar
thalamus, in addition to the lesional areas delineated with traditional MRI . We planned to perform a functional magnetic resonance (fMRI),
but the patient refused the procedure. Consecutive sequences of axial T1-weighted MRI scan of the patient's brain three years after her
strokes (right hemisphere is on the left side of the picture). Hypodense lesion massively extends from the bilateral superior temporal gyrus
toward the transverse temporal gyrus, the pulvinar, thalamus and insula and the middle temporal gyrus. The right hemisphere was further
damaged in the lentiform nucleus, the postcentral gyrus, the inferior frontal gyrus and the inferior parietal lobe. Audiological examination
comprised pure tone audiometry and auditory evoked potentials. Standard pure-tone air and bone conduction threshold audiometry tested for
peripheral hearing impairment using tones of different frequencies with increasing sound pressure intensity, according to the guidelines
recommended by the British Society of Audiology . The audiological examination was completed with the auditory brainstem responses (ABRs)
and further tests of the central auditory system: middle and long latency auditory evoked potentials (MLAEPs and LLAEPs, respectively). ABRs
include short-latency potentials and are associated with the eighth nerve, cochlear nucleus, superior olive, and midbrain. They occur in the
first 10 ms following stimulus onset. MLAEPs represent the earliest cortical response to acoustic stimulus and cover the 10–80 ms latency
range, including Na, Pa, Nb and Pb components. Finally, N1, P2, and N2 components of LLAEPs occur between 80 and 200 ms after sound onset
and are related to auditory system on primary and secondary cortical areas involved in the central auditory process. Auditory responses were
recorded with the patient rested on a bed in an acoustically shielded room. 1-kHz tone bursts were presented monaurally at a frequency of 10
Hz with alternating polarity (condensation and rarefaction clicks). The acoustic stimulus was applied monaurally via TDH-49 earphones. The
estimation of auditory threshold was traced by the wave V detection which can be used as a robust indicator that the central nervous system
detected an auditory stimulus . The patient exhibited large and reproducible waves V at an intensity of 100 dB. Thus, we adopted the same
stimulation intensity to evoke auditory responses. The contralateral ear was masked by 40 dB white noise in all trials. Recordings were
derived from the vertex (Cz), referenced to the earlobes (A1 and A2). At least two runs, consisting of 2000 click presentations each, were
obtained for all auditory evoked potentials. ABRs were set as follows: 10 ms epochs, bandpass filtering of 150–3000 Hz. Middle-latency
response variables were: 80 ms epochs using band-pass of 5–1000 Hz. Late auditory potentials were analysed in 500 ms epochs and band-pass of
0.5–30 Hz. All auditory signals were inspected visually. All visual analyses were revised by one investigator aware of the patient but
blinded to the patient's age and further clinical data. Auditory recordings classified as distorted or insufficient for interpretation were
excluded. Individual waveforms were included in a grand average providing a better estimate of peak amplitudes and latencies. In addition to
audiological tests, the later, more cognitive stages of auditory processing were examined in an auditory oddball experiment.
Electroencephalogram (EEG) was recorded from a 32 channel electrode cap, according to the extended 10–20 method of electrode application,
referred to linked earlobes with a forehead ground. Additional electrodes were placed below the right eye and at the outer canthus, for
bipolar recordings or the electroocular activity (EOG). Stimuli were presented monaurally at 90 dB. Two sinusoid tones of 1000 and 2000 Hz
served as frequent and rare tones, respectively. Probability of rare tones was 20% and probability of occurrence of frequent tones was 80%.
The interstimulus interval was 1.0–1.3 sec. The experimental session was subdivided into four blocks consisting of 100 stimuli each,
separated by 1-min breaks. Data were recorded with a band-pass of 0.15 to 70 Hz and digitized at 1000 Hz (NeuroScan Amplifier, Compumedics
Neuroscan) for later off-line analysis. EEG data analysis was performed using EEGLAB 9.0.4, an open source Matlab toolbox. A notch filter
was used to eliminate the frequencies centred on 50 Hz. The EEG data were segmented in epochs of 1200 ms including 200 ms pre-stimulus
baseline, time-locked to the beginning of the stimulus presentation. Epochs including EEG excursions exceeding ±90 µV were rejected. After
averaging, a further digital low-pass filter at 30 Hz was applied. For assessment of the MMN, we computed the increase in the negativity of
the evoked potential in response to the deviants as compared with the response to the standards occurring within a 100–300 ms time window.
P3 was measured relative to the pre-stimulus baseline and was defined as the largest positive component occurring after the N1-P2-N2
complex, within a latency window between 300 and 700 ms after a deviant stimulus was detected. Auditory oddball ERP signals of the patient
were compared with those of ten healthy controls matched for age and gender to gain insight into underlying mechanisms of P3 in cortical
deafness. Healthy controls were submitted to the same data collection and analysis conditions as the patient. Topographic maps of P3
distribution were constructed using grand-average voltage information from all scalp electrodes. Within and between group analysis was
performed by the modified t-test described by Crawford and Howell (1998) . Statistical analysis was restricted to P3 findings in terms of
peak amplitude at central midline electrodes (Fz, Cz, and Pz), as well as overall brain electrical activity mapping when P3 component
exhibited largest amplitude in both groups. Statistical significance was accepted when p<0.05. Pure tone air and bone conduction audiometry
indicated a complete sensorineural hearing loss bilaterally. The patient had no response at output limits of audiometry (110 decibels, dB)
in the frequency range of 250–8000 Hz. Figure 2 shows the grand-averaged waveforms of auditory evoked potentials for the two runs of
stimulation. Brainstem auditory potentials of either ear evoked essentially normal responses suggesting the integrity of the auditory nerves
and pathways up to the inferior colliculi of both sides. Auditory brainstem responses (ABRs; top), middle-latency auditory evoked potentials
(MLAEPs; middle), and long-latency auditory evoked potentials (LLAEPs; bottom) recorded by routine clinical protocols in the patient with
cortical deafness (left) and in the control group (right). Note the integrity of brainstem auditory responses and the absence of bilateral
middle- and long-latency evoked potentials, characterizing cortical deafness. Conversely, middle latency auditory responses (Na, Pa, Nb and
Pb) and long latency potentials with N1, P2 and N2 could not be identified reliably. The Mismatch Negativity could not be recorded in
response to deviant stimuli. However, robust positive peaks in the latency range of 650–700 ms were clearly seen following the right ear
stimulation (Fig. 3B). Contralateral responses were abolished. Grand-averaged ERP waveforms at electrode Cz and thirty-one channel ERP
topographical maps recorded in the patient (B) and controls (A). The latency is referred at the time point at which the positive peak
between 300 and 700 ms latency is maximum at Cz electrode site. ERP waveform from the patient revealed a significantly higher P3 at the left
posterior and central sites in response to right stimulation. No P3 could be recorded after left ear stimuli. Statistical comparison between
patient and controls revealed significant differences in P3 scalp distribution. In the within-group analysis, the control group showed a
significantly larger right centro-parietal P3 in response to left ear stimulation (p = 0.0001), and a bilateral centro-temporal dominance in
response to right ear stimulation (p = 0.01) (Fig. 3A). Differently, the patient exhibited the largest amplitude of P3 at the left posterior
and central areas after right ear stimulation (p = 0.0001; p = 0.0001) (Fig. 3B). No P3 could be recorded in response to left ear stimuli.
Finally, the between-group analysis showed a significantly lower P3 amplitude over the right fronto-temporal and central regions of the
patient compared to controls (p = 0.0001; p = 0.008, respectively). In the present study, we reported the rare case of a patient with
persistent cortical deafness. This disorder is characterized by bilateral temporo-parietal lesions involving the primary auditory areas and
their radiations and implies the complete absence of auditory afferent input at the cortical level. In contrast, several authors have
presented evidence of residual capacity of the damaged auditory system to process acoustic stimuli , , . The goal of the present study was,
therefore, a systematic examination of several levels of auditory function using auditory evoked potentials in the attempt to better
evaluate the dissociation between perception and higher order processing of acoustic information. Cortical deafness is generally associated
with a damage of central auditory functions, in spite of normal peripheral hearing. Accordingly, our patient showed normal ABRs, expression
of the integrity of the inner ear and cochlear nerve, as well as the auditory pathways within the brainstem. However, middle-latency
responses were consistently absent to both right and left ear stimulation. The neural origin of MLAEPs is still a subject of controversy.
Although some authors support the hypothesis of a subcortical involvement in the potential generation, it is generally assumed that MLAEPs
arise from the medial geniculate and the supratemporal plane comprising the primary auditory area (A1), and the surrounding region of the
superior temporal gyrus and the frontal and parietal operculum , . Thus, in our patient the extent of the brain damage and the absence of
MLAEP waves provide evidence of a cortical origin of the mid-latency potentials. Concerning the long-latency auditory potentials, recent
neuroimaging data have suggested that abnormalities in the P1, N1 and P2 components reflect lesions extended into the multi-modal areas of
the inferior parietal lobule. This area appears to exert a critical modulatory influence over LLAEP generators outside of the superior
temporal plane . The absence of LLAEPs in our patient does not necessarily reflect a damage to primary auditory cortex, but also a damage to
adjacent posterior areas. Finally, we recorded two main components of ERPs: the Mismatch Negativity and the P3. Although we supposed to
observe an absence of endogenous potentials, we found some unexpected results. MMN could not be recorded in response to deviant sounds.
Generally, the MMN appears in response to changes in sound stimulation and is known to reflect a relatively automatic comparison of incoming
sounds to auditory cortex sensory-memory representations of the preceding repetitive stimuli . Some authors have suggested that these
representations might be explained by the transient adaptation of feature-specific neurons within the anterior and posterior parts of the
primary auditory cortex that regulate the access to the conscious perception of sound , . In fact, numerous brain imaging studies on
preattentive auditory deviance detection have demonstrated an initial contribution of the primary auditory cortex followed by the activation
of the posterior superior temporal gyrus and the lateral planum temporale. These areas might be involved in the withdrawal of the details of
the acoustic change , . Through the connections of the arcuate and superior longitudinal fascicle, the superior temporal gyrus is in
communication with the inferior frontal gyrus. The activation of this region of the mid-ventrolateral prefrontal cortex might indicate a
higher cognitive processing related to the judgement of sufficient novelty of auditory stimulus to require attentional resources . The brain
damage of CDB extended to the primary auditory cortex, the superior temporal gyrus, planum temporale and inferior frontal gyrus and could
hamper sounds to access consciousness. In contrast with the absence of the MMN, a reliable positive peak at 660 ms could be clearly detected
in response to right ear stimulation. Because of its morphology and topographic distribution, we inferred that such late waveform could
represent a P3-like potential. P3 offers a covert and indirect measure of attentional resource allocation that represents an index of change
detection . P3 is related to the activity of associative cortical areas and is sensitive to complex processes around recalled information,
stimulus significance, recognized auditory information and memory context updating , . The sources of P3 are believed to be located in
heteromodal areas of the fronto-parietal cortex and their activation might reflect an attention switch to an environmental change encoded by
the cerebral process generating the MMN , . The bilateral supramarginal gyrus, frontal operculum and insula seem to be mainly involved in
the network for saliency detection in auditory modality . However, some authors have demonstrated an asymmetrical cortical activation of P3
by using unilateral auditory stimulation. Among others, Gilmore and colleagues (2009) argued that in normal condition the right hemisphere
is more prominently engaged during working memory and updating processes underlying P3 . Accordingly, our healthy controls exhibited a right
lateralized potential in response to left ear stimulation, and a bilateral distribution of ERPs to right ear stimulation. This denotes a
more marked right side activation of P3 wave (Fig. 3A). In contrast, the patient showed robust P3-like components over the left posterior
areas and a significantly lower distribution of the potentials over the right fronto-temporal and central areas in response to right ear
stimulation. The left ear stimulation could not evoke any detectable responses. (Fig. 3B). Depth recordings and lesion studies have
implicated the frontal, temporal and inferior parietal lobes in the generation of the auditory P3 . The interaction of these structures
seems to play a key role in the auditory perceptual awareness, and the right hemisphere seems to be mainly engaged during working memory
updating processes , . Thus, the marked right fronto-parietal dysfunction of our patient, in particular the damage of the right inferior
frontal gyrus and the inferior parietal lobe, might partially explain the dissociation between detection and perception of sounds. Several
authors have demonstrated that ERPs can be elicited even when stimuli are presented outside conscious awareness , . Bernat et al. (2001)
offer evidence that subliminal stimuli can evoke consistent P3 waves. They speculated that P3 could represent a link between unconscious and
conscious awareness in the context updating processes . In our patient the generation of P3-like potentials implied that deviant stimuli
were selectively processed bypassing networks involved in conscious perception. Schönwiesner et al. (2007) and Pandya (1995) hypothesized
that association areas in and adjacent to the auditory parabelt might form an independent circuit from thalamo-cortical projections in the
auditory system , . These alternate pathways could be preserved in our patient and responsible for the generation of P3-like potentials. In
addition, the lack of awareness of auditory stimuli might be further aggravated by the bilateral functional abnormalities of the pulvinar.
In fact, the auditory association area seems to be preferentially related to the pulvinar complex . The thalamic pulvinar nucleus plays an
important role in the coupling of sensory and attentional functions. As demonstrated by Hugdahl et al. (1991), a lesion of this structure
might imply an auditory neglect that further affected the conscious awareness of sounds of CDB . As a final consideration, our findings seem
to be in contrast with the hypothesis of a hierarchical information processing of auditory stimuli. A large body of physiological and
functional data suggests that processing of auditory information is implemented in a hierarchical manner . Lower levels are considered
responsible for extracting basic spectro-temporal features of the auditory signal. Higher cortical areas are involved in a higher level of
information processing, such as abstraction, perception, reasoning, and learning. They are characterized by at least four different,
hierarchically organized processing levels, each containing several segregated sub-regions: the primary areas that receive their input from
the thalamus; surrounding lateral and medial “belt” areas, that receive input from primary areas; a parabelt area on the dorsal plane of the
superior temporal gyrus; and higher-level areas in the superior temporal sulcus and the frontal lobe. From that, the higher level
integrative functions evolved from and are dependent on the integrity of lower-level structures. In other words, simple processing
operations are necessary prerequisites for more complex operations , . Our results are rather compatible with a growing body of literature
demonstrating another line of thought, based on the reverse hierarchy theory (RHT) . The reverse hierarchy theory provides a
representational hierarchy to describe the interaction between sensory input and top–down processes to guide plasticity in primary sensory
areas . RHT asserts that neural circuits mediating a certain percept can be modified starting at the highest representational level and
progressing to lower-levels in search of more refined high resolution information to optimize perception. RHT may be a plausible explanation
for top–down influences on cortical levels of sensory processing . This might further clarify the presence of higher order auditory cortical
responses, even when more automatic components are lacking. In conclusion, the paradoxical partial preservation of P3-like potentials in a
patient with persistent cortical deafness suggests the integrity of independent neural circuits necessary to process auditory stimuli even
in the absence of conscious awareness. Furthermore, electrophysiological techniques combined with functional neuroimaging could be of
primary importance in demonstrating the activation of neural substrates underlying deaf-hearing. The authors gratefully acknowledge the very
helpful discussions with Drs Luciano Foscolo, Annalena Venneri and Luca Ghezzo. Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no
competing interests exist. Funding: The authors have no support or funding to report.
