Thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis (THPP) is a rare, potentially life-threatening endocrine emergency. It is characterized by
recurrent muscle weakness and hypokalemia. Because many THPP patients do not have obvious symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism,
misdiagnosis may occur. The published studies revealed that definitive therapy for THPP is control of hyperthyroidism by medical therapy,
radioactive iodine or surgery, but the long-term post-operative follow-up result was not observed. We reported two cases of medically
refractory THPP with recurrent paralysis of extremities and hypokalemia, and both were combined with thyroid nodules. Both patients were
treated with total thyroidectomy; the pathology revealed that one is Graves' disease with thyroid papillary carcinoma, and the other is
adenomatous goiter with papillary hyperplasia. No episode of periodic paralysis was noted and laboratory evaluation revealed normal
potassium level during the post-operative follow up. Our experience suggests that total thyroidectomy by experienced surgeon is an
appropriate and definite treatment for medically refractory THPP, especially in cases combined with thyroid nodules. Thyrotoxic hypokalemic
periodic paralysis (THPP) is a rare endocrine disorder and a reversible medical emergency. The incidence of THPP in Asians, the most
frequently affected population, is approximately 2%, while THPP is largely unknown in the West, although the number of reported cases in
Western countries has increased recently in the literature . Recent papers show a tendency towards male predominance . In Asian populations,
THPP usually appears between the ages of 20 and 40 years of life , coinciding with the main age for hyperthyroidism. Hypokalemia with
associated flaccid paralysis and signs of hyperthyroidism are the hallmarks of THPP. Hypokalemia occurs due to a massive shift of potassium
into the cells rather than net loss from the body. Excess thyroid hormone may predispose to paralytic episodes by increasing the
susceptibility of epinephrine or insulin, and therefore increasing Na-K-ATPase activity in the beta-adrenergic receptors in skeletal
muscles, which leads to potassium shift into the cells . The published studies revealed that the definitive therapy for THPP is control of
hyperthyroidism by medical therapy, radioactive iodine or surgery, but the long-term post-operative follow-up result was not observed. We
reported two cases of medically refractory THPP with recurrent paralysis of extremities and hypokalemia, and both were combined with thyroid
nodules. After definite treatment by total thyroidectomy, none of them experienced recurrent THPP episodes during long term follow up. A
33-year-old male without significant past medical history presented to the emergency department with sudden onset weakness of bilateral
lower extremities. This was the third episode in the previous two weeks despite medication. Prior to the episode, the patient had suffered
from hand tremors, palpitations, sweating, body weight loss, good appetite, and anxiety for a period of time. His sister had been diagnosed
with hyperthyroidism but his family members had no history of similar episodes. After physical examination and laboratory study, the patient
was diagnosed with hypokalemic periodic paralysis associated with Graves' disease. After initiation of intravenous potassium replacement,
the patient's neurologic symptoms completely resolved. Reviewing the medical record, the patient received medication for several months,
including potassium chloride (600 mg/tid) for hypokalemia, methimazole (30 mg/day) to control his underlying hyperthyroidism, and
propranolol (80 mg/day) to control blood pressure and tachycardia. Despite these medications, the patient still suffered from three attack
episodes. We arranged thyroid ultrasonography for this patient, and this revealed focally heterogeneous hypoechoic nodules with
calcification, and fine needle aspiration biopsy (FNAB) showed atypia cells. Neck computed tomography (CT) survey also revealed multiple
punctuate calcifications in heterogeneous thyroid nodules, which represent an increased risk of thyroid malignancy . Due to FNAB and CT
findings, the impression was highly suspected thyroid cancer. Total thyroidectomy was performed for this patient under the impression of
Graves' disease with suspected thyroid cancer, and the pathology revealed papillary thyroid carcinoma. After operation, no recurrence of
periodic paralysis occurred and laboratory evaluation revealed normal potassium level during the ten years of follow-up period. A 52-year-
old male had past medical history of alcoholic liver cirrhosis and type 2 diabetes mellitus. He suffered from sudden onset generalized
weakness especially of the bilateral lower extremities, and he had presented to the emergency department four times in the previous five
years. The patient had hand tremors, but he denied any other symptoms and signs of hyperthyroidism. None of his family members had a history
of similar episodes or other significant illnesses. The patient was diagnosed with hypokalemic periodic paralysis associated with
hyperthyroidism, and the patient's neurologic symptoms completely resolved after intravenous potassium replacement. Thyroid ultrasonography
revealed diffuse heterogeneous goiter. Reviewing the medical record, the patient have received medication for four years, including
treatment for hypokalemia with potassium chloride (600 mg/tid), and for thyrotoxicosis with propranolol (80 mg/day) and methimazole (30
mg/day). Despite of these medications, the patient still suffered from recurrent attack episodes. Since thyroid enlargement persisted
despite the medication, annual follow-up thyroid ultrasonography revealed diffuse heterogeneous goiter with a left neck lymphadenopathy, and
FNAB showed thyroid atypia cells with lymphadenopathy, total thyroidectomy was performed about five years after the initial hypokalemic
paralysis attack. Pathology revealed adenomatous goiter with papillary hyperplasia, and lymph node with reactive hyperplasia. After
operation, no episode of periodic paralysis was noted and laboratory evaluation revealed normal potassium level during the two years of the
follow-up period. THPP does not usually recur once the patient is euthyroid, except in a few studied cases . Adequate control of
hyperthyroidism is the mainstay of therapy. Hsieh et al reported that before achieving the euthyroid status, the rate of recurrent attacks
was as high as 62.2%, peaking in the first 3 months after THPP diagnosis. The published studies revealed long-term control treatment for
THPP is control of hyperthyroidism by medical therapy with antithyroid drugs and nonselective beta-blockers , radioactive iodine or surgery
(thyroidectomy or subtotal thyroidectomy ). Since failure to properly diagnose and treat THPP can be fatal, rapid correction of potassium
abnormalities is imperative as it can resolve the symptoms quickly and completely, and definitive treatment depends on the underlying
etiology. In our experience of these two cases, we find total thyroidectomy for treatment of medically refractory THPP may have the
following advantages: it can offer a definitive control of hyperthyroidism and the coexisting thyroid disorder, such as Graves' disease or
benign/malignant goiter, can also be treated. We believe that surgery is better than radioactive iodine treatment because the latter has the
risk of radiation exposure. We also suggest total thyroidectomy rather than subtotal thyroidectomy because of the possibility of recurrence
of thyroid tumor which may lead to THPP attack if the patient still has hyperthyroidism, or which may render revision surgery more
difficult. However, this procedure should be performed by experienced surgeons to minimize the surgical complications such as recurrent
laryngeal nerve injury, hematoma with or without airway obstruction and hypoparathyroidism. Therefore, we suggest that total thyroidectomy
by experienced surgeons is an appropriate and definite treatment for THPP. We reported two cases of medically refractory THPP; neither of
whom suffered from recurrent episodes of paralysis during the long-term follow up after total thyroidectomy. Since failure to properly
diagnose and treat THPP can be fatal, rapid correction of potassium abnormalities is imperative as it can resolve the symptoms quickly and
completely. Thus, we suggest total thyroidectomy as the definitive therapy for THPP, and the coexisting thyroid disorder, such as Graves'
disease or benign/malignant goiter, can also be treated. We believe that total thyroidectomy is better than radioactive iodine treatment due
to there being no risk of radiation exposure, and that it is superior to subtotal thyroidectomy due to the lesser risk of thyroid tumor
recurrence. Although total thyroidectomy may have certain surgical complications, we suggest that total thyroidectomy by experienced thyroid
surgeons is an appropriate and definite treatment for THPP. Patients' written consent was obtained for publication of their case records.
THPP: thyrotoxic hypokalemic periodic paralysis; FNAB: fine needle aspiration biopsy. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. YCL, CWW: Data collection, manuscript composition and submission. HCC, HYC, ICL: Took part in the care of the patient, performed
literature search, and helped with manuscript preparation. WRK, FYC: Critical revision and supervision, study conception and design. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. This study was supported by grants from the National Science Council, Taiwan (NSC
99-2314-B-037-015-MY2), Kaohsiung Medical University Hospital (KMUH100-0R34), and Kaohsiung Municipal Hsiao-Kang Hospital (Kmhk-100-022). We
thank the study participants for their contribution to this study.
