Liver angiosarcoma is a rare disease, however it still ranks as the third of most common primary liver maligancies. The prognosis of liver
angiosarcoma is very poor with almost all patients with this kind of disease die within 2 years after diagnosis. No specific symptoms and
signs are closely associated with this disease. Here, we report a case presenting shock status at first due to rupture of liver
angiosarcoma- induced internal bleeding. After emergent transarterial embolization (TAE), she received partial hepatectomy two weeks later.
4 months after operation, she is still with a good performance status without obvious recurrence or metastasis identified. Hepatic
angiosarcoma is a very rare disease, accounting for only 2% of primary liver malignancy ; however, it still ranks as the third place in the
list of most common primary liver malignancies . Hepatic angiosarcoma originates from endothelial cells and usually presents as an abdominal
mass with unspecific symptoms and signs , making it difficult to diagnose in the early stage. The survival of hepatic angiosarcoma is very
poor, which is attributable to its rapid progress, high recurrence rate, and resistant to traditional chemotherapy and radiotherapy . Even
liver transplantation could not benefit patients with liver angiosarcoma . To date, the therapeutic guideline for liver angiosarcoma has not
been set up; partial liver resection to remove tumor radically still remains to be the cornerstone of treatment options. Here we reported a
case with primary liver angiosarcoma presenting with hemoperitoneum due to tumor rupture and active bleeding treated by TAE and subsequent
partial liver resection. An 83 year-old female complained about lower abdomen pain for two months. After one episode of fierce right upper
abdomen pain occurred on July 12th, 2011, she was brought to our emergency department for aid by her families. In our emergency department
(ER), unstable systolic blood pressure of 90 mmHg with tachycardia of 110 beats/min was found. Resuscitation was then given. Subsequent
blood examination showed leukocytosis (161000/μL), anemia (9 g/dL), and thrombocytopenia (85000/μL). Abdomen distension with mild tenderness
while pressed was also noted. Under the impression of internal bleeding, bedside echo was then conducted, which revealed intra-abdomen fluid
accumulation and a liver mass. Abdomen computer tomography(CT) was thereafter arranged for this patient with contrast injection, which
indicated a 3 cm hypervascular mass over segment 5 of liver with active bleeding (Figure 1). An emergent angiogram of celiac trunk was then
conducted and showed a hypervascular tumor at the right lobe of liver which was supplied by the right hepatic artery. Extravastion of
contrast medium from the tumor surface was shown which indicated an active tumor bleeding (Figure 2A). Then emergent embolization was done
after superselective cannulation into the feeders using a 3 Fr. Microcatheter from the S5 branch of the right hepatic artery, 5 ml
suspension of gelfoam powder (200 um) mixed with contrast medium were infused via the feeders into the right lobe tumor until the flow
stasis. Post-embolization angiogram showed that no extravastion of the contrast medium from the right lobe tumor (Figure 2B). After
admission, thorough liver function tests and hepatitis survey were done. This patient's liver function was categorized as Child Pugh A and
no hepatitis was diagnosed. Alpha-fetoprotein, CEA, CA 19-9 were within normal range. Under the impression of liver tumor, highly suspected
as a hepatoma based on findings in TAE and abdominal CT of this patient, laparotomy were performed two weeks later after TAE. During
operation, 2000 cc bloods inside abdomen was found. A 3 cm tumor over surface of segment 5 of liver was noted. Partial hepatectomy of liver
segment 5 to remove tumor was done. Enhanced CT scan showed a ruptured irregular liver mass. Enhanced CT scan showed a ruptured irregular
liver mass (balck arrow) with prominent enhancement at the liver surface inducing contrast leakage into the right subphrenic space. The
celiac trunk angiogram showed a hypervascular mass in right lobe of liver with contrast extravastion from the tumor surface (black arrow),
which was compatible with CT findings of a hypervascular hepatic tumor bleeding. Figure 2B-After embolization, no contrast extravastion from
the tumor was shown. The resected liver contained a tumor composed of anastomosing vascular channels in an infiltrating growth pattern. The
vascular channels were lined by atypical endothelial cells with enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei (Figure 3). The other sections of resected
liver showed spindled or epithelioid tumor cells forming hemorrhagic nests and sheets with rudimentary vascular channels. The tumor cells
possessed high grade nuclear atypia and brisk mitotic activity(Figure 4). Epithelioid areas made up of large rounded tumor cells with high
grade nuclear atypia and brisk mitotic activity were also seen (Figure 5). Immunohistochemically, the tumor cells expressed usual vascular
antigens CD31 and CD34 as well as mesenchymal marker, Vimentin (Figure 6, 7, 8) . The negative staining of HAS and GPC-3 excludes the
possibility of hepatocytic neoplasm(Figure 9, 10) . Subsequently, a final diagnosis of liver angiosarcoma was confirmed. The section of
resected liver showed a tumor composed of anastomosing vascular channels in an infiltrating growth pattern. The section of resected liver
showed a tumor composed of anastomosing vascular channels in an infiltrating growth pattern. The vascular channels are lined by atypical
endothelial cells with enlarged hyperchromatic nucle (black arrow). The section of resected liver showed spindled tumor cells forming
hemorrhagic nests and sheets. The section of resected liver showed spindled tumor cells forming hemorrhagic nests and sheets. Rudimentary
vascular channels were noted within the tumor cell nest. The spindled tumor cells showed high grade nuclear atypia with brisk mitotic
activity(black arrows). Epithelioid areas. Epithelioid areas made up of large rounded tumor cells with high grade nuclear atypia and brisk
mitotic activity were also seen(black arrows). Immunohistochemical study. Immunohistochemical study showed that the tumor cells expressed
vascular antigen CD31 strongly(black arrow, score 3+, clone 1A10, Novocastra). Immunohistochemical study. Immunohistochemical study revealed
that the tumor cells was strongly positive for vascular antigen CD34 (black arrow, score 3+, clone QBEnd-10, Dako). Immunohistochemical
study. Immunohistochemical study demonstrated that the tumor cells strongly expressed the mesenchymal marker, Vimentin (black arrow, score
3+, clone V9, Novocastra). Immunohistochemical study. Immunohistochemical study revealed negative staining of hepatocyte paraffin antibody
(HAS, clone OCH1E5, CellMarque) over tumor cells (black arrow). Immunohistochemical study. Immunohistochemical study showed negative
staining of Glypican-3 (GPC-3, clone 1G12, Bio SB) over tumor cells (black arrow). After operation, this patient recovered very well and was
discharged two weeks later. Adjuvant chemotherapy and radiation were not given after taking the effectiveness of them and her old age into
consideration. No local recurrence or distant metastasis has been found at the time of writing, 4 months after operation. This patient is
now still with a good performance status. Angiosarcoma, a subtype of soft tissue sarcoma, is an aggressive malignant disease deriving from
endothelium, lymphatics, or blood vessels. Angiosarcoma occurs most commonly in head and neck, followed by breast. Liver angiosarcoma is
ranked as fifth in the list of most common seen sites of angiosarcoma and is very rare. Liver angiosarcoma occurs in the elder mainly .
Although the symptoms are usually nonspecific, abdominal distension and discomfort, weight loss, and fatigue are commonly found . Others
like jaundice, ascites, or hepatomegaly are usually associated with advanced liver angiosarcoma . The abnormal liver functions found in
advanced liver angiosarcoma are attributable to the replacement of normal liver parenchema by tumor . Due to the hypervascular
characteristic of liver angiosarcoma, it is difficult to differentiate liver angiosarcoma from other vascular tumors in liver, such as
hepatoma or adenoma, radiologically. As shown in the present case, CT and angiogram all indicated a hypervascular mass, which was in line
with the image findings of hepatoma. After resection, pathologically, the resected liver showed a tumor composed of anastomosing vascular
channels infiltrating surrounding hepatic tissue in a destructive fashion. The channels were lined by atypical endothelial cells with
enlarged hyperchromatic nuclei. Immunohistochemically, the tumor was positive for CD31, CD34, and Vimentin, a mesenchymal marker, and
negative for HAS and GPC-3, which excluded the possibility of hepatocyte origin. Taken together, the liver angiosarcoma was confirmed as the
final diagnosis . The survival of patients with liver angiosarcoma is very poor with media survival of 6 months without treatment. Even
after treatment, only 3% of patients were reported to live longer than 2 years . The reasons contributing to this are complicated. First,
due to its nonspecific symptoms, the diagnosis is usually too late, which excludes the chance of complete resection of tumor in most cases.
Second, liver angiosarcoma usually presents with early metastases to other organs, such as lung, spleen, or bone, which further worsens its
prognosis. At present, the standard treatment for liver angiosarcoma remains surgical resection. Others such as chemotherapy or radiotherapy
fails to reach a conclusive benefit on survival of liver angiosarcoma , although chemotherapy is the critical part of treatments of soft
tissue sarcoma and radiotherapy plays a palliative role in liver metastasis ; Liver transplantation is also not deemed feasible to treat
liver angiosarcoma thanks to its high recurrent rate and still poor survival after transplantation . Liver angiosarcoma also easily induces
severe intraabdominal hemorrhage due to spontaneous rupture, leading to subsequent tumor cell spillage and peritoneal tumor seeding, which
further complicates the prognosis . Once liver angiosarcoma-induced internal bleeding happens, TAE is usually the first choice to stop the
bleeding and to get the patients stable . Otherwise, in relatively stable patients, conservative treatment may also work in this situation .
However, due to the rare incidence of liver angiosarcoma, how to treat acute bleeding of liver angiosarcoma has not yet reached a definite
conclusion at present. As shown in the present case, spontaneous liver angiosarcoma rupture made her present with a shock status at first.
After embolizaton and resuscitation, her condition got stabilized and she received partial hepatectomy two weeks later. For this patient,
the poor prognosis is expected according to previous reports. However, given that this patient is already 83 years old and no effective
strategies against liver angiosarcoma are available so far, no more adjuvant therapy has been given to this patient. No recurrence or
metastasis has been identified at the time of writing and she is still with a good performance status so far, 4 months after operation.
Seeking a new strategy in addition to surgical resection to treat liver angiosarcoma should be prioritized due to its high recurrence rate
and very dismal prognosis. Since traditional chemotherapy and radiotherapy could not benefit this kind of patients, combined with the rapid
progress of current molecular biology, target therapy may be the further direction against liver angiosarcoma This study has been approved
by Chang Gung memorial hospital IRB board. The approved IRB number is 100-3732B. A copy of the approval of IRB is available for review by
the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. CY wrote the manuscript, Cheng-cheng carried
out the pathological examination, Chun-nan Yeh helped wrote the manuscript, Huang-yang helped wrote the manuscript, Jui- Teng participated
in data collection, Chan-Siu carried out the image reading, Chih-Lang helped data collection, Cho-li participated in pathological
examiantion, Wen-yen participated in data collection, Kun-Chun finalized the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
