Testicular Leydig cell tumours (LCTs) are rare, steroid-secreting tumours. Elevated levels of aromatase (CYP19 or CYP19A1) mRNA have been
previously described in LCTs; however, little is known about the mechanism(s) causing CYP19 over-expression. We report an LCT in a 29-year-
old male with elevated plasma oestradiol caused by enhanced CYP19 transcription. First, we measured the intra-tumour expression of CYP19 and
determined the use of CYP19 promoters by qPCR. Secondly, we explored CYP19 and promoter II (PII) for gene amplifications and activating
mutations in PII by sequencing. Thirdly, we analysed intra-tumour expression of steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1 (NR5A1)), liver receptor
homologue-1 (LRH-1 (NR5A2)) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2 (PTGS2)). Finally, we analysed SF-1 for promoter mutations and gene amplifications.
Similar to what has been recorded in normal Leydig cells, we first found the bulk of tumour CYP19 transcripts to be PII derived, excluding
promoter shift as a cause of enhanced transcription. Secondly, we excluded CYP19 and PII gene amplifications, and activating mutations in
PII, as causes of elevated CYP19 mRNA. We found SF-1 mRNA to be up-regulated in the tumour, while LRH-1 and COX2 were down-regulated. The
finding of elevated SF-1 levels in the tumour was confirmed by immunohistochemistry. The elevated level of SF-1 was not due to promoter
mutations or amplifications of the SF-1 gene. Our results strongly suggest that the elevated levels of SF-1 have induced PII-regulated CYP19
transcription in this tumour. These findings are of relevance to the understanding of CYP19 up-regulation in general, which may occur in
several tissues, including breast cancer. Leydig cells are found adjacent to the seminiferous tubules in the testicles. These cells
constitute the main androgen-synthesising compartment in adult males and are also capable of oestrogen production (reviewed in (1, 2, 3,
4)). Leydig cell tumours (LCTs) of the testis are rare, representing about 1–3% of all testicular tumours. They are most frequently
diagnosed in pre-pubertal boys between 5 and 10 years and adult men aged 30–60 years (5, 6). While usually benign, about 10% of LCTs in
adult patients reveal a malignant phenotype (7). LCTs are steroid-secreting tumours and consequently associated with endocrine disturbances.
In testosterone-secreting LCTs, boys usually present symptoms of precocious puberty, whereas excess androgen rarely causes notable effects
in adults. About one-fourth of all LCTs are oestrogen secreting, and the most common symptoms include gynaecomastia in addition to sexual
dysfunction and infertility in adults (6, 8, 9, 10). There have also been described cases of LCTs in pre-pubertal boys, revealing symptoms
of both oestrogen and androgen production, causing gynaecomastia and precocious puberty in concert (reviewed in (4)). Local oestrogen
synthesis plays a functional role in the testis (reviewed in (11, 12)). In resemblance with other oestrogen-producing compartments,
androgens are converted into oestrogens by the aromatase (CYP19) enzyme. CYP19 is encoded by the CYP19A1 gene, localised at chromosome
15q21.2 (13, 14, 15). The unusually large regulatory region of this gene contains several tissue-specific promoters, and each of the
promoters give rise to mRNAs with distinct untranslated first exons (16). The first exon is spliced onto a common splice junction in exon
II, immediately upstream of the coding region. Thus, the different mRNA species expressed from this gene contains an identical open reading
frame (exons II–X), and the translated protein is the same, regardless of the promoter used. Elevated CYP19 expression with subsequent high
plasma oestradiol (E2) levels has been reported in a few cases of testicular LCTs (17, 18, 19, 20, 21). The main regulator of normal
testicular cell aromatization is the CYP19 proximal promoter II (PII), which has also been reported as the main active promoter in LCTs (18,
20). Different response elements have been identified in PII, and both steroidogenic factor 1 (SF-1 (encoded by NR5A1)) and liver receptor
homologue-1 (LRH-1 (encoded by NR5A2)) have been reported to be involved in PII-regulated CYP19 expression (22, 23, 24, 25). Moreover,
several cAMP-response element (CRE)-like sequences have been identified in PII (26, 27), and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX2 (encoded by PTGS2)) was
recently reported to be involved in the phosphorylation of CRE-binding proteins and thus stimulate CYP19 expression and the proliferation of
Leydig tumour cells (28). While over-expression of SF-1 was reported in Fisher rat testicular tumours (22), so far we lack information
regarding what mechanism(s) may cause CYP19 over-expression in human testicular LCTs. Here, we report an oestrogen-producing LCT in a
29-year-old man. The finding of SF-1 over-expression in concert with elevated levels of the PII-derived CYP19 transcripts suggests increased
SF-1 levels to play a key role in stimulating oestrogen synthesis in these tumour cells. A 29-year-old male with severe gynaecomastia and
elevated plasma E2 levels (248 pM, normal upper range 130 pM) was referred to the Endocrine Unit. He was subsequently diagnosed with an
oestrogen-producing LCT on the right testis. The tumour was not palpable but visualised on testicular ultrasound. He had normal pubertal
growth, had developed normal secondary sex characteristics and was the father of one child. There was no clinical, biochemical (HCG and
α-fetoprotein negative) or radiological sign of malignant disease. The high serum E2 levels returned to normal after surgical removal of the
tumour. Although E2, testosterone and SHBG levels normalised rapidly, LH and FSH remained elevated at follow-up, indicating impaired
function of the left testicle. All serum hormone levels are summarised in Table 1. At 1-year follow-up, he felt well and the gynaecomastia
had resolved. Subject to patient consent, part of the tumour specimen obtained at orchidectomy was snap-frozen and stored in liquid nitrogen
for research purposes. A part of the testis specimen was fixed in 4% formalin and representative samples including both tumour and normal
tissues were embedded in paraffin. Standard haematoxylin- and eosin (H&E)-stained sections (5 μm) were made for microscopic histology
evaluation. Sections (5 μm) from formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tumours were prepared. Immunohistochemical aromatase enzyme staining was
performed using the MAB Aro677 (gift from Dr Dean Evans, Novartis AG). SF-1 was stained with the mouse antihuman MAB 434200 (Invitrogen),
while the oestrogen and progesterone receptors (PRs) were stained using the MABs M7047 and M3659 (Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) respectively. For
the staining procedure, the DAKO Envision HRP mouse kit (Dako) with DAB as detection method was used. Total RNA was extracted from snap-
frozen biopsies using Trizol reagent (Life Technologies) according to the manufacturer's procedure and dissolved in DEPC-treated deionised
water as described by Knappskog et al. (29). The RNA concentration was measured on a Nanodrop ND1000 spectrophotometer and adjusted to
1 μg/μl. Single-strand cDNA was synthesised from 4 μg total RNA using Transcriptor reverse transcriptase (Roche) according to the
manufacturer's procedure. Both oligoT (16-mers) and random hexamers were used as primers in the cDNA synthesis reaction mix. Genomic DNA was
extracted from snap-frozen biopsies using QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's procedure. Transcript levels of total
CYP19, promoter-specific CYP19 transcript variants, COX2, SF-1 and LRH-1, were quantified using the Lightcycler 480 instrument (Roche).
Ribosomal protein P2 (RPLP2) mRNA level was used as reference. The amplification primers and BlackBerry-quenched hydrolysis probes used are
listed in Table 2. Amplification was performed in a 20 μl reaction solution using the LC480 Probes Master (Roche) reaction mix, 0.5 μM of
each primer, 0.125 μM hydrolysis probe and 0.5 μl cDNA synthesised from 4 μg total RNA. The following thermocycling conditions were used:
initial denaturation/enzyme activation at 95 °C for 5 min and then 50 cycles of 95 °C for 10 s (denaturation) and 55 °C for 20 s
(annealing/elongation) before a final cooling step at 40 °C for 5 s. Negative controls (water) were included in each run. The results were
converted into relative concentrations using an in-run standard curve, and then normalised for RPLP2 mRNA levels. All gene-specific data
from the tumour sample were compared with the corresponding data from a reference sample consisting of pooled total RNA from healthy testis
of five donors (BioChain, Newark, CA, USA). The expression levels of the promoter-specific transcript variants were assessed using different
primers and assay-specific standard curves (i.e. different qPCR efficiencies), and the data are therefore not directly comparable. However,
an estimate of the differences in expression of these promoters can be made by assuming that all reactions run with the same efficacy
(efficiency=2) and comparing the delta crossing points of the different assays. In order to investigate possible gene copy number changes of
the CYP19 gene and the CYP19 PII, levels of genomic DNA were quantified in duplex reactions with beta-2-microglobulin (B2M) as reference
using the Lightcycler 480 instrument (Roche). Two distinct CYP19 genomic areas and three distinct areas covering the CYP19 PII region were
amplified using the primers and BlackBerry-quenched hydrolysis probes listed in Table 2. Amplification was performed in a 20 μl reaction
solution using the LC480 Probes Master (Roche) reaction mix, 0.5 μM of each primer, 0.125 μM of each hydrolysis probe and 2 μl gDNA as
template. The following thermocycling conditions were used: initial denaturation/enzyme activation of 95 °C for 5 min and then 50 cycles of
95 °C for 15 s (denaturation) and 55 °C for 20 s (annealing/elongation) before a final cooling step at 40 °C for 5 s. Negative controls
(water) were included in each run. The data obtained through quantification were normalised by adjusting for B2M levels. These normalised
values were divided by the corresponding values from a reference sample (pooled DNA from six healthy donors). The concentration of the
reference was set to 1.0, and we considered the samples to have reduced copy number if the sample/reference ratio was <0.65 and increased
copy number if the ratio was >1.35. The CYP19 PII and SF-1 promoter regions were amplified and sequenced using primers listed in Table 2.
The SF-1 gene has two alternative, untranslated first exons. Relative to the transcription start sites of these two exons, we sequenced the
area −1475/+1053 (alternative 1) and −1650/+858 (alternative 2). PCR amplification was performed using the Kod XL DNA polymerase system
(Merck) in a 50 μl reaction mix containing 1× PCR buffer, 0.2 mM of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate, 0.2 μM of each primer, 1.25 U Kod XL
DNA polymerase and 1 μl genomic DNA. The thermocycling conditions used were an initial denaturation step of 5 min at 94 °C, followed by 30
cycles of denaturation (94 °C for 1 min), annealing (CYP19 PII: 54.9 °C and SF-1: 63.2 °C for 10 s) and elongation (72 °C for 30 s) and a
final elongation step of 7 min at 72 °C. Following amplification, the PCR product was treated with ExoSAP-IT (USB Products, Affymetrix,
Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) at 37 °C for 30 min and 80 °C for 15 min according to the procedure as outlined by the manufacturer. DNA
sequencing was performed in a 10 μl reaction mix containing 1× sequencing buffer, 1 μM primer and 1× BigDye v.1.1 (Applied Biosystems,
Carlsbad, CA, USA). Capillary electrophoresis was performed on an automated DNA sequencer (ABI 3730). The multiplex ligation-dependent probe
amplification (MLPA) method and the SALSA MLPA kit P185-B1 lot 0308 (MRC Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) were used according to the
manufacturer's instructions to identify deletions or amplifications in the SF-1 gene (NR5A1) localised on 9q33.3. Capillary electrophoresis,
data collection and peak analysis were performed on an automated DNA sequencer (ABI 3730). In the patient sample, the peak areas of all MLPA
products resulting from SF-1-specific probes were first normalised by the average of peak areas resulting from control probes specific for
locations other than on chromosome 9q33.3. A ratio was then calculated where this normalised value was divided by the corresponding value
from a sample consisting of pooled DNA from six healthy individuals. A sample was scored as having a reduced copy number at a specific
location if this ratio was below 0.75 and as having an increased copy number if the ratio was above 1.25. The intra-testicular tumour
(largest diameter of 1.8 cm) was sharply delimited from the testicular parenchyma with a non-infiltrative ‘pushing’ border and a
solid/nodular growth pattern. The tumour cells had abundant, deeply acidophilic, finely vacuolised cytoplasm with focally deposited brownish
yellow lipochrome pigment and intracytoplasmic Reinke's crystalloids, as displayed by H&E staining in Fig. 1. No malignant histological
features were observed, i.e. tumour diameter <5 cm, lack of infiltrating border, few mitoses (mean 1 per 10 high power fields), absence of
necrosis, no vascular invasion and low tumour cell proliferation assessed with Ki-67/MIB-1 (1–2%). Immunohistochemically, vimentin and
inhibin were strongly co-expressed and cytokeratin AE1/3 showed weak and focal positivity, typical for this entity. The epithelial marker
(EMA) and germ cell markers (AFP, PLAP) were negative. PR was weakly positive in about 5% of tumour nuclei and oestrogen receptor alpha
(ERα) was negative. We examined the CYP19 expression level and found it to be strongly up-regulated (125-fold) in the tumour sample compared
with normal testis tissue (Fig. 2A). Then, we determined promoter usage by quantifying CYP19 transcript variants specific for promoter PII,
1.3, 1.4 and 1.7 in both tumour and normal tissues (Fig. 2B, C, D and E). The expression level of the PII-specific CYP19 transcript in the
tumour sample was 59-fold elevated relative to normal testis tissue. In addition, we found the transcript variants specific for promoters
1.3 and 1.7 to be up-regulated in the tumour tissue. The transcript related to promoter 1.3 displayed an 11-fold increase from normal to
tumour tissue while the levels of the variant specific for promoter 1.7 became detectable in the tumour sample contrasting undetectable
levels (after 50 amplification cycles) in the normal sample. Interestingly, the transcript variant specific for promoter 1.4 was down-
regulated in the tumour tissue (tumour to normal tissue ratio: 0.4). Three runs were performed per promoter assay, and the curves shown in
Fig. 3 are representative for these runs. The curves for RPLP2 were removed from Fig. 3 for clarity. When assuming that the qPCRs run with
the same efficacy, we found the tumour CYP19 mRNA levels deriving from promoter PII to be 77-, 1233- and 7236-fold higher than from
promoters 1.3, 1.7 and 1.4 respectively. This finding strongly indicates that PII-transcribed mRNA accounts for the majority of the total
CYP19 mRNA detected. Moreover, this finding reveals PII to be the principal promoter in both normal and tumour tissue, arguing against the
use of an alternative promoter as an explanation for elevated CYP19 levels. Addressing the potential causes for CYP19 over-expression, we
analysed the gene copy number for CYP19 using qPCR. No amplifications within the CYP19 locus were observed. In addition, due to the large
contribution from PII, we speculated whether CYP19 up-regulation could be due to either a selective amplification of the PII area or to an
activating mutation located in this promoter area. Hence, we performed a copy number analysis specifically for the region harbouring this
promoter and sequenced the PII region. No promoter amplification, mutations or polymorphisms were detected. In order to validate the data
obtained by qPCR, we analysed CYP19 at the protein level by immunohistochemistry (IHC). Anti-CYP19 (Aro 677)-stained sections revealed focal
strong cytoplasmic staining of tumour Leydig cells and negative staining of normal tissue sections (Fig. 4). Based on the lack of copy
number changes within the CYP19 gene and PII, and/or mutations in PII, we hypothesised that the CYP19 over-expression could be caused by
increased levels of a trans-acting factor. Regarding the structure of PII and its known binding sites for different transcription factors,
we analysed the mRNA levels of three potential ligand candidates: COX2, LRH-1 and SF-1. COX2 and LRH-1 were down-regulated in the tumour
compared with normal tissue (tumour to normal ratios of 0.04 and 0.08 respectively). In contrast, we found the mRNA level of SF-1 to be
6.6-fold up-regulated in the tumour tissue compared with the normal sample (Fig. 5). In order to validate the data obtained by qPCR, we
analysed SF-1 at the protein level by IHC. Anti-SF-1-stained sections showed strong nuclear staining in tumour tissue and negative staining
in normal tissue (Fig. 6). Finally, we explored potential causes of SF-1 over-expression by analysing the copy number of this gene using
MLPA, as well as sequencing the promoter region for potential activating mutations. No promoter mutations, amplifications or deletions of
SF-1 were observed. While most LCTs reveal benign characteristics, the elevated steroid production may cause disturbing virilising or
feminising symptoms. In this report, we describe a patient with an oestrogen-producing LCT revealing elevated CYP19 and SF-1 mRNA levels.
While some previous papers reported elevated oestrogen production in LCTs to be related to enhanced CYP19 mRNA levels (17, 18, 19, 20, 21),
the underlying cause of elevated CYP19 mRNA in these tumours has not been reported so far. The results presented here provide further
insight into the mechanism(s) of CYP19 up-regulation in LCTs. First, we ruled out gene amplification of the CYP19 gene as a potential cause
of mRNA up-regulation. Secondly, we evaluated the use of CYP19 promoters. While the CYP19 enzyme is coded for by a single gene, it is
subject to tissue-specific regulation due to several alternative promoters (16). Further, there is evidence that CYP19 expression may be
differentially regulated in tumours compared with their normal tissue of origin. Taking breast cancer as an example, CYP19 transcription in
normal breast tissue is mainly regulated by promoter 1.4, while transcription in breast cancer tissue is regulated by the promoters II, 1.3,
1.7 and 1.4 (30). Here, we found that the majority of the CYP19 mRNA transcripts in both normal and tumour tissue originate from PII. Thus,
the elevated CYP19 mRNA level observed in the tumour tissue was not due to alternative promoter use, in conformity with what has been
described earlier in a few other cases (18, 20). Thirdly, we measured intra-tumour mRNA levels of the ligands SF-1, LRH-1 and COX2. We found
elevated mRNA levels of SF-1 in tumour compared with normal tissue, a finding validated by the observation of elevated SF-1 protein staining
by IHC. While our results are in accordance with findings in experimental systems (22), to the best of our knowledge, SF-1 up-regulation in
LCTs has not been demonstrated in humans earlier. Notably, the SF-1 mRNA up-regulation was neither due to NR5A1 gene amplification nor due
to activating mutations in the promoter area. Moreover, we found the expression of LRH-1 and COX2 to be significantly down-regulated in
tumour tissue compared with normal tissue. LRH-1, like SF-1, has been demonstrated to bind a nuclear receptor half site in PII (31) and
regulate CYP19 expression in Leydig cells (23, 25). Our observation of SF-1 up-regulation in concert with LRH-1 down-regulation might
indicate that there is a negative feedback loop controlling the expression of these genes. In previous studies, local COX2 up-regulation has
been discussed as a potential mechanism of elevated oestrogen synthesis in inflammation and some cancers (reviewed in (32)), but we lack
evidence confirming this in vivo. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report to demonstrate a similar effect on oestrogen
synthesis through local SF-1 up-regulation. In summary, we found elevated oestrogen synthesis in an LCT to be caused by elevated PII-
transcribed CYP19 levels. Moreover, we found the enhanced CYP19 transcription to be most likely caused by elevated levels of the
transcription factor SF-1. Interestingly, CYP19 up-regulation in oestrogen-dependent breast cancer has been attributed to enhanced PII
activity (30). Our findings reveal pathological SF-1 up-regulation to be a potential mechanism enhancing local oestrogen synthesis in LCTs,
suggesting this mechanism to be explored as a potential cause of CYP19 up-regulation in other pathological conditions as well. The authors
declare that there is no conflict of interest that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research reported. This work
was supported by grants from the Norwegian Cancer Society and the Norwegian Health Region West. A H Straume is the recipient of a PhD grant
and S Knappskog received his postdoc fellowship from the Norwegian Cancer Society. All the laboratory work was performed in Mohn Cancer
Research Laboratory. Standard H&E-stained section (5 μm) of testicular Leydig cell tumour. The intra-testicular tumour (largest diameter of
1.8 cm) was sharply delimited from the testicular parenchyma. The tumour cells had abundant, deeply acidophilic, finely vacuolised cytoplasm
with focally deposited brownish yellow lipochrome pigment and intracytoplasmic Reinke's crystalloids. Scale bar=50 μm. mRNA levels of total
CYP19 and CYP19 promoter-specific transcript variants. Transcript levels of total aromatase (CYP19) and promoter-specific CYP19 transcript
variants were determined in both tumour (T) and normal (N) testes with qPCR. Triplicate runs were performed, and expression of the ribosomal
protein P2 (RPLP2) was used as reference in all the reactions. Individual in-run standard curves were used in the five different assays and
the relative concentrations as displayed on the y-axes are therefore not comparable between the assays A, B, C, D and E. We observed an
increased transcript level of (A) total CYP19 (125-fold), (B) promoter II-specific CYP19 (59-fold), (C) promoter 1.3-specific CYP19
(11-fold) and (E) promoter 1.7-specific CYP19 (not detected in the normal sample). (D) We observed a down-regulation of promoter
1.4-specific CYP19 transcript level (tumour to normal ratio: 0.4). qPCR-crossing points (Cps) for total CYP19 and CYP19 promoter-specific
transcript variants. The qPCR-Cp values for each of the promoters examined were compared in a common run. Three runs were performed per
promoter assay, and the curves shown here are representative for these runs. All CYP19 assays were run with RPLP2 as a reference; however,
the curves for RPLP2 were removed from the figure for clarity. The Cps strongly indicated that the main contribution to the total CYP19 mRNA
level was from PII. (A) Tumour sample, (B) normal tissue sample. Anti-CYP19 staining of tumour and normal tissue. Anti-CYP19 (Aro 677)
stained sections showed (A) strong cytoplasmic staining for tumour Leydig cells, and (B) negative staining in normal tissue. Scale bar: 100
μm. The mRNA levels of SF-1, COX2 and LRH-1 (tumour/normal tissue ratio) were analysed by qPCR. COX2 and LRH-1 were down-regulated in the
tumour compared with normal tissue (tumour to normal ratios of 0.04 and 0.08 respectively). In contrast, we found the mRNA level of SF-1 to
be 6.6-fold up-regulated in the tumour tissue compared with the normal sample. Anti-SF-1 staining of tumour and normal tissue. Anti-
SF-1-stained sections showed strong nuclear staining in tumour tissue (A) and negative staining in normal tissue (B). Scale bar: 100 μm.
Patient serum hormone levels (pmol/l). Primers and probes.
