Recently, single port laparoscopic surgery has been the focus of attention due to the advanced laparoscopic skills accumulated from
experience and developments in laparoscopic instruments. Herein, we present two cases of initial single port laparoscopic adrenalectomies.
Case 1 was a 38-year-old female patient diagnosed with primary hyperaldosteronism because of a the right adrenal 2.5-cm sized adenoma, and
case 2 was a 31-year-old female patient diagnosed with primary adrenal Cushing's syndrome because of a left adrenal 2.9-cm sized adenoma.
Both patients successfully underwent single port laparoscopic adrenalectomies via a transumbilical transperitoneal approach. There was no
estimated blood loss and the total operating times were 60 and 70 minutes, respectively. Both patients recovered uneventfully. We believe
that this technique presented could provide potential benefits (lesser wound pain, better cosmetic satisfaction, and shorter convalescence)
if the indications are carefully selected. The adrenal glands have gained several advantages especially because of laparoscopic surgery due
to its small size and deep location in the abdomen, and the laparoscopic adrenalectomy has emerged as a standard surgical procedure in the
vast indications of the diverse adrenal diseases.1-3 Recently, advanced laparoscopic skills accumulated from experience and new developments
in laparoscopic instruments have led to the introduction of single port laparoscopic adrenalectomy. Herein, we present two cases of initial
right and left transumbilical single port laparoscopic adrenalectomies. A 38-year-old female patient was admitted to the emergency room with
epistaxis. Evaluation revealed that she had hypokalemia (2.2 mmol/L; reference range: 3.5-5.5 mmol/L) and hypertension (220/130 mm Hg). High
serum aldosterone level (1174 pg/mL; reference range: 10-105 pg/mL) was revealed, and computed tomography (CT) discovered a 2.5-cm sized
well-defined mass on the right adrenal gland. She was diagnosed with primary hyperaldosteronism, based on the right adrenal adenoma. The
patient was placed in a left lateral kidney position, which was established by flexing the operative table with elevation of the kidney bar
on just over the iliac crest.4 A 2 cm vertical transumbilical skin incision was made and deepened into the peritoneum. The Glove port
(Nelis, Seoul, Korea) (Fig. 1A) was inserted through the incision, and the inner ring placed below the peritoneum using the Kelly and the
outer ring was rolled down to fix the port on the abdominal wall. At this point, the trocar channel for laparoscope should be placed in the
6-o'clock position (Fig. 1B). The pneumoperitoneum was established, and a 10 mm-45 cm long-45 degree forward oblique bariatric laparoscope
was inserted. A snake retractor was inserted to retract and elevate the right lobe of liver medially by the second assistant, which allowed
the right adrenal gland visible (Fig. 1B). An articulating laparoscopic coagulator was inserted to dissect the right triangular ligament and
inferior border of the liver. The retroperitoneum covering the adrenal gland and inferior vena cava was incised using the articulating hook
coagulator with an aid of a 45 cm long straight laparoscopic grasper (Fig. 2A). The adrenal vein could then be identified at the medial side
of the adrenal gland and carefully isolated using the articulating dissector (Fig. 2B) and ligated using 5 mm endo-clips (Fig. 2C). Once the
adrenal vein was controlled, the tissues around the adrenal gland were completely dissected using the articulating hook coagulator with
clipping of vasculatures (Fig. 2D). The specimen was retrived using the endopouch and the umbilical wound was closed without a drain (Fig.
3). There was no estimated blood loss and the total operating time was 60 minutes. The patient resumed an oral diet the next day and was
discharged on the 5th postoperative day in good general condition. A 31-year-old female patient was admitted with edema of the extremities,
central weight gain and muscle weakness for a period of one month. Her 24 hour urine free cortisol level was 1372 µg/day (reference range:
55.5-286.0 µg/day). A CT scan revealed a 2.9-cm sized left adrenal mass, and she was diagnosed with primary adrenal Cushing's syndrome. The
patient was placed in a right lateral kidney position and prepared in the same manner as the patient in case 1. The white line of Toldt was
dissected using an articulating laparoscopic hook coagulator with an aid of the laparoscopic grasper (Fig. 4A). The lienorenal ligament was
incised, and the dissection was deepened through the plane between the colonic mesentery and Gerota's fascia (the superomedial side of the
kidney) retracting the pancreas and spleen medially with the laparoscopic grasper (Fig. 4B). After the left renal vein was identified, the
left adrenal vein was easily found (Fig. 4C) and ligated with 5 mm endoclips. After resection of the left adrenal vein, the tissues around
the adrenal gland were completely dissected using the harmonic scalpel (Fig. 4D). The specimen was extracted using the endopouch and drain
tube was not indwelled. There was no estimated blood loss, and the total operating time was 70 minutes. The postoperative course was
uneventful and steroid was tapered. She was discharged on the 4th postoperative day. Although several published studies have introduced
single port laparoscopic adrenalectomy, the procedure is still in its infancy and have been performed via diverse methods.5-9 The
transperitoneal approach using the vertical transumbilical incision used in the present study has several advantages; 1) providing
sufficient working space and allowing early ligation of the adrenal vein6 compared with the retroperitoneal approach, 2) apparent cosmetic
effect because the scar recedes into the umbilicus, 3) easy access to open and close without muscle splitting, and 4) easy wound extension.
The transperitoneal approach could be applied in a patient with bilateral adrenal lesions or other pathologic conditions of the abdominal
organs such as the gallbladder, inguinal hernia, appendix, ovary, uterus, urinary system, and others. However, the single port laparoscopic
adrenalectomy requires some technical challenges. Working in a single and small fulcrum need instrument triangulation, which is essential
for retraction and dissection. For the establishment of proper triangulation, one articulating main working instrument and counterintuitive
movement of the long straight instrument in surgeon's other hand makes it possible. Crowding of instruments is an another major obstacle.
Therefore, we used a 45 degree forward oblique laparoscope which enabled the surgeon to avoid a parallel between instruments. A 45 cm length
bariatric laparoscope with 90 degree light cable adapter and long instruments helped to prevent external crowding, making a distance between
the hands of operator and assistants. The Glove port (Nelis, Seoul, Korea) also plays a part. The port is composed of two rings (inner ring
and outer ring to fix the port on the abdominal wall) and four trocar channels with gas insufflation and exsufflation lines. The two rings
of the Glove port offers a relatively flexible fulcrum compared with other ports, and it's four trocar channels allows proper retraction of
the adjacent organs, allowing an addition of a retractor or grasper whenever it is needed without additional port insertion: this is
important for the safety and securing proper operative field. Furthermore, the trocar channel of the Glove port enables to use 10 mm
laparoscope camera with high resolution and wide optic angle image, which makes a fine manipulation of the tissues possible and provides a
comfort operative field for the surgeon. As most of laparoscopic surgeons feel, a small disturbance in a setting of the instruments makes
the operation impossible or difficult. In that point of view, our technique suggests many tips for successful and safe single port
laparoscopic adrenalectomy, based on our accumulated experience of laparoscopic adrenalectomy and single port laparoscopic cholecystectomy
using this Glove port. We believe that the technique presented herein is technically feasible and safe. The potential benefits of this
technique should be proven in the near future with careful selection of indications. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest.
Glove port and external view of instruments of the case 1. (A) The Glove port is composed of two rings and four trocar channels with gas
insufflation and exsufflation lines. (B) The laparoscope camera is inserted through the blue trocar channel (thin arrow), which should be
placed in the 6-o'clock position. The articulating hook coagulator and long shaft grasper (arrow head) are working instruments and the snake
retractor (thick arrow) is applied for liver retraction. Operative findings of case 1. (A) The retroperitoneum covering the adrenal gland
and inferior vena cava was incised using the articulating hook coagulator with an aid of a long straight laparoscopic grasper. (B) The
adrenal vein was carefully isolated using the articulating dissector. (C) The adrenal vein was ligated using 5 mm endo-clips and resected.
(D) The tissues around the adrenal gland were completely dissected using the articulating hook coagulator with clipping of vasculatures.
Postoperative wound of the patient in case 1. Operative findings of case 2. (A) The white line of Toldt was dissected using an articulating
laparoscopic hook coagulator with an aid of the laparoscopic grasper. (B) The lienorenal ligament was incised, and the dissection was
deepened through the plane between the colonic mesentery and Gerota's fascia retracting the pancreas and spleen medially with the
laparoscopic grasper. (C) The left adrenal vein (arrow) was identified and isolated. (D) The tissues around the adrenal gland were
completely dissected using the harmonic scalpel. Sp, spleen; Panc, pancreas; RV, renal vein.
