We report a case of necrotizing fasciitis in the loin of a 76-year old man with several coexisting or past health issues, including diabetes
mellitus, hypertension, alcohol-related liver cirrhosis, gastrectomy for gastric cancer, subarachnoid hemorrhage, normal pressure
hydrocephalus, and cerebral infarction. Incision of the necrotizing fasciitis was successful, but it revealed an appendicocutaneous fistula;
thus, we performed appendectomy and fistulectomy. We think that the necrotizing fasciitis was caused by appendicitis perforation involving
the retroperitoneum, inducing the formation of an appendicocutaneous fistula. Necrotizing fasciitis and appendicocutaneous fistulae are rare
complications of appendicitis. Moreover, to our knowledge, this is the first report of fluoroscopic examination demonstrating that a primary
appendicocutaneous fistula had caused necrotizing fasciitis. Our search of the literature found 12 cases of necrotizing fasciitis caused by
preoperative appendicitis. We discuss the characteristics and findings of these cases. Necrotizing fasciitis is a potentially fatal soft
tissue infection associated with high mortality (6–76%) ; the necessity of early aggressive surgical debridement for necrotizing fasciitis
is well documented. When a pathogen enters the subcutaneous space, necrotizing fasciitis can occur. Although appendicitis is one of the soft
tissue injuries included in its etiology, appendicitis resulting in necrotizing soft tissue infection is extremely rare and often fatal . We
report a case of a primary appendicocutaneous fistula causing necrotizing fasciitis, which is an exceptionally rare event . The patient was
a 76-year-old man whose chief complaint was difficulty in walking and pain in his right loin. His coexisting disorders included diabetes
mellitus, hypertension, and alcoholic liver cirrhosis. He also had a history of gastrectomy for gastric cancer, subarachnoid hemorrhage,
normal pressure hydrocephalus, and cerebral infarction. On admission, his body temperature was 35.9°C; blood pressure, 113/80 mmHg; and
pulse rate, 95 beats/min. He reported tenderness in his right loin, but there were no reddish areas or swelling. His laboratory data on
admission were as follows: white blood cell count, 460 × 102/μl (neutrophils: 98.5%); hemoglobin, 7.5 g/dl; creatine, 3.5 mg/dl and
C-reactive protein, 25.7 mg/dl. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) showed gas and fluid collection extending from the subcutaneous layer of
his right loin to his retroperitoneal cavity (Fig. 1). Based on these findings, we diagnosed necrotizing fasciitis. No connection was found
between the necrotizing fasciitis and the gut and his appendix was not swollen. Therefore, a 10-cm incision was made in his right loin. Pus
and foul-smelling gas were released, and the subcutaneous fat was debrided. Bacterial culture of the pus grew Peptostreptococcus micros,
Peptostreptococcus sp., Prevotella disiens, and Escherichia coli. Antibiotic sensitivity tests for meropenem hydrate and clindamycin
hydrochloride were positive. We irrigated the incised tissue and gave systematic antibiotic therapy (meropenem hydrate: 1 g/day, clindamycin
hydrochloride: 1.2 g/day) for 10 days. His inflammatory response improved; however, the underlying cause of his condition could not be
investigated effectively because he suffered epileptic seizures. About 3 months after his admission, sordes were discharged from the
affected body part. Subsequently, an appendicocutaneous fistula was revealed by fluoroscopy-aided colonoscopy (Fig. 2). An open laparotomy
revealed strong adhesions between the terminal ileum and retroperitoneum. We found that the distal end of the vermiform appendix had adhered
to the retroperitoneum and a fistula had formed. Thus, we performed appendectomy and fistulectomy. The pathohistological diagnosis was
chronic acute phlegmonous appendicitis.Fig. 1Abdominal computed tomography scan (horizontal image) showed gas and fluid collection from the
subcutaneous layer to the retroperitoneal cavity, with inflammation extending into the adjacent soft tissue near the loinFig. 2Fluoroscopic-
aided colonoscopy showed the fistula (arrow) enhanced between the appendix (arrowhead) and the incised tissue Abdominal computed tomography
scan (horizontal image) showed gas and fluid collection from the subcutaneous layer to the retroperitoneal cavity, with inflammation
extending into the adjacent soft tissue near the loin Fluoroscopic-aided colonoscopy showed the fistula (arrow) enhanced between the
appendix (arrowhead) and the incised tissue His postoperative course was uneventful; however, on postoperative day 35, a urinary tract
infection developed and methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus sepsis ensued, resulting in the death of multiple organ failure on
postoperative day 48. Necrotizing fasciitis is a rare soft tissue infection, which involves the superficial fascia, subcutaneous fat, and
deep fascia. Giuliano et al. divided necrotizing fasciitis into two distinct groups, based on his analysis of bacteriologic culture results
obtained from affected patients: Type 1, which is polymicrobial and involves non-group A streptococci plus anaerobes and/or facultative
anaerobes and also often involves enterobacteriaceae; Type 2, also known as hemolytic streptococcal gangrene, in which the pathogen
population is composed of group A β-hemolytic streptococci alone or in combination with a staphylococcus bacterium . Necrotizing fasciitis
can occur in any region of the body, but is found most commonly in the abdominal wall, extremities, and perineum. Involvement of the
abdominal wall is usually a postoperative complication of abdominal surgery. Its reported causes include appendicitis, colocutaneous
fistula, incarcerated hernia, perforated viscus, renal calculi after abdominal injury, and postoperative complications [1, 2, 4]. The case
in this report was classified as type 1 and involved necrotizing fasciitis as a preoperative complication of appendicitis. We found only 12
case reports of patients with necrotizing fasciitis caused by appendicitis published in the English literature and cited in Pub Med
(Table 1) [3, 5–15]. Four of these patients were male and nine, female, and their ages ranged from 28 to 85-years old (mean age: 66-years
old). Seven of the 12 patients had a significant medical history (53.8%). It is evident that the disease occurs more frequently in patients
with complications, but it can even in young, healthy individuals. Four (30.8%) of the patients died, reinforcing that the condition is
associated with high mortality.Table 1Cases of necrotizing fasciitis caused by preoperative appendicitis reported in the English
literatureNo.AuthorYearSexAgeMedical history/coexisting diseaseAppendix conditionResults1Mazza 1987Female59NonePerforated
appendicitisDeath2Guirguis 1989Female80Atrial fibrillation, hypertension, non-insulin-dependent diabetes, prescribed four drugsGangrenous
appendix in an incarcerated femoral herniaAlive3Jacobs 1993Female44Not describedPerforated appendicitisAlive4Gerber 1994Male85Alzheimer’s
dementiaPerforated appendicitisAlive5Bobrow 1996Male63Hypertension, congestive heart failure, depression, insulin-requiring diabetes
mellitusPerforated appendicitis with abscess formationDeath6Groth 1999Female49HypertensionPerforated appendicitisAlive7Harwant
2001Female66Not describedPhlegmonous appendicitisDeath8Awe 2003Female28Not describedPerforated appendicitis with an appendicocutaneous
fistulaAlive9Mukoyama 2003Male77DepressionNecrotizing appendicitisAlive10Marron 2005Female67Not describedIncarceration of an inguinal hernia
containing the appendix alone (Amyand’s hernia)Alive11Penninga 2006Female33NonePerforated appendicitisAlive12Chen 2010Female76Congestive
heart failure, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, chronic renal insufficiencyPerforated appendicitis with abscess formationAlive13Our
case2010Male76Diabetes mellitus, alcoholic liver cirrhosis, hypertension, cerebral infarction, subarachnoid hemorrhage, normal pressure
hydrocephalus, gastric cancerPerforated appendicitis with an appendicocutaneous fistulaDeath Cases of necrotizing fasciitis caused by
preoperative appendicitis reported in the English literature A diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis is primarily based on the clinical and
physical examinations. Patients complain of severe pain, and the characteristic examination features include edema and tenderness extending
beyond the limits of cutaneous erythema, crepitus, and skin vesicles. Our patient did not complain of the typical symptoms so diagnosis was
difficult using only clinical and physical examinations; however, the CT examination is very useful for confirming the diagnosis of
necrotizing fasciitis. Kjellman defined an appendiceal fistula as the primary perforation of the appendix into an adjacent hollow viscus or
the skin and excluded fistulae resulting as sequelae of surgically treated appendicitis . The bladder is the organ most commonly associated
with appendix fistulae. Appendicocutaneous fistulae are a rare form of enterocutaneous fistulae, and very few cases have been reported [17,
18]. We did not investigate the cause of our patient’s condition, but concentrated on treating his necrotizing fasciitis and many
complications. Based on the bacterial culture results and the presence of a fistula, we assume that acute appendicitis perforated the
retroperitoneum and formed an appendicocutaneous fistula, resulting in necrotizing fasciitis. Considering the high rate of complications
shown in Table 1, we speculate that our patient’s state of ill health predisposed to the acute appendicitis causing the fistula and
necrotizing fasciitis. Prompt incision and drainage of the collected fluid and antibiotics is considered the best treatment strategy. The
cause of necrotizing fasciitis must be investigated after early debridement of all necrotic tissue and drainage of pus. In conclusion,
appendicocutaneous fistula induced by appendicitis perforating the retroperitoneum is a rare cause of necrotizing fasciitis. Surgical
debridement should be performed for the necrotizing fasciitis, the cause of which must be investigated after the patient’s condition has
improved. Fluoroscopic-aided colonoscopy is very useful for investigating the cause of necrotizing fasciitis. Acute appendicitis is one of
the most common diseases encountered in clinical practice; however, we should bear in mind that unusual complications can occur, such as
necrotizing fasciitis and gangrenous intrathoracic appendicitis caused by incarceration of diaphragmatic hernia, as reported by Schellhaas
et al. . This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
