In February 1961, Brockenbrough, Braunwald and Morrow described a new haemodynamic test in the differential diagnosis of left ventricular
outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction, based on the haemodynamic profiles of the left ventricle and aorta immediately following an extrasystolic
beat1. Despite 50 years of multiple technological advances, the observation retains a place in the discrimination of fixed versus dynamic
LVOT obstruction. A 59 year old man, with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy was admitted for cardiac catheterisation after recent
echocardiographic examination had shown a rise in LVOT gradient with progression of symptoms. Simultaneous left ventricular and aortic
pressure tracings revealed a classical Brockenbrough-Braunwald sign (figure 1) in keeping with “dynamic” LVOT obstruction. The sign is
characterised by an abrupt increase in peak-systolic LVOT gradient, coupled with a decrease in aortic pulse pressure, immediately after an
extrasystolic beat. It is distinct from “fixed” obstruction (e.g. aortic stenosis) where both the aortic pulse pressure and LV systolic
pressure increase following an extrasystolic beat (figure 2). Dynamic left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction (the Brockenbrough-
Braunwald sign). At rest, a small (10mmHg) LVOT gradient is present (a) with an aortic pulse pressure of 110mmHg (b). Following two
extrasystolic beats (VPC) there is a marked increase in LVOT gradient to 105mmHg (A) with a corresponding fall in pulse pressure to 75mmHg
(B). Fixed left ventricular outflow tract (LVOT) obstruction (In this example, aortic stenosis from the original work of Brockenbrough,
Braunwald and Morrow (1)). At rest, the LVOT gradient is measured at 80mmHg (a) with a pulse pressure of 60mmHg (b). Following an
extrasystolic beat (VPC) there is an increase in both LVOT gradient (A) and pulse pressure (B) to 115mmHg and 90mmHg respectively. Dynamic
LVOT obstruction occurs when the ejection orifice is narrowed by increased force of LV contraction2. This can occur during catecholaminergic
stress, exercise, the use of cardiac inotropes and following an extrasystolic beat (post-extrasystolic potentiation). In the latter case,
the reduced effective orifice area leads to a fall in stroke volume and the associated fall in aortic pressure. Even fifty years after its
first description, the physiological understanding of dynamic LVOT obstruction is greatly enhanced by the original work of Brockenbrough,
Braunwald and Morrow. The authors have no conflict of interest
