Editor, We wish to record an association between a severe thrombophilic state and the presence of anti-glomerular basement membrane (anti-
GBM) antibody. Case Report: An active man aged 41 noticed chest pain, haemoptysis and dark urine after a two-week lecture course late in
March 2004. On 18 April he developed headache, dim vision, memory loss and epileptic seizures. Tests showed multiple cerebral haemorrhages
and thrombosis of the anterior half of the superior sagittal sinus. Thromboses of the left brachial, axillary and subclavian veins and
superior vena cava followed the insertion of a long line and he later developed a left femoral DVT and pulmonary emboli. He was anti-
coagulated and transferred for convalescence on 28 May with an INR of 2.6 to Musgrave Park Hospital, Belfast. Despite continued anti-
coagulation he developed a right below-knee DVT and pulmonary emboli in early June, extension of the right DVT to above the knee in mid
June, and a recurrence of the left leg DVT in late July. His mother had multiple sclerosis and a cousin a lupus-like illness. A benign right
adrenal phaeochromocytoma had been removed in 2000. CRP was 38 mg/L (normal < 10) on 2nd April, 223 on 2nd May, and 111 on 28th June. Anti-
GBM antibody titre was 193 (normal < 10) on 8th June, 108 on 17th June and 33 on 29th June. Plasma homocysteine was 21.3 micromol/L (normal
5.5-13.6). No other haematological, biochemical, or immunological abnormality was found, with thrombophilia screen, anti-cardiolipin
antibody, convalescent urinary catecholamines, creatinine clearance and urinary protein in particular being normal. MIBG, CT and PET scans
showed no phaeochromocytoma or other tumour, and OGD and colonoscopy were normal. He was given prednisolone from 1st July to 12th August.
CRP was normal from 24th July onwards. Anti-GBM antibody titre was normal from 9th July onward apart from one reading of 27 on 27th July. He
made an excellent recovery. He was advised to remain on warfarin for life. Discussion: Anti-GBM antibody is not normally associated with
recurrent venous thrombosis and its presence may simply have reflected an underlying immunological abnormality of unknown origin. Both it
and the CRP responded promptly to steroid treatment. Only one thrombosis occurred after the prednisolone was started but the thrombotic
tendency was probably already diminishing. Perhaps anti-GBM antibody should be looked for in other patients with severe thrombophilic states
and high CRP. We acknowledge the excellent care he received in the Lagan Valley Hospital, Lisburn, and the Royal Victoria Hospital, Belfast,
and thank all who contributed to the good clinical outcome. The authors have no conflict of interest.
