To the Editor: The novel metallo-β-lactamase named New Delhi metallo-β-lactamase (NDM-1) was identified from Klebsiella pneumoniae and
Escherichia coli isolates in Sweden from a patient previously hospitalized in India (1). NDM-1 is spreading rapidly worldwide to nonclonally
related isolates, many of which are directly or indirectly tracked to the Indian subcontinent (2). A carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae
strain, KLZA, was isolated in May 2009 from the culture of a blood sample from of a 40-year-old man on the day after his admission to a
surgical intensive care unit of the Clinical Hospital Center in Zagreb, Croatia. The patient had been transferred after 5 days of
hospitalization in Bosnia and Herzegovina following a car accident. The clinical history mentioned antimicrobial drug treatment that did not
include carbapenems (gentamicin, metronidazole, and ceftriaxone) and no link to the Indian subcontinent. Antimicrobial drug susceptibility
testing was performed by Vitek2 (bioMérieux, Marcy-l’Etoile, France) and broth microdilution and interpreted according to the latest
documents from the European Committee on Antimicrobial Susceptibility Testing (www.eucast.org/clinical_breakpoints/, version 1.1). The
strain proved resistant to imipenem and meropenem, to all broad-spectrum cephalosporins, and to aminoglycosides and susceptible to
ciprofloxacin and tigecycline (Table). We checked for blaVIM, blaIMP, blaSPM, blaGIM, blaSIM, and blaNDM resistance genes by using PCR. A
PCR product was obtained only with the NDM primers, after being purified (QIAquick PCR Purification Kit, QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), its
sequence showed 100% identity with blaNDM-1. Strain genotyping was performed by multilocus sequence typing to determine the sequence type
(ST) of the isolate and to establish a comparison with previously reported NDM-1–producing isolates. Allelic numbers were obtained on the
basis of sequences of 7 housekeeping genes at www.pasteur.fr/recherche/genopole/PF8/mlst/Kpneumoniae.html. Multilocus sequence typing
identified K. pneumoniae KLZA as an ST25 strain, which significantly differs from the ST14 type found in the index NDM-1–producing strain
and from other isolates originating from India (1) and then in other countries. ST25 K. pneumoniae was also found in K. pneumoniae isolates
in Geneva (3). Other K. pneumoniae STs harboring NDM-1 were ST15, ST16, and ST147 (4–7). Resistance was transferred by conjugation to E.
coli J53, with selection based on growth on agar in the presence of ceftazidime (10 mg/L) and azide (100 mg/L). The conjugant T1 showed
resistance to β-lactams, including all carbapenems, as well as decreased susceptibility to ciprofloxacin. The KLZA strain and its
transconjugant harbored other determinant of resistance, namely blaCTX-M-15, blaCMY-16, and qnrA6. Plasmid incompatibility groups,
determined by a PCR-based replicon typing method, belonged to the incA/C replicon type. This report of an NDM-1–producing K. pneumoniae in
Croatia adds to those of other cases in patients from patients hospitalized in the Balkan area. The patient in this report had no apparent
link to the Indian subcontinent. In a survey conducted by the European Centre for Disease Prevention and Control to gather information about
the spread of NDM-1–producing Enterobacteriaceae in Europe and reporting cases from 13 countries during 2008–2010, five of the 55 persons
with known travel histories had traveled to the Balkan region during the month before diagnosis of their infection: 2 to Kosovo and 1 each
to Serbia, Montenegro, and Bosnia and Herzegovina. All had received hospital care in Balkan countries because of an illness or accident that
occurred during the journey (7). Two of the latter cases (4,8) and a case from Germany (9) were subsequently published. No patient had any
apparent link to the Indian subcontinent. Although the way NDM-1 isolates might have been imported to western Europe not only from the
Indian subcontinent but also from Balkan countries (10) has been highlighted, awareness of western Europe as a possible area of endemicity
remains limited. The aforementioned report from Germany, although recognizing that the patient had been repatriated after hospitalization in
Serbia, declared “no evidence about contact with people from regions where NDM-enterobacteria are endemic” (9). This limited awareness shows
the threat of neglecting to screen patients who are transferred from countries thought not to be at risk for NDM-1. Furthermore, it means
that specimen are not sent to the local reference laboratories and recognized as positive for NDM-1, thus permitting wide dissemination of
NDM-1–producing enterobacteria in the community (4). The accumulating evidence of NDM-1 from the Balkan area could suggest a possible
multifocal spread of this enzyme, with the Balkans as a possible second area of endemicity, in addition to the Indian subcontinent, and
prompts for widespread epidemiologic surveillance. Suggested citation for this article: Mazzariol A, Bošnjak Z, Ballarini P, Budimir A,
Bedenić B, Kalenić S, et al. NDM-1–producing Klebsiella pneumoniae, Croatia . Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet] 2012 Mar [date
cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1803.110389
