Pierre-Robin sequence (PRS) is defined by micro- and/or retrognathia, glossoptosis and cleft soft palate, either caused by deformational
defect or part of a malformation syndrome. Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant syndrome caused by mutations in the NF2
gene on chromosome 22q12.2. NF2 is characterized by bilateral vestibular schwannomas, spinal cord schwannomas, meningiomas and ependymomas,
and juvenile cataracts. To date, NF2 and PRS have not been described together in the same patient. We report a female with PRS
(micrognathia, cleft palate), microcephaly, ocular hypertelorism, mental retardation and bilateral hearing loss, who at age 15 was also
diagnosed with severe NF2 (bilateral cerebellopontine schwannomas and multiple extramedullary/intradural spine tumors). This is the first
published report of an individual with both diagnosed PRS and NF2. High resolution karyotype revealed 46, XX, del(22)(q12.1q12.3), FISH
confirmed a deletion encompassing NF2, and chromosomal microarray identified a 3,693 kb deletion encompassing multiple genes including NF2
and MN1 (meningioma 1). Five additional patients with craniofacial dysmorphism and deletion in chromosome 22-adjacent-to or containing NF2
were identified in PubMed and the DECIPHER clinical chromosomal database. Their shared chromosomal deletion encompassed MN1, PITPNB and
TTC28. MN1, initially cloned from a patient with meningioma, is an oncogene in murine hematopoiesis and participates as a fusion gene
(TEL/MN1) in human myeloid leukemias. Interestingly, Mn1-haploinsufficient mice have abnormal skull development and secondary cleft palate.
Additionally, Mn1 regulates maturation and function of calvarial osteoblasts and is an upstream regulator of Tbx22, a gene associated with
murine and human cleft palate. This suggests that deletion of MN1 in the six patients we describe may be causally linked to their cleft
palates and/or craniofacial abnormalities. Thus, our report describes a NF2-adjacent chromosome 22q12.2 deletion syndrome and is the first
to report association of MN1 deletion with abnormal craniofacial development and/or cleft palate in humans. Pierre-Robin sequence (PRS)
refers to a combination of micrognathia or retrognathia, glossoptosis and respiratory distress, with or without cleft palate, named after
the French stomatologist, Pierre Robin . The incidence of PRS is estimated at 1 in 8,500-14,000 births and continues to be associated with
high morbidity secondary to a compromised airway, feeding difficulties, and speech problems . While the clinical presentation is well
defined, pathogenesis is heterogeneous and not completely understood. In half or more of patients PRS occurs in isolation . Isolated PRS is
often thought to be due to intrauterine fetal constraint where extrinsic physical forces (e.g., oligohydramnios, breech position or abnormal
uterine anatomy) inhibit normal mandibular growth. Micrognathia in early fetal development may then cause the tongue to remain between the
palatal shelves, thus interfering with palate closure . However, this mechanism has been challenged by some . Isolated PRS can also be
associated with chromosomal deletions such as 2q24.1-33.3, 4q32-qter, 11q21-23.1, and 17q21-24.3 . Recent reports of isolated PRS have
additionally found mutations in highly conserved non-coding elements surrounding SOX9 at 17q24 . Frequently, PRS is associated with
additional clinical findings that may or may not constitute part of a recognized syndrome. The most common PRS-associated syndromes include
Stickler syndrome, velo-cardio-facial syndrome (VCFS, associated with chromosome 22q11.2 mutations), fetal alcohol syndrome and trisomy 18 .
Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF2) is an autosomal dominant disorder that predisposes to multiple neoplastic lesions. Birth incidence is
estimated to be between 1 in 25,000 to 1 in 40,000 births . The distinctive features of NF2 are eighth cranial nerve schwannomas, which
occur bilaterally in over 90% of NF2 patients . Patients may also develop schwannomas in other locations, particularly the spine, as well as
meningiomas, ependymomas, and juvenile cataracts. NF2 is typically caused by truncating mutations (nonsense or frameshift) of the NF2 gene
on chromosome 22q12.2, which encodes the intracellular membrane-associated tumor suppressor protein, merlin, also called schwannomin . While
most NF2 patients are diagnosed in their second or third decades of life, cataract, hearing loss, facial weakness, headache or ataxia may
occur during childhood. To date, there have been no published reports of patients diagnosed with both PRS and NF2. Here we provide the first
description of clinical association between PRS (including cleft palate) and NF2 in a patient in whom we found a 22q12.2 deletion.
Interestingly in addition to NF2, this deletion also encompasses Meningioma1 (MN1), a gene that is important in murine craniofacial
development, and whose haploinsufficiency in mice causes skull abnormalities and secondary cleft palate, but which to date, has not been
associated with malformations in humans. Our patient (PRS-NF2) was born to healthy non-consanguineous parents (mother 39 years old) at week
36 by emergency cesarean section due to premature contractions and early decelerations. Pregnancy was otherwise uncomplicated, without
report of oligohydramnios or breech presentation. Cleft palate, micrognathia, microcephaly and ocular hypertelorism were noted at birth and
the patient suffered multiple apneic episodes. For the first year she was fed by nasogastric tube due to poor weight gain. Motor development
was delayed (rolled at 8 months, sat at 10 months, walked at 18 months), and she was later diagnosed with mental retardation. From preschool
age she had bilateral severe conductive hearing loss requiring hearing aids that was attributed to bony changes associated with her
congenital dysmorphic features. Sensorineural hearing was only mildly affected at that time. At age 14 she had severe to profound mixed
hearing loss to which the bony conductance only contributed mild to moderate impairment. Her dysmorphic features, including micrognathia and
hypertelorism, persisted into early adulthood and are shown in Figure 1A-B. Patient PRS-NF2, clinical presentation. A-B) PRS-NF2 at age 17
years with severe micrognathia, ocular hypertelorism and microcephaly. Measurements: outer canthal distance 8.3 cm, 25th %ile; inner canthal
distance 4 cm, 3 S.D. above the mean; interpupillary distance 5.5 cm, 25th %ile; head circumference 52 cm, 2nd %ile, weight 41.8 kg, 2-1.4
S.D. below the mean; height 156 cm, 10th-25th %ile. C-D) MRI of brain shows bilateral cerebellopontine angle tumors (left: 3.1 × 4.6 × 6.1
cm, right: 1 × 1.2 × 1.1 cm; arrows) with mass effect by the left tumor on the brain stem, pons and cerebellum, with associated effacement
of the 4th ventricle, enlargement of the 3rd and lateral ventricles, enlarged cervical cord and tonsillar herniation. E-F) MRI of spine
shows holocord syrinx with large neurofibroma at C7-T1 (E), causing cord compression and canal stenosis. Some of the other extramedullary
intradural neurofibromas described in the text are also shown. G-H) Histological analysis of the resected left cerebellopontine angle tumor
shows spindled nuclei with dense to finely granular chromatin and cells with long tapering cytoplasmic processes with inconspicuous outer
membranes. Panel G demonstrates both short fascicular bundles with dense Antoni type A area (right upper corner) and loose hypocellular
Antoni type B area (middle to left lower corner) characteristic of schwannomas (H&E, G-100×). Panel H is 400 × magnification of the inset
from panel G). At age 15 years PRS-NF2 presented for the first time with a 2 week history of headache and ataxia. Brain MRI showed bilateral
large acoustic masses and a left trigeminal mass (Figure 1C-D). Corpus callosum was normal. Spine MRI showed multiple extramedullary
intradural lesions ranging from 1 to 7 mm in diameter (approximately 12 lesions identified from the C4-C5 level to the cauda equina; Figure
1E-F). A left-sided C7-T1 extradural lesion and a separate left-sided C7-T1 neurofibroma were also seen, and increased in size in subsequent
years. No definite intramedullary lesions were identified. A holocord syrinx, likely related to a secondary Chiari malformation (inferior
cerebellar tonsil herniation), was also evident. The left cerebellopontine tumor was partially-resected and identified as a schwannoma,
consistent with diagnosis of NF2 (Figure 1G-H). Hence, we designated her as patient PRS-NF2. The high tumor burden, tumor progression and
the patient's young age at onset of tumors fit a classification of severe NF2 . Due to the unique combination of severe NF2, facial
dysmorphism and mental retardation in patient PRS-NF2, genetic evaluation was initiated. G-banding high resolution karyotype on her blood
revealed 46, XX, del(22)(q12.2), indicative of an interstitial deletion of band q12.2 in the long arm of chromosome 22 (Figure 2A, arrow).
FISH demonstrated a deletion of at least 1,607 kb in the 22q12.2 region (Figure 2B). Parental testing was declined. Chromosomal microarray
analysis (CMA; Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array) to better delineate the mutation detected a chromosome 22q12.2 deletion of approximately 3.7 Mb
(3,693 kb) spanning the NF2 gene, with break points at base pairs 25937541 and 29635842 (UCSC Genome Browser version hg18, release name NCBI
build 36.1) (Figure 2C). 3,693 kb deletion of 22q12.2 in patient PRS-NF2. A) G-banding high resolution karyotype reveals interstitial
deletion of the light band q12.2 in the long arm of chromosome 22 (arrowhead - intact normal region; arrow - deleted region). B)
Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) studies with EWSR1 (22q12.2) dual color break apart probe revealed one entire fusion signal
missing indicating heterozygous deletion in 22q12.2. FISH studies with flanking probes: TUPLE1 (22q11.2) and the BCR(22q11.2)/ABL(9q34)
probes showed no deletions of TUPLE or BCR. C) Affymetrix Genotyping Console™ (GTC) Software display of the 22q12.2 deletion identified
using chromosomal microarray (CMA; Affymetrix Genome-wide Human SNP Array 6.0). This is the first published report of a patient diagnosed
with both PRS and NF2. Our patient's diagnosis of PRS, based on micrognathia and cleft palate, represents only part of her phenotype, which
also includes microcephaly, ocular hypertelorism and mental retardation. Molecular analysis revealed a 22q12.2 deletion spanning
approximately 3.7 Mb and encompassing the NF2 gene locus. The chromosomal microdeletion associated with velo-cardio-facial syndrome (22q11.2
locus) was intact in our patient. Therefore, we propose that we have identified a novel NF2-adjacent 22q12.2 microdeletion syndrome. Review
of the literature revealed only five other patients who presented with clinical features distinct from the standard diagnostic criteria of
NF2 and who had large 22q12 deletions encompassing the NF2 gene (Table 1, Figure 3). Of these five patients three are described by Bruder et
al . The first (JP) had a 7.4 Mb deletion of chromosome 22q12, bilateral vestibular schwannomas before the age of 25 years, mental
retardation, and grand mal seizure at age 9 years, but no report of facial dysmorphism . A second patient (p41) had NF2, facial dysmorphic
features, mental retardation, developmental delay and a large 22q12 deletion with unknown span due to an unclear proximal deletion
breakpoint . The third patient (p12) had moderate NF2, mild mental retardation, and a 530 kb deletion encompassing NF2 . Two other described
patients, pX and TC, with large deletions at chromosome 22q12 that included NF2 also had severe craniofacial dysmorphism, but were too young
to show stigmata of NF2 . The first was a 10.5 month old female (pX) with facial dysmorphism including hypertelorism, mandibular hypoplasia,
cleft palate, severe neurodevelopmental delay and 8 Mb deletion of chromosome 22q12.2-q12.3 . Her mandibular hypoplasia and cleft palate
suggest likely diagnosis of PRS. The second young patient (TC) had Toriello-Carey syndrome, including PRS with large cleft palate,
micrognathia, hypertelorism, agenesis of the corpus callosum, and 6 Mb deletion overlapping much of the deletion of pX and PRS-NF2 . Patient
TC only walked at 22 months . Patient phenotypes. Clinical features of the eight patients described in the text * Patients pX and TC were
was only 10 months old and 2 years old, respectively, at the time of the report . While their clinical description did not include features
of NF2, as would be expected at their age, their deletions did encompass the NF2 gene. ** Patient TC was described as having walked at age
22 months, but there is insufficient information to determine other measures of developmental and/or intellectual delay. NF2
neurofibromatosis 2, MR mental retardation. Chromosome 22q12.2 deletions reveal loss of MN1 in six patients with facial dysmorphism and/or
cleft palate and/or abnormal cranium. Schema of the deletions on chromosome 22q12.2 in the eight patients described in the text and Table 1.
Black bars depict the six patients with abnormal cranium and/or facial dysmorphism, and/or cleft palate. pX and TC were too young to
determine whether they manifest clinical NF2. Gray bars depict the two patients without these abnormalities but with NF2. Dashed black line
indicates the approximated proximal deletion in patient p41. Genes: NF2-purple, TTC28-green, PITPNB-orange, MN1-blue. Translucent vertical
bars align the location of the deleted genes in relation to the chromosomal deletion found in each patient. The young age at which PRS-NF2
was diagnosed with bilateral vestibular schwannomas (15 years), the high tumor burden that included multiple spinal tumors, and the
progressive nature of some of these tumors qualify her as having a severe form of NF2 . Several reports have demonstrated that
nonsense/frameshift mutations are associated with a more severe phenotype than are deletions of the NF2 gene. This difference is thought to
be due to nonsense/frameshift mutations causing a truncated protein that may have dominant negative effect, versus deletion of one copy of
the NF2 gene, that results in decreased merlin protein expression . Watson et al provided the first report on a large deletion (600-700 kb)
encompassing NF2 that was associated with mild disease without mental retardation or facial dysmorphism . Bruder et al described patient
p12, who had a 530 kb deletion encompassing NF2 (partially overlapping with the patient reported by Watson et al) and who had moderate NF2
(Figure 3, Table 1). Others support that complete deletion of the NF2 gene is usually associated with mild disease . It is therefore
interesting that PRS-NF2 (our patient) and patient JP , both of whom had large deletions encompassing the NF2 gene, had severe NF2 phenotype
(Figure 3). Bruder et al hypothesized that the high severity of NF2 in JP may be due to loss of a putative second tumor suppressor gene
within the 7.4 Mb deletion, that usually remained intact in patients with smaller chromosomal deletions that encompass all of NF2 . Deletion
of this putative tumor suppressor may have similarly changed a generally mild phenotype associated with complete deletion of NF2 to the
severe phenotype seen in PRS-NF2. The craniofacial dysmorphism in PRS-NF2 and the three other patients whose deletion overlaps her deletion
(pX, p41, TC; Table 1, Figure 3) suggested a causal link between loss of one or more genes within the overlapping region of the NF2-adjacent
22q12.2 deletion and these clinical findings. To further investigate this association we searched the public database DECIPHER, which
contains clinical information of individuals with chromosomal anomalies with the aim of increasing medical and scientific knowledge about
these chromosomal defects . DECIPHER reported two patients with chromosomal deletions in the region deleted in PRS-NF2 (Figure 3, patients
4110 and 999). Although the information is brief, there are similarities to PRS-NF2, pX, p41 and TC (Table 1): Both 4110 and 999 had mental
retardation; patient 4110 had a submucous cleft palate and patient 999 had speech delay and microcephaly. To determine genes potentially
associated with the craniofacial dysmorphism and/or palatal defects in these six patients we aligned their deletions (Figure 3). The deleted
area common to all six patients includes three recognized genes: MN1, PITPNB and TTC28, none of which has been previously linked in humans
to palatal defects, calvarial abnormalities or craniofacial dysmorphism. Of these, MN1, initially reported as a candidate gene for sporadic
meningioma and later found to be involved in acute myeloid leukemia (fusion TEL/MN1) and as an oncogene in murine hematopoiesis, was
recently implicated in murine calvarial osseous development, facial membranous bone ossification, and palatal development . Homozygous
Mn1-/- mice had calvarial bone defects with secondary cleft palate and died at birth or shortly thereafter . Heterozygous Mn1+/- mice showed
hypoplastic membranous calvarium with incomplete penetrance of cleft palate , consistent with the demonstrated role of Mn1 in maintaining
maturation and function of calvarial osteoblasts . Furthermore, Mn1 is a transcriptional activator that regulates expression of Tbx22 during
palatal development in mice . Loss of murine Tbx22, which regulates intramembranous bone formation in the posterior hard palate, causes
submucosal cleft palate with ankyloglossia in mice . Importantly, TBX22 was recently also implicated in cleft palate formation in humans in
that up to 5% of children with non-syndromic cleft palate have mutations in TBX22 , and TBX22 loss in humans is associated with X-linked
cleft palate with ankyloglossia (CPX) . Interestingly, the six patients we identified with MN1 deletion (Figure 3, Table 1) all had either
craniofacial dysmorphism and/or palatal defects. Taken together, this suggests that loss of MN1 in these six patients may be the underlying
cause for, or contributing factor to, their craniofacial dysmorphism and/or cleft palate, and supports investigation of a role for MN1 in
human craniofacial dysmorphism and/or cleft palate. This is the first report of association between haploinsufficiency of the human MN1 gene
(a gene associated with murine craniofacial development) and human craniofacial malformations, supporting a more in-depth investigation of a
role for MN1 in human craniofacial development. Additionally, the overlapping phenotype of the patients described here suggests that a
22q12.2-contiguous gene deletion syndrome should be considered in individuals with hearing loss, developmental deficits and craniofacial
dysmorphism that includes Pierre-Robin Sequence or isolated micrognathia with or without cleft palate. As microarray testing replaces
chromosome and FISH testing, large deletions such as the one found in our patient are more likely to be found when interrogating cases of
PRS. This may allow earlier diagnosis of similar contiguous gene deletions and provide for earlier surveillance of serious clinical
disorders such as NF2. Written informed permission for use and disclosure of this patient's protected health information for research
purposes and permission to obtain and release the accompanying photographs were obtained from the patient's parents. Copies of the consents
are available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. MN1: Meningioma1; NF2: Neurofibromatosis type 2; PRS: Pierre-Robin
Sequence. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors reviewed the manuscript critically for its content, revised
and edited it, and approved the final version. Additionally, specific author contributions are as follows: TBD coordinated data acquisition,
analyzed and interpreted the data and drafted the manuscript. PA S-L participated in analysis and interpretation of the molecular data,
search of the DECIPHER database and drafting of the manuscript. LMR and MDK acquired and interpreted the clinical data and drafted the
manuscript. SW performed and interpreted the karyotype and FISH analysis. AP analyzed and interpreted the MRI imaging data. HS analyzed and
interpreted the pathological slides. AE-E conceptualized, designed and coordinated the study, acquired and interpreted data, drafted the
manuscript and finalized it. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2350/13/19/prepub The authors are grateful to the patient and her parents who made this report
possible. We thank Dr. Jonathan Finlay for critically reviewing the manuscript and providing input. PA S-L is supported by the Harold Amos
Faculty Development Program through the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the CHLA-USC Child Health Research Career Development Program
(NIH K12-HD05954). AE-E is supported in part by Grayson's Gift supporting pediatric brain tumor research and by the Rachel Ann Hage Neuro-
Oncology Fund.
