Pseudomonas aeruginosa may cause venereal disease and infertility in horses. A Pseudomonas aeruginosa - carrier stallion, often unresponsive
to artificial vagina collection, was used to naturally breed mares. Semen collected from the same stallion was also used to perform
artificial inseminations. Pregnancy rates, embryo quality and incidence of uterine infection were compared between inseminated or naturally-
bred mares. P. aeruginosa was isolated from swabbing of the penis, prepuce and distal urethra of the stallion. Before being bred or
inseminated, clitoral/vestibular samples were collected from all mares, and cultured for isolation of P. aeruginosa. At the first observed
estrus, endometrial swabs were also collected. All mares subjected to natural mating (NS) were re-evaluated for P.aeruginosa by culture of
clitoral and endometrial swabs. Artificial inseminations (AI) were performed either with fresh-extended semen (11 AI/7 mares) or frozen
semen (10 AI/7 mares). The stallion was also used to breed 3 mares (4 services). For embryo collection, 2 mares were inseminated with fresh-
extended semen (1 AI/mare), and 2 additional mares were inseminated with frozen semen (2 AI/mare). Two mares were naturally-bred with a
total of 9 services, for embryo collection. All mares were examined after AI or natural service (NS), for uterine pathologies. Embryo
recoveries were attempted passing a catheter with inflatable cuff connected to a sterile flexible 2-way flushing catheter, through the
cervix. Flushed media was recovered into an Em-Con filter, and embryos searched using a stereoscope. Embryos were graded from 1 (excellent)
to 4 (degenerated/dead). Pregnancy rates obtained after NS was 50% per cycle. However, more than half of the NS resulted in uterine disease,
while uterine pathology was seen only in 22% of the time following AI. Half of the mares bred by NS got positive to P. aeruginosa.
Percentage of embryo recovery rates was identical after AI or NS (66.7%). The 4 embryos recovered after AI were classified as Grade 1, while
after NS only 2 out of the 6 recovered embryos were Grade 1. a) there was no evidence of reduced fertilization after AI or NS, b) a
numerically higher incidence of uterine disease was noticed after NS, c) venereal transmission of P. aeruginosa after NS was confirmed, d) a
lower percentage of G1 embryos may be obtained after NS. Overall, the data supports the indication for P. aeruginosa-carrier stallions to be
bred by AI rather than by NS, and raises the possibility that P. aeruginosa may affect embryo quality. Horses may harbor Pseudomonas
aeruginosa in the genitalia in percentages that ranged from 4% to 10% in mares and as high as 36% in stallions . P. aeruginosa can cause
venereal disease and infertility in the equine and it is generally accepted that stallions contaminated with this bacteria need to be
considered potential carriers of a venereal-transmitted disease , in particular when used to breed older mares . Pseudomonas aeruginosa is
frequently multi-resistant to antibiotics and is the most potent biofilm - producing pathogen of the equine reproductive tract . Washing of
the stallion penis with disinfectants may lead to unwanted colonization by yeasts and pathogenic bacteria. Therefore, artificial
insemination (AI) associated with minimum contamination techniques is considered to have a distinct advantage over natural service to
control the transmission of these bacteria . However, the effect of those techniques on the control of the disease and even the rate of
transmission by infected stallions after natural service (NS) is poorly documented and the effect of NS by P. aeruginosa-carrier stallions
in embryo quality have not been reported. In the present work we decribe the conception rates obtained after NS with a stallion carrier of
P. aeruginosa, the conception rates after AI with fresh extended and frozen/thawed semen of the same stallion, the incidence of uterine
disease with either method of breeding, as well as embryo recovery rates and embryo quality after AI and NS. Pseudomonas aeruginosa was
repeatedly (6 times) isolated from swabbing of the penis, prepuce and distal urethra in a Holstein stallion stationed at the Centre of
Animal Reproduction of Vairão, ICBAS, University of Porto. Undiluted samples from eight different ejaculates collected with artificial
vagina (Missouri model) after cleaning of the stallion's penis with warm water were negative for P. aeruginosa. Also negative were 3 samples
of semen from the same ejaculates, extended with antibiotic-free extender (E-Z Mixin®, Animal Reproduction Systems, Chino, CA, USA), and 6
samples of semen frozen with Botu-crio®, which contains amikacin. However, at the end of the breeding season one more sample collected from
the stallion's genitalia resulted positive to P. aeruginosa. Antibiotic susceptibility tested by the disk diffusion method showed that the
bacteria were multi-resistant to 21 of the 25 antibiotics used. No inflammatory cells were detected in the ejaculates and ultrasound
examination (Aloka Prosound 2 with 5 and 7.5-10 MHz probes, Aloka Holding Europe, Steinhausertrasse, Switzerland) of the bulbourethral
glands, prostate, seminal vesicles and ampullae did not evidence any sign of pathology. Successful semen collection with artificial vagina
(AV) was intermittent, and the stallion's owner expressed his desire to have his mares bred by NS when a successful collection with AV could
not be obtained, despite being aware of the potential risk of P. aeruginosa transmission. Ejaculates (n = 8) had a mean (± SD) volume of
182.5 ± 67.1 mL (gel-free), with a concentration of 103.4 ± 33.0 sperm cells/mL, with a subjective (optical microscopy) progressive motility
of 53.1% ± 5.3%. Three ejaculates evaluated by a computer assisted sperm analysis system (ISAS®, Proiser) had a progressive motility of
34.6% ± 16.8%, a total motility of 74.5% ± 14.1%, 21.1% of sperm cells with rapid movements (> 25 μm/s), a linear velocity (VSL) of 25.8 ±
8.8 μm/s, a curvilinear velocity (VCL) of 66.7 ± 23.4 μm/s, and a mean velocity (VAP) of 40.5 ± 11.6 μm/s. All mares had an intensive sports
background, were 12 to 18 years old and had not been bred for at least several years. Before being bred or inseminated with the stallion,
clitoral/vestibular samples were collected from all mares at the time of admission in the center, and cultured for isolation of P.
aeruginosa. At the first observed estrus, endometrial swabs were also collected. For clitoral/vestibular cultures, a sterile swab was
utilized and the ventral aspect of vestibule, as well as the central clitoral fossa was swabbed. Endometrial swab was performed in mid-to-
late estrus, utilizing a guarded swab (Ref. 17214-2950, Minitüb Ibérica, Barcelona, Spain), passed through the cervix into the uterine
lumen, protected in a sterile gloved hand. The swab was then retracted into its sterile sheath. Clitoral/vestibular and endometrial swabs
were placed immediately into a sterile centrifuge tube with transport medium and sent refrigerated to the university's microbiology lab, in
less than two hours. All mares subjected to natural mating with this stallion were re-evaluated for P.aeruginosa by culture of clitoral and
endometrial swabs. Mares were teased every other day using a stallion. After signs of behavioral estrus, the mares' uterus and ovaries where
examined daily by ultrasound scanning (Aloka Prosound 2, 5 and 7.5-10 MHz probes) and 1500 UI of human chorionic gonadotropin (hCG -
Chorulon®, Intervet, Portugal) was administered (iv) after detection of a follicle with a diameter ≥ 35 mm. Twenty four hours later semen
was collected after cleaning of the penis with warm water and diluted at a concentration of 50 × 106 sperm cells/mL in antibiotic-free
extender (E-Z Mixin®, Animal Reproduction Systems, Chino, CA, USA), and AI was performed with approximately 450 to 600 × 106 sperm cells
with progressive motility. Artificial insemination with frozen semen was performed within 6 hours post ovulation with approximately 300 ×
106 sperm cells with progressive motility. The stallion was also used to breed mares by NS. For that, the same management used for AI
including the cleaning of the stallion's penis was used, with the AI replaced by NS. No filling of the uterus with extender immediately
prior to NS as described originally for the minimum contamination technique was done, to allow for the confirmation of ejaculated semen in
the uterus by ultrasound scanning. Ultrasound examinations were repeated daily after AI or natural service to confirm ovulation and to
assess uterine clearance until day 4 post-ovulation. When uterine fluid was present 24 hrs post AI (delayed uterine clearance/endometritis)
mares were treated with 30 IU of oxytocin i.v. (Placentol®, CEVA, Portugal) 2 to 3 times daily and the uterus was flushed with saline. One
mg/day of Cetiofur (Excenel®, Pfizer Manufacturing, Puurs, Belgium) was infused in the uterus up till day 4 post ovulation when purulent
uterine exudates were recovered after uterine flushing, or when a neutrophile-positive uterine swabbing was obtained 24-hrs after AI, and in
all mares bred by NS. Eleven inseminations were performed with fresh-extended semen in 7 mares. Ten inseminations were performed with frozen
semen in 7 mares. Three mares were hand mated by NS to get impregnated, two of which in a single estrous cycle and other in two estrous
periods. One of these mares had turned positive to P. aeruginosa after previously being bred by NS for embryo collection. Ultrasound
examination confirmed pregnancies 12 to 16 days post ovulation. For embryo collection, 2 mares were inseminated with fresh-extended semen (1
AI/mare), and 2 additional mares were also inseminated with frozen semen (2 AI/mare), in two consecutive cycles. Two mares were allocated to
be bred by NS for embryo collection. A total of 9 natural services were performed in these 2 mares. Embryo recoveries were attempted passing
a catheter with inflatable cuff through the cervix, connected to a sterile flexible 2-way flushing catheter, after careful washing of the
vulva. Once in the body of the uterus, the cuff was inflated with 50 to 70 mL of air and the catheter pulled backwards onto the internal os
of the cervix to seal off the uterus. Between 2 and 3 Lts of warmed Ringer lactate (Laboratorio sorologico, Amadora, Portugal) for embryo
collections were infused into the uterus. The media was recovered by gravity flow into an Em-Con filter, after which the cuff was deflated
to allow the withdrawal of the catheter. The medium in the filter was than transferred to a Petri dish and embryos searched using a
stereoscope. The embryos were graded from 1 (excellent) to 4 (degenerated/dead) as reviewed by McCue et al. . All statistical procedures for
analysis of the data were computed using SAS software . Fisher's exact test was dimmed the appropriate statistic to assess the univariate
associations between the outcome of interest (positive vs negative to AI with fresh and frozen semen and NS) with pregnancy per cycle,
uterine pathology and frequencies of Grade 1 embryos. Differences were considered significant when P < 0.05. Authorization was granted, from
the owner of the animals, to use the data for a scientific publication. Pregnancy rates per cycle were not significantly different (P >
0.3). Data on pregnancy rates obtained after AI and NS are detailed in Table 1. All 7 mares inseminated with fresh-extended semen became
pregnant. Only one of these mares required post-AI treatment for delayed uterine clearance. No delayed uterine clearance was detected in the
2 mares inseminated with fresh-extended semen for embryo collection, and one embryo was collected. Pregnancy rates after AI with fresh
extended and frozen thawed semen, and after natural service * Includes mares that did not get pregnant Four of the 7 mares inseminated with
frozen semen got pregnant (57%). Embryos were recovered in 3 out of 4 flushings (75% recovery rate). Two of the 3 mares bred by NS became
pregnant. P. aeruginosa was isolated from one pregnant mare (clitoral swab) and from one of the mares that did not get pregnant (clitoral
and uterine swab). Embryos were collected in 6 out of 9 flushings (66% recovery rate). Differences in uterine pathology between mares
inseminated or subjected to NS approached significance (P = 0.07). In total, 6 cases (22%) of delayed uterine clearance/endometritis were
noted after the 27 AIs performed with fresh or frozen/thawed semen, either for pregnancy or for embryo collection, while 7 cases (54%) of
endometritis were diagnosed after the 13 natural services performed by the stallion for the establishment of pregnancies or for embryo
collection. The difference in frequency of Grade 1 embryos produced by AI or NS approached significance (P < 0.08). The embryo recovered
after AI with fresh semen was classified as a day 8, Grade 1 blastocyst. Two day 8 Grade 1 blastocysts and a day 10 Grade 1 expanded
blastocyst were obtained after insemination with frozen semen. In relation to embryo quality after natural breeding, the results were as
follow: one Grade 4 morula after a day 8 flushing, a Grade 2 morula and a grade 1 blastocyst after a day 8 flushing of a mare with two
ovulations within a 3 day interval, a Grade 2 and a Grade 4 blastocysts in two nine-day flushings, respectively, and a Grade 1 expanded
blastocyst after a day 10 flushing. Table 2 summarizes the results obtained in relation to embryo recovery rates and embryo quality after NS
or AI. Embryo recovery attempts, embryo recovery rates and embryo quality after Artificial Insemination (fresh extended plus frozen/thawed
semen) or Natural Service The results of this study were based on a limited number of observations and thus no solid inferences can be made
about the fertilizing ability of inseminated semen vs. NS for this stallion. Notwithstanding that, conception rates and embryo recovery
rates after AI with fresh and frozen semen were in the normal range obtained in our centre. Not all ejaculates were tested for the presence
of P. aeruginosa, but the fact that the bacteria was not isolated from 8 fresh, undiluted ejaculates raises the possibility that it was not
present in the semen or had a very low concentration. As no isolations were obtained in undiluted semen, none should be expected in extended
semen even if without antibiotics (E-Z Mixin®) or even less when containing antimicrobials (Botu-crio®). The somewhat lower conception rate
achieved with frozen semen may be attributed, at least in part , to degenerative conditions of the endometrium of two older mares (18 years-
old) which had a grade III Kenny's endometrial classification. Pregnancy rates as well as embryo recovery rates obtained after NS with the
infected stallion were acceptable despite having more than half of the NS resulting in uterine disease compared to only in 22% following
insemination. These positive results may have been due, at least in part, to the intensive uterine treatments performed right after every
natural service, up till day 4 post ovulation. Confirmation of venereal transmission of P. aeruginosa and was obtained with 2 out of the 4
mares bred by natural service getting positive to P. aeruginosa and thus acquiring the potential to transmit the bacteria. The majority of
recovered equine embryos were of good to excellent quality . In the present case all embryos collected after AI were of excellent quality.
However, and despite identical embryo recovery rates after AI or NS, embryo quality was decreased after the latter, compared to AI. In
cattle, the use of P. aeruginosa - contaminated semen did not result in decreased embryo quality . However, in cattle as opposed to in
horses, P. aeruginosa it is not considered to be a potentially venereal transmitted disease. Taken together the data suggest that NS with a
P. aeruginosa-carrier stallion resulted in acceptable fertilization rates, but despite aggressive post-insemination treatments originated a
higher percentage of lower quality embryos. With this carrier stallion, there was no evidence of low fertilization rates after AI or NS, but
uterine disease was noted more often after NS than after AI. Venereal transmission of P. aeruginosa after NS did occur, and was associated
with lower embryo quality after NS compared to AI. Overall, the data supports the indication for P. aeruginosa - carrier stallions to be
bred by AI rather than by NS, both when used to impregnate mares or to breed embryo donors. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. AR and TG executed the field work and collected the data, TG wrote the first draft of the manuscript, AR and JC produced the
final version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This work was partially financed by Projects
PTDC/CVT/108456/2008 (FCT) and COMPETE:FCOMP-01-0124-FEDER-009565 (FEDER). The authors appreciatively acknowledge the revision of the final
manuscript by Dr. John Edwards, College of Veterinary Medicine, Texas A&M University.
