Thyroid gland lacks squamous epithelium (except in some rare situations like embroyonic remnants or in inflammatory processes); for that
reason the primary squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of thyroid is extremely rare entity, seen only in less than 1% of all thyroid malignancies
and is considered almost fatal. So, far, only few case reports have been published in literature. Herein we present a 54 years old Saudi
female with 3 months history of progressive neck swelling and hoarse voice, who was referred to us by her primary care physician as
suspected case of anaplastic carcinoma of thyroid for radical external beam radiation therapy (EBRT). Fine Needle aspiration cytology (FNAC)
revealed squamous cell carcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) neck showed 10 × 10 cm mass in left lobe of thyroid invading trachea and skin.
Extensive staging work up ruled out the possibility of any primary site of SCC other than thyroid gland. Tumor was found unresectable and
was referred to radiation oncology. She received palliative EBRT 30 Gy in 10 fractions. After completion of EBRT, there was progression of
disease and patient died 3 months after completion of EBRT by airway compromise. Primary SCC of thyroid is rare and aggressive entity. FNAC
is reliable and effective tool for immediate diagnosis. Surgery is a curative option, but it is not always possible as most of cases present
as locally advanced with adjacent organs involvement. EBRT alone was found ineffective. Aggressive combined modality (debulking surgery,
radiation and chemotherapy) shall be considered for such cases. PUBLISHER'S NOTE: Based on the information available to BioMed Central, this
article was apparently handled and peer reviewed only by Waseem Jerjes, an Editor-in-Chief of the journal at that time. There were no other
peer reviewers. Primary squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) of thyroid is an uncommon malignancy and has poor prognosis . SCC of thyroid
constitutes less than 1% of thyroid malignancies and has been found fatal within one year of initial diagnosis . The median age is fifth and
sixth decade, but can be seen at any age. Main cause of death in these patients is secondary to respiratory interference by direct invasion
or compression of the trachea . When SCC of thyroid is diagnosed, the possibility of the tumor arising from adjacent organs (esophagus,
larynx) or representing metastatic disease from primary growth somewhere else (lungs) must be considered before concluding the malignancy as
SCC of thyroid. The etiology of SCC thyroid is uncertain as thyroid gland lacks the squamous epithelium. However three theories have been
postulated; first the embryonic nest theory suggests that squamous cells are derived from the embryonic remnants such thyroglossal duct,
thymic epithelium and ultimobronchial body . Second the metaplasia theory suggests that the environmental stimuli (inflammation and
Hashimoto's thyroiditis) result in squamous metaplasia . Third the de-differentiation theory suggests that existing papillary, follicular,
medullary and anaplastic thyroid carcinoma de-differentiate into SCC . Herein we present a case of 54 years old Saudi lady with locally
advanced primary squamous cell carcinoma of thyroid, diagnosed by fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) was treated with radiation therapy.
A 54 year old Saudi female presented in our clinic with neck swelling and hoarse voice. She had noticed this swelling for 3 months and it
had been rapidly increasing in size over a week causing dyspnoea and dysphagia to solids. Her previous medical history revealed type II
diabetes mellitus since last 10 years and hypothyroidism since last 3 years, for that she was taking thyroxin 50 micrograms daily and
metformin. She had no history of smoking and her weight was stable. On physical examination, her vitals were stable. A fixed hard neck mass
of size 8 × 8 cm was palpable in the left thyroid lobe with inflammatory surface Figure 1. There was no palpable cervical lymphadenopathy
and examination of chest, heart, nervous system and abdomen was normal. Clinical differential diagnosis was anaplastic carcinoma of thyroid.
A fixed hard neck mass of size 8 × 8 cm was palpable in the left thyroid lobe with inflammatory surface. Ultrasonography showed huge left
thyroid lobe partially cystic and solid mass of size 8.5 × 9 cm. Computed tomography (CT) neck showed 10 × 10 cm mass in left lobe of
thyroid, partially necrotic invading to adjacent skin and trachea and no lymphadenopathy was found Figure 2. Serum T4, thyroid stimulating
hormone (TSH), thyroglobulin and serum calcium were within normal limits. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of mass was performed,
which revealed squamous cell carcinoma Figure 3. Differential diagnosis was metastatic squamous cell carcinoma from another primary
location. CT chest, abdomen, pelvis, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of head and neck region, pan-endoscopy, laryngoscopy, esophagoscopy
and bone scintigraphy did not reveal any primary lesion or other metastatic disease Figure 4. Radiological stage was made as T4N0M0.
Computed tomography (CT) neck showing 10 × 10 cm mass in left lobe of thyroid, partially necrotic invading to adjacent skin and trachea and
no cervical lymphadenopathy. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) showing nests of pleomorphic cells with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm
and keratin formation along with intercellular bridging. Bone scintigraphy showing no evidence of distant bone metastasis. In a
multidisciplinary tumor (MDT) meeting it was labeled unresectable and patient was referred for external beam radiation therapy (EBRT) after
prophylactic percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) insertion. Due to retrosternal extention of disease, tracheostomy was deferred.
Patient received 30 Grays (Gy) in 10 fractions to thyroid. Post radiation therapy, there was progression size of neck mass with progressive
dyspnoea. Patient died of airway compromise 3 months of palliative EBRT. Primary SCC of the thyroid gland is an extremely rare and
aggressive entity usually presents with classic triad features; (I) rapidly enlarging mass in the older patients behaving like anaplastic
carcinoma, (II) it may be associated with other thyroid malignancies and (III) histological features of intercellular bridges and keratin .
FNAC is reliable and confirmatory tool, but it is mandatory to exclude the metastatic SCC . Treatment with surgery, radiation therapy and
chemotherapy alone has been found ineffective in previously published similar case reports, as majority of these patients present as locally
advanced cases not amenable for curative resection Table 1. The better survival rates have been achieved with aggressive combination therapy
(surgery followed by adjuvant radiation therapy (50-60 Gy) with or without chemotherapy or induction chemotherapy followed by surgery) .
Previously published case reports (2000-2012) of primary squamous cell carcinoma of thyroid Primary squamous cell carcinoma of thyroid is a
rare and aggressive entity with poor prognosis. FNAC is effective confirmatory tool, but efforts shall be made to rule out metastatic SCC
originating from other sites. Surgery, radiotherapy and chemotherapy alone are ineffective. Aggressive treatment with surgery followed by
adjuvant radiotherapy with or without chemotherapy is recommended to achieve better outcome. Written permission was taken from the patient
for publication of the case report. SCC: Squamous cell carcinoma; EBRT: External beam radiation therapy; FNAC: Fine needle aspiration
cytology; CT: Computed tomography; RAI: Radioactive iodine; TSH: Thyroid stimulating hormone; MDT: Multidisciplinary tumor meeting; PEG:
Percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy. Authors have neither potential conflict of interest nor received any grants for this case report. MAT,
MAA Manuscript preparation. RA Data Collection. MF Pathological data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
