Avelino-Silva VI conceived and coordinated the study and participated in the acquisition of data and manuscript writing. Leal FE
participated in the design of the study, data acquisition and manuscript writing. Coelho-Netto C, Cotti GC, Souza RA, Azambuja RL, and Rocha
MS participated in the acquisition of data and in manuscript writing. Kallas EG coordinated the study and participated in the acquisition of
data and in manuscript writing. Fever of unknown origin (FUO), defined as a temperature higher than 38.3°C on several occasions and lasting
longer than three weeks that is associated with a diagnosis that remains uncertain after one week of investigation (1), is a frequent
condition in the infectious diseases specialty clinic. The condition is often associated with extensive diagnostic procedures and, not
rarely, frustration for both the patient and the physician. An evidence-based approach has been used to group the causes of FUO (2) into
four general categories: infectious, rheumatic/inflammatory, neoplastic, and miscellaneous disorders (3). Infectious diseases such as
endocarditis, intra-abdominal abscesses, and tuberculosis, as well as inflammatory conditions such as temporal arteritis, adult's Still
disease, and late-onset rheumatoid arthritis, are commonly identified causes of FUO (3). However, unexpected and rare causes are sometimes
diagnosed, as reported below in a case of sclerosing mesenteritis. A 44-year-old, previously healthy man was referred to the infectious
disease specialist for the investigation of fever that had occurred in the previous 10 days and fatigue that had been present for the
previous 30 days. He reported being chronically constipated, which had worsened over the previous 30 days. The daily fever was the main
complaint and arose at any time of the day without chills or notable sweats; no weight loss was reported. The physical examination was
unremarkable, and the initial laboratory findings revealed only a low positive protein levels as determined by urinalysis and slight
increases in the levels of C-reactive protein and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate, with a normal complete blood count. Tests for
mononucleosis-like agents were negative for active infections. The patient was hospitalized for additional exams and evaluation. Fever
(38-38.5°C) was confirmed, but it disappeared right after the introduction of a nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory medication (naproxen).
Echocardiography, blood cultures, an eye fundoscopic examination, and a colonoscopy were all unremarkable. The patient was then submitted to
abdominal and pelvic computed tomography (CT) scans, which revealed a mural thickness in the sigmoid colon with nodular densities in
adjacent adipose tissue (Figure 1A). Large numbers of lymph nodes up to 1.0 cm in diameter were observed near the inferior mesenteric
vessels. An intestinal lymphoma was initially suspected, and the patient was submitted to abdominal laparoscopic surgery with
rectosigmoidectomy and lymph node resection. The intraoperative aspect was of a chronic inflammatory lesion affecting the entire mural
thickness and adjacent tissues in addition to moderate dilation of the proximal colon (Figure 1B). After hematoxylin-eosin staining, the
histopathologic exam revealed extensive lymphoplasmocytic inflammatory infiltrate with collagenic deposition involving the mesenteric
adipocytes (Figures 1C and 1D). Staining for IgG4 was negative in the inflamed tissue. After the surgical procedure, clinical recovery was
adequate, and there was no rebound of fever or weakness after discontinuation of the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug. At a follow-up
visit eight months later, the patient remained asymptomatic and no longer complained of intestinal bowel symptoms or fever. Sclerosing
mesenteritis is a rare idiopathic condition characterized by a non-neoplastic inflammatory process in the mesenteric fat (4). Men are more
commonly affected than women, and the incidence increases in middle-aged and older adults (5). The clinical presentation and radiological
findings are nonspecific, which renders the condition a diagnostic challenge for surgeons and internists. Granulomatous and neoplastic
diseases are part of the differential diagnosis for sclerosing mesenteritis on clinical and radiological grounds (6). Therefore,
histopathology remains the main diagnostic tool (7). The histological findings are fibrosis, myofibroblasts, and inflammatory cell
infiltration of the fatty tissue with degeneration or fat necrosis; aggregations of lipid-laden foamy macrophages are also present (4,8).
The process can be predominantly inflammatory with fat tissue inflammation and necrosis (mesenteric panniculitis) or predominantly fibrotic,
which leads to retractile mesenteritis (7-9). Sclerosing mesenteritis is sometimes observed in association with a multisystem clinical
syndrome affecting the pancreas, biliary tract, liver, kidneys, and lungs; this condition has been described as “IgG4-related systemic
sclerosing disease”, and one of the most common histopathological features is the presence of IgG4+ plasma cells within involved tissues
(10). However, cases of sclerosing mesenteritis have also been described in the absence of other sites of involvement. The likely causal
relationship of the disease and FUO in this case is supported by the lack of any other diagnosis, the confirmatory histological findings of
sclerosing mesenteritis, and the remission of fever with nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drug use and the surgical removal of involved
tissue. At a follow-up visit, the patient remained asymptomatic, suggesting that the local process was the only cause of FUO. Case reports
of sclerosing mesenteritis as a cause of FUO are rare, and we were able to identify only seven cases after a thorough review of the medical
literature (Table 1). The best treatment for sclerosing mesenteritis remains unclear. Asymptomatic or mild clinical forms may sometimes be
left untreated with spontaneous recovery (8). Surgical resection is required for patients with intestinal obstruction and perforation, and
immunosuppressive therapy with corticosteroids, thalidomide, and other drugs has been recommended by some authors (7,8). In the present
case, surgical removal was able to limit the process. The prognosis is mainly dependent on a correct diagnosis and on the extension of the
fibrotic process (9). Fever has not often been described as a symptom of sclerosing mesenteritis. In this case report, a long-lasting fever
was the clinical hallmark of FUO. Although rare, physicians should be aware of this possibility. This report is not a result of a specific
funded grant. We acknowledge Professor Christopher D.M. Fletcher for his contribution to the histopathologic diagnosis. No potential
conflict of interest was reported. A: Abdominal and pelvic CT scan showing mural thickening of the sigmoid colon with densification of the
adjacent mesenteric fat (white arrow) and an increased number of lymph nodes up to 1.0 cm in diameter near the inferior mesenteric vessels;
B: Surgical photography showing the inflamed sigmoid; C and D: microscopic exam after hematoxylin-eosin staining showing an extensive
lymphoplasmocytic inflammatory infiltrate with collagenic deposition involving the mesenteric adipocytes at 100x (C) and 400x (D)
magnifications. Case reports of sclerosing mesenteritis as a cause of FUO. M = male; F = female; CT = computed tomography;
USG = ultrasonography; NMR = nuclear magnetic resonance.
