Torsades de Pointes is a life-threatening arrhythmia associated with a number of causes, but is very rare among endocrinologic disorders. We
report a case of male pseudohermaphroditism with hyperaldosteronism due to a 17α-hydroxylase deficiency presented with sudden cardiac
arrest. Deficiency of 17α-hydroxylase is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which causes congenital adrenal hyperplasia.1 Defects in the
synthesis of cortisol and compensatory hypersecretion of adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) stimulate the synthesis of a large quantity of
11-deoxycorticosterone (DOC) and corticosterone in adrenal glands. High concentrations of DOC, which is a potent mineralocorticoid, lead to
hyperaldosteronism which results in hypertension, hypokalemia, and a suppressed renin-angiotensin system. In gonads, the absence of
17α-hydroxylase activity prohibits the synthesis of androgens, causing pseudohermaphroditism in males and sexual infantilism with primary
hypogonadism in females.2 Aldosterone excess with subsequent hypokalemia leads to the prolongation of the QT interval,3,4 which may increase
the risk of fatal arrhythmias such as polymorphic ventricular tachycardia (Torsades de Pointes), although these are very rare in subjects
with hyperaldosteronism. We report a case of male pseudohermaphroditism due to 17α-hydroxylase deficiency presented with malignant
arrhythmias, Torsades de Pointes. The 31-year-old woman was presented to our emergency room with an episode of resuscitated sudden cardiac
arrest. She suddenly collapsed at her office, where, upon arrival, the emergency medical technician documented no pulse, and cardiopulmonary
resuscitation was started and continued until the patient reached our hospital. An initial electrocardiogram revealed a normal sinus rhythm
with left ventricular hypertrophy and a markedly prolonged QT interval (QTc=635 ms) (Fig. 1A). In the intensive care unit, recurrent
episodes of Torsades de Pointes developed, which were terminated spontaneously (Fig. 1B) or by DC shock (Fig. 1C). Echocardiographic
assessment revealed severe left ventricular hypertrophy with normal systolic function. The patient did have a past history of primary
amenorrhea and had been treated for hypertension with hydrochlorothiazide and valsartan. Initial laboratory evaluation revealed severe
hypokalemia of 1.6 mmol/L (reference, 3.5-5.5 mmol/L). Plasma renin activity was decreased (0.13 ng/mL/hr; reference, 0.15-2.23 ng/mL/hr),
but aldosterone level was elevated (270.1 pg/dL; reference, 29.9-158.8 pg/dL). Plasma dehydroepiandrosterone (0.8 ng/mL; reference, 1.8-12.5
ng/mL) and cortisol (4.93 ng/mL; reference, 70-250 ng/mL) were decreased, while plasma 11-hydroxycorticosterone (76.0 ug/dL; reference,
8.0-30.0 ug/dL) and ACTH (420.5 pg/mL; reference, 7.2-63.3 pg/mL) were markedly elevated. Follicle stimulating hormone (30.9 mIU/mL;
reference, 1.3-8.1 mIU/mL) and luteinizing hormone (19.6 mIU/mL; reference, 1.0-5.3 mIU/mL) were elevated; however, testosterone was
undetectable. Abdominal computed tomography showed bilateral hyperplasia of adrenal glands (Fig. 2). Chromosome analysis for karyotype
showed a 46, XY normal male karyotype, and genomic polymerase chain reaction direct sequencing for CYP17A1 confirmed the diagnosis of
17α-hydroxylase deficiency. After treatment with parenteral replacement of potassium and dexamethasone concurrent with antihypertensive
medications, including captopril (300 mg/day), cilnidipine (20 mg/day), and spironolactone (100 mg/day), no more Torsades de Pointes was
noted and QTc was normalized (Fig. 3). We report a case of male pseudohermaphroditism with life-threatening arrhythmia as the first
manifested symptom. A deficiency of 17α-hydroxylase is well known to cause male pseudohermaphroditism, combined with hyperaldosteronism. In
this case report, hyperaldosteronism due to 17α-hydroxylase deficiency and diuretics might cause severe hypokalemia, leading to Torsades de
Pointes. Low extracellular potassium produces hyperpolarization and prolongation of the action potential duration, resulting in Torsades de
Pointes triggered activity.5 Moreover, a hypertrophic heart is known to be attributable to baseline increased transmural dispersion of
repolarization and is more susceptible to develop Torsades de Pointes.6,7 Accordingly, this patient was at a very high risk of life-
threatening arrhythmia and, surprisingly, her first presenting symptom was sudden cardiac arrest. Although the majority of cases of sudden
cardiac arrest are caused by underlying cardiac disease vulnerable to fatal ventricular arrhythmia, including myocardial infarction with a
low ejection fraction or congestive heart failure and electrical disorders,8 several endocrinologic disorders seem to present with sudden
cardiac death. In the literature, fatal sudden cardiac arrest as a first manifested symptom was reported in patients with endocrinologic
disorders such as anterior pituitary insufficiency and aldosterone producing adrenal adenoma.9,10 Although all of the endocrinologic
disorders associated with sudden arrest show a similar mechanism of QT prolongation caused by hypokalemia, their underlying diseases are
likely to be heterogeneous. Male pseudohermaphroditism is a rare endocrinologic disorder and sudden cardiac arrest is a very unusual
presenting symptom of this disease. To our knowledge, this is the first report of male pseudohermaphroditism presented with sudden cardiac
arrest. This case demonstrates that it is important to consider endocrinologic disorders among various causes in the diagnostic work-up,
when a patient presents sudden cardiac arrest with a long QT interval. This study was supported in part by a Korean Healthcare Technology
Research and Develop grant number A085136, a faculty research grant (6-2009-0176) and a CMB-YUHAN research grant (7-2009-0583) of Yonsei
University College of Medicine (BJ). The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. ECG and arterial blood pressure recording. (A) The
12-lead ECG at the emergency room shows a markedly prolonged QT interval (QTc=635 ms). (B) Spontaneous termination of Torsades de Pointes.
Note the short-long-short initiation of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia. (C) Torsades de Pointes with hemodynamic compromise, which was
terminated by biphasic shock of 100 J. The ABP waveform became flat after the occurrence of Torsades de Pointes. ABP, arterial blood
pressure; ECG, electrocardiogram. Abdominal computed tomography showed bilateral hyperplasia of adrenal glands (arrows). Clinical course of
the patient. Serial variations in plasma ACTH, systolic blood pressure (SBP), corrected QT interval (QTc), serum cortisol, and potassium
(K+) are shown. ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; HD, hospital day.
