Spinal tuberculosis or Pott's disease of the spine associated with pleural involvement has long intrigued researchers regarding the nature
and pathogenesis of their occurrence. We describe two interesting patients of spinal tuberculosis, one with cervical and another with
thoracic spine disease, with pleural involvement, which developed after lateral extension of cold abscess involving the parietal pleura, and
without any evidence of pulmonary disease. We present two interesting patients with tuberculous lesions of two different parts of the spine
in whom magnetic resonance imaging revealed unusual pleural involvement. In both cases, the diagnosis of tuberculosis was confirmed by
demonstration of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in the paraspinal collection aspirated under computed tomography guidance. Figure 1 Figure 1.(A)
Sagittal T2-weighed short tau inversion recovery image showing involvement of the sixth and seventh cervical and first thoracic vertebrae
with abscess in the pre-vertebral space (arrow). Compression over the corresponding segments of the spinal cord is also evident. (B) Coronal
T2- weighted short tau inversion recovery image showing circumferential involvement of the pleura (arrow heads) and prominent horizontal
fissure (arrow) with a large paravertebral abscess (asterisk). shows involvement of the sixth and seventh cervical vertebrae with the first
thoracic vertebra in a 27-year-old lady with abscess tracking into the pre-vertebral space and involving the pleura on the right side.
Figure 2 Figure 2.(A) Sagittal T2-weighed short tau inversion recovery image showing involvement of ninth, tenth, and eleventh thoracic
vertebrae with abscess in the pre-vertebral space (arrow). Compression over the corresponding segments of the spinal cord is also evident.
(B) Coronal T2- weighted short tau inversion recovery image showing circumferential involvement of the pleura (arrow heads) and prominent
horizontal fissure (arrow) with paravertebral abscess (asterisk). Short tau inversion recovery sequence is a sensitive technique for fluid,
whether within soft tissue or bone, around joints, or along tendon sheaths (including soft tissue and marrow edema). shows diffuse left-
sided pleural involvement in a 35-year-old man with tuberculosis of the ninth, tenth, and eleventh thoracic vertebrae. (A) Sagittal
T2-weighed short tau inversion recovery image showing involvement of the sixth and seventh cervical and first thoracic vertebrae with
abscess in the pre-vertebral space (arrow). Compression over the corresponding segments of the spinal cord is also evident. (B) Coronal T2-
weighted short tau inversion recovery image showing circumferential involvement of the pleura (arrow heads) and prominent horizontal fissure
(arrow) with a large paravertebral abscess (asterisk). (A) Sagittal T2-weighed short tau inversion recovery image showing involvement of
ninth, tenth, and eleventh thoracic vertebrae with abscess in the pre-vertebral space (arrow). Compression over the corresponding segments
of the spinal cord is also evident. (B) Coronal T2- weighted short tau inversion recovery image showing circumferential involvement of the
pleura (arrow heads) and prominent horizontal fissure (arrow) with paravertebral abscess (asterisk). Short tau inversion recovery sequence
is a sensitive technique for fluid, whether within soft tissue or bone, around joints, or along tendon sheaths (including soft tissue and
marrow edema). Spinal tuberculosis or Pott's disease of the spine associated with pleural involvement has for long intrigued the researchers
regarding the nature and pathogenesis of their occurrence.1 Pleural effusion secondary to large extra-pleural extension of paravertebral
abscess has been described in a series published in 1955. The author suggested that pleural involvement occurred either before or after the
development of the spinal lesion, but rarely without pulmonary disease or without operative interventions.2 Our two patients represent a
rare occurrence of pleural involvement, which developed concomitantly with lateral extension of cold abscess involving the parietal pleura
but without any evidence of pulmonary disease. Authors' addresses: Hardeep Singh Malhotra, Ravindra Kumar Garg, and Tushar Premraj Raut,
Department of Neurology, Chhatrapati Shahuji Maharaj Medical University, Lucknow, Uttar Pradesh, India, E-mails: drhsmalhotra@gmail.com,
garg50@yahoo.com, and tushar.27r@gmail.com.
