A 56-year-old right-handed man suffered from progressive apraxia of speech (AOS), characterized by agrammatism and buccofacial apraxia. He
also became mute at the later stages of the disease progression. At autopsy, the left precentral gyrus, pars opercularis, and hippocampus
showed severe atrophy. Pick bodies and Pick cells were observed. In this report, we also review previous case reports of AOS. Pick's disease
is among the most commonly associated of the major diseases. Brain lesions associated with AOS may be found in regions such as the
precentral gyrus and the pars opercularis in the left hemisphere. Apraxia of speech (AOS) is a rare disturbance in speech output that does
not involve impairment of auditory or reading comprehension or writing (Darley, 1968). This disorder usually results from strokes (Lecours &
Lhermitte, 1976). Aside from a seminal review on AOS in patients with neurodegenerative disorders (Duffy, 2006), only a few case reports
have documented AOS diagnoses and pathological evaluations in sufficient clinical detail (Broussolle et al., 1996; Fukui, Sugita, Kawamura,
Shiota, & Nakano, 1996; Sakurai et al., 1998). In this paper, we describe the case of a patient who clinically presented with progressive
AOS and was pathologically confirmed as having Pick's disease (PiD) with Pick bodies (PB) (PiDPB). In addition, we review previously
reported cases on the basis of two main criteria. First, sufficient clinical descriptions were required to allow our neuropsychologist
(M.B.) to determine whether the speech disorder described above was indeed AOS. Second, there needed to be sufficiently detailed
pathological examinations performed to determine the pathological diagnosis and the anatomical distributions of lesions in affected brain
regions. The purpose of this study was to determine the clinico-anatomical relationship between AOS and the original lesion responsible for
AOS. Furthermore, we discuss the underlying pathological spectrum of AOS. A 56-year-old right-handed Japanese male office worker often
repeated the word ‘well’ in conversations in 1985. He had no prior medical history of neurological diseases, nor did his family. He noted
difficulties in finding words and in ‘expressing his thoughts’. In April 1991, his first physical examination revealed no remarkable
findings. Neurological and neuropsychological examinations showed that his speech was not effortful, but was slightly slow, and he
frequently stopped talking to search for speech sounds. His speech was agrammatic, with marked ‘phonemic paraphasia’, and his vowels too
were either substituted, omitted, added, or distorted. It was difficult to determine whether these errors were phonological or phonetic
(Code, 1998). His speech was so dysprosodic that it gave an impression of having a ‘foreign accent’, although not full-blown. This
articulatory impairment featured inconsistent distortions, omissions, and substitutions of phonemic realization, which are characteristics
of AOS (Code, 1998; Sugishita et al., 1987). The patient exhibited a mild writing disturbance, which consisted of phonemic paragraphia. His
examination results, obtained from the Japanese version of the Western Aphasia Battery (WAB), are shown in Table 1. He scored a 160/165 on
the Token Test. His score on the Standard Language Test for Aphasia (SLTA) also showed impaired repetition and dictation of sentences,
whereas his auditory and written comprehension and his dictation of single words were relatively well preserved. These results suggest that
the cardinal speech problem was an impairment of phonetic production, and his language profile at this stage indicated AOS with agrammatism.
His performance on the formal intelligence test was slightly poor, mainly owing to his language impairment. His performance IQ was
determined using the Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised (WAIS-R), and he scored a 96. The Rey's Complex Figure Test, the Illinois
Test of Psycholinguistic Abilities (ITPA), and the Motor Sequence Test were also performed. The results from these exams showed that his
intelligence was almost normal, without any memory disturbance. The patient also had buccofacial apraxia. Routine laboratory tests showed
mostly unremarkable findings, except for a chronic hepatitis C viral infection. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) study demonstrated an
enlargement of the left Sylvian fissure and atrophy of the left superior temporal gyrus, left central operculum, and insular cortex (Figure
1). Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) showed abnormalities of the left frontotemporal regions, particularly in the
perisylvian region (Figure 2). Serial evaluations using the Japanese version of the WAB from 1992 to 1997 revealed that his auditory and
reading comprehension remained relatively well preserved, whereas his repetition, word fluency, and writing had progressively worsened
(Table 1). However, there was no apparent detection of a deterioration of personality or intelligence. In July 1997, the patient exhibited
severe AOS, and he became functionally mute. He also presented with both ideomotor and ideational apraxia. In December 1997, his
bradykinesia and dysphagia had progressively worsened; however, he was independent in his daily living until July 1998, when he was admitted
to our department for aspiration pneumonia. His neurological examination indicated that he was mute because he was only capable of producing
the ‘ouch’ or ‘uhh-uhh’ sounds; however, he remained ambulant, recognized people, and gave the clinical impression of being able to
understand simple questions. He remained polite to the hospital staff and exhibited appropriate behavior. Owing to the progression of his
liver dysfunction and frequent aspiration pneumonia, he died in February 1999 at the age of 69, 13 years after the onset of the disease.
Magnetic resonance (MR) T1-weighted images taken in May 1991. The right side of the brain is indicated by an R. MR images show the
enlargement of the left Sylvian fissure and atrophy of the superior temporal gyrus, operculum, and insular cortex in the left hemisphere.
Single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) images taken in May 1991. The left side of the brain is indicated by an L, and the right
side by an R. SPECT images reveal decreases in cerebral blood flow in the left frontotemporal lesions, particularly in the perisylvian
lesions. Patient scores in the Japanese version of the Western Aphasia Battery (WAB) Note: AQ, Aphasia Quotient; CQ, Cortical Quotient. The
fresh brain weighed 1068 g. A gross external examination (Figure 3A–D) revealed that the left hemisphere showed severe focal atrophy of the
pars opercularis, the lower part of the precentral gyrus, the anterior part of the temporal lobe, and the superior frontal gyrus. In
contrast, the left middle and inferior temporal gyri were relatively well preserved. In the right hemisphere, the medial part of the
temporal lobe was mildly atrophic, and the superior frontal gyrus showed moderate atrophy. The bilateral postcentral areas, brainstem and
cerebellum were spared. Macroscopic appearance and coronal sections of the brain. The left side of the brain is indicated by an L, and the
right side by an R. Although the left frontal and temporal cortices exhibited generalized atrophy, the precentral gyrus, pars opercularis,
superior temporal gyrus, temporal pole, and hippocampus in the left hemisphere demonstrated severe focal atrophy. In contrast, the parietal
and occipital cortices were comparatively well preserved. The right-sided counterparts of the frontal and temporal lobes showed milder
changes (E–G, anterior–posterior). Coronal sections of the fixed brain (Figure 3E–G) exhibited severe dilatation of the lateral ventricles
and third ventricle and severe atrophy extending from the left temporal pole to the mesial part of the left parahippocampus, the left
amygdala, and also the left insular cortex. Moreover, atrophy of the left hippocampus reached the outside of the subiculum. In contrast, the
left transverse temporal gyrus was relatively well preserved. In the right hemisphere, the uncus, the anterior part of the superior temporal
gyrus, and the parahippocampal gyrus were moderately atrophic. There were no abnormalities identified in the basal ganglia, thalamus,
brainstem nuclei, or cerebellum. Hematoxylin-eosin staining revealed neuronal loss, rarefaction of neuropils, and gliosis, mainly in the
second and third layers of the cortex. The changes were prominent in the superior frontal gyrus, pars opercularis, insular cortex, inferior
temporal gyrus, and parahippocampus of the left hemisphere (Figure 4). Although the amygdala showed rarefaction of neuropil and gliosis,
other basal ganglia areas showed unremarkable findings. Pigmented cells in the locus coeruleus and substantia nigra were well preserved, and
no Lewy bodies were identified. Neurofibrillary tangles and senile plaques were absent from the cortex, hippocampus, and brainstem.
Argyrophilic neuronal inclusions (PBs) and ballooned neurons (Pick cells) (Figure 5) were observed in the limbic areas and the atrophic
cerebral cortices (Figure 4). The pathological diagnosis was PiDPB. Distribution of cerebral cortical lesions. The lesions of neuronal loss,
rarefaction of neuropils, and gliosis are classified into three categories: slight (hatched), moderate (sparsely cross-hatched), and severe
(densely cross-hatched). A normal cerebral cortex is also shown (white). The black dots represent Pick bodies (PBs). The lesions where there
are numerous dots demonstrate a high PB density. The left side of the brain is indicated by an L, and the right side by an R. The pars
opercularis, precentral gyrus, temporal pole, insular cortex, and the limbic areas (amygdala and hippocampus) in the left hemisphere show
severe cortical changes. Pathological findings of the cingulate gyrus and the amygdale of the dominant hemisphere. (A) Hematoxylin-eosin
staining reveals many ballooned neurons (Pick cells) in the left cingulate gyrus. (B) Bodian staining shows many argyrophilic neuronal
inclusions (Pick bodies) in the left amygdala. The patient presented with a 6-year history of slowly progressive speech disturbance that
began with AOS, marked by agrammatism and buccofacial apraxia, which was overlaid with bradykinesia, dysphagia, ideomotor, and ideational
apraxia over the next 7 years. His general intelligence was relatively well preserved for at least 10 years after disease onset, but it
showed a progressive decline over the course of his illness. Atrophy was prominent in the pars opercularis, precentral gyrus, superior
temporal gyrus, temporal pole, and the limbic areas in the dominant hemisphere. The pathological findings of this patient were consistent
with those of PiD Type A (Constantinidis, Richard, & Tissot, 1974). This patient was unique because of the specific combination of AOS as
the initial symptom, detailed documentation of pathological findings correlating with his clinical features, and the detailed
neuropsychological dataset that was recorded throughout the course of his illness. To the best of our knowledge, two other case reports and
one case series are worth assessing with respect to the relationship between AOS as the initial symptom and the distribution of lesions
(Broussolle et al., 1996; Fukui et al., 1996; Sakurai et al., 1998) (Tables 2.1, 2.2), and we have identified several clinicopathological
similarities between our case and the Fukui et al. (1996) report. Summary of the clinical features of reviewed cases Note: BFA, buccofacial
apraxia; IMA, ideomotor apraxia; MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; CT, computed tomography; SP, SPECT (single-photon emission CT); NA, not
available. Summary of pathological features of reviewed cases Note: BW, brain weight, Dx, diagnosis; LB, Lewy bodies; NL, neuronal loss;
NFT, neurofibirillary tangles; RN, rarefaction of neuropils; PB, Pick bodies; PiDPB, Pick's disease with PB; PFAS, progressive focal atrophy
syndrome; SP, senile plaques; *Left hemisphere was available for microscopic examination in No. 2 and 3. Many studies have attempted to
localize the brain lesions that contribute to AOS. Several case studies (Fox, Kasner, Chatterjee, & Chalela, 2001; Lecours et al., 1976;
Mori, Yamadori, & Furumoto, 1989; Tonkonogy & Goodglass, 1981) have demonstrated that the inferior portion of the left precentral gyrus is
responsible for AOS. Other studies reported by Dronkers (1996) suggest that AOS patients have lesions in the precentral gyrus of the insula.
However, Hillis et al. (2004) have demonstrated that AOS is associated with structural damage or low blood flow in the left posterior
inferior frontal gyrus. Josephs et al. (2006) suggest that the premotor and supplemental motor cortices are the main regions associated with
AOS. Because of these conflicting findings, we decided to review case reports with sufficiently detailed clinico-anatomical information
(Tables 2.1, 2.2) to determine associations between patients identified with AOS and the distribution of lesions. We found that atrophy of
the anterior operculum was demonstrated in all four documented cases, including ours, and atrophy of the left precentral gyrus in three of
the four reviewed cases. On the basis of these findings, the following conclusion was made: AOS results from the anterior perisylvian
cortical lesion (Ziegler, 2008), particularly the precentral gyrus and anterior operculum of the dominant hemisphere. Moreover, we found
similarities of pathological distribution between our case and that reported by Fukui et al. (1996). In both reports, focal atrophies were
prominent in the left pars opercularis, lower precentral gyrus, frontal convexity, temporal pole, and superior temporal gyrus of the left
hemisphere. Sakurai et al. (1998) reported a case where atrophy was restricted to the left precentral gyrus and frontal operculum, and
neuronal loss was prominent in the pars opercularis, temporal tip, and anterior insula. In PiDPB marked with AOS, these areas may be
causative lesions that lead to disease progression. Over the past few decades, there have been a series of published cases that have
attempted to characterize the etiology of aphasia. Here, we reviewed a series of AOS case reports (Tables 2.1, 2.2). Of the three cases with
pathological diagnoses of PiDPB, one exhibited progressive focal atrophy syndrome (Broussolle et al., 1996; Fukui et al., 1996; Sakurai et
al., 1998). Josephs et al. (2006) reported that, of the seven cases reviewed in which AOS was the sole or dominant feature, five had a
pathological diagnosis of PSP, one had a diagnosis of corticobasal degeneration (CBD), and one had a diagnosis of PiDPB. Furthermore, three
progressive nonfluent aphasia (PNFA)–AOS cases, in which PNFA was more prominent than AOS, had CBD. The atypical distribution of the PSP
pathology in these cases was more widespread, affecting cortical regions (Josephs et al., 2006). Although PSP is reported to be the most
predominant etiology, based on previous reports, PiDPB can account for more cases than PSP. Because AOS syndrome results from the damage of
the perisylvian cortex and adjacent substructures, one may speculate that AOS syndrome is directly associated with PiDPB and atypical
PSP/CBD.
