Academic Editor: Mei Tian Multiple benign osteolytic lesions are very hard to differentiate from disseminated bone metastasis. Whole-body
bone scintigraphy (WBBS) with technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP) demonstrates multiple lesions with increased uptake in any
bone involved. Even combined with medical history and multiple imaging results, such as MRI and CT, the clinical diagnosis of metastasis
lesion remains as a challenge. These clinical characteristics are similar to multiple malignant bone metastases and therefore affect the
following treatment procedures. In this paper, we analyzed multiple benign osteolytic lesions, like eosinophilic granuloma (EG), multiple
myeloma (MM), disseminated tuberculosis, fibrous dysplasia, or enchondroma, occurring in our daily clinical work and concluded that
additional attention should be paid before giving the diagnosis of multiple bone metastases. Radioisotopes play an important role in the
diagnosis of benign and malignant bone lesions. Whole-body bone scintigraphy (WBBS) with technetium-99m methylene diphosphonate (Tc-99m MDP)
is widely available and commonly used to detect metastases from malignant tumors because it is more sensitive than X-rays and allows the
whole body to be surveyed. However, multiple benign osteolytic lesions are very similar with bone metastasis in findings of bone
scintigraphy. Before sending out the report of multiple metastases, benign osteolytic lesions should be considered according to other
imaging findings, detailed medical history, or even the preliminary pathology result. In this pictorial review, we retrospectively studied
the WBBS with Tc-99m MDP findings in 5 patients of selected multiple benign osteolytic lesions. For adult patients, 15 mCi Tc-99m MDP was
administered intravenously. For pediatric patients, a smaller dose was used dependent on patient body weight: adult dose/70 ∗ patient weight
(kg). A 41-year-old man with left upper arm pain for 3 months was admitted for left humerus fracture after a tumble. All of images of Tc-99m
MDP WBBS (Figure 1), left shoulder joint MRI (Figure 2), and thoracic CT (Figure 3) indicated bone metastases. Left humerus resection and
internal fixation were performed thereafter. EG was diagnosed definitely by histopathological examination (positive: CD1a, S-100, LCA, Ki67
(6%) and negative: CD68, CD79a, CD138, and P53). The patient received 4 courses of chemotherapy (steroids, vinca alkaloids, and
antimetabolites) before discharge. Two years later, the patient was admitted again in our hospital for right femoral fracture caused by an
accidental fall. Another Tc-99m MDP WBBS (Figure 4) was performed, and similar findings (except for deterioration of right femur site) were
observed as shown in the previous one (Figure 1). A 45-year-old female patient suffered chest pain for 2 months that deteriorated recently.
Blood routine examination found WBS 4.0 ∗ 109/L, Hb 43 g/L and Plt 243 ∗ 109/L. Bone marrow biopsy demonstrated plasma cell myeloma. Serum
immunoglobulin (IgG) and β2-microglobulin (MG) were 43.59 g/L and 18.58 mg/L, respectively, and both were above the normal level. Tc-99m MDP
WBBS (Figure 5) was performed before chemotherapy and found multiple bones accumulated the agent abnormally. Clinical diagnosis was multiple
myeloma IgG stage III; then, chemotherapy of VAD regimen was given to this patient. A 25-year-old male patient suffered cough and chest pain
for 1 month, and the pain extended to back and waist recently. Diffused military nodules with small cavities in both lungs, and multiple
bone destructions in thoracic and lumbar vertebra were found on chest CT suggesting of disseminated tuberculosis. Tc-99m MDP WBBS (Figure 6)
demonstrated high uptake in multiple bones. The patient felt remission after the treatment of antituberculosis drugs. An 18-year-old female
patient suffered right hip pain after long walking for this year. She received sectional resection of right femur and allograft for the
reason of fibrous dysplasia when she was only 7 years old. X-ray showed benign tumor changes in upper section of right femur, considering
fibrous dysplasia. WBBS (Figure 7) before operation found abnormal accumulation in right femur, tibia, and cotyle. Then operation of right
femur tumor resection and internal fixation was performed. A 14-year-old male patient found swelling of interphalangeal joint in left middle
finger 11 years ago. Then the swelling extended to left ring and little fingers. CR and MRI illustrated multiple enchondroma in left hand.
Before the operation, Tc-99m MDP WBBS (Figure 8) found additional bones involvement. This patient received sectional resection of multiple
lesions in left hand and allograft the next day. Histopathological examination after operation was cracked cartilage tissue which is in
accordance with multiple enchondroma. EG, formerly termed histiocytosis X, is the most common and benign form of the Langerhans cell
histiocytosis which includes another two forms: the Hand-Schüller-Christian disease (the triad of diabetes insipidus, exophthalmos, and
lytic bone lesions) and the Letterer-Siwe syndrome (a rapidly-progressing multisystem disease with poor prognosis). EG predominantly affects
children and adolescents although it can be found in any age. Solitary lesion is more common than multiple lesions. In our cases, a 41-year-
old man with EG admitted for pathologic fracture demonstrated multiple malignant metastases like bone involvement on both scintigraphic and
radiographic imaging. Although multiple bones were involved in this case with EG, we can easily differentiate it from the Hand-Schüller-
Christian disease for the absence of main characteristics of diabetes insipidus and exophthalmos. The etiology of EG is still unknown. The
skeletal involvement is frequent and generally demonstrates as destroyed solitary or multiple bones in any age , while the visceral
involvement is rare and often occurs at age below 2 years old . Localized pain is always the first symptom of bone involvement, but it can
also be presented as pathologic fractures after injuries. The most commonly involved bones are skull, mandible, pelvis, spine, ribs, and
long bones. Radiographic imaging is the main modality for the diagnosis of EG, although the radiographic characteristics of EG are
considerably different according to the site and the activity of the lesion . Bone destruction in granulation tissue forming areas of
osteolysis is the main pathological characteristic of EG and may involve any portion of any bone . Typical finding on Tc-99m MDP WBBS in the
patients with EG is the lesion with intensive radioactive accumulation with a photopenic center , because the bone involvement in EG always
begins from osteolysis that arise in the bone marrow cavity and following periosteal reaction. However, all the manifestations of the
lesions with increased, decreased, or normal accumulation on Tc-99m MDP WBBS could be observed according to the amount of viable residual or
reactive bone tissue. Those can significantly accumulate the radioactive tracer [6, 8]. In EG, Tc-99m MDP WBBS is generally less sensitive
than radiography in the detection of osseous lesions . The findings in this patient confirmed this opinion. However, Tc-99m MDP WBBS may
play roles in searching additional bone lesions and monitoring therapeutic response and is helpful when the radiographs are normal or
equivocal . In addition, Tc-99m MDP WBBS has the advantage of detecting the asymptomatic bone abnormalities possibly missed by other imaging
modalities. It is suggested that combination of various imaging modalities might be helpful to make a definite diagnosis when bone biopsy or
operation is not available . In this patient, all images of Tc-99m MDP WBBS, MRI, and CT demonstrated the characteristics of disseminated
bone metastases although EG was finally diagnosed by postoperative pathological examination. Multiple bone lesions in EG are relatively rare
because solitary lesion predominates over multiple lesions, and only around 10% of solitary lesion may eventually develop into multiple
lesions . EG is a benign inflammatory disease, and the activity of this disease may remain stable during follow-up . In this case, the
Tc-99m MDP WBBS performed 2 year later revealed only mild alternations in a wide range of bone involvement as shown in the previous one
except the increased radioactive accumulation in fractured right femur, confirming the benignity of EG. Multiple myeloma is a plasma cell
dyscrasia of the bone marrow. It can be mistaken radiographically for metastatic bone disease because it presents with multiple osteolytic
lesions or diffuse osteopenia. WBBS often fails to demonstrate a hyperconcentration at sites of skeletal involvement by myeloma despite
extensive disease by radiography. This occurs because reactive bone formation is not a feature of the disease; this might be due to release
of an inactivation factor by the tumor. Multiple myeloma is a common tumor of elderly patients. It is usually confirmed by serology or bone
marrow examination. Radiographs typically show either a solitary or multifocal osteolytic pattern. However, skeletal survey is not always a
useful screening method, so other imaging modalities such as CT and WBBS are often used. WBBS is sensitive in 75% of patients with myeloma,
but only about 10% of lesions are shown . Therefore, WBBS may be helpful when there is focal pain and a negative radiograph. Skeletal TB
occurs in only very small part of patients with TB, and therefore the diagnosis is often difficult due to the nonspecific nature of the
clinical presentation . The spine, particularly the thoracolumbar spine, is the most common site of skeletal involvement of TB. Back pain
can affect anyone and in general can originate from the bone (vertebrae), muscles, ligaments, tendons, or nerves. Tuberculosis of the spine
is one of the causes for back pain, and early diagnosis and management can prevent complications. Imaging plays an important role in the
diagnosis and management of spinal infections. Infection and inflammation of the spine are complex. The intense vertebra uptake on WBBS is
nonspecific, so the differential diagnosis would include bone metastases from lung cancer . It is important to obtain material for culture
and sensitivity in the absence of confirmed pulmonary TB for a definitive diagnosis . Fibrous dysplasia is a benign tumor in which masses of
fibroblasts and islands of cartilage replace bone marrow in one or more locations. It is commonly found in young patients with mild bone
pain or as an incidental finding, although the lesions may persist into late adulthood. The main value of WBBS in fibrous dysplasia is to
show polyostotic involvement, but sometimes these lesions may show only minimal uptake or even no uptake . From our case of multiple fibrous
dysplasia, the differentiation from bone metastasis can be made by combining with their past medical history. Enchondroma is a common benign
lesion that appears in the medullary portion of bone and is composed chiefly of mature hyaline cartilage. The solitary enchondroma has a
predilection for the phalanges and metacarpals of the hand. Multiple enchondromas, or enchondromatosis, is an anomaly usually disclosed in
infancy. When one side of the body exhibits greater involvement than the other, the condition is called Ollier's disease. The combination of
enchondromatosis and soft tissue hemangiomata is referred to as Maffucci's syndrome. Malignant transformation into chondrosarcoma can occur,
especially in multiple enchondromatosis. Chondrosarcoma is exceedingly rare in the phalanges. Enchondroma can have high FDG and MDP uptake
on scintigraphic imaging and occasionally may mimic metastatic lesions in patients being screened for metastatic disease . Taking one with
another, WBBS is an effective and economic method in detecting multiple enchondromatosis. WBBS is that of intense radioactive imaging agent
uptake in the osteolytic lesions. Given the low specificity of Tc-99m MDP WBBS and its sensitivity to increased bone remodeling from any
cause, whether benign or malignant, the presence of multiple benign osteolytic lesions renders the interpretation indistinguishable from
malignant metastasis. Therefore, we should be watchful of giving the diagnosis of disseminated bone metastasis during our daily work;
furthermore, detailed past medical history and various laboratory results might be helpful for accurate diagnosis. This work is partly
sponsored by Grants from the Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation of China (Z2110230), Health Bureau of Zhejiang Province
(2010ZA075, 2011ZDA013), National Science Foundation of China (NSFC) (no. 81101023, 81170306, 81173468), and Ministry of Science and
Technology of China (2011CB504400, 2012BAI13B06). Tc-99m MDP WBBS of the first admission found multiple lesions with intensive radioactive
accumulation in skull, mandible, left humerus, scapulas, ribs, vertebras, pelvis, femurs, and tibias. MRI of left shoulder demonstrated
isointensity and mild-hypo-intensity signal on T1-weighted images (A), hyperintensity signal on T2-weighted images (B), and inhomogenily
enhanced after Gd-DTPA administration (C) in humeral midshaft and surrounding soft tissues. These abnormal signals prompted bone malignancy
and pathologic fracture. Chest CT of bone window showed eroded bone destruction with sclerotic edge in scapulas and ribs ((A): right
scapula; (B): left scapula and the left 5th posterior rib) and patchy high density in thoracic vertebrae (C) However, the amount of the
lesions was greater than that in Tc-99m MDP WBBS within the corresponding thoracic area. The bone lesions on CT with intensive Tc-99m MDP
accumulation prompted multiple bone metastases. Tc-99m MDP WBBS of the second admission 2 years later showed multiple bone involvement
observed as similar to those found in the previous Tc-99m MDP WBBS except the increased radioactive accumulation in fractured right femur.
Tc-99m MDP WBBS before chemotherapy found a wide range of abnormal radioactive accumulation in ribs, thoracic and lumbar vertebra, sacrum,
and pelvis. Tc-99m MDP WBBS showed ribs, spine, and pelvis intensively accumulated the agent and was very similar to the changes of multiple
bone metastasis. Tc-99m MDP WBBS found abnormal intensive accumulation in right femur, tibia, and cotyle suggesting tumor, and decreased
accumulation in upper right femur due to the previous operation. Tc-99m MDP WBBS before operation demonstrated intensive radioactive
accumulation in multiple metacarpophalangeal and interphalangeal joints of left hand, left ulna, left radius, and right femur.
