Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (LC) refers to diffuse seeding of the leptomeninges by tumor metastases. The clinical presentation may differ
and the diagnosis may be difficult especially when cancer has not yet been diagnosed. We report a case of LC, where the clinical picture and
a specific change in cerebrospinal fluid suggested the diagnosis of a prion disease. Leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (LC) refers to diffuse
seeding of the leptomeninges by tumor metastases. This condition was first reported in 1870 by Eberth, although this term was commonly used
only in the early 20th century. LC occurs in an estimated 20 % of patients diagnosed with cancer; in adults, it is most frequently found in
breast and lung carcinoma as well as in melanoma. In a few cases, prostate cancer also can spread to the leptomeninges. In children,
hematogenous malignancies and primitive neuroectodermal tumors are the most common cause of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis, but pilocytic
astrocytomas (which are generally low grade) occasionally can demonstrate this type of aggressive behavior [1, 2]. Patients typically
present with symptoms caused by the effects of tumor emboli on subarachnoid nerve roots, direct invasion into the spinal cord or the brain,
or cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) obstruction. Signs and symptoms referable to one or several cranial or spinal nerve roots are the typical
presentation of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis (such condition), associated soon with headache, confusion and other type of neurological
involvement [3, 4]. However, the clinical presentation may be different and the diagnosis is difficult, especially in the cases where the
diagnosis of cancer is lacking (Table 1).Table 1Incidence of clinical symptoms and signs of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis [3, 4]Clinical
featuresFrequency (%)Cranial nerve palsies (any)75Cerebral signs66Headache66Spinal nerves60Mental changes45Limb weakness44Difficulty
walking33Meningism21Sensory abnormalities21Nausea–vomiting20Cerebellal signs16Fits12Dizziness9Autonomic dysfunction Incidence of clinical
symptoms and signs of leptomeningeal carcinomatosis [3, 4] The outlook is grim; untreated patients are unlikely to survive more than
4–6 weeks. Intrathecal chemotherapy and/or radiation can increase the survival to some extent, depending partly on the cell type of the
involved tumor, but most patients succumb to their disease within 6–8 months [1, 2, 3–13]. We report a case of LC, the clinical picture of
which associated with a peculiar change of CSF suggested in vita the diagnosis of a prion disease. A 56-year-old woman affected by
depression and obsessive compulsive traits, migraine and fibromyalgia for years came to our observation because of headache and marked
thymic deflection, inability to work and weight loss. She had been admitted to a private clinic and subjected to brain MRI that did not show
any abnormal findings (Figs. 1, 2); she was discharged after 10 days with the diagnosis of depressed mood. Despite the drug therapy, the
symptoms worsened and became associated with impoverishment of language, confusion, and severe postural instability. The patient was then
hospitalized in the neurological department of the city hospital.Fig. 1MRI (GE-Philips 1.5T) Patient’s axial T2 weighted normal
imageFig. 2MRI (GE-Philips 1.5T) Patient’s axial T2 weighted image (top of the head: absence of meningeal abnormalities) MRI (GE-Philips
1.5T) Patient’s axial T2 weighted normal image MRI (GE-Philips 1.5T) Patient’s axial T2 weighted image (top of the head: absence of
meningeal abnormalities) On admission, the clinical picture was mainly characterized by a severe cognitive decline, dysarthria, ataxic gait,
plastic hypertonia and postural instability. Blood tests showed elevated IES (45 mm), a slight increase of CEA (4.9 ng/ml). VDRL/TPHA and
HIV tests were negative; total body TC did not reveal any evidences of inflammatory, vascular or neoplastic processes, mainly neither
abdominal nor pulmonary cancer. The electroencephalogram showed a marked slowing of background activity, but neither paroxistic activities
(P, PO, PPO) nor periodic sharp wave complexes were found. Visual evoked potential (VEP) were markedly altered bilaterally. The patient was
again subjected to brain MRI with contrast showed no abnormalities of the brain parenchyma (Figs. 1, 2). The clinical condition impaired
rapidly within the following days; confusion and disturbances of alertness were rapidly substituted by stupor and coma, but she never showed
tremor or seizure. The CSF collected by lumbar puncture appeared clear; the chemical and physical examination demonstrated a slight increase
of proteins (57.5 mg/dl) with reduction of glucose (13 mg/dl). No cells were detected and cytology did not show any atypical cells. CSF was
positive for 14-3-3 protein and a content of Tau protein of >4,000 pg/ml. In conclusion, the data available to us were the following: a
rapid cognitive decline with cerebellar and extrapyramidal signs, akinetic mutism, MRI negative for parenchymal abnormalities and positivity
of CSF for 14-3-3 and Tau proteins. The 14-3-3 protein is present in many inflammatory, degenerative and paraneoplastic diseases; when there
is the clinical suspicion of prion disease, the presence of the 14-3-3 protein associated with Tau protein in excess of 1,000 pg/ml, assumes
a positive diagnostic-predictive significance in 97 % of patients. For this reason, we made the diagnosis of “Probable Creutzfeldt–Jakob
disease” in accordance with the latest diagnostic criteria. On 9 December, after 26 days of hospitalization, the patient dies. Histological
examination performed on the left cerebral hemisphere. The cerebral hemispheres have a normal configuration. The leptomeninges appear smooth
and transparent. The grooves are slightly dilated and the cortical convolutions are slightly atrophic. No significant areas of softening.
There are no signs of huncus or cingulate gyrus’s herniation. The blood vessels examined show a normal configuration and mild
atherosclerosis. After coronal resection of the cerebral hemisphere, the cortex appears macroscopically intact.The ventricular system is not
deformed or dilated. The semioval center is normal. The hippocampus, amygdala, basal ganglia and cerebellum appear normal. The locus
coeruleus and substantia nigra have normal pigmentation. In all sections of the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum cellular
infiltration in neoplastic nature that affects the meninges is observed. The infiltrate consists of cells with moderate nuclear
pleomorphism, medium size, with clearly visible cytoplasm, polygonal shape or cylindrical, often arranged in nests aspect of “epithelial”.
The infiltration of tumor cells is almost restricted to meningeal spaces. Immunohistochemical investigations were carried out using
antibodies specific for the following proteins: GFAP, CKWS (broad-spectrum cytokeratins) and Ki67. The neoplastic cells were GFAP negative
and CKWS positive. Ki67 staining showed a positive mitotic index in approximately 5 % of neoplastic cells. The Pursuit of pathological prion
protein (WB) gave negative results. Histological examination performed on the left cerebral hemisphere showed an histology of neoplastic
meningeal infiltration of epithelial nature. Meningeal carcinomatosis is a rare complication that occurs in 20 % of cancer patients many of
whom suffering from lung or breast cancer [3, 4, 14–16]. The clinical presentation is heterogeneous and in many cases, that is difficult to
recognize as expression of meningeal pathology: the diagnosis is based on the involvement of one or more cranial nerve associated with
headache and confusion, due to raised intracranial pressure and is sustained by the demonstration of malignant cells in the CSF. The
diagnostic management of LC is based on the CSF examination with cytology and biochemical analysis as well as on the radiological
investigation, mainly with MRI . Basically, CSF examination includes the fluid cytology, estimation of the opening pressure, as well as
measurement of protein and glucose concentrations. The measurement of other biochemical markers is less reliable. Lumbar puncture for CSF
cytology remains the standard diagnostic procedure. The demonstration of malignant cells in the CSF is still the cornerstone of the final
diagnosis. An adequate sample of 5 ml or more increases the percentage of positive examination. A positive CSF cytology is found on the
initial lumbar puncture in 50–70 % and in nearly all cases after three attempts. False-positive cytologies are associated with infectious or
inflammatory diseases demonstrating reactive lymphocytes. Increased CSF opening pressure is found in 50–70 % of the patients and depends on
the extent of the leptomeningeal involvement. Elevated CSF protein and low glucose are observed in approximately 75 and 40 % of the cases,
respectively. In our case, the cytology was negative both in the first and the second CSF prelevament. MRI and CT demonstrate multiple
masses within the subarachnoid space, hydrocephalus without a discernible cause, or diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement [1, 2, 10–12]. The
latter enhancement pattern has been referred to as cake icing or zuckerguss (German for sugar icing) and can be found in the brain, spine,
or both, as shown in the figures. As the diagnostic accuracy of lumbar puncture is only 50–60 % after a single LP and 90 % after three LPs,
MRI is considered complementary and can be invaluable, detecting up to 50 % of cases with false-negative LPs [1, 2, 4, 8]. In our case,
neither CSF abnormalities nor MRI alteration addressed us to the diagnosis of MC; on the contrary, the clinical presentation with rapidly
progressing cognitive failure preceded by cerebellar and extrapyramidal signs suggested the diagnosis of Creutzfeldt–Jakob disease mainly by
the demonstration of markers such as 14-3-3 and Tau proteins. The diagnostic procedure was correct even though the diagnosis was wrong and
other most sophisticated diagnostic methods, except the brain biopsy, would not achieved the diagnosis. We did not find the principal tumour
although the patient has been submitted to neuroimaging and CSF examinations. The most likely hypothesis could be that the primary tumour
was a misunderstood malignant melanoma, confirmed by the negativity of total body CT scan. In this case report, only brain biopsy addressed
the correct diagnosis. Due to the peculiar features that characterize the clinical picture and the dramatic evolution, we think this case is
worthy to be published as short case report. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which
permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
