Familial hemiplegic migraine (FHM) type 1 is a rare monogenic dominant autosomal disease due to CACNA1A gene mutations. Besides the
classical phenotype, mutations on CACNA1A gene are associated with a broader spectrum of clinical features including cerebellar ataxia,
making FHM1 a complex channelopathy. We report the case of a patient carrying the p.Arg583Gln mutation affected by hemiplegic migraine and
late onset ataxia and we performed a literature review about the clinical features of p.Arg583Gln. Although p.Arg583Gln mutations are
associated with a heterogeneous phenotype, carriers present cerebellar signs which consisted generally in ataxia and dysmetria, with
intention tremor appearing mostly in advanced age, often progressive and permanent. The heterogeneous spectrum of CACNA1A gene mutations
probably causes sporadic hemiplegic migraine (SHM) to be misdiagnosed. Given the therapeutic opportunities, SHM/FHM1 should be considered in
differential diagnosis of patients with cerebellar ataxia and migraine with aura. Familial/sporadic hemiplegic migraine (FHM/SHM) is a rare
migraine with aura subtype, usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner . Mutations on CACNA1A on chromosome 19p13, (FHM1), ATP1A2 on
chromosome 1q23 (FHM2) and SCN1A genes on chromosome 2q24 (FHM3) were identified as causing FHM [2, 3]. Missense mutations in the CACNA1A
gene, which encodes for the alpha1 subunit of a P/Q type voltage-gated calcium channel, account for 50–70 % of FHM patients . Besides
hemiplegic migraine, FHM1 is associated with a broad spectrum of clinical features [3, 4]. Cerebellar signs and symptoms, ranging from
nystagmus to progressive, usually late-onset, mild ataxia, both during or independently from FHM/SHM attacks, are also not uncommon in FHM1
families . They have been identified in up to 20–40 % of FHM1 families and can become permanent and associated with cerebellar atrophy at
cerebral MRI in 60 % of affected individuals. Pathogenesis of cerebellar involvement remains controversial. It has been shown that different
FHM mutations induce changes in single-channel function and expression leading to opposite effects on Ca2+ influx. Particularly, some
authors observed that only mutations causing a reduction of Ca2+ influx are associated with cerebellar ataxia in addition to the classical
FHM phenotype, whereas in other papers cerebellar signs have been associated with a gain of function in Ca2+ receptor determining lower
threshold and lower depolarization level [4, 10]. We report a 54-year-old woman, among the population of the Lombardia GENS project
(http://www.clinicaltrial.gov), affected by migraine with aura and ataxia carrying the p.Arg583Gln missense substitution in the CACNA1A gene
focusing, through a review literature, on the clinical phenotype of mutation carriers. A 54-year-old woman (PV) was admitted in 2009 to the
Stroke Unit of Azienda Ospedaliera Ospedale di Circolo di Busto Arsizio, Saronno, Tradate for recurrent attacks of right temporal migraine
followed by a sudden sequence of left hemiparesis, associated with a decreased level of consciousness, dysarthria, vision loss and sensory
deficit alternating in limb side. The neurological examination at admission revealed a mild depression and a slight cognitive deficit with a
Minimental State Examination Score (MMSE) of 27/30. No cranial nerve deficits, including dysarthria and nystagmus, were detected. A slight
left hemiparesis, mild hypotonia in the four limbs and alternating arm deficit in sensation were also observed. Cerebellar tasks showed a
bilateral dysmetria pattern at the nose–finger and heel–shin test and inaccuracies were observed in fast alternating hand movements
(dysdiadochokinesia). Truncal ataxia and intention tremor were not detected. Stance was achievable without aid although the loss of balance
and gait was ataxic, but she was able to walk without help. From early childhood she suffered from migraine with aura with a bi-monthly
frequency, mainly characterised by vision loss, sensory deficit in the right limbs and sometimes, left hemiparesis. Aura usually developed
over a period of 5 min and lasted less than 60 min. No triggers for symptoms onset or worsening were identified. Biochemistry, inflammatory
markers, thyroid hormones, cyanocobalamin dosage and autoantibodies search (anti GAD, anti-glyadin, anti-endomysium, anti neuronal) were
negative. ECG, echocardiography and epiaortic and transcranial ultrasound examination were normal too. The brain CT scan performed in the
acute phase demonstrated a hypodense round lesion proximal to the left silvian fissure. The cerebral MRI confirmed the left hyperintense
round lesion at T2 and FLAIR weighted images, consistent with an old small ischemic infarction and revealed a mild cerebellar atrophy
(Fig. 1). Electroencephalogram showed unspecific abnormalities on the left hemisphere, consistent with lesional activity. During the
hospitalization, the patient’s left strength deficit as well as migraine progressively improved whereas cerebellar deficits remained stable.
Since the patient did not reported other hemiplegic attacks at 1 year follow-up, no therapy was administered. Familial history was not
completely available given the premature death of both parents. One brother had an undocumented mental retardation. However, his
neurological examination was negative except for a bradypsychia.Fig. 1a, b Coronal and axial T2-weighted images showing the small vascular
lesion near the left silvian scissure (red arrow). c, d Axial and sagittal T1 weighted images demonstrating cerebellar atrophy with deeper
sulci on (color figure online) a, b Coronal and axial T2-weighted images showing the small vascular lesion near the left silvian scissure
(red arrow). c, d Axial and sagittal T1 weighted images demonstrating cerebellar atrophy with deeper sulci on (color figure online) Given
the suspicion of sporadic hemiplegic migraine, a genetic analysis for FHM1 and FHM2 was performed after obtaining informed consent. Sequence
analysis of CACNA1A gene revealed the presence of the heterozygous variant c.1748G>A, resulting in the p.Arg583Gln missense substitution in
the putative protein, already described in association with hemiplegic migraine and ataxia (http://grenada.lumc.nl/LOVD2/FHM/home.php). We
report a patient presenting with migraine with aura and cerebellar signs and symptoms, carrying the p.Arg583Gln mutation in the CACNA1A
gene. This mutation is located in S4-transmembrane segments of a protein domain II, which is considered the channel voltage sensor segment.
The substitution of an arginine by a neutral glutamine determines a change in the 3D structure and in the electrical activity of the P/Q
calcium channel, bringing a shift in activation and inactivation dependence to a more negative potential. It is also thought that the
inactivation recovery of p.Arg583Gln mutant is slower than normal, leading to accumulation of many inactivated calcium channels during
depolarization. The mutation has been already described in about 30 patients with hemiplegic migraine (HM) and ataxia , who are summarized
in Table 1. Phenotype of p.Arg583Gln carriers seems to be quite heterogeneous and not always including cerebellar ataxia. Some isolated and
familial carriers have been reported to be asymptomatic or presenting migraine without ataxia . This finding is consistent with an
incomplete disease penetrance or alternatively with the late disease onset [3, 6], given the young age of most asymptomatic cases. However,
despite the heterogeneous phenotypic spectrum, some common characteristics can be drawn. First, cerebellar signs appeared mostly in advanced
age and mainly consisted in ataxia and dysmetria with intention tremor, whereas nystagmus was never described [3, 7]. Second, in most cases
cerebellar signs are progressive and permanent making the phenotype of p.Arg583Gln mutations more similar to SCA6 than EA2. Lastly, except
for a few cases in which migraine was triggered by fever or head trauma, in most cases, a provoking event was not detectable [5, 7]. Our
case, except for relatively small attack duration, does not differ from other literature observations. However, the small number of reported
patients and the lack of neuroimaging data make it difficult to define a clearer p.Arg583Gln phenotype. Interestingly, acetazolamide seems
to be effective in p.Arg583Gln symptomatic carriers . The availability of therapeutic options supports genetic screening for FHM/SHM also in
atypical form of hemiplegic migraine with cerebellar symptoms after exclusion of other possible causes.Table 1CACNA1A R583Q reported
mutation in FHM/SHM associated with ataxia in literatureAuthorsType of studyN ptsAge of MA onset range/meanMigraine/headache
FeaturesFrequencyDuration (h)Cerebellar sign and symptomsOther clinical featuresAge at onset of cerebellar signsCerebral MRI/CTBattistini et
al. Family3/1117–40 yearsTypical paroxysmal manifestations of HM. 1 pt asymptomatic for HM12–24/yearMinutes–72 hPermanent cerebellar ataxia1
proband with episodes of severe migraine associated with confusion and fever60 yearsCerebellar atrophyDucros et al.
Population16/11711.7 ± 8.1 mean ± DS13/16 HMN.r.0.5–125 hPermanent cerebellar ataxia. In 13/16 ptsAtaxia without nystagmusN.r.N.r.Terwindt
et al. Population1/2713 yearsMigraine attacks with aphasia, hemiparesis, and confusionN.r.<1 hPermanent cerebellar ataxia–N.r.NormalAlonso
et al. Family17 pts from a family3–23 years9/17 pts with HM2/year24 hNoEpisodes of altered consciousness, focal neurological deficits
precipitated or not by minor head trauma16–50 yearsCerebellar atrophyThomsen et al. Population based11/2915–44 yearsHM in 8 pts with nausea,
vomiting, photofobia and phonofobia. Headache always accompanying attacks1–8/year1–48 hPermanent cerebellar ataxia in 13 ptsThree non
affected relatives carried the mutationN.r.Cerebellar atrophy in 1 ptOur caseCase report113 yearsHM with transient left hemiparesis, vision
loss and paresthesia in right limbs6/year<1Permanent cerebellar ataxiaDecreased level of consciousness, dysarthria, vision loss and sensory
deficit alternating in limb side50 yearsCerebellar atrophyN.r. not reported, MA migraine with aura, FHM/SHM familial/sporadic hemiplegic
migraine, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, CT computer tomography CACNA1A R583Q reported mutation in FHM/SHM associated with ataxia in
literature N.r. not reported, MA migraine with aura, FHM/SHM familial/sporadic hemiplegic migraine, MRI magnetic resonance imaging, CT
computer tomography This patient was diagnosed according to a genetic screening performed within the Lombardia GENS project, implemented to
provide a regional diagnostic standardised pathway for monogenic diseases (http://www.clinicaltrial.gov). We thank the ‘Lombardia GENS’
network and project for their support. The existing network and the research grants of Regione Lombardia are gratefully acknowledged. All
the authors disclose any conflicts of interest including any financial (grant or fundings), personal or other relationships with other
people or organizations within 3 years of beginning the work submitted that could inappropriately influence or bias their work. This article
is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any
medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited. On behalf of Lombardia GENS collaborators.
