Duplications leading to functional disomy of chromosome Xq28, including MECP2 as the critical dosage-sensitive gene, are associated with a
distinct clinical phenotype in males, characterized by severe mental retardation, infantile hypotonia, progressive neurologic impairment,
recurrent infections, bladder dysfunction, and absent speech. Female patients with Xq duplications including MECP2 are rare. Only recently
submicroscopic duplications of this region on Xq28 have been recognized in four females, and a triplication in a fifth, all in combination
with random X-chromosome inactivation (XCI). Based on this small series, it was concluded that in females with MECP2 duplication and random
XCI, the typical symptoms of affected boys are not present. We present clinical and molecular data on a series of five females with an Xq28
duplication including the MECP2 gene, both isolated and as the result of a translocation, and compare them with the previously reported
cases of small duplications in females. The collected data indicate that the associated phenotype in females is distinct from males with
similar duplications, but the clinical effects may be as severe as seen in males. Duplications leading to functional disomy of chromosome
Xq28 are associated with a distinct clinical phenotype in males, characterized by severe mental retardation, infantile hypotonia,
progressive neurologic impairment, recurrent infections, bladder dysfunction, and absent speech (see and for reviews). This combination of
features is known as the Xq28 microduplication syndrome or Lubs syndrome and was first described by Pai et al. and Lubs et al., followed by
many others. The reported Xq28 duplications vary in size and location, however the majority are intrachromosomal duplications ranging from
0.3 to 2.3 Mb. Alternatively, duplications may be the result of another mechanism, such as rearrangements between Xq and Xp, or between Xq
and the Y chromosome . The methyl-CpG binding protein (MECP2) gene on Xq28 is proposed to be the critical dosage-sensitive gene responsible
for the severe phenotypes observed in patients with this duplication. In males, over 140 cases of Xq28 duplications including MECP2 have
been described to date . Female patients with an Xq28 duplication are rare. In families with X-linked pedigrees, female carriers of an Xq
duplication are usually asymptomatic, due to skewed X-chromosome inactivation (XCI) pattern with preferential inactivation of the rearranged
chromosome. Until recently, only three symptomatic females had been reported with large, cytogenetically visible Xq28 duplications
(summarized in ). Clinically, these females presented with severe developmental delay and other features similar to those observed in
affected males. In all cases the duplication was the result of an unbalanced X-autosome translocation, explaining the absence of skewing of
the aberrant X-chromosome and the effect on the phenotype. After introduction of array CGH analysis, smaller, submicroscopic duplications of
this region on Xq28 have been detected in four females, all in combination with random XCI . The patient with a MECP2 duplication described
by Ariani et al. should not be included in this series, as the patient turned out to have a 47,XXX karyotype (F. Ariani, personal
communication). Based on this small series, it was concluded that in females with MECP2 duplication and random XCI, the typical symptoms of
affected boys are not present . Instead, the clinical signs in female patients consist of unspecific mild to moderate mental retardation,
combined with variable symptoms (autistic features, recurrent infections in early childhood, constipation, and late-onset neurological
features). Recently, a girl with a de novo complex X-chromosomal rearrangement was described, with a triplication of a fragment containing
MECP2. She was severely mentally retarded and had seizures, but no other symptoms as seen in boys with a duplication . Here we present
clinical and molecular data on a series of five females with an Xq28 duplication including the MECP2 gene and these are compared with the
previously reported cases of small duplications in females. In patient 1, a MECP2 duplication was the result of a rare insertion duplication
of a small segment of Xq28 into an autosome. Patients 2 and 3 are functionally disomic for region Xq28 due to an unbalanced X-autosome
translocation. The fourth patient is a mildly affected obligate carrier from an X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) family. We detected a
familial, intrachromosomal Xq duplication including MECP2 in her, but unlike previously reported carrier females in X-linked families, she
showed random X-inactivation. Patient 5 carries a small intrachromosomal de novo duplication of Xq28, including MECP2. In contrast to the
previously reported series of affected females, our series includes a female patient with the typical symptoms of affected boys, therefore
expanding the phenotypic spectrum of small Xq28 duplications including MECP2 in females. Patients were evaluated in a diagnostic setting
because of mental retardation (in the family). Standard karyotyping was performed by G-banding. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood
using standard procedures. Duplications were either characterized by Affymetrix Genome-Wide SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix Inc, Santa Clara,
California, USA; Patients 1 and 5) or Agilent 44K array (Agilent, Santa Clara, California, USA; patient 2 and 3) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. The array design for patient 2 was modified for constitutional cytogenetic applications (see design
specification at: http://www.ngrl.org.uk/wessex/arraycgh.htm). Data analysis was carried out with Genotyping Console 3.0.2 (patient 1) or
Agilent's Analytics (patient 2 and 3). Patient 4 was characterized using an X-chromosome specific tiling-path array as described previously
. MLPA was performed with a specific kit for Rett syndrome (Salsa P015, MRC Holland, Amsterdam, The Netherlands) according to the
manufacturer's instruction. Data analysis was performed with GeneMarker software (Softgenetics, USA). FISH analysis was carried out by
standard procedures, using BAC clones selected within the duplicated and deleted regions (patients 1, 2, 5) and TelVision subtelomeric Xq
probe (Vysis) (patient 3). In patients 1, 2, 4, and 5, X-chromosome inactivation was studied using the highly polymorphic small tandem
repeat within the human androgen receptor gene, as described by Allen et al. . Inactivation was considered to be random if the ratio of
active to inactive X was less than 75:25. Extreme skewing of X inactivation was defined as the preferential inactivation of one X chromosome
in 90–95% of cells . Table 1 provides a summary of the cytogenetic and phenotypic characteristics on five female patients with a MECP2
duplication. All patients showed a normal karyotype by G-banding. Patient 1 is a 10-year old girl, first born to a 24-year old mother and a
25-year old father. Parents are healthy and non-consanguineous. The maternal grandfather developed epilepsy around the age of 40 years,
otherwise the family history is unremarkable. The patient was born at term with a birth weight of 3040 g (−1 SDS). Apgar scores were 8 and
10 at 1 and 5 min, respectively. It was noted early on that her neuromotor development was slow (rolling over at 10 months of age, standing
and walking a few steps (both with support) at the age of 3.5 years). She developed no speech. In the first year of life she made little
contact, but this improved gradually and she became a friendly, sociable girl. She disliked changes in daily routine and loved spinning
toys. Her health is severely compromised. She had noisy breathing from birth on and laryngoscopy at the age of 2.5 years showed
laryngomalacia. In infancy she was repeatedly admitted because of recurrent infections (at 7 years of age she had had several episodes of
pneumonia (13 times), otitis media (five times), and pyelonephritis (twice)). She had surgery for reimplantation of the right urether. Her
deciduous teeth did not fall out spontaneously, resulting in a double row of teeth, and had to be removed surgically. At the age of 8 years
and 2 months she was operated because of a luxation of the right hip and a subluxation of the left hip. Afterwards her condition
deteriorated, she lost the ability to crawl and to walk with support. At the age of 8.5 years she developed febrile convulsions, followed by
seizures and she was diagnosed with Lennox–Gastaut type of epilepsy, with a poor response to medical treatment. She has severe constipation,
sleeping problems (refusing to go back to sleep after waking up in the middle of the night), and feeding problems (unable to eat solid
food). She had a nasogastric tube for fluid, extra feeding and medication. At the age of 10 years she needed a PEG tube. Placement was
complicated and prolonged due to an aberrant position of the liver (ventral to the stomach). At 8 years of age she was able to communicate
using pictures, she has limited understanding of sign language. After the hip surgery and development of epilepsy she lost most of these
abilities. Also from that time on, parents noted loss of appetite, loss of energy and reported her to be increasingly lethargic. She showed
a delayed reaction to stimuli. She was hypersensitive to loud noise and sunlight. IQ testing using Kent Infant Development Scale confirmed
severe developmental delay and regression (at the ages of 18, 32, 68, and 108 months, her development was conform 7, 8, 12, and 9 months,
respectively). When first assessed at the age of 17 months, her head circumference was 50.5 cm (+2.3 SDS). She showed mild dysmorphic
features: prominent broad and high forehead, thin curly hair, telecanthus and epicanthus, thin eyebrows, small nose, full cheeks, open mouth
with everted lower lip, broad alveolar ridges, narrow palate, widely spaced teeth, slightly pointed ears, short neck and inverted nipples
(Fig. 1a). On examination at the age of 3 years and 7 months her height was 98 cm (−0.8 SDS), her weight 16.4 kg, (+0.7 SDS for height) and
her head circumference 52.5 cm (+1.7 SDS). Most facial features had become more obvious, however her forehead had grown normal and her
philtrum was short and prominent (Fig. 1b). She drooled constantly. Neurological examination showed axial and peripheral hypotonia and brisk
tendon reflexes. She had no apparent breathing abnormalities. On follow up at the age of 7 years (Fig. 1c) she could pull herself up to her
knees and stand with support. She made stereotypic movements with her hands, with preserved hand function. On follow up at the age of 9
years her height was 128 cm (−1.5 SDS), her weight was 25 kg (−0.5 SDS for height) and her head circumference 54.5 cm (+1.4 SDS). She had
difficulty to sit unsupported. She had no scoliosis. She had a limitation of 20° in the extension of right hip and knee, for which she wears
nightly splints. A brain MRI at the age of 10 months showed mildly enlarged ventricles and prominent sulci, suggestive of mild brain
atrophy. MRI was repeated at 4 years of age and showed a Dandy-–Walker malformation and demyelination. MLPA analysis of the MECP2 gene
showed a duplication of this gene. Subsequent SNP array analysis identified a 279 kb duplication on chromosome Xq28 and a 207 kb duplication
on chromosome 3q25.33q26.1. The duplication on Xq28 encompasses eight protein coding genes including MECP2, OPN1LW, TEX28P2, OPN1NW,
TEX28P1, TEX28, OPN1NW2 and TKTL1. Parental analysis showed that both rearrangements occurred de novo. X-inactivation analysis unravelled a
random-methylation (60:40). Additional FISH analysis showed that the Xq28 duplication has been inserted into chromosome 3, adjacent to the
3q25.33q26.1 duplication (Fig. 2a). Patient 2 is a currently 7-year old girl, born at term after an uneventful pregnancy with a birth weight
of 2940 g (−1 SDS). Postnatally, she was diagnosed with laryngomalacia at 3 days of age, which improved with time. She presented at the age
of 2 years and 8 months with failure to thrive despite a good appetite (height 81 cm, −3.5 SDS; weight 10.6 kg, −2.4 SDS, −0.2 SDS for
height), microcephaly (OFC 45.5 cm, −2.2 SDS), and developmental delay. She has had recurrent urinary tract infections, with no underlying
abnormalities. Her development was moderately delayed, with sitting at the age of 14 months and crawling at 22 months. She had no speech,
although her level of understanding was thought to be better than her expressed speech. She had some repetitive behaviour (hair pulling,
hand flapping, biting herself). She had sleeping problems (refused to go back to sleep after waking up in the middle of the night). On
examination she was microcephalic (head circumference 45.6 cm (−2.1 SDS). She had no apparent dysmorphic features, apart from prominent
infraorbital fullness (the appearance is of very prominent ‘bags’ under her eyes) (Fig. 1d). She had repeated chest infections and a
persistent cough. She was seen for follow up at the age of 4 years and 6 months (Fig. 1e). She had started to walk at the age of 3 years and
9 months, she walked with a wide-based gait. She was smiling a lot and she might use ‘mama, dada, and bye–bye’ appropriately, but had no
other words. Her repetitive behaviour was getting less as her communicating skills had increased. Her sleeping problems had not responded to
melatonin. She was about to start at a normal school, with full time personal help. Apart from a marginally elevated TSH, additional
investigations were normal, including an EEG and a brain MRI. Array CGH analysis showed a 1.69 Mb duplication on chromosome Xq28 and a
1.54 Mb deletion on chromosome 21q22.3. Confirmatory FISH experiments using tiling path BAC clones, showed that BAC clones RP11-119A22,
RP11-103M23, and RP11-402H20 from the Xq28 region have been translocated to the distal long arm of one of the chromosomes 21 homologues.
FISH analysis with specific clones from the distal 21q region, RP11-162F19 and RP11-71A7, confirmed the telomeric deletion of one of the
chromosome 21 homologues. Consequently, this patient carries a cryptic unbalanced translocation between chromosomes X and 21, der(21)t(X;
21)(q28; q22.3). Studies of parental chromosomes showed that the rearrangement is de novo and occurred on the paternal chromosomes.
X-inactivation analysis showed random-methylation (45:55). Patient 3 is a 6.5-year old girl, first child of non-consanguineous and healthy
Caucasian parents. She was born at term after an uneventful pregnancy by caesarian section, due to breech presentation. At birth, weight was
2320 g (−1.5 SDS), length 47 cm (−1.0 SDS) and head circumference 33.5 cm (−0.5 SDS). Apgar scores were 8 and 9 at 1 and 5 min,
respectively. Her development was delayed: sitting at the age of 10 months, walking with ataxic gait at 24 months, babbling at 4 years. She
had feeding difficulties and growth deficit. In infancy, she suffered from constipation. She had several episodes of upper airway infections
(bronchitis, pneumonia, and tonsillitis) since the age of 7 months, as well as nocturnal apnea. She was evaluated at the age of 5 years. She
was moderately interactive and she had a sociable behaviour. On follow up at the age 6 years and 5 months she showed little interest in
people. She had developed dystonic movements. On physical examination her height was 112 cm (−1.0 SDS) and weight 23 kg (+0.7 SDS). She was
microcephalic (head circumference 48.1 cm, −2.0 SDS), with a round face, up-slanting palpebral fissures, severe bilateral ptosis of eyelids
(also noted in her paternal grandmother), bilateral epicanthic folds, flat and wide nasal bridge, small and widely spaced teeth, normal hand
and foot length, bilateral hallux valgus, and cutis marmorata. She walked with ataxic gait, did not speak and she made repetitive movements
with her head (stretching upward). A cerebral CT recorded at the age of 7 months showed a cyst of the septum pellucidum and cavum vergae. A
brain MRI at 2 years and 7 months of age showed an immature aspect of cortical white matter, mainly in the frontal lobes. An EEG, recorded
at the age of 4 years and 10 months showed slowing down of background rhythm. Endocrinological evaluation performed for her growth deficit
showed hypothyroidism. CD4/CD8 ratio and the study of T-lymphocyte subpopulations were normal. Array CGH analysis identified a chromosome X
subtelomeric duplication of about 2.10 Mb (Fig. 2b). Confirmatory FISH experiments showed that the Xq28 region has been translocated to the
short arm of one of the chromosomes 22 homologues. Studies of parental chromosomes showed that the rearrangement is de novo. The karyotype
is 46,XX.ish der(22),t(X; 22)(q28; p13)(VAMP7+)dn. Patient 4 is a member of an X-linked mental retardation family. The index patient in this
family (Fig. 3V-1; Fig. 1f) was included in a Spanish collaborative XLMR study. The duplication was identified by an X-chromosome array-CGH
and previously published (case 5, pedigree E in ). Subsequent attempts to study the complete family were in vain. The family consists of
three known affected males in three generations (Fig. 3). Three other males died a few days after birth and were probably also affected.
Only one branch of the family could be studied (III-6; IV-2; IV-3 and the index patient V-1). The aforementioned paper included few clinical
details . A detailed description of the index is provided in the Supplementary data, clinical details on his mother and grandmother are
presented here. Clinical data from other family members are scarce, but confirm X-linked inheritance of severe mental retardation. Patient
4, mother of the index patient (IV-3, Fig. 3) was born to healthy non-consanguineous parents. Pregnancy and delivery were uneventful. She
was born at 39 weeks of gestation, birth weight 2850 g (−1.1 SDS), length 48 cm (−1.2 SDS), and OFC 32 cm (−1.7 SDS). During early childhood
she did not show signs of developmental delay, speech development was normal. She had autistic features, interaction both with her mother
and others was poor. She presented with learning difficulties at school and she could not finish primary school. Before having her son,
psychiatric symptoms had become apparent (depression, compulsions). She is currently rather impulsive and has a strong and difficult
character when she is upset. Her cognitive level is below average (IQ 84) and below the level in her family (see Suppl. Table 1 for Wechsler
Adult Intelligence Scale (WAIS-III) results). She shows little interest in other people and she is unemployed. She lives with her mother. On
physical examination at 26 years of age her height was 162 cm (−0.3 SDS), weight was 68 kg (+1.2 SDS), and OFC 56.5 cm (+0.7 SDS). Apart
from fifth finger clinodactyly she had no apparent dysmorphic features (Fig. 1g). Patient 4's mother, grandmother of the index case (III-6)
is healthy, with a cognitive level within the normal range (see Suppl. Table 1 for the results of formal testing). She takes care of her
daughter and grandson. She reported not to be very skillful with her hands and to suffer from a panic disorder. On physical examination
weight and height were within normal limits, OFC is 56.5 cm (+0.7 SDS). She had large ears. Apart from clinodactyly of fifth fingers and
hyperextensible interphalangeal joints, no dysmorphic features were present (Fig. 1h). Her son (IV-4) suffered from meningitis when he was 9
days of age. Subsequently he presented with severe mental retardation, he never developed speech although he was able to understand simple
tasks. He walked independently at the age of 3 years despite ataxic gait. He presented progressive epilepsy at 11 years of age, had
recurrent episodes of severe pneumonia and died when he was 15 years old due to a complicated respiratory infection. MLPA confirmed the Xq
duplication in the index patient (Fig. 2c) and identified the same duplication in his mother (patient 4, IV-3) and grandmother (III-6,
Fig. 2c). X-inactivation studies in the mother, patient 4, showed random X-inactivation (63.3:36.7), whereas it showed skewed X-inactivation
in the grandmother (88.2:11.8). Patient 5 is an 8-year old girl, first born to 29-year old parents. Maternal hypertension developed at 36
weeks of gestation. The girl was born at 38 weeks of gestation, weighing 3430 g (0 SDS), length 53.3 cm (+1.7 SDS) and with normal Apgar
scores. Apart from eczema, no health problems were noted in the neonatal period. At 6 months of age hypotonia and developmental delay became
apparent. Neurological evaluation at the age of 18 months left this unexplained. Brain MRI and EEG were normal. Her motor development was
delayed (walking around 22 months of age), as was her speech development (first words around 3 years of age). At the age of 7 years she
could speak in 5-word sentences, though she was at times difficult to understand. She was in a special needs class. She had difficulties
with social interaction and with changes in her environment or routine. Formal assessment for autism could not diagnose autism spectrum
disorder. When first assessed in a genetics clinic at the age of 22 months, she had a history of recurrent otitis media. On physical
examination, length was 82.2 cm (−0.5 SDS), weight 10.8 kg (−1.0 SDS), and head circumference 47.7 cm (+0.5 SDS). Apart from slight
epicanthal folds, there were no dysmorphic features. The skin revealed scattered patches of eczema. There was muscular hypotonia. On follow
up at the age of 7 years, she had a history of chronic constipation and chronic ear infections. On examination, her height was 121.8 cm
(−0.5 SDS), her weight was 23 kg (−0.2 SDS), and her head circumference was 53.3 cm (+1.0 SDS). She had no apparent dysmorphic features.
Family history is unremarkable, her younger sister is doing well without concern for any delays. SNP array analysis detected a 107.5 kb
duplication on Xq28 and an 824.5 kb duplication on chromosome 2q23.1–q23.2. FISH experiments with BAC clone RP11-119A22 confirmed the
duplication on the X chromosome. X inactivation studies showed skewing, though not complete (84:16). Parental analyses showed that the
phenotypically normal father carried the 2q23 duplication, the Xq28 rearrangement is de novo. In summary, all females described in this
study had mental retardation or learning difficulties (Table 1). Accompanying features were mixed, but speech delay and recurrent infections
were frequent symptoms. Notably, patient 1 had the most features as usually seen in affected boys. Array CGH data are summarized in Table 2
and Fig. 4. We describe a series of five females carrying a submicroscopic Xq28 duplication involving MECP2. Whereas the phenotypic effect
of a MECP2 duplication is already well documented in males, it is a comparatively rare cause of mental retardation in females. In a recent
paper, only two cases out of 1000 unselected patients with mental retardation were identified . Though females with large Xq28 duplications
have been documented (as the results of X-autosome translocations, summarized in ), only after introduction of array techniques were females
with small de novo duplications including MECP2 reported . In addition, two affected carrier females in X-linked families have been reported
. Our series is compared with published cases in Table 1, array data (where available) are summarized in Fig. 4. As can be deduced from
Fig. 4, the minimal critical region in this series of females contains only the MECP2 gene, confirming its role in mental retardation in
females. Previously, it has been stated that females with a (de novo) MECP2 duplication lack the typical symptoms of affected boys, such as
seizures, poor speech development, and recurrent severe infections (, Table 1). Several females in our series however, do have poor speech
development and patient 1 has recurrent severe infections. Furthermore, as patient 1 in our series only developed seizures after the age of
8 years, the younger patients with a de novo duplication may still be at risk of developing this feature. Compared to the compiled data in
affected males with a MECP2 duplication (Table 1), the course of the disease in patient 1 is strikingly similar, with regression after the
start of seizures. Follow-up of patient 3 indicated also regression. Based on our data, we conclude that the associated phenotype in females
with a MECP2 duplication may be as severe as seen in affected males. In our series, several mechanisms were found that resulted in
functional disomy for region Xq28: i.e. X-autosome translocation, duplication (either familial or de novo) on the X-chromosome combined with
random X-inactivation, and insertion duplication into an autosome. In unbalanced X-autosome translocations, the translocated segments will
escape X-inactivation and cause functional disomy for genes contained within the translocated segments. In our series, patients 2 and 3
carry an unbalanced X-autosome translocation, as does the case described by Auber et al.. Previously reported X-autosome translocations have
been excluded from the comparison as duplicated regions were either very large (∼16 Mb) or undefined . Patients in this group show various
phenotypes, ranging from apparently mild mental retardation in patient 2 to a more severe clinical course in patient 3, with regression,
loss of attention and emerging dystonic and repetitive movements, to a clinical picture that is comparable with the male Xq28 duplication
syndrome in the patient described by Auber et al. . As the concurrent imbalance in these X-autosome patients is most likely of minor
significance (see below), the phenotype is most likely determined by the Xq duplication. In this small series, the size of the Xq
duplication appears to correlate with the severity of the clinical course. Our series contains one female carrying a familial Xq duplication
including MECP2. Patient 4 is a mildly affected obligate carrier from an X-linked mental retardation (XLMR) family. Previously reported
families demonstrated asymptomatic carriers with extreme or complete skewing of X-chromosome inactivation. Unlike previously reported
carrier females however, patient 4 showed random X-inactivation. Taking only her IQ score into account, she is not mentally retarded, yet
she has notable learning difficulties and a striking difference in IQ compared to her mother. We hypothesize that this difference in
performance is caused by the difference in XCI in mother and daughter (88:12 versus 63:37) and that the clinical features in patient 4 are
caused by random X-inactivation. Previous papers lend support to this view. Recently, Reardon et al. reported a manifesting carrier with
skewed X-inactivation in the ratio of 70:30. She had non-specific developmental delay, without seizures, speech problems, or recurrent
infections. Furthermore, Kirk et al. describe a manifesting carrier with mild learning disability who had a mosaic X-inactivation pattern:
in blood she showed complete skewing, however in hair roots XCI was random (74:26). It has been suggested that a 70% skewing or less will
lead to manifestation of the disease in female carriers of a familial Xq duplication . Data on our patient support this hypothesis and
indicate that the resulting phenotype is probably mild. On the other hand, in a recent study focused on clinical and neuropsychiatric
phenotype of MECP2 duplication carriers, three out of nine female carriers of a familial MECP2 duplication had IQs in the low normal range .
Female carriers also had psychiatric symptoms, including anxiety, depression, and compulsion, despite 100% skewing of X-inactivation in
blood. In comparison, the phenotype of patient 4 may fit into the clinical spectrum depicted in that paper, indicating that low normal IQ
and psychiatric symptoms may be part of the clinical spectrum in female carriers, regardless of their XCI status. Alternatively, as
X-inactivation pattern has only been tested in blood, the females with low scores in Ramocki's series may in fact have mosaic XCI, leading
to tissue-specific dosage alterations, and probably to poor performance. A final conclusion awaits further studies. A separate group is
formed by patients with a de novo intrachromosomal MECP2 duplication. It has been suggested previously that in these cases random XCI may be
causative for the phenotype . To date, two females with a de novo Xq duplication of this type and random XCI have been reported, revealing
moderate mental retardation in childhood and development of neurological features in the second decade . Patient 5 in our series also
belongs to this category. As she is symptomatic, we assumed random XCI in her. Analysis in blood however showed skewed X-inactivation,
though not complete (84:16). This may indicate that skewing needs to be complete to avoid a phenotypic effect of an Xq duplication. The XCI
in patients 4's mother does not support this presumption, as she is normal functioning despite incomplete skewing (88:12). Alternatively,
the phenotypic effect in patient 5 may be caused by an unfavourable skewing pattern, leading to preferential inactivation of the normal X
chromosome, or by a mosaic XCI pattern, with random XCI in other tissues. With regard to the mechanism of preferential X-inactivation, it
has been suggested that co-duplication of neighbouring genes (i.e. ARD1A or HCFC1) may be responsible for complete skewing of X-inactivation
in female carriers of an Xq28 duplication . Consequently, smaller deletions would thus result in random X-inactivation. Again, the XCI
patterns in patient 4 and her mother do not support this hypothesis, as the same duplication, including the aforementioned genes, leads to
either random XCI or almost extreme skewing in members of the same family. Recently, Makrythanasis et al. reported a patient with an
insertion duplication of a small segment of Xq28 into an autosome, causing a short segment on the X-chromosome to escape X-inactivation.
Also the additional copy of MECP2 in patient 1 is inserted into an autosome and therefore constitutionally active. Yet the clinical course
of both patients is completely different: the patient described by Makrythanasis et al. is mildly affected, whereas the course of the
disease in patient 1 is comparable to that in males, with regression after the start of seizures. We have no explanation for this
discordance, however a difference in expression level may be postulated. It has been demonstrated in males that a triplicated MECP2 gene
resulted in the most severe phenotype . Recently, a severely mentally retarded girl with a triplication including MECP2 was described,
suggesting a phenotypic effect of copy number . Also, in mice higher MeCP2 protein levels lead to more severe phenotypes . Therefore, it may
be speculated that the difference in phenotype between the two insertion/duplication cases is caused by different levels of expression, for
instance because the translocated MECP2 gene in patient 1 has been coupled to a strong promotor, thus enhancing the MeCP2 level. On the
other hand, expression studies in males have shown that MECP2 mRNA levels do not correlate with disease severity . Alternatively, under the
influence of another promotor, transcription of the translocated MECP2 gene may have been silenced in the patient described by Makrythanasis
. As yet, the various mechanisms do not correspond to a distinct clinical phenotype, only familial duplications with random X-inactivation
seem to result in a mild phenotype (Table 1). In addition to the Xq duplication, three patients in our series showed an imbalance of another
chromosome region (Table 1). In patient 1, a de novo duplication of 3q on the site of the insertion of Xq in the long arm of chromosome 3
was found. The duplicated region contains one gene, IL12A. To our knowledge no phenotype has been demonstrated for a duplication of this
gene, but clinical relevance cannot be excluded. As a result of an unbalanced X-autosome translocation, patient 2 is also monosomic for
distal 21q. The contribution of the deleted genes from this region to her phenotype is probably negligible, as larger distal 21q deletions
have been described without phenotypic effect . In patient 5, the additional duplication was inherited from her phenotypically normal
father, therefore indicating a most probably rare polymorphism. Gene content of additional CNVs in patient 1, 2 and 5 is listed in Suppl.
Table 2. Interestingly, second de novo imbalances were also found in previously reported patients (, see Table 1). In both cases, an
association between the additional imbalance and the clinical phenotype was deemed unlikely. Many authors have stressed the recurrent
infections in males with Xq duplications (Table 1). Smyk et al. have suggested that they result from increased IRAK1 dosage . Our data do
not support this hypothesis, as in patient 1 IRAK1 is not included in the duplicated fragment, yet she has a typical pattern of recurrent
infections as seen in boys with a MECP2 duplication. As none of the other duplicated genes in the region are associated with recurrent
infections, this clinical course suggests that this symptom can be attributed to duplication of the MECP2 gene. In summary, an Xq
duplication including MECP2 is described in five females with various grades of developmental delay. With our series of MECP2 duplication
carriers we have extended the spectrum of the associated phenotype in females. We conclude that a duplication of MECP2 may be associated
with a severe phenotype in both males and females. Especially de novo duplications that escape X-inactivation may be associated with a
severe clinical outcome in females. The phenotype of intrachromosomal duplications of this region is more difficult to predict and may be
mild. However, the highly variable clinical presentation makes genetic counselling in terms of prognosis difficult, especially in prenatal
cases. It has been postulated that carriers of a familial MECP2 duplication may express a phenotype if X-inactivation is not completely
skewed. Our data provide additional evidence for this hypothesis. Further studies of more females with a MECP2 duplication are needed to
gain better insight in the clinical variability and into the potential pathology associated with rearrangements in this area. The following
are the Supplementary material related to this article: We thank the patients and their families for their kind collaboration. Our special
thanks go to patient 1's mother, for scrutinizing the internet and thus getting us into contact with patients 2 and 5. Also, we would like
to thank prof.dr. Hilde van Esch, for sharing her knowledge about MECP2 duplications in females and bringing patients 3 and 4 to our
attention. Part of this work is supported by Telethon grant GTB07001C to A.R. and a grant from the University of Siena (PAR 2006) to F.M.
Part of M.I.T.'s work was supported by grant PI05/1632 (FIS-ISCIII). Phenotypical characteristics of individuals with an Xq28 duplication
including MECP2. a-c. patient 1, aged 1 year and 5 months (a), 3 years and 7 months (b) and 7 years (c). Note facial hypotonia, large mouth,
and widely spaced teeth. d,e. patient 2, aged 2 years and 8 months (d) and 4 years and 6 months (e). f. Index patient in the described XLMR-
family, his mother, patient 4 (g) and grandmother (h). Overall, patients show no common facial features, though patient 2 (c,d) and the
index patient in the described XLMR-family (f) show almost identical prominent infraorbital fullness. Illustration of Xq duplication of the
MECP2 region. a. FISH analysis in patient 1. The Xq duplication (RP11-333O06; red) is inserted in the long arm of chromosome 3 (black
arrow), coinciding with the 3q duplication (RP11-67F24; green). Control probes: centromere chromosome 3 (a-sat 3, Cytocell; green) and
centromere chromosome X (pBamX5; red). b. Array-CGH ratio profile in patient 3. Chromosome X array CGH ratio profile using DNA from the
patient and a reference DNA from a normal female. On the left, the chromosome X ideogram. On the right, the log2 ratio of the chromosome X
probes plotted as a function of chromosomal position. Each dot represents a single probe (oligo) spotted on the array. Oligos with a value
of zero represent equal fluorescence intensity ratio between sample and reference. c. MLPA profiles showing an Xq duplication in family 4.
Graphical representation of MLPA data (left panel, index patient; right panel, maternal grandmother), showing the bars of the duplicated Xq
region in red (from SLC6A8 to OPN1MW including all MECP2 exons). In the index, peak valuesreach 1.50, suggesting a duplication as normal
dose is normalized to 0.75. In the grandmother, peak values of the duplication (bars in red) reach 1.25, as normal dose corresponds to two X
chromosomes. Pedigree of X-linked mental retardation family (previously published as pedigree E in Madrigal et al., 2007). 49 y, age at last
examination; d 15 y, died at the age of 15 years. (For interpretation of the references to colour in this figure legend, the reader is
referred to the web version of this article.) Schematic representation of part of the Xq28 region. The location of the duplications of our
five patients and five previously reported females is depicted. Due to missing data, the patient described by Kirk et al. could not be
included. Pattern codes: vertical stripes, insertion of Xq into an autosome; solid bar, unbalanced X-autosome translocation; horizontal
stripes, familial intrachromosomal Xq duplication; dotted, de novo intrachromosomal duplication of Xq, diagonal stripes, de novo
intrachromosomal triplication of Xq. Arrow, minimal critical region. Gene content of the region is shown from the UCSC Genome Browser
version Human March 2006 (NCBI36/hg18). Comparison of genotype and phenotype in males and females with submicroscopic Xq28 duplications,
including MECP2. d.n., de novo; +, present; –, absent (as stated in paper, or deduced from normal results); empty field, no data; mat,
maternal; pat, paternal; GU, genitourinary; GER, gastoesophageal reflux; IPO, intestinal pseudo-obstruction. based on the compiled data of
affected males summarized in (n = 119) , (n = 6) , (n = 4) , (n = 1) , (n = 1) , (n = 3) , (n = 1), and (n = 7). t(X; A), unbalanced X;
autosome translocation; X → A, insertion of Xq into an autosome; dup X, intrachromosomal duplication of Xq; trip X, intrachromosomal
triplication of Xq. Summary of array results in patients with Xq28 duplications, including MECP2. Mapping positions are according to the
hg18 assembly of the UCSC genome browser. Del, deletion; dup, duplication.
