Microstructural alterations of the putamen were recently reported in patients with partial and generalized epilepsy disorders. However, it
is unknown whether these alterations pre-exist or are secondary to recurrent seizures. Here we investigated the progression of putamen
fractional anisotropy (FA) alterations in a case of recurrent psychomotor seizures using longitudinal diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) shortly
before (DTI-1) and after a psychomotor seizure (DTI-2). We obtained FA values of a hypothesis-guided putamen region-of-interest (ROI) and
seven exploratory ROIs. FA values from both DTIs were compared with reference values from 19 controls. Relative to controls, the patient's
putamen FA was increased at DTI-1 (13% left putamen, 7% right putamen), an effect that was exacerbated at DTI-2 (24% left putamen
(p < 0.05), 20% right putamen). In the exploratory ROIs we found FA reductions in the corticospinal tract, temporal lobe, and occipital lobe
(p < 0.05) relative to controls at DTI-1 and DTI-2. In contrast to the putamen, all exploratory ROIs showed no relevant FA change between
DTI-1 and DTI-2. These results suggest that recurrent seizures may lead to progressive microstructural putamen alterations. It has been
recently reported that patients with cryptogenic temporal lobe epilepsy (TLE) and juvenile myoclonic epilepsy (JME) have inter-related
increased diffusion tensor imaging (DTI)-derived measures of putamen fractional anisotropy (FA) and macroscopic putamen atrophy relative to
age-matched healthy subjects.1,2 This unusual finding has been observed in other neurological disorders, including Huntington's disease3,4
and Susac's syndrome,5 but without sufficient neurological explanation.3,4 Given that the putamen and more generally the basal ganglia have
a crucial role for the mediation of seizure propagation,6 it is important to understand how the putamen is architecturally affected in
epilepsy. In patients with habitual epilepsy, it is difficult to confidently deduce whether neuroanatomical abnormalities pre-exist or are
the consequence of recurrent seizures without monitoring the progression of brain structure and integrity during the course of serial
imaging with simultaneous consideration of clinical variables, such as number and type of seizures, medication, etc. There are very few, if
any, longitudinal DTI studies of the effects of recurrent seizures in patients with epilepsy syndromes that are not treatable by surgery. In
almost all studies7 focus has been given to pre-/post-operative chronic partial epilepsy cohorts.8,9 DTI offers the opportunity to
investigate microstructural changes not observable using conventional structural MRI,10,11 and quantification of such alterations12 may
provide more information on progressive brain damage in epileptic syndromes. In the present study, we used serial applications of DTI to
investigate the possible progression of gray and white matter alterations in a patient with symptomatic partial epilepsy, with a particular
focus to investigate the stability or progression of putamen microstructural alterations in response to recurrent seizures. A 48-year-old
woman was found unconscious at home with deviation of the eyes and bite of the tongue. A cranial CT revealed a 2.2 cm × 2.7 cm measuring
left parietal hemorrhage. During 20 months after onset of symptomatic epilepsy she had four complex-partial seizures with secondary
generalization and three complex-partial seizures. Most frequently the patient presented with global aphasia, disorientation and mild
paresis of the right arm. EEGs indicated a left temporal focus, occasionally with secondary generalization (for more detailed information
see Table 1). We also studied a group of 19 neurologically and psychiatrically healthy age-matched controls (median 47 years, min 42, max
51). All subjects gave written informed consent and the local ethics committee approved this study. The patient was admitted for DTI at two
time points using a 1.5 T MR system (Gyroscan Intera T15, Philips Medical Systems, Best, The Netherlands). The time between the initial
insult and the first DTI scan (DTI-1), and second scan (DTI-2), was 21 months and two days, and 23 months and one day, respectively. Time
between the two scans was eight weeks and four days. For DTI we used single shot echo planar imaging (EPI) with 20 diffusion directions [two
b-factors, 0 and 1000 s/mm2, TR = 9.3 s/TE = 89 ms, acquisition matrix: 128 × 128, voxel size: 1.8 mm × 1.8 mm × 3.6 mm (reconstructed to
2.0 mm × 2.0 mm × 2.0 mm for image processing), two averages]. DTI image processing was performed by using the “Münster Neuroimaging
Evaluation System (EVAL)”.12,13 All time consuming calculations, e.g. eddy currents correction and normalizations, were carried out on a
64-processor computer (Sun Microsystems, Inc., Palo Alto). Diffusion-weighted images were corrected for eddy currents using a recently
developed technique.13 The employed EVAL-DTI processing pipeline incorporated (i) structure adaptive smoothing14 and (ii) a multi-contrast
image registration toolbox for the optimum spatial pre-processing of DTI data prior to statistical analysis.15,16 Registered FA images
corresponded to the MNI coordinate space. For hypothesis-guided analysis of FA images, we generated a putamen region-of-interest (ROI) and
for further explorative analysis seven other ROIs, including the whole white matter, corticospinal tract, corpus callosum, occipital lobe,
frontal lobe and temporal lobe. These ROIs were created automatically by the EVAL pipeline on the output images from the registration
toolbox for all patients and controls, as previously performed.1 For each of these ROIs mean FA was calculated. We used a two-sample t-test
including correction for multiple comparisons to test for differences in mean FA between patient's DTIs and controls. The FA values of the
19 normal controls have been tested by the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test for normality (p > 0.20). In order to assess intra-individual
reproducibility of putamen FA, we compared putamen FA in a healthy control across 10 separate DTI measurements. We found that over the 10
DTI measurements, the control subject's putamen values were a mean of 0.127 with a standard deviation (SD) of ±0.009 for the right putamen
and of 0.125 with a SD of ±0.008 for the left putamen (coefficient of variation CV = SD/mean × 100% = 7%). DTI-1 was performed three days
after a complex-partial seizure (Seizure No. 7, Table 1), which occurred approximately 18 months after the initial hemorrhage. At this time,
patient mean FA was increased in the left (+13%) and right (+7%) putamen relative to the mean putamen FA of controls (Table 2). The mean FA
values of all exploratory white matter ROIs were reduced relative to controls. The most prominent reductions of FA relative to controls were
observed in the left temporal lobe (−12%; p < 0.05) and occipital lobes (−18%; p = 0.001). Furthermore, significant reduction of ROI FA was
observed in the whole white matter (p < 0.05), and bilaterally in the corticospinal tracts (p = 0.05, Table 2). Mean FA of the frontal
lobes, corpus callosum and the right temporal lobe was also reduced (>1 SD relative to controls). Approximately six weeks after DTI-1 the
patient's next seizure occurred (Seizure No. 8, Table 1). DTI-2 was acquired two weeks later. When comparing DTI-1 with DTI-2 the putamen FA
was further increased (24% for the left putamen, ipsilateral to the lesion (p < 0.05) and 20% (p = 0.088) for the right putamen relative to
controls). This increase of putamen FA between DTI-1 and DTI-2 was (i) beyond the estimated intra-individual variability (7% CV) and (ii)
significant in the left putamen when compared with the mean left putamen FA of the controls. Progressive putamen FA increases in the patient
are shown in Fig. 1. The exploratory white matter ROIs showed no relevant change of mean FA. The primary finding of this case is the
progressive bilateral increase of putamen FA in a patient with a unilateral parieto-occipital hemorrhage, complex partial seizures and
occasional secondary generalized seizures. The putamen is not causally linked with focal unilateral epilepsy disorders, but contributes to
the modulation of seizure propagation after the principle epileptogenic focus has become active.6 In patients with TLE and JME, putamen
macroscopic atrophy is directly related to pathologically increasing putamen FA.1,2 Furthermore, increasing putamen FA significantly
correlates with the age of onset and duration of JME.1 In the present study, we observed a progressive putamen FA increase manifested as (i)
an overall increase in the patient's putamen FA at DTI-1 relative to controls and (ii) a further putamen FA increase between DTI-1 and DTI-2
in the patient that exceeded the values observed in a randomly selected serially imaged healthy control. As discussed in more detail
previously,1,2 one explanation for the increase in putamen FA in patients with epilepsy may be due to increased levels of iron in patients
with epilepsy that accumulate in the putamen, thus increasing the putamen FA and exacerbating a normal effect seen in healthy aging.17
Whether individual seizures increase such iron accumulation is unknown and warrants further investigation. An alternative explanation is
that the atrophic gray matter within the putamen excessively constrains the space where numerous myelinated axons intersperse. Myelinated
axons have a much greater FA compared to gray matter, and the spatial constriction of myelinated axons may lead to a localized increased
anisotropy of water diffusion, given that this would occur beyond the voxel resolution of DTI.1,2 The putamen has been implicated in the
normal inhibition of seizure generalization, and metabolic and structural alterations of the putamen have been reported in various epileptic
syndromes.6,18–20 It is also important to note that increasing putamen FA is also observed in other neurological disorders including
Huntington's disease3,4 and Susac's syndrome5 suggesting that this pathological alteration may not be specific to epileptic syndromes. The
present results of increased putamen FA also extent findings by a cross-sectional study of increased FA in bilateral caudate nuclei and
increased mean diffusivity values bilaterally in thalamus, putamen, and left caudate nucleus in patients with absence seizures.21 In
summary, the findings of this case suggest that unilateral symptomatic partial seizures can lead to progressive microstructural changes of
the putamen in both hemispheres. This is the first report that illustrates the dynamic of progressive microstructural subcortical
alterations in a patient with a unilateral epilepsy disorder by comparison of DTI examinations performed shortly before and after a complex
partial seizure. Future work should determine the aetiology of putamen FA increase in epileptic and other neurodegenerative syndromes. None
of the authors has any conflict of interest to disclose. We confirm that we have read the Journal's position on issues involved in ethical
publication and affirm that this report is consistent with those guidelines. This work was supported by the Transregional Collaborative
Research Centre SFB/TR 3 (Project A8) of the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG) and by the Neuromedical Foundation (Stiftung
Neuromedizin), Münster. SM was supported by the Wellcome Trust. (a) Mean putamen FA of controls (CTRL Group) (whiskers represent the
standard deviation) and patient's (Pat.) putamen FA of DTI-1 and DTI-2 (whiskers represent the estimated intra-individual reproducibility
(7% CV) of FA). The increase of putamen FA between DTI-1 and DTI-2 was significant (p = 0.05) in the left putamen when compared with the
mean left putamen FA of the healthy age-matched control group. (b) FA image of a healthy control. (c) FA image calculated from DTI-2 of the
patient. The extent of the ROI is depicted for the right hemisphere; the color-coded FA is shown for the left hemisphere. The colored arrows
indicate the position of the ROI for the left (orange) and the right (blue) hemisphere. *The increase of putamen FA values between DTI-1 and
DTI-2 was beyond the estimated intra-individual reproducibility of the mean FA in the putamen ROI. (For interpretation of the references to
color in the figure caption, the reader is referred to the web version of the article.) Seizure history with clinical details. LEV,
levetiracetam; VPA, valproate; LTG, lamotrigin. Columns represent mean FA and standard deviation (SD) of the controls and patient DTI-1 and
DTI-2. Changes in % are calculated relative to the mean FA of controls. Significant (p < 0.05) changes are in bold. p-Values were corrected
for multiple comparisons. ROIs are displayed in descending order according to changes in % of DTI-2.
