A 73-year-old female presented with a tumor in the frontal region, which had been noticed for the last 3 months (Figure 1, Figure 1.Tumor in
the frontal region with 4 cm diameter, punctuated in its center with keratosic material. Figure 2 Figure 2.Tumor in the frontal region with
4 cm diameter, punctuated in its center with keratosic material.). The patient observed a papule similar to a mosquito bite that grew to
become tumoral. Incisional biopsy was performed and the lesion partially regressed over the next 30 days, although not treated (Figure 3).
Histopathology revealed pseudocarcinomatous hyperplasia and occasional multinucleated giant cells. Growth of Sporothrix schenckii was
depicted in tissue culture. Because of the patient's diabetes and renal failure, terbinafine therapy was chosen over itraconazole, which has
known drug interactions with antidiabetic agents. Complete response was achieved with 125 mg PO daily (renal dose adjustment) for 2 months.
Tumor in the frontal region with 4 cm diameter, punctuated in its center with keratosic material. Tumor in the frontal region with 4 cm
diameter, punctuated in its center with keratosic material. Partially regression of the lesion after incisional biopsy. Sporotrichosis is a
subcutaneous or systemic infection caused by the dimorphic fungus S. schenckii. Starting as an outbreak in 1998, several cat-transmitted
cases have been regularly reported in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.1 Presentation varies according to virulence of the strain and host immune
status. Main forms are lymphocutaneous and fixed cutaneous, with the latter occasionally resembling rosacea, pyoderma gangrenosum, and
keratoacanthomas.2 Despite the striking resemblance of the clinical behavior with keratoacanthoma, histopathology and culture confirmed
sporotrichosis in this case. Authors' addresses: Fernanda Tcatch Lauermann and Raquel Lopes Gaudio, Department of Dermatology, Bonsucesso
Federal Hospital, Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, E-mails: fernandalauermann@hotmail.com and raqflopes@gmail.com. Marcelo Rosandiski Lyra,
Evandro Chagas Clinical Research Institute, Oswaldo Cruz Foundation (FIOCRUZ), Rio de Janeiro, RJ, Brazil, E-mail:
marcelolyradermato@hotmail.com.
