This note describes the sudden death of a dog by the rupture of the thoracic aorta caused by the presence of Angiostrongylus vasorum. A
female mongrel canine with a history of weight loss and exhaustion died two hours after clinical examination. At necropsy, performed one
hour after death, showed the presence of clotted blood in the thoracic cavity. Haemothorax was diagnosed. The thoracic aorta wall was thin,
congested and an abnormal hole in the wall was detected approximately 0.5 cm from the entrance to the diaphragm. From clotted blood
collected from the thoracic cavity, 224 first stage larvae (L1) and 15 adults of Angiostrongylus vasorum were recovered alive. Also, from a
blood clot found in the aorta, four adult females and 47 L1 larvae were recovered alive. Possibly, this parasite was responsible for the
aortic rupture and death of the animal. Cette note décrit la mort subite d’un chien par rupture de l’aorte thoracique causée par la présence
d’Angiostrongylus vasorum. Un chien de race, avec une histoire de perte de poids et d’épuisement, est mort deux heures après l’examen
clinique. La nécropsie, réalisée une heure après la mort, a montré la présence de sang coagulé dans la cavité thoracique. Un hémothorax a
été diagnostiqué. La paroi de l’aorte thoracique était mince, congestionnée, et un orifice d’environ 0,5 cm a été détecté. Il se situait
près de l’entrée de l’artère dans le diaphragme. 224 larves (L1) et 15 adultes d’Angiostrongylus vasorum ont été retrouvés vivants dans le
sang coagulé recueilli dans la cavité thoracique. Par ailleurs, dans le sang coagulé contenu dans l’aorte thoracique ont été trouvées quatre
femelles adultes et 47 larves (L1). Ce parasite est probablement responsable de la rupture de l’aorte et de la mort de l’animal.
Angiostrongylus vasorum (French Heartworm) is a nematode parasite of the right ventricle and pulmonary artery and its branches in wild and
domestic canids (Verzberger-Epshtein et al., 2008). It has been reported in Europe, North America, South America and Africa, covering
tropical, subtropical and temperate region (Koch & Willesen, 2009). The life cycle of A. vasorum is heteroxenic, with terrestrial and
aquatic snails as intermediate hosts. These mollusks are infected by first stage larvae (L1) by ingestion or penetration into the tegument.
The infection of the definitive host occurs by ingestion of third stage larvae (L3). The main clinical signs are related to the
cardiorespiratory system as dyspnea, tachycardia, arrhythmias, persistent dry cough and other clinical signs such as pyodermas, alopecia,
weight loss, onychogryphosis, thrombosis, disseminated intravascular coagulation and death of the animal (Cury et al., 2002; Morgan et al.,
2005). Although there have been studies involving the life cycle of the parasite, there are still mechanisms that are not well understood
concerning the biology of A. vasorum. One of these mechanisms is erratic migration, which is sporadically mentioned in the literature (Perry
et al., 1991; Cury & Lima, 1996; Oliveira-Júnior et al., 2004; Sasanelli et al., 2008). A female mongrel canine, 14 kg was inoculated by
oral route with 2,800 infective larvae of A. vasorum to maintain the strain in the laboratory. Parasites were obtained from the tissue of an
intermediate host Omalonyx matheroni maintained in laboratory and experimentally contaminated with the first-stage larvae (L1) of this
nematode, following methodology Mozzer et al. (2011). The dog was born in the breeding facilities of the Federal University of Minas Gerais,
Brazil under the management systems on animal well-being and according to the ethics committee of the university (CETEA/UFMG). The dog was
subjected to physical examinations by a veterinarian before inoculation, and weekly from ten days postinoculation (dpi). Blood samples were
taken before inoculation and twice a month from the day of inoculation. Fecal samples were taken daily from 25 dpi. The first meeting of
larvae in the feces of the dog was 35 dpi. At 39 dpi the animal walked with its back arched and was indifferent to its environment. The dog
presented with a temperature of 38.1 °C, heart rate of 160 beats/minute, respiratory rate of 42 breaths/minute and pale pink, dry mucous
membranes with a prolonged capillary refill time greater than two seconds. Clinical examination revealed loud bronchovesicular sounds on
thoracic auscultation and attenuated cardiac sounds. Showed increased superficial cervical lymph nodes, chest sensitivity and pain from
manipulation in this region. Following the examination, blood samples were collected for laboratory tests, which showed the following
values: 5,000,000 erythrocytes/mL, 11.70 g/dL hemoglobin, 38.05 % hematocrit, 158,000 platelet/mL and 26,000 leukocytes/mL. The differential
leukocyte count was as follows: 6 % band neutrophils, 34 % segmented neutrophils, 22 % eosinophils, 35 % lymphocytes and 2 % monocytes. The
animal had 90 mg/dL of fibrinogen. The prothrombin time was 11 seconds, and the partial activated thromboplastin time was 13 seconds. The
animal was died two hours after the clinical examination. From the necropsy performed one hour after death, it was observed that the mucosa
and carcass were very pale. After retracting the skin, internal intercostal muscles showing suffusion points were found. Opening the thorax
showed the presence of clotted blood in the thoracic cavity. When examining the circulatory system, approximately 15 cm of the thoracic
aortic wall was irregular, thickened and firm. An abnormal hole in the wall of the thoracic aorta was detected approximately 0.5 cm from the
entrance to the diaphragm. At this location, the aorta wall was thin and congested. From 980 ml of clotted blood collected from the chest
cavity, 224 first stage (L1) larvae, 12 adult females and three adult males nematodes were recovered alive. From a clot found inside the
aorta, 47 L1 larvae and four adult females were recovered alive. The parasitic nematodes were identified as Angiostrongylus vasorum (Lima et
al., 1985). The heart was hypertrophied. The lungs had multiple nodules of different sizes scattered diffusely throughout the parenchyma.
The diaphragm had suffusion points. The superficial cervical, auxiliary and mediastinum lymph nodes were enlarged and congested. Examination
of the locomotion system showed no change, with bone strength within normal limits. A total of 118 adult males and 103 adult females of A.
vasorum were observed and recovered. The clinical, hematological and pathological changes found in the examined animal are consistent with
canine angiostrongylosis and corroborate descriptions made in previous studies (Prestwood et al., 1981, Perry et al., 1991; Patteson et al.,
1993; Cury et al., 2002, Schnyder et al., 2010). The circulatory problems in infected animals are due to mechanical irritation in the
arterial endothelium caused by the parasites. The eggs, larvae and adults cause inflammatory and thromboembolic pulmonary processes. Erratic
migrations of larvae and adults to the kidneys, brain, eyes, femoral artery and bladder have been observed (Perry et al., 1991; Cury & Lima,
1996; Oliveira-Júnior et al., 2004; Denk et al., 2009). Sudden death in dogs with angiostrongylosis may be caused by obstruction of the
pulmonary artery or other major arteries or heart failure (Patteson et al., 1993; Ramsey et al., 1996; Chapman et al., 2004; Garosi et al.,
2005; Staebler et al., 2005; Wessmann et al., 2006). Sasanelli et al. (2008) described one case report in which hemothorax was caused by A.
vasorum infection; however, this result does not explain the presence of L1 larvae in the pleural effusion seen in this study. Therefore,
this is the first report of a fatal thoracic aortic rupture by hemothorax caused by adult and larval A. vasorum and accompanied by thrombus
formation, local inflammation and weakness of the artery wall. The recovery of A. vasorum adults and larvae in organs other than those
involved in the natural parasite life cycle has been described (Oliveira- Júnior et al., 2004; Cury & Lima, 1995, 1996). The discovery of
another ectopic location of the parasite is important for understanding A. vasorum pathogenesis because erratic migrations can cause death
or injury in other tissues by changing their functionality and causing symptoms that increasingly prevent clinical diagnoses of
angiostrongylosis. Moreover, it is clear that further studies focusing on disease pathogenesis and the actual life cycle within the
definitive host are needed to clarify such migrations of the parasite. The nonspecificity of clinical signs hinder the clinical diagnosis of
the disease since it can be mistaken with other diseases leading to the misdiagnosis and an underestimation of the real parasite. The
presence of males and females erratic parasites as well as the presence of the first larval stage within the aortic artery and the fluid
found in the thoracic cavity showed the association with hemothorax and describes for the first time the rupture of the aortic artery.
Continued bleeding following elective surgery in infected dogs has been reported in practice (Helm et al., 2010) and these cases might be
presented as emergencies. It is notable that the severity of bleeding correlates poorly with the extent of detectable coagulation
abnormalities, such that some dogs exhibit severe signs with apparently normal coagulation profiles. Thus, screening for infection and
performing a coagulation profile before surgery in known hyperendemic areas is indicated. It is fair to assume that increasing populations
of dogs are at risk from A. vasorum infection. This note has relevance to warn doctors of small animals veterinary clinic’s that
angiostrongylosis should be related within differential diagnoses in dogs with bleeding and cardiopulmonary disorders especially in enzootic
areas.
