Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) syndrome includes varying combinations of endocrine and non-endocrine tumors. There are also a
considerable number of atypical MEN1 syndrome. In this case, a 68-yr-old woman was referred to the Department of Endocrinology for
hypercalcemia. Five years ago, she had diagnosed as primary hyperaldosteronism and now newly diagnosed as parathyroid hyperplasia with
laboratory and pathologic findings. Hürthle-cell thyroid cancer was also resected during the parathyroid exploration and small meningioma
was found on brain MRI. Her general condition has markedly improved and her adrenal mass and meningioma are being closely observed now. We
could find the loss of heterozygosity of the MEN1 locus in parathyroid glands, suggesting a MEN1-related tumor, but not a germline mutation.
Considering a variety of phenotypic expression and a limitation of current molecular analysis, periodic follow up will be needed in patients
with a MEN1-like phenotype. Multiple endocrine neoplasia type 1 (MEN1) syndrome is an autosomal dominant inherited disorder, which
predisposes patients to the development of varying combinations of endocrine and non-endocrine tumors (1). They include the hyperplasia or
adenoma of the parathyroid gland, and tumors of the endocrine pancreas and anterior pituitary (2). However, primary aldosteronism is one of
the conditions rarely associated with MEN1 (3). It has also been reported that meningiomas are related to MEN1 (4). The candidate gene,
MEN1, is located on chromosome 11q13 and loss of heterozygosity (LOH) of the MEN1 locus appears to MEN1-related tumors (5). Here we report a
rare case consisting of primary hyperparathyroidism associated with primary aldosteronism, Hürthle-cell thyroid carcinoma, and meningioma. A
68-yr-old woman was referred to the Department of Endocrinology for an elevated serum calcium level (2.95 mM, normal value: 2.25-2.75 mM) on
May 24, 2010. Five years earlier, she had visited to the Department of Nephrology for evaluation of hypokalemia. At that time, she had been
diagnosed with primary hyperaldosteronism with a low potassium level (1.7 mM, normal value: 3.5-5.3 mM), a high plasma aldosterone level
(0.244 nM, normal value: 0.014-0.083 nM), and a low normal plasma renin level (0.021 pM, normal value: 0.008-0.3 pM). Adrenal CT scan showed
a 1-cm round nodule in the left adrenal gland (1.1 × 1.0 cm), suggestive of adrenal adenoma (Fig. 1A). At that time, she refused an
operation and started to take spironolactone. After 5 months, however, she did not visit the outpatient clinic any more. Two years before
the presentation reported here, she came to the Department of Neurology, complaining of the involuntary movement of her neck and four
extremities. She was referred again to the Department of Nephrology with a similarly low potassium level (1.8 mM, normal value: 3.5-5.3 mM),
and high plasma aldosterone level (aldosterone 0.327 nM, normal value: 0.014-0.083 nM),and low normal plasma renin level (0.040 pM, normal
value: 0.008-0.3 pM). On the follow-up CT scan, the size of the left adrenal adenoma had slightly increased since the previous film (1.4 ×
1.2 cm) (Fig. 1B). She started to take 50 mg of spironolactone again. Because of other vague symptoms like depression, anxiety, headache,
nausea, anorexia, and polydipsia, it was also recommended that she visit a neuropsychiatric clinic under the suspicion of manic depressive
disorder. When she visited the Department of Endocrinology due to hypercalcemia, she had taken spironolactone for 2 yr, maintaining a normal
potassium level. She had been taking antihypertensive medication for 20 yr and hypoglycemic agents for 2 yr. She had no family history of
the endocrine tumors such as parathyroid gland, pancreas or pituitary gland. Further studies demonstrated that her hypercalcemia was
associated with an elevated intact-PTH level (83.2 ng/L, normal value 14-72 ng/L). An increased parathyroid uptake of MIBI scan was noted in
the right superior, right inferior, and left inferior parathyroid glands (Fig. 2). Multiple cystic and solid nodules, suggestive of
malignancy, were incidentally found in both thyroid glands by neck sonography and fine needle aspiration cytology (Fig. 3). During the
parathyroid exploration, total thyroidectomy was performed at once. The pathological diagnosis of the resected parathyroid glands was chief
cell hyperplasia and that of the thyroid gland was Hürthle-cell carcinoma (Fig. 2, 3). Due to her lasting headache during hospital days, we
performed an imaging study. On her brain MRI, a small meningioma (2.1 × 2.0 × 1.4 cm) was detected, as a non-endocrine tumor, in the left
parasagital-frontoparietal convexity (Fig. 4); however, there were no pituitary lesions. We decided to follow up on the meningioma without
surgery because of the small mass size and no correlating symptoms. Her general condition markedly improved and her adrenal mass and
meningioma are now being closely observed. Based on these results, we could conclude that she had primary hyperparathyroidism, primary
hyperaldosteronism, Hürthle-cell carcinoma of the thyroid gland, and meningioma. From various clinical manifestations, we suspected that the
findings of the patient might have been related to a MEN1 mutation or other genetic background. In the analysis of all coding exons of MEN1
of the patient, polymorphisms were detected in exon 9 and exon 10, but failed to show a germline mutation (Fig. 5A). However, we could find
the LOH of the MEN1 locus at codon 1269 (C1269T), in exon 9 of the parathyroid gland, suggesting a MEN1-related tumor (Fig. 5B). In case of
the thyroid glands, there was no LOH of MEN1 locus at codon 1269 (Fig. 5C). We report here a rare case consisting of primary
hyperparathyroidism associated with primary hyperaldosteronism, Hürthle-cell thyroid carcinoma, and meningioma. We suspected those serial
findings might have come from a MEN1 mutation and tested this using genomic DNA from peripheral blood leukocytes. In this patient, we could
not find a germline mutation in the protein-coding lesion of the MEN1 gene, but detected the LOH of the MEN1 locus in exon 9 of the
parathyroid gland, suggesting a MEN1-related tumor. A practical definition of MEN1 states that a patient must have abnormalities in at least
two of the affected endocrine glands, as well as a first-degree relative with at least one MEN1-related lesion or a known MEN1 mutation (2,
6). This usually involves the parathyroids (95%), pancreas (40%), or pituitary (29%), but occasionally other endocrine glands are affected
as well (7, 8). Our patient had a parathyroid lesion, but neither pancreas nor the pituitary lesions. However, it is well known that MEN1
mutation relates to combinations of over 20 different endocrine and non-endocrine tumors (1). Thus, no simple definition of MEN1 could cover
all index cases or all families. Some researchers have called those atypical types of patients as 'MEN1 phenocopy' or 'MEN1 phenocopy
variants'. The prevalence of adrenal lesions in MEN1 ranges from 9% to 55% (3, 8), and is generally reported to be rarer than those of
parathyroid or pancreatic endocrine lesions (11, 12). Furthermore, "functional" aldosterone-producing adrenocortical adenoma is rarely seen.
In earlier studies, some researchers found LOH of the 11q13 locus in aldosterone-producing adrenal adenoma (8, 9). It was notable that
primary hyperparathyroidism was newly detected after treating hyperaldosteronism with spironolactone. It has been reported that
hypercalcemia might be masked for a while under hyperaldosteronism, which causes hypokalemic alkalosis and a low serum ionized calcium (13).
Thyroid disease can be observed in over 25% of MEN1 patients (12). Even though there have been a few reports of papillary thyroid cancer
(14-16), no report has associated Hürthle-cell thyroid cancer with MEN1-like syndrome. In this case, we found Hürthle-cell thyroid cancer
incidentally during exploration. Although we could not find somatic changes like LOH of the MEN1 locus in the thyroid tissue, this is the
first report of Hürthle-cell thyroid cancer combined with MEN1-like phenotype. Meningioma was also accompanied by other endocrine tumors in
this patient. Asgharian et al. recently reported that meningiomas developed in 6 of 74 (8%) MEN1 patients with pancreatic endocrine tumors
(PETs) prospectively. According to them, meningiomas were 11 times more frequent in patients with PETs and MEN1 than without it (4).
Bäcklund et al. (17) also studied the relationship between parathyroid adenoma and primary CNS tumors, particularly meningiomas. They
reported that the incidence of meningiomas in patients with parathyroid adenoma was much higher than in those without it. Although more
research is needed, there might be a shared etiology of parathyroid adenomas and meningiomas. The MEN1 gene is a tumor suppressor gene on
chromosome 11q13 that encodes the nuclear protein, menin, which regulates cell growth and cycle, and when this protein deficit occurs, MEN1
develops (10). In addition, LOH at the locus of the MEN1 tumor suppressor gene may have an important role in the development of tumor (5).
In this patient, we found the LOH of the MEN1 locus of the parathyroid gland, but could not detect a germline mutation in the MEN1 gene.
There might be several explanations for the lack of definite mutations. First, the sensitivity of the PCR and direct sequencing method is
generally 60%-70%. MEN1 germline mutations have been identified in about 80% to 90% of probands with familial MEN1 syndrome (2) and about
65% of individuals with simplex MEN1 syndrome (5). There is no doubt about the usefulness of MEN1 mutation analysis to confirm a diagnosis
of MEN1, but we should also note the limitation of genetic analysis indicated above. Next, approximately 10% of new germline mutations are
being detected among all MEN1 patients, which is one of the reasons why the association of genotype and phenotype could not be identical in
our case. Based on a few recent studies, the incidence of CDKN1B mutations in patients with a MEN1-related phenotype is estimated to be
1.5%-3.7% (18-20). Our patient has shown more than two endocrine tumors over several years, suggesting MEN1-related clinical features. In
this patient, we found the LOH of the MEN1 locus of the parathyroid gland, but could not detect a germline mutation in the MEN1 gene.
Considering a variety of phenotypic expression and a limitation of current molecular analysis, periodic screening and follow up will be
needed in the patient who have a MEN1-like phenotype but test-negative for MEN1 mutations. The serial radiologic findings of adrenal lesion.
(A) The first CT scan showed a 1-cm round nodule in left adrenal gland (1.1 × 1 cm). (B) The size of it slightly increased (1.4 × 1.2 cm) on
the following CT scan three years later. The radiologic and pathologic findings of parathyroid glands. (A) Parathyroid MIBI scan showed an
increased uptake in the right superior/inferior and left inferior glands. (B) The pathological diagnosis of the resected parathyroid glands
were chief cell hyperplasia, H&E stain, × 200. The radiologic and pathologic findings of thyroid glands. (A) Multiple thyroid nodules were
incidentally found in preoperative neck US. (B, C) The resected tumor of thyroid gland shows a capsular invasion, consisting solid Hürthle-
cells and variable sized follicles, suggestive of Hürthle-cell carcinoma. H&E stain, B × 20; C × 400. In the left parasagital-frontoparietal
convexity of brain MRI, a small meningioma (2.1 × 2.0 × 1.4 cm) was newly detected. Direct sequence analysis of all coding exons of MEN1 of
the patient. (A) Blood cell DNA failed to show a germline mutation. (B) DNA from the parathyroid hyperplasia showed a LOH of the MEN1 locus
at codon 1269 (C1269T), in exon 9. (C) On the other hand, LOH of MEN1 locus was not detected in DNA from the thyroid tissue.
