Dear Readers, Greetings from the Editorial desk! This issue brings you a bouquet of a wide variety of articles from different
subspecialities. An interesting article: ‘Fifteen-year trends in indications for enucleation from a tertiary care center in South India’ by
Sabyasachi Sengupta et al has found increasing trends in enucleations due to retinoblastoma and reduction of enucleations due to trauma,
chronic uveitis, and glaucoma. There has been a sea change in the doctrine of management of ocular trauma. The vast majority of open globes
can be repaired without requiring primary enucleation. Secondary enucleation is most commonly carried out for pain. Eyes with no light
perception can be closely observed if the patient chooses. The current scenario demands proper documentation of eye injuries for benefit of
patients as well as doctors. Any attempt to reconstruct an eye is useful to preserve the eye anatomically and keep the chance of a
functional improvement, irrespective of an initial complete functional loss. This observation not only proves that a missing light
perception is no contraindication to an attempt to reconstruct an eye anatomically. Despite repeated surgeries, the risk of sympathetic
ophthalmia has not risen above 0.1–0.3% during the last four decades. On the other hand, evisceration seems to be no measure to prevent the
development of sympathetic ophthalmia. On behalf of the Ocular Trauma Society of India, an initiative has been taken for documentation of
eye injuries in the country by developing “Indian Eye Injury Registry Form” which is available on the following link:
http://otsi.in/ieir.aspx. The form is bound to undergo several improvements but I urge all of you to be part of this by documenting your
cases of eye injuries. Ophthalmology is a visual science in more ways than one. Its proper practice may depend more on detection of
distinctive visual images and on recognition of characteristic visual patterns than does any other medical specialty. Our ability to observe
most pathologic changes and surgical manoeuvres of the eye through transparent tissues is unsurpassed by other medical disciplines and
probably accounts for much of the appeal that ophthalmology holds for many of us. This issue will witness a new and exciting development for
our journal – the introduction of photo essay. A picture is worth 1000 words…. and a series of pictures is priceless! Keeping with the trend
of recent advances and rapidly developing technology, it was only a matter of time before we introduced photo essays in the Indian Journal
of Ophthalmology. Photo essays have been a trend in Ophthalmology Journals since the 1980s. Photography and imaging is now integral to
diagnosis in our field and a boon to monitor progress of disease. Photoessays aim at highlighting the importance of utilizing the
appropriate technology which is specific for certain conditions and the value of documentation. I hope that the following photo essay will
be the trend setter for this new development and act as an example and guideline for future submissions. I look forward to many submissions.
General The word limit is 300 words for the discussion and introduction.A minimum of four and maximum of eight photos can be sent.Legends
for figures must be not more than 150 words in total.Photoessays are not a modality to present a rare case report but rather a way to teach
the readers about the use of appropriate technology to reach a diagnosis.The format will be Presentation (Case report) and discussion.
References can be a maximum number of 5, no abstracts are required.Only one photoessay will be accepted per issue.The submitted photos can
be Anterior Segment pictures, Fundus Pictures, Angiograms, OCT pictures, Visual fields, Topographs, or any other imaging technique used to
reach a diagnosis including CT scan, MRI.The picture can be cropped so that the relevant part is emphasized.The cost of the photo print will
have to be borne by the author however the cost for six to eight photos will still be charged for six photos only. The word limit is 300
words for the discussion and introduction. A minimum of four and maximum of eight photos can be sent. Legends for figures must be not more
than 150 words in total. Photoessays are not a modality to present a rare case report but rather a way to teach the readers about the use of
appropriate technology to reach a diagnosis. The format will be Presentation (Case report) and discussion. References can be a maximum
number of 5, no abstracts are required. Only one photoessay will be accepted per issue. The submitted photos can be Anterior Segment
pictures, Fundus Pictures, Angiograms, OCT pictures, Visual fields, Topographs, or any other imaging technique used to reach a diagnosis
including CT scan, MRI. The picture can be cropped so that the relevant part is emphasized. The cost of the photo print will have to be
borne by the author however the cost for six to eight photos will still be charged for six photos only. Submission Double spacing of all
words.Title of not more than 10 wordsAuthor name with the highest degree with a maximum of three authors. Double spacing of all words. Title
of not more than 10 words Author name with the highest degree with a maximum of three authors. Technical Images should be optimum for print
production Resolution should be 1800 × 1600 pixels or 8 × 6 inches with 300 dpi.For print TIFF images are preferred. Submission of photos
can be in the format of JPG, PNG, GIF provided they are of high resolution. Images should be optimum for print production Resolution should
be 1800 × 1600 pixels or 8 × 6 inches with 300 dpi. For print TIFF images are preferred. Submission of photos can be in the format of JPG,
PNG, GIF provided they are of high resolution. S Natarajan, Shachi Desai, Samita Moolani Presentation A 25-year-old male patient reported in
2010 with gradual diminution of vision in RE over the past 5 years. Best corrected OD Visual acuity was 6/18 and OS was 6/9. Amsler's chart
showed central distortion in the right eye. Fundus evaluation revealed yellow egg yolk like lesion at the macula in both eyes, with the
right eye being more affected. The diagnosis of Best disease was made. In 2011, he returned after an year with complains of further
diminution of vision of right eye to 6/12. Discussion Best disease, an autosomal dominant disorder, is also known as adult vitelliform
degeneration. It was named after Dr Franz Best, a German ophthalmologist, described the first pedigree in 1905. Disease remains asymptomatic
for years and starts causing visual disturbances as it passes through its five stages. Asymmetric egg yolk like lesions at macula in both
the eyes is usual presentation for the disease. Fundus photography is very helpful for documentation and follow up. OCT findings vary from
thickening of RPE in early stages and atrophy in late stages. Fundus photo is clearly showing egg yolk like lesion in vitello-disruptive
stage in the right eye and vitelliform in the left eye OCT scanning of the right eye shows typical changes at RPE level with thickening of
RPE with neurosensory retina elevation in both the eyes Fundus picture with autofluorescence revealed OD progression of vitelliform stage
into pseudohypopyon: stage 5 Photographs a and b show the right and left fundus autofluorescence of the right and left eye, respectively.
Photographs c and d show the progression of the disease 1 year later
