Home hemodialysis is common in New Zealand and associated with lower cost, improved survival and better patient experience. We present the
case of a fully trained home hemodialysis patient who exsanguinated at home as a result of an incorrect wash back procedure. The case
involves a 67 year old male with a history of well controlled hypertension and impaired glucose tolerance. He commenced on peritoneal
dialysis in 2006 following the development of end stage kidney failure secondary to focal segmental glomerulosclerosis. He transferred to
hemodialysis due to peritoneal membrane failure in 2010, and successfully trained for home hemodialysis over a 20 week period. Following one
month of uncomplicated dialysis at home, he was found deceased on his machine at home in the midst of dialysis. His death occurred during
the wash back procedure performed using the “open circuit” method, and resulted from misconnection of the saline bag to the venous end of
the extracorporeal blood circuit instead of the arterial end. This led to approximately 2.3L of his blood being pumped into the saline bag
resulting in hypovolaemic shock and death from exsanguination. Despite successful training, critical procedural errors can still be made by
patients on home hemodialysis. In this case, the error involved misconnection of the saline bag for wash back. This case should prompt
providers of home hemodialysis to review their training protocols and manuals. Manufacturers of dialysis machinery should be encouraged to
design machines specifically for home hemodialysis, and consider distinguishing the arterial and venous ends of the extracorporeal blood
circuit with colour coding or incompatible connectivity, to prevent occurrences such as these in the future. For those with end stage kidney
failure, hemodialysis is the most common modality of treatment. Haemodialysis is commonly performed at home in Australasia and particularly
in New Zealand. This practice is motivated by better clinical and patient experience, improved patient outcomes, and lower cost . Our
nephrology service is based in Auckland, New Zealand, and has been providing home hemodialysis for almost 30 years. Currently, we care for
approximately 80 prevalent home hemodialysis patients and train between 20 and 25 patients for home hemodialysis per year. Such patients are
selected for home hemodialysis by a multidisciplinary team. While there are no absolute inclusion or exclusion criteria for home
hemodialysis, there must be general agreement within the multidisciplinary team that patients are medically, physically, and functionally
capable. Once they are selected, training for home hemodialysis is rigorous and lasts on average 110 days. After that, patients perform
their hemodialysis at home with frequent phone support and monthly home visits from their trainer/case manager. An important aspect of
hemodialysis is the wash back procedure at the end of treatment. During this procedure, saline is infused through the dialysis machine’s
extracorporeal blood circuit thereby returning blood to the patient’s circulation and minimizing blood loss. In our home hemodialysis
training program, we instruct patients to use the “open circuit” method. The correct form of this procedure is illustrated in Figure 1.
Summarily, the procedure involves disconnecting the arterial end of the extracorporeal blood circuit from the arterial needle, then
connecting the arterial end of the circuit to a saline infusion set, before using the blood pump to draw saline through the extracorporeal
blood for wash back. Schematic of normal extracorporeal blood circuit configuration. The top panel represents configuration during a normal
hemodialysis treatment. The bottom panel represents configuration during the wash back procedure using the “open circuit” method with the
arterial end of the circuit connected to the saline infusion set. We present a case of a patient who died performing his hemodialysis at
home as a result of an incorrect wash back procedure. The case involves a male who was 67 years old at the time of his death. He was a
retired businessman, married with several children, and socioeconomically advantaged. He lived with his wife and children, and his mother.
He spoke both English and Hindi fluently, and had no sensory or cognitive impairment. His only co-morbidities were longstanding well
controlled hypertension and impaired glucose tolerance. He was diagnosed with chronic kidney disease secondary to focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis in 2003. He commenced peritoneal dialysis for end stage kidney failure in 2006, which continued without any infectious or
technical complication for the entire period of his treatment with this modality. He developed peritoneal membrane failure after 4 years; we
made a decision to transition him to home hemodialysis in early 2010. He had an arteriovenous fistula placed on 21st July 2010, and
commenced home hemodialysis training 14th September 2010. He completed training on 7th February 2011, and commenced home hemodialysis
thereafter. There were no reported problems or technical difficulties throughout his training. His hemodialysis prescription was for 5 hours
of dialysis three times a week, using a hollow fibre polyamide 2.1m2 high flux dialyser, bicarbonate-based dialysate with a of 1.25 mM, and
a Gambro AK200S machine (Gambro AB, Lund, Sweden). On the day of this death, 3rd March 2011, the patient had contacted his case manager in
the morning to propose a decrease in his target weight and the removal of more fluid than prescribed. He was advised against this. Several
hours later, his family called the unit to report that they had returned home to discover him dead while still attached to his dialysis
machine. Investigations showed that the patient had exsanguinated during the wash back procedure. During the wash back, a 1 L bag of saline
had been misconnected to the venous end of the extracorporeal blood circuit, rather than the arterial end. As a result, the patient’s blood
was pumped out of his circulation into the bag of saline, instead of saline being pumped out of the bag through the extracorporeal blood
circuit (Figure 2). The bag of saline is shown in Figure 3, and weighed 3.3 kg implying at least 2.3 L of the patient’s blood in addition to
1 L of saline. Of note, his last blood pressure reading was recorded one and half hours before the end of dialysis (patients are usually
advised to take their observations hourly), and at that time his blood pressure and heart rate were satisfactory (146/84 and 59 bpm
respectively). Schematic of extracorporeal blood circuit configuration in this case. The top panel represents configuration during a normal
wash back procedure using the “open circuit” method. The lower panel represents the configuration of the patient’s circuit with the venous
end of the circuit connected to the saline infusion set. The saline bag found attached to the deceased’s dialysis machine. The weight of the
bag was 3.3kg, implying the addition of 2.3L of the patient’s blood to the bag of saline during the wash back procedure. Exhaustive testing
of the patient’s hemodialysis machine showed that it was functioning correctly, and in particular venous alarms were triggering normally. To
replicate the patient’s situation, we tested the distensibility of a bag of normal saline and determined that it can expand to several times
its volume to accommodate at least three litres of extra fluid, all without substantial increase in venous pressure on the dialysis machine
or bag rupture (Figure 4). A saline bag after a simulation of circumstances surrounding the deceased’s last dialysis treatment. The weight
of the bag was 4kg, and venous pressures with a pump speed of 200mL/min rose to only just higher than 200mmHg during this exercise. At a
blood pump speed of 200 mL/min, it would have taken more than 10 minutes to fill the saline bag with as much blood as we found.
Consequently, we were concerned that the patient may have been acutely incapacitated by a primary cardiovascular or cerebrovascular event at
the time of the wash-back. A post mortem examination was performed, with the forensic pathologist reporting no specific anatomic,
toxicological or biochemical abnormality to account for his death. Minor arthrosclerosis was noted in the left anterior descending and right
coronary arteries, left vertebral artery, and the infrarenal aorta. The myocardium and brain were normal on multiple sections. The Coroner’s
conclusion was that death was due to hypovolaemic shock arising from blood loss into an incorrectly connected saline bag. Three providers of
home hemodialysis around New Zealand have reported similar incidents. Two occurred in setting of home hemodialysis training rather than
dialysis at home. In both of these cases, the trainer noticed the error immediately and was able to rectify the problem and use it as a
teaching point. The third case occurred under ostensibly similar circumstances to ours, also appearing to lead to the patient’s death. That
case is currently sub judice with the Coroner’s Office. The death of our patient prompted an external formal review of our home hemodialysis
training program, resulting in the following changes. We now make patients aware of this specific potential complication, and emphasize to
them that they must ensure clearing of the extracorporeal blood circuit after a minute or two of the wash back procedure. We also emphasize
the potential dangers of performing home hemodialysis alone, especially in those who are newly trained, and re-iterate our recommendation
that there is someone else in the home when they dialyse if that is possible. Finally, we have developed a one-way valve that we are
incorporating into the saline line for all of our home hemodialysis patients. This valve prevents reflux of blood back into the saline bag
from the extracorporeal blood circuit in the event of misconnection, and triggers pressure alarms that alert patients to their error.
Another potential solution is the “closed circuit” wash back procedure. In this procedure, there is a Y-connection close to the arterial end
of the extracorporeal blood circuit where it attaches to the arterial needle. At the discontinuation of dialysis, the patient attaches the
saline line (or on-line ultrapure/sterile dialysate line) to the Y-connect, then clamps the line between the arterial needle and the
Y-connect, before using the blood pump to draw saline through the extracorporeal blood circuit for wash back. The procedure is illustrated
in Figure 5. The primary shortcoming of this procedure pertains to the residual blood between the arterial needle and the Y-connect, usually
2.5-5mL depending on manufacturer. This blood can either be discarded, or returned to the patient by stopping the blood pump and allowing
gravity to motivate saline from the hanging bag towards the arterial needle in a retrograde fashion through the circuit. This effectiveness
of the last part of this procedure is limited by the opposing pressure in arteriovenous access, and in our experience is not successful in
many patients without pressure applied to the saline bag which is generally not a standard or recommended practice. Schematic of wash back
procedures at the discontinuation of dialysis. The “open circuit” method is illustrated in the top panel in the top panel, and the “closed
circuit” method in the bottom panel. The manufacturer of our patient’s dialysis machine is aware of this incident. There have been
discussions around the feasibility of changing the extracorporeal blood circuit to make such an error impossible in the future. For
instance, the arterial and venous ends of the circuit could be produced with different coloured or incompatible connections to make it
difficult for patients to misconnect them. Currently, this fail-safe facility is not available from any manufacturer of dialysis machines.
Home hemodialysis is a durable and effective form of renal replacement therapy. Despite this, there are a myriad of complications that can
occur . The particular complication that we have described is the first report in the medical literature as far as we are aware. Providers
of home hemodialysis services and hemodialysis trainers should emphasize this potential complication to patients and design wash-back
procedures that will detect or prevent misconnections. We feel strongly that manufacturers should be designing hemodialysis machines that
are specifically suited for home hemodialysis. In our opinion, such a machine would include arterial and venous ends of the extracorporeal
blood circuit with colour coded or incompatible connections to prevent future incidents such as these. Written consent was obtained from the
patient’s family for the publication of the case report and its accompanying images. The authors declared that they have no competing
interests. MM and CH treated the patient, MM and BJ collected data and drafted the manuscript together with KA. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. KA (MBBS) is a Renal Registrar at Counties Manukau District Health Board; BJ (BSc PGDip Dialysis Therapy), is
the Head Clinical Dialysis Technician at Waitemata District Health Board; CJH (MA MBBS FRACP) is a nephrologist at Counties Manukau District
Health Board; MRM (MPH (Hons) FRACP) is a nephrologist and the Clinical Director of Renal Medicine at Counties Manukau District Health
Board. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2369/13/28/prepub The authors
extend their deepest sympathies to the entire family of the deceased, and wish to particularly acknowledge the generosity and strength of
SK.
