Methaemoglobinaemia is a rare condition of unknown prevalence. Diagnostic tests in resource limited settings are very rare but clinical
signs can be a good guide. We set out to describe a case of Methaemoglobinaemia, raise awareness among practitioners in resource limited
settings and to share experiences in its diagnosis and management. A previously well three and a half year old girl was admitted with
central cyanosis of sudden onset. She underwent clinical, laboratory and radiological evaluation. Having been in a resource limited setting,
the process of making a diagnosis was slow and difficult. After the diagnosis, the treatment was not available in the country but we managed
to get it all the way from Nairobi, Kenya. A diagnosis of Methaemoglobinaemia was made using Spectrophotometry and she was successfully
treated using 2 doses of intravenous Methylene blue. The cause of Methaemoglobinaemia was established to have been nitrites from food
preservatives. Methaemoglobinaemia (MetHba) is a rare condition. There is scarce data on this condition in Africa. We set out to describe a
case of MetHba following nitrite ingestion through food preservatives. In this case report, we highlight the difficulties in managing the
case in a resource limited setting like a public Hospital in Kampala, Uganda. A 3 and a half year old previously well girl was referred to
Hospital with a diagnosis of unexplained cyanosis. The child had been well until 9 pm on the day of admission when the mother, a medical
doctor, all of a sudden noticed that the child’s lips were blue. She was not a known cardiac patient and did not have any cough or
difficulty in breathing. However, she had eaten food from a fast food restaurant 6 hours earlier and had vomited 2 hours later but remained
generally well. She did not have diarrhea, abdominal pain, fever or loss of appetite and she was playing. They reported no history
suggestive of poisoning although there was some rat poison which was in easy reach of the child. The younger brother who ate the same food
was completely well except that the following day he passed loose stool twice. Initial physical examination at the Hospital revealed a child
in good general condition, well nourished, alert and playing. She had central cyanosis, was afebrile, not in respiratory distress and was
not anaemic. She had equal air entry bilaterally and normal breath sounds. In the Cardiovascular system, the pulse rate was 150 per minute,
normal volume and heart sounds were normal. Notably, the motor exam was normal. Oxygen saturation by pulse oxymetry was 80% without oxygen.
Other systems were normal. Full blood Count done was normal, with an Hb of 12.6g/dl, total white blood cell count was 7,700/ml. The child
was given only Oxygen therapy at 2 liters. While on Oxygen, the saturation only raised to 85%. Chest X-Ray, ECG and Echocardiography were
done and they were all normal. At that time, we made a diagnosis of Methaemoglobinaemia following poisoning, and thought it was so mild that
it would resolve spontaneously on only Oxygen. On day 3, while still on oxygen, the child’s condition deteriorated, with saturations going
down to 68%. She became so weak that she could not stand unsupported, was restless and irritable and even got visual hallucinations. She
lost appetite and vomited twice. She however remained conscious. We concluded that the mental confusion was due to the hypoxia or toxins
from the poison and intervention was needed. Methaemoglobinaemia needed to be treated but there was neither a way of confirming it nor drugs
to treat it at that time. By the end of the day, we had found out where to do the toxicology screen and also confirm Methaemoglobinaemia
using Spectrometry. On Day 4, blood samples were taken to the Government Analytical Laboratory and the diagnosis of Methaemoglobinaemia was
confirmed. Toxicology screen of blood and urine revealed Nitrites in both. After confirming the diagnosis, Methylene Blue was flown in from
Nairobi, Kenya within 12 hours. The child was taken to Intensive Care Unit and given high flow Oxygen up to 5 liters and Ascorbic acid as we
awaited arrival of Methylene Blue. The general condition improved remarkably but she remained cyanosed. Cyanosis stopped after 2 doses of
intravenous Methylene Blue at 30mg per dose, 6 hours apart. Oxygen was gradually reduced titrating against the saturation. She was in
Hospital for 9 days in all and went home fully recovered. Methemoglobinemia (MetHba) is a clinical syndrome caused by an increase in the
blood levels of methemoglobin (MetHb) . MetHb is the oxidized form of haemoglobin and incapable of carrying oxygen. The concentration of
MetHb does not exceed 1%–2% in the normal physiological state. Increased levels of MetHb lead to tissue hypoxia and can be fatal. Its
prevalence is difficult to determine because it encompasses a wide spectrum ranging from mild cases, which are probably under diagnosed to
fatal cases . Aetiology of MetHba is secondary to either toxic agents or it may be as a result of congenital enzyme deficiencies . Toxic
causes include drugs like Benzocaine, Chlorates, Chloroquine, Dapsone, Nitrophenol, Phenazopyridine, phenacetin derivatives, Primaquine,
Sodium nitroprusside, 4-dimethylaminophenol, aniline dyes, sulphonamides and quinones. Exposure to nitrites and nitrate compounds (for
example, amyl nitrite, glyceryl trinitrite) is the commonest cause of acquired Methaemoglobinaemia . Those drugs are powerful oxidants
widely used as preservatives and dyes in the food industry . They can be found in industrialized baby foods, barbecue-flavored foodstuffs,
and other products . Nitrates can also be present, as a contaminant, in drinking water. Local anesthetics (benzocaine, lidocaine, and
prilocaine) are also common causes. Intoxication with pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers, automobile exhaust fumes, and industrial
chemicals has also been associated with MetHba. . This child ingested Nitrites from food preservatives. In the pathophysiology of Metha,
each Hb molecule has four atoms of iron. Each ferrous iron can reversibly link one O2 molecule, for a total of four molecules of O2
transported by each Hb molecule . Methemoglobin is the oxidized form of Hb, whose heme Fe+2 is oxidized to ferric iron (Fe+3) and for this
reason, cannot bind oxygen. Ferric iron also causes an allosteric change in the heme portion of partially oxidized Hb, increasing its O2
affinity. Thus, besides the inability to bind O2, MetHb shifts the dissociation curve of partially oxidized Hb to the left, hindering the
release of O2 in the tissues . Tissue hypoxia caused by MetHba is secondary to a reduction in free Hb to transport O2 and the difficulty to
release O2 in the tissues. Clinical manifestations of MetHba reflect the reduction in O2-carrying capacity, leading to tissue hypoxia .
Clinical features depend on the level of Methaemoglobinaemia. One should suspect MetHba in patients with central cyanosis and low saturation
on pulse oxymetry refractory to oxygen administration once more common causes, like cardiopulmonary dysfunctions, are ruled out . This was
the presentation of this child, and the diagnosis was entertained after the tests showed normal cardiac and respiratory functions. Below 3%,
there are no signs and symptoms. Between 3-15%, there are frequently no symptoms but they may present with grayish skin color. Cyanosis
starts above 15% and it does not respond to Oxygen administration . They also have chocolate brown blood between 15-30%. Dyspnoea usually
sets in between 30-50%. At this level, the SpO2 is about 85%. Dizziness, fatigue, headache, weakness and syncope may also be present at this
level. Severe forms present with metabolic acidosis, cardiac arrhythmias, seizures, CNS depression and coma when levels are 50-70%. Death
usually occurs with levels about 70% . In this patient, the levels of MetHba were not measured but from the clinical presentation, she
should have had between 30-50% since she had weakness and SpO2 below 85%. The severity of the case depends on the amount of toxin the
patient has been exposed to, individual metabolic capacity, intestinal absorption, and entero-hepatic circulation. This could explain why
the younger sibling who ate the same food did not develop MetHba. Co-oximetry is the gold standard for the diagnosis of MetHba . The co-
oximeter is capable of measuring the concentration of different types of Hb in the blood through spectrophotometry, using different
wavelengths. On measuring the arterial blood gases, the p02 is normal while the measured oxygen saturation is decreased . In this child,
Spectrophotometry was done and it revealed Methaemoglobinaemia. Toxicology screen revealed Nitrites as a cause. Treatment of patients with
MetHba should be guided by the severity of the disorder . General measures include provision of High flow oxygen and identification of
offending agent and prevention of further exposure. These measures alone are usually adequate for mild cases. Treatment with Methylene Blue
(MB) is advised when the MetHb level is >30%–40% but each case must be treated individually on clinical grounds and symptoms. In situations
of significant clinical manifestations (e.g., dizziness, headache, anxiety, dyspnea, symptoms of low cardiac output, somnolence, and
seizures), besides the basic conduct mentioned, MB should be used as a specific antidote. Several authors suggest that MB should be used
with MetHb above 30%, regardless of the presence or absence of symptoms . Methylene blue is a thiazine dye with dose-dependent antiseptic
and oxidizing properties . During its use, it activates NADPH methemoglobin reductase, which reduces methylene blue to methylene leucoblue,
which transforms MetHb in HHb by a non-enzymatic mechanism. The recommended dose is 1–2 mg/kg given intravenously over five minutes.
Additional doses can be administered every hour if necessary, up to a maximum total dose of 7 mg/kg. In G6PD deficiency, red blood cells do
not produce enough NADPH to reduce methylene blue to methylene leucoblue; N-acetyl-cysteine has instead been used on those cases . In our
patient, G6PD deficiency was negative and she responded well to MB. Another treatment for MetHba is ascorbic acid, but acquired MetHba does
not respond to it because its capacity to reduce MetHb is much inferior to that of endogenous enzymatic systems . Exchange transfusion is
reserved for severe cases that do not respond to MB . Though congenital MetHba is usually benign, the form due to a defective reducing
system can be treated with ascorbic acid taken daily. The other congenital form due to hemoglobin M has no treatment as of late . Our case
report demonstrated that MetHba can be diagnosed and successfully treated in a resource limited setting. It also showed that MetHba can
present acutely in a previously well child following ingestion of nitrites from food preservatives. Practitioners in resource limited
settings could draw from this experience and suspect MetHa in any cyanosed child without respiratory or cardiac problems. The authors
declare no competing interests. Both authors are paediatricians who contributed fully to the management of this patient and writing this
manuscript. All the authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
