Struma ovarii (SO) is a slow-growing ovarian neoplasm with thyroid tissue as its predominant component. It is an uncommon neoplasm, usually
asymptomatic with an unknown risk of malignant transformation. Due to difficulties in assessing the rare biological nature and the
discrepancies in the reported cases, a consensus on the appropriate treatment has not been definitively reached. A 50-year-old female was
subjected to upper gut endoscopy which showed a 30-mm mass located in the gastric antrum, suggestive of mesenchimal tumor. Incidentally, a
pelvic CT scan also documented a solid mass in the right adnexa, with morphological characteristics of ovarian neoplasm. The patient
underwent gastrectomy, total hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with lymph node dissection, and omentectomy. Histology documented
the presence of gastric cavernous angioma, and, in the right adnexa, foci of follicular thyroid-type carcinoma arising in SO with a well-
differentiated neuroendocrine component. Here we report and discuss the clinical and morphological presentation of follicular thyroid-type
carcinoma arising in SO. The neoplasm was discovered incidentally and had a favorable clinical outcome at 1-year follow-up. Struma ovarii
(SO) is a monodermal variant of ovarian teratoma which predominantly contains thyroid tissue . The incidence is from 0.1% to 0.3% of all
ovarian teratomas . Patients are usually asymptomatic or predominantly presented with a pelvic mass in 45% of cases or abdominal pain .
Menstrual irregularities and clinical hyperthyroidism have been demonstrated in 9% and 5% of cases, respectively . Diagnosis of SO is based
on histopathological criteria and guidelines for primary thyroid gland disease . Malignant SO consists of papillary thyroid carcinoma (PTC)
cells, follicular variant of PTC or follicular thyroid carcinoma (FTC) cells, and mixed follicular/papillary carcinoma cells . The most
common type is PTC, followed by FTC and the recent form of highly differentiated follicular carcinoma (HDFCO), characterized by extraovarian
dissemination of thyroid elements . The differential diagnosis between benign and malignant neoplasm is still extremely difficult, in
particular for SO with a follicular growth pattern and undefined capsule. The incidence of malignancy is also difficult to assess due to the
rare nature of this case and the absence of standardized diagnostic criteria . Malignant transformation has been reported to vary from 5% to
37% of cases, metastasis is seen in 23% of cases and it is mainly intra-abdominal . Basing our research on the review of specific scientific
literature, we examined this uncommon case of follicular thyroid-type carcinoma arising in SO, unsuspected in the preoperative evaluation. A
50-year-old female presented to our observation with epigastric pain. Her past surgical history was uneventful except for appendectomy. A
30-mm gastric solid mass, suggestive of mesenchimal tumor, was documented by endoscopy. Due to its high vascularization and the risk of
gastrointestinal bleeding, a biopsy was not indicated. The CT scan of the abdomen confirmed the presence of the gastric lesion, and
incidentally showed a pelvic mass of 65×45×60 mm in the right adnexa (Figure 1). The patient was asymptomatic. The pelvic finding was
confirmed by US scan: the right ovarian mass had a prevalent solid component with a rich supply of blood vessels. No signs or symptoms of
hyperthyroidism were observed. The patient underwent right oophorectomy, and after intraoperative histological diagnosis of ovarian
carcinoma, a total abdominal hysterectomy with bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, retroperitoneal lymph node dissection, and omentectomy were
finally performed. The gastric lesion was resected and the digestive continuity was restored by Billroth’s II anastomosis. At surgery, no
abnormal lymph nodes and ascites were noted. Histology did not reveal signs of peritoneal carcinomatosis in the pelvis. Macroscopically the
right ovary mass measured 62x45 mm and cut sections showed a solid white-yellowish tissue with focally hemorrhagic areas. CT appearance of
gastric and ovarian neoplasms: 30-mm solid mass with minute calcifications located between the anterior wall of corpus and gastric antrum
(a, arrow). Pelvic mass of 65×45×60 mm on right adnexa suggestive of mixed cystic-solid ovarian tumor (b). The follicular thyroid-type
carcinoma was characterized by the proliferation of cells arranged in follicular and trabecular pattern (Figure 2). In the contest of
ovarian teratoma, the follicular component showed an infiltrative growth as observed in thyroid carcinoma with moderate differentiation. The
mitotic index was not elevated and any necrotic tissue areas have been documented. The follicular tumor border was infiltrated but the
cellular growth was restricted within the capsule. Vascular invasion was reported in pericapsular capillary structures (Figure 3). Together
with the focal follicular thyroid-type carcinoma, the mature ovarian teratoma showed a well-differentiated neuroendocrine component with
cells arranged in cordonal-alveolar structures (Figure 3). Histological and immunohistochemical profile of thyroid type carcinoma in SO. The
sections show follicular thyroid cells with the mucoid glandular component (H&E), ×10 (a); strong and diffuse CD56 reactivity, ×20 (b);
Chromogranin A expression in ovarian struma, showing the neuroendocrine cells × 20 (c); Intrafollicular material and the immunoreactivity
for thyroglobulin, ×20 (d). Histological and immunohistochemical profile of thyroid type carcinoma in SO. Microscopical relationship between
SO and ovarian teratoma: on the right side mature bone tissue with osteoblasts; on the left, follicular thyroid cancer cells, ×20 (a).
Vascular invasion: capillary structures are invaded by cancer cells in the pericapsular area (b, black arrows). Neuroendocrine tumor
morphology with cordonal-alveolar pattern (c). Cavernous hemangioma of the stomach arising from submucosa: on the lower part of the section,
normal gastric mucosa and muscolaris mucosae, ×20 (d). For immunohistochemistry, sections of formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded samples were
treated with H2O2/3% for 5 minutes to inhibit endogenous peroxidase and then washed in H2O. Antigen was unmasked by treatment with EDTA at
pH 9, or with citrate buffer at pH 6 in a microwave oven (two 5-minutes courses). The slices were then held for 20 minutes at room
temperature. After washing in PBS/Tween-20, sections were incubated for 30 minutes with the primary antibodies. Then, they were washed and
stained with BondTM Polymer Refine/HRP Detection Kit according to the manufacturer’s protocol (Leica, Wetzlar, Germany) or BondTM Polymer
Refine Red Detection Kit (Leica) for PgR, ER, TTF1, Chromogranin A, Calcitonin, CD56, CDX2, CEA, CK20. For negative controls, we substituted
non-immune sera for the primary antibodies. The immunohistochemistry analysis demonstrated positivity for PgR, TTF1, Chromogranin A, CD56,
CDX2, CEA, and CK20. It was negative for ER and calcitonin. Based on these specific immunophenotype profile, diagnosis of follicular
thyroid-type carcinoma arising in SO was made (Figures 2 and 3). The multiple peritoneal biopsies and the lymph nodes were free from
metastatic cancer cells. In addition, peritoneal washing revealed mesothelial cells, leukocytes but not tumor cells on cytological
examination. The definitive diagnosis of gastric neoplasm was cavernous hemangioma involving submucosa (Figure 3). The immediate
postoperative course was characterized by anemia treated by medical supporting therapy and blood transfusions. Postoperative thyroid scan
and thyroid function were normal. She was referred for thyroidectomy but she refused the operation. Thyroglobulin levels were monitored in
the postoperative period. Nine months after treatment, laboratory evaluation revealed normal serum TSH (0.95 mU/L) and thyroglobulin (6.17
ng/mL) levels. Local and distant recurrences were not observed at the CT scan evaluation after a follow-up period of 1-year and the patients
was scheduled for further follow-up. During this period the US of the neck revealed a normal thyroid gland. Although SO has elicited
considerable interest since it was first described, many diagnostic aspects are still unknown. SO, defined as containing 50% or more thyroid
tissue, accounts for approximately 5% of all ovarian teratoma, with an incidence of malignant transformation reported in 5% to 37% of SO .
Most cases are found incidentally and for this reason the only clinical data are obtained from retrospective reports. Previous studies have
demonstrated that the majority of patients with SO are asymptomatic or accompanied by non-specific symptoms similar to other ovarian
neoplasms. At the time of diagnosis, the most common symptoms were lower abdominal pain, palpable abdominal mass, ascites, and abnormal
vaginal bleeding . Unusual clinical presentations such as hyperthyroidism and Meigs' syndrome have been also documented . The incidence of
hyperthyroidism was reported to be 5% to 8% and 17% to 33% of the cases had ascites at diagnosis . The pathophysiology of hyperthyroidism in
SO is still unknown. Matsuda and colleagues have reported that malignant SO can be diagnosed before operation by the evaluation of free T3,
and T4, Thyroglobulin, and TSH. The extremely high levels of Thyroglobulin in local ovarian venous blood compared with that in peripheral
blood provide evidence of the production of Thyroglobulin in the ovarian tumor and the normalization of it’s serum levels is related to
surgical resection of the tumor . In our case the patient did not show any specific symptoms and the diagnosis of SO was incidental and only
established after surgical removal. Thyroid tissue in SO is morphologically, biochemically identical to that of cervical thyroid gland. For
this reason the diagnosis of malignant SO is in conformity to the same criteria used for thyroid carcinoma, such as the presence of ground
glass nuclei, vascular invasion, and mitotic activity . Unfortunately, the concept of malignant SO in the literature is confusing due to
lack of standardized prognostic parameters. The diagnosis of a well-differentiated variant is particularly difficult due to lack of a well-
defined tumor capsule in the ovarian tissue. In these cases, the presence of infiltration by tumor cells into the surrounding ovarian
tissue, and involvement of vascular system, or metastasis, highly supported the diagnosis of malignancy . Although the histological aspects
of malignancy are often documented, the majority of patients that underwent surgical treatment for thyroid type carcinoma arising in SO did
not show a clinically aggressive outcome with high rates of recurrences and metastatic spread. The biological behavior remains often
enigmatic and seems not to be correlated with the observed long-term clinical outcomes. With the efforts of understanding the prognostic
parameters and defining more appropriate treatment care, a molecular and morphological consensus is advocated to standardize diagnostic
criteria of malignancy in cases of thyroid type carcinoma in SO. Distant metastasis has been reported to be a rare feature of SO in
approximately 5% of cases . Other clinical studies demonstrated a higher intra-abdominal metastatic rate of 23% . Common metastatic sites
are the omentum, peritoneum, lymph nodes, fallopian tubes, and the contralateral ovary . Some patients presented with distant metastases to
the lungs, bone, brain, liver, and mesenteric surfaces of the spleen and diaphragm . In clinical diagnosis, thyroid type carcinoma in SO has
to be differentiated from cystadenoma and other primary ovarian cancers or metastatic tumors. Generally, SO appeared as a smooth-margin
multicystic mass with a high attenuation signals during pre-contrast on CT scan. Signal intensities on T1-weighted images were usually
intermediate to high, and those on T2-weighted images were low as recently reported by Shen and colleagues . The majority of tumors showed a
mixed cystic and solid mass, with capsule wall thickness of 3 mm on average, and contained transparent, green, or brown fluids . To our
knowledge five lethal cases have been reported in literature with recurrences and metastatic disease . In our case no metastasis have been
documented during 1-year follow-up after surgery. The treatment of malignant SO remains controversial and no consensus exists on the
surgical and non-surgical modalities. Surgical treatment consists in total abdominal hysterectomy plus bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy with
omentectomy and lymph nodes sampling, a reasonable therapy for postmenopausal women with diagnosis of carcinoma. In other conditions,
especially when fertility has to be preserved, conservative surgery concerning unilateral oophorectomy might be proposed together with a
strict follow-up . This hypothesis should be carefully discussed with the patients. Laparoscopic surgery may offer some advantages in
surgical staging and its mini-invasive removal but this technique is not standardized for these uncommon conditions . After the initial
surgery, some authors have advocated near total thyroidectomy and radioactive iodine ablation to detect and treat recurrent disease . Total
thyroidectomy is mandatory to exclude a primary thyroid neoplasm in the differential diagnosis of SO. Total thyroidectomy followed by ¹³¹ I
radio ablation therapy should be reserved for patients with recurrence or residual disease . Thyroglobulin is a well established marker for
monitoring the recurrence of malignancy. An increased serum levels of Thyroglobulin represent the early detection of recurrence as reported
in many studies . SO containing thyroid type carcinoma must be distinguished from papillary or follicular thyroid carcinoma metastatic to
the ovary . It is mandatory to study the thyroid gland for the differential diagnosis of primary or secondary tumor of the ovary. De Simone
and colleagues have proposed thyroidectomy to confirm normal thyroid gland, by excluding a primary thyroid carcinoma, and potentiate
radioactive iodine therapy . No consensus has been reached in performing prophylactic total thyroidectomy after the diagnosis of thyroid
type carcinoma in SO. In this situation, the combination of surgical removal with subsequent thyroidectomy and radiotherapy do not represent
a standardized therapy but it is a comprehensive therapeutic modality, still not supported by scientific data in reducing the risk of
recurrence and increase prognostic indices of selected cases. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. FS, MW, RC, and PI
analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript. DR, AD, and DS participated in the acquisition and interpretation of radiological data. DA
carried out the histological and bio-molecular studies. FS and PI contributed to the final version and carried out the clinical case report.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Written informed consent was obtained for publication of this clinical case with
accompanying imaging. The work was supported by funding to F.S. from ’G. d’Annunzio’ University, Chieti, Italy; Support Grant Ex-Legge
240/2010 (Progetto Speciale Multiasse ’RETI PER L’ALTA FORMAZIONE’ - P.O. F.S.E. 2007-2013, Piano Operativo 2009-2010-2011).
