The use of imatinib mesylate is associated with a progression free survival of 41 months in first line treatment of metastatic or locally
advanced gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST) and other studies approved that adjuvant imatinib treatment improves the recurrence-free
survival in patients with GIST. Current recommendations include 1 year adjuvant treatment in GIST patients at risk but active studies
explore different durations of treatment with an interval of up to 5 years. While the most frequent adverse events (AEs) are blood count
alterations, abdominal discomfort and edema, the occurrence of grade 3 or 4 increase of AST or ALT is specified with 2.1% and 2.7%
respectively. We report a 49-year old male with a gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) of the small bowel who developed liver cirrhosis
under adjuvant imatinib treatment. Our report supports the notion that imatinib-induced hepatotoxicity may lead to acute liver damage with
subsequent cirrhotic remodelling. Patients developing grade 3 or 4 hepatotoxicity during imatinib treatment should therefore be carefully
evaluated for chronic liver disease. The selective tyrosine kinase inhibitor imatinib mesylate has dramatically influenced the treatment of
chronic myeloid leukemia (CML) and gastrointestinal stromal tumors (GIST). First line treatment of metastatic or locally advanced GIST with
imatinib is currently associated with a PFS of 41 months . The basis for imatinib in the treatment of GIST has been further broadened by
other studies, which showed that adjuvant treatment with imatinib improves the recurrence-free survival in patients with GIST . As imatinib
treatment is commonly well tolerated, the most frequent adverse events (AEs) are blood count alterations, abdominal discomfort and edema.
The adjuvant Z9100 GIST trial reported on grade 3 or 4 increase of AST or ALT in 2.1% and 2.7% respectively, indicating the rather rare
occurrence of hepatotoxicity . With the implementation of imatinib for adjuvant treatment in GIST more patients are exposed to imatinib,
which may also increase the occurrence of imatinib-induced liver damage. Current recommendations include 1 year adjuvant treatment in GIST
patients at risk, but active studies explore different durations of treatment with an interval of up to 5 years duration. We report on a
case with liver cirrhosis in a patient with advanced GIST and high-risk of recurrence during adjuvant treatment with imatinib. A 49-year old
male patient presented with flank pain and hematuria. The CT scan showed a large pelvic tumor 18 cm in diameter (Figure 1). A biopsy was
performed and the pathologic examination revealed a spindle cell tumor with co-expression of CD117 and S100 protein, as well as a point
mutation in c-kit exon 11, consistent with the diagnosis GIST. Due to the large tumor size, neoadjuvant therapy with imatinib 400 mg daily
was initiated. After 6 months of treatment, the patient developed grade 3 hepatotoxicity with ALT and AST elevations from normal values to
882 U/l and 383 U/l, and an elevated bilirubin of 25 umol/l. Imatinib was paused for two weeks and parameters rapidly declined to normal
limits. Treatment was then continued at 400 mg OD and sustained tumor shrinkage was seen in subsequent CT scans. After 16 months of
neoadjuvant therapy tumor shrinkage ceased and tumor size was reduced from 18 cm to 14 cm (22% reduction). A complete tumor resection was
performed at that time. Consistent with the clinical response, the pathological examination revealed a tumor regression of 20% (Figure 2)
with low expression of proliferation markers (MIB <1%). Due to the high risk of recurrence, adjuvant therapy with imatinib 400 mg OD was
initiated. After 7 months of adjuvant treatment, grade 4 hepatotoxicity developed with an ALT 1837 U/l and AST 1022 U/l (Figure 3) and an
elevated bilirubin of 90 umol/l. Imatinib was paused for a total duration of 8 weeks, and subsequently the elevated transaminases declined
to values within normal limits. Subsequent re-challenge of imatinib was associated with another episode of hepatotoxicity after 14 days of
re-exposure. A corresponding MRI showed the development of cirrhotic changes of the liver (Figure 4), which had been absent at the previous
MRI 3 months before. Other possible causes of liver damage, including metastasis, alcoholic liver disease, hepatitis A, B, C, and E,
autoimmune hepatitis and metabolic disorders were excluded. Imatinib was discontinued permanently and the transaminases returned to normal
values within 6 months. Fifteen months after discontinuation of imatinib the patient is still without relapse, but cirrhotic changes of the
liver remained sustained on MRI. CT scan of the patient. GIST of the small bowel 18 x 10 cm in size when it was first diagnosed prior
nedoadjuvant treatment. Photomicrograph of the GIST, (Hematoxylin– eosin; original magnification, x200. Tumor regression of 20% under neo-
adjuvant treatment. Development of transaminases under adjuvant imatinib treatment. MRI of the liver. One month after discontinuing adjuvant
treatment MRI shows clearly cirrhotic changes of the parenchyma. To our knowledge this is the first case, which reports on the development
of liver cirrhosis during adjuvant imatinib treatment in a patient with GIST. Hepatotoxicity has been observed in about 2–5% of patients
receiving imatinib . Most of them present with mild temporary liver enzyme elevations, which resolve after dose reductions or
discontinuation of imatinib treatment . However, acute liver failure has also been reported sporadically during imatinib treatment .
Histologic changes have been described in some of these cases and consist of inflammation, fatty degeneration, or necrosis of the liver .
Due to the transient nature of toxicity, re-exposure to imatinib is warranted in most cases . Prospective studies in patients with pre-
existing liver disease showed that imatinib can be administered safely in these patients, indicating a different mechanism for hepatic
toxicity . However, late changes have been recognized in a patient with CML who was diagnosed with liver cirrhosis one year after cessation
of treatment due to imatinib-induced acute liver failure . Therefore a close follow up should be mandatory. In asymptomatic patients
constant liver enzyme measurements should be adequate. If cirrhotic changes already occurred, liver enzyme quantifications every 3 months
with ultrasound of the abdomen and Alpha-Fatal Protein measurements twice a year are performed at our institution. If signs of consecutive
liver damage without evident morphological changes of the parenchyma occur, transient elastography could represent an elegant screening
method . As we move forward to adjuvant therapy in GIST, a much larger proportion of patients will receive drug exposure and currently the
ideal duration of adjuvant imatinib treatment in high risk GIST remains undefined. The work of Dematteo et al. indicates that the recurrence
free survival seems to adapt after a treatment free interval of 18 months. To determine the ideal period of adjuvant imatinib treatment
prospectively, clinical trials are conducted to test the efficacy of a prolonged exposure to adjuvant imatinib treatment in GIST for 5 years
(NCT00867113) or to evaluate the effects of 12 months versus 36 months (NCT00116935). Our report supports the notion that chronic liver
disease can be a consequence of imatinib-induced hepatotoxicity. In consequence a careful follow-up strategy should be implemented for
patients with grade 3 or 4 hepatic toxicity. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare
that they have no competing interests. CS: reviewed the literature, drafted and edited the manuscript; MF: drafted and edited the
manuscript; FL: processed and provided pathology; HB: Helped in editing the manuscript; gave advice in terms of gastroenterologic problems;
AG: drafted and edited the manuscript; VG: reviewed the literature, drafted and edited the manuscript All authors were involved in the
patient active management. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed
here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2407/12/186/prepub Publication was assisted by the project "Open-Access-Publizieren" of the Deutsche
Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG).
