Hepatic-associated immunoglobulin A (IgA) nephropathy is a relatively common condition that occurs in adults with liver cirrhosis and portal
hypertension. However, it is rare in children. This condition is characterized by the deposition of IgA in the renal glomeruli. The present
report describes a 14-year-old boy with cryptogenic liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension who presented with hematuria and proteinuria
associated with histological changes of IgA nephropathy. Hepatic-associated immunoglobulin A nephropathy (IgAN) is a common complication of
chronic liver disease in adults, particularly alcoholic cirrhosis and other forms of cirrhosis and chronic hepatitis; however, it is rare in
children. Hepatic-associated IgAN being clinically silent with majority of patients presented with microscopic hematuria, proteinurea, and,
in some cases, mild renal impairment. The histopathological characteristic of this disease is glomerular deposits of IgA and less amount of
other immunoglobulins and C3. This hepatic-associated IgAN is considered the most common form of secondary IgAN, and it shares many features
with the primary IgAN; however, a common pathogenesis could not be established. Some of the abnormalities of liver clearance of IgA and
cellular control of IgA production found in liver disease might play a role in the pathogenesis of the disease. Herein, we report a case of
hepatic-associated IgAN in a child with cryptogenic liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension. A 14-year-old boy was presented with a history
of gross hematuria and abdominal distention. The patient also had no history of previous surgical operation, blood transfusion, or use of
hepatotoxic or nephrotoxic medications. The parents are not consanguineous, and there was no family history of liver or renal diseases. The
physical examination revealed that his vital signs were normal; however, he had pallor, jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, and ascites.
Laboratory investigations at presentation showed the following: hemoglobin 9 g/dl, platelets 133 × 109/l, prolonged prothrombin time 16.9 s,
prolonged partial throbmoblastin time 50.7 s, elevated total bilirubin 37 μmol/l (normal, <17 μmol/l), slightly elevated serum aspartate
aminotransferase 51 IU/l (normal, 15–37 IU/l), normal alanine aminotransferase 29 IU/l (normal, 30–65 IU/l), normal alkaline phosphatase 172
IU/l (normal, 100–500 IU/l), normal γ–glutamyl transferase 86 IU/l (normal, 5–85 IU/l), low albumin 31 g/l (34–50 g/l), normal globulin 25
g/l (23–35 g/l), normal IgG level 11 g/l (normal, 5.4–16.1 g/l), normal IgA level 3.13 g/l (0.7–4.0 g/l), elevated IgM level 2.45 g/l
(0.5–1.9 g/l), elevated blood urea 12.7 mmol/l (normal, 2.3–6.7 mmol/l), and slightly elevated serum creatinine 111 μmol/l (normal, 40–105
μmol/l). Serum C3 and C4 were 1.23 g/l (normal, 0.86–1.84 g/l) and 0.3 g/l (normal, 0.2–0.58 g/l), respectively. The urine examination
showed proteinuria (3+), hematuria (red cell count 50 per field), red blood cell casts, and granular casts. The urine protein/creatinine
ratio was elevated, 2.37 (normal, <0.03). Further investigations with the use of upper gastrointestinal endoscopy showed gross esophageal
varices, and ultrasonography of the abdomen revealed heterogeneous liver with irregular surface with splenomegaly and moderate ascites.
Doppler ultrasound examination showed intrahepatic portovenous shunt and varices just posterior to the anterior abdominal wall. The chest
X-ray and echocardiography were also normal. The liver biopsy performed after the correction of the deranged coagulation with factor 7
showed grade IV liver cirrhosis but could not reveal the underlying etiology of the disease. Additional investigations revealed that serum
α1-antitrypsin, copper, iron, and ceruloplasmin levels were normal. The urinary copper study was normal, as well as an eye examination for
Kayser–Fleischer ring. In contrast, viral hepatitis screen for hepatitis B surface antigen, hepatitis A and C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr
virus, and herpes simplex antibodies were negative. Serum antinuclear antibody, antiliver kidney microsomal antibody, antimitochondrial
antibody, perinucleolar antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibody, and serum cryoglobulin were negative. However, serum antismooth muscle antibody
was positive at 1:40. Following the initial evaluation, the patient was discharged and was later readmitted with gross hematuria and hepatic
encephalopathy. During the second admission, renal biopsy was performed, which showed mesangial expansion and hypercellularity and
glomerular basement membrane thickening [Figure 1]. Immunofluorescence analysis revealed diffuse granular deposits predominantly of IgA
(2+), IgM (1+), IgG (1+), and C3c (1+). Examination using electron microscopy showed mesangial and endocapillary proliferation and focal
paramesangial dense deposits associated with effacements of the foot processes and focal double contouring of the basement membrane. These
features were typical of the IgAN with the membranoproliferative pattern. Section from the kidney biopsy shows two glomeruli, revealing
endocapillary proliferation with obliteration of the capillary lumina and lobular accentuation giving a membranoproliferative pattern
(hematoxylin and eosin, ×200) IgAN is commonly reported in adult patients in association with liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension. It
has also been reported in adults with chronic hepatitis due to various causes and in noncirrhotic portal hypertension. However, IgAN in
children with liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension is rare. The pathogenesis of hepatic-associated IgAN is not fully understood. The
abnormal clearance of the circulating immune complexes by hepatic Kupffer cells may allow them to access the systemic circulation with
subsequent deposition in the kidney. Shunting of the portal venous blood to the systemic circulation by passing the liver may increase the
renal IgA deposition. Therefore, reduction in the portal pressure is expected to increase the hepatic processing of circulating IgA immune
complex. In addition, abnormalities of cellular control of the IgA production that have been described in patients with liver cirrhosis may
contribute to the increasing pool of circulating IgA. Unlike primary IgAN, hepatic-associated IgAN is usually asymptomatic. Although the
majority of patients present with microscopic hematuria and proteinuria, others may exhibit gross hematuria. Also some cases may present
with mild renal impairment and in rare cases with nephrotic syndrome. In this study, the patient had hematuria and proteinuria with mild
renal impairment. Milner et al. reported that hematuria occurred in 66% of the children with end-stage liver disease. The disease usually
remains mild and rarely progresses to end-stage renal failure, and there was no correlation found between the severity of liver failure and
the extent of the glomerular disease. Although there was no considerable evidence that improvement in the hepatic disease improves the renal
disease, some authors reported an improvement of IgAN with the control of associated portal hypertension. Kalambokis et al. have reported a
case of a 34-year-old man with cryptogenic liver cirrhosis and portal hypertension with the resolution of proteinuria and hematuria. The
patient had improvement in nephrotic syndrome following hepatic-associated IgAN with the control of portal pressure when treated with
propranolol. This study is consistent with that of Nakamura et al., who reported similar findings. Moreover, in one adult patient with
noncirrhotic portal hypertension associated with IgAN, Babbs et al. reported the disappearance of proteinuria and hematuria following
splenectomy and resection of a large splenic artery aneurysm. The differential diagnoses of concomitant liver and renal disease in children
may also include the following: (1) conditions sharing the same etiology, such as congenital hepatic fibrosis and Caroli disease associated
with autosomal recessive polycystic kidney disease, (2) chronic viral infection, such as chronic hepatitis B causing membranous nephropathy,
or (3) renal impairment in a failing liver due to various causes, occurring as a terminal event, such as hepatorenal syndrome. In summary,
we have demonstrated an additional case of hepatic-associated IgAN that occurs in a child with cryptogenic liver cirrhosis with portal
hypertension. Pediatricians dealing with children with chronic liver disease should be aware of such a condition, so that renal-related
complications could be anticipated. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
