A 32-year-old woman presented with complaints of intermittent dull aching pain at the right upper abdomen for the last 3 months. There was
no radiation of pain and the pain was not related to meals. There was no history of jaundice. Abdominal examination was normal.
Ultrasonography showed cystic dilatation of common hepatic and common bile duct. Following this magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography
(MRCP) [Figure 1] and contrast-enhanced computed tomography [Figure 2] of the abdomen was done. Magnetic resonance cholangio-pancreatography
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography abdomen Q1.What is the diagnosis?Q2.What is the treatment? What is the diagnosis? What is the
treatment? Type-IA choledochal cyst with cholalgocarcinoma. MRCP shows dilatation of the common bile duct (CBD) with mass in its lower end.
Contrast-enhanced computed tomography shows the mass to be anteriorly placed in the lower CBD. Biliary tract malignancy has been reported to
occur in 2.5–28% of patients with choledochal cyst, representing a risk at least 20 times greater than that of the normal
population.Pancreaticoduodenectomy with excision of whole cyst. Complete removal of distal extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma usually requires
a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure). Curative resections are associated with a 25–50% 5-year survival rate. The main determinants
of poor outcomes are positive surgical margins and lymph node involvement. Type-IA choledochal cyst with cholalgocarcinoma. MRCP shows
dilatation of the common bile duct (CBD) with mass in its lower end. Contrast-enhanced computed tomography shows the mass to be anteriorly
placed in the lower CBD. Biliary tract malignancy has been reported to occur in 2.5–28% of patients with choledochal cyst, representing a
risk at least 20 times greater than that of the normal population. Pancreaticoduodenectomy with excision of whole cyst. Complete removal of
distal extrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma usually requires a pancreaticoduodenectomy (Whipple procedure). Curative resections are associated
with a 25–50% 5-year survival rate. The main determinants of poor outcomes are positive surgical margins and lymph node involvement. Source
of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
