A laparoscopic approach was found to be safe and effective for the treatment of a patient with testicular vein syndrome. Testicular vein
syndrome (TVS) is a rare cause of ureteral obstruction. Only 5 previous cases are on record in the literature, and no review exists on this
topic to date. Laparoscopic treatment has never been mentioned in the management of TVS. We reviewed the literature related to this unusual
entity to clarify the preoperative evaluation and the management of TVS. For this purpose, the data related to all the 5 cases previously
reported so far in the English literature have been reviewed. Also, we report the sixth case of TVS, and the first patient to be
successfully treated with the laparoscopic approach. This was a 37-year-old male with a 6-month history of left loin pain. Preoperative
diagnosis was confirmed by CT-Urography. Our patient underwent laparoscopic excision of the left testicular vein followed by
ureteroureterostomy in a single sitting. The laparoscopic transperitoneal approach was used. Histopathological examination of the vein
showed normal venous tissue. This is the sixth reported case of TVS and the first to be successfully treated with a laparoscopic technique.
A laparoscopic approach is safe and effective for treating patients with TVS with the common advantages of minimal invasiveness and better
visualization of the complex anatomy of the retroperitoneum. Thus, it should be the treatment of choice for TVS. Testicular vein syndrome
(TVS) is a rare cause of ureteral obstruction that is largely unknown. Only 5 cases are on record in the English literature.1–5 The cause of
obstruction to flow of the urine is compression of the ureter by crossing of the testicular vein on either side. Treatment thus includes
transection/excision of the involved part of the vein with or without ureteroureterostomy.1–3 We here describe the first case of TVS treated
successfully with the laparoscopic approach. All the previous reported cases have been reviewed in detail. Comparisons have been made at
relevant points to its so-called counterpart, ovarian vein syndrome (OVS). The literature related to TVS in particular is being reviewed in
terms of presentation of all the previously reported cases in the English literature, their preoperative evaluation and management (Table
1).1–6 A similar case treated successfully with the laparoscopic approach at our center is herein described in detail. Details of the Cases
of Testicular Vein Syndrome Reported in the Literature A 37-year-old male presented with a 6-month history of left loin pain. The pain was
dull in nature and not associated with any other complaint. He had not undergone any abdominal surgery and was otherwise healthy. He denied
having a previous history of stones, urinary tract infection, or hematuria. Physical examination was unremarkable. Routine and microscopic
examination of the urine and serum creatinine (0.8 mg/dL) were normal. Ultrasonography (USG) of the abdomen revealed mild-to-moderate left
hydronephrosis (HDN) and dilatation of the proximal ureter suggestive of upper ureteral obstruction, but no calculus. Intravenous urography
(IVU) showed mild HDN on the left side with dilatation of the proximal segment of the ureter up to the level of the third lumbar (L3)
vertebra (Figure 1). No radio-opaque shadow was seen on IVU. Left retrograde pyelography (RGP) revealed the normal size of the lower and mid
ureter, and dilation of the pelvicaliceal system and the upper ureter proximal to an abrupt narrowing at the level of the L3 vertebra. While
performing the RGP a “jet effect” of the contrast, which is typical of the ureteropelvic junction obstruction, was observed. We planned for
a left percutaneous nephrostomy (PCN) and subsequently a computerized tomography (CT) scan. The PCN tube started draining 1500mL to 1800mL
of urine daily. Intravenous urography (IVU) shows mild left hydronephrosis with dilatation of the proximal ureter up to the level of the
third lumbar vertebra (L3), and lesser passage of the contrast distal to the level of obstruction. A CT-urography was performed that
confirmed the findings of IVU and RGP. Images during the intravenous phase of the contrast-enhanced CT revealed mild left HDN and proximal
hydroureterosis (Figure 2A), because of anterior compression of the left ureter by a vascular structure (Figure 2B). Careful review of the
CT images during different phases of the examination revealed that it was the left testicular vein that was crossing-over anterior to the
left ureter at the level of the L3 vertebra. The patient was scheduled for laparoscopic excision of the testicular vein and if needed
intraoperatively, ureteroureterostomy. Intravenous contrast-enhanced CT-urography. (A) Volume randomized tomography image during the
excretory phase reveals mild left hydronephrosis with dilatation of the proximal ureter up to the level of an abrupt narrowing in caliber
(white arrow), and poor passage of the contrast into the ureteral segment distal to the obstruction. (B) Paracoronal section during the
excretory phase combined with predominant venous phase shows compression of the left ureter by a vascular structure crossing anteriorly
(single yellow arrow). Below the level of obstruction, the caliber of the left ureter is normal (double yellow arrow). For a laparoscopic
procedure, the patient was positioned in a 450 oblique position. A standard 3-port (12-mm camera port, and two 5-mm ports; Figure 3)
transperitoneal laparoscopic approach was used. The left ureter was identified in the retroperitoneum. The left testicular vein was seen
crossing the left upper ureter anteriorly from lateral to medial. The vein was noted to cause compression of the ureter, because only the
ureteral segment proximal to the crossing point of the vein was dilated and had a normal caliber distal to this point (Figure 4A & B). No
additional periureteral pathology or crossing vessels were identified. The testicular vein was dissected from the ureter, ligated, and
divided (Figure 4B). Although the compressed segment of the ureter appeared free of intrinsic obstruction, it appeared atretic. Therefore,
the decision to perform ureteroureterostomy was made. The atretic segment was excised. Both the ends of the ureter were spatulated and
anastomosed with Vicryl 4-0 suture by using an intracorporeal suturing technique. At the end, a closed drain was left in the area. No
intraoperative or postoperative complications occurred. The patient's symptoms were relieved in the immediate postoperative period. He was
discharged on the third postoperative day. He has remained asymptomatic since then. IVU after 3 months showed just mild fullness of the left
pelvicaliceal system. At 4 months of follow-up, a radionuclide renal scan showed adequate function and excretion of the tracer. The port
placement for laparoscopic treatment of left TVS. The numbers in the circles (below each port site) depict the order of insertion of the
port at that site. A & B. Intraoperative photographs of laparoscopic treatment of left TVS (Right hand side of the images is the cephalic,
and left hand side is caudal of the patient); (A) The left testicular vein crossing anterior to the left ureter (double arrow) causing
compression of the underlying ureter resulting in dilatation of its proximal segment (*). (B) The left testicular vein has been ligated with
vascular clips, cut and its proximal and distal ends (upper and lower single arrows) have been separated to show the compressed segment of
the left ureter. Different vascular anomalies can cause ureteric obstruction by external pressure. Among these, lower pole crossing vessels
at the ureteropelvic junction (UPJ) are the most common cause. Similarly, retrocaval ureter is another such anomaly that develops because of
aberrant development of the inferior vena cava (IVC).6 Ovarian vein syndrome (OVS) is yet another rare syndrome that occurs in females
because of obstruction of the ureter and resulting hydronephrosis due to an enlarged and frequently thrombosed ovarian vein.7 Unlike OVS in
which a pathologically altered (inflamed/enlarged/thrombosed) ovarian vein is usually the cause of the ureteral obstruction,8 little is
known regarding TVS. Except for crossing vessels at UPJ, retrocaval ureter, and OVS, the other vascular causes of extrinsic compression of
the ureter are frequently overlooked. Proximal ureteral obstruction resulting in hydroureteronephrosis (HUN), because of normal testicular
vein crossing in front of the ureter on either side is one such unusual example. Venous drainage of the testes is done through the
pampiniform plexus, which forms the testicular vein near the deep inguinal ring. The right testicular vein drains into the IVC at an oblique
angle, while the left testicular vein drains into the corresponding renal vein at a straight angle. The right and left testicular veins
cross the corresponding ureters anteriorly at the level of the third lumbar vertebra.1–4,9 Although OVS is rare, since it was first reported
in 1964 many case reports and series of OVS have been published, and today it is considered a well-described entity in the
literature.8,10,11 However, Mellin et al1 in 1975 reported the first case of its own kind in a male patient where an enlarged right
testicular vein with an atypical course was the cause of HUN. After 2 years, Kretkowski et al2 described another similar case in which the
left testicular vein that was enlarged due to thrombophlebitis was found as the cause of proximal ureteric obstruction resulting in HUN.
From the findings of their case, they suggested the possibility of a male counterpart of OVS seen in females, and coined the term
“testicular vein syndrome” (TVS).2 However, since Kretkowski et al2 reported the second case of TVS, only 3 more cases have been added to
the literature.3–5 We have herein described another such case of TVS that was successfully treated with the laparoscopic approach, a
considerable step forward in its management, along with review of all the previously reported cases in the literature. Three cases out of a
total of 5 cases of TVS reported so far had been reported and written about from a urologist's prospective. However, the literature
comprising these 3 cases is more than 30 years old.1–3 For the other 2 cases, although they were recently reported, the main emphasis of the
authors was on radiographic findings.4,5 Table 1 elaborates the details of the so far reported cases of TVS in the literature.1–5 Mean age
of presentation was around 40 years. TVS also differs from OVS in some aspects. First, unlike OVS, no right-sided predilection has been
found in TVS.1–5 Second, in half (50%) of the reported cases of TVS, the offending spermatic vein was not pathologically altered,1–5 while
it is usually so in cases of OVS.7 The ureteral obstruction due to compression by the testicular vein usually presents with common symptoms
of dull and intermittent loin pain with or without microscopic hematuria. A preoperative diagnosis of TVS can be stated only after other
common causes of ureteral obstruction have been ruled out. As in our case, the patient should be evaluated by USG and IVU to confirm or
exclude the underlying cause of HUN. Contrast enhanced computerized tomography (CECT) shows the culprit vessel compressing the ureter from
its anterior aspect usually at the level of the third lumbar vertebra on the right side and a little higher on the left side.4 HUN proximal
to the point of the crossing vessel can be easily recognized. The ureter is normal size distal to the crossing point provided there is no
distal obstruction. Ugurel et al5 have recently described multidetector-row computerized tomography (MDCT) findings in a case of right TVS.
MDCT has the abilities of 3-dimensional visualization.12 It has also been applied in the techniques of CT-urography and CT-angiography
(especially in the venous phase) that may be used singly or combined, and are really valuable in the diagnosis and treatment plan of
extrinsic ureteral obstruction due to vascular compression.5,12 If the diagnosis is still not certain, a jet effect of the contrast seen on
RGP (as in our case) may point towards the diagnosis of TVS. A jet effect is typically seen in UPJ obstruction, but in TVS the level of
obstruction is usually the L3 vertebra. Classically, TVS has been treated by transection or excision of the segment of the spermatic vein
that is compressing the ureter, with or without ureterolysis.1–3 This has been performed with the open approach. Further, although
successful pure laparoscopic transperitoneal or retroperitoneal and robot-assisted laparoscopic approaches have been described for
OVS,10,11,13,14 such a minimally invasive approach has yet to be shown to be effective and safe for TVS. We believe that the main reason for
this is the extreme rarity of this clinical entity and thus the paucity of cases. Further, one report of improvement in symptoms of TVS with
conservative treatment is also available. This patient had mild symptoms because of partial obstruction.5 In our case, we decided to perform
laparoscopic excision of the testicular vein, followed by ureteroureterostomy. Our decision was based on many factors. First, the
preoperative diagnosis of left TVS was almost certain. Second, the laparoscopic approach allows detailed assessment of the anatomical
relationships of the ureter in the deep-seated area of interest in the retroperitoneum. Also, if intraoperatively, pyeloplasty had been
chosen, it could have been easily performed through the laparoscopic approach. TVS is an extremely rare entity that should be regarded as a
diagnosis of exclusion. The available literature has been reviewed along with the first report of successful treatment of TVS with the
laparoscopic approach at our center. The laparoscopic approach is safe and effective to treat TVS and should be considered as the treatment
of choice.
