Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection Primary
epiploic appendagitis (PEA) is a rare cause of abdominal acute or subacute complaints. Diagnosis of PEA is made with ultrasonography (US) or
when computed tomography (CT) reveals a characteristic lesion. We report on two patients with PEA. In one patient PEA was first seen with US
and confirmed with contrast enhanced CT, and in the second patient CT without contrast enhancement demonstrated PEA. In both patients an
outpatient recovery with conservative non-surgical treatment is described. Medical personnel should be aware of this rare disease, which
mimics many other intra-abdominal acute and subacute conditions. A correct diagnosis of PEA with imaging procedures enables conservative and
successful outpatient management avoiding unnecessary surgical intervention and additional costs. Primary epiploic appendagitis is a very
rare condition that results from inflammation of an epiploic appendage in an otherwise healthy patient. Owing to a lack of pathognomonic
clinical features and awareness of the disease, primary epiploic appendagitis (PEA) is rarely diagnosed as the cause of acute and subacute
abdominal complaints. Recognition of PEA has increased over the past 10 years owing to the increasing use of abdominal ultrasonography and
the introduction of cross-sectional imaging CT scans for the primary evaluation of abdominal pain . A 52-year-old male Caucasian patient
presented with a dull constant, localized and non-migratory abdominal pain. Physical examination revealed localized tenderness in the left
lower abdominal quadrant and his symptoms besides the pain only included epigastric discomfort. At admission an abdominal ultrasound
examination demonstrated a non-compressible hyperechogenic paracolic oval shaped mass in the area of pain (Figure 1). Additionally an
abdominal computed tomography (CT) with intravenous contrast medium was performed and demonstrated an oval lesion, maximum diameter 2.4 cm,
with fat attenuation, located adjacent to the descending colon. The inflamed and thickened visceral peritoneum surrounding the fat-
containing appendage was demonstrated as hyperattenuating ring and the diagnosis of PEA was completed (Figures 2 and 3). Laboratory
parameters were not determined in this patient. As outpatient a therapy with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (ibuprofen 600 mg twice
daily) was initiated. Within 7 days the patient’s complaints resolved and further recovery was uneventful. In the second patient, a 62-year-
old male Caucasian, who was evaluated because of inguinal hernia, physical evaluation demonstrated tenderness in the left sided lower
abdominal quadrant. Because the patient refused application of intravenous contrast medium the abdominal computed tomography (CT) without
intravenous contrast medium demonstrated an oval lesion, maximum diameter 2.6 cm, located adjacent to the descending colon. The inflamed and
thickened visceral peritoneum surrounding the fat-containing appendage was demonstrated with an edematous ring and the diagnosis of PEA was
completed (Figures 4 and 5). Laboratory parameter were leukocytes 10.6×109/L (normal 4–9), C-reactive peptide 1.0 mg/dl (normal <0.5),
fibrinogen 509 mg/dl (normal 210–400), all the routine laboratory parameters, including erythrocyte sedimentation rate, liver- and pancreas
enzymes, were within normal limits. At an external institution outpatient therapy with antibiotic drugs (ciprofloxacin 250 mg and
metronidazol 500 mg, each twice daily) was initiated. Within 3 days the patient’s complaints resolved and further recovery was uneventful.
Appendices epiploicae are pouches of subserosal fat lining the entire length of the colon. They appear in two parallel rows next to the
anterior and the posterior taenia coli, and are attached to the colonic wall by a vascular stalk. Approximately 100 appendices epiploicae
per colon exist and they are clustering mainly in the cecal and sigmoid region. Therefore, pain is usually located in the left, sometimes in
the right lower abdominal quadrant . Although, this pain can be located in all abdominal regions and may be in the location of an acute or
subacute abdominal condition such as diverticulitis, cholecystitis and appendicitis . It was suggested that many patients treated for mild
diverticulitis may have PEA and it was reported that up to 7% of all patients clinically suspected of having diverticulitis may have
epiploic appendagitis . Due to the lack of pathognomonic clinical features the diagnosis of epiploic appendagitis is difficult and rare.
Symptoms include acute and recurrent non-migratory abdominal pain, local tenderness, postprandial fullness, early satiety, epigastric
discomfort, vomiting, bloating, diarrhea, intermittent febrile temperature, and moderate weight loss. The pain is usually described as dull,
constant, non-migrating, and physical examination reveals a well-localized tenderness. Abnormal laboratory parameters may include slightly
elevated C-reactive peptide and neutrophile leukocytes, all the other routine laboratory parameters are within normal limits . During the
last few years with the introduction of cross-sectional imaging and the increasing use of abdominal CT scans for primary evaluation of
abdominal pain, the recognition of PEA is increasing. In the past, diagnosis in many patients was attained during surgery , but imaging
procedures are now increasingly used for this purpose. Normal epiploic appendages cannot be seen on CT scans. PEA is thought to be an
inflammatory condition and to arise primarily from a torsion causing ischemia and infarction with aseptic fat necrosis, spontaneous venous
thrombosis, and is a localized sterile inflammation in and surrounding one epiploic appendage . CT is the diagnostic modality of choice for
patients with suspected PEA because PEA has a characteristic appearance on CT . Abdominal ultrasound in experienced hands has revealed PEA
in an increasing number of patients. PEA on ultrasonography is shown as a non-compressible hyperechogenic paracolic oval-shaped mass (Figure
1) . However, appropriate diagnosis with CT allows a successful outpatient treatment avoiding surgery and unnecessary additional costs.
Usually patients recover with conservative non-surgical treatment, with anti-inflammatory drugs or without medication. Careful physical
examination and awareness of the characteristic imaging findings of PEA support the suggestion that surgical intervention is only
recommended if conservative medical treatment fails to improve a patient’s symptoms and clinical signs of PEA. Competing interests The
authors declare no competing interests. Source of support: Departmental sources Ultrasonography image of epipolic appendagitis showed an
hyperechogenic paracolic oval-shaped mass in the left lower abdominal quadrant. Longitudinal and transverse abdominal CT with contrast
enhancement demonstrated the inflamed lesion (arrow) adjacent to the descending colon and showed an oval area of fat attenuation with a
diameter of 2.4 cm surrounded by a hyperattenuating ring. Longitudinal and transverse abdominal CT without contrast enhancement demonstrated
the inflamed lesion (arrow) adjacent to the descending colon and showed an oval area with a diameter of 2.6 cm surrounded by an edematous
ring.
