A generic miltefosine pharmaceutical product containing no active pharmaceutical ingredient for the treatment of visceral leishmaniasis
emerged in Bangladesh for use in the national elimination programme. Poor-quality drugs for the treatment of this fatal neglected tropical
disease are life-threatening for the vulnerable patients using them but also have a devastating impact on public health and elimination
programmes targeting this disease. National drug regulators should take responsibility and ensure without any concessions that procured
drugs for neglected tropical diseases, either innovator or generic, adhere to international standards for drug quality and safety. Proper
chemotherapy is pivotal in the management of visceral leishmaniasis (VL, also known as kala-azar); without an effective treatment this
neglected parasitic disease is inevitably fatal . Nevertheless, the few new and safer but more expensive treatment options that were
developed in the past decade (i.e., liposomal amphotericin B and miltefosine) remain largely out of reach of the affected rural population
who are most in need, mainly the poorest of the poor . Miltefosine, an alkylphosphocholine drug, is an essential drug in the management of
VL as it is the first effective oral treatment option with a reasonable safety profile . Oral miltefosine allows the treatment of VL
patients without an extended period of hospital admission and thus puts fewer demands on both patients and health services , . Miltefosine
is currently preferred for implementation in national VL elimination programmes , although the burden of high treatment costs incites the
exploration of possibilities for a generic miltefosine product . Unfortunately, the precarious position of VL patients was recently
jeopardized as patients in Bangladesh were confronted with a new threat: the emergence of a new miltefosine product containing no active
pharmaceutical ingredient , . Together with Nepal and India, the government of Bangladesh has committed to eliminate VL by 2015, supported
by the World Health Organization (WHO) , . Interventions in this VL elimination programme comprise active case surveillance and
implementation of vector control management strategies, but also improvement of the availability of appropriate drugs . Oral miltefosine was
recommended for this strategy and was therefore registered in Bangladesh . Nevertheless, problems relating to its procurement and supply
prohibited accessibility of this treatment and required a less costly alternative. Local procurement of miltefosine was therefore sought and
a generic product supposedly containing miltefosine named “Miltefos” was manufactured by a local company for use in the Bangladeshi national
elimination programme for VL. In early 2008, “Miltefos” was implemented as first-line therapy for VL in Bangladesh . Although official
numbers remain absent, reports from the field indicated abnormal “poor responses in hundreds of patients” after the use of “Miltefos” , ,
thereby clearly contradicting high historic efficacy rates (∼95%) of miltefosine in VL in nearby Indian and Nepalese provinces . Therefore
bioequivalence studies were planned to compare the local generic “Miltefos” product to the innovator “Impavido” product (Paladin Labs);
however, the validity of the underlying assumption of pharmaceutical equivalence had to be established first. For this reason drug samples
were sent from Bangladesh to our lab to analyze them for their miltefosine content. To our best knowledge, only two different “Miltefos”
batches were produced and distributed in Bangladesh and representative drug samples from both these batches of “Miltefos” with respective
label claims of “10 mg miltefosine” and “50 mg miltefosine” (Figure 1) were analyzed. A platform of analytical techniques was developed of
which the methodology is described in more detail elsewhere . A high-performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry
(LC-MS/MS) method validated for the detection of miltefosine with a lower limit of quantitation of 4 ng/ml in human plasma immediately
revealed that no miltefosine could be identified in methanol extracts of any of the “Miltefos” capsules, while this method allowed the
irrefutable identification and quantification of miltefosine in the “Impavido” capsules . This absence of miltefosine was confirmed in the
crude “Miltefos” capsule contents by Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy and a new, simple, and rapid colorimetric test for miltefosine
with a lower limit of detection of at least 12.5 µg/ml . Near-infrared spectroscopy even allowed us to confirm this finding without opening
the capsules. Further tests using mass spectrometry could not identify any other compound, including any possible degradation products of
miltefosine, in the “Miltefos” capsule contents besides the common excipients lactose and microcrystalline cellulose . Backs of blister
package “Miltefos, Miltefosine 50 mg” (A) and “Miltefos, Miltefosine 10 mg” (B), respectively. The name and logo of the manufacturer have
been obscured. To confirm these findings and to ensure that the pharmaceutical product under investigation was the same product that was
being used by Bangladeshi VL patients, a second representative sample of “Miltefos” specimens was collected directly in the field in
Bangladesh at a health centre where VL patients were under treatment with “Miltefos” at that time. Furthermore, whole blood samples from
five VL patients who were still under treatment with “Miltefos” and the exact blisters that had been used to treat these patients were
collected simultaneously. Both these blood and drug specimens were transported to our lab in sealed and signed envelopes to ensure the
integrity of the parcel in transit. Case record forms and signed statements by the doctors of these patients indicating the origin and
authenticity of the samples were included. The same analytical techniques as mentioned above reconfirmed the previous results: no
miltefosine could be identified in these “Miltefos” batches, nor any other active pharmaceutical ingredient. Storage conditions in
Bangladesh or during transport are not expected to have been of any influence, given miltefosine's excellent stability profile, also in
humid and hot conditions . Moreover, no miltefosine could be detected in the whole blood samples of the patients to whom these “Miltefos”
capsules were administered. All these patients were already several days on “Miltefos” treatment and should have accumulated substantial
miltefosine blood concentrations because of the extremely slow elimination of miltefosine from the body . A real-time reverse-transcriptase
PCR (qRT-PCR) targeting the Leishmania 18S ribosomal RNA performed on blood of these patients confirmed that they were suffering from VL,
indicating the authenticity of the received samples . Following these findings, clinical care of the patients was changed to treatment with
intravenous sodium antimony gluconate. Eventually, “Miltefos” was removed from all patient care regimens throughout Bangladesh and
intravenous sodium antimony gluconate was re-introduced as first-line therapy for VL in Bangladesh . This case demonstrates that despite
existing international regulations for quality assurance of medicines, poor-quality drugs can be distributed through a nationwide treatment
programme in a resource-poor country and reach patients suffering from a fatal neglected tropical disease whose survival depends on good-
quality drugs. The control of anthroponotic VL in South Asia relies most importantly on early case detection and effective treatment,
thereby reducing the human reservoir of disease , . The use of substandard or counterfeit drugs containing no or a subtherapeutic amount of
active pharmaceutical ingredient not only severely jeopardizes the individual health of patients but also these control efforts for VL. This
emphasizes the need for prioritizing the quality of anti-infective medicines that are being used in resource-poor countries to treat
neglected tropical diseases and the development of simple and rapid methods to assess drug quality . The poor-quality generic miltefosine
product that we investigated can be considered as a substandard product according to WHO definitions, since it never contained any active
pharmaceutical ingredient . However, this product cannot directly be assumed to be a counterfeit as well, since a fraudulent motive for the
mislabelling of this product cannot be inferred from our scientific investigation . For VL, at least three previous cases of poor-quality
drugs have been described in India, Nepal, and Sudan, all concerning antimonials and resulting in unacceptable toxicity and even death .
Poor-quality medicines, both substandard and counterfeit, constitute a major burden on the public health in resource-poor countries , , , .
Inadequate local drug regulation and law enforcement combined with poor compliance of local pharmaceutical industry with good manufacturing
practices (GMP) can lead to high rates of substandard drug production in resource-poor countries, but also to a higher degree of deliberate
counterfeiting activities , . Antimalarials have most extensively been reported as a victim of counterfeiting in resource-poor countries,
with a focus on artesunate products containing no or only a subtherapeutic amount of active pharmaceutical ingredient . Provision of free or
inexpensive antimalarials has been mentioned as one of the possible solutions to this widespread problem, removing the financial incentive
for counterfeiters . It has also been suggested that the quality of drugs would be warranted if distributed “through official institutions”
. However, this case clearly underlines that provision of free anti-infectives—even through official institutions—does not necessarily imply
that the problem of poor-quality anti-infectives in resource-poor countries is resolved and strict monitoring of drug quality by the funding
organizations or responsible government bodies is therefore key in any drug provision programme. Without ignoring the ongoing debate on the
various definitions of “substandard” and “counterfeit” , , , , the emphasis in tackling poor-quality drugs should be on the safety of
patients and public health, especially in resource-poor countries and certainly concerning the treatment of life-threatening diseases.
Shifting the focus from intellectual property or trade issues towards public health and patients to define and combat poor-quality drugs is
therefore urgently needed . Quality assurance of pharmaceutical products should be guaranteed by appropriate (government) bodies that have
the specific mandate to protect individuals and public health, and should not be the responsibility of vulnerable individual patients
themselves , . In resource-poor countries it remains cumbersome to provide this protection, partly due to an urgent lack of both drug
regulatory capacity and regional analysis laboratories for quality control of medicines. Previously, it has been shown that GMP compliant
facilities can have parallel productions with lower standards for poorly regulated countries . Quality assurance should therefore
specifically extend to assessment of each manufacturing site and each product dossier according to the rigorous criteria set by the WHO for
each individual drug that is being procured . Several programmes have been initiated by the WHO (most notably the WHO Prequalification
Programme) but separately also by other organizations (e.g., Médecins Sans Frontières) to facilitate qualification of drugs and access to
technical expertise on this topic , . Unfortunately, the WHO Prequalification Programme selectively focuses on good-quality medicinal
products relating to HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, malaria, influenza, and reproductive health and has thus far ignored medicines against
neglected diseases, although the availability of general technical expertise could help support regulatory authorities with limited
capacities. This case indicates that it may be needed to extend the WHO Prequalification Programme to drugs for VL and other neglected
diseases. Availability and accessibility of regulatory information and technical expertise such as methods of analysis and identification
for drugs for neglected diseases need to be prioritized. Currently, no monograph on miltefosine has been included in any of the major
international pharmacopoeias, although the drug has been added to the WHO Model List of Essential Medicines and has received approval in
Germany, which has a stringent regulatory authority , . International pharmacopoeias should cease to neglect drugs for neglected diseases to
facilitate the quality control of these medicines and the production of generic pharmaceutical products. Furthermore, no formal approval of
miltefosine or “Miltefos” could be traced in the publicly available information of the Bangladeshi drug regulatory authorities , despite WHO
documents mentioning the registration of miltefosine in Bangladesh . Full transparency of the current regulatory status of medicinal
products is simply a prerequisite for the safe and effective use of drugs for neglected diseases, certainly in the resource-poor countries
that are most affected. Nevertheless, all these outstanding efforts can only be effective when national or regional drug regulators and
procurement programmes in resource-poor countries are aware of the devastating impact of poor-quality drugs and decide to make use of all
the (technical) resources that could be provided to them by international agencies. It must be emphasized that these recommendations
certainly do not reject a priori the production or procurement of generic pharmaceutical products as a cheaper alternative for the treatment
of neglected tropical diseases; however, no concessions should be tolerated in terms of assurance of quality and safety of these medicines,
either innovator or generic. VL patients belong to the poorest quintile of the population of resource-poor countries , which make them
highly dependent on drug donations or drug provision by national elimination programmes for the treatment of their fatal disease. These
extremely vulnerable patients deserve to be protected by national or regional drug regulators who should take responsibility by implementing
the necessary precautions to prevent repetition of this poor-quality drug case. All procured VL drugs either used in the respective national
VL elimination programmes, available over the counter, or used in clinical trials need to adhere to the WHO standards for quality and
safety, irrespective of the country of origin of these drugs, whether they are innovator or generic medicines and whether they are intended
to be used in resource-rich or resource–poor countries. Only under this condition can VL patients trust in a safe treatment, and national
elimination programmes might have an impact on this typically neglected disease. Written informed patient consent was obtained for the blood
samples. Institutional review board approval was not required, since patients were not treated in the context of a study and the described
procedures on the blood samples were performed to ensure that these patients received adequate treatment. The authors have declared that no
competing interests exist. No direct funding was received for this study. The authors were personally salaried by their institutions during
the period of writing (though no specific salary was set aside or given for the writing of this paper).
