Chronic sclerosing sialadenitis, also known as Kuttner tumor, is a chronic inflammatory disease of the salivary glands that is reported in a
few cases in medical literature. Recent reports suggest that certain aspects of sclerosing diseases, including chronic sclerosing
sialadenitis or dacryoadenitis, should be classified under immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-related sclerosing disease based on immunohistochemical
studies. This study reports an unusual case of IgG4-related sclerosing disease appearing simultaneously in the lacrimal glands,
submandibular glands, and extraocular muscles. A 56-year-old male presented with complaints of bilateral eyelid swelling and proptosis that
began two years ago. Computed tomography confirmed that bilateral submandibular enlargements also existed five years ago in the subject.
Orbital computed tomography and magnetic resonance imaging revealed bilateral lacrimal gland enlargement and thickening of extraocular
muscles. Typical findings of chronic sclerosing dacryoadenitis were revealed upon pathologic exam of the right lacrimal gland.
Immunostaining revealed numerous IgG4-positive plasma cells. Through these clinical features, we make a diagnosis of IgG4-relataed
sclerosing disease in the subject. In 1896 in Germany, a man named Kuttner first described the Kuttner tumor (KT), one of the common
diseases involving the submandibular salivary glands, also known as chronic sclerosing sialadenitis. The tumor occurs mainly in the
submandibular glands and appears as a firm and painless swelling mass. Clinically, KT is similar to a salivary gland neoplasm, which makes
correct diagnosis difficult . Histopathologically, KT shows the characteristics of chronic sclerosing sialadenitis, including progressive
periductal sclerosis and dilated ducts with a dense lymphocyte infiltration and lymphoid follicle formations. The histopathology suggests
that KT is closely related to an active local immune response . Recent papers have presented a number of sclerosing diseases having abundant
immunoglobulin G4 (IgG4)-positive plasma cells and sharing similar pathologic features with autoimmune sclerosing pancreatitis. KT is also
classified under the category of IgG4-related sclerosing disease . Additionally, a study by Cheuk et al. has suggested that chronic
sclerosing dacryoadenitis might be a part of the spectrum of IgG4-related sclerosing disease, as is chronic sclerosing sialadenitis.
Regardless, most reported cases of IgG4-related sclerosing sialadenitis or dacryoadenitis show single organ involvement, except for a few
case reports . To the best of our knowledge, the present report is the first case of an unusual presentation of IgG4-related sclerosing
disease involving bilateral lacrimal and submandibular glands, as well as extraocular muscles simultaneously. A 56-year-old male complained
of mild intermittent diplopia. He also had swelling in both eyelids and proptosis that started 2 years ago, but he had not taken any special
treatment (Fig. 1). He did not experience any symptoms of dry eyes or dry mouth. Exophthalmometric measurements were 21 mm in the right eye
and 19 mm in the left eye. No limitation of motion was found in all extraocular muscles. His visual acuity, intraocular pressure, and fundus
exams were normal. In his past medical history confirmed by his electronic medical records, both submandibular glands were enlarged five
years ago. A fine needle aspiration biopsy done by an otolaryngologist revealed atypical lymphoid hyperplasia and periductal fibrosis,
similar to sclerosing sialadenitis, but insufficient to diagnose KT (Fig. 2A). Despite not receiving any special treatment, currently there
have been no definite changes of signs. Thyroid function and antinuclear antibody test scores were within normal limits. The level of serum
IgG was elevated to 2,770 mg/dL. Other serum levels of immunoglobulins, including IgA and IgM, were normal. Orbital computed tomography (CT)
and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated bilateral lacrimal gland enlargement and thickening of extraocular muscles, including the
right inferior rectus muscle and both lateral rectus muscles, with homogeneous enhancement (Fig. 3). Orbital lymphoma was highly suspected,
so incisional biopsy of the right lacrimal mass was done (Fig. 2B). Light microscopic examination of tissue stained with hematoxylin and
eosin showed dense lymphocyte hyperplasia and lymphoid follicles. In the center of the hyperplastic lymphoid follicles, atrophic lacrimal
ducts and periductal sclerosis with an onion-skin appearance around the ducts were observed. An atherosclerotic vascular change was also
observed in the mass. Application of immunohistochemial stains revealed that the hyperplastic lymphoid tissues were composed of polyclonal
lymphoid cells, positive for CD 20 and CD 79a in the center of the follicle, and positive for CD 3 and CD45RO around the follicles. This
indicates reactive lymphoid tissue without malignant process (Fig. 4). Immunostaining for IgG4 also revealed numerous IgG4-positive plasma
cells (Fig. 5). The possibility of malignant lymphoma, including extranodal marginal zone B-cell lymphoma (MALT lymphoma), was ruled out. In
light of overall clinical characteristics, together with histological and immunohistochmical results, KT was determined to be a reasonable
diagnosis. The patient was administered oral prednisolone 30 mg/day for 1 week with a dose taper over the course of 3 weeks. The size of the
orbital lesion and submandibular gland started to decrease slowly and the intermittent diplopia disappeared. Four months later, however, the
disease recurred with upper eyelid swelling. Systemic steroid therapy was restarted with a dose of oral prednisolone 1 mg/kg/day, which was
gradually tapered over the course of four months. This disease showed good steroid response, but tended to recur after steroid medication
stopped. A third attack of the disease appeared 8 months after the last steroid treatment. Again the patient took high-dose systemic steroid
medication, and after completion of the steroid-tapering schedule was administered azathioprine, a low-dose immunosuppressive agent. During
the 1-year period of follow-up there was no recurrence of disease with the use of low-dose immunosuppressants. KT is usually diagnosed by
clinical and histological features, however, its etiology remains unclear. Sialolithiasis, change of ductal secretion, and local
inflammation have been suggested as possible causes of KT . KT is sometimes associated with retroperitoneal fibrosis or sclerosing
cholangitis, which undermines assertions that the pathogenesis of the disease is related to immunologic processes . Recent reports have used
immunologic studies to support KT as part of the IgG4-related sclerosing disease spectrum. IgG4 occupies less than 6 percent of the total
IgG fraction in the serum of normal subjects . IgG4-related diseases are characterized by high levels of IgG, infiltration of IgG4 plasma
cells, sclerotic changes, and good response to steroid treatment. Already well-known sclerosing diseases, including autoimmune pancreatitis,
sclerosing cholangitis, and retroperitoneal fibrosis, share similar features of elevated levels of serum IgG4 and IgG4 plasma cell
infiltration . A study by Kitagawa et al. has found that IgG4-positive plasma cells, which are distributed at low rates in sialolithiasis
and Sjogren's syndrome, abundantly infiltrate the salivary glands of KT patients. The study divides chronic sclerosing sialadenitis into 2
types. In the localized type, the disease is associated with only the salivary glands. In the systemic type, on the other hand,
extrasalivary glands, such as lacrimal glands, the pancreas or gall bladder can be affected along with the salivary glands. A study by Cheuk
et al. states that chronic sclerosing dacryoadenitis could be included in the spectrum of IgG4-related sclerosing disease, the finding of
which was revealed by the immunohistochemistry of lacrimal glands. A study by Lee et al. documents a case of the simultaneous occurrence of
IgG4-related chronic sclerosing dacryoadenitis and chronic sclerosing sialadenitis. Both diagnoses were established through
immunohistochemical staining. In Korea, a study by Kwon et al. has reported two cases of IgG4-related sclerosing dacryoadenitis without the
involvement of other organs. According to the above-mentioned studies of several investigators, chronic sclerosing sialadenitis and
dacryoadenitis are also IgG4-related sclerosing diseases in line with other systemic sclerosing diseases. In the present case, typical
histological findings of KT were presented and T-cells were mainly located in the ducts, acini, and interfollicular spaces in lacrimal
glandular tissue. Rich infiltrations of IgG4-positive plasma cells on immunostaining were consistent with the findings of recent studies.
While only the level of serum IgG was elevated, its subclasses were not measured. According to the results of lacrimal gland biopsy, we
assumed that previous histological findings of the submandibular glands that were insufficient to lead to diagnosis definitely were
associated with KT. Lastly, even though a biopsy of extraocular muscles was not performed, CT and MRI demonstrated the hypertrophy of
extraocular muscles. Therefore, a combination of histological, immunologic and image findings confirmed a case of unusual involvement of
IgG4-related sclerosing disease in the lacrimal and submandibular glands, as well as extraocular muscles simultaneously. By Kitagawa's
classification , our case can be included as a systemic type of chronic sclerosing sialadenitis. Generally this disease shows good response
to steroid treatment. However, if the disease recurs frequently, as in our case, low-dose steroid or immunosuppressive treatment may be
needed long-term . Generally, KT involves one of the submandibular glands exclusively. However, there are some recent reports of multiple
involvements of salivary glands or lacrimal glands together . The present case indicates that IgG4-related sclerosing sialadenitis,
previously called KT, can appear in the lacrimal and submandibular glands, and extraocular muscles simultaneously. This case also supports
the previous idea that KT may be developed through active local inflammation by lymphocytes and IgG4-positive plasma cells based on
immunohistochemical studies. Differential diagnosis of IgG4-related sclerosing sialadenitis is very important because of how difficult it is
to correctly diagnose, especially when it comes to differentiating it from MALT lymphoma in the early course of disease. Another issue is
that IgG4-related sclerosing disease is known as a totally benign inflammatory disease, however, some case reports have shown the potential
for lymphoma to arise in scenarios of chronic sclerosing dacryoadenitis . Whether or not close follow-up for recognizing lymphoma is
necessary is a controversial subject. As in our case, however, regular follow-up visits are prudent for monitoring recurrence. No potential
conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Complaint from a 56-year-old male of bilateral eyelid swelling and proptosis
that started 2 years ago. Symptoms were more promi nent in the right eye. (A) Frontal view and (B) inferior view. (A) Both submandibular
enlargements (arrows) existed 5 years ago. Currently there have been no definite changes of size. (B) Incisional biopsy of right lacrimal
mass was performed. Enlargement of lacrimal gland was found (arrow). (A) Axial view of orbital computed tomography (CT). Arrows indicate
bilateral lacrimal gland enlargement. (B) Axial view of orbital magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) also shows bilateral lacrimal gland
enlargement (arrows). (C) Coronal view of orbital CT demonstrates the enlargement of bilateral lateral recti (arrows) and right inferior
rectus. (D) Coronal view of orbital MRI. Dashed arrow indicates the hypertrophy of right inferior rectus. (A,B) Light microscopic
examination of tissue stained with H&E. (A) Lacrimal gland reveals dense lymphocyte hyperplasia and lymphoid follicles (×2). (B) Atrophic
lacrimal ducts and periductal sclerosis are shown (×40). (C,D) Tissue with immunohistochemical stains. The hyperplastic lymphoid tissues are
composed of polyclonal lymphoid cells, positive for CD 3 (C, ×40) and positive for CD 20 (D, ×2). (A,B) Immunostaining for immunoglobulin G4
(IgG4). Abundant IgG4-positive plasma cells (brown color) are demonstrated. Prevalence shows that Kuttner tumor is a kind of IgG4-related
sclerosing disease (A, ×100; B, ×200).
