Photodynamic therapy (PDT) - the fourth modality - has been successfully used in the management of early and advanced pathologies of the
head and neck. We studied the effect of this modality on a giant solitary neurofibroma of the neck. A 70-year-old Caucasian female presented
with left neck pain and disfigurement associated with slight shortness of breath and dysphagia. Examination revealed a large mass in the
neck with no neurovascular compromise. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reported a heterogeneously enhancing mass extending from the left
angle of the mandible to the base of the neck. A core biopsy was performed and histopathological examination revealed a disorganised array
of peripheral nerve fascicles. The patient elected to receive photodynamic therapy as the primary intervention. The multi-disciplinary
meeting approved the treatment plan. The photosensitizing agent was mTHPC (0.15 mg/kg), which was systemically administered 96-hours prior
to ultrasound (US)-guided light delivery to the mass, which was undertaken under general anaesthesia. Recovery was uneventful.Post-PDT
follow-up showed that the patient’s pain, dysphagia and shortness of breath issues had improved. The disfigurement of the neck caused by the
mass was no longer a problem. Three months post-PDT, MRI revealed a significant reduction in the neurofibroma size. PDT was proven as a
successful primary intervention for this pathology. However, higher evidence-based studies are required before this therapy can be proposed
as a replacement to any of the other conventional therapies. PUBLISHER'S NOTE: Based on the information available to BioMed Central, this
article was apparently handled by Waseem Jerjes, an author of the article and Editor-in-Chief of the journal at that time. The manuscript
was reviewed by one recent co-author of some of the authors and accepted without revision. Neurofibroma is a rare benign tumour arising from
nerves that is composed of Schwann cells, perineural cells and fibroblasts. Neurofibromas may present either as solitary lesions or as part
of a syndrome, i.e. neurofibromatosis or von Recklinghausen's disease of the skin (NF-1) . The aetiology behind solitary neurofibroma is
still unknown. Marocchio et al. considered solitary neurofibroma to be hyperplastic hamartomatous malformations rather than neoplastic.
Anatomically, neck neurofibromas are relatively rare, with slow painless growth. Neurofibromas are usually treated by excision, especially
when they are symptomatic (i.e. pain causing swallowing or breathing problems) or disfiguring. Photodynamic therapy (PDT) has been applied
in the management of superficial and deep pathologies involving the head and neck . PDT has been successful in managing superficial diseases
such as oral premalignant disorders and early (T1/T2) oral cancer . Successful applications were also reported in the management of
nasopharyngeal carcinoma , tongue base carcinoma , subglottic carcinoma , vascular anomalies , sarcomas , pericarotid disease , metastatic
disease to the orofacial region , mantle lymphoma and Kimura disease . The advancement in photodynamic applications suggests that PDT may be
more effective when combined with other modalities, (i.e. photochemical internalization . Optical diagnostics (i.e. optical coherence
tomography) can be used to guide PDT therapy and assess outcome especially when it comes to superficial tissue disease, (i.e. skin cancer) .
In this case study, we describe an unusual case of solitary neurofibroma of the neck without the stigmas of NF-1, which was treated with US-
guided interstitial PDT. A 70-year-old Caucasian female presented to the UCLH Head and Neck Unit, London, with a large left neck mass. Pain
and disfigurement were the major complaints. The pain itself was described as sharp, radiating to the right ear and exacerbated by turning
the head to the right. The mass had been increasing in size over the last year and causing significant disfigurement to the left side of the
neck. Other complaints included slight shortness of breath, mainly on exertion, and mild dysphagia. The patient's medical history included
congestive heart failure. Clinical examination revealed a large mass of the left neck, which was slightly mobile but fixed to deeper tissue
with no ulceration of the overlying skin and no transillumination. There was no neurovascular compromise and examination of the cranial
nerves in the area was unremarkable. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) reported a 12 × 12 × 5 cm heterogeneously enhancing mass in the left
base of neck, extending from the left angle of the mandible to the base of neck. There was invasion of the surrounding structures, including
the sternocleidomastoid muscle. However, there was no invasion of neighbouring vascular structures. A surgical core biopsy was performed
under general anaesthesia. Histopathological assessment revealed a submucosal nodular proliferation that consisted of a disorganised array
of peripheral nerve fascicles. Within the fascicles, individual nerve fibres were splayed apart by an increased endoneural matrix. Surgical
excision was initially offered as it represents the gold-standard treatment, but the patient requested an alternative less-invasive therapy.
Following the multi-disciplinary meeting (MDM), the patient was offered US-guided photodynamic therapy using mTHPC as the photosensitizing
agent. The patient was sensitized 96-hours prior to light delivery by the photosensitive agent mTHPC 0.15 mg/kg. The agent was administered
intravenously and the patient instructed to remain in a dimly lit room until the day of the procedure (light delivery). Intra-operatively,
an US scan of the area was performed to assess the centre and periphery of the lesion, as well as its involvement with any neurovascular
structures or hollow organs. Spinal needles were then fed into the tumour under US-guidance. Optical fibres were then inserted through the
needles and allowed to protrude by 2-3 mm to deliver maximum light to the abnormal tissue. As the diameter of necrosis post-PDT does not
exceed 1 cm, the needles were pulled back 1 cm at a time to allow treatment of the whole tumour mass. The total energy delivered per port
was 20 J/cm2 (Figure 1). PDT of neurofibroma. A: Intra-operative image showing the large mass of the left neck. B: Intra-operative
ultrasonography assessing the centre and periphery of the lesion as well as any neurovascular involvement or involvement of hollow organs. C
and D: On-table US images showing the neurofibroma and its boundaries. E: Needle insertion into lesion prior to fibre insertion. F and G:
light delivery to initiate the photochemical reaction. Pain, with slight dysphagia and odynophagia were the main issue in the immediate
post-PDT phase. The pain was manageable by simple analgesics and settled completely within 5–7 days. Post-PDT follow-up showed that the
patient’s pain, dysphagia and shortness of breath issues had been improved. The disfigurement of the neck caused by the mass was no longer
evident. Three months post-PDT, MRI revealed a significant reduction in the neurofibroma size (Figure 1). The patient is now four years
post-intervention and continues to complain of no quality of life issues. Axial MRI scanning of neurofibroma of the neck. A: Baseline MRI
showing a large lesion of the left neck compressing the nearby hollow organs, causing a slight breathing and swallowing compromise. B and C:
three months post-PDT scans, slightly upper and lower to the pre-PDT scan level, showing significant shrinkage with an increase in airway
patency. The gold-standard treatment for neurofibromas continues to be surgery. In the head and neck, this often presents a challenge
because complete excision of these benign tumours may result in greater morbidity due to the complicated anatomy. In some cases, complete
excision may require sacrifice of the cranial nerves, causing significant functional and loco-regional deficits, or result in substantial
cosmetic deformity. Subtotal resection may allow reduced morbidity but inevitably leads to recurrence . There have been very few
alternatives to surgery. Radiotherapy is often not feasible when dealing with a diffuse form of the disease. For solitary plexiform
neurofibroma of the head and neck, however, radiotherapy may have a role in shrinking these lesions and controlling their growth. Intensity-
modulated radiotherapy was shown to be effective in controlling extensive or recurrent juvenile angiofibroma . Our patient had a lesion
causing refractory pain, dysphagia and some breathing problems, especially on exertion. Although resection has been the treatment of choice
for these lesions, PDT was employed due to the patient’s choice. PDT led to significant reduction in the lesion size after only one round of
treatment. This has led to complete symptoms resolution with no morbidity. Successful treatment of these lesions does not require a complete
PDT response and the possibility remains that a further round of PDT could be employed, especially in the case of regrowth and recurrence of
symptoms. We believe that the application of three-dimensional PDT can be instrumental in eliminating disease and reduces the chances of
recurrence. The aim here was to ensure that the disease margins are dealt with and nothing gets missed. With regards to neurofibromas, due
to the non-malignant nature of the disease, shrinkage and control of disease progression and symptoms may be satisfactory to the patient and
also avoid exposing the patient to a major and sometimes disfiguring surgery. Although the patient continues to be symptom-free after four
years since intervention, continuous surveillance is recommended due to the small risk of malignant transformation. This has been reported
to occur infrequently with acoustic neuromas treated with radiotherapy . Solitary plexiform neurofibromas of the head and neck occurring
outside the setting of NF-I are rare. Because of the infiltrative quality of these lesions, complete surgical excision can be difficult and
may result in significant morbidity. PDT has been used successfully to treat similar benign tumours of the head and neck. Current state-of-
the-art PDT techniques, which can limit harmful effects to surrounding normal structures, provide a viable therapeutic option in cases where
complete excision poses an unjustifiably high risk of morbidity. This case study showed that PDT was effective in shrinking the neurofibroma
and controlling its progression leading to symptom control and no morbidity. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case study and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. ZH, WJ, RA and CH contributed to conception and design, carried out the
literature research, manuscript preparation and manuscript review. All authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
