This case report presents two patients with persisting anterior ankle impingement pain after an ankle distortion. A web-like intra-articular
fibrous band was discovered and resected. The patients presented were, after a 1-year follow-up, pain free. Level of evidence IV. Anterior
ankle pain is a common complaint after an ankle sprain. Most patients are successfully treated non-operatively. However, some patients
remain symptomatic. Both Biedert and Takao et al. showed the importance of ankle arthroscopy in cases where the cause of residual pain after
an ankle sprain was, after clinical examination and complementary investigations, undiagnosable. Biedert described several conditions
showing good results after arthroscopic interventions in two-thirds of all patients. One-third showed unsatisfactory results mainly because
of degenerative changes. In this article, two cases of undiagnosable posttraumatic anterior ankle impingement pain are described. Both were
caused by a seldom seen intra-articular fibrous band. Both cases are illustrated using arthroscopy images and an anatomical specimen. Two
patients with ankle complaints were referred to our out-patient clinic with identical symptoms. A 21-year-old male (patient 1) reported a
right ankle sprain one year before, and a 38-year-old male (patient 2) sustained an identical trauma two years before to his left ankle.
Sports activities (jumping, running, soccer) were restricted due to pain on the anteromedial side of the ankle joint. No restrictions were
reported for ADL. At physical examination, the ankles showed a full range of motion and were ligamentous stable. A recognizable superficial
ankle pain could be provoked by compressing the anteromedial side of the ankle joint. Standard anteroposterior and lateral radiographs and a
complementary oblique anteromedial impingement (AMI) radiograph of the ankle displayed no abnormalities. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
evaluation was performed 3 months (patient 1) and 12 months (patient 2) post trauma. In both cases, no particular bony, ligamentous or soft-
tissue pathology could be diagnosed. The only apparent finding was a mild increase in intra-articular fluid. A standard anterior ankle
arthroscopy was performed, and although MRI evaluation was not conclusive, soft-tissue impingement was suspected. During the operation, a
web-like intra-articular fibrous band was discovered in both cases, extending from the medial malleolus to the anterior distal tibia rim and
talus, creating a web over the anteromedial portion of the talus (Fig. 1a–e). After the removal of the band, a superficial fraying of the
talus (a sign of the impingement of the band on the talar surface) was noticed in patient 1 (Fig. 2). At a 1-year follow-up, both patients
had no swelling, a pain-free full range of motion and a maximum AOFAS score.Fig. 1Intra-articular fibrous bands creating a web over the
anteromedial talus with its attachments to the medial malleolus, distal tibia rim and talusFig. 2Detail of the anteromedial talus with a
chondral lesion illustrated by arrows. The asterisk indicates a partially resected fibrous band Intra-articular fibrous bands creating a web
over the anteromedial talus with its attachments to the medial malleolus, distal tibia rim and talus Detail of the anteromedial talus with a
chondral lesion illustrated by arrows. The asterisk indicates a partially resected fibrous band Histology of the fibrous band showed fibrous
tissue with broad collagen and normal fibroblasts resembling ligamentous tissue. The most important findings of the present study were the
discovery of an intra-articular fibrous web over the anteromedial talus causing anterior ankle impingement and the value of ankle
arthroscopy both as a diagnostic tool and as a treatment modality. A complication of an ankle trauma is the development of anterior ankle
impingement. It can be classified according to its location (anterolateral, anterocentral, anteromedial) and to its biological substrate
causing the impingement; most commonly: post-traumatic synovitis, capsular scarring or bony osteophytes . Bony osteophytes may lead to
entrapment of the adjacent anterior joint capsule and give rise to the actual pain sensation . Soft-tissue pathology can also cause anterior
ankle impingement in the absence of underlying osteophytes. Excellent functional outcomes after arthroscopic resection of anteromedial ankle
impingement were reported by Murawski and Kennedy . Transarticular fibrous bands are distinct band-like structures which are firmly attached
to capsule, articular surface or bone. Johnson was the first to describe transarticular fibrous bands . Guhl attributes the origin of these
bands to a cellular reaction following an intra-articular hematoma . An explanation for the fibrous bands occurring more frequently in the
anterior recess of the ankle is the larger volume of the anterior recess compared to the posterior recess, allowing more blood to accumulate
after a trauma. Because of the frequent association of fibrous bands with fractures, a careful inventory of the ankle joint should be
performed if a fibrous band is encountered during an ankle arthroscopy . Ankle fractures are known to cause arthrofibrosis with its negative
effect on joint function . Considering the etiology of intra-articular fibrous bands, the consequence of finding one should prompt a careful
inspection of the ankle joint for occult pathology [1, 9, 10]. Fibrous bands differ from meniscoid tissue. The main distinction being that
the meniscoid is attached at one end and the fibrous band is attached at both ends. The meniscoid is flattened and usually tapering at its
free end and has its origin at the inferolateral gutter on the anterior talofibular ligament [2, 10] or on the deltoid ligament on the
medial side [3, 7]. A fibrous band is cord-like in cross section and can be found anywhere in the joint . A specimen was prepared by Golanó
in order to illustrate fibrous bands in the anterior ankle recess causing a web over the anterior dome of the talus (Fig. 3). Following
repetitive impingement of the talar surface on the web with active dorsiflexion, a superficial fraying of the cartilage of the anterior dome
of the talus can be found (Fig. 2). This is in accordance with Guhl and Stones findings .Fig. 3Anatomical ankle specimen. The arrows
indicate a fibrous band extending from the distal tibia to the talus and fibula. lateral malleolus (1), medial malleolus (2), anterior
tibiofibular ligament (3), anterior talofibular ligament (4), tibionavicular part of deltoid ligament (5), anterior tibiotalar part of
deltoid ligament (6), dorsal talonavicular ligament (7), subtalar joint (8), tarsal sinus (9) Anatomical ankle specimen. The arrows indicate
a fibrous band extending from the distal tibia to the talus and fibula. lateral malleolus (1), medial malleolus (2), anterior tibiofibular
ligament (3), anterior talofibular ligament (4), tibionavicular part of deltoid ligament (5), anterior tibiotalar part of deltoid ligament
(6), dorsal talonavicular ligament (7), subtalar joint (8), tarsal sinus (9) Limitations of the present study are the small patient group
and short follow-up. Tol et al. showed excellent or good results after a 5–8-year follow-up for the arthroscopic treatment of anterior soft-
tissue ankle impingement. Comparable long-term results for the treatment of the pathology of the present study are lacking. MRI is valuable
in the diagnostic workup of ankle impingement lesions . In cases of fibrous bands of the ankle, MRI is less sensitive. However, the bands
are most evident on axial and sagittal proton-density images [5, 9]. In both patients, MRI evaluation was negative for the intraoperatively
diagnosed fibrous band. In our opinion, it is the clinical suspicion for soft-tissue impingement that sets the indication for anterior ankle
arthroscopy. An ankle distortion can result in the formation of intra-articular fibrous bands causing “web impingement” of the ankle.
Anterior ankle arthroscopy is of great value in the diagnostic work-up and treatment. If intra-articular fibrous bands are encountered,
inspection of the ankle for the coexistence of occult pathology is indicated. In the present study, arthroscopy was superior to MRI in
detecting this type of pathology. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any
use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
