A 77-year old woman visited the emergency room (ER) because of abdominal pain and severe diarrhea. She had undergone radiation therapy for
cervical cancer 30 years earlier. Pertinent initial laboratory data included a serum urea nitrogen level of 90.9 mg/dL and a creatinine
level of 4.1 mg/dL. Sigmoidoscopy showed circular ulceration with whitish exudates consistent with ischemic colitis in the mid rectum. When
she came to the ER, she showed oliguria with no evidence of hydronephrosis or indication of urinary tract obstruction on unenhanced computed
tomography (CT) (Fig. 1). She was treated aggressively with fluid and antibiotics for dehydration and ischemic colitis. Her condition seemed
to be improving, with diminished diarrhea and increased urine output. Serum creatinine level dropped to 0.6 mg/dL. However, on the 5th day
in the hospital, she suddenly developed a spiking fever and flank pain, and there was bilateral costovertebral angle tenderness. Follow-up
CT scan demonstrated newly emerged bilateral hydronephrosis and diffuse thickening of the bladder wall without stone, mass, or stricture
(Fig. 2). Cystoscopic biopsy showed many chronic inflammatory cells, especially plasma cells and some acute inflammatory cells, throughout
the bladder wall. The urinary bladder is irradiated incidentally in patients with cancer involving other pelvic structures. Late-phase
symptoms may occur years after the initial radiation therapy. Ischemia and fibrosis may result from radiation, leading to contracted
bladders, ulcer formation, fistulas, and dysfunction of the bladder. Decreased bladder capacity followed by chronic inflammation is one of
the causes of urinary tract obstruction. Urinary tract obstruction can be diagnosed by the presence of hydronephrosis on ultrasound or CT
scan. However, in the following situations hydronephrosis may not be apparent: 1) Within the first three days after the obstruction event
when the collecting system is relatively incompliant and less likely to dilate; 2) When the collecting systems are encased by
retroperitoneal tumor or fibrosis. In this setting, hydronephrosis may be present in the absence of ureteral dilatation; 3) With mild
obstruction, there is usually no impairment in renal function; 4) With volume depletion, particularly in the elderly, partial obstruction
may be obscured. In this case, urinary flow was partially reduced without the need for compensation because of the radiation-induced
cystitis. The concomitant colitis caused severe diarrhea and volume depletion, decreased the renal function, and masked the presence of
hydronephrosis at first. When the patient recovered from decreased renal function, with hydration by forced diuresis, the hydronephrosis
manifested fully. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Initial CT scan. There was no evidence for
hydronephrosis or urinary obstruction on admission. Follow-up CT scan. Note marked bilateral hydronephrosis, which was not detected on early
CT.
