We identified Dobrava-Belgrade virus infection in Turkey (from a strain related to hantavirus strains from nearby countries) in a patient
who had severe symptoms leading to panhypopituitarism, but no known risk for hantavirus. Our findings emphasize the need for increased
awareness of hantaviruses in the region and assessment of symptomatic persons without known risk factors for infection. Hemorrhagic fever
with renal syndrome (HFRS) is caused by infection with hantaviruses. Most patients with HFRS recover completely, but acute and chronic
complications may develop. HFRS patients with severe lung involvement resembling hantavirus cardiopulmonary syndrome have been described
(1). In addition, pituitary hemorrhage, followed by hypopituitarism, is a possible complication of HFRS. Involvement of the pituitary gland
has been observed in some patients infected with Puumala virus, a hantavirus commonly found in western and central Europe (2–4). We report
on a patient who experienced shock, pulmonary failure, and panhypopituitarism as complications of HFRS. By testing for neutralizing
antibodies and by amplification and molecular characterization of virus samples, we identified the causative pathogen as a strain of
Dobrava-Belgrade virus (DOBV) that is closely related to a hantavirus strain typically carried by the yellow-necked field mouse (Apodemus
flavicollis), strain DOBV-Af. A 34-year-old man with fever (38°C), tender cervical lymph nodes, and symptoms of pharyngeal infection was
admitted to a hospital in Istanbul, Turkey on February 3, 2010. His blood pressure was 120/70 mm Hg and heart rate was 96 beats/min.
Laboratory findings included thrombocytopenia (63,000 platelets/mm3 [reference 130–450×103 platelets/mm3]) and mild elevation of
transaminase levels (alanine transaminase 95 IU/L [reference 10–40 IU/L]; Aspartate aminotransferase 99 IU/L [reference 15–40 IU/L]) (Table
1). Results of urinalysis, chest radiograph, and ultrasound of the abdomen were normal. Diarrhea developed during the first day of
hospitalization, and conjunctival suffusion was observed on ocular examination. Ciprofloxacin was given to treat suspected salmonellosis at
a dosage of 400 mg every 12 hours. *DOBV, Dobrava-Belgrade virus; ALT, alanine transaminase; AST, aspartate aminotransferase; BUN, blood
urea nitrogen; aPTT, activated partial thromboplastin time; PT, prothrombin time; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; ACTH,
adrenocorticotropic hormone; ADH, antidiuretic hormone; LH, luteinizing hormone; FSH, follicle-stimulating hormone; IGF, insulin-like growth
factor. †Test not performed. On day 2 of hospitalization, the patient became oliguric and hypotensive. He had persisting fever. His platelet
count decreased to 20,000/mm3, and his serum creatinine level increased to 1.8 mg/dL (reference 0.7–1.2 mg/dL). Urinalysis results showed
microscopic hematuria and proteinuria. Results of a transthoracic echocardiogram showed heart chambers of normal size, a left ventricular
ejection fraction of 60%, and moderate pericardial effusion. The patient was transferred to the intensive care unit. Broad-spectrum
antimicrobial drugs were initiated as treatment for suspected sepsis, and platelet and albumin transfusions were given as supportive
therapy. On day 3 of hospitalization, the patient experienced tachycardia, petechial lesions appeared on his extremities, and his platelet
count dropped to 13,000/mm3. Results of a bone marrow aspiration showed proliferation of histiocytes and prominent hemophagocytosis.
Intravenous methylprednisolone therapy (100 mg/day) was started. Septic shock developed in the patient, and inotropic therapy was initiated.
On the same day, acute respiratory distress syndrome developed, and assisted ventilation was started. Results of a thoracic computerized
tomographic scan showed focal infiltration on the upper zone of the left lung and minimal pleural effusion on the right lung. Results of
abdominal computerized tomographic scan revealed ascites and multiple mesenteric lymphadenomegalies. On the basis of these clinical and
laboratory findings, hantavirus infection was suspected. Blood samples were obtained for hantavirus testing, and oral ribavirin was added at
an initial dose of 30 mg/kg, followed by 15 mg/kg every 6 hours for 4 days, then 7.5 mg/kg for 6 days. On the same day, hemofiltration was
started and continued for 6 consecutive days. The patient’s urinary output gradually increased, pulmonary symptoms regressed, and his
ventilation tube was removed on day 12 of hospitalization. The patient stayed in the intensive care unit for 18 days and was then
transferred to a standard care unit. No microbial growth was observed in the cultures of samples taken during the first days of
hospitalization. Serum samples were tested for antibodies against a panel of pathogens, including Salmonella typhi, S. paratyphi A and B,
Brucella spp., HIV, Crimean-Congo hemorrhagic fever virus, Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, parvovirus B19, adenovirus, dengue virus,
Rickettsia spp., Leptospira spp., Treponema pallidum, and hepatitis viruses A, B, C, and E. Results of these serologic tests were negative
or inconspicuous. Results of PCR analysis conducted for leptospirosis, respiratory viruses, and cytomegalovirus were below the detection
limit of the assays. Serologic testing for hantavirus was performed by using the recomLine Bunyavirus IgG/IgM immunoassay (Mikrogen,
Neuried, Munich, Germany); results showed strong reactivity for IgG and IgM antibodies, indicating an acute hantavirus infection. The blot
data provided evidence of an infection with DOBV; to confirm the results, we performed serotyping by using focus reduction neutralization
tests (Table 2). The results confirmed a DOBV infection most likely caused by a strain of DOBV-Af. Reverse transcription PCR results for
hantaviral RNA were positive for the first acute-phase blood sample. Subsequent nucleotide sequence determination of parts of the 3 genomic
segments and molecular phylogenetic analysis of these small, medium (Figure 1), and large gene sequences (data not shown) showed that the
isolate was most closely related to DOBV-Af. *DOBV, Dobrava-Belgrade virus; Aa, Apodemus agrarius; Af, Apodemus flavicollis; SK, strain
Slovakia; Slo, strain Slovenia. Molecular phylogenetic analysis of small (S) and medium (M) gene segments. Consensus neighbor-joining
phylogenetic tree (Tamura-Nei 93 evolutionary model) of hantavirus strains was constructed as described (9) based on partial sequences of
the S (panel A) and M segment (panel B). Bootstrap values >70%, calculated from 10,000 replicates, are shown at the tree branches. Sequences
taken from GenBank are indicated by their accession numbers. SAAV Est, Saaremaa virus from Estonia; DOBV AnoP, Dobrava-Belgrade virus
(lineage DOBV-Af) from Greece; DOBV Slo, Dobrava-Belgrade virus (lineage DOBV-Af) from Slovenia; DOB SK, Dobrava-Belgrade virus (lineage
DOBV-Aa) from Slovakia; HTNV, Hantaan virus; SEOV, Seoul virus; ANDV, Andes virus; SNV, Sin nombre virus; PUUV, Puumala virus; TULV, Tula
virus; PHV, Prospect Hill virus. Scale bars indicate an evolutionary distance of 0.1 substitutions per position. On day 19 of
hospitalization, the patient displayed generalized weakness. The results of the basal levels of hormonal studies are shown in Table 1. On
day 20 of hospitalization, panhypopituitarism was diagnosed. Hormone replacement therapy using hydrocortisone, thyroxin, and testosterone
was immediately initiated. On day 22 of hospitalization, magnetic resonance imaging showed pituitary hemorrhage and pituitary atrophy
(Figure 2). After the administration of hormone replacement therapy, symptoms improved markedly. The patient was discharged on day 33 of
hospitalization. At the final outpatient followup visit, the patient had normal urine output and his serum creatinine level was 1.5 mg/dL.
His pulmonary examination results and chest radiograph findings were normal, but he continued to require hormonal replacement therapy at the
16th month of followup care. Magnetic resonance images showing hemorrhage of the pituitary gland and pituitary atrophy as indicated by
arrows. A) T1-weighted coronal image shows high signal intensity on the right side of the adenohypophysis consistent with hemorrhage. B)
T2-weighted sagittal image shows decreased pituitary gland height and heterogenous low signal intensity of the central adenohypophysis due
to hemorrhagic infarction. The general symptoms and results of the serologic tests and molecular analyses for this patient were consistent
with a hantavirus infection. After the acute phase of the illness, characterized by renal and pulmonary failure, panhypopituitarism
developed in the patient. Pituitary hemorrhage and atrophy were observed on the magnetic resonance image. Case reports have documented that
pituitary hemorrhage followed by panhypopituitarism may complicate HFRS (2–4), and Puumala virus was reported as the causative agent in most
of these cases. In addition, hormonal deficiencies have been shown to be common features of Puumala virus infections, and chronic hormonal
deficits develop in some patients (5). Our findings demonstrate that development of hypopituitarism can also be associated with infection by
DOBV. Since the patient does not belong to any groups that have high exposure to hantaviruses (such as farmers, forest workers, and military
recruits) and did not report any travel in hantavirus-endemic areas, the source of infection remains unclear. In contrast to what is known
about hantavirus presence in other Balkan states, little is known about the distribution, diversity, or host range of hantaviruses in Turkey
(6). In 2009, a hantavirus outbreak occurred in Turkey; 3 of the 5 infected persons died (7). Serologic assays have been used to detect DOBV
infection in patients in Turkey, but focus reduction neutralization tests have not been used for serotyping. DOBV RNA was found only in 1
urine sample from a hantavirus-infected patient from Turkey; however, sequence data were not provided (8). Prevalence studies of rodents
collected in Turkey revealed 6% seropositivity to Puumala virus in Microtus voles and no appearance of hantavirus antibodies in the Apodemus
species of rodents (9). Focus reduction neutralization testing and virus sequencing confirmed that the patient in our study was infected
with DOBV-Af. This strain is associated with A. flavicollis field mice and yet has not been reported in animals in Turkey (see 10,11 for the
molecular classification of Apodemus spp.–associated DOBV virus lineages). This case should alert physicians that hantavirus infection
should be considered in the differential diagnosis of patients who have high fever and thrombocytopenia, including those without known risk
factors for hantavirus exposure. Since severe hormonal deficiencies are life-threatening, neuroendocrinologic complications should be taken
into account and the endocrine status should be investigated to prevent panhypopituitarism even after recovery from HFRS. Suggested citation
for this article: Sarıgüzel N, Hofmann J, Canpolat AT, Türk A, Ettinger J, Atmaca D, et al. Dobrava hantavirus infection complicated by
panhypopituitarism, Istanbul, Turkey, 2010.Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Jul [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1807.111746 These authors contributed equally to this article. Work in the laboratory in Berlin was supported
by the Robert Koch Institute with funds from the German Ministry of Public Health (grant no. 1369-382 and 1369-435). Dr Sarıgüzel is a
specialist in clinical microbiology and infectious diseases at Acıbadem Health Group in Istanbul. Her research interests are infectious
diseases, tuberculosis, and nosocomial infections.
