Medscape, LLC is pleased to provide online continuing medical education (CME) for this journal article, allowing clinicians the opportunity
to earn CME credit. This activity has been planned and implemented in accordance with the Essential Areas and policies of the Accreditation
Council for Continuing Medical Education through the joint sponsorship of Medscape, LLC and Emerging Infectious Diseases. Medscape, LLC is
accredited by the ACCME to provide continuing medical education for physicians. Medscape, LLC designates this Journal-based CME activity for
a maximum of 1 AMA PRA Category 1 Credit(s)TM. Physicians should claim only the credit commensurate with the extent of their participation
in the activity. All other clinicians completing this activity will be issued a certificate of participation. To participate in this journal
CME activity: (1) review the learning objectives and author disclosures; (2) study the education content; (3) take the post-test with a 70%
minimum passing score and complete the evaluation at www.medscape.org/journal/eid; (4) view/print certificate. Release date: June 13, 2012;
Expiration date: June 13, 2013 Upon completion of this activity, participants will be able to: Distinguish the usual severity of infections
with LPAI Analyze the differential diagnosis for patients presenting with LPAI infection Evaluate the epidemiology of LPAI Assess other
clinical characteristics of LPAI infection P. Lynne Stockton, VMD, MS, ELS(D), Technical Writer/Editor, Emerging Infectious Diseases.
Disclosure: P. Lynne Stockton, VMD, MS, ELS(D), has disclosed no relevant financial relationships. Charles P. Vega, MD, Health Sciences
Clinical Professor; Residency Director, Department of Family Medicine, University of California, Irvine. Disclosure: Charles P. Vega, MD,
has disclosed no relevant financial relationships. Disclosures: Belinda Ostrowsky, MD, MPH; William Terry, MD, MPH; Diane Anton, MS,
M(ASCP); Barbara Brunagel, MS; Lorraine Traynor, BS; Syed Abid, PhD; Geraldine Johnson, MS; Marilyn Kacica, MD, MPH; Stephen Lindstrom, PhD;
Alexander Klimov, PhD; and Timothy M. Uyeki, MD, MPH, MPP, have disclosed no relevant financial relationships. Ada Huang, MD, has disclosed
the following relevant financial relationships: owns stock, stock options, or bonds from Merck, Pfizer. Jacqueline Katz, PhD, has disclosed
the following relevant financial relationships: received grants for clinical research from GlaxoSmithKline for research not related to the
current study; received grants for preclinical research from Colby Pharmaceuticals (formerly Juvaris Bio Therapeutics) for research not
related to the current study. Lindsay Edwards has disclosed the following relevant financial relationships: spouse owns GlaxoSmithKline
stock. Suggested citation for this article: Ostrowsky B, Huang A, Terry W, Anton D, Brunagel B, Traynor L, et al. Low pathogenic avian
influenza A (H7N2) virus infection in immunocompromised adult, New York, USA, 2003. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Jul
[date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1807.111913 Current affiliation: Montefiore Medical Center, the University Hospital for the
Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Current affiliation: The State University of New York School of Medicine,
Buffalo, New York, USA. Current affiliation: University of Colorado School of Medicine, Denver, Colorado, USA. In 2003, infection with low
pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N2) virus was identified in an immunocompromised man with fever and community-acquired pneumonia in New
York, USA. The patient recovered. Although the source of the virus was not identified, this case indicates the usefulness of virus culture
for detecting novel influenza A viruses. Limited numbers of human infections with low pathogenic avian influenza A, subtype H7, viruses have
been reported and attributed to recent exposure to infected poultry (1–6). Such infections generally resulted in clinically mild illness. We
report a case of low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) A (H7N2) virus infection in an immunocompromised adult. On November 3, 2003, a
48-year-old man from the Caribbean sought care at an emergency department in Westchester County, New York, USA, after an episode of near
syncopy; a 2–4 week history of feverishness, cough, fatigue, and myalgia; and a 10-pound weight loss over 2 months. He had lived in the
United States since 1987 and had no known medical conditions. A month earlier, he had been evaluated at a clinic, and an oral antimicrobial
drug was prescribed for possible pneumonia. Eight days before the emergency department admission reported here, he had sought emergency care
for unilateral conjunctivitis, eye pain, and blurred vision; the diagnosis was corneal abrasion. Physical examination on November 3, 2003,
found that the patient was afebrile, weak, and mildly tachypneic (respiratory rate 18–26 breaths/minute, room air oxygenation saturation
98%) with bibasilar inspiratory rales. Pertinent laboratory findings included mild anemia and thrombocytopenia (hemoglobin 11.9 g/dL,
platelets 107 × 109/L, leukocytes 8.0 × 109 cells/L [52% lymphocytes]), mildly elevated hepatic transaminases (aspartate aminotransferase
116 U/L, alanine aminotransferase 87 U/L), and elevated creatine kinase (1,844 U/L). A chest radiograph showed a right hilar density and
left lower lobe infiltrates; computed tomographic scan of the chest and abdomen showed bilateral micronodular opacities with right perihilar
infiltrates and lymphadenopathy. The patient was admitted for community-acquired pneumonia and received intravenous gatifloxicin. A
tuberculin skin test was reactive (20-mm induration). HIV ELISA/Western blot test results were positive (HIV test result from 3 years
earlier was reportedly negative), and CD4 count was 300 cells/μL. Treatment was switched to rifampin, isoniazid, pyrazinamide, ethambutol,
and pyridoxine. Bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) performed on November 7 yielded influenza A virus by tissue cell culture at the Westchester
County Department of Laboratories and Research and was negative for Pneumocystis spp., Legionella spp., and other bacterial or viral
pathogens. A second BAL and biopsy performed later during hospitalization to evaluate adenopathy indicated inflammation without definitive
pathology. The lower respiratory tract disease improved after 13 days, and the patient was empirically prescribed tuberculosis treatment
(directly observed therapy) and discharged while mycobacterial culture results were pending. After 8 weeks, mycobacterial culture of the BAL
specimen was negative for Mycobacterium tuberculosis but yielded M. avium complex. The patient lived in an apartment with his wife and 4
children, none of whom were sick during his illness. He denied recent travel and had not traveled outside the United States for 4 years. He
worked in a cafeteria as a dishwasher and handled food and garbage until 1 month before hospitalization. He denied any known risk factors
for HIV infection. The influenza A virus isolate was difficult to grow in culture, reacted minimally with antiserum to hemagglutinin H1, and
was sent to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) for further characterization. On March 19, 2004, CDC reported that the
influenza isolate, designated A/New York/107/2003, was an LPAI A (H7N2), not subtype H1N1, virus. An epidemiologic investigation was
initiated by the Westchester County Department of Health. During 3 interviews (with a Creole interpreter), the patient denied any exposure
to live or dead poultry, wild birds, or bird feces. No live poultry markets or poultry were found on the surrounding property or in the
neighborhood. Serum samples obtained during the patient’s hospitalization on November 5, 2003, and on April 4, 2004, were tested at CDC by
microneutralization assay with the LPAI A (H7N2) virus from the patient. The acute-phase serum sample was negative (titer 10), but the
convalescent-phase serum sample was positive (influenza virus neutralizing antibody titer 80), indicating seroconversion and evidence of
infection with LPAI A (H7N2) virus. A confirmatory Western blot assay detected H7 hemagglutinin-specific antibody in the convalescent-phase
serum sample. Testing of paired serum samples by ELISA demonstrated a 16-fold rise in H7 hemagglutinin-specific IgG. Serum samples collected
from the patient’s wife and 3 of the children on April 4, 2004, were seronegative for influenza A (H7N2) neutralizing antibodies. In this
immunocompromised man with pneumonia, the contribution of influenza A (H7N2) virus infection to his lower respiratory tract disease is
unclear. The diagnosis of influenza A (H7N2) virus infection was not made until long after the patient had been discharged, and no influenza
antiviral treatment was administered. The patient’s history and clinical findings were consistent with HIV and community-acquired pneumonia
with possible clinical response to the antimicrobial drug therapy or improvement of self-limiting viral pneumonia. In patients with HIV
infection, M. avium complex is often detected as an indolent pathogen, especially associated with disseminated disease in patients with
advanced AIDS; clinical resolution usually requires prolonged multidrug treatment (7). Isolation of influenza A (H7N2) virus from a BAL
specimen and resolution of lower respiratory tract disease during hospitalization suggest that this infection might have contributed to the
pulmonary disease. The clinical spectrum of human infection with LPAI viruses, including subtype H7, is generally mild, ranging from
conjunctivitis to influenza-like illness (1–6), although hospitalization of patients with influenza A (H7N2) virus infection has been
reported (6). Conjunctival infection with influenza A subtype H7 viruses in persons with conjunctivitis has been confirmed by reverse
transcription PCR or virus isolation (1–3,5). The patient initially reported ophthalmologic symptoms. Because conjunctival specimens were
not available for virus testing, the role of influenza A (H7N2) virus in the conjunctivitis is unknown. However, intraocular inoculation of
mice with the influenza A (H7N2) virus from the patient (A/New York/107/2003) did not result in infection, and the virus replicated at
relatively low levels in murine corneal epithelial cells ex vivo (8,9). Intranasal inoculation with the LPAI A (H7N2) virus caused
respiratory symptoms, elevated mean lung titers, and cytokine increases in mice; among ferrets, the virus replicated efficiently in the
upper respiratory tract and was transmissible through direct contact (8,10). The source of the patient’s infection with influenza A (H7N2)
virus was not determined, although exposure to poultry was suspected. A limitation is that the investigations were conducted 5 months after
the patient was hospitalized, after the influenza A isolate was identified as an LPAI A (H7N2) virus. LPAI A (H7N2) viruses have been
documented among birds in live poultry markets in the northeastern United States, including New York (11–13). Such viruses have receptor-
binding properties consistent with receptors found in the human upper respiratory tract (10). This case of LPAI A (H7N2) virus infection was
detected through influenza virus surveillance of specimens submitted from outpatients and hospitalized patients to the Westchester County
Department of Laboratories and Research and illustrates the value of virus culture for detection of human infections with novel influenza A
viruses, which are nationally notifiable. For the patient reported here, neither seasonal influenza nor zoonotic influenza was suspected.
Whether HIV infection might have made the patient more susceptible to lower respiratory tract infection with LPAI A (H7N2) virus is unknown,
but a case of pulmonary infection with LPAI A (H9N2) virus in an immunosuppressed adult has been reported (14). A serologically confirmed
case of LPAI A (H7N2) virus infection in the United States was associated with upper respiratory tract illness (4). Although information
about the frequency of human infection with LPAI A H7 viruses is limited, 1 study reported antibody detection in 3.8% of exposed poultry
workers after an outbreak of LPAI A (H7N3) virus infection among poultry in Italy (15). More information is needed to clarify the risk for
LPAI A H7 virus infections among immunocompetent and immunocompromised persons. Suggested citation for this article: Ostrowsky B, Huang A,
Terry W, Anton D, Brunagel B, Traynor L, et al. Low pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N2) virus infection in immunocompromised adult, New
York, USA, 2003. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Jul [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1807.111913 Current
affiliation: Montefiore Medical Center, the University Hospital for the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Current
affiliation: The State University of New York School of Medicine, Buffalo, New York, USA. Current affiliation: University of Colorado School
of Medicine, Denver, Colorado, USA. We thank the many colleagues who helped with the epidemiologic and laboratory investigations, including
Ralph Bernard , who assisted with interviews and translation; the public health nursing staff who arranged for the serologic testing and
directly observed therapy; the staff at the Westchester Medical Center, where the case-patient received medical care; and Perry Smith,
Barbara Wallace, Bryan Cherry, and Amanda Balish. Dr Ostrowsky was director of communicable and sexually transmitted diseases at the
Westchester County Department of Health when the case reported here was investigated. She is currently director of the antimicrobial
stewardship program at Montefiore Medical Center of Albert Einstein College of Medicine. Her research interests include antimicrobial drug
resistance, health care–associated infections, and public health. To obtain credit, you should first read the journal article. After reading
the article, you should be able to answer the following, related, multiple-choice questions. To complete the questions (with a minimum 70%
passing score) and earn continuing medical education (CME) credit, please go to www.medscape.org/journal/eid. Credit cannot be obtained for
tests completed on paper, although you may use the worksheet below to keep a record of your answers. You must be a registered user on
Medscape.org. If you are not registered on Medscape.org, please click on the New Users: Free Registration link on the left hand side of the
website to register. Only one answer is correct for each question. Once you successfully answer all post-test questions you will be able to
view and/or print your certificate. For questions regarding the content of this activity, contact the accredited provider, CME@medscape.net.
For technical assistance, contact CME@webmd.net. American Medical Association’s Physician’s Recognition Award (AMA PRA) credits are accepted
in the US as evidence of participation in CME activities. For further information on this award, please refer to http://www.ama-
assn.org/ama/pub/category/2922.html. The AMA has determined that physicians not licensed in the US who participate in this CME activity are
eligible for AMA PRA Category 1 Credits™. Through agreements that the AMA has made with agencies in some countries, AMA PRA credit may be
acceptable as evidence of participation in CME activities. If you are not licensed in the US, please complete the questions online, print
the certificate and present it to your national medical association for review. 1. You are seeing a 48-year-old man who complains of 2 weeks
of severe malaise, tactile fever, cough, and weight loss. You consider whether this patient has influenza. Which of the following statements
best characterizes the majority of low pathogenic avian influenza (LPAI) viral infections? A. The mortality rate approaches 50% B. Almost
all cases are diagnosed in the hospital C. Most infections are mild in nature D. They are characterized by higher rates of secondary
pneumonia compared with other influenza infections 2. You want to offer targeted antimicrobial therapy for this patient. What was the
patient in the current case study treated for originally? A. Community-acquired pneumonia B. Primary influenza infection C. Primary HIV
infection D. Tuberculosis 3. The patient is confirmed to have infection with LPAI. How did the patient in the current case study acquire
LPAI? A. Keeping pigeons above his home B. Working in a poultry processing plant C. Direct contact with infected coworkers D. Unknown 4.
What else should you consider regarding the current case study as you treat this patient with LPAI infection? A. The presence of
conjunctivitis suggests something different from infection with H7 subtype viruses B. Concomitant HIV infection has been definitively
associated with an increased risk of lower respiratory tract infection with H7N2 virus C. The case patient recovered without specific
treatment for influenza D. The influenza A isolate grew rapidly in culture Suggested citation for this article: Ostrowsky B, Huang A, Terry
W, Anton D, Brunagel B, Traynor L, et al. Low pathogenic avian influenza A (H7N2) virus infection in immunocompromised adult, New York, USA,
2003. Emerg Infect Dis [serial on the Internet]. 2012 Jul [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1807.111913 Current affiliation:
Montefiore Medical Center, the University Hospital for the Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York, USA. Current affiliation:
The State University of New York School of Medicine, Buffalo, New York, USA. Current affiliation: University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Denver, Colorado, USA.
