The association of achondroplasia and Klinefelter syndrome is extremely rare. To date, five cases have been previously reported, all of them
diagnosed beyond the postnatal period, and only one was molecularly characterized. We describe the first case of this unusual association
diagnosed in the neonatal period, the clinical findings and the molecular studies undertaken. The boy was born at term with clinical and
radiological features indicating the diagnosis of achondroplasia or hypochondroplasia combined with the prenatal karyotype of Klinefelter
syndrome (47,XXY). Neonatal FGFR3 mutation screening showed that the newborn was heterozygous for the classic achondroplasia G340R mutation.
Microsatellite marker analysis showed that the sex chromosome aneuploidy had arisen from a non-disjunction error in paternal meiosis I, with
a recombination event in the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1). Specific mutation analysis is appropriate to confirm the clinical diagnosis of
achondroplasia for appropriate diagnosis, prognosis, and genetic counseling, especially when the karyotype does not explain the abnormal
prenatal sonographic findings. In the present case, a recombination event was observed in the PAR1 region, although recombinational events
in paternally derived Klinefelter syndrome cases are much rarer than expected. The association of achondroplasia and Klinefelter syndrome is
extremely rare. To our knowledge, only five cases have been reported previously , all well beyond the immediate postnatal period, and
mutation analysis was performed in only one case . In all cases the achondroplasia FGFR3 gene defect dominated the clinical picture, even
prenatally, and the Klinefelter syndrome is not able to counter the achondroplasia’s effects on height. Klinefelter syndrome is readily
diagnosed by karyotype analysis, but the diagnostic confirmation of the skeletal dysplasia requires a specific mutation analysis, necessary
for genetic counseling and prognosis, and to determine perinatal lethality. We clinically and molecularly describe here the first case of
this extremely unusual association that was diagnosed in the neonatal period, and emphasize the importance of performing specific genetic
studies when there are prenatal ultrasound findings suggestive of skeletal dysplasia. It is noteworthy that in our case a recombination
event was observed in the PAR1, although a highly significant reduction in recombination has been observed in paternally derived Klinefelter
syndrome cases. The boy was born at term (41 weeks according to gestational age) after an uneventful pregnancy. Birth weight was 3000 g
(-0.77 standard deviations, SD), birth length 47 cm (-1.76 SD) and head circumference 36 cm (+ 0.6 SD), according to Spanish neonatal
standards . He was the second child of healthy parents of normal height (mother -0.6 SD, father - 1 SD). The mother was 37 years old and the
father was 43 years old at the time of conception. There was no history of consanguinity. One brother was healthy. During pregnancy, a
routine sonography was carried out at a different institution at 27 + 2 weeks and the fetus was detected to have abnormal head morphology
with small body and limbs with no other significant abnormalities. Prenatal analysis was undertaken, revealing a 47,XXY karyotype,
corresponding to Klinefelter syndrome. Genetic counseling was given accordingly and no further studies were undertaken at that time. On
physical examination at birth, the newborn had rhizomelic shortening, a large head with protruding forehead, mid-facial hypoplasia,
depressed nasal bridge, hypoplastic chin, low set ears, and short neck (Figure 1A). The abdomen was protruding and there was evidence of
decreasing anterior-posterior chest diameter, and lumbar lordosis. Signs of trident hand were present (Figure 1B). The external genitalia
were unremarkable, with testes present in the scrotum that appeared normal (Figure 1C). Clinical and radiological findings. A. Patients
general appearance with rhizomelic limb shortening. B. A large head with protruding forehead, mid facial hypoplasia, depressed nasal bridge,
hypoplasic chin, short neck. C. Short trident hands. D. Radiograph showing bowing and shortness of legs with metaphyseal flaring.
Radiological studies revealed decreased interpedicular distances, anterior beaking and posterior scalloping of the lumbar vertebrae (Figure
1D). The sacro-coccyx was curved posteriorly with small square iliac wing and the horizontal acetabulum roof had champagne glass appearance.
The neonate had bilateral short humeri, radii and ulnae with metaphyseal flaring, as well as a short tibia and fibula with metaphyseal
flaring, mildly increased fibular length and a generalized brachydactylia with bullet shaped proximal and middle phalanges. The clinical and
radiological features indicated a diagnosis of achondroplasia or hypochondroplasia combined with the prenatal karyotype of Klinefelter
syndrome. Hormonal analysis was also undertaken at day 3. LH (< 0.1 UI/L), FSH (< 0.3 UI/L) and testosterone (89.5 ng/dl) levels were within
the normal range for age. Mutation screening of exons 8 and 11 of FGFR3 (NM_000142) was undertaken by PCR and direct sequencing. Mutations
in these two exons account for >98% of achondroplasia and >70% of hypochondroplasia cases, including the most frequently observed mutations
in achondroplasia (p.G380R) and hypochondroplasia (p.N540K). The patient was shown to be heterozygous for the classical c.1138 G > A
mutation which results in a Glycine to Arginine substitution at position 380 (p.G380R) within the transmembrane domain of the mature
protein. The 47,XXY karyotype was confirmed postnatally in 30 metaphases. Analysis of microsatellite markers localized along the X
chromosome, including the pseudoautosomal region 1 (PAR1), was carried out as previously described and in accordance to the kit (Devyser
Compact). The aneuploidy was shown to be of paternal origin with a recombination event present between markers DXYS10082 and DXYS10097
(Figure 2). Analysis of PAR1 and X-chromosome specific microsatellite markers in the studied family. The markers show that the extra X
chromosome is of paternal origin. A recombination is observed in PAR1 between markers DXYS10085 and DXYS10087. Marker DXYS10084 was not
informative. X1, X2 and X4 are X-chromosome markers included in the Devyser Compact kit. At the age of one year, the patient presented
typical achondroplastic body proportions, normal neurological development except for axial hypotonia, and the height, weight and head
circumference were -4.9 SD and -3.8 SD and -0.34 SD respectively, according to the Spanish population . The patient developed a severe
kyphoscoliotic deformity affecting the lower thoracic and upper lumbar spine. To our knowledge, this is the first report of the extremely
unusual association of achondroplasia and Klinefelter syndrome that was diagnosed in the neonatal period. Only five cases have been
previously reported, including a 28 month old boy , one child , one teenager , and two adults . The incidence of Klinefelter syndrome and
achondroplasia occurring together is estimated at 1 in 25 million births using recent data for the respective disorders . In previuously
reported cases (1-5) the initial diagnosis was achondroplasia, based on the clinical findings of facial appearance, severe short stature and
body proportions. Similarly, in our case, height was dominated by the effect of the FGFR3 mutation rather than by the XXY aneuploidy. Based
on the karyotype analysis ordered because of abnormal sonographic findings, our case was initially diagnosed prenatally in a different
institution of non-mosaic Klinefelter syndrome. At birth, achondroplasia was clinically suspected and mutation analysis confirmed the
suspicion. Our case is of great clinical interest, as it documents the interest of mutation screening when sonography during pregnancy
reveals findings suggestive of a skeletal dysplasia, especially when the karyotype does not explain the abnormal sonographic findings. The
p.G380R substitution in the transmembrane domain of the FGFR3 protein, as identified in this case, is present in >98% of achondroplasia
patients, and may either have arisen sporadically or be due to germline mosaicism. More than 90% of achondroplasia cases are sporadic and
there is an association of increased incidence with advancing paternal age at the time of conception of affected individuals, as in this
case, suggesting that de novo mutations are of paternal origin . Recently, Almeida et al. emphasized the clinical heterogeneity of skeletal
dysplasias (achondroplasia and hypochondroplasia) associated with FGFR3 mutations, and the importance of undertaking mutation analysis to
confirm the clinical diagnosis and to establish an appropriate prognosis and genetic counseling . Analysis of PAR1 microsatellite markers
revealed that the extra sex chromosome was of paternal origin, arising from the fusion of an XY spermatozoon and an X ovum. The frequency of
XY sperm increases with paternal age , thus increasing the risk of fathering boys with Klinefelter syndrome. Interestingly, in our case a
recombination event was observed in PAR1, although a highly significant reduction in recombination has been observed in paternally derived
cases of Klinefelter syndrome and in diploid 24, XY spermatozoa reviewed in . Fertility prognosis in these cases is unclear. There is one
report of preserved fertility in a non-mosaic Klinefelter patient with a mutation in FGFR3 (5). The authors speculate that the classical
FGFR3 mutation (p.G380R) found in this patient may stimulate spermatogonial proliferation and/or prevent apoptosis, giving germ cells a
selective advantage. In our case the LH, FSH and testosterone levels were in the normal range at the third day of life. However, a more
prolonged follow up is necessary to determine the function of the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis and the potential for fertility. In
summary, mutation screening is appropriate when sonography during pregnancy reveals findings suggestive of a skeletal dysplasia, especially
when the karyotype does not explain the abnormal sonographic findings. The presence of FGFR3 mutations dominates the clinical picture and
its identification is important not only for genetic counseling and recurrence risk, but also to determine perinatal lethality, the severity
of the dysplasia and prognosis. The coordinated collaboration between gynecologists, pediatricians and geneticists is appropriate. Written
informed consent was obtained from both parents for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the informed
consent is available for review by the Series Editor of BMC Pediatrics. The genetic analysis was approved by the local ethical committee,
Hospital Universitario La Paz. All studies were in compliance with the Helsinki Declaration. The authors declare that there are no competing
interests, either financial or non-financial, that could be perceived as prejudicing the impartiality of the research reported. PRP
conceived the report. PRP, FJR, EC and CMP carried out clinical examinations and diagnostic interpretations. EB and KEH: designed, performed
and interpreted the genetic studies. PRP, FJR, EC, CMP and KEH wrote and revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/12/88/prepub
