To describe two unique cases of osteoporotic vertebral compression fracture (OVCF) treated with balloon kyphoplasty (BKP) that were
complicated by spinal instability and resultant lower extremity paraparesis. Kyphoplasty was performed in two patients with OVCF that had
persistent back pain despite a course of conservative care. Immediately following BKP, both patients had a marked improvement in back pain.
However, they developed progressive bilateral lower extremity weakness. Lateral spine flexion–extension radiographs demonstrated
instability, and polymethyl methacrylate did not adhere to the endplate of the treated vertebrae. Both the patients underwent a hybrid
fixation without a decompression. Postoperatively, both of them demonstrated gradual improvement in their neurological exam. To the best of
our knowledge, this is the first report describing the development of spinal instability with resultant delayed paraplegia following BKP.
This case report demonstrates another cause of neurological decline following BKP, in the absence of cement leakage. Osteoporotic vertebral
compression fracture (OVCF) is one of the most common complication of osteoporosis. Vertebral compression fractures affect an estimated 1.4
million people worldwide annually . The burden of OVCFs can be substantial, resulting in chronic pain, marked reduction in health-related
quality of life, and high health-care costs . Over the past two decades, vertebroplasty has been developed to stabilize OVCF without the
increased morbidity and mortality associated with open surgery . Kyphoplasty, a modification of vertebroplasty, has theoretical advantages
including focal kyphosis correction and lower complication rate . Boonen et al. demonstrated that balloon kyphoplasty (BKP), for the
treatment of vertebral compression fractures, provides more rapid reduction in pain,and improves function, disability, and quality of life,
as compared to non-operative treatment. Kyphoplasty demonstrates a lower complication rate, as compared to vertebroblasty, including
decreased risk of cement extravasation, pulmonary embolism, infection, epidural hematoma, and systemic toxicity [5, 6]. Paralysis following
BKP is rare and has been reported to be secondary to cement extravasation . Herein we report two unique cases of patients that were treated
with BKP and developed instability with resultant neurological decline. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report describing
the development of instability with resultant paraplegia following BKP. A 72-year-old man experienced persistent severe back pain after
falling from a cultivator 3 months prior to presentation. He demonstrated a normal neurological exam but was unable to ambulate secondary to
pain. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated a collapsed L1 vertebrae, with T1 and T2-weighted sequences showing edema and an
intervertebral cleft (IVC) in the central area of the fractured vertebral body (Fig. 1a). Based on the AO classification, he was having an
incomplete osteoporotic burst fracture (AO type A3.1). BKP was performed with injection of about 4.0-mL polymethyl-methacrylate (PMMA)
(Fig. 1b). Postoperatively, his back pain significantly improved. At the time of hospital discharge, 2 weeks after the first operation, he
was able to walk without a cane. However, he developed progressive bilateral lower-extremity weakness about 1 month after BKP. Exacerbation
of back pain was not observed. Neurological examination revealed weakness in both thighs and legs (MMT 2/3), numbness on the anterior
thighs, and symmetrical hyporeflexia (modified Frankel classification C1). MRI of the spine did not reveal canal stenosis but radiograph
demonstrated the cement was still contained within the vertebral body. However, lateral spine flexion–extension radiographs demonstrated
instability, with discontinuity between the PMMA and the endplate of the treated vertebrae (Fig. 2a). Surgical intervention was performed by
instrumented fusion from T10 to L2 without decompression (Fig. 2b). Three days postoperatively, motor exam improved to grade four
bilaterally with resolution of the paresthesia. Four weeks postoperatively, the patient was able to walk with a T-cane (modified Frankel
classification D2).Fig. 1(Case 1) a Sagittal T1- and T2-weighted images showing collapsed vertebral body with formation of a cavitary lesion
at the L1 level. b Radiograph of the spine after BKP reveals effective filling of cystic fracture cavityFig. 2(Case 1) a Lateral spine
flexion–extension radiographs demonstrated instability, and PMMA did not adhere to the endplate of the treated vertebrae. b Surgical
intervention was performed by pedicle screw and hook fixation from Th10 to L2 (Case 1) a Sagittal T1- and T2-weighted images showing
collapsed vertebral body with formation of a cavitary lesion at the L1 level. b Radiograph of the spine after BKP reveals effective filling
of cystic fracture cavity (Case 1) a Lateral spine flexion–extension radiographs demonstrated instability, and PMMA did not adhere to the
endplate of the treated vertebrae. b Surgical intervention was performed by pedicle screw and hook fixation from Th10 to L2 A 79-year-old
man experienced persistent severe back pain after falling from the rear deck of a truck 2 months prior to presentation. The findings on
neurological examination were within normal limits. MRI of the spine revealed collapse of the vertebral body with the formation of a
cavitary lesion at the T12 level. A high signal on T2-weighted MRI revealed a fluid-filled intravertebral cleft, he was having an incomplete
osteoporotic burst fractures (AO type A1.3). Because of his intractable back pain, which was not relieved by conservative treatment, BKP was
performed. Approximately, 6.0-mL PMMA was injected into the vertebral body (Fig. 3). Immediately after the operation, his back pain improved
and he was able to walk without a cane. However, he developed progressive bilateral lower-extremity weakness at about 2 weeks after BKP.
Neurological examination revealed right lower-extremity weakness (MMT 2/5), and symmetrical hyporeflexia (modified Frankel classification
C2). Similar to case 1, MRI of the spine did not reveal canal stenosis, yet dynamic radiographs demonstrated instability with discontinuity
between the PMMA and the endplate of the treated vertebrae (Fig. 3). An instrumented fusion was performed between T9 and L2 without
decompression (Fig. 4). Postoperatively, the patient demonstrated gradual improvement in motor strength to a grade of 5/5 by 1 month
(modified Frankel classification D3).Fig. 3(Case 2) a Sagittal T1-andT2-weighted images showing collapsed vertebral body with formation of a
cavitary lesion at the L1 level. b Radiograph of the spine after BKP reveals effective filling of cystic fracture cavityFig. 4(Case 2) a
Lateral spine flexion–extension radiographs demonstrated instability, and PMMA did not adhere to the endplate of the treated vertebrae. b
Surgical intervention was performed by pedicle screw and hook fixation from Th10 to L2 (Case 2) a Sagittal T1-andT2-weighted images showing
collapsed vertebral body with formation of a cavitary lesion at the L1 level. b Radiograph of the spine after BKP reveals effective filling
of cystic fracture cavity (Case 2) a Lateral spine flexion–extension radiographs demonstrated instability, and PMMA did not adhere to the
endplate of the treated vertebrae. b Surgical intervention was performed by pedicle screw and hook fixation from Th10 to L2 Vertebral
compression fractures are becoming more prevalent as our society ages. Managing symptomatic osteoporotic compression fractures that fail
conservative care with balloon kyphoplasty has gained in popularity. The advantages of kyphoplasty, as compared to vertebroplasty, include
improved restoration of sagittal balance and decreased risk of cement extravasation secondary to the low injection pressure and increased
viscosity . The reported rate of cement leakage (symptomatic 0.2 %), adjacent level fracture and pulmonary embolism is 9 %, 13.6 %, 0.1 % of
cases, respectively. Few case reports describe neurological complications following BKP. Previous reports of neurological complications are
secondary to cement extravasation into the spinal canal . The two patients described within this report had normal neurological exams during
the initial perioperative period and no evidence of cement extravasation on imaging studies. Neurological decline occurred at >2 weeks
postoperatively. Lavelle et al. reported a 10 % incidence of recurrent fracture after kyphoplasty in the treated vertebrae typically
occurring within the first 90 days postoperatively. Young-Yul Kim and colleagues suggest that inadequate filling of the intervertebral
cleft, whereby the PMMA does not contact the endplates, is a risk factor for same level fracture. The two patients described in this report
had an intervertebral cleft preoperatively; however, on initial radiographs it was felt that the PMMA had interdigitation with the endplates
to provide the necessary load-bearing. However, in BKP, the low-pressure injection of PMMA has far less interdigitation with the surrounding
bone [12, 13]. The other disadvantage of BKP is that balloon expansion and cement are usually placed in the anterior aspect of the vertebral
body and thus the posterior vertebral body often lacks necessary cement and reinforcement. There was no canal stenosis observed on CT and
MRI in the patients described above. However, dynamic radiographs demonstrated instability with discontinuity between the PMMA and endplate
of the treated vertebrae. It was felt that the neurological deficit was secondary to dynamic stenosis and therefore the patient underwent
instrumented stabilization without decompression and had complete neurological recovery. In essence there was a fracture between the
endplate and the PMMA with surrounding spondylosis. Biomechanically, this created a two column fracture through the level that was treated
with BKP and resultant instability. The indication for treatment of BKP is one of the most important unsolved issue case. In this report we
describe one patient with an incomplete osteoporotic burst fracture (AO type A3.1) and another patient with an AO type A1.3 fracture. Walter
et al. evaluated the frequency of complication with regard to the fracture type, and suggested that BKP can be considered as a safe
procedure, even in the treatment of painful osteoporotic vertebral fractures of AO type A3.1 . Our current case report demonstrates a cause
of delayed neurological decline in those that undergoing BKP. Postoperative instability through the operated level should be considered in
those who do not have evidence of a compressive lesion on MRI or CT-myelography, indicating the importance of obtaining dynamic radiographs
in this group of patients. No funds were received in support of this work. No benefits in any form have been or will be received from a
commercial entity with financial interests related directly or indirectly to the subject of this manuscript. This article is distributed
under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
the original author(s) and the source are credited.
