Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare aggressive lymphoid neoplasm occurring in about 3–7 % of non-Hodgkin lymphomas in the United States and
Europe. Although lymphomas infiltrations are recognized in about half of post-mortem studies, in available literature we found only eight
cases of mantle cell lymphoma with renal involvement. Five of them present MCL related glomerulonephritis, two show renal MCL infiltration
with acute kidney injury and the last one describes MCL infiltration with acute tubulo-intrerstitial nephritis. We present the first case of
a patient with the coexistence of renal mantle cell lymphoma infiltration, subacute membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis and acute
kidney injury. Patient B.C., age 59, was admitted to the Clinic of Nephrology in August 2011 with a suspected rapidly progressing
glomerulonephritis. In an interview, the patient described the existence of eczema present for about 5 years, on face, chest, back and limbs
recognized as rosacea-like dermatitis. So far performed diagnostics has found markers of eosinophilia increasing since 2008 (0.55–2.42 g/l)
and neck lymphadenopathy (lymph nodes up to 8 × 25 mm) without further diagnostics. In 2008, the patient was temporarily treated orally with
methylprednisolone and cetirizine. Additional diagnostics performed in June 2010, during another stay at the Clinic of Dermatology,
discovered high concentration of total IgE (20.44 g/l), slight impairment of renal function (creatinine 106.08 μmol/l, GFR-MDRD
67 ml/min/1.73 m2) with proteinuria (0.5 g/l) and hematuria (16–25/high-power field) suggesting glomerulonephritis, hypercholesterolemia
(6.7 mmol/l), hyperbilirubinemia (32.8 μmol/l) and elevated erythrocyte sedimentation rate (28 mm/h). In May 2011, hemorrhagic,
Henoch–Schönlein-like purpura of hands, feet and legs joined the existing eczema. For this reason, in July 2011 the patient was hospitalized
in the Clinic of Infectious Diseases and Allergology, where persistent features of glomerulonephritis with proteinuria 0.45 g/24 h, elevated
levels of sIgA (8.37 g/l), and proper kidney function (creatinine 79.56 μmol/l, GFR-MDRD 92 ml/min/1.73 m2) were confirmed. A chest
radiograph indicated a widened shadow of the right mediastinum. An ultrasound examination visualized numerous enlarged peripheral lymph
nodes in the neck (up to 13 × 37 mm), enlarged spleen, and stones of 5–9 mm in both kidneys. A biopsy of the skin revealed erythema elevatum
with neutrophilic, eosinophilic and lymphocytic infiltration around vessels. As a complication of the biopsy, erysipelas of the left upper
limb occurred (August 2011), with a fever up to 39 °C, treated successfully with the second- and third-generation cephalosporins and
metronidazole. During the treatment, progressive deterioration of renal function was found. At the admission to the Clinic of Nephrology,
the patient did not report any essential ailments. Additional diagnostics revealed signs of progressive multi-organ failure: kidney with
nephrotic syndrome (creatinine 772.92 μmol/l, GFR-MDRD 7 ml/min/1.73 m2; urea 27.89 mmol/l; albumin 25 g/l; proteinuria 6.88 g/24 h with
preserved diuresis 2.5 l/24 h), liver (bilirubin 131.67 μmol/l, GGTP 2,938 U/l; AST 119 U/l, ALT185 U/l), and hematopoietic system (Hgb
77 g/l) with the complement system activation (C3 0.23 g/l; C4 0.01 g/l). The presence of ANA, p- and c-ANCA antibodies was not confirmed,
but the level of dsDNA antibodies was elevated up to 44 IU/ml. Ultrasound abdomen examination showed enlargement of the kidneys (left kidney
length 141 mm, right kidney 134 mm) with signs of the parenchyma swelling and bilateral kidney stones. Therefore, it was decided to initiate
temporary renal replacement therapy by hemodialysis every second day, using a central venous catheter. At the same time, between
hemodialysis, immunosuppressive therapy with i.v. infusions of 3 × 1.0 g methylprednisolone was started. The treatment continued with oral
administration of 60 mg prednisone daily. The red blood cell concentrate was transfused. After three hemodialysis interventions, a
significant improvement in renal function was achieved, and renal replacement therapy was no longer required (creatinine 114.92 μmol/l, GFR-
MDRD 60 ml/min/1.73 m2, urea 8.3 mmol/l). Moreover, both normalization of liver function (bilirubin 13.68 μmol/l, GGTP 772 U/l, AST 16 U/l,
ALT 28 U/l) and correction of anemia (Hgb 101 g/l) were achieved. A biopsy of the left kidney and a cervical lymph node was collected for
histopathological evaluation. Based on the preliminary result of the renal biopsy, in which active lesions were found in the form of
vascular loops necrosis and cellular crescents, intravenous infusion of 1.0 g of cyclophosphamide was administered. Renal core biopsy
submitted for embedding contained 10 glomeruli and cortex parenchyma. On histological examination, several foci of dense lymphocytic
infiltration were found. These foci concentrated mainly around glomeruli and consisted of medium-sized slightly atypic lymphocytes with
sparse cytoplasm. The nuclei were of similar size and cytological features and stayed in close intimacy with each other without overt
molding (Fig. 1). Immunohistochemical studies revealed expression of CD20, CD5 and cyclin D1 markers, while CD3 staining was positive only
in non-neoplastic cells (Figs. 2, 3). The Ki-67 staining displayed a low mitotic activity with the expression in about 20 % nuclei (Fig. 4).
These morphology and immunoprofile justified the diagnosis of mantle cell lymphoma invading renal parenchyma. In addition, the biopsy showed
features of membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis including mesangial proliferation and basal membranes thickening and double contouring
(Fig. 5). Segmental, cellular crescents were present in 2 of 10 glomeruli as signs of glomerular sclerosis were present in several
glomeruli. A striking feature of Bowman’s capsule thickening mainly in glomeruli encircled by lymphoma infiltrations was clearly visible.
Immunofluorescnece staining showed C3 deposits in the subendothelial capillary space. In addition, only sparse mononuclear inflammatory
infiltration was present within renal parenchyma as well as slight tubular injury in the form of epithelial cell edema and degeneration. The
cervical lymph node biopsy confirmed the diagnosis with the recognition of mantle cell lymphoma.Fig. 1Mantle cell lymphoma infiltration in
renal cortex (HE, a ×100, b ×200)Fig. 2Expression of CD20 (a ×100) and CD3 (b ×100)Fig. 3Expression of cyclin D1 (a ×100) and CD5 (b
×200)Fig. 4Expression of Ki-67 in about 20 % of nuclei (×100)Fig. 5Double contouring of basal membranes and segmental sclerosis of
glomerulus (×400) Mantle cell lymphoma infiltration in renal cortex (HE, a ×100, b ×200) Expression of CD20 (a ×100) and CD3 (b ×100)
Expression of cyclin D1 (a ×100) and CD5 (b ×200) Expression of Ki-67 in about 20 % of nuclei (×100) Double contouring of basal membranes
and segmental sclerosis of glomerulus (×400) The tests performed 3 weeks after leaving the hospital showed further improvement in renal
function, only small-degree proteinuria with disappearance of parenchymal edema in ultrasound imaging (left kidney length 119 mm and right
kidney 115 mm). Significant changes in clinical and biochemical outcomes 3 weeks after initial therapy are presented in Table 1. Patient was
transferred to the Clinic of Hematology, in order to continue treatment.Table 1Significant changes in clinical and biochemical outcomes
3 weeks after initial therapyBefore therapyAfter initial therapySkinHemorrhagic, Henoch–Schönlein-like purpuraSlight (retracting) rosacea-
like dermatitisKidney FunctionAcute kidney injury (creatinine 772.92 μmol/l, GFR-MDRD 7 ml/min/1.73 m2)Proper kidney function (creatinine
79.56 μmol/l, GFR-MDRD 92 ml/min/1.73 m2)Nephrotic syndrome (proteinuria of 6.88 g/24 h)Small-degree proteinuria in spot morning urine
sample (0.25 g/l) Ultrasound imagingEnlargement (left kidney—141 mm; right kidney—134 mm)Correct length of kidneys (left kidney—119 mm;
right kidney—115 mm)Parenchymal edemaNo abnormal alterationsLiver FunctionAcute liver injury (bilirubin 131.67 μmol/l, GGTP 2,938 U/l; AST
119 U/l, ALT 185 U/l)Normalization (bilirubin 22.23 μmol/l; AST 19 U/l, ALT 31 U/l) Ultrasound imagingHepatomegaly (length:
160 mm)Hepatomegaly (length: 167 mm)Spleen Ultrasound imagingSplenomegaly (length: 137 mm)Almost normal spleen length (126 mm) Significant
changes in clinical and biochemical outcomes 3 weeks after initial therapy Mantle cell lymphoma (MCL) is a rare aggressive lymphoid neoplasm
occurring in about 3–7 % of non-Hodgkin (NHL) lymphomas in United States and Europe [1, 2]. Most frequent NHL infiltrating kidneys are
recognized as extranodal cancers of marginal zone, especially MALT (mucose-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma), DLBCL (diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma) and Burkitt’s lymphomas . Seizure of the genitourinary tract by lymphoma occurs rarely, its incidence is estimated in about 5 %,
in which renal involvement is most common and occurs in approximately 37 % of cases. On the basis of retrospective studies, Da’as et al.
found that NHL were a rare cause of acute renal failure (9.5 %). Ultrasonographic findings are expressed as kidneys enlargement with a
decreased echogenicity of the parenchyma. Glomerulonephritis (GN), in the course of NHL is one of the causes of acute kidney injury (AKI).
In most cases, membranoproliferative GN, mesangial proliferative GN, crescenic GN or minimal change GN, as well as membranous GN and IgA
nephropathy are recognized, and clinically expressed as nephrotic syndrome with microhematuria, seldom with reduced complement components or
cryoglobulinemia . Start of chemotherapy, resulting in partial remission of NHL, correlates with the decrease in the signs of GN and
improved organ function [3, 4, 9]. Infiltration of renal parenchyma by lymphoma cells is very rare and is rated in about 1 % of cases . Most
often, renal lymphoid infiltration is asymptomatic, but sometimes it can be a cause of acute tubulo-interstitial nephritis. Start of
immunosuppressive treatment with a few 0.5–1.0 g intravenous doses of methylprednisolone administered every 1–2 days, then continued with
oral prednisone, enables rapid improvement of renal function, although temporal renal replacement therapy is at times necessary [6, 7]. So
far, eight cases of kidney impairment due to MCL have been described: four of them presenting proliferative GN, one focal segmental
glomerulosclerosis (FSGS), two renal MCL infiltration with AKI, and the last AKI due to acute tubulo-interstitial nephritis . The presented
case is the first announcement describing the coexistence of renal infiltration by MCL with secondary membranoproliferative subacute GN and
AKI. There is no clear explanation of the cause of the patient’s AKI. Renal failure occurred in the period of acute dermatitis and suggests
diagnosis of post-infectious GN. Whereas participation of skin infection in the development of AKI may be important, the existence of
chronic GN (at least from 2008) recognized in the interview seems to be more essential. The changes discovered in the renal biopsy showed a
secondary GN with an indication of neoplastic process as the cause of the disease. On the other hand, untreated infiltration of the kidney
with MCL could be the reason for their tubulo-interstitial inflammation and AKI . Although renal biopsy showed only sparse mononuclear
inflammatory infiltration within renal parenchyma and slight tubular injury, the examination took place 10 days after starting intravenous
methylprednisolone and already achieved the returning of renal function (creatinine 97.24 μmol/l). Also, an improvement in renal function
after infusions of methylprednisolone does not indicate clearly the cause of AKI with preserved diuresis. Such treatment is recommended as a
part of the induction in rapidly progressing GN, acute glomerulopathies, as well as acute tubulo-interstitial renal inflammations. In the
presented case, renal biopsy was performed after the improvement of renal function in order to determine diagnosis and further treatment.
The diagnosis of MCL renal involvement and neoplastic generalization confirmed later in a lymph node biopsy has become the reason for
systemic chemotherapy in the Clinic of Hematology. The presented case demonstrates for the first time the possibility of renal infiltration
by MCL concomitant with secondary membranoproliferative GN. It also shows the importance of the renal biopsy as a useful diagnostic tool in
case of kidney impairment due to the lymphoma. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which
permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
