A.J.C. and V.L.C. contributed equally to this study. In women with hyperglycemia due to heterozygous glucokinase (GCK) mutations, the fetal
genotype determines its growth. If the fetus inherits the mutation, birth weight is normal when maternal hyperglycemia is not treated,
whereas intensive treatment may adversely reduce fetal growth. However, fetal genotype is not usually known antenatally, making treatment
decisions difficult. We report two women with gestational diabetes mellitus resulting from GCK mutations with hyperglycemia sufficient to
merit treatment. In both women, DNA from chorionic villus sampling, performed after high-risk aneuploidy screening, showed the fetus had
inherited the GCK mutation. Therefore, maternal hyperglycemia was not treated. Both offspring had a normal birth weight and no peripartum
complications. In pregnancies where the mother has hyperglycemia due to a GCK mutation, knowing the fetal GCK genotype guides the management
of maternal hyperglycemia. Fetal genotyping should be performed when fetal DNA is available from invasive prenatal diagnostic testing.
Heterozygous mutations in the glucokinase (GCK) gene result in mild, lifelong fasting hyperglycemia (1), typically 5.5–8.0 mmol/L. The
latest International Association of Diabetes and Pregnancy Study Groups’ recommendations reinforce the advice to treat hyperglycemia in
pregnancy and defines gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) as a fasting glucose ≥5.1 mmol/L (2). Therefore, patients with GCK mutations meet
the criteria for GDM and account for 1–3% of the GDM population (3). For offspring of mothers with a GCK mutation and untreated
hyperglycemia, birth weight is normal if the fetus inherits the mutation but is increased by 550–700 g if the fetus is not affected (4,5).
Diet has little impact on the raised maternal fasting glucose. Insulin treatment is indicated if the fetus is not affected. However, if the
fetus is affected, growth is normal if the mother is not treated, and achieving maternal euglycemia may result in reduced fetal growth, so
maternal treatment is not recommended (6). Usually fetal genotype is not known antenatally; therefore, regular assessment of fetal growth is
recommended with acceleration of fetal abdominal circumference >75th percentile, a prudent surrogate basis for the decision of whether to
treat maternal hyperglycemia (5,7). We describe the first two cases of fetal diagnosis of a GCK mutation, which altered gestational
management of maternal hyperglycemia. Both patients provided consent to publication of their case. A white, European, 33-year-old woman was
diagnosed with GDM at 32 weeks’ gestation in her first pregnancy (75-g oral glucose tolerance test = 5.8, 9.9, and 8.0 mmol/L [fasting, 1 h,
and 2 h, respectively]). Insulin treatment was given from 35 weeks’ gestation. She delivered a healthy girl, weighing 3,405 g (50th
percentile), at 39 weeks’ gestation. A heterozygous GCK mutation (c.1340G>A, p.Arg447Gln) was found in the mother on sequencing performed
because of a three-generation paternal history of diabetes, persistent fasting hyperglycemia, and small glucose increment in a postpartum
OGTT (7.0, 7.5, and 7.9 mmol/L) (8). During her second pregnancy, her initial self-monitored blood glucose levels were ≈6 mmol/L, fasting,
and 6–8 mmol/L, 1-h postmeal. Her HbA1c was 46 mmol/mol at 12 weeks’ gestation. The hyperglycemia was managed with diet alone during the
first two trimesters. Chorionic villus sampling (CVS) had been undertaken at 13 weeks’ gestation after high-risk first-trimester aneuploidy
screening (normal result). Urgent sequencing of DNA from this sample at 18 weeks’ gestation found the fetus to be heterozygous for the GCK
mutation. Thus, insulin treatment was not initiated in the second or third trimester despite fasting and postprandial hyperglycemia on self-
monitoring (Fig. 1A) and the fetal abdominal circumference being in the 94th percentile. The patient’s HbA1c was 41 mmol/mol at 36 weeks’
gestation. She delivered a normal boy, weighing 3,415 g (51st percentile), at 39 weeks’ gestation. There was no neonatal hypoglycemia or
peripartum complication. A: Median and range of capillary glucose by time of day for patient 1 showing hyperglycemia above conventional
treatment targets from 29 to 31 weeks’ gestation. Horizontal lines indicate fasting and postprandial capillary glucose targets. B: Median
and range of capillary glucose by time of day for patient 2 showing hyperglycemia above conventional treatment targets from 29 to 31 weeks’
gestation. Horizontal lines indicate fasting and postprandial capillary glucose targets. (A high-quality color representation of this figure
is available in the online issue.) In her first pregnancy, a white, European, 43-year-old woman had selective fetocide at 17 weeks’
gestation for dichorionic twins discordant for trisomy 21. She delivered a healthy boy at 38 weeks, weighing 3,000 g (21st percentile). She
was diagnosed with GDM in her second pregnancy. The pattern of glucose values (OGTT at 28 weeks = 5.5 and 8.3 mmol/L [fasting and 2 h]) (8),
paternal, diet-treated diabetes, and BMI = 22.7 kg/m2 suggested a diagnosis of GCK hyperglycemia, which was confirmed on sequencing
(heterozygous GCK mutation c.370G>A, p.Asp124Asn). Self-monitored glucose levels were 5.2–6.7 mmol/L, fasting, and 5.8–10.2 mmol/L, 1-h
postmeal (Fig. 1B). The fetal abdominal circumference was in the 88th percentile. The patient’s HbA1c was 34 mmol/mol at 33 weeks’
gestation. Treatment with insulin was considered in line with conventional guidelines of the management of GDM (2). CVS had been undertaken
at 12 weeks’ gestation after high-risk first-trimester aneuploidy screening (normal result). Urgent sequencing of DNA from this sample
confirmed the fetus had inherited the GCK mutation. Therefore, insulin treatment was not commenced. The patient delivered a normal boy,
weighing 3,590 g (55th percentile), at 38 weeks’ gestation. There was no neonatal hypoglycemia or peripartum complication. In these two
cases of GDM, due to a mutation in the GCK gene, antenatal genetic testing showed the fetuses had inherited the GCK mutation. As a result,
neither mother received insulin treatment for established maternal hyperglycemia. The children had normal birth weights (51st and 55th
percentiles) and did not have any metabolic complications. Normal birth weight is the usual outcome of GDM resulting from a GCK mutation if
the fetus inherits the mutation and maternal hyperglycemia is not treated (5). Heterozygous GCK mutations cause a regulated rise in fasting
plasma glucose, typically 5.5–8.0 mmol/L (1). This raised glucose results in appropriate fetal insulin secretion because the affected fetus
has the same homeostatic glucose set point as its mother (5). Insulin is not recommended for pregnancies in which the fetus has inherited
the mutation because it can result in low birth weight (6). In contrast, when the fetus is unaffected, macrosomia is common, and treatment
with insulin to achieve maternal euglycemia is appropriate. The clinical dilemma of managing pregnant women with GCK mutations is due to
uncertainty about the fetal genotype. Although unreliable (9), current advice is to measure fetal growth using serial ultrasound scans as a
surrogate for fetal genotype, to guide diabetes and obstetric management. In pregnancies with accelerating fetal growth (abdominal
circumference >75th percentile), it is assumed that the fetus has not inherited the mutation. Intensive insulin treatment should be
initiated, aimed at lowering elevated blood glucose levels to normal pregnancy ranges. Large insulin doses of >1 U/kg/day (6) may be
required to overcome maternal glucose homeostasis, which can be difficult to achieve without causing symptoms of hypoglycemia. In these two
cases, knowledge that the fetuses had inherited the GCK mutation allowed the maternal hyperglycemia in pregnancy to remain untreated. We
recommend that if a pregnant woman with a GCK mutation has a CVS or amniocentesis for another reason, the fetal DNA should be tested for the
GCK mutation. However, the 1% miscarriage rates associated with these procedures (10) means they are not routinely warranted for fetal
genetic diagnosis in this situation. In the future, noninvasive prenatal diagnosis using cell-free fetal DNA or fetal cells in maternal
blood (11) has the potential to determine fetal genotype and therefore influence the management of GCK-MODY (maturity-onset diabetes of the
young) in pregnancy without the attendant risks associated with invasive prenatal testing. See accompanying editorial, p. 1811. No potential
conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. A.J.C. and V.L.C. wrote the manuscript. S.E. supervised the genetic testing
and reviewed and edited the manuscript. J.W. and D.K.Y. reviewed the manuscript and advised on case 1. J.P. reviewed and edited the
manuscript, advised on case 1, and arranged genetic testing of case 1. A.T.H. reviewed and edited the manuscript, advised on case 1, and was
responsible for the clinical management of case 2. G.P.R. reviewed and edited the manuscript and was responsible for the clinical management
of case 1. G.P.R. and A.T.H. are the guarantors of this work and, as such, had full access to all the data in the study and take
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
