Thymoma is an epithelial neoplasm of the thymus, which commonly lies in the anterior mediastinum and, therefore, an intrathoracic origin is
considered to be rare. This report presents a case of giant thymoma arising in the thoracic cavity. A 61-year-old male presented with a
chronic cough and breathlessness. Chest CT revealed a well enhanced giant mass approximately 18 cm in diameter in the right thoracic cavity.
FDG-PET showed that the SUVmax of the tumor was 5.0 in the center and almost 2.5 in the surrounding area. A trans- bronchial needle biopsy
was performed to find atypical cells. Surgery was scheduled based on the radiological and histological findings. A well-defined giant mass
in the thoracic cavity, measuring 18 × 14.5 × 11 cm had undergone expansive growth without apparent invasion. The tumor was completely
resected without combined resection of the other organs. The weight of the tumor was 1350 g. The tumor was histologically diagnosed to be
type AB thymoma according to the World Health Organization classification and Masaoka stage IIB. Thymoma is an epithelial neoplasm of the
thymus, which commonly lies in the anterior mediastinum and ectopic thymomas account for only 4% of all thymomas . Most ectopic thymomas
present as superior or inferior mediastinum tumors, therefore intrathoracic origin was rare . Although surgery is the most effective
treatment modality for thymomas, in some cases, it is difficult to excise due to involvement of surrounding organs or tumor size. This
report presents a case of ectopic thymoma that presented as a giant intrathoracic tumor histologically diagnosed as type AB thymoma and
Masaoka stage IIB. A 61-year-old male presented with chronic cough and breathlessness. Chest CT revealed a well enhanced giant mass,
approximately 18 cm in diameter in the right thoracic cavity (Figure 1). FDG-PET showed that the SUVmax of the tumor was 5.0 in the center
and almost 2.5 in the surrounding areas (Figure 1). A trans-bronchial biopsy was performed and atypical cells were detected from the giant
tumor. An intrathoracic malignant tumor was suspected, therefore surgical resection was performed. The CT findings suggested that the mass
had not invaded surrounding organs, but had some adhesion to the right lung and superior vena cava. Surgical access to the mass was
accomplished through a median sternotomy with a 4th intercostal thoracotomy of the right chest wall. A well-defined giant mass measuring
18 × 14.5 × 11 cm was found in the right thoracic cavity. The feeding vessels of the tumor were branching from internal thoracic vessels and
collateral blood vessels were extensive surrounding the giant tumor. The tumor was completely resected without combined resection of the
other organs. The weight of the tumor was 1350 g. The cut surface of tumor revealed a light brown color, an internal lobulated structure
with a portion of capsulation invasion (Figure 2). A microscopic examination showed the tumor to contain spindle shaped cells with a
lymphocyte rich component (Figure 2). Immunohistochemistry showed predominantly lymphocytes expressing CD1a, TdT and CD5. The spindle cells
of the tumor were all negative for EMA, cytokeratin, CAM5.2,αSMA, S100, CD5, TTF-1 and CD34. These histopathological findings indicated that
the tumor was a type AB thymoma according to the World Health Organization classification and Masaoka stage IIB. The postoperative course
was uneventful, and there has been no evidence of recurrence 6 months after the surgery. (A) Chest CT showing a huge mass, measuring
18 × 14 × 11 cm in diameter in the right thoracic cavity.(B) FDG-PET revealed that SUVmax of the tumor was 5.0 in the center and almost 2.5
in the surrounding areas. (A) Gross pathologic finding of the tumor: an encapsulated elastic mass. The cut surface of tumor revealed a light
brown color, an internal lobulated structure with a portion of capsulation invasion. (B)Histological findings of the tumor: the tumor shows
a proliferation of spindle-shaped epithelial cells with many lymphocytes (original magnification: 100×). Thymomas develop mainly in the
thymus and are usually located in the anterior mediastinum, only 4% of the tumors are ectopic tumors . Ectopic thymomas have been reported
in the neck, middle or posterior mediastinum, lung and pleura, a few reports have described giant intrathoracic tumors . FDG-PET showing
increased uptake of FDG is suggestive of malignant potential and SUVmax correlates with malignancy in mesenchymal tumors. Several authors
reported a significant correlation between the histological subtype of thymicepitherial tumors and FDG-PET accumulation . Who type A, AB and
B1 tumors have significantly lower SUV than that of the other types of tumors . In addition, SUVmax has a close correlation with the Masaoka
stages . SUVmax of the tumor in the current case was not very high in the proportion to the size. Fortunately, the tumor did not invade the
heart or great vessels, therefore curative resection could be performed. The tumor was diagnosed to be type AB thymoma according to the
World Health Organization classification and Masaoka stage IIB. Although thymomas can present as huge masses, the symptoms and stage may not
always correlate with tumor size. A large tumor size is a significantly poor prognostic factor of thymomas . Limmer et al. reviewed
previously reported giant thymomas . According to the article, all of the giant tumors were type A, AB and B1 according to WHO
classification . Interestingly, although a large tumor size is a poor prognostic factor, the resected giant thymomas tended to be low-grade
thymomas. This report presented a very rare case of an intrathoracic giant thymoma, histologically diagnosed as type AB Masaoka stage IIB.
Surgical resection must be considered regardless of tumor size if curative resection is possible. FDG-PET is useful modality for
preoperatively evaluating the grade of thymomas. Our Institution and the patient provided Clinical Consent for the publication of this case.
All the authors declare that they have not competing interest. TT: concept and design, writing the article. YH, ST, HM made a critical
review of the manuscript. TI: final approval of the article. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
