Glomus tumor (glomus cell tumor) is a rare, hamartomatous, usually benign neoplasm, whose cells resemble the modified smooth muscle cells of
the normal glomus body. The diagnosis of a lower extremity is often delayed, due to the lack of awareness and low level of suspicion, by the
treating physician. The glomus tumor (GT) often involves the nail beds. The unusual location of the lower extremity often leads to missed or
delayed diagnosis and management. There is a paucy of information about GT in general, especially among orthopedic surgeons. The aim of this
article is to make the surgical community more aware of this disease A 10-year-old boy presented with a 2-weeks history of tenderness and
induration in the medial aspect of the right knee, after a fall on his leg. Physical examination revealed a 5 cm round, mobile mass, well
circumscribed, without localized pain to palpation. The patient had no symptomatology before the traumatism. An X-ray of the right knee and
its laboratory values including VSH, CRP, HLG, serum calcium, alkaline phosphatase, phosphorus, magnesium, were normal (Fig. 1). X-ray of
the right knee The IRM of the right knee revealed an oval soft tissue mass (6,5/3,5/1,5cm) on the medial side of the right knee. The lesion
exhibited hypointense signal on MR T1-weighted images, isointense signal on MR T2-weighted images and moderate enhancement after injection
of gadolinium (Fig. 2,3,4). IRM of the right knee - A IRM of the right knee - B IRM of the right knee – C The incisional biopsy revealed
multiple reddish nodules, well circumscribed. The first histopathology examination established the diagnostic of villonodular synovitis. The
second look, in the other department established the diagnostic of glomangyoma. In the meantime, the tumor developed outside the skin and
became mushroom-like, painless (Fig. 5,6). After 2 months, we performed a surgical excision, followed by another histopathological
examination. A histopathological diagnosis of glomus tumor was made. The postoperative evolution was very good, without local recurrence
after complete excision. Tumor development Mushroom-like tumor Glomus tumor (GT), also termed tumor of Popoff, or Barre-Masson syndrome, is
an extremely rare benign lesion composed of rounded uniform cells often arranged in a brick-work-like manner. They are intimately associated
with the vascular structures . At one time, this tumor was considered to derive from the neuromyoarterial glomus, a neurovascular structure
. At present, however, it is believed that the tumor arises from the modified smooth muscle cell. Outside the bone, the glomus tumors with
cellular atypia (so-called symplastic glomus tumors) and malignant glomus tumors have been described both of which are exceedingly rare .
Recently, glomuline, a gene located on chromosome 1p21-22 and possibly involved in the differentiation of vascular smooth muscle cells, has
been shown to be mutated in familial glomuvenous malformations (glomangiomas) . Genetic alterations in sporadic glomus tumors have not been
published . A vast majority of glomus tumors occur at the fingertips , arising in the distal phalanges . The unusual location of the lower
extremity often leads to missed or delayed diagnosis and management. In 1812, Wood made the first clinical description of a GT; he described
it as a “painful cutaneous tubercle” . In 1924, Masson published its first comprehensive pathologic description . These tumors typically
present as a painful, firm, purplish, solitary, subcutaneous nodule. Tumor size is generally reported to be small, rarely bigger than 1 cm .
When the tumors are located at the lower extremity, the average tumor size is more than 2 cm, in contrast to those tumors located in typical
locations (fingers). Symptoms include intense burning pain at the tumor size, which occurs spontaneously or is precipitated by temperature
changes or touch. A fear of using the lower extremity may cause severe limb atrophy, extremity vasomotor disturbances or flexion
restrictions . GT has been reported in about 1,6% of 500 consecutive patients with primary soft tissue upper and lower extremity tumors .
Multiple classifications of GT have been proposed by several investigators, depending on the tumor histology and behavior . GT may be
solitary or multiple; the latter may be further divided into regional or disseminated, which are usually familial or congenital. Other
variants, such as plaque type and patch type have been described . Solitary GTs are usually seen in adults, commonly equal in both sexes,
except for the subungual glomus tumors, which show a female preponderance . A solitary glomus tumor is a pink or purple nodule with classic
triad of pain, cold sensitivity and point tenderness . The commonest site is the hand, particularly the fingers. There have been reports in
the literature of unusual location of glomus tumor such as the ankle , foot , knee , thigh , and hip . Histologically, the tumors have
variable quantities of glomus cell, blood vessels and smooth muscle . Accordingly, they are classified as solid glomus tumor (25%),
glomangioma (60%) and glomangiomyoma (15%) . Glomangiomyoma is the rarest histological type of the glomus tumor and is frequently located in
the lower extremities. GT has to be differentiated from enchondroma, epidermal inclusion cyst, metastasis, aneurismal bone cyst, sarcoidosis
eccrine spiradenoma, leiomyoma, neuromatosis hyperplasia, multiple hemangiomas . The treatment of choice for isolated GT is surgical
excision. Sclerotherapy with sodium tetradecyl sulphate, polidocanol and hypertonic saline has been reported to be effective in patients
with multiple glomangioma located on the extremities. Ablative therapy with Argon and Carbon dioxide laser is of potential benefit for
small, superficial lesions . There is a generalized misconception about the frequency of GT affecting the lower extremities. GT is often
misdiagnosed initially and can lead to significant morbidity to the patient owing to severe symptoms, despite its benign appearance. Because
of symptoms and malignant potential, diagnosis and treatment of GT are essential. However, owing to its rarity, especially situated in
atypical locations, such as the lower extremities, the treating physician must have a high index of suspicion.
