Patients with diabetes are at increased risk for depression, compounding the burden of disease. When comorbid with diabetes, depression
leads to poorer health outcomes and often complicates diabetes self-management. Unfortunately, treatment options for these complex patients
are limited and comprehensive services are rarely available for patients in rural settings. A small open trial was conducted to test the
acceptability, feasibility and preliminary outcomes of a telephone-delivered coaching intervention for rural-dwelling older adults with
uncontrolled diabetes and comorbid, clinically significant depressive symptoms. A total of eight older adults were enrolled in Healthy
Outcomes through Patient Empowerment (HOPE), a 10-session (12-week), telephone-based coaching intervention. Primary study constructs
included measures of diabetes control (Hemoglobin A1c), depressive symptoms (Patient Health Questionnaire-9 ), and diabetes-related distress
(Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale ). Assessments were conducted at baseline, post-intervention, and 6-month follow-up. Acceptability and
feasibility were evaluated using patient surveys, focused exit interviews, and session attendance data. Clinically significant improvements
were realized post-intervention and at 6-month follow-up for outcomes related to diabetes and depression. Effect sizes using Cohen's d were
determined post-intervention and at 6-month follow-up, respectively, for HbA1c (d=0.36; d=0.28), PHQ-9 (d=1.48; d=1.67, and PAID (d=1.50;
d=1.06) scores. Among study participants, HbA1c improved from baseline by a mean (M) of 1.13 (SD=1.70) post-intervention and M=0.84
(SD=1.62) at 6 months. Depression scores, measured by the PHQ-9, improved from baseline by M=5.14 (SD=2.27) post-intervention and M=7.03
(SD=4.43) at 6-month follow-up. PAID scores also improved by M=17.68 (SD=10.7) post-intervention and M=20.42 (SD=20.66) from baseline to
6-month follow-up. Case examples are provided for additional context and to more fully articulate salient intervention concepts. Although
preliminary, data from this small open trial suggest that HOPE holds the potential to improve both physical (diabetes) and emotional
(diabetes distress, depression) health outcomes and that changes can be maintained over a 6-month time period. As envisioned by the authors,
HOPE may function as an extension of traditional primary care for rural-dwelling older adults with multiple comorbidities. A future
randomized clinical trial will test HOPE’s broader effectiveness with rural-dwelling older adults. NCT01274715 Diabetes mellitus is a
chronic disease affecting 8.3% of the US population, with this percentage sharply increasing for older adults (15-20%) and often leading to
serious medical complications and high healthcare costs . Patients with diabetes are at increased risk for depression, compounding the
burden of disease . When comorbid with diabetes, depression leads to poorer health outcomes and often complicates diabetes self-management .
Although multidisciplinary treatments for diabetes and depression are possible, access to such care is highly limited, especially for rural-
dwelling older individuals . It is far more common for patients with complex diabetes and depression to receive inadequate or uncoordinated
treatment for these conditions . Prior clinical trials for diabetes and depression suggest limited reach and modest effectiveness. Intensive
programs involving depression medications and behavioral counseling (stepped care management, collaborative care) improve clinically
significant depressive symptoms and quality of life in primary care patients with depression but not diabetes self-management or clinical
outcomes . Coordinated and stepped care interventions for comorbid cases appear to neglect diabetes care by relying on intervention models
specific to depression management and directing intervention practices primarily toward depressive symptoms without translation to diabetes
self-care . A few studies currently under way utilize cognitive behavioral therapy, but these are again focused on either depression or
diabetes self-care and not on behavior change techniques that can be applied to both conditions. Thus, behavioral strategies that activate
patients to perform health behaviors for both diabetes and depression hold the potential to improve both the emotional and physical health
difficulties of these medically complex patients. The current study used a small open trial format to examine the acceptability, feasibility
and preliminary outcomes of a telephone-delivered behavioral coaching intervention for rural-dwelling older adults with uncontrolled
diabetes and comorbid, clinically significant depressive symptoms. The intervention used a flexible patient-centered approach to treatment,
targeting physical and emotional health issues simultaneously. All procedures for the HOPE trial were approved by the Baylor College of
Medicine Institutional Review Board (IRB) and the Michael E. DeBakey Veterans Affairs (VA) Medical Center Office of Research and
Development, Houston, TX. HOPE recruitment sought to engage rural-living older adults with uncontrolled diabetes and comorbid, clinically
elevated depressive symptoms. Data from a VA patient registry was extracted to identify rural-dwelling individuals with uncontrolled type 2
diabetes mellitus, as indicated by average glycated hemoglobin (HbA1c) of 7.5 or greater and no single HbA1c marker below 7.0 over the past
year. Individuals who met these inclusionary criteria were mailed an opt-out letter describing the HOPE Program. One week after the mail-
out, a member of the project team called potential participants to ascertain their interest in participating. Interested individuals
completed a short screening assessment, including a six-item cognitive screener, a three-item mental health screener, and the Patient Health
Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2), a validated, short version of the PHQ-9, used to screen for depressive symptoms . A binder with detailed study
information, including informed consent and print-based aids for telephone assessments, was sent to each person who met initial screening
criteria. A project team member then called qualifying patients to review consent materials and obtain audio-taped consent prior to
conducting a baseline assessment interview, which included a demographic questionnaire and the PHQ-9. Patients satisfying baseline
depression screening requirements (i.e., PHQ-9 score of 10 or greater) were enrolled in the HOPE program, administered the remaining
baseline assessment measures, scheduled for lab work (i.e., HbA1C test) at their local primary care site, and mailed a HOPE program
intervention workbook. The HOPE intervention consisted of ten 30–45 minute sessions delivered by telephone over a 12-week period. The
overall objective of HOPE was to assist participants to improve their ability to self-manage their physical and emotional health. HOPE
coaches (described below) sought to assist participants to prioritize their self-care needs, and to identify and resolve barriers to
effective self-care. Participants learned and practiced skills that would help them reach the goals and action plans they set for themselves
to improve their self-care . While prior clinical interventions have targeted either physical or emotional issues, HOPE extends these
efforts by addressing both dimensions simultaneously . HOPE uses a structured patient workbook to guide participants and coaches. The
workbook, modeled using prior work from this group used a module-based approach where participants and coaches selected treatment goals and
self-management skills that met the individual needs of the patient. The workbook was structured to facilitate behavioral change through
collaborative goal-setting and action planning across physical and emotional health domains. It was ideographic by nature, allowing coaches
to use structured information presented in physical and emotional health modules to stimulate conversation around issues of personal
salience to patients, to educate patients on these issues and to build skills necessary to practice goals and action plans. Goal-setting and
action planning components (e.g., worksheets to stimulate collaborative construction of high-quality goals and action plans) were
incorporated throughout physical and emotional heath modules. These components were previously employed in a randomized clinical trial
demonstrating that collaborative goal-setting in group diabetes clinics is associated with improved diabetes control . In the HOPE
intervention, collaborative goal setting and action planning reflected an iterative process whereby coaches assisted patients to set
personally meaningful goals and action plans to meet their goals. Coaches continuously assessed goal attainment with patients, focusing on
barriers and collaborative problem-solving to negate these barriers. The coaching model for the HOPE Program was based on the 5 As Model for
coping with chronic illness . Guided by the 5 As (i.e., Assess, Advise, Agree, Assist, Arrange), intervention coaches assisted participants
in selecting and refining physical and emotional health goals and in developing action plans to meet their goals. Table 1 describes the
content of session modules and the overall intervention structure by session. HOPE was structured around core concepts but also included a
modular component that allowed coaches and patients to focus on physical and mental health difficulties of personal salience to the
participant. The goal of this modular-based approach was to advance patient involvement and empowerment through active participation in the
treatment process. HOPE intervention session structure and module content The first two HOPE sessions educated participants about the
importance of holistic diabetes self-care, emphasizing both physical health monitoring and emotional well-being as complementary dimensions
of maintaining overall health. Session 1 introduced participants to the HOPE intervention and focused on rapport building by assessing
feelings about diabetes and physical and emotional health challenges. In Session 2, participants learned the principles of effective goal
setting and action planning and begun to apply these theoretical principles to their own situations. HOPE provided participants with the
flexibility and autonomy to select from six elective physical and emotional health modules. Elective modules included: Managing Your
Medications, Using Thoughts to Improve Wellness, Eating a Healthy Diet, Increasing Pleasant Activities, Getting Fit, and Learning How to
Relax (see Table 1). Each module incorporated skill-building techniques, didactic learning, and interactive exercises designed to facilitate
goal setting and action planning. Participants chose the order in which modules were discussed, based on their preferences and self-care
needs. Participants could spend two or more sessions focused on a particular module, either to build on a successful attempt at implementing
an action plan, or to revise an action plan he/she was unable to practice because of unforeseen obstacles. In Session 9, coach/participant
dyads reviewed all goals developed in prior sessions and made final action-plan adjustments, as necessary. Session 10 focused on maintaining
changes post-treatment. Given the limited availability of mental health providers in the current medical care environment, HOPE sought to
demonstrate the appropriateness of using non-expert mental health coaches. Coaches were recruited from a variety of disciplines and training
levels including a clinical psychology graduate intern, a developmental psychology postdoctoral fellow, a doctoral student in public health,
and a post-bachelors psychology student. A large body of literature supports the role of paraprofessionals, community health workers, and
peers in the delivery of self-management coaching . While none of the coaches in the current study had focused training in diabetes care,
and only one coach (psychology intern) had experience treating depression, all coaches received structured training and follow-up assessment
by qualified clinicians. Coaches also interfaced with primary care providers and the broader clinical care setting using the VA’s electronic
medical records (EMR) system. Coaches accessed clinical patient information from the EMR to review past medical history and identify ongoing
treatment plans from the primary care team in order to set coordinated clinical care goals and action plans that enabled the established
treatment plan. Coaches then used standardized note templates to inform PCPs about their patients’ goals and action plans. Additionally,
coaches encouraged patients to communicate any further concerns to their PCPs by assisting them to set goals and action plans around doctor-
patient communication. In essence, HOPE coaches functioned as clinician-extenders rather than an alternative or auxiliary provider. Coaches
were trained and provided with ongoing support for the intervention, structured around the HOPE workbook and larger intervention materials.
All coaches received initial and ongoing training (and monitoring of cases) in the HOPE procedures via weekly group and individual
supervision lead by the intervention’s dual principal investigators, a medical geriatrician (Naik) proficient in primary care of diabetes
and a licensed clinical psychologist (Cully) who specializes in treatment of mental disorders and comorbid chronic disease. During
supervision meetings, coaches would review patients’ progress and address challenges related to intervention concepts and use. Coaches also
learned from their peers through discussion of issues that commonly emerged across patients (e.g., reluctance to address medication
management), including the generation of potential solutions that could be used in subsequent sessions. In accordance with standardized
clinical and research protocols, coaches were specifically trained to respond to crisis situations should a patient present with suicidal
ideation/intent or notable decompensation in their physical or emotional health. A suicide protocol approved by the IRB included steps to be
followed by a coach should a patient report suicidal ideation or other clinical crisis information. This protocol included a cascade list of
licensed mental health and medical providers to be contacted immediately by the coach in the event of a high-risk situation. Licensed
providers with hospital privileges would follow up by calling the patient, assessing their emotional and physical health needs, and
responding with appropriate care recommendations. All study measures were collected by a trained interviewer who remained blind to the
intervention practices of the open trial. HbA1c is a form of hemoglobin measured in lab testing to evaluate an individual’s average
percentage of blood glucose concentration over a 3-month period. HbA1C is the gold standard for evaluation of diabetes control, as defined
by The American Diabetes Association’s recommendation of HbA1c of 7% or less . The PHQ-9 is a well-validated assessment of depressive-
symptom severity and is widely used within the VA . Test-retest reliability of this measure demonstrates its diagnostic utility and capacity
to measure significant change (sensitivity to change) in clinical settings . Nine items determine the presence and degree of all Diagnostic
and Statistical Manual, Fourth Edition criteria on a Likert-type scale, ranging from 0 (“not at all”) to 3 (“nearly every day”). Total
scores≥ 10 represent clinically significant depressive symptoms and inter-test score differences≥ 5 suggest clinically significant change .
The Problem Areas in Diabetes Scale (PAID) was used to assess diabetes-specific emotional distress . This 20-item scale measures the extent
to which living with and managing diabetes contributes to feelings of emotional burden (e.g., guilt, frustration, anger, depression).
Response options range from 0 (“not a problem”) to 4 (“serious problem”). Scores are transformed on a scale from 0 to 100, with higher
scores reflecting greater distress. Prior research suggests that a score of 50 or greater indicates clinically significant diabetes-related
distress . Eight patients with a mean age of 62 years (range=58–67) were enrolled in the program. Following enrollment, an intervention
coach was assigned. Intervention coaches called their assigned participants within 5 days of mailing the participant workbook to schedule
their first HOPE session. The following results section will present clinical outcome data from the HOPE trial followed by three case study
reports that provide additional information about salient intervention concepts. All participant names have been changed. Eight older
individuals enrolled in HOPE, seven of whom completed the program (one did not proceed beyond session 1 because of an unrelated hospital
admission). Enrolled participants were, on average, 62 years of age (range 58–67), had been living with diabetes for over 17 years, and
lived over 30 miles from their primary care provider (PCP). Over 70% of the participants had received mental health treatment in the past,
and over 85% were receiving insulin therapy. Table 2 contains a full listing of participant demographic characteristics. Clinical outcome
data from this trial, including HbA1c, PHQ-9, and diabetes distress scores pre- and post-treatment, can be found in Table 3. Effect sizes
using Cohen's d (with pooled standard deviations) were found for HbA1c at post-treatment (d=0.36) and 6-month follow-up (d=0.28); PHQ-9 at
post-treatment (d=1.48) and 6-month follow-up (d=1.69); and PAID at post-treatment (d=1.50) and 6-month follow-up (d=1.06). Baseline
characteristics of the study population M Mean, SD Standard Deviation, R Range, n number of participants, PCP Primary Care Provider.
Clinical outcome data for the HOPE Pilot study cohort M mean, SD standard deviation, R range; Effect sizes measured using Cohen’s d
(0.8=large effect, 0.5=medium effect, 0.2=small effect). Baseline=readings at baseline assessment; 3-month=readings at 3-month follow-up
assessment; 6-month=readings at 6-month follow-up assessment. HbA1c hemoglobin A1c; Lower HbA1c is consistent with better diabetes control.
PHQ-9 Patient Health Questionnaire-9; Higher total PHQ-9 scores indicate elevated depressive symptoms. PAID Problem Areas In Diabetes scale;
Higher total PAID scores represent greater diabetes related distress. Upon completion of the coaching sessions, exit interviews were
conducted with each participant, rating items on a 5-point Likert scale (0=not at all, 5=very helpful). On average, participants’ responses
to the following items suggested strong acceptability of the HOPE program: “Overall, how would you say the HOPE program was in improving
your quality of life?” (M=4.5, SD=0.756); “Overall, how would you say the HOPE program was in helping you to learn to manage your diabetes?”
(M=4.625, SD=0.744); “Overall, how would you say the HOPE program was in helping you to manage stress, anxiety, and depression?” (M=3.375,
SD=1.506); and “Overall, how confident are you that you will continue to use the skills in the future?” (M=4.5, SD=0.535, where 5=very
confident). The narratives below introduce HOPE patients and illustrate coaches’ use of the 5 As model of coping within a chronic illness
framework including focused intervention efforts related to goal setting and action planning. Case 1: Brian, age 63. Brian, a retired
Veteran, reported high diabetes interference in his daily life at baseline interview. His HbA1c, which ranged from 8.9 to 11.3 over the last
year (M=10.9, SD=1.19), was 11.2 at baseline. He was also morbidly obese, suffered from sleep apnea, and had been diagnosed with Major
Depressive Disorder, exemplified by his PHQ-9 baseline score of 13. He acknowledged that his diet was poor and that he had limited diabetes
knowledge. Brian was admittedly doubtful at the start of the intervention of HOPE’s potential efficacy in producing positive health
outcomes. After assessing Brian’s diabetes knowledge and concerns about the HOPE Program, his coach advised him on goal-setting.
Acknowledging his unstable HbA1c markers, Brian agreed to set multiple diet goals, including controlling meal portion sizes, increasing
fruit and vegetable intake, reducing carbohydrate intake, and keeping a food log to monitor this goal for the duration of the program. Brian
was initially skeptical about the process; however, as he began successfully reaching goal-setting milestones, he became increasingly
engaged in the program. Brian experienced significant goal attainment, consistently increasing the scope of his goals as he progressed, and
later adding fitness and medication-adherence goals. His coach assisted him in improving communication with his wife and increasing his
diabetes care self-efficacy, arranging a self-monitoring plan to help maintain future success and communication action plans with his PCP to
help manage mild hypoglycemia symptoms with improved control. Brian realized a marked drop in HbA1c from 11.2 at baseline to 7.2 at 6-month
follow- up, and a reduction in diabetes distress (PAID score improved 3.75 at 6-month follow-up). Though his depression score at baseline
(13) showed clinically significant improvement at 3-month follow-up, his depressive symptoms at 6-month follow-up returned to baseline
functioning, suggesting the need for additional depression intervention. Case 2: Laura, age 59 Laura was a disabled Veteran, divorced, and
living alone. She entered the HOPE program with severely high HbA1c at baseline (14.8), shown to be consistent over the past year (M=13.5,
SD=2.15). She disclosed that daily diabetes monitoring limited her physical activity, causing stress and anxiety. In addition, she suffered
from multiple comorbidities, including Major Depressive Disorder (demonstrated by her high baseline PHQ-9 score of 19), post- traumatic
stress disorder, and asthma. Prescribed an extensive list of medications, she admitted to having trouble adhering to her complicated regimen
because of side-effects, financial limitations, and scheduling conflicts. During her initial session, Laura expressed optimism for the
potential outcomes of HOPE, despite some initial resistance to participate because of failures experienced in a prior diabetes education
program. On the basis of Laura’s extremely high diabetes numbers, her coach advised her to take immediate steps to alter lifestyle choices;
she agreed to begin walking for 30 minutes daily, planning to increase scope and potency of this goal as she progressed. She also committed
to stop eating fast food and began packing healthy snacks to carry throughout her day. However, after completing her fourth session, she
experienced a stressful life event that caused her to disengage from HOPE, and she began missing and/or rescheduling coaching sessions.
Given the significant barriers to goal attainment, Laura and her coach decided not to attempt any new goals. Her coach attempted to assist
her to overcome barriers to her initial goals. They used the remaining interactions to arrange a prolonged monitoring plan and, although
Laura verbally maintained commitment to finish the program, she eventually completed only five sessions. Though she reported improvements in
diabetes distress at 3-month follow-up (PAID score improved by 30) and depression at 3-month follow-up (PHQ-9 score had significant
improvement of 6 points), her HbA1c did not improve (increase from 14.8 at baseline to 16.1 at 6-month follow-up). By the conclusion of the
pilot, her PCP had ordered a more aggressive medical intervention; yet she maintained her positive improvements related to depressive
symptoms and diabetes distress. Case 3: Daniel, age 62 Daniel was a disabled Veteran, divorced, and living alone at the time of treatment
initiation. At baseline, he reported feeling stuck in daily routines (e.g. poor diet, lack of exercise) that he considered unhealthy. He
also reported problems falling and staying asleep, which interfered with the daytime activities necessary to effectively manage his
diabetes. His moderately high baseline markers for HbA1c (8.8) and PHQ-9 (14) were likely a result of these factors. He felt a great deal of
stress and worry over potential complications of his condition, especially because several of his family members had experienced diabetes-
related complications. Additionally, he found social situations that involved eating to be difficult, given his dietary restrictions, and
admitted to occasional interpersonal difficulties caused by low frustration tolerance and poor stress management. In assessing Daniel, his
coach recognized lifestyle problems common to uncontrolled diabetes and advised that simple lifestyle modifications would make a big
difference in overall well-being. The dyad agreed to begin with a fitness goal of walking ¼ mile 5–6 days per week, which Daniel
successfully increased to 1 mile as he progressed through the program. In addition to addressing physical goal barriers, such as pain from a
leg injury that caused sleep problems, Daniel’s coach assisted him by helping him identify emotional concerns that could impede goal
attainment. Daniel became open to practicing relaxation techniques during coaching sessions and established a goal to incorporate them in
his daily life. In arranging for prolonged goal maintenance, his coach emphasized the need to identify barriers to his goals and encouraged
him to share his diabetes experiences with others to help improve his social connections. At the conclusion of the treatment, Daniel
realized notable 6-month changes, including moderate yet clinically significant improvement in HbA1c (drop of 0.9 from baseline) and marked
reductions in depression (PHQ-9 score improved 14 points) and diabetes distress (PAID score improved 37.5 points). The HOPE program is a
structured, theory-driven psychosocial intervention that uses telephone-based behavioral health coaching to promote lifestyle changes for
improved diabetes control and reduced depressive symptoms in older rural-dwelling patients. Initial data from the HOPE program suggest that
the multifaceted intervention, as designed, may generate positive outcomes for both physical and emotional aspects of diabetes self-care.
Patient-level data and qualitative interviews post-treatment suggest that patients responded positively to the collaborative goal setting
and action-planning process. Prior diabetes and depression interventions have typically shown positive outcomes for either diabetes or
depression markers, but not both . Under these more narrowed aims, structured behavioral intervention strategies have been demonstrated to
be more effective at improving glycemic control than traditional diabetes education programs in patients with diabetes for at least two
years . In contrast, the HOPE program demonstrated an ability to cultivate positive outcomes across all clinically relevant measures,
including diabetes-related distress, in a group of medically complex patients with an average diabetes duration of 17 years. Changes in
clinical outcomes may be related to reductions in diabetes-related distress, measured by the validated PAID instrument . These findings,
derived through the application of a simple telephone-based protocol delivered by non-expert coaches, extend the results seen in more
resource-intensive interventions targeting diabetes and depression . Common among the HOPE pilot cohort was the initial selection of more
traditional diabetes lifestyle goals (e.g. diet and exercise), rather than emotional health goals. On the whole, participants were initially
reluctant to discuss topics related to emotional well-being, possibly because they did not want to appear vulnerable, or due to lack of
awareness and understanding of a potential connection to self-management and physical health. Those participants who did engage around
affective goals were usually encouraged to do so by their coaches when they encountered goal barriers that could not be overcome through
physical health changes alone. It may have been this private individualized attention from coaches and the built-in process of building
rapport that eventually encouraged goal-setting around emotional health issues. Prior research has shown individual education to be superior
over group education and usual care in reducing HbA1c, further supporting this notion . Importantly, outcome data from the trial suggest
that, although emotional health concerns were not always addressed overtly, especially at the onset of treatment, depressive symptoms may be
reduced, as evidenced by the 6-month effect size for PHQ-9 scores (d=1.70). Participants were also generally hesitant to discuss their
diabetes medication regimens including associated side-effects, unless hypoglycemia-related issues arose during the program. If this
happened, coaches helped participants to identify and monitor hypoglycemia-related events and construct action plans with PCPs to address
this potentially dangerous side-effect. Thus, the HOPE program may be an effective method of addressing hypoglycemia-related events that
arise during diabetes interventions. The pilot cohort completion rate indicated high patient acceptability and satisfaction with the HOPE
intervention. HOPE holds the potential to be implemented in clinical practice and the use of non-experts as coaches may reduce potential
"translational" difficulties including limited mental health provider availability and other time and resource limitations common to the use
of behavioral change interventions. HOPE may be especially suitable for older adults with multiple chronic conditions. The telephone-based
nature of the program increases access to care for vulnerable rural-dwelling individuals who may be unable or unwilling to travel to and
from a central treatment site due to functional limitations or a lack of social support . Importantly, HOPE was structured to support and
sustain aging in place initiatives that promote independent living among older adults. The HOPE protocol also fosters self-efficacy with
chronic self-management by encouraging, supporting, and providing practice for participants to engage in proactive coping and skill
development efforts that initiate and sustain behavioral change. Coping skills prevent and alleviate stress allowing older adults to
preserve resources that are susceptible to aging-related losses and declines . Previous research also highlights the importance of perceived
control as a key component of successful aging . Our study corroborates previous research suggesting that middle-aged and older adults can
learn, integrate, and practice proactive coping skills. Using these skills, it appears that the rural-dwelling adults in our study were able
to take charge of their own health and better position themselves for future health challenges. A number of limitations in the present study
should be acknowledged. While participants in the HOPE trial realized notable positive clinical changes, the small sample size and lack of
control group limit the generalizability and interpretation of study clinical outcomes. Although effect sizes were maintained at 6-months,
time constraints to complete the pilot did not allow for longer-term follow-up sessions to promote maintenance of goal attainment. A larger
trial could allow for a more comprehensive examination of the HOPE intervention using a larger sample size, intervention control group, and
lengthier follow-up to evaluate long-term self-management behaviors. It is important to note that the age cohort (range=58–67) of our pilot
participants may have led to greater intervention acceptability and better clinical outcomes than would be realized with an older age group.
However, due to the complexity and severity of conditions experienced by this cohort at baseline, our results show promise for the potential
of clinical improvements in others treated within the HOPE program. Lastly, we did not seek direct PCP engagement in the treatment process,
although coaches did communicate goal progress through passive notes in patients’ electronic medical records and were aware of PCPs’
treatment plans as documented in medical records. Increased interface with participants’ PCPs above the standard chart notes could increase
provider engagement and may have helped guide tailored intervention plans for each patient potentially further personalizing treatment. We
acknowledge there are potential difficulties inherent in engaging clinicians, particularly clinician availability and willingness to
participate. Future work should focus on developing a system that would further facilitate sharing of information between PCPs and HOPE
coaches. Experiences from the HOPE open pilot suggest that patients with severe depressive symptoms and/or long-standing mental health
issues, such as Major Depressive Disorder or post-traumatic stress disorder, may be poor candidates for HOPE, as they require mental health
treatment beyond the scope of this intervention. Future studies should examine the association between severity of depression and other
mental health comorbidities in response to treatment and potential need for a stepped-care approach. Overall, HOPE demonstrated clinically
meaningful improvements in diabetes control, depressive symptoms, and diabetes distress over a 6-month period, using a tele-coaching
intervention. HOPE appears to be a feasible and potentially cost-effective, telephone-delivered coaching intervention targeting high-risk
older patients with comorbid diabetes and depression. Because older adults experience increased obstacles (e.g. financial limitations; lack
of transportation/inability to self-transport; comorbid/unrelated health conditions restricting mobility) to participation in clinic-based
diabetes protocols, HOPE may provide a viable option to reach geographically isolated or disparate populations with limited access to
comprehensive diabetes and mental health care. While HOPE cannot replace the need for basic primary care, it does provide a potentially
critical adjunct for aging patients with treated but uncontrolled diabetes and depression. A larger study with lengthier follow-up and
greater PCP engagement is needed to support and extend the findings of this pilot. The authors declare that they have no competing interests
relating to the HOPE project or this manuscript. The authors’ responsibilities were as follows- AN and JC: conception and design of
intervention, drafting and revisions to the article. CW: behavioral coaching, drafting and revisions to the article. MA, SR, and BL:
behavioral coaching and revisions to the article. LS: study coordination and revisions to the article. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2318/12/37/prepub This
study is funded by a research grant from the VA Mental Illness Research, Education, and Clinical Center (MIRECC) Behavioral Coaching for
Rural Veterans with Diabetes and Depression Pilot Study Program H-26812. Additional support was provided with resources and use of
facilities at the Houston VA Health Services Research and Development Center of Excellence (HFP90-020) at the Michael E. DeBakey VA Medical
Center. Dr. Naik is also supported by National Institute on Aging Career Development Award (K23AG027144-5) and by a Doris Duke Charitable
Foundation Clinical Scientist Development Award. The U.S. National Institute of Aging and Department of Veterans Affairs had no role in the
design and conduct of the study; the collection, management, analysis and interpretation of the data; or the preparation, review or approval
of the manuscript. The views reflect those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Department of Veterans Affairs/Baylor College of
Medicine or the National Institute on Aging. The authors thank Mark Kunik and Melinda Stanley for their insights and expertise in the
development of this pilot study; and Sonora Hudson and Levi Herman for their careful reviews of the final draft of this manuscript.
