The clinical features of interface Candida keratitis after deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK), may imitate rejection or crystalline
keratopathy. We report here an 18-year-old woman presented with red eye, 4 months after undergoing DALK. Slit lamp examination revealed
keratic precipitates (KPs) and cojunctival injection. She was prescribed corticosteroid treatment for endothelial rejection by another
ophthalmologist because of misdiagnosis, but suffered a recurrence of symptoms after reduction of the corticosteroid treatment. At that
time, she was referred to our office. The recurrence persisted despite antibiotic and antifungal therapies. Ten days after treatment with
interface irrigation with amphotericin, the infiltration and hypopyon were resolved. Topical steroid was added after 3 months of antifungal
monotherapy. Irrigant cultures confirmed the presence of Candida albicans. The corneal graft appeared semi-clear with no signs of infection
at 17-month follow-up. We recommend a close follow-up and a timely intervention to prevent the need for more invasive treatment such as
penetrating keratoplasty. Deep anterior lamellar keratoplasty (DALK) has been introduced as a less invasive surgical alternative to
penetrating keratoplasty for the treatment of corneal diseases not affecting the endothelium. Infection is a serious complication for any
kind of corneal transplant as it may result in graft failure and poor visual outcome. A variety of treatments have been suggested for
corneal interface infection. Medical therapy by antibiotic could be safe and effective if it was used in proper approach, but just
penetrating keratoplasty (PK) was tested for treatment of interfaces infection in DALK. PK should be considered as an invasive treatment. We
report here a case of Candida albicans interface infection after DALK and its management by a new, effective and less invasive treatment
other than PK. An 18-year-old woman presented with a red eye, 4 months after undergoing DALK as a treatment for keratoconus. Anterior
segment examination revealed keratic precipitates (KPs) and conjunctival injection [Fig. 1]. She was treated for endothelial rejection with
1 mg/kg daily oral prednisolone (Iran Hormon company, Tehran, Iran) and topical 1% prednisolone acetate (PRECORD®, Sina Darou, Tehran,
Iran), applied 6 times per day. This was recommended by another ophthalmologist because of his misdiagnosis. Slit-lamp photograph
demonstrating multiple keratic precipitates and conjunctival injection in the right cornea of an 18-year-old woman, 4 months after deep
anterior lamellar keratoplasty. We have borrowed the picture from the ophthalmologist who first treated her According to the recommendation
of the first physician, the corticosteroid was tapered off when the patient showed a favorable treatment response. Upon tapering, however,
she experienced a recurrence with crystalline keratopathy features [Fig. 2a] and she was referred to our office. The recurrence was treated
with topical fortified vancomycin (50 mg/ml) (VANCO®, Jaber Ebne Hayyan Pharmaceutical Mfg. Co., Tehran, Iran), a Gram-positive bacterial
antibiotic, and the corticosteroid regimen was discontinued. After 1 week, she came back with the clinical appearance of non-necrotizing
suppurative keratitis and hypopyon [Fig. 2b]. Topical fortified ceftazidim (50 mg/ml) (CEFTAZID®, Jaber Ebne Hayyan Pharmaceutical Mfg. Co.,
Tehran, Iran) was commenced immediately, in addition to the vancomycin. Unfortunately, however, the keratitis progressed to a necrotizing
ulcer within a week [Fig. 2c, d]. (a) After the tapering off of topical corticosteroid, the clinical features converted to those of
crystalline-like keratopathy. (b) Non-necrotizing suppurative keratitis and hypopyon, 1 week after the use of fortified topical vancomycin.
(c) Worsening of the infection with development of a necrotizing ulcer despite use of combined fortified topical vancomycin and ceftazidim;
associated slit photograph is shown in (d) Hourly 5% natamycin suspension (NATACYN®, Alcon Inc., Texas, USA) was started. Corneal ulcer
margin and surface infiltration samples, submitted to culture analysis, were negative. It is worth mentioning here that the microbial
assessment of the donor tissue was negative at the time of DALK. In the following week, interface irrigation was performed. The interface
was further irrigated with amphotericin B (0.15%) during the procedure (Cipla Ltd., India). Unfortunately, a posterior perforation occurred
during the irrigation procedure, and the anterior chamber was formed by an air bubble. Topical natamycin was continued postoperatively.
Culture and smear tests from the irrigated material confirmed the presence of C. albicans. Ten days after the irrigation treatment, the
patient's infiltrations and hypopyon had resolved, but we observed a double chamber formation due to the posterior perforation [Fig. 3a].
Three weeks later, the double chamber had resolved completely without any further intervention [Fig. 3b]. After 3 months of natamycin
monotherapy, the patient was prescribed topical corticosteroid, 3 times a day for 8 weeks. Follow-up examination done 17 months after the
patient's initial presentation, the graft appeared semi-clear. There was no Descemet's scar at the site of infection and rupture, with no
evidence of recurrence and her uncorrected visual acuity was 20/30 [Fig. 3c]. (a) Double chamber formation and resolution of hypopyon and
infiltrates, 10 days after interface irrigation and topical natamycin therapy. (b) Completely resolved double chamber, 3 weeks after its
formation with no intervention. (c) Clear graft, no infiltration, no recurrence and no double chamber, 17 months after first presentation;
uncorrected visual acuity:20/30 Candida species are the most common fungal cause of post keratoplasty endophthalmitis. The onset of such
infections has been reported to occur as soon as 1 week or as long as several months after surgery. C. albicans presence may be limited to
the graft–host interface following DALK due to the barrier role of the Descemet's membrane. Corneal interface infection has been reported
after laser-assisted in situ keratomileusis (LASIK), epikeratoplasty, endokeratoplasty and DALK. The first-line treatment for early stage of
fungal keratitis consists of topical and oral antifungal medications. In the treatment of the severe cases or failure of treatment by
medical therapy, surgical procedures such as PK and conjunctival flap have been used. However, PK is an aggressive treatment and has its own
complications. Intracameral antifungal medication has been used as an adjunctive therapy for fungal keratitis after PK. Graft infection can
be acquired at any time following operation, but most of it occurs during the first 6 months postoperatively. Preoperative corneal button
contamination, insufficient aseptic conditions during surgery, or recipient factors such as corneal anesthesia, ocular surface problems,
eyelid abnormalities, persistent epithelial defect and suture-related complications may result in such infections. Furthermore, eyes with
corneal grafts are susceptible to infection because of long-term topical corticosteroid use and corneal sutures. The late infections are
usually acquired from the environment. Development of endophthalmitis can be prevented by the corneal layers separating the infection site
from intraocular spaces in DALK, but penetration of topical, intraocular and systemic drugs may not be adequate to reach the infection site,
so surgery is always the only treatment. Furthermore, obtaining enough material for reliable culture tests may be more difficult with the
layers intact. In prior reports of Candida interface infection following DALK, the infection was treated by PK. Antibiotic irrigation of the
interface following LASIK has been reported. Here, we report evidence of therapeutically efficacious interface irrigation with amphotericin
in the treatment of interface Candida infection after DALK. Culture carried out on liquefied irrigation material may help in the timely and
effective treatment of interface infection when culture tests of marginal and superficial infiltrations are negative. The confocal
microscopy could give useful information for diagnosis of bacterial, fungal or acanthamoeba corneal ulcers. There are different reports of
successful use of in vivo confocal microscopy in early detection, evaluation of the effectiveness of treatment and healing process of
microbial corneal infections, especially in fungal ones. Unfortunately, it was not accessible in our city at the time of our report. In
summary, the clinical features of interface keratitis after DALK may imitate endothelial rejection, crystalline keratopathy or epithelial
downgrowth. Therefore, Candida keratitis should be considered in cases involving interface deposits and recurrent inflammation after the
tapering off of steroid therapy for presumed graft rejection, following any kind of lamellar keratoplasty. Interface irrigation combined
with topical antifungal administration can preserve the graft and may result in good vision without the need for more invasive treatments
like PK.
