Peptic ulcer disease (PUD) in children remains rare and difficult to diagnose before the onset of complications. We report on a case of a
12-month child with perforated duodenal ulcer, association with malaria. The severity of the febrile presentation and the positive
laboratory confirmation of malaria delayed the diagnosis of PUD. Surgical intervention was successful and without significant sequelae. An
awareness of the possibility, and a lower threshold for considering PUD in children may help prevent complications. Peptic ulcer disease
(PUD) is uncommon and difficult to diagnose in young children and clinical features are often non-specific . We report a case of a 12-month
old boy with severe malaria who developed duodenal perforation. A previously healthy 12-month old boy was referred from a clinic to the
Kintampo Municipal Hospital (Kintampo, Ghana). He had presented at the clinic with a 2-day history of fever and vomiting. On admission to
the clinic, diagnosis of severe anaemia secondary to Malaria was made. Despite treatment with IV fluid, IM Quinine and a blood transfusion,
his condition deteriorated and he began to pass bloody stools. After two days he was referred to hospital for further management. On
arrival, the child had a reduced conscious level. He was febrile (39.5°C) and pale with pulse and respiration rates 110 beat/min and 60
breaths/min respectively. Abdominal examination was normal apart from periumbilical tenderness. Blood film was positive for malaria
parasites. Haemoglobin was 4.2g/dL and white blood cell count 16.4 × 109. Neither Widal test nor stool cultures were done. Supine abdominal
X-ray showed air fluid levels. Erect chest X-ray showed no subphrenic gas. Treatment of severe anaemia secondary to malaria and suspected
typhoid was continued. Intranasal oxygen, IV fluids and whole blood were administered along with paracetamol, IM quinine, IV gentamicin and
IV metronidazole. After a further 2 days he remained semiconscious and febrile, passing blood clots in his stool. Despite transfusion,
haemoglobin remained 4.3g/dL. Abdominal examination remained unremarkable. An exploratory laparotomy was performed. On entering the
peritoneum a large amount of blood-stained fluid was seen. A 1.5cm anterior perforation of the duodenal wall was found, with bleeding from
the posterior duodenal wall (Figure 1). The bleeding vessel was clamped and the perforation closed using an omental patch. 1.5 cm anterior
duodenal wall perforation (arrowed) in a 12-month old child with severe malaria. Postoperatively the child received a further blood
transfusion, antibiotics and IV ranitidine. Ten days post-operatively he was discharged. On follow-up he had no sequelae. Due to resource
constraint no test for Helicobacter pylori was performed. The mother denied giving any medication to the child. PUD is rare in children with
an estimated frequency of 1 in 3000 hospital admissions . Symptoms are often non-specific and difficult to assess. Endoscopy has improved
diagnosis in suspected PUD but is often not available in resource poor settings, making diagnosis challenging . PUD in children is
classified as primary or secondary depending on the aetiology. Secondary PUD is associated with physiological stress, systemic illness and
drugs including non-steroidal anti-inflammatories and steroids. Primary PUD is commonly associated with Helicobacter pylori infection. It
can also be idiopathic or associated with conditions causing increased acid secretion [1, 3]. PUD is more commonly secondary in children
under ten years of age and primary in the over tens. Secondary PUD occurs in the stomach or duodenum and is more likely to present with
complications including perforation and hemorrhage. Primary PUD predominantly occurs in the duodenum and rarely presents with perforation .
94% of children with perforated PUD present with acute abdominal signs . Free air under the diaphragm is found in 82.7% . Surgery is the
recommended treatment for perforation. Medical management of secondary PUD includes histamine receptor blockers and elimination of
physiological stress. If treated secondary PUD rarely recurs . A literature search revealed no reports of perforated duodenal ulcers
associated with malaria. In our case, we postulate that physiological stress from severe malaria resulted in secondary PUD progressing to
perforation due to characteristics of secondary PUD and diagnostic challenges. PUD remains difficult to diagnose in children prior to
complications especially in a resource poor settings. A lower threshold for considering PUD in children may help prevent complications. The
authors declare no competing interests. All the authors have contributed to this manuscript in ways that conform to the ICMJE authorship
criteria. All the authors have read and approved the final version of the manuscript.
