L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria is a metabolic repair deficiency characterized by elevated levels of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid in urine, blood
and cerebrospinal fluid. Neurological signs associated with the disease in humans and dogs include seizures, ataxia and dementia. Here we
describe an 8 month old Yorkshire terrier that presented with episodes of hyperactivity and aggressive behavior. Between episodes, the dog’s
behavior and neurologic examinations were normal. A T2 weighted MRI of the brain showed diffuse grey matter hyperintensity and a urine
metabolite screen showed elevated 2-hydroxyglutaric acid. We sequenced all 10 exons and intron-exon borders of L2HGDH from the affected dog
and identified a homozygous A to G transition in the initiator methionine codon. The first inframe methionine is at p.M183 which is past the
mitochondrial targeting domain of the protein. Initiation of translation at p.M183 would encode an N-terminal truncated protein unlikely to
be functional. We have identified a mutation in the initiation codon of L2HGDH that is likely to result in a non-functional gene. The
Yorkshire terrier could serve as an animal model to understand the pathogenesis of L-2-hydroxyglutaric aciduria and to evaluate potential
therapies. L-2 hydroxyglutaric aciduria (L-2-HGA) was first described in 1980 in a young boy with psychomotor retardation and
musculoskeletal dystrophy . This rare autosomal recessive inherited disease is characterized by an elevated concentration of
L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid in plasma, cerebrospinal fluid, and urine . In human patients, the clinical features are mild psychomotor delay,
followed by progressive cerebellar ataxia, dysarthria, moderate to severe mental deterioration and in some cases seizures . Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) of L-2-HGA patients shows abnormal signal in the peripheral subcortical white matter, basal ganglia and dentate
nuclei. Also, cerebellar atrophy is present. The distribution of signal abnormalities in the MRI of L-2-HGA patients is distinct and
differentiates it from other diseases . In 2004, mutations in L2HGDH were shown to cause human L-2-HGA . L2HGDH is comprised of 10 exons
which encode a protein of 463 amino acids that contains a N-terminal mitochondrial targeting sequence and C-terminal amino acid sequence
homology to FAD-dependent oxidoreductases . L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase is bound to mitochondrial membranes and catalyzes the
conversion of L-2-hydroxyglutarate to α-ketoglutarate . L-2-HGA was described in Staffordshire bull terriers in 2003 . These dogs presented
with ataxia, dementia, tremors and seizures, and they showed MRI changes similar to the human disease. L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid levels were
elevated in urine, cerebrospinal fluid and plasma from affected dogs. In 2007, Penderis et al. identified a 2 bp substitution in exon 10 of
L2HGDH predicting a two amino acid substitution in Staffordshire bull terriers affected with L-2-HGA. A case of L-2-HGA was also reported in
a West Highland white terrier with clinical and MRI characteristics of the disease , but no molecular genetic cause was determined. In this
report, we describe the clinical features and the likely molecular genetic cause of L-2-HGA in a Yorkshire terrier. An 8 month old neutered
male Yorkshire terrier was presented with episodes of hyperactivity and aggressive behavior. The episodes would last for about 40 minutes
and then the dog behaved normally between episodes. No abnormalities were found on neurologic examination. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
showed a mild mononuclear pleocytosis (WBC 23/ul {N<8} with 92% mononuclear cells and 8% small lymphocytes) and normal protein (7 mg/dl
{N<36}). An MRI of the brain (Figure 1) demonstrated hyperintensity of the gray matter of the thalamus, cerebral cortex and cerebellum on T2
weighted images similar to previously described MRIs from Staffordshire bull terriers and a West Highland white terrier with L-2-HGA . No
abnormalities were apparent on FLAIR, gradient echo or T1 weighted images with or without gadolinium contrast. Urine organic acid levels
were quantified by gas chromatography-mass spectroscopy as previously described , and showed an elevated concentration of hydroxyglutaric
acid (1,743 mmol/mol creatinine {N = 0.6–5.7}). Plasma amino acid levels were also quantified and showed elevated lysine (600 μmol/L
{N = 145–201}). A lysine restricted diet was developed, but it was not palatable so the dog was placed on a commercial protein restricted
diet1. The dog was also started on phenobarbital at 2.5 mg/kg. The frequency of the episodes decreased with treatment, and the dog showed no
progression of signs over 6 months. Transverse T2-weighted image (TR = 3000, TE = 90) through the midbrain of the Yorkshire terrier with
L-2-HGA. The gray matter of the cerebrum and brainstem shows the symmetric hyperintensity characteristic of the disease . Because MRI
findings and urinary organic acid profiles were consistent with a diagnosis of L-2-HGA, L2HGDH became the most likely candidate gene to
harbor the mutation responsible for the 2-HGA in this dog. DNA was extracted from an EDTA blood sample using a previously described method .
First, we eliminated the presence of the mutation identified in Staffordshire bull terriers . To investigate whether there were other
sequence variants in the affected dog’s L2HGDH, we sequenced all 10 exons and intron–exon junctions as previously described . Primer
sequences are provided in Additional file 1. Comparison of the sequencing data from all 10 exons of canine L2HGDH from the affected dog to
the published canine sequence (Ensembl Gene ID ENSCAFG0000001437) revealed a homozygous c.1A>G substitution (Figure 2). This nucleotide
substitution changes the initiation methionine codon, which is predicted to alter the translation start site . Partial nucleotide sequence
of L2HGDH exon 1 from a control dog and the Yorkshire terrier with L-2-HGA illustrating the L2HGDH :c.1A>G mutation. We genotyped 6
unaffected Yorkshire terriers and 97 dogs from other breeds at L2HGDH:c.1 by PCR-RFLP with PCR primers 5′-GCGCTCGATTGGCCCTTG-3′ and
5′-GCAGGCCAGCGGCTACTCAC-3′ which produced a 298 bp amplicon. The wild type allele was hydrolyzed by restriction enzyme NcoI into fragments
of 157 and 141 bp; whereas, the mutant allele lacked the NcoI restriction site. All 103 normal dogs were homozygous for the wild type A
allele. L2HGDH encodes a FAD-dependent L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase that is bound to mitochondrial membranes and converts
L-2-hydroxyglutarate to α-ketoglutarate . L-2-hydroxyglutarate is endogenously produced but is not an intermediate of any currently
recognized mammalian metabolic pathway. Instead, L-2-hydroxyglutarate is formed because mitochondrial L-malate dehydrogenase is not
completely specific for oxaloacetate, its primary substrate. This enzyme can also reduce α-ketoglutarate to L-2-hydroxyglutarate as a side
reaction . L-2-hydroxyglutarate dehydrogenase prevents the accumulation of L-2-hydroxyglutarate by FAD-dependent oxidation back to
α-ketoglutarate. Thus, L-2-HGA is considered to be a deficiency of ‘metabolite repair’ . The deleterious consequence of L-2-hydroxyglutarate
dehydrogenase deficiency is the accumulation of L-2-hydroxyglutarate. L-2-hydroxyglutarate induces oxidative stress and inhibits
mitochondrial creatine kinase in the cerebellum . Also, L-2-hydroxyglutarate is a structural analog of glutamate, and thus a potential
inhibitor of the many biologic processes that involve this key metabolite and neurotransmitter . The exact mechanism by which accumulation
of L-2-hydroxyglutaric acid causes brain injury is still unknown. Since the identification of the first human L2HGDH mutations , about 70
L-2-HGA-causing mutations have been reported . Among these are two that occur in the initiator codon (c.1A>C and c.1A>G), similar to the
canine L2HGDH:c.1A>G mutation reported here. The canine initiator codon mutation was absent from 103 unaffected dogs. Mutations in initiator
codons require the use of an alternative downstream methionine codon . The next potential translational start site in the canine L2HGDH is
out of frame and would encode a peptide of only 4 amino acids before it reaches a stop codon. The first inframe methionine codon is located
183 codons downstream from the original start codon, which if used would encode a protein without the N-terminal mitochondrial targeting
domain . Thus, the mutant L2HGDH in the Yorkshire terrier with L-2-HGA is unlikely to be functional. The only clinical signs shown by the
Yorkshire terrier were episodes of hyperactivity and aggression. At the time of this report, the dog has not shown any dementia, ataxia or
generalized seizures as has been described in human patients and dogs with L-2-HGA from other breeds. Unless there is an unidentified splice
variant that provides an alternative initiator methionine codon, the milder phenotype is unlikely to be due to residual enzyme activity. It
could reflect a response to therapy or the younger age of the Yorkshire terrier. The decreased severity may have been due to the altered
diet or to the phenobarbital therapy which would suggest that these episodes were complex partial seizures, possibly with post-ictal
behavior changes. We described a previously unreported mutation in L2HGDH in a Yorkshire terrier with L-2-HGA. This mutation is predicted to
result in a non-functional gene. We recently learned that another group has independently found the same mutation in two European Yorkshire
terriers with L-2-HGA . The occurrence of L-2-HGA in two European Yorkshire terriers with an identical mutation is additional evidence that
the L2HGDH:c.1A>G transition is the cause of L-2-HGA in this breed. The similarities between canine L-2-HGA and the human disease suggest
that the canine disease could be a useful model to understand the pathogenesis of the disease and to evaluate potential therapies. 1L/D,
Hill’s Pet Nutrition, Inc., Topeka, KS, USA. FHGF analyzed sequences of L2HGDH, genotyped normal dogs and drafted the manuscript and
submitted the manuscript for publication. RZ genotyped the Yorkshire terrier for the mutation identified in Staffordshire bull terriers. GSJ
designed experiments and helped to draft the manuscript. Analysis of organic acids in the urine was performed by GDS. DP performed the
clinical and neurological examinations and generated the MRI. DPO contributed to the clinical assessment and helped to draft the manuscript.
All authors contributed to the preparation of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Primer sequences for
amplification of canine L2HGDH. Click here for file
