Many techniques have been proposed for root coverage. However, none of them presents predictable results in deep and wide recessions The aim
of this case series report is to describe an alternative technique for root coverage at sites showing deep recessions and attachment loss >4
mm at buccal sites. Four patients presenting deep recession defects at buccal sites (≥4 mm) were treated by the newly forming bone graft
technique, which consists in the creation of an alveolar socket at edentulous ridge and transferring of granulation tissue present in this
socket to the recession defect after 21 days. Clinical periodontal parameters, including recession depth (RD), probing depth (PD), clinical
attachment level (CAL), bleeding on probing (BOP), plaque index (PI) and keratinized gingiva width (KGW) were evaluated by a single examiner
immediately before surgery and at 1, 3, 6 and 9 months postoperatively. All cases showed reduction in RD and PD, along with CAL gain,
although no increase in KGW could be observed. These findings suggest that the technique could favor periodontal regeneration along with
root coverage, especially in areas showing deep recessions and attachment loss. Coverage of denuded roots has been a main concern for both
professionals and patients. Many surgical techniques have been proposed to cover denuded roots, showing varying rates of success depending
on factors related to the surgical technique and anatomical features of the lesions13,14,17,26. A greater reduction in recession depth and
width as well as a greater increase in the width of keratinized gingiva are obtained by subepithelial connective tissue graft (SCTG)
associated to coronally positioned flap5,13,19. However, the success of such technique is limited in wide recession defects presenting
interproximal bone and soft tissue loss17. To overcome these problems, the use of barrier membranes positioned over exposed root surface
(GTR) warranting a space for regeneration to occur along with root coverage has been suggested7,20,23,26,27. This technique resulted in gain
of attachment level, reduction of probing depth, bleeding on probing and recession depth19,23,26 in single, large, deep, localized marginal
tissue recessions showing ≥5 mm of depth27, in the presence of hypersensitivity7, cervical caries lesions or restorations23,28. Histological
studies demonstrated that wound healing proceeded with the formation of new cementum, periodontal ligament and alveolar bone coronal to the
pre-existent level, suggesting that root coverage was accomplished by regeneration of periodontal tissues7,20. In turn, it is contra-
indicated for the treatment of multiple and shallow recessions18,30 or in areas of thin gingival tissue11. To further improve these results,
the use of allogenic bone grafts associated to GTR for root coverage was proposed8,12,24,25 to support the membrane and to act as an
osteoinductive/osteoconductive biomaterial, resulting in improved reduction of recession and probing depth and gain of attachment level
compared to the use of barrier membranes alone8,12, as well as a slightly smaller - but not significant - reduction in recession depth
compared with subepithelial connective tissue graft24. Recently, the use of growth factors or stem cells under membranes has been proposed
to treat denuded areas15 or missing papillae16, with promising results. Passanezi, et al.21 (1989) proposed a surgical technique based on
the transfer of osteogenic cells to treat infrabony periodontal defects with high rates of clinical success. The technique consists in the
transfer of healing bone from a surgically created alveolar socket to infrabony periodontal defects approximately 21 days after. A
substantial quantity of a relatively mature newly forming bone containing a vast amount of osteoblasts with osteogenic potential is observed
in alveolar socket 4-12 weeks after tooth extraction9. This material shows positive staining against collagen I, osteocalcin, bone
sialoprotein and alkaline phosphatase activity22, which are considered as markers of mesenchymal stem cells3,6, resulting in regeneration of
periodontal tissues in animal and human studies21. The treatment of wide recession defects by the newly forming bone graft (NFBG) technique
would then be favored by the formation of a new periodontal attachment apparatus, even in the presence of attachment loss or thin
keratinized tissue. Considering that, the aim of this case series report is to propose a new technique for coverage of denuded roots in
order to achieve root coverage along with successful regeneration of bone, cementum and periodontal ligament, especially at deep and wide
recession defects. Patient #1 was a 44-year-old systemically healthy never-smoker female who presented for treatment at the Clinics of the
Discipline of Periodontics at Bauru School of Dentistry, University of São Paulo, Brazil. Patient reported no use of antibiotics or other
medicines in the previous 6-month period. Treatment plan involved extraction of the mandibular left central incisor and root coverage of the
mandibular right second premolar, which showed a 5 mm-deep and 4 mm-wide recession at baseline examination. No tooth mobility was present.
Clinical and radiographic examination suggested a slight loss of soft and hard tissues at distal sites compatible with a Miller class III
recession defect, since the mandibular right second premolar was adjacent to an edentulous ridge. Patient #2 presented for treatment at the
Periodontics Clinics complaining of recession at the mandibular left first premolar. Clinical examination revealed a 5 mm-deep recession
defect. Patient reported no systemic disease, no smoking, no use of antibiotics or any other medications or periodontal treatment in the
6-month period previous to baseline examination. No tooth mobility was present. Clinical and radiographic examination suggested a Miller's
class III recession defect. Patient #3, a 35 year-old female, presented a deep recession defect (5 mm) at the mandibular right second
premolar. Patient was systemically healthy, never smoker, and reported no use of any medication or periodontal treatment in the 6-month
period previous to baseline examination. There was no clinical sign of trauma from occlusion or tooth mobility. Clinical and radiographic
examination suggested a Miller's class III recession defect. Patient #4 was a 32-year-old female with a 4-mm-deep recession defect at the
mandibular right second premolar. No tooth mobility was present, and there was no clinical sign of trauma from occlusion. Patient reported
to be systemically healthy and never smoker. Additionally, patient reported no regular use of medications or periodontal treatment during
the past 6 months. Clinical and radiographic examination suggested a Miller's class III recession defect. All patients were submitted to a
phase I therapy, which included removal of caries and endodontic lesions, oral hygiene instruction and scaling and root planning aiming at
plaque control. Surgical treatment was performed after active treatment, when resolution of inflammation was achieved, as observed by
absence of bleeding on probing and clinical signs of gingival health. Clinical examinations were performed by a single trained examiner
immediately before surgery and at 1, 3, 6 and 9 months post-operatively. Depth of marginal tissue recession (DR), probing depth (PD),
clinical attachment level (CAL), bleeding on probing (BOP) and keratinized gingiva width (KGW) were determined using a millimeter manual
probe (HuFriedy, Chicago, IL, USA). DR was determined by the distance from cementum-enamel junction to gingival margin. PD was determined by
the distance from gingival margin to the bottom of the sulcus. CAL was defined as the distance from cementum-enamel junction to the bottom
of sulcus (DR+PD). KGW was determined by the distance from gingival margin to the mucogingival junction. The presence of bleeding upon
probing was recorded as 1 and its absence as 0. Plaque index was recorded as the presence (1) or absence (0) of plaque after staining of
tooth surface with a plaque-evidencing solution. Percentage of root coverage was determined by the application of the formula11: % root
coverage=(RDinitial-RDfinal)x100/RDinitial The alveolar socket was created by perforation of alveolar bone ridge with a diamond bur, as
previously described21 (Figure 1A-B). A bovine type 1 collagen membrane (GenDerm, Baumer, Bauru, SP, Brazil) was positioned over the socket
(Figure 1C) to prevent ingrowth of connective tissue or epithelial cells. Flaps were sutured without tension with silk 4-0 (Ethicon, Johnson
& Johnson, São Paulo, SP, Brazil), as shown in Figure 1D. Patients were prescribed antibiotics (Amoxicilin, 1500 mg, t.i.d, 7 days) and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory (Nimesulide, 100 mg, b.i.d., 3 days) and instructed not to rinse during the first 48 h. Sutures were removed
after 7 days, with clinical evidence of uneventful wound healing. Prepare of donor site. (A) Occlusal view from edentulous ridge selected
for the creation of a surgical alveolus; (B) Rising of a full thickness flap and creation of a surgical socket by perforation of alveolar
ridge with a diamond bur in high speed with vigorous irrigation; (C) Bovine type 1 collagen barrier membrane trimmed to overlap defects
margins in 2-3 mm positioned over the defect; (D) Primary closure of the flaps without tension with 4-0 silk Root coverage procedure was
carried out 21 days after (Figure 2A, B). After appropriate anesthesia, a trapezoidal flap7 was performed and a full thickness flap was
raised (Figure 2C). After debridement and scaling and root planning, root surface was conditioned with a citric acid (pH 1) and a 50%
tetracycline solution (Discipline of Biochemistry, School of Dentistry at Bauru-USP) during 3 minutes, followed by vigorous rinsing with
saline solution. Afterwards, a full thickness flap was raised at donor site (Figure 2D). The healing tissue was removed from the alveolus
with a Lucas curette (Chinelatto, Ribeirão Preto, SP, Brazil) and transferred to the receptor site (Figure 2E). Flaps were displaced
coronally and sutured at cementoenamel junction (Figure 2F). A periodontal dressing (CoePack, GC America INC, Alsip, IL, U.S.A) protected
the area for 14 days. Patient was prescribed a non-steroidal anti-inflammatory and instructed not to rinse during the first 48 h. Sutures
were removed after 14 days. Patient was advised to carry out routine oral hygiene procedures with dental floss and soft brush for the next
30 days. Postoperative controls were performed at 1, 3, 6 and 9 months and included instruction of oral hygiene and supra and subgingival
plaque control, when necessary. Treatment of recession defect by the newly forming bone technique. A: Buccal view of the 5-mm-deep and 4-mm
wide recession defect at the mandibular right second premolar; B: Panoramic x-ray view of the area. A slight loss of interproximal bone at
distal site of the mandibular right second premolar can be noticed; C: Trapezoidal full thickness flap at receptor site 21 days after
surgical creation of alveolar socket; D: Occlusal view of donor site containing the healing tissue after rising of a full-thickness flap; E:
Positioning of the newly forming bone at the receptor site. A slight compression with saline solution embedded gauze warranted a close
contact between the graft material and the root surface; F: Flaps displaced coronally and sutured at the level of cementoenamel junction
without tension Table 1 describes RD, PD, CAL, BOP, PI, KGW and the percentage of root coverage observed at buccal sites at baseline and at
the postoperative examinations for all cases described. A reduction in RD was observed for all cases after 9 months, although Cases 2 and 3
showed a slight relapse from 3-month to 6- and 9-month examinations. All cases resulted in CAL gain and reduction or stability of PD
measures, as well as absence of plaque accumulation and BOP. Cases 2, 3 and 4 showed a slight increase in KGW, while no change was observed
in Case 1. Figure 3 shows the results obtained in Case 1, in which CAL gain was observed at interproximal and buccal sites, along with
reduction of RD from 5 mm at baseline to 2 mm after 9 months. Probing depth (PD), clinical attachment level (CAL), bleeding on probing
(BOP), plaque index (PI), recession depth (RD), keratinized gingiva width (KGW) and percentage of root coverage (%RC) observed at baseline
and postoperative examinations Buccal view of the area 9 months after treatment, suggesting gingival health and reduction of recession The
aim of this case series report is to present a new surgical technique that could favor both root coverage and periodontal regeneration,
especially at sites showing deep recession defects and attachment loss. The primary results obtained showed reduction of PD, BOP and plaque
index and gain of CAL after 9 months of follow-up. A slight increase in KGW was observed after treatment. These results are in agreement
with other studies1,5,7,8,19,23,24-29 which suggested reduction of probing depth and gain of attachment level in wide and deep recession
defects treated by GTR associated to a coronal positioned flap. Similar results were obtained by the use of β-TCP and 0.3 ng/mL rhPDGF-BB
under a collagen membrane for treatment of denuded roots, resulting in the formation of new cementum, periodontal ligament and alveolar bone
along with root coverage15. The main advantage of this novel technique is the use of autograft material containing osteogenic cells9,22
capable of regenerating periodontal tissues21 even in horizontal defects. Disadvantages of the technique include the necessity of performing
two surgical procedures in a short period of time, as well as the existence of two surgical sites at the graft surgery. Besides, patient is
required to present at least one condemned tooth or an alveolar ridge that allows the surgical creation of an alveolar socket. An important
issue was the difficulty in stabilizing the graft on the root surface, due to the convexity of roots and the absence of remaining walls to
support the graft. This was at least partially solved by performing suture of apical portions of the flaps prior to positioning of the
graft, which allowed more stability of the graft. The aim of the present technique is to achieve periodontal regeneration coronal to the
preexistent level along with root coverage. This is especially important at sites showing deep recession and dehiscence defects, when
conventional soft tissue grafts show limited results23,29. Many studies1,5,19,29 indicate that subepithelial connective tissue results in
greater complete and mean root coverage, and a greater increase in KGW than GTR techniques, with long-term stability of the results
obtained. However, at sites showing interproximal bone loss or deep dehiscence defects and severe attachment loss, regeneration of
periodontal tissues may be required to improve attachment support and, consequently, reduce recession depth7,26,29 without the formation of
a long junctional epithelium, as observed when defects with such features are treated by SCTGs10. Periodontal regeneration can only be
evaluated at the histologic level, which was not performed at the present study. However, previous histological studies performed in animal
models showed that NFBG is capable of forming new alveolar bone, cementum and periodontal ligament coronal to the base of the pre-existent
defect21. Since the healing tissue present at fresh alveolar sockets shows positive staining for collagen I, osteonectin, bone sialoprotein
and alkaline phosphatase activity9, it is possible that mesenchymal stem cells are available at the material, as suggested by other studies
investigating the presence of mesenchymal stem cells in periodontal ligament by using the same panel of markers3,6. Considering that one of
the main features of mesenchymal stem cells is plasticity3 and the healing tissue removed from alveolar sockets and transferred to
periodontal defects are able to form bone, periodontal ligament and cementum21, it seems reasonable to believe that mesenchymal stem cells
are present at the newly forming bone granulation tissue, which could explain its osteogenic properties9,21,22. The use of regenerative
techniques to achieve root coverage has been used for many years26. Trombelli, et al.27 (1995) showed that areas of 4-6 mm recessions
treated by guided tissue regeneration resulted in greater reduction of recession and probing depth, as well as greater gain of attachment
level than sites treated by free gingival grafts and coronally advanced flap. Other researchers have also demonstrated that the treatment of
large recession defects by GTR results in the formation of new alveolar bone, cementum and periodontal ligament coronal to the base of the
defect5,7,13,27,28, although unsatisfactory results were observed in shallow recession defects18. The percentage of root coverage obtained
by GTR varies from 16.7%-100%4,5,7,8,20,23,26,27, which are in agreement with results presented in this case report. In comparison with
subepithelial connective tissue grafts, GTR shows better results in reduction of probing depth and gain of attachment level, especially in
areas showing ≥5 mm of recession, and similar or slightly smaller reduction of recession1,19,24,29. The main factors associated with
incomplete root coverage are related to early exposition of the membrane and wide recessions2,4. These problems are overcome with the
present technique, since the use of barrier membranes is unnecessary due to the osteogenic properties of the material21. The use of
allografts in combination with barrier membranes improves the results obtained by the use of barrier membranes alone8,12 or subepithelial
connective graft1,24,29 in wide recession defects. Cases treated by bone grafts and GTR showed decreased probing depth at post-operative
evaluations, suggesting a reconstitution of biological width, without the formation of long junctional epithelium1,8,12,24,29. Considering
that in the present case a histological evaluation was not performed, reduction of probing depth and gain of attachment are suggestive of
regeneration of periodontal tissues. The primary results obtained in the present case series suggest that the technique is able to cover
denuded areas, along with reconstitution of biological width and gain of attachment level, especially in wide recession areas. Predictable
and long-term well succeeded cases of root coverage by the NFBT require a strict selection of patients and sites to be treated. Further
studies are necessary to compare the results obtained by the proposed technique with other conventional reconstructive periodontal plastic
surgeries, such as subepithelial connective tissue grafts and guided bone regeneration. The results obtained in the present clinical case
series suggest that NFBT can be an alternative to the treatment of deep and wide recession defects.
