Venous gas embolism is common after laparoscopic surgery but is only rarely of clinical relevance. We present a 52 year old woman undergoing
laparoscopic treatment for liver cysts, who also underwent cholecystectomy. She was successfully extubated. However, after a few minutes she
developed cardiac arrest due to a venous carbon dioxide (CO2) embolism as identified by transthoracic echocardiography and aspiration of
approximately 7 ml of gas from a central venous catheter. She was resuscitated and subsequently treated with hyperbaric oxygen to reduce the
size of remaining gas bubbles. Subsequently the patient developed one more episode of cardiac arrest but still made a full recovery. The
courses of events indicate that bubbles had persisted in the circulation for a prolonged period. We speculate whether insufficient CO2
flushing of the laparoscopic tubing, causing air to enter the peritoneal cavity, could have contributed to the formation of the
intravascular gas emboli. We conclude that persistent resuscitation followed by hyperbaric oxygen treatment after venous gas emboli
contributed to the elimination of intravascular bubbles and the favourable outcome for the patient. Laparoscopic surgery with carbon dioxide
(CO2) insufflation affects circulatory, pulmonary, renal, splanchnic, and endocrine functions but such perturbations are, most often, of
little clinical significance . Yet cardiac arrest has been reported following 2–20 of 100,000 laparoscopic procedures , and cardiac arrest
seems to be related to a vasovagal response following rapid peritoneal distension and gas embolism . Human and animal studies of
laparoscopic surgery indicate gas embolism in about half of the cases, as detected by transoesophageal echocardiography . Symptomatic
supportive care is the primary therapeutic modality for venous gas embolism (VGE), while hyperbaric oxygen therapy is the first line of
treatment for arterial gas embolism . Here, we report of a patient who survived significant gas embolism by aspiration of the embolus
followed by hyperbaric oxygen treatment. A female patient (52 years, 56 kg, ASA II) underwent laparoscopic marsupialization for liver cysts
and also cholecystectomy. The patient was undergoing treatment with thiazide diuretics and a renin-angiotensin inhibitor for hypertension
but had no other illnesses as evaluated by routine laboratory tests. The patient was pre-medicated with oral dexamethasone 4 mg. Anaesthesia
was induced with propofol 200 mg and maintained with propofol and remifentanil. After induction of anaesthesia, oral intubation was
facilitated with rocuronium 40 mg, which was increased to a total dose of 90 mg guided by ‘train of four’ . The ventilation was controlled
with an inspired oxygen fraction (FiO2) of 0.50, end-tidal tension of carbon dioxide (ET’CO2) was between 28 and 34 mmHg and a positive end-
expiratory pressure (PEEP) of 5 cm H2O. Blood pressure was monitored noninvasively on the right arm and oxygen saturation was measured by a
pulse oximeter. Four trocars were inserted in the abdomen and one was connected to a CO2 source (Fig. 1). Intra-abdominal pressure was
maintained < 12 mmHg with the patient in a head-up tilted position. During dissection, the surgeon used an ABC surgical system (Force Argon™
II; Valleylab™, Boulder, CO). When awake after the operation, the patient complained of nausea. After a few minutes, the patient developed
ventricular tachycardia and then pulseless electrical activity (PEA). Advanced resuscitation included uninterrupted manual compression,
immediate intravenous administration of 1 mg of adrenaline and 3 mg of atropine intravenously, followed by 1 mg of adrenaline every 2–4 min.
The patient was reintubated and received 100% oxygen. Transthoracic echocardiography showed minimal contraction of the ventricular walls.
Gas bubbles were seen to move from the inferior caval vein into the right atrium and ventricle. The patient was placed in Trendelenburg’s
position and a central venous catheter was placed through the internal jugular vein. Approximately 7 ml of gas was aspirated through the
catheter. Resuscitation was successful after 40 min and she was transferred to the intensive care unit (ICU) with assisted mechanical
ventilation: PEEP 13 cm H2O and a FiO2 of 1.0. Frothy pink sputum was seen in the tracheal tube and a chest X-ray showed bilaterally
pulmonary oedema (Fig. 2). Blood pressure was measured by a radial arterial catheter and maintained at 90/50 mmHg by intravenous infusion of
noradrenaline 25–50 μg/kg/h. Laparoscopic procedure. Trocars are inserted in the abdomen (not from the presented case, picture kindly
supplied by Dr. E. G. Hansen). X-ray of the chest of the patient in the presented case showing bilaterally pulmonary oedema. The patient was
referred to a nearby hospital and treated in a hyperbaric chamber at a pressure of 2.8 ATA. The patient was ventilated with 100% oxygen.
Within 2 h and 37 min, the fluid balance was 1000 ml positive and the inotropic medication was discontinued when systolic pressure was
140 mmHg. The patient was sedated with fentanyl 2 ml/h and propofol 20 ml/h and by then no longer had frothy pink sputum. When the pressure
was lowered to 1.9 ATA the patient developed non-sustained ventricular fibrillation followed by bradycardia. It was believed that the
ventricular fibrillation and subsequent cardiac arrest was a result of reperfusion rather than VGE and the hyperbaric treatment was
therefore terminated. The patient was referred to the ICU where, on arrival, she again developed cardiac arrest with PEA. Treatment was with
adrenaline 1 mg, atropine 3 mg, and uninterrupted manual compression while mechanical ventilation with 100% oxygen was continued.
Transthoracic echocardiography showed no movement of the ventricular walls and extracorporeal membrane oxygenation was considered, while
adrenaline administration was repeated every 2–4 min. The patient then went into ventricular fibrillation, but after one biphasic direct
current shock of 200 J, return of cardiac function was obtained after 18 min. The patient was then monitored according to a hypothermia
algorithm that included continuous ECG, a central venous catheter and an arterial catheter. Temperature was monitored using a Foley
catheter. Goals of treatment were a mean arterial pressure (MAP) of 65–100 mmHg (by continuous dopamine infusion, 2–10 μg/kg/min), heart
rate 40–90 min − 1, central venous pressure 2–10 mmHg, blood glucose 4.5–6.1 mmol/L, and diuresis > 1 mL/kg/h. Active cooling was initiated
with ice packs and infusion of 30 mL/kg of 4°C Ringer’s solution as well as continued therapeutic surface cooling using an Allon Thermowrap
TM (MTRE, Israel). The target core temperature was 32.5–35.5°C and it was maintained for 24 h with subsequent rewarming by 0.5°C per hour
until normothermia. Meanwhile, the patient was sedated to a Ramsey score 6 (propofol 0.3–4.0 mg/kg/h, fentanyl 100 μg/h) and paralysis
during muscle shivering (cisatracurium, 0.06–0.12 mg/kg/h) . On post-operative day (POD) 1, arterial blood gas analysis and chest X-ray
findings were normal. On POD 2, the patient was extubated and transferred to a cardiology unit and she made a full recovery on POD 4.
Repeated transthoracic echocardiography showed a normal ejection fraction, no valvulopathy, pulmonary hypertension, or pericardial
exudations, but a possible small ventricular septum defect. ECG showed no sign of infarction. Ultrasonography of the liver revealed no
sequelae and clinical neurological assessment was normal. The risk of iatrogenic gas embolism is low. Three cases per 100,000 may be in need
of hyperbaric treatment for gas embolisms and only 7/4,727,496 cases are described as being caused by laparoscopic surgery with
intraperitoneal insufflation of CO2. However, in the case presented here, the patient went through laparoscopic liver surgery and
cholecystectomy with an inherent risk of VGE, since liver veins are little prone to collapse in the supine position . The effect of VGE
depends on the rate of CO2 infusion and its volume . For adults, the potentially lethal volume is estimated at 200–300 ml or 3–5 mL/kg . The
effect VGE also depends on whether the patient is breathing spontaneously, yielding a negative thoracic pressure during inspiration and
hence facilitating air entrapment, or whether the patient is under positive pressure ventilation, possibly supplemented by PEEP. The
essential pathological factor is pulmonary gas embolism. Tachyarrhythmias are common following VGE and the electrocardiogram demonstrates a
right heart strain pattern as well as ST–T changes, and blood pressure decreases with cardiac output. Pulmonary symptoms following VGE
include dyspnoea, continuous coughing, and chest pain. Gasping for air reduces the intrathoracic pressure and may be a sign of air
entrapment. Pulmonary signs of VGE include rales, wheezing, and tachypnoea. The central nervous system may be affected by VGE by
cardiovascular collapse secondary to reduced cardiac output from right ventricular failure or myocardial ischemia, which rapidly results in
cerebral hypoperfusion . In the present case, the VGE did probably not pass the interventricular septum, as no gas was seen on the left side
of the heart and the patient recovered without any apparent neurological deficits despite three episodes of cardiac arrest and prolonged
resuscitation. The most widely used gas for laparoscopic procedures is CO2. CO2 is inexpensive, non-flammable and has the additional
advantage of being readily available. Since CO2 has a high Ostwald’s solubility coefficient in blood and tissue (L = 0.54 ml per ml whole
blood ), and since blood holds a high buffering capacity for CO2, VGE’s consisting of CO2 are quickly absorbed should they occur. When
insufflated into the abdominal cavity, CO2 diffuses across the peritoneum, and, more importantly, is carried by the circulation to the lungs
and expired. However, as demonstrated by SP Taylor and GM Hoffman, substantial amounts of air (containing 79% of the insoluble N2) may be
insufflated into the peritoneal cavity from the tubing, if the system is not adequately purged with CO2 gas before insertion . The VGE in
the present case may therefore be a combination of a CO2 and air embolism. Whether or not air contamination of the peritoneal cavity was a
matter of significance in the present case remains speculative, as we were not capable of measuring the gas content of the bubbles aspirated
through the central venous catheter. Although surgeons routinely purge laparoscopic tubing systems with CO2 gas, as was the standard
operational procedure in the present case, surgeons and anaesthetists should be aware of the risk of simultaneous CO2 and air embolisms
during these procedures. In the case of air bubble contamination during laparoscopic procedures, AB Branger et al. have demonstrated that
microscopic N2 bubbles (50 nl) having a cylindrical shape in the capillary vessels will dissolve in > 300 min. Larger emboli, in the size of
millilitres, would require even longer resorption time if left untreated, and air bubbles have been observed to persist within the
vasculature for more than 48 h . The molar flux of any permeating ideal gas species present in blood and tissues obeys Fick’s first law of
diffusion whereby each gas will have a flux through the surface area of the gas emboli, driven by the partial pressure difference between
the inside of the emboli and surrounding tissue and blood. It is conceivable that larger gas emboli of CO2 may persist in blood vessels and
tissues long enough for them to equilibrate with other gases present in blood and tissues (i.e. oxygen, nitrogen and water vapour), thereby
increasing the bubble resolution time considerably, as demonstrated by Barrera et al. . During anaerobic metabolism, such as with gas
embolism blocking microcirculation, large amounts of CO2 would be liberated from bicarbonate stores of blood and tissue, resulting in high
levels of local PCO2, thereby reducing the partial pressure gradient of CO2 from the emboli to blood, which could contribute considerably to
the bubble volume or reduce the rate of CO2 disappearance from the emboli . If large iatrogenic VGE causes hemodynamic changes, treatment in
a hyperbaric chamber combined with 100% oxygen breathing is well indicated . If available, such treatment will often consist of compression
of the patient to 285 kPa (i.e. 2.8 atm abs) breathing oxygen. The purpose is to 1) reduce the intravascular bubble size by compression of
the gas phase according to Boyles Law, 2) maximize gas partial pressure gradients from bubbles and tissues to blood thereby increasing the
speed of bubble elimination, and 3) to introduce systemic hyperoxia in an otherwise hypoxic tissue. The first goal is almost immediately
achieved by compression regardless of the breathing mixture used, whereas oxygen breathing would achieve the latter two goals. An arterial
partial pressure of oxygen greater than 2000 mmHg is readily achieved. Hyperoxia also increases the distance of oxygen diffusion in tissues
and offsets the embolic insult to the microvasculature. Hyperbaric oxygen is the treatment of choice for arterial gas embolism . Time is
important, but delayed treatment in a hyperbaric chamber may still be indicated to ameliorate the patient’s condition and reduce long term
neurological sequelae. Apparently, the patient benefited from the hyperbaric treatment. The courses of events suggest that bubbles had
persisted in the circulation for a prolonged period, and that persistent resuscitation followed by hyperbaric treatment after VGE
contributed to their elimination. The second cardiac arrest might have been avoided, if the pressure in the chamber had been increased
instead of reducing the pressure to 1.9 ATA. The patient has given verbal and written consent to the publication of her case report. The
author(s) declare that they have no competing interests. OH contributed to the drafting of the manuscript including interpretation of
observed clinical data as well as search of and adding of references. TJ contributed in writing and editing of manuscript, search of and
adding references, correspondance with co-authors and adjustments according to comments from editors from SJTREM and biomed central, adding
figure 2 and observed clinical data. ECJ contributed to the drafting of the manuscript including interpretation of observed clinical data as
well as search of and adding of references. HR contributed to the drafting of the manuscript including interpretation of observed clinical
data. NGH contributed to the interpretation of observed clinical data. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The authors wish
to thank Professor Niels H. Secher, medical secretary Karen O’Neill and medical translator Lisbet Guhle for comments.
