Sinus histiocytosis with massive lymphadenopathy (SHML) was first described in 1969 by Rosai and Dorfman . It is a rare inflammatory
disorder with key clinicopathological characteristics such as emperipolesis and positive immunostaining for S-100 protein and CD68.
Rosai–Dorfman disease (RDD) is primarily manifested in the lymph nodes, yet extranodal disease has been reported in as many as half of
patients . Such cases affect primarily the head and neck, upper respiratory tract, and central nervous system, although the disease has been
found in almost every organ system. The gastrointestinal tract is rarely involved, and only two cases of primary involvement of the pancreas
have been previously described [4, 5]. We present a 74-year-old African–American female who presented to another hospital with low-grade
periumbilical pain which she described as “bloating,” but she had experienced no weight loss. Computed tomography of the abdomen
demonstrated a mass in the head of the pancreas. There was no radiographic evidence (See Fig. 1) of lymphadenopathy or obvious metastatic
disease. The mass was located in the uncinate process and appeared closely adherent to the superior mesenteric vein (SMV) and superior
mesenteric artery (SMA). The patient denied nausea or vomiting and was not jaundiced, and her CA 19-9 was within normal limits. The patient
was referred for surgical evaluation. After review of her imaging and clinical presentation, it was determined that this mass was suspicious
for malignancy. After discussing options with the patient, she opted for surgical intervention. The patient underwent a pylorus-sparing
pancreaticoduodenectomy after preoperative medical evaluation and optimization. Intraoperatively, there was no evidence of distant spread,
and the mass appeared locally resectable. However, the portal vein was intimately adherent to the specimen and was resected due to
friability and bleeding. The portal vein was reconstructed in our standard fashion with primary anastamosis, and the rest of the resection
and reconstruction were uneventful.Fig. 1Computed tomography demonstrating a subtle mass in the head of the pancreas, posterior to the
portal confluence Computed tomography demonstrating a subtle mass in the head of the pancreas, posterior to the portal confluence The
specimen contained a poorly circumscribed mass centered within the uncinate process of the pancreas and abutting the vascular groove. It was
firm and, on cut section, consisted of yellow–white homogeneous parenchyma. The greatest dimension measured 2 cm in diameter. The lesion
grossly appeared to infiltrate the wall of the adherent SMV. The remaining pancreas was grossly unremarkable without evidence of additional
lesions or disease. At low magnification, the mass was infiltrative and composed of a polygonal-to-spindle cell population of histiocytes
(pale areas) and scattered small- to medium-sized lymphoid aggregates (darker areas). The histiocytes demonstrated an insidious invasive
pattern as they subtly penetrated and entrapped the surrounding normal pancreatic elements and extended through the media of the SMA. The
histiocytes had abundant, granular eosinophilic cytoplasm with a round-to-oval nucleus. Emperipolesis was conspicuous and readily
identified, particularly within lymphatic-like spaces (Fig. 2, inset). Immunohistochemical labeling for CD-68 and S-100 protein (Fig. 3) was
diffusely positive within the histiocytic population confirming the diagnosis of extranodal Rosai–Dorfman disease. Immune stain for IgG4 was
noncontributory due to high background. Twelve lymph nodes were also benign.Fig. 2Hematoxylin and eosin-stained section demonstrating two
distinct cell populations of polygonal- to spindled-shaped histiocytes (pale areas) and scattered lymphoid aggregates (dark areas). Inset:
An area of lymphocyte engulfment by a lesional histiocyte consistent with emperipolesisFig. 3Immunohistochemical labeling for S-100 protein
was diffusely positive within the lesional histiocytes Hematoxylin and eosin-stained section demonstrating two distinct cell populations of
polygonal- to spindled-shaped histiocytes (pale areas) and scattered lymphoid aggregates (dark areas). Inset: An area of lymphocyte
engulfment by a lesional histiocyte consistent with emperipolesis Immunohistochemical labeling for S-100 protein was diffusely positive
within the lesional histiocytes Rosai and Dorfman first described a clinicopathological entity separate from histiocytosis X in 1969 and
named it SHML. Rosai–Dorfman disease is characterized by emperipolesis or lymphophagocytosis, where affected nodes show expansion of the
sinuses by histiocytes with an abundant pale eosinophilic cytoplasm often containing lymphocytes within. All cases involving the
gastrointestinal tract have strongly expressed CD68 and S-100 protein . Classically, patients present with painless lymphadenopathy, which
is frequently self-limited in course. The disease presents in children and young adults though it can affect all ages. There is a slight
predilection for male patients (58 %) and African–American ethnicity . Its etiology is yet to be determined, though current thinking
attributes it to an immunologic process. Occasionally, patients have had an indolent course where the disease has spread retrograde from the
lymph nodes into other organ systems. Notably, one case report described the 17-year-long course of a patient who presented at 11 years of
age with nasal disease and ultimately died of diffuse involvement of his lungs, kidneys, and pancreas . Although, the disease was originally
defined as a nodal disorder, extranodal involvement has been reported in as many as half of all patients . Multiple organ systems have been
involved in extranodal disease, notably the head and neck, eyes and orbits, and the central nervous system. The gastrointestinal system is
rarely involved, and only two cases of primary pancreatic involvement have been reported. Esquivel first reported a 48-year-old
African–American female with a 3.5-cm mass in the body of the pancreas, who underwent a distal pancreatectomy. This patient did not have
lymphadenopathy, and preoperative biopsies had been inconclusive . Zivin reported a second case in 2009, a 63-year-old African–American
female with obstructive jaundice and weight loss, who was found to have a mass in the head of the pancreas. Preoperative fine-needle
aspiration was negative for malignancy . It is important to distinguish patients with RDD from those with autoimmune pancreatitis (AP). In
addition to chronic pancreatitis, the characteristic histologic features of AP are dense lymphoplasmacytic infiltrate centered on the
pancreatic ducts, venulitis, and interstitial fibrosis. Increased numbers of IgG4+ plasma cells are also seen in most cases of AP . The
pathologic findings in our patient were classic for RDD, and the IgG4 stain was noncontributory due to high background. Furthermore, IgG4+
cells have been documented in sclerosing diseases, such as AP, but the association between IgG4+ plasma cells and RDD is not yet well
understood. Two studies evaluating this characteristic have been reported. In extranodal (pulmonary) RDD, 10–70 % of plasma cells were IgG4+
. In patients with cutaneous RDD, the mean number of IgG4+ plasma cells was 349 cells/HPF . This area needs further study in larger patient
populations before conclusions may be drawn in individual cases. Patients who present with a pancreas mass, abdominal discomfort, weight
loss, and malaise present a challenge to clinicians evaluating them for malignant process as this rare entity may present in an
indistinguishable manner. In patients whose biopsy results are inconclusive or negative for malignancy despite a clinical picture of
neoplasm, performing immunohistochemical labeling may be a way to discard RDD from the differential although the vast majority of patients
presenting in such a fashion will have their diagnosis made upon resection. Dr. Romero Arenas wrote the manuscript, selected images, and
made editions/revisions. Dr. Singhi provided remarks on the pathological findings and provided the images. Dr. Hruban and Dr. Cameron
provided revisions and oversight in the manuscript preparation. The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest to disclose.
This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and
reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
