Juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) is essentially a benign neoplasm arising from any site on the body; however, there has so far been only one
report of JXG located on the chest wall involving a rib. This report presents a rare case finally diagnosed as JXG based on
histopathological and immunohistochemical examinations. Pediatric chest wall tumors are relatively rare and include a variety of diseases.
Malignant chest wall tumors, especially Ewing sarcoma and the primitive neuroectodermal family, are found more frequently than benign
lesions. Therefore, a histopathological examination is often required in case the definite diagnosis is not revealed during clinical course.
This report presents a rare case finally diagnosed as juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG) based on a histopathological examination, although
mesenchymal hamartoma (MH) was suspected from the clinical course and the radiological examinations. A 3-month-old female, with no
complications at birth, was referred to our hospital for an enlarging right chest wall mass that had not responded to antibiotic therapy. A
physical examination demonstrated an approximately 5 cm subcutaneous mass on the right chest wall, accompanied by skin redness and
tenderness. Laboratory examinations demonstrated leukocytosis (11,000/μl) and high levels of CRP (4.8 mg/dl), whereas tumor markers showed
levels within the normal range. A chest radiograph showed an increased radiolucent lesion on the right 8th rib. Chest computed tomography
(CT) revealed a multicystic mass (28 × 27 mm) with enhanced homogeneously (Fig. 1a). Three-dimensional CT image indicated an osteolytic
finding (Fig. 1b). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed an enhanced thickened septum in the tumor (Fig. 1c). These findings suggested
MH. However, malignant neoplasms, such as Ewing sarcoma, neuroblastoma, fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and chondroblastoma, which are also
characterized by cystic osteolytic findings, were also considered as alternative diagnoses. The tumor showed self-destruction with the
discharge of a serous fluid and it decreased dramatically in size throughout the clinical course. The skin redness and tenderness also
gradually disappeared. A benign tumor was strongly suggested by the sudden regression; however, tumor resection was performed to obtain a
definite diagnosis. Poorly demarcated fibrous tissue was located subcutaneously, with slight adhesion to the surface of the 8th rib. The
tumor was excised with the surrounding tissue.Fig. 1Chest CT demonstrated a multicystic mass, sized 28 × 27 mm and enhanced homogeneously
(a). A three-dimensional CT image clarified an osteolytic finding (← arrow) (b). A MRI revealed an enhanced thickened septum in the tumor
(c) Chest CT demonstrated a multicystic mass, sized 28 × 27 mm and enhanced homogeneously (a). A three-dimensional CT image clarified an
osteolytic finding (← arrow) (b). A MRI revealed an enhanced thickened septum in the tumor (c) The histological findings showed cells with
foamy cytoplasm in a sheet-like or lobular-like aggregation in the interstitium. Lymphocyte infiltration was observed on the periphery. The
cells were composed of histiocytes (Fig. 2a, b). These findings suggested that histiocytic granulation tissue are accompanied by fibrotic
change. There were no atypical cells and findings are consistent with MH. Immunohistochemical investigations have shown that the cells to be
positive for Kp-1 (Fig. 2c), CD163 (Fig. 2d), focally positive for Factor 13a (Fig. 2e, f), whereas they were negative for S100 (Fig. 2g),
CD1a (Fig. 2h). The histological and immunohistochemical findings indicated that the chest wall tumor was a JXG. The postoperative course
was uneventful and there was no evidence of recurrence during a 1-year follow-up at the out-patient clinic.Fig. 2The histological findings
showed foamy cytoplasmed cells aggregated sheet-like or lobular-like into the interstitium. The lymphocyte infiltration was observed on the
periphery. The cells were composed from histiocyte (a H&E, ×40; b H&E, ×100) In the immunohistochemical examinations, the cells were
positive for Kp-1 (c immunohistochemistry of Kp-1, ×40), CD163 (d immunohistochemistry of CD163, ×40), focally positive for Factor X111a (e
Immunohistochemistry of Factor X111a, ×40, f Immunohistochemistry of Factor X111a, ×100), whereas the cells were negative for S100 (g
immunohistochemistry of S100, ×40) and CD1a (g immunohistochemistry of CD1a, ×40) The histological findings showed foamy cytoplasmed cells
aggregated sheet-like or lobular-like into the interstitium. The lymphocyte infiltration was observed on the periphery. The cells were
composed from histiocyte (a H&E, ×40; b H&E, ×100) In the immunohistochemical examinations, the cells were positive for Kp-1 (c
immunohistochemistry of Kp-1, ×40), CD163 (d immunohistochemistry of CD163, ×40), focally positive for Factor X111a (e Immunohistochemistry
of Factor X111a, ×40, f Immunohistochemistry of Factor X111a, ×100), whereas the cells were negative for S100 (g immunohistochemistry of
S100, ×40) and CD1a (g immunohistochemistry of CD1a, ×40) Pediatric chest wall tumors are relatively rare and only account for approximately
1.8 % of all solid tumors in pediatric patients . Benign tumors, such as MH, Langerhans cell histocytosis (LCH), aneurismal bone cyst and
osteoma are much rarer than malignant tumors. MH is the most common benign chest wall tumor with an inner cystic component. The rib is the
most common site of predilection . Osteolytic finding are frequently observed in malignant tumors such as neuroblastoma, primitive
neuroectodermal tumor, hematological tumors and primary soft tissue tumors such as Ewing sarcoma, fibrosarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and
chondroblastoma. Whereas this is rare in benign tumors, MH demonstrates inner bone destruction and bulging . MH arises from the ribs and
forms a subcutaneous mass along the chest wall in the neonatal period or infancy. The vast majority of such cases are located on the chest
wall, arise in the ribs and are often noted by swelling of the chest wall or detected incidentally by a chest radiograph . The chest X-ray
findings show a large expansive mass that has well-defined sclerotic margins. CT demonstrates a heterogeneous extrapleural tumor mixed with
a solitary component and a cystic component filled with fluid characteristic of hemorrhaging. MRI also demonstrates a heterogeneous middle
signal intensity mass in both T1 and T2 weighed images [1, 2]. MH contains solid and cystic lesion in which there is proliferation of
fibroblastic cells, osteocytes, chondrocytes and hemorrhagic cysts. The differential diagnosis includes chondrosarcoma, aneurysmal bone
cyst, chondroma and osteosarcoma. However, these diseases can generally be ruled out without performing immunohistochemistry. Most of the MH
demonstrate the spontaneous regression. The present case showed spontaneous tumor regression and an osteolytic finding in the clinical
course, which was quite similar to the typical clinical course of MH, although the tumor size was smaller . On the other hand, JXG is known
as a benign histolytic tumor, which develops within several months of birth and regresses spontaneously. JXG arises from any site of the
body and is predominantly located on the surface of the skin, in particular, on the face, extremities and the trunk. In addition, this tumor
is sometimes detected in the deep dermis or muscular layer, and has been found in organ tissues . A review of 174 JXG cases found that 28
cases (16 %) were solitary subcutaneous or deep soft tissue masses, and only 5 (2.9 %) cases arose from bone lesions. Only three of those
cases were centered in the bone and occurred in the temporal-petrous bone in two and the lumbar vertebra in the other . Only one report has
so far described a case involving a rib . However, this case did not have any obvious osteolytic findings as was observed in the current
case. The prognosis of JXG is essentially good. However, despite its self-regressive nature, a tumor resection is frequently conducted to
obtain a definite diagnosis in most cases even if located on the skin. Histiocytic nodular infiltration in all the layers of the dermis,
accompanied by foamy cells and Touton multinucleated giant cells, are also observed . An osteolytic finding due to JXG is extremely rare,
therefore, it is hard to obtain a definitive diagnosis by only radiological examinations. Surgical excision was required for the definite
diagnosis in the current case, to determine the further therapeutic course . LCH should be differentiated from JXG in histopathological
findings . LCH develops commonly in the infant and toddler period. The most common sites of involvement are the bone, lung, central nervous
system, liver, thymus, skin and lymph nodes. Up to 90 % of LCH in children occurs in bone . Any bony lesion can be involved in LCH, whereas
the skull is the most frequently involved, followed by the pelvis, spine, mandible and ribs [11, 12].There have been several LCH case
reports involving the sternum . The X-ray findings demonstrate an osteolytic lesion with relatively sharp margins and a punched out
appearance. The histopathological findings show the proliferation of dendritic cells and also demonstrate giant cells similar to JXG.
Therefore, an immunohistochemical examination is useful for further investigation to distinguish these tumors [8, 14]. JXG demonstrates
positive in CD68 and factor 13a in immunohistochemical studies, whereas negative staining for CD1a and S-100. On the other hand, LCH shows
all positive CD68, CD1a and S-100 [8, 14]. The prognosis of LCH varies from spontaneous regression to cases with poor outcomes, especially
with multi-organ involvement. There is no standardized treatment modality for LCH. Solitary bone involvement can often regress spontaneously
or after percutaneous needle biopsy. Surgical curettage and direct intralesional injection of methylprednisolone are reported as effective
therapies [15, 16]. The clinical difference between JXG and LCH is that the common site: skin JXG versus bone LCH [6, 17]. The percentage of
spontaneous regression is higher in JXG than LCH which could affect the prognosis. The present case revealed osteolytic findings in the
image studies, which made it difficult for a definitive diagnosis. Finally, histopathological examinations with immunohistochemistry have
been reported to be quite useful for distinguishing between JXG and LCH [6, 8]. In conclusion, a high proportion of the pediatric chest wall
tumors are generally malignant. It is intolerable for clinicians to observe a growing mass over the long term without a definite diagnosis.
Therefore, an incisional biopsy should not be delayed in order to achieve a definitive diagnosis and to initiate a prompt therapeutic
course. JXG is essentially a benign neoplasm arising from any site on the body, whereas, there has been only one report of JXG located on
the chest wall involving a rib. The present case demonstrated osteolytic findings, therefore, surgical excision was conducted to rule out
the presence of malignant neoplasm and an immunohistochemical examination was useful for distinguishing the lesion from LCH. JXG should
therefore be considered in the differential diagnosis of a pediatric chest wall tumor. This article is distributed under the terms of the
Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s)
and the source are credited.
