Secondary radiation-induced cancers are rare but well-documented as long-term side effects of radiation in large populations of breast
cancer survivors. Multiple neoplasms are rare. We report a case of esophageal adenocarcinoma in a patient treated previously for breast
cancer and clear cell carcinoma of the kidney. A 56 year-old non smoking woman, with no alcohol intake and no familial history of cancer;
followed in the National Institute of Oncology of Rabat Morocco since 1999 for breast carcinoma, presented on consultation on January 2011
with dysphagia. Breast cancer was treated with modified radical mastectomy, 6 courses of chemotherapy based on CMF regimen and radiotherapy
to breast, inner mammary chain and to pelvis as castration. Less than a year later, a renal right mass was discovered incidentally. Enlarged
nephrectomy realized and showed renal cell carcinoma. A local and metastatic breast cancer recurrence occurred in 2007. Patient had 2 lines
of chemotherapy and 2 lines of hormonotherapy with Letrozole and Tamoxifen assuring a stable disease. On January 2011, the patient presented
dysphagia. Oesogastric endoscopy showed middle esophagus stenosing mass. Biopsy revealed adenocarcinoma. No evidence of metastasis was
noticed on computed tomography and breast disease was controlled. Palliative brachytherapy to esophagus was delivered. Patient presented
dysphagia due to progressive disease 4 months later. Jejunostomy was proposed but the patient refused any treatment. She died on July 2011.
We present here a multiple neoplasm in a patient with no known family history of cancers. Esophageal carcinoma is most likely induced by
radiation. However the presence of a third malignancy suggests the presence of genetic disorders. Esophageal cancer is the sixth most common
malignancy worldwide with an estimated incidence of over than 300,000 new cases in 2011 . It is more frequent in males with a current male-
to-female ratio estimated 7-10: 1 . Several meta-analyses have shown that tobacco and alcohol increase the risk of esophageal cancer
especially the squamous cell histology . The role of radiation as a risk factor is not well established. Evidence from previous case reports
and cohort studies raised the possibility of a relation between radiation therapy and esophageal cancer . There is a particular interest in
the late side effects of radiation therapy for breast cancer because of the large number of women who receive such treatment each year . In
a large multicenter retrospective series examining the risk of secondary non hematological malignancies in 376,825 breast cancer survivors,
there were 3,301 patients with potentially radiotherapy-associated cancers, among them 343 patients presented esophageal carcinoma with a
standardized incidence ratio (SIR) of 1.44 . Another large cohort of 220,806 women of the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program focusing on esophageal cancer after local breast cancer, diagnosed and treated between 1973 and 1993, showed that the SIR of
esophageal cancer after radiation therapy was 54 percent higher than in the general population . Second malignancies reported to be
associated with renal cell carcinoma (antecedent, concurrent or subsequent) include bladder, prostate, rectal, and lung cancer as well as
non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma and melanoma . Breast cancer also reported to be associated with renal cancer. In a series of 8,667 patients treated
for renal cell carcinoma collected in the Swedish family database; 677 had a second primary malignancy with SIR of 1.55; there were 44
breast cancers with SIR 1.69. However, breast cancer was not associated with an increased risk of developing upper gastro-intestinal track
carcinomas . Second primary malignancies among cancer survivors account for 16% of all cancers. Few data currently exist regarding the
molecular mechanisms for second primary cancers and other late outcomes after cancer treatment . This is a report of subsequent three
malignancies, breast cancer, renal cell carcinoma and potentially radiation induced esophageal adenocarcinoma. A 56 year-old non-smoking
north African woman, with no familial history of cancer, followed at the National Institute of Oncology of Rabat Morocco since March 1999
for breast cancer in premenopausal setting; presented in consultation on January 2011 with dysphagia. Her past medical history was not
significant for any gastrointestinal disorders or alcohol intake. Her initial breast cancer was ductal infiltrating carcinoma of the two
lower quadrants of the right breast, classified T4b N2 M0 according to TNM classification adopted by the AJCC, grade 2 of SBR (Scaff Bloom
and Richardson), with vascular invasion and positive hormone receptors. She underwent modified radical mastectomy then 6 courses of adjuvant
chemotherapy with CMF regimen cyclophosphamide 500 mg/m2 metotrexate 500 mg/m2 and 5FU 500 mg/m2. Adjuvant radiotherapy then was delivered
50 grays to the right breast, upper clavicular and the inner right mammary nodes. The patient received also 12 grays radiation to pelvis as
castration. No adjuvant oral hormone therapy was given. Treatment achieved on August 1999. On April 2000 an incidental right renal mass,
measuring 6 cm, discovered by abdominal ultrasound. Enlarged right nephrectomy was performed and the diagnosis of clear cell carcinoma of
the kidney was done. On 2007, the patient presented local breast recurrence and distant relapse to bone and the pleura confirmed by a biopsy
of skin nodules in mastectomy area. Both ER and PR were positive (90% and 100% respectively). HER 2 was negative. Chemotherapy with AC
regimen as first line treatment (doxorubicin 60 mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide 600 mg/m2 was given with progression after 3 cycles.
Docetaxel/capecitabine regimen was given as second line treatment for a total of 8 courses. A partial response then stabilization were
achieved. Letrozole was given as maintenance therapy with ibandronate. Disease was stable until October 2010 where the patient presented
bone progression. Patient was given Tamoxifen as second line hormonotherapy and remains stable. On January 2011 she presented dysphagia.
Oesogastric endoscopy showed middle un-crossable esophagus stenosing mass. CT (computed tomography) scan showed the esophageal stenosis and
stable pleural and lung breast cancer metastasis (Figure 1). Biopsy of the esophageal mass revealed an adenocarcinoma with dissociated cells
(Figure 2). Immunochemistry was negative for hormone receptors and HER 2. Cytokeratines 7 and 20 were positives (Figure 3). No evidence of
distant metastases or breast cancer progression on CT scan and markers was detected. Palliative brachytherapy to esophagus was delivered.
Patient presented dysphagia due to progressive disease 4 months later. Jejunostomy was proposed but the patient refused any treatment. She
died on July 2011 due to a esophageal progressive disease. CT scan of circumferential thickening on thoracic esophagus. Adenocarcinoma with
dissociated cells (HE, Gx100 and Gx400). Immunolabelling CK7 and CK20 positive (Gx400). Experimental data has proven the role of radiation
in developing esophageal carcinoma, induced by continuous gamma irradiation . Also based on data from the cohort of Japanese survivors of
the atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki, esophageal cancers have been conclusively related to ionizing radiation exposure . In human,
the first case described was reported by Slaughter in 1957, 27 years of latency after radiation. It was of adenocarcinoma histological
subtype . Since then case reports described mainly the squamous cell carcinoma subtype . In two previous large cohorts reporting data from
the SEER, published in 1999 and 2006, there was an increased risk of developing esophageal cancer after breast cancer radiation . In the
first report, the risk increased with time, reaching a standardized incidence ratio of 5.42 for esophageal squamous cell carcinoma 10 years
after radiotherapy. A less definitive increasing trend was evident for esophageal adenocarcinoma; the relative risk after 10 years was 4.22
. In the second report, women treated with radical mastectomy and radiation had an estimated relative risks of 2.83 (95% confidence
interval: 1.35, 5.92) and 2.17 (95% confidence interval: 1.67, 4.02) for squamous cell esophageal cancer at 5–9 and ≥10 years, respectively.
No significant increase in risk was found for adenocarcinomas. In the same report esophageal carcinoma risk increases only for the upper
(cervical) and middle (thoracic) third of the esophagus. In contrast, the risk for the lowest (abdominal) third of the esophagus was only
not significantly increased . Similar data were obtained from Dutch and Scandinavian registry cohorts . Our patient presented adenocarcinoma
of the middle esophagus. She fits some criteria of radiation induced cancers as previously described by Chudecki in early seventies, which
are: history of previous irradiation, cancer occurring within the irradiated area and a long latent interval between irradiation and
development of cancer that is over than 10 years in our case . However the presence of a third malignancy (renal cell carcinoma) concurrent
to breast cancer could suggest the presence of genetic disorders predisposing to such late side effects of radiation. There are several
genetic syndrome associated with multiple neoplasms, such as BRCA mutation, Li-Fraumeni syndrome and Cowden disease . Syndrome-associated
cancers usually develop at younger-than-usual ages, associated with a family history of developing metachronous tumors at high frequencies
throughout life . However neither the clinical presentation of our patient, nor her familial histories are typical of one of those known
syndromes. Not all previously radiated patients or given chemotherapy experience second malignancies. Late effects of treatments may be
modified by genetic penetrance, interaction between gene and environment and genes interactions . Individual variations of pharmacodynamics
and pharmacokinetics of drug metabolizing enzymes such as glutathione S-transferase, cytochrome P450s and thiopurine methyltrans-ferases,
may influence the occurrence of therapy-related malignancies . In a series published by Relling and al, of children affected with leukemia
and treated with prophylactic cerebral radiotherapy, children who had genetic defect of catabolism of thiopurine and high metabolism of
thioguanine were more likely to present secondary brain tumors . Also there are few data supporting the role of polymorphism of DNA repair
in cancer related treatments susceptibility . Other factors that may influence the occurrence of radiation related cancers are genomic
instability, epigenetic phenomena and bystander effects . In our context we couldn’t realize genetic and pharmacogenic researches because
they are not available. Some charred etiologic factors such as tobacco and alcohol intake are known to be associated with multiple cancers
as lung, bladder, upper gastro-intestinal tract, breast, pancreas and kidney . Our patient hadn’t been exposed to such factors. Concerning
the association of esophageal cancer with renal carcinoma, it was rarely reported. In a large cohort of 766 renal cell carcinomas, where 118
patients had second malignancies, only 3 had cancer of the upper gastro-intestinal tract . In other large series of the Mayo clinic in 2,722
patients with renal cell carcinoma, the papillary carcinoma histology was associated significantly with multiple neoplasms . We report here
a rare case of secondary esophageal carcinoma in a previously treated patient for breast cancer and renal cell carcinoma. The isolation of
one causative factor leading to cancer is difficult. We suggest that esophageal carcinoma is more likely radiation induced. However the
occurrence of three subsequent cancers suggest strongly the presence of genetic susceptibility. Careful patient selection, thorough
treatment planning and modern radiation equipment could obviously reduce the dose to the surrounding tissues and thus decrease the incidence
of secondary malignancies radiation induced in predisposed populations. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next of kin
for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. The authors report no conflicts of interests. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the
paper. Authors have equally contributed to this paper. SR was involved in the management of that patient, the analysis of the data and the
literature research and wrote the manuscript. FR, NK and NA were involved in the endoscopic diagnosis and management of nutritional support.
GR was involved in the management of the patient and revision of the manuscript. MA, SL and AM helped with the literature research. RL
performed radiological diagnosis. F R helped with the final editing of the manuscript. HM and HE approved the treatment and analyzed the
literature data. All authors read and approved the manuscript.
