The current paper describes a case of prostatic adenocarcinoma metastatic to the skin presenting as an extrammamary Paget's disease, a very
rare and poorly characterised morphological entity. We report a case of prostatic carcinoma metastatic to skin showing a pattern of
extramammary Paget's disease which has not been clearly illustrated in the literature Case presentation: A 63 year-old man with prostatic
adenocarcinoma developed cutaneous metastases after 16 years. The inguinal metastases were sessile and 'keratotic.' The tumour displayed
solid, glandular areas as well as a polypoid region suggestive of extramammary Paget's disease were identified. We review the diagnostic
criteria that have led to the correct histopathological diagnosis in this case. A differential diagnosis of the pagetoid spread in the skin
and various forms of cutaneous metastases determined by a prostatic adenocarcinoma as well as the role of immunohistochemistry in
establishing the prostatic origin are presented in the context of this case. Although, morphologically the cells presented in the skin
deposits were not characteristic for adenocarcinoma of prostate, immunohistochemistry for PSA and PSAP suggested a prostatic origin. The
virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1395450057455276 Prostate adenocarcinoma
is one of the most common cancers in Australia. The Melbourne Collaborative Cohort Study revealed that 8.4% of the subjects enrolled in the
study developed over 15 years prostatic adenocarcinoma and more than 10% of these patients died . While some long-term survivors develop an
indolent disease without dissemination others develop early or even late metastases. Secondary deposits associated with prostatic
adenocarcinoma are located with predilection in the bone system while skin metastasis represents an exceptional event . Evaluation of these
skin lesions should always include a thorough clinical examination, past history and histopathological evaluation. In some patients the
history of prostatic adenocarcinoma is absent and in others the histology is not characteristic for a prostatic origin or the patients might
have had cancers with various origins. In these cases, immunohistochemistry is an invaluable tool, the most commonly used markers being
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) and prostate acid phosphatase (PSAP) . Skin metastasis determined by a prostate adenocarcinoma may display a
variety of patterns including the extrammamary Paget’s disease. However, at the present time, we do not understand the implication of this
morphology for the aggressiveness of the primary cancer and the general outlook of the patient. Initially, a 63 year-old male was diagnosed
with locally metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma, moderately differentiated, Gleason score 3 + 3 = 6 (T3NxM0). However, no prostatectomy was
performed after the initial clinical diagnosis. Subsequently, the patient elected to receive radiation therapy and long-term flutamide. A
bone scan performed after eight years revealed no proliferative lesions. However, at 16 years after the initial diagnosis he was admitted to
dermatology clinic with an eruption of multiple tan keratotic polypoidal lesions located on his scalp, abdomen and bilateral groin areas.
Bilateral inguinal lymphadenopathy was also noted. Clinical and radiological evaluation revealed an irregularly enlarged prostate. The MRI
showed abdominal lympadenopathy. Several atypical areas were detected in bone pelvis but a clear diagnosis of bone metastasis was not
possible. However, no other masses were detected elsewhere. Immediately prior to his anatomo-pathological evaluation, the patient developed
macroscopic haematuria, overflow urinary incontinence and renal failure with increased creatinine. The general status of the patient did not
allow a prostatic biopsy and the patient was transferred for palliative care and expired after three weeks. However, during his hospital
stay the PSA level increased from 24.3 ng/ml to 46.3 ng/ml. A skin biopsy of a fibroepithelial-like lesion located in the right lower
abdominal quadrant (inguinal area) was performed a diagnosis of skin metastasis was made. Histopathological evaluation of this lesion
revealed several patterns of metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma. The dominant feature was represented by solid and glandular areas. In
addition, large areas of hyperplastic epidermis revealed clear tumour cells suggestive of extramammary Paget’s disease (EMPD) (Figure 1;
Figure 2). Skin and subcutis showing hyperplastic epidermis with “clear cells” suggestive of EMPD. The “shoulder” of the lesion reveals no
epidermal involvement. Hyperplastic epidermis showing massive infiltration by “clear cells” suggestive of EMPD. The skin and subcutis
represent the site for a large variety of epithelial stromal and lymphovascular tumours but also metastatic deposits are identified at this
site. Thus metastases from most internal organs and breast have been described in the skin. The real incidence of skin metastasis determined
by internal organs is difficult to be ascertained with precision but it seems to be between 2.8 and 5% . In this context, prostate
adenocarcinoma metastatic to the skin is an exceptional occurrence. Clinical research conducted in 4020 patients with cancer has revealed
207 cases of metastatic prostate carcinoma but none of the prostate cancer patients developed skin metastasis . However, it is believed that
when noted, skin metastases in patients with prostatic adenocarcinoma are indicative of a very poor outcome and thorough clinico-
pathological evaluation is mandatory. Rattanasirivilai et al. mention fewer than 80 published reports of prostate adenocarcinoma metastatic
to the skin between 1962 and 2009. However, a variety of morphological patterns have been described in the literature (Table 1) Cutaneous
metastasis of prostatic adenocarcinoma: morphological patterns In our reported case, the background where the prostatic cells have lodged
was represented by papulo-nodular skin with preservation of the adnexae (Figure 1). This obvious exophytic pattern was similar to that of
fibroepithelial papillomas, melanocytic nevi or warts occurring in eyelids, neck, axilla or groin. Therefore, we conclude that a precise
macroscopic differential diagnosis and a detailed personal history are of paramount importance for the initial clinical diagnosis and work-
up. As mentioned, our patient presented with a mixed pattern of solid and glandular dissemination in the skin but the interesting aspect was
the presence of neoplastic cells in the epidermis suggesting EMPD (Figure 3). These malignant cells present in the epidermis showed large
clear and clefted nuclei with obvious nucleoli and atypical mitoses. Remarkably, some histological fields showed areas without evidence of
EMPD especially towards the “shoulder” of the sections, which brings into question the evolution of the lesion from areas without EMPD to
extensive epidermal metastasis regions. Malignant cells in epidermis: large, clear and clefted nuclei with atypical mitoses. Very
importantly, this pattern of prostatic metastasis needs to be recognised since many other cancers present similarly and the differential
diagnosis could be rather vast (Table 2). Pagetoid spread in the epidermis The currently reported EMPD pattern in a site not prone to the
development of a “primary” extrammamary Paget’s makes this lesion exceptional. However, the currently described lesion represents the
dissemination from the initial prostatic adenocarcinoma rather than a “primary” EMPD. The first argument, upholding this would be the
clinical history. It is likely that dormant neoplastic foci of prostatic adenocarcinoma have been reactivated. Subsequently, the patient has
developed skin metastases. Reedy et al. highlight the fact that although rare, the “primary”extrammamary Paget’s disease is usually seen as
erythematous lesions in areas rich in apocrine glands such as axilla or perineum. Jones RE et al. concluded in a study performed on fifty-
five patients that in primary EMPD, the diagnostic criteria are represented by the Paget cells extending from the epidermis to the
epithelial structures of adnexa, and the dermis. In our case, no lesional contiguity from the prostate to skin was present. Morphological
changes described in this paper most likely represent the lymphovascular metastasis originating from the prostatic gland. One may argue that
the aspect of the neoplastic cells seen in the epidermis is not that of usual prostatic adenocarcinoma. Most likely this represents a
pleomorphic variant of prostatic cancer but since there is no direct link between the prostate and skin lesions, one may speculate that this
patient had two primary lesions, in the skin and in the prostate. However, this is not the case and immunohistochemistry was of crucial
importance in elucidating the diagnosis. Although, with the exception of very rare undifferentiated cases, the prostatic adenocarcinoma
demonstrates positive staining for PSA. Contrary, some authors have suggested that skin metastases are negative but in our case the PSA was
intensely positive (Figure 4, Figure 5) for both dermal and epidermal metastatic cells. Interestingly, in examined tissue, the
immunostaining pattern for PSA was displayed as clumps of brown staining unlike the finely granular staining classically described in
prostatic cells. These findings raised again the question whether this is truly metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma. It has been suggested
that rarely several non-prostatic tumors such as salivary gland neoplasms, malignant melanoma, adenocarcinoma of paraurethral glands
(Skene's), urothelial carcinoma may show PSA positivity . However, on clinical, CT and MRI evaluation there was no evidence of any of the
above mentioned tumours in our patient. Therefore, considering the past history and the current laboratory and histopathological
information, the increased serum PSA level was more likely due to a prostatic adenocarcinoma metastatic to the skin. In addition, PSAP
staining which is recommended if the PSA staining is not concludent was intensely positive and revealed neoplastic cells of prostatic origin
in dermis and epidermis (Figure 6, Figure 7). The rest of immunohistochemistry markers including markers for neuroendocrine differentiation
were non-contributory. The immunohistochemistry is of paramount importance in arriving at the correct diagnosis. Srinivasan et al. have
shown that double sequential staining for p63 and P501S (prostein) is very important to differentiate a prostatic carcinoma from an
urothelial primary especially since some cases of urothelial carcinoma may present with increased PSA if they involve secondarily the
prostate gland. The sequential method is very useful in circumstances when only a limited amount of tissue is available. Prostein, a 553
amino-acid protein is positive in most of the prostatic tumours while p63, a transcription factor belonging to the p53 family is a marker of
urothelial differentiation. The authors have reported that none of the urothelial or prostatic cancers evaluated in the study has shown
positivity for both markers. The profile characteristic for urothelial cancers (p63+/p501s-) showed 95.7% sensitivity, 100% specificity and
100% positive predictive value while the immunohistochemical profile suggesting a prostatic origin (p63-/p501s+) showed a 90.2% sensitivity,
100% specificity and also 100% positive predictive value. . It seems that adenocarcinoma of prostate may expresses estrogen receptor a
(ER-a) in stromal and basal cells while epithelial cells could express estrogen receptor b (ER-B) . The authors have revealed that all cases
of low and intermediate grade prostatic adenocarcinoma and 83% of high grade tumours express ER-b. Their study not only rises the issue of
modulation of prostate adenocarcinoma by estrogens but also suggest that ER-b may represent a reliable marker which may be used in selected
cases. In difficult cases of metastatic prostatic adenocarcinoma, FISH may be the most effective way of reaching an accurate diagnosis in
many types of cancers including prostate adenocarcinoma . Taylor et al. have reported that TP53 and PTEN, which may be prostate cancer
tumour suppressors are commonly altered in prostatic adenocarcinoma. The nuclear receptor coactivator NCOA2 may also be altered in some
prostate cancers. FISH may also identify a narrow deletion on 3p14 which is associated with TMPRSS2-ERG fusion characteristic only for
prostatic adenocarcinomas. This abnormality may be described in some cases of TMPRSS2-ERG in parallel with a PTEN loss . Malignant cells
positive for PSA in both dermis and epidermis. Dermal clusters of malignant cells positive for PSA. The above epidermis reveals no PSA
positive neoplastic cells. Skin and subcutis showing hyperplastic epidermis with PSAP positive cells. Dermal clusters of neoplastic cells
show PSAP positivity as well. Dermal and epidermal PSAP positivity, high power. We present a rare pattern of prostatic adenocarcinoma
metastatic to the skin. Immunohistochemistry for PSA and PSAP along with clinical and radiological examination and personal history were
corroborated for the final diagnosis. For the histo/dermatopathologist it is important to recognize the plethora of various patterns
displayed by cutaneous metastases of a prostatic adenocarcinoma. Last but not least, we should be aware that the PSA/PSAP might not be
helpful in confirming the diagnosis if the skin lesion represents the extension of a poorly differentiated prostatic adenocarcinoma and
other markers and/or methods need to be employed. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. EBP: drafted the manuscript,
provided histopathological material, took digital pictures, AGS: helped drafting the manuscript, provided clinical background and
interpretation, RGW: provided advice on interpretation and took digital pictures, MS: provided histopathological research information,
helped drafting the manuscript, KB: helped drafting the manuscript, provided basic research information and histopathological evaluation.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
