Musculoskeletal involvement occurs in 25% of patients with non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma (NHL). Primary lymphoma in the joint is rare. It can
present as a bone lesion or as atypical soft tissue proliferation. NHL has an increased incidence in patients with autoimmune rheumatic
diseases. We present a case in which non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma was found coincidentally in the synovium during knee joint replacement surgery
in a 69-year old woman with rheumatoid arthritis. Pigmented, vitreous tissue was resected, which turned out to be a diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma after histological examination. The coincidental intraoperative finding of intra-articular non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma was reported
twice before, presenting as synovial proliferation in elbow and shoulder surgery. In a few other cases non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma presented most
often in the knee, as a bone lesion or, when soft tissue was involved, as arthritis. Non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma should be considered in patients
with autoimmune rheumatic diseases. In case of persistent arthritis, non-respondent to anti-inflammatory drugs, a biopsy might be warranted.
Moreover, when arthroscopy or arthrotomy is planned, any atypical tissue should be sent for histological analysis. Early diagnosis of NHL
can contribute to improved outcome of its rapidly developing treatment options. Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma (NHL) is a malignancy of the
lymphatic system of uncontrolled proliferation of B- or T-lymphocytes. The musculoskeletal system is affected in 5-25% of the patients .
Musculoskeletal involvement of NHL has been reported before as a primary bone lesion or as intra-articular soft tissue proliferation with
arthritis as presenting symptom. We present a case in which atypical soft tissue found during a routine knee arthroplasty led to the
diagnosis systemic NHL. A 69-year old woman was referred to our clinic with chronic left knee pain. Her walking distance was limited and she
complained of joint stiffness. After a sports trauma 40 years ago, the patient underwent a lateral meniscectomy of the left knee. Two loose
tissue parts were removed; histological analysis showed synovial tissue with chronic inflammation possibly indicating rheumatoid arthritis
(RA). The following decades she had internal and rheumatological examinations for multiple joint pain and general body weakness. Multiple
joint osteoarthritis and rheumatoid factor (RF)-negative RA were diagnosed. In 1997 a total knee arthroplasty was performed on the right
side. In 2006 the patient consulted a rheumatologist for chronic fatigue, pain in the left knee, elbow and both wrists and feet. Further
laboratory and radiographic investigation yielded no other diagnosis than RF-negative RA. A vital woman was seen with a normal hip function.
There was a correctable valgus deformity of the left leg with slight effusion of the knee and tenderness on palpation of the lateral joint
space. No inflammation was seen and range of motion was normal. A conventional X-ray showed severe lateral osteoarthritis of the knee with
loss of height of the lateral tibial plateau (Figure 1A,B). An X-ray of the left knee showed severe osteoarthritis with evident lateral
joint space narrowing, bone sclerosis, osteophytes and a calcified medial meniscus. A. anteroposterior axis. B. lateral axis. With informed
consent of the patient we decided to proceed to a total knee replacement. Intraoperatively, pigmented vitreous synovial tissue was seen in
the subcutaneous tissue, which was resected and sent to the pathology department for further analysis. A total knee replacement could be
performed without any complications. The patient recovered well and was discharged five days postoperatively. Immunohistological analysis of
the resected soft tissue showed a large cell lymphoid proliferation under the synovial tissue surface with expression of B-cell antigen
CD-20 (Figure 2A-C). This finding matches the localization of a B-cell NHL, WHO 2008 classified as diffuse large B-cell lymphoma– not
otherwise specified (DLBCL-NOS). WHO guidelines suggest an Epstein Bar Virus-negative B-cell lymphoma that develops around chronically
inflamed joints in a patient with RA, as in the present case, to be classified in this category. In the synovial biopsy (A) a atypical
lymphoid cell proliferation is present under the synovial surface (hematoxylin-eosin (HE), 2.5x) that (B) consists of a diffuse
proliferation of large lymphoid cells (HE, 40x), showing (C) membranous expression of B-cell antigen CD20, which can be seen as brown
deposit (40x). This formed the histological diagnosis Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma. Anamnesis and physical examination by an oncologist did not
reveal any clues for malignancy. But a PET-CT scan showed pathologic enlarged lymph nodes along the aorta and the left iliac and inguinal
vessels. Lungs and liver were clean in the scan and a bone marrow biopsy did not show signs of tumor activity. The B-cell lymphoma was
staged level 2-E, therapy was started with rituximab, cyclofosfamide, vincristine, doxorubicin and prednisone (R-CHOP) combination
chemotherapy in six doses. In 5-25% of the patients with NHL, the bone is involved, sometimes resulting in joint pain . When this is the
primary symptom, imaging techniques can raise suspicion of a malignancy. Also, bone surfaces during surgery can be suspect. A NHL was once
reported in the cutting surface of the femur in a total knee arthroplasty . A routine analysis of 852 retrieved femoral heads in hip
arthroplasty confirms the possibility of bone involvement . In 14 femoral heads a low-grade B-cell lymphoma was detected. Systemic disease
was found in only two of these patients. The diagnosis in this case report was based on synovial tissue analysis. This coincidental finding
was reported twice before, though this was in elbow and shoulder surgery . In a literature overview till 2006, 13 cases of intra-articular
synovial manifestation of NHL were presented, of which 11 cases concerned the knee . All patients presented with inflammation of the knee
joint, sometimes clinically simulating RA . In later literature two more patients were strikingly described discovering NHL with arthroscopy
. Both patients were planned for a partial meniscectomy. One patient (51 years old) had a history of gonarthritis deformans, without signs
of inflammation of the knee. The other patient (31 years old) had a constant knee pain and swelling . Arthroscopically obtained atypical
synovial tissue appeared to be a B-cell lymphoma in both cases. Important in this case report is that patients with active RA have an
increased risk of developing lymphoma . A recent review showed that aggressive B-cell lymphomas, particularly the diffuse large B-cell
lymphoma in the present case, are stronger associated with autoimmune rheumatic diseases than more indolent lymphomas. Although the presence
of NHL was less associated with RA than with Sjögren’s syndrome and systemic lupus erythematosus , a 28-fold increased risk of NHL in
patients with RA was found when severe damage in the knee existed in the year prior to lymphoma diagnosis . Most lymphomas in this
population are diffuse large B-cell lymphomas, which form an aggressive subtype of NHLs. Though with new treatment methods survival has
significantly increased over the last decade . The main pathophysiological mechanisms for NHL are B-cell hyperactivity and chronic
inflammation . Nevertheless, anti-inflammatory drugs are no treatment option for NHL . Probably through its malignant character, NHL will be
persistent to anti-inflammatory drugs, also in case of musculoskeletal involvement. In relation with RA, the rheumatic disease itself
appears to have a larger effect on the development of lymphoma than its therapy . As the presented patient had used immunosuppressive drugs
(salazopyrine and leflunomide) for only two years, the contribution of drugs can be expected to be minimal. Part of the patients with a
lymphoma is infected with the Epstein-Barr Virus (EBV) . The presence of EBV in the lymphoma can have therapeutic consequences. Though, in
the presented case no EBV-encoded RNA was found with in-situ hybridisation. To conclude we can say NHL seldom has its primary presentation
in a joint. If it occurs, it presents most often in the knee as arthritis. To our knowledge we are the first to present a coincidental
finding of soft tissue NHL in knee arthroplasty, without malignant bone pathology or signs of arthritis. However it is possible that the
lymphoma was partly responsible for the diffuse joint pain and general body weakness this patient had for several years. In patients with a
rheumatic disease, we advice to consider NHL in the diagnostic work-up if arthritis does not respond to anti-inflammatory drugs. In these
cases a biopsy may be warranted, since the risk of developing a lymphoma is significantly increased in this population. Moreover, when
arthroscopy or arthrotomy is planned, any atypical tissue should be sent for histological analysis. Early diagnosis of NHL can contribute to
improved outcome of its rapidly developing treatment options. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. NHL:
Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma; RF: Rheumatoid Factor; RA: Rheumatoid Arthritis; DLBCL-NOS: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma– not otherwise specified.
All four authors declare they have no competing interests. All questions underneath are answered NO by all authors. · In the past five years
have you received reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from an organization that may in any way gain or lose financially from the
publication of this manuscript, either now or in the future? Is such an organization financing this manuscript (including the article-
processing charge)? NO · Do you hold any stocks or shares in an organization that may in any way gain or lose financially from the
publication of this manuscript, either now or in the future? NO · Do you hold or are you currently applying for any patents relating to the
content of the manuscript? Have you received reimbursements, fees, funding, or salary from an organization that holds or has applied for
patents relating to the content of the manuscript? NO · Do you have any other financial competing interests? NO · Are there any non-
financial competing interests (political, personal, religious, ideological, academic, intellectual, commercial or any other) to declare in
relation to this manuscript? NO Nijmegen, 24 April 2012 Jetze Visser, Vincent Busch, Ineke de Kievit-van der Heijden, Arno ten Ham. JV and
VB designed and drafted the manuscript. VB and AH did the surgical procedure. IK did the histological analysis and contributed to the
manuscript regarding the pathological sections. AH initiated this case report and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. We thank dr. F.M.A. Slaats, rheumatologist, Amphia Hospital, Breda, the Netherlands for reviewing this paper
with special attention to rheumatologic aspects. 1Sint Maartenskliniek, Department of Orthopaedics, Hengstdal 3, PO Box 9011, 6500GM
Nijmegen, The Netherlands. 2Canisius Wilhelmina Hospital, Department of Pathology, Nijmegen, The Netherlands.
