Odontogenic tumors are lesions that are derived from remnants of the components of the developing tooth germ. The calcifying cystic
odontogenic tumor or calcifying odontogenic cyst is a benign cystic neoplasm of odontogenic origin that is characterized by an
ameloblastoma-like epithelium and ghost cells. Calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor may be centrally or peripherally located, and its ghost
cells may exhibit calcification, as first described by Gorlin in 1962. Most peripheral calcifying cystic odontogenic tumors are located in
the anterior gingiva of the mandible or maxilla. Authors report a rare case of a peripheral calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor of the
maxillary gingiva. A 39-year-old male patient presented with a fibrous mass on the attached buccal gingiva of the upper left cuspid teeth.
It was 0.7-cm-diameter, painless and it was clinically diagnosed as a peripheral ossifying fibroma. After an excisional biopsy, the
diagnosis was peripheric calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor. The patient was monitored for five years following the excision, and no
recurrence was detected. All biopsy material must be sent for histological examination. If the histological examination of gingival lesions
with innocuous appearance is not performed, the frequency of peripheral calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor and other peripheral odontogenic
tumors may be underestimated. A calcifying cystic odontogenic tumor (CCOT) is an extremely rare benign cystic neoplasm that is characterized
by an ameloblastoma-like epithelium and ghost cells that have the potential to undergo calcification . Originally, CCOTs were referred to as
calcifying odontogenic cysts (COC). The structure was first described by Gorlin in 1962 as a distinct entity and was therefore called Gorlin
cyst . COC was considered as a developmental odontogenic cyst in the jaw. In their first report, Gorlin et al. considered this lesion to be
a possible analogue of the cutaneous calcifying epithelioma of Malherbe (the pilomatrixoma). COC accounted for approximately 1% of jaw
cysts. In 1981, Praetorius et al. studied and reevaluated 16 cases of COC and proposed that the group actually contained two entities, a
cyst and a neoplasm. Since then, neoplastic potential has been investigated. In 2005, the World Health Organization (WHO) designated
Gorlin’s cyst as a tumor and described it as belonging to a group of related neoplasms, including the benign cystic-type (CCOT), the benign
solid-type dentinogenic ghost cell tumor, and the malignant ghost cell odontogenic carcinoma . The dentinogenic ghost cell tumor seems to be
more aggressive than CCOT. CCOT can occur peripherally or centrally, although only 13% of CCOTs are extraosseous . Extraosseous lesions are
typically exophytic masses . In this article, we report an extremely rare case of peripheral CCOT in the maxilla. A 39-year-old male
patient, without relevant medical history, was referred to the Stomatology Outpatient Clinic of the School of Dentistry of São José dos
Campos - UNESP - Univ Estadual Paulista (SP, Brazil) in May of 2007 due to a gingival lesion. A fibrous mass on the attached buccal gingiva
of the upper left cuspid teeth was seen during the clinical intraoral examination. The lesion was a 0.7-cm-diameter, painless, firm, sessile
nodule of the same color as the adjacent mucosa. The nodule was clinically diagnosed as a peripheral ossifying fibroma. An excisional biopsy
was performed under local anesthesia, and the tissue was submitted for histopathological examination. Upon microscopic examination, the oral
mucosa of the resected sample was found to contain parakeratinized stratified squamous epithelium and underlying fibrous connective tissue.
Within the connective tissue, the cystic lesion (Figure 1) was lined with ameloblastic-type basal cells disposed in a palisaded fashion.
These cells contained hyperchromatic nuclei that were polarized away from the basement membrane. In addition, eosinophilic ghost cells, a
characteristic feature of CCOT, were evident within sheets of loosely arranged cells resembling stellate reticulum (Figure 2). Calcification
of ghost cells was also found in the connective tissue wall. Based on these findings, a diagnosis of peripheral CCOT was made.
Hematoxylin/eosin-stained section of a well-circumscribed cystic lesion present within the connective tissue (50× original magnification).
Hematoxylin/eosin stained section of a cystic lesion lined by ameloblastic-type basal cells. Note that ghost cells are also evident within
an irregular collection of cells that resemble the stellate reticulum (100× original magnification). Following resection of the lesion, the
patient’s healing process was uneventful and he was referred for periodontal treatment. After five years’ follow-up, there were no clinical
signs of recurrence (Figure 3). The patient has not received periodontal treatment and was referred again. Clinical appearance of the site
of the lesion 5 years from the surgery, exhibiting no recurrence. Odontogenic tumors are relatively uncommon lesions that are derived from
the epithelial, mesenchymal, or epithelial/mesenchymal remnants of the components of the developing tooth germ. They are found in the
mandible and maxilla and must be considered in differential diagnoses of lesions involving these sites. They can be classified by location
as peripheral or central lesions . Peripheral odontogenic tumors are rare and exhibit the histologic features of their central counterpart
but occur only in the soft tissue covering the tooth-bearing portion of the maxilla and mandible . Like other neoplasms in the body,
odontogenic tumors tend to mimic, at a microscopic level, the cell or tissue of origin. Lesions in this group range from hamartomatous
proliferations to malignant neoplasms with metastatic capabilities . CCOT are believed to be derived from odontogenic epithelial remnants
within the gingiva or within the mandible or maxilla. The presence of ghost cells, the characteristic microscopic feature of CCOT, may also
be seen in other lesions, including ameloblastomas, odontomas, adenomatoid odontogenic tumors, ameloblastic fibroodontomas, and ameloblastic
fibromas . Peripheral CCOTs are rare. There were only 45 cases reported in the English-language literature until 1991 . In 2006, Buchner et
al. noted that peripheral CCOTs tend to occur more often in mandibular incisor/canine and premolar areas and also occurred more often in
females (66.6%) than in males (33.3%). Resende et al. , in their review of 44 well-defined cases of peripheral CCOT, also found a slight
predilection for females and the anterior region. However, they found a similar distribution throughout the maxillary (40.9%) and mandible
(47.7%) regions. In their study, the mean age at the time of diagnosis was 49.4 years. The peripheral variant of CCOT appears clinically as
a well-circumscribed fibrous mass mimicking a nonspecific gingival enlargement. Differential diagnosis of peripheral cases depends on its
localization and should include peripheral giant cell lesions, gingival cysts of the adult, fibroma, mucocele, and other benign mesenchymal
tumors (e.g., neurofibromas) . Unfortunately, due to the common clinical aspect of the lesion, the case was not photographed. The discussion
about the neoplastic behavior of CCOT is still current. Yoshida et al. studied the immunohistochemical features of 16 cases of intraosseous
COC with various histological features, including the proliferative type lining epithelium, that with an ameloblastomatous appearance, and
combined odontoma. They found that lining epithelial cells showed cytoplasmic staining for bcl-2 in 12 cases of COCs, but those cells
sporadically showed positive reactions for Ki-67 antigen. Immunohistochemical examinations revealed little or no difference in
cytodifferentiation or cellular activity among COCs. They concluded that the COC with heterogeneous histological features have neoplastic
potential and may not be separate entities within the same histological spectrum. The nature of ghost cells is not clearly known. Some
authors have demonstrated positive expression of amelogenin protein in the cytoplasm of ghost cells, suggesting that epithelium lining CCOT
might show ameloblastic differentiation in ghost cells . Due to the non-aggressive behavior of this lesion , for most CCOTs, a conservative
treatment like enucleation or local resection is appropriate . The lack of recurrence depends on the degree of completion of the excision.
Following enucleation treatment, only a few recurrences have been reported, including intraosseous- and extraosseous-type lesions . In the
present case, the patient was monitored for five years following the excision, and no recurrence was detected. All biopsy material must be
sent for histological examination. If the histological examination of gingival lesions with innocuous appearance is not performed, the
frequency of peripheral CCOTs and other peripheral odontogenic tumors may be underestimated. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the
Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. APL, JDA and DK examined the patient. DK carried
out the biopsy. APL drafted the manuscript. JDA participated in the design of the manuscript and helped to draft the manuscript. AAHB
performed the histological examination. ALA conceived the short report, and participated in its design and coordination. All authors read
and approved the final version of the manuscript.
