Funding agencies: P.T.C. is funded by the Great Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity. Relevant conflicts of interest/financial
disclosures: Nothing to report. Full financial disclosures and author roles may be found in the online version of this article. These
authors contributed equally. The first gene causing early-onset generalized dystonia with brain manganese accumulation has recently been
identified. Mutations in the SLC30A10 gene, encoding a manganese transporter, cause a syndrome of hepatic cirrhosis, dystonia, polycythemia,
and hypermanganesemia. We present 10-year longitudinal clinical features, MRI data, and treatment response to chelation therapy of the
originally described patient with a proven homozygous mutation in SLC30A10. The patient presented with early-onset generalized dystonia and
mild hyperbilirubinemia accompanied by elevated whole-blood manganese levels. T1-sequences in MRI showed hyperintensities in the basal
ganglia and cerebellum, characteristic of manganese deposition. Treatment with intravenous disodium calcium edetate led to clinical
improvement and reduction of hyperintensities in brain imaging. We wish to highlight this rare disorder, which, together with Wilson's
disease, is the only potentially treatable inherited metal storage disorder to date, that otherwise can be fatal as a result of
complications of cirrhosis. © 2012 Movement Disorder Society The first inborn error of manganese metabolism has recently been identified.1
This autosomal recessive condition caused by mutations in the SLC30A10 (Solute Carrier Family 30, Member 10) gene, encoding a manganese
transporter, results in manganese accumulation, mainly in the basal ganglia and cerebellum, and the liver, and causes a syndrome of early-
onset generalized dystonia, cirrhosis, polycythemia, and hypermanganesemia.1–3 Twenty affected individuals from 10 families have been
described by two independent groups.1, 3 Seventeen affected members from eight families presented with young-onset (2–14 years) generalized
dystonia, whereas 1 affected member presented with spastic paraparesis without dystonia. Interestingly, the 2 affected individuals from an
Italian family presented with late-onset (age 47 and 57 years) asymmetric parkinsonism, early postural instability, and asymptomatic
hepatomegaly,3 implying that the phenotypical spectrum of this disorder, with regard to both the neurological and hepatic manifestations, is
wide. MRI of the brain typically shows hyperintensities in the basal ganglia and subthalamic and dentate nucleus on T1-weighted images,
characteristic of manganese deposition. The metabolic signature of this disorder is the extreme hypermanganesemia with polycythemia and
depleted iron stores (e.g., low ferritin and increased total iron binding capacity), whereas laboratory findings reflecting hepatic
dysfunction vary even between members of the same family.1, 3 Manganese induces erythropoietin gene expression and this could be the
mechanism leading to polycythemia.4 The depleted iron stores can be explained by the fact that hypermanganesemia favors the release of iron
from intracellular stores, enhances iron uptake, and decreases iron utilization.5–8 Here, we present longitudinal videos, clinical data,
serial MRI images, and treatment response to chelation therapy over 10 years of the originally described case with a proven homozygous
mutation in SLC30A10.2 This 22-year-old lady of Arabic origin was born to healthy first-cousin parents from a normal pregnancy and had an
uncomplicated delivery and neonatal period. At the age of 2 years, she developed difficulty walking, which subsided for some years, but
worsened again at the age of 11. At 12 years, she was mildly icteric with palpable hepatomegaly. Neurological examination revealed
generalized dystonia, reduced arm-swing when walking, and increased tone in all four limbs, but no spasticity and no bradykinesia2 (see
Video, Segment 1). She had one brother, who presented with a similar clinical syndrome and died after complications of cirrhosis at the age
of 18, and seven healthy siblings. Blood tests revealed polycythemia, hypermanganesemia, unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia, and increased
total iron-binding capacity (TIBC) (Supporting Table 1).2 MRI of the brain (age 12; 2002) showed hyperintensities on T1-weighted sequences
in the basal ganglia (caudate and lentiform nuclei), cerebellum (dentate nuclei and white matter), and anterior pituitary (Fig. 1A);
hypointensities in these areas were present, to a much lesser extent, in T2-weighted sequences.2 Liver biopsy confirmed micronodular
cirrhosis associated with elevated hepatic manganese content (Supporting Table 1).2 Recently, genetic testing has identified a homozygous
mutation in the SLC30A10 gene (nine-base deletion in exon 1 resulting in a deletion of three amino acids of the protein).1 Serial MRI brain
over a 10-year follow-up. (A) T1-sequences at the age of 12 (2002), before treatment. (B) T1-sequences at the age of 15 (2005), 3 years
after treatment, slightly improved, compared to (A). (C) T1-sequences at the age of 16 (2006), 4 years under treatment, 1 year after
increasing the frequency of infusions, and 1 month after adding oral ferrous iron, hyperintensities are less pronounced than before. (D)
T1-sequences at the age of 20 (2010), 1 year after reducing chelation therapy, because of a lack of supplies. There is reaccumulation of
manganese, compared to MRI 4 years earlier (C). (E) T1-sequences at the age of 21 (2011), 1 year after increasing the frequency of
infusions, overall 9 years after onset of treatment, hyperintensities have clearly diminished. Initial treatment with levodopa (120 mg/day)
led to a mild improvement of dystonia. Vitamin E (100 mg/day) and a multivitamin preparation (Ketovite) were started to recover low vitamin
E levels (Supporting Table 1). Chelation therapy with oral D-penicillamine (250 mg/6-hourly over 24 hours) led to a mild increase of urinary
manganese excretion (from <91 nmol before treatment to 240 nmol after 24 hours).2 In contrast, intravenous disodium calcium edetate
(CaNa2-EDTA [ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid]), 1 g twice-daily (BD) over 5 days led to significantly increased 24-hour urinary manganese
(12,852 nmol after 5 days) and reduced blood manganese levels (from 2,800 to 1,780 nmol/L after 2 months) and improvement of dystonia.2
Hence, CaNa2-EDTA was the treatment of choice and continued as a 5-day monthly course. Zinc levels decreased during chelation treatment
therefore zinc sulphate was added (125 mg BD). At the age of 15, after 3 years of treatment, icterus had resolved and dystonia moderately
improved (Supporting Table 1; see Video, Segment 2). However, brain MRI had only slightly improved (age 15; 2005) (Fig. 1B), and blood
manganese levels were still high (2,322 nmol/L); therefore, CaNa2-EDTA was increased to 8 days/month. Oral ferrous fumarate (Fe) (204
mg/day) was added to decrease intestinal manganese absorption.8 One year after these adjustments (age 16; 2006), blood manganese had
dramatically fallen; MRI (Fig. 1C) and liver histology had improved (Supporting Table 1). To avoid Fe toxicity, dosage was reduced because
serum iron had reached abnormally high levels. Because of a lack of supplies in her home country, she was treated less frequently with both
CaNa2-EDTA and Fe over the duration of 1 year (from 19 to 20 years). This led to worsening of dystonia, increase in blood manganese levels,
and more prominent hyperintensities in brain MRI (age 20; 2010) (Fig. 1D). Treatment was reintroduced and, at the age of 21, dystonia had
improved (see Video, Segment 3). MRI showed reduced hyperintensities, compared to previous MRI images (age 21; 2011) (Fig. 1E). No
susceptibility-related signal loss was evident on gradient echo images. Dopamine transporter imaging (DaTSCAN) was normal. Here, we present
the clinical description over 10 years, serial brain imaging, and response to chelation treatment of a patient with generalized dystonia,
hypermanganesemia, cirrhosis, and polycythemia resulting from SLC30A10 mutations.2 Diagnosis of this inherited metal storage disorder should
not be missed because it is potentially treatable. Therefore, as for Wilson's disease (WD), we suggest that manganese blood levels should be
routinely tested alongside copper and ceruloplasmin in the initial diagnostic work-up of patients with young-onset generalized dystonia.
Inherited disorders with mineralization evident on brain imaging may cause a variety of neurological syndromes, with different age of onset,
phenotypes, and associated systemic abnormalities.9 These comprise WD, as a result of mutations in the ATP7B gene, encoding a copper
transport ATPase,10 brain iron-accumulation syndromes (NBIAs),11, 12 syndromes with brain calcium depositions (e.g., Fahr's disease),13 and
the syndrome described here with manganese accumulation. In contrast to manganese deposition, characterized by hyperintensities in
T1-sequences, brain MRI in WD shows, among other features, hyperintensities in the basal ganglia in T2-sequences and the pathognomonic
“giant panda face” in the midbrain14; NBIAs cause distinct patterns of iron deposition for each disorder in T2* sequences,15, 16 whereas
calcifications are best evident as hyperintensities in CT. A phase II study with the iron chelator, deferiprone, in pantothenate kinase-
associated neurodegeneration showed reduced iron in MRI after treatment, but no clinical improvement.17 Hence, WD and SLC30A10 mutations
are, to date, the only treatable conditions among these disorders. Hypermanganesemia with brain manganese accumulation has been described in
environmental overexposure (e.g., miners and smelters), in acquired hepatocerebral degeneration (AHD), after use of ephedrone, containing
potassium permanganate, and in patients receiving parenteral nutrition.18–22 The clinical characteristics of these conditions may vary
(Table 1).18, 22–27 For example, patients with environmental manganism present typically with parkinsonism, early postural instability, and
psychiatric features, whereas in AHD, ataxia and orobucco-lingual dyskinesias are common. The distribution of hyperintensities in T1-MRI
sequences are similar and cannot differentiate between these disorders.28, 29 Similarly, DaTSCAN is normal in both secondary
hypermanganesemia and patients with SLC30A10 mutations. Clinical characteristics, laboratory findings, and response to various treatments in
manganism resulting from various etiologies +Mild to moderate effect; rarely formally tested, mostly in combination with other treatments.
Cerebrolysin is produced by enzymatic breakdown of purified brain proteins and consists of low-molecular-weight peptides and amino acids.
Abbreviations: SGP, supranuclear gaze palsy; PO, per oral; IV, intravenously, AHD, acquired hepatocerebral degeneration. However, there are
certain laboratory findings underpinning the syndrome described here that should prompt testing for SLC30A10 mutations in patients with
hypermanganesemia. First, hypermanganesemia in SLC30A10 mutations is usually much higher than in other causes of manganism (Table 1).1, 3,
22, 26 Second, polycythemia and depleted iron stores (e.g., low ferritin and high TIBC), as observed in patients with SLC30A10 mutations,
have not been observed in other causes of manganism (Table 1). Among the various causes of manganism, the main cause that may need to be
differentiated from SLC30A10 mutations is AHD, in particular, when the etiology of the primary liver dysfunction is unclear (e.g.,
cryptogenic liver cirrhosis), whereas the diagnosis of environmental overexposure, ephedrone use, and parenteral nutrition is facilitated by
history, in most cases. These parameters may therefore be helpful to correctly identify patients with SLC30A10 mutations. Moreover, because
the full phenotypical spectrum of this disorder is, as yet, not known, these parameters may help in identifying patients with other
phenotypical manifestations that may belong to this syndrome. With regard to treatment, this should be initiated early and continued
lifelong because the disorder may otherwise be fatal as a result of cirrhosis, but also to alleviate disability, because several patients
have become wheelchair bound, when remaining untreated.1 CaNa2-EDTA infusions were effective in our and further patients with SLC30A10
mutations,1, 3 whereas the effect may vary in patients with other causes of manganism (Table 1).22, 25, 30, 31 Dimercaptosuccinic acid, a
further chelating agent, has been suggested to have some effect in 2 siblings with SLC30A10 mutations,1 but not in manganese
overexposure.32, 33 Sodium para-aminosalicylic acid may also act as a manganese-chelating agent and has been shown to be useful in patients
with environmental manganese exposure and ephedrone users,34 but was not beneficial in 1 patient with SLC30A10 mutations.1, 35 With regard
to chelators commonly used in WD, D-penicillamine did not seem to be the treatment of choice in our patient, whereas 1 patient with
manganism resulting from environmental overexposure has been reported to have improved with trientine (Table 1).36 Chelation therapy needs
strict monitoring of other essential heavy metals, such as zinc, that may need to be supplemented. Moreover, additional oral iron
supplementation seems to be crucial in the treatment of this syndrome because it limits intestinal dietary manganese absorption by competing
with manganese for similar transport proteins (e.g., divalent metal transporter-1 and the transferrin/transferrin receptor system).8
Identification of further families and individuals with SLC30A10 mutations will be important to unravel the true phenotypical spectrum and
evolution of this disorder. Moreover, it would be of interest to investigate patients with manganism attributed to other causes for
mutations or polymorphisms in this gene, which may explain why some individuals may be more prone to develop manganism than others when
overexposed to manganese. Finally, further chelating agents, preferably administrable orally, and long-term follow up of various treatment
outcomes are needed. Video Segment 1. The patient at the age of 12 before treatment, with dystonia affecting the limbs more on the right
than the left, slowness of finger movements without true bradykinesia, dystonic gait, and reduced arm swing on both sides when walking.
Video Segment 2. The patient at 15, 3 years under treatment with mild improvement of dystonia, mostly on the right hand and improved gait.
Video Segment 3. The patient 9 years under treatment, with dystonic grimacing and dystonia of the limbs affecting more the left side. There
is slowness in tapping, but no true bradykinesia. There is a slight terminal tremor on the left. There is in-turning of the right foot when
walking. The authors thank the patient for the cooperation and the permission to publish the videos. Additional Supporting Information may
be found in the online version of this article.
