The association between fire-setting behavior and psychiatric or medical disorders remains poorly understood. Although a link between fire-
setting behavior and various organic brain disorders has been established, associations between fire setting and focal brain lesions have
not yet been reported. Here, we describe the case of a 24-year-old first time arsonist who suffered Todd’s paralysis prior to the onset of a
bizarre and random fire-setting behavior. A case of a 24-year-old man with a sudden onset of a bizarre and random fire-setting behavior is
reported. The man, who had been arrested on felony arson charges, complained of difficulties concentrating and of recent memory disturbances
with leg weakness. A video-EEG recording demonstrated a close relationship between the focal motor impairment and a clear-cut epileptic
ictal discharge involving the bilateral motor cortical areas. The SPECT result was statistically analyzed by comparing with standard SPECT
images obtained from our institute (easy Z-score imaging system; eZIS). eZIS revealed hypoperfusion in cingulate cortex, basal ganglia and
hyperperfusion in frontal cortex,. A neuropsychological test battery revealed lower than normal scores for executive function, attention,
and memory, consistent with frontal lobe dysfunction. The fire-setting behavior and Todd’s paralysis, together with an unremarkable
performance on tests measuring executive function fifteen months prior, suggested a causal relationship between this organic brain lesion
and the fire-setting behavior. The case describes a rare and as yet unreported association between random, impulse-driven fire-setting
behavior and damage to the brain and suggests a disconnection of frontal lobe structures as a possible pathogenic mechanism. The association
between fire-setting behavior and psychiatric or medical disorders remains poorly understood. Thus far, studies on the characteristics of
fire-setters have revealed associations with substance use disorders, personality disorders, mental retardation, schizophrenia-, mood-, and
neurotic-spectrum disorders, and impulse-control disorders, including pyromania . Rare associations of fire-setting behavior with sexual
disorders (e.g. paraphilias), luteal phase dysphoric disorder, Asperger’s syndrome, delirious states, dementia, epilepsy, Klinefelter
syndrome, XYY karyotype, Kleine–Levin syndrome, Fahr disease, and mutations in the gene encoding for monoamine oxidase A have also been
reported . Although a link between fire-setting behavior and various organic brain disorders has been established , associations between
fire setting and focal brain lesions have not yet been reported. Transient paresis of an arm or leg following an epileptic seizure is
probably the most classic lateralizing postictal paresis (PP) . Here, we describe the case of a 24-year-old first time arsonist who suffered
Todd’s paralysis prior to the onset of a bizarre and random fire-setting behavior. A 24-year-old, right-handed Japanese man with a ninth-
grade education was referred to us by the court for pre-trial evaluation. His sister, aunt and cousin have been suffering from epilepsy. He
had no history of antisocial behavior. Fifteen months ago, he suffered from headache, nausea, vomiting, general malaise, abdominal
discomfort, vertigo, and tinnitus during a shopping experience and could not maintain an upright stance or walk. He was transported to the
hospital, and was diagnosed with vertigo and generalized anxiety disorder. Fourteen months ago he showed the same symptoms, as well as a
loss of consciousness and numbness in the legs during a lunch break. Thirteen months ago, he stopped driving because he complained about
headaches and vertigo, although he could move his legs. He could not remember this episode. Eight months ago a psychiatrist diagnosed
epilepsy with an electroencephalogram (EEG) and started to administer clonazepam (1 mg). After this he spent most of his days fishing
without a job. The suspect had been arrested on felony arson charges after starting at least five separate fires in residential
neighborhoods in less than a month. The suspect, who had no prior arrests, indictments, or convictions, confessed to setting fires
indiscriminately and seemingly without purpose to a bamboo broom, styrofoam, a towel, and a wooden board near a junior high school, a
warehouse, a boat, and a shrine, respectively. When he set fire to some items he felt vertigo and could not maintain power in the legs. The
pre-trial evaluation involved the assessment of (i) the examinee’s current mental state, (ii) the examinee’s criminal responsibility,
primarily depending on the examinee’s mental state at the time of the offence, (iii) the examinee’s risk for criminal recidivism, and (iv)
the suitability of a court order for mental health treatment to reduce criminal recidivism. Upon presentation, the examinee appeared to feel
well but complained of difficulties concentrating and of a recent impairment in memory. He claimed to have had no intent to violate the law
and appeared to have no explanation for his fire-setting behavior. He recalled waking up in the early morning hours and leaving his home to
roam the residential neighborhood. He also recalled feeling somehow strange before setting fire to various items haphazardly. The examinee
denied any sexual fantasies or arousal associated with the fire-setting behavior. The examinee was taking no regular medication but had a
history of alcohol abuse since his adolescent years. Alcohol intoxication was therefore considered as a possible cause for the fire-setting
behavior but was later dismissed as no evidence for recent alcohol consumption emerged. Initial multiaxial diagnostic assessment according
to classifications provided by the Fourth Edition of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders-Text Revision (DSM-IV-TR,
American Psychiatric Association, Washington DC, 2000) revealed mild mental retardation. There was no evidence for delusions,
hallucinations, manic episodes, or possible axis II disorders relevant to the fire-setting behavior. Axis III evaluation revealed a history
of Todd’s paralysis, which raised the possibility of a delirious state as a possible cause for the observed fire-setting behavior . Axis IV
evaluation did not reveal burdening psychosocial and environmental factors including occupational and housing problems. Further
investigations showed that, prior to the fire-setting, he was unemployed for eight months after a security guard job. Finally, axis V
assessment of global functioning revealed a score below 65 (maximum score 100). Laboratory results were normal or borderline pathologic. A
diminished lymphocyte count (990/ml), a slightly elevated C-reactive protein (2.3 mg/l), and marginally diminished Ca++ (10.4 mg/l) were
found. Serologic testing showed no evidence for infection with Treponemapallidum, Borreliaburgdorferi, hepatitis B or C viruses, or HIV 1/2.
Cerebral magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed atrophy of the brain and dilated lateral ventricle (Figure 1). An easy Z-score imaging
system (eZIS) program was used to analyze perfusion single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT) images of the study participants .
SPECT images obtained from each participant were subjected to anatomic standardization using statistical parametric mapping two with an
original Tc-99 m ECD template followed by isotropic 12- mm smoothing and compared with the mean and standard deviation (SD) of SPECT images
obtained from a normal database that had been previously established at our institute. The SPECT result was statistically analyzed by
comparing with standard SPECT images obtained from our institute (easy Z-score imaging system; eZIS). eZIS revealed hyperperfusion in
frontal cortex (Figure 2). eZIS from ictal – interictal ECD-SPECT showed hyperperfusion in the frontal cortex (Figure 3). eZIS from
interictal – ictal Tc-99 m ECD-SPECT showed hypoperfusion in cingulate cortex, basal ganglia (Figure 4). MRI of the brain and dilated
lateral ventricle. eZIS from ictal and interictal Tc-99 m ECD-SPECT (A), (B). eZIS from ictal - interictal Tc-99 m ECD-SPECT (A), (B). This
figure shows hyperperfused areas compared with the standard database. Hyperperfusion is shown as a blue to yellow area in the frontal
cortex. This figure is typical of the “frontal type” of eZIS pattern. eZIS from interictal - ictal Tc-99 m ECD-SPECT (A), (B). Hypoperfusion
is shown as a blue area in cingulate cortex, basal ganglia. Bilateral PP of the bilateral legs (motor deficits without sensory deficits)
lasted approximately 5 minutes. He was confused during ictal events, and suffered from headache, and retrograde and anterograde amnesia
after ictal events. Further examination showed that an electrocardiogram was normal. A video-EEG was performed. The tracing just before
epilepsy was characterized by the presence of irregular slow waves (Figure 5A). The tracing during epilepsy was characterized by the
presence of an ictal discharge of repetitive spikes localized in the frontal, central, and parietal regions. The appearance of the motor
deficit (starting from the hand) was accompanied by a clear-cut ictal discharge of repetitive spikes involving the right frontal, central,
and parietal regions (Figure 5B). The discharge clearly correlated with the severity of the neurologic deficit, being more sustained when
the paralysis was complete and more irregular and fragmented when it was less severe. The electroclinical features of an episode of
fluctuating left upper limb motor deficit that occurred during a video-EEG recording. We performed a number of neuropsychological tests with
particular emphasis on the assessment of executive function and control . Performance on the n-back task, which is sensitive to frontal lobe
damage , was poor (trials correct; 1-back: 75%, 2-back: 42%, 3-back: 16%). Assessment of letter-based word retrieval using the phonemic
version of the Thurstone Word Fluency Test yielded remarkably poor results (21 words produced in 3 min), consistent with a loss-of-function
of the left frontal lobe . With respect to the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST), the error rate, the number of categories achieved, and
the number of perseverative errors of the Nelson type were 52.6%, 4, and 20, respectively. The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III (WAIS-
III) revealed scores below the normal range (scaled score 10.1 ± 0.9) for three performance subtests: arithmetic (score 3), picture
completion (score 1), digit symbol coding (score 12), and symbol search (score 1). These scores indicated a moderate impairment in
perceptual organization and a severe impairment in processing speed, consistent with the involvement of frontal brain regions in these tasks
. An important finding across all neuropsychological tests was the examinee’s unawareness of his test performance. Most likely, these
cognitive impairments developed as a result of epilepsy. In particular, performance on the three WAIS-III subtests with low scores was
normal in the pre-stroke condition: picture completion (score 8), block design (score 7), and digit symbol coding (score 8). The average
premorbid intelligence quotient (IQ) score, obtained at the same time, was 63 (performance score 68; verbal score 64). Treatment with
carbamazepine was started and led to complete seizure control. Arson is frequently associated with psychiatric morbidity and with previous
non-violent or violent offences . In contrast, our case suggests an association between an isolated, first-time arson offence and Todd’s
paralysis. Todd’s paralysis describes focal weakness in a part of the body after a seizure. Our case showed bilateral leg weakness, and this
weakness recovered completely within 48 hours. The precise mechanism that links damage of the motor cortex to this complex, impulse-driven
behavior is not known. Neuropsychological and neuropsychiatric findings suggest temporal and frontal lobe dysfunctions in violent offenders
and these dysfunctions appear to be more pronounced in the dominant hemisphere . However, lesions in the hypoperfused regions within the
frontal cortex and basal ganglia might result in a disconnection and deactivation of the frontal cortex. Consistent with this concept are
more recent observations linking cognitive inflexibility with prefrontal depletion of serotonin . Moreover, and in agreement with our
findings, neuropsychological deficits (including memory impairment) have been associated with hypoperfusion within the frontal cortex and
basal ganglia . Finally, a neural framework controlling impulsive behavior, decision-making, and willpower has been proposed incorporating
components of this framework, and is primarily localized to frontal lobe structures . Here we argue that, in our case, disconnection of the
frontal lobe resulted in impairments of cognition, primarily executive functions involving planning and judgment, as well as partial loss of
memory and impulse control functions. Together, this led to a bizarre type of impulse-driven, non-intentional fire-setting behavior.
Consequently, the examinee’s capacity to form a specific intent at the time of the offence remained uncertain, implying lack of capacity to
form mensrea, which, at least in part, negated criminal responsibility. Based on our pre-trial evaluation, a diagnosis of personality change
(disinhibited behavior) due to brain damage and dysfunction (DSM-IV-TR: 310.1) was made, combined with anosognosic features (i.e., the
suspect’s unawareness of his impaired cognitive functions). The examinee was found not criminally responsible. However, the examinee was
deemed at risk for criminal recidivism as no specific treatment for his condition existed. We recommended continuing prophylactic treatment
with antiepileptic medication to help prevent further hypoxic-ischemic insults. The case was closed with a verdict of guilty by reason of
legal sanity and the examinee was transferred to a prison. Neuropsychological reassessment may help estimate the examinee’s risk for future
criminal recidivism. The fire-setting behavior and Todd’s paralysis, together with an unremarkable performance on tests measuring executive
function fifteen months prior, suggested a causal relationship between this organic brain lesion and the fire-setting behavior. The case
describes a rare and as yet unreported association between random, impulse-driven fire-setting behavior and damage to the brain and suggests
a disconnection of frontal lobe structures as a possible pathogenic mechanism. DSM-IV-TR, The Fourth Edition of the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Text Revision; EEG, Electroencephalogram; eZIS, Z-score imaging system; MRI, Magnetic resonance
imaging; WAIS-III, The Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-III; SPECT, Single-photon emission computed tomography. Authors have no competing
interests to declare that are relevant to the content of this submission. MK and KM followed up the patient during the admission. YM and TN
participated in EEG study. YI and YT examined SPECT study, HK, JT and HH examined psychological test examination, JA planed the study, and
participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-244X/12/132/prepub Written consent was obtained
from their relative for publication of study.
