We report the case of a 73-year-old woman who was found to have an inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm caused by surgical drain
placement during a laparotomy for an appendix abscess. She presented with pain around the drain site two months following surgery and
intravenous contrast computed tomography (CT) revealed a right inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm. A decision was made to manage this
expectantly as she remained stable with no other complications. Following a period of nine months of observation, repeat intravenous
contrast CT showed evidence of spontaneous regression and thrombosis of the pseudoaneurysm. She remains well and her symptoms have now
resolved. A 73-year-old Caucasian woman presented with right iliac fossa pain and clinical evidence of sepsis three months following an
admission with an appendix abscess that had been treated non-operatively with intravenous antibiotics. Her previous medical history included
hypertension, asthma, an open cholecystectomy and bladder cancer diagnosed two years previously. She was a non-smoker with no significant
family history of note. Clinical examination revealed tenderness in the right iliac fossa associated with pyrexia and tachycardia as well as
an elevated white blood count (19.6 × 109/l) and C-reactive protein level (208mg/l). Computed tomography (CT) of the abdomen and pelvis
revealed several loculated pelvic collections of varying size between 2cm and 5cm in their longest axes that were not amenable to
percutaneous drainage, associated with evidence of an inflamed appendix. As conservative management had failed, a midline laparotomy was
performed the day following admission. This revealed multiple loculated interloop abscesses with an inflamed appendix that was adherent to
the pelvic floor. The abscesses were drained and irrigated with saline and an appendicectomy was performed with oversewing of the stump
using Vicryl® (Ethicon Inc, Somerville, NJ, US) 3/0 sutures. A 20Fr Portex® Robinson surgical drain (Smiths Medical, Watford, UK) was sited
in the right iliac fossa. This was inserted by making a skin crease incision in the anterior abdominal wall at the right iliac fossa and
then, using a Robinson drain, introducing a trocar to pierce the underlying fascia, muscle layers and peritoneum of the anterior abdominal
wall under direct vision. No bleeding was observed. Post-operative recovery was uneventful. The drain output was initially 150ml per day for
the first three days, then reduced to 60ml per day. On day 6, it was commented that the drain output appeared purulent and it was therefore
left in situ at this time. In the days following this, the drain output became clear and reduced in volume every day. As the patient
remained well with no evidence of undrained sepsis, the drain was removed after 11 days. There was no pain, bleeding or other complications
noted at this time. The patient was discharged home on day 16 after admission. Histological examination of the appendix revealed numerous
inflammatory cells with no evidence of dysplasia or malignancy. Two months later on review in the outpatient clinic, the patient complained
of a burning pain in the right iliac fossa and around the previous drain site that had started several weeks following the surgery. On
examination, there was tenderness in the right iliac fossa but no evidence of a pulsatile mass around the drain site and the wound had
healed well. Repeat intravenous contrast CT was requested to exclude a recurrent collection and this revealed a 1cm pseudoaneurysm of the
right inferior epigastric artery, which was not present on the pre-operative CT (Fig 1). Figure 1Intravenous contrast computed tomography
revealing right inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm (arrow) Intravenous contrast computed tomography revealing right inferior
epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm (arrow) Opinions were sought from a consultant vascular surgeon and a consultant interventional radiologist
regarding further management. The decision was taken to manage expectantly without any specific intervention unless there was any
deterioration as the patient’s symptoms were controlled with simple analgesia. Follow-up CT performed nine months later showed that the
right inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm had thrombosed (Fig 2). The patient remains well and her symptoms have now resolved fully.
Figure 2Intravenous contrast computed tomography revealing partial resolution of inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm at nine months
Intravenous contrast computed tomography revealing partial resolution of inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm at nine months The
inferior epigastric artery is susceptible to injury during abdominal wall procedures due to its position in the rectus sheath. However,
despite this, pseudoaneurysms of the inferior epigastric artery are rare. Reported cases in the literature have been associated with trauma,
removal of retention sutures, percutaneous biopsy, paracentesis, Tenckhoff catheter removal and formation of stoma.1 There has been one
other reported case of inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm formation secondary to surgical drain placement.2 In this case, the
pseudoaneurysm presented acutely with right iliac fossa pain, large abdominal wall haematoma and anaemia 48 hours post-operatively. The
authors also managed the pseudoaneurysm conservatively, allowing the tamponade effect of the associated rectus sheath haematoma to compress
the pseudoaneurysm, although no subsequent follow-up information was reported. Various other treatment options have been reported including
open surgical ligation, ultrasonography guided percutaneous thrombin, coil embolisation3 and ultrasonography guided compression.4 In our
case, the decision was made to reserve surgical or radiological management of the pseudoaneurysm and to adopt a ‘watch and wait’ approach as
the patient remained stable and her symptoms were well controlled with simple analgesia. Furthermore, endovascular treatment has been
associated with post-procedural pain, arterial thrombosis and failure.2 Spontaneous thrombosis of pseudoaneurysms has also been reported in
varying locations in the body including splenic and hepatic arteries following trauma.5 We therefore emphasise that in those patients with
inferior epigastric artery pseudoaneurysm who remain asymptomatic, conservative management can result in spontaneous regression and
thrombosis. However, it should be noted that for large or rapidly growing pseudoaneurysms, or for those failing to resolve spontaneously,
treatment options such as ultrasonography guided compression or percutaneous thrombin, coil embolisation and even surgical ligation should
be considered.
