A traumatic carpometacarpal joint dislocation of the thumb accounts for less than 1% of all hand injuries. Optimal treatment strategies for
this injury are still a subject of debate. In this article, we report a case of bilateral thumb carpometacarpal joint dislocations: a unique
combination of injuries. We believe our case is the second report of bilateral carpometacarpal joint dislocation regarding the thumb in
English literature. It was successfully treated with closed reduction and percutaneous K-wires fixation on one side, and an open reduction
and reconstruction of the ligament on the other side. A carpometacarpal joint (CMCJ) of the thumb is important for the function of the thumb
and in the performance regarding strong pinch and grasp. The dislocation of the CMCJ in the thumb accounts for less than 1% of all hand
injuries.1) Mechanical instability for the CMCJ of the thumb is an important factor, which may lead to articular degeneration of the joint
and thus interfere with the normal function of the hand. Recommended treatment for this injury has ranged from closed reduction with or
without percutaneous K-wire fixation to reconstruction of the ligaments. We report a case of bilateral thumb CMCJ dislocations: a unique
combination of injuries. It was successfully treated with closed reduction and percutaneous K-wires fixation on one side, and an open
reduction and reconstruction of the ligament in the other side. Our patient was informed that the data concerning this case would be
submitted for publication. A 50-year-old man was taken to the emergency room as a result of a motorbike accident. At the time of impact, he
was firmly grasping the handlebars with both hands. A physical examination revealed severe tenderness and dorsal prominence at the CMCJ
regarding both thumbs. There were no neurovascular injuries or skin lesions. The radiographs showed dorsal dislocation of the CMCJ for both
thumbs with a tiny fracture fragment in the right hand (Fig. 1). His accompanying injuries were a bilateral haemothorax, nasal bone
fracture, and right distal tibia fracture. Under lidocain block, a closed reduction was performed by gentle longitudinal traction. After the
reduction, 3-dimensional computed tomography showed that the dislocations of both CMCJs still remained. Due to a bilateral haemothorax,
surgery was performed 2 weeks after the injury. His right hand was treated with a closed reduction and percutaneous K-wires fixation under
fluoroscopic guidance. However, his left hand was significantly unstable, so an open reduction with ligamentous reconstruction was performed
(Fig. 2). During the operation, the dorsal capsule and volar oblique ligament were ruptured, making it impossible to suture securely. Some
small cartilage fragments and remnants of ligament interposed in the joint space were removed. Reconstruction of the volar oblique ligament
was performed with the radial half of the flexor carpi radialis remaining in continuity at its insertion on the second metacarpal base. It
was routed through a drill hole in the base of the metacarpal in the sagittal plane perpendicular to the thumb nail, using a 28-gauge
stainless steel wire, passed deep to the abductor pollicis longus insertion, and then passed around the remaining flexor carpi radialis and
secured over the dorsal capsule (Fig. 3). Both thumbs were immobilized in a thumb spica cast for 6 weeks. Routine activities were
recommended immediately upon removal of the cast. The K-wires were removed 7 weeks after surgery. At the 16-month follow-up, the patient
complained of mild stiffness of the left thumb. However, there was no pain or chronic instability. A CMCJ of the thumb is a biconcave saddle
joint: the trapezium is convex on anteroposterior views and concave on lateral views, whereas the thumb metacarpal is the opposite. This
unique configuration provides a wide range of motion varying from abduction to opposition while the joint remains stable.2) Furthermore, it
is supported with a thickened joint capsule composed of sixteen ligaments, although stability is primarily provided by 4 main ligaments: the
anterior oblique, the intermetacarpal, the dorsoradial, and the posterior oblique ligament.3) Controversy concerning which ligaments are
damaged in joint dislocation and which ligaments are the true key stabilizers for joint stability still exists. However, for years the volar
oblique ligament has been believed to be the key stabilizer for CMCJ of the thumb. In this case, the dorsal capsule and volar oblique
ligament were ruptured from the base of the first metacarpal bone. This intrinsic joint stability makes a dislocation of the thumb CMCJ
quite a rare injury. Mueller1) reported that the CMCJ dislocation of the thumb accounts for less than 1% of all hand injuries. Bilateral
CMCJ dislocation of the thumb was first described by Khan et al.4) in 2003. In their report, both joints appeared stable after closed
reduction and the patient was treated with a thumb spica cast for 6 weeks. At a 15-month follow-up, the functional result was good. We
believe this is the second case described regarding a bilateral CMCJ dislocation of the thumb in the English literature. Two mechanisms have
been reported for a traumatic dislocation of the CMCJ of the thumb.5-8) The first is a longitudinally directed force along the axis of the
metacarpal with the joint in full flexion. The second is a force driven into the first web space of the thumb. This force separates the base
of the first and second metacarpal joints and produces a CMCJ dislocation. It commonly occurs when motorcycle drivers grip the handlebars
before an impact and the traumatic event of our case suggested that the injury was caused by the second mechanism. There is some controversy
regarding which treatments are optimal for acute thumb CMCJ dislocations. The treatments have ranged from a closed reduction and
immobilization to a closed or open reduction and K-wire fixation with or without the reconstruction of the capsule and ligaments.2) It is
believed that the most important point in the management of acute CMCJ dislocations is to assess the stability of the joint after
reduction.9) If the first metacarpal bone was not well seated radiographically or was loose or sloppy clinically following the reduction,
surgical reduction was indicated. Simonian and Trumble10) advocated thumb spica casting if stable closed reduction was obtainable, but
suggested early ligament reconstruction for an unstable thumb CMCJ. They reported that early reconstruction might decrease the incidence of
recurrent instability and posttraumatic arthritis. Similarly, Shah and Patel8) reported that open reduction and internal fixation alone were
not adequate for an unstable thumb CMCJ dislocation and that the reconstruction of the capsular as well as ligamentous structures are
needed. We performed a closed reduction and percutaneous K-wires fixation on the right hand. Although the extent of ligamentous injury was
not determined, we believed that the volar oblique ligament was intact since the avulsion of the first metacarpal base was seen. On the
other hand, an open reduction and reconstruction of the volar oblique ligament according to Eaton et al.7) were performed on the left hand
due to severe instability. This had the advantage of reconstructing the joint in two planes, reconstituting the volar oblique ligament and
also creating a new ligament radially in a part of the joint capsule, which was weak and membranous. At the 16-month follow-up, the patient
demonstrated a normal range of motion, strength and no joint instability. Overall, he was satisfied with the outcome. Although the follow-up
period is short in order to allow a comment on the development of posttraumatic arthritic changes, this positive result would encourage us
to adopt this technique in future cases. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Radiographs of both hands
showed a dislocation of the carpometacarpal joint in both thumbs with a tiny fracture fragment in the right hand. Closed reduction and
percutaneous K-wires fixation were performed in the right hand (A). Also, open reduction and ligamentous reconstruction were performed in
the left hand (B). Intraoperative photographs for the reconstruction of the volar oblique ligament according to the Eaton and Littler
technique. (A) Radial half of the flexor carpi radialis (black star) was passed through a drill hole in the base of the first metacarpal
bone (MC). (B) It was placed beneath the abductor pollicis longus (white arrow) and then passed around the remaining flexor carpi radialis
(white arrow head) and secured over the dorsal capsule.
