Impalement rectal injuries with intraperitoneal organ injuries are rare. It is even rarer for such injuries to result in pelvic, abdominal
and thoracic internal injuries. We present the case of a 39-year-old man who was admitted after an assault where a broken broomstick was
inserted forcibly into his rectum. Surgery revealed penetration through the rectum, dome of the bladder, mesentery, liver and right lung.
The patient survived following management by a multispecialty surgical team. Our literature review identified four similar cases with one
fatality only. Prognosis seems to be good in these types of injuries provided there is an early presentation, the penetrating object is left
in situ before the operation and, most importantly, an organised team approach to deal with the various injuries. Rectal injuries are rare
as they only represent 9.6% of all colorectal trauma. In most series, gunshot wounds account for 80–85% of injuries and stab wounds for
3–5%. Other causes include iatrogenic injuries from urological and endoscopic procedures, sexual misadventures and anorectal foreign bodies.
Blunt trauma accounts for 5–10% of cases and is usually the result of pelvic fractures or impalement. One of the earliest attempts to review
these injuries was in 1896 and included 58 cases.2 Rectal injuries that penetrate the peritoneum are even less common as in a subsequent
more comprehensive review of 175 cases, peritoneal penetration was recorded in only 70 cases. Rectal impalement injuries with penetrating
trauma across the pelvis, abdomen and thorax are much rarer. We report a case of such an injury, where the patient presented after an
assault and survived with no major lasting physical damage. A 39-year-old man presented as an emergency following assault where a wooden
handle of a cleaning mop had been forcibly inserted into his rectum while his head was slammed in a car door. The mechanism of the injury
was low velocity as he had been bent over and one of the assailants pushed the wooden handle in via his foot. On examination, there were
abrasions and bruises periorbitally, behind his ear and around his trunk. There was also bleeding per rectum. Nevertheless, he was
haemodynamically stable with a Glasgow coma scale score of 15. Computed tomography (CT) of the head and spine ruled out head and spinal
injuries. However, CT of the chest, abdomen and pelvis revealed a foreign body penetrating from the lower third of the rectum through the
bladder, mesentery, stomach and liver, and to the right lung (Figs 1 – 3). A small right pneumothorax was noted (Fig 2). The patient was
taken to theatre and a chest drain was put in. This was followed by an emergency laparotomy and thoracotomy, a joint procedure involving
three consultant surgeons in the fields of colorectal, cardiothoracic and hepatopancreatobiliary surgery. Figure 1Coronal computed
tomography of abdomen and pelvis showing extent of impalement Figure 2Computed tomography of thorax showing: a) stick and b) pneumothorax
Figure 3Computed tomography of abdomen showing the stick traversing the liver Coronal computed tomography of abdomen and pelvis showing
extent of impalement Computed tomography of thorax showing: a) stick and b) pneumothorax Computed tomography of abdomen showing the stick
traversing the liver Examination under anaesthesia did not reveal a palpable mucosal defect in the rectum. Following laparotomy, a wooden
rod was seen to penetrate the rectum, dome of the bladder, root of the small bowel mesentery, transverse mesocolon, anterior and posterior
walls of the stomach, inferior to superior surface of the liver through the porta hepatis, diaphragm and right lung. The upper tip of the
wooden stick was lying in contact with the right subclavian vessels. However, there was no associated vascular injury. The wooden rod was
divided in its middle below the liver using an electric saw and removed from the root of the mesentery and a Hartmann’s operation with an
end colostomy was performed. The liver was partially mobilised with hilar control and the upper part of the rod was removed slowly under
direct vision. There was some bile leak from the exit wound in the superior aspect of the liver. A drain was left in and a decision was made
that if the leak continued, a post-operative endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) would be considered. Lacerations in the
stomach and dome of the bladder were repaired. The thoracotomy revealed 1–2 litres of blood clots and haemostasis was achieved. The patient
was transferred to the intensive care unit. He was successfully weaned off ventilatory support and discharged to the surgical high
dependency unit after one day. He had post-operative bile leak that stopped after few days and ERCP was therefore not needed. A
Gastrografin® enema (Bracco Diagnostics, Princeton, NJ, US) ten weeks later revealed no leak from the rectal stump and a month later the
patient underwent an elective laparoscopic reversal of his Hartmann’s operation. Post-operative recovery was uneventful. There has been
progressive decline in the mortality from colorectal injuries.3 The mortality rate decreased to 40% during the Second World War from more
than 90% during the US Civil War (1861–1865) and subsequently to less than 10% through the Vietnam War. Even though there has been marked
improvement in the management of colorectal injuries, the mortality rate is still 3% and the abdominal sepsis rate is higher than 20%. There
have been only four previously reported similar cases in the literature of rectal impalement injury though the pelvis, abdomen and thorax
(Table 1). Our case highlights the advantage of a multispecialty approach. Table 1Summary of the previous reports of rectal impalement
injury though the pelvis, abdomen and thoraxAuthorsAge and sexMechanism of injuryObjectAssociated
injuriesComplicationsOutcomeBoyd216MAccidental fall during playMetal crossbarLeft external iliac and anterior rectal wall
lacerationsRectourethral fistula; loss of left kidney function as left ureter fibrosed due to infectionSurvivedLear et al426FJump from
burning buildingTree branchDevascularised right colon and terminal ileum; lacerations in right lobe of liver and broad ligamentBilateral
bronchopneumonia; paralytic ileus septicaemia; required psychiatric treatment for post-traumatic effectsSurvivedKarger et al549MPossibly
self inflictedStool legIntra-abdominal haemorrhage; lacerations in anterior rectum, bladder, peritoneum, mesentery, transverse mesocolon and
liverDiedMoncure et al645MPossibly self-inflictedBroomstickLacerations in mesentery, stomach, diaphragm and pericardiumAtrial fibrillation;
pneumonia; brachial plexopathy; ventral incisional hernia; residual right upper limb weaknessSurvived Summary of the previous reports of
rectal impalement injury though the pelvis, abdomen and thorax Rectal impairment injuries that also involve the abdominal and thoracic
cavities are usually due to accidents,2,4 sexually related activities5,6 or, as in our case, assault. The objects used for penetration tend
to be long and thin such as mop handles, chair legs, tree branches or billiard cues.2 Diagnosis is often challenging; in our patient’s case
there was no visible perineal trauma and even a rectal examination under anaesthesia revealed no mucosal defect. Clinical examination only
is therefore not reliable to diagnose rectal injuries, their extent and associated organ damage.7 CT examination allowed us to establish the
diagnosis and also to assess pre-operatively the extent of the various injuries, which in our case was far greater than could be predicted
from clinical examination only. More importantly, it allowed planning of the surgical intervention before the start of the operation as well
as coordination between different specialties. Despite our patient’s injury involving the pelvic, abdominal and thoracic cavities, it was
not associated with major vascular injury. This has also been commented on by other authors.6 This could be explained by the fact that in
both occasions the foreign object had a rounded end, acting as a blunt tunneler. As the foreign object in our case was pushed by the
assailant’s foot, it travelled with low velocity, resulting in displacement rather than penetration of the major vascular structures,
especially in the porta hepatis. Prognosis seems to be good in these types of injuries provided there is an early presentation, the
penetrating object is left in situ before the operation and, most importantly, there is an organised team approach to deal with the various
injuries.
