Duplication of the left vertebral artery was observed in a 43-year-old Caucasian male with dissection of the right internal carotid artery
during multidetector 64-row computer tomography and Doppler ultrasonography B-flow mode. Both duplicated segments arose from the left
subclavian artery and united at levels C5–C6 to form a single vessel. The presented case describes precisely the origin and diameter of both
vertebral arteries. Additionally, after all procedures associated with diagnosis and treatment of the patient, Ehlers–Danlos syndrome type
IV was diagnosed. The lumen of the duplicated vertebral artery was smaller than normal; it can be concluded that this variant has clinical
implications and should be taken into consideration when vertebral arteries need catheterization. Variations of the origin and course of the
vertebral arteries are uncommon, but extremely important to recognize in the diagnosis, catheter-based evaluation and treatment of patients
suffering cerebrovascular disease. One of the rarest anomalies is the duplication of the extracranial segments of vertebral arteries, which
is usually an incidental finding in an autopsy series, angiographic studies or, more recently, MR and CT angiography and color Doppler
studies (Harnier et al. 2008; Ionete and Omojola 2006; Kendi and Brace 2009; Mahmutyazicioglu et al. 1998). The term “duplication of the
vertebral artery” is applied to a vessel that has two origins with a variable level of fusion in the neck (Goddard et al. 2001; Ionete and
Omojola 2006). Nevertheless, the precise definition of this anomaly is occasionally confused with “fenestration”. However, “fenestration of
the vertebral artery” refers to an artery with a single origin, with two parallel segments anywhere along its course and fusion (Goddard et
al. 2001; Ionete and Omojola 2006). Both “duplication” and “fenestration” are variants of developmental abnormalities resulting from a
failure of fetal vessels to involute (Lie 1972; Padget 1948; Sim et al. 2001). The main difference between duplications and fenestrations is
that, in duplication, a vertebral artery has two origins, a variable course and fusion level in the neck. In contrast, fenestration refers
to a vessel with a single origin, where the main trunk divides into two parallel segments anywhere along its course (Goddard et al. 2001;
Harnier et al. 2008). The frequency of fenestration of the vertebral artery is identified in 0.23–1.95 % of angiographies or autopsy studies
(Goddard et al. 2001; Sim et al. 2001). Duplication is much rarer, reported by Bergman et al. (1988) in 0.72 % of studied cadavers. This
anomaly is often associated with significant cerebrovascular abnormalities such as symptomatic kinking, aneurysm, arterio-venous fistulae
and arterio-venous malformations (Dare et al. 1997; Gaskill et al. 1996; Kendi and Brace 2009; Koenigsberg et al. 2003; Lie 1972; Thomas et
al. 2008). It has been speculated that duplicated vertebral arteries may be more predisposed to dissection (Dare et al. 1997; Gaskill et al.
1996). Therefore, every description of a duplication of the vertebral artery associated with another anomaly or genetic disease is
important, as each contributes to a database allowing a meta-analysis to be performed in the future. A 43-year-old Caucasian man was
admitted to the emergency department of our hospital for headache associated with weakness of the left limbs. He had no medical history, he
denied even slight trauma of the neck, and his only cardiovascular risk factor was tobacco smoking for 10 years. Neurological examination
revealed verbal aphasia and left hemiparesis. During CT angiography (TK–64-row MDCT scanner, LightSpeed VCT, GE, Waukesha, WI) of the neck
and head, segmental dissections of the right internal carotid artery (ICA) at the level of the cranial basis were discovered (Fig. 1a). The
lumen of the ICA was decreased to 4 × 2.5 mm (60 % of normal flow). Cerebral CT showed a recent infarction involving the medial part of the
right temporal lobe and deep structures of the right hemisphere including the thalamus, the genu and the posterior limb of the internal
capsule (Fig. 1b).Fig. 1a, bComputer tomography (CT) of the neck and head. a Segmental dissections of the right internal carotid artery. b
Infraction involving deep structures of the right hemisphere including thalamus, genu and posterior limb of internal capsule, which on this
single scan represent a part of the ischemic area Computer tomography (CT) of the neck and head. a Segmental dissections of the right
internal carotid artery. b Infraction involving deep structures of the right hemisphere including thalamus, genu and posterior limb of
internal capsule, which on this single scan represent a part of the ischemic area CT angiography of the neck and head also showed a
duplication of the left vertebral artery (LVA) with two origins, both from the left subclavian artery (Figs. 2, 3). The duplicated segments
were fused at level of the C5–6 vertebrae into a single vertebral artery, which then entered the transverse foramen of C5 (Fig. 3). All
measurements were taken on an Advantage Workstation (GE).Fig. 2Helical CT angiography, MPR reconstruction in sagittal plane of the neck and
superior part of the thorax: arrows origins of the duplicated left vertebral arteries, arrowhead level of fusion of duplicated left
vertebral arteries, Ao aortic arch, BC brachiocephalic trunk, LC left common carotid artery, LS left subclavian arteryFig. 3Three-
dimensional CT reconstruction of the arteries. White arrows origins of the duplicated left vertebral arteries, black arrow right vertebral
artery, arrowhead level of fusion of duplicated left vertebral arteries, Ao aortic arch, BC brachiocephalic trunk, LC left common carotid
artery, LS left subclavian artery, RC right common carotid artery, RS right subclavian artery Helical CT angiography, MPR reconstruction in
sagittal plane of the neck and superior part of the thorax: arrows origins of the duplicated left vertebral arteries, arrowhead level of
fusion of duplicated left vertebral arteries, Ao aortic arch, BC brachiocephalic trunk, LC left common carotid artery, LS left subclavian
artery Three-dimensional CT reconstruction of the arteries. White arrows origins of the duplicated left vertebral arteries, black arrow
right vertebral artery, arrowhead level of fusion of duplicated left vertebral arteries, Ao aortic arch, BC brachiocephalic trunk, LC left
common carotid artery, LS left subclavian artery, RC right common carotid artery, RS right subclavian artery The first LVA originated from
the left subclavian artery at a distance of 7 mm from the aortic arch. It measured 2.9 and 2.8 mm in diameter at the points of origin and
just before fusion, respectively (Fig. 4). The course of the artery was 101 mm. The second LVA arose from the left subclavian artery 37 mm
distal to the first (44 mm from the aortic arch). It measured 2.4 and 2.2 mm in diameter at the points of origin and just before fusion,
respectively (Fig. 4), and its course was 89 mm. Both vertebral arteries possessed a regular lumen. The diameter of the LVA after fusion was
3.3 mm (at level C5–6) (Fig. 4).Fig. 4Schematic arrangements of the vessels of the neck and measurements of diameter of the vertebral
arteries: arrows origins of the duplicated left vertebral arteries, arrowhead level of fusion of duplicated left vertebral arteries, Ao
aortic arch, BC brachiocephalic trunk, LC left common carotid artery, LS left subclavian artery, RC right common carotid artery, RS right
subclavian artery, VL left vertebral artery, VR right vertebral artery Schematic arrangements of the vessels of the neck and measurements of
diameter of the vertebral arteries: arrows origins of the duplicated left vertebral arteries, arrowhead level of fusion of duplicated left
vertebral arteries, Ao aortic arch, BC brachiocephalic trunk, LC left common carotid artery, LS left subclavian artery, RC right common
carotid artery, RS right subclavian artery, VL left vertebral artery, VR right vertebral artery The right VA arose as the first branch from
the left subclavian artery, 43 mm from the aortic arch. Its course was normal. The diameters of the right VA were 4 mm at the points of
origin and 3.8 mm at the C5–C6 vertebrae (Fig. 4). Both thyrocervical trunks were seen to originate separately from the subclavian arteries.
Additionally, complementary but independent to CT angiography Doppler Sonography B-flow mode (Vivid 7 Pro, GE) of the vertebral arteries
also revealed a duplicated LVA (Fig. 5).Fig. 5Duplication of the left vertebral artery in Doppler ultrasonography (B-flow mode): arrows
duplicated left vertebral arteries, LC left common carotid artery Duplication of the left vertebral artery in Doppler ultrasonography
(B-flow mode): arrows duplicated left vertebral arteries, LC left common carotid artery After all procedures were completed, Ehlers–Danlos
syndrome type IV was diagnosed. In most examples of a duplicated vertebral artery, the two roots originate from the aorta and the subclavian
artery (Kendi and Brace 2009; Koenigsberg et al. 2003; Mahmutyazicioglu et al. 1998; Suzuki et al. 1978). However, a second, more common
situation occurs when, as in the example presented in the paper, both duplicated arteries originate from the left subclavian artery
(Table 1). Kiss (1968) describes a bifid origin of the right vertebral artery, one arising from the right subclavian artery and the other
from the brachiocephalic trunk. Bergman et al. (1988) note the presence of dual vertebral arteries in 5 of 693 studied cadavers (0.72 %),
and all were left-sided. In three of the specimens, the vertebral arteries arose as direct branches of the aortic arch, and the other two as
a branch of the thyrocervical trunk. In all cases, a second ipsilateral vertebral artery arose from the subclavian artery.Table 1Reports of
duplicated vertebral artery when both originate from the subclavian arteryReferenceCountryAge (years)SexSideLevel of fusionDisease and/or
symptomsAccompanying vascular anomaliesBabin and Haller (1974)France18FRC5EpilepsyDolichoarterial loop of the L vertebral arteryHashimoto et
al. (1987)Japan67MRC5Temporal and cerebellar infarctionNoneHarada et al. (1987)Japan70FRC4Occipital heaviness, dizzinessHypoplastic L
vertebral arteryTakasato et al. (1992)Japan37MRC4Brain-stem infarctionRudimentary and accessory L vertebral arteriesMahmutyazicioglu et al.
(1998)Turkey62MLC2Vertigo, weakness and nausea, thrombosis at the origin of duplicated arteryNoneGoddard et al. (2001)Great Britain66FRMid-
cervical regionRight cerebral infarctNoneThomas et al. (2008)United States49FRNot describedNot describedMid-basilar trunk aneurysmHarnier et
al. (2008)Germany61FRNot describedDizzinessDuplication at the right common carotid artery, Fenestration of the left common carotid
arteryMelki et al. (2012)France51MRNot describedCervical artery dissection, infarction of cerebellar vermisNoneM male, F female, R right, L
left Reports of duplicated vertebral artery when both originate from the subclavian artery M male, F female, R right, L left Generally, the
duplication of vertebral arteries is reported to be more common on the left side (Bergman et al. 1988; Goddard et al. 2001; Kendi and Brace
2009; Vasović 2004). However, when both arteries arise from the same subclavian artery, this variation is recognized more commonly on the
right side (Table 1). Only Mahmutyazicioglu et al. (1998) and the present study describe a duplication of the LVA originating from the left
subclavian artery. Several vascular anomalies coexisting with these variations have been reported: fenestration and duplication of the
common carotid artery (Harnier et al. 2008), hypoplastic vertebral artery (Harada et al. 1987), arachnoid cyst (Ionete and Omojola 2006) and
aneurysm (Kendi and Brace 2009; Koenigsberg et al. 2003; Mahmutyazicioglu et al. 1998; Suzuki et al. 1978; Thomas et al. 2008). Spontaneous
dissection of the carotid or vertebral artery accounts for only about 2 % of all ischemic strokes, but 10–25 % of those occur in patients
<45 years of age (Schievink 2001). Origin duplication of the VA is a relatively rare, clinically silent condition. However, some authors
have speculated that fenestration and duplication of arteries is caused by “structures that split the flow and therefore divide the lumen”.
Hence, it appears possible that a misplaced squamous epithelium may cause such a split in blood flow or interfere with the complete fusion
of embryonic brain-stem arteries, leading to a persistent duplication (Oldendorf 1989). Drapkin (2000) and Nogueira et al. (1997) state that
duplication of vertebral artery is clinically significant because it can be mistaken for a VA dissection, and therefore has therapeutic
implications for interventional procedures using the proximal VA (V1 segment of the VA). Also, Gaskill et al. (1996) consider that
duplicated vertebral arteries may be more predisposed to dissection. Dare et al. (1997) also report extensive vertebrobasilar CAD on a
duplicated vertebral artery. Schievink (2001) note that well-characterized genetic hereditary affections, such as autosomal dominant
connective tissue disorders (Ehlers–Danlos syndrome type IV, Marfan’s syndrome, autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease, and
osteogenesis imperfecta type I), might predispose the patient to dissections of arteries. This view is also supported by a report by Arnold
et al. (2006); however, clinical signs of these disorders are present only in 1–5 % of carotid artery dissection (CAD) cases (Schievink
2001). Fibromuscular dysplasias are frequently identified in about 11 % of patients with an sVAD (Arnold et al. 2006) and in 15 % of
patients with a spontaneous CAD (Schievink 2001). These segmental nonatherosclerotic noninflammatory arterial diseases of unknown etiology
commonly involve the renal and carotid arteries (Schievink 2001). In 2001, Brandt et al. stated that, as the mechanical stability and
elasticity of the vessel wall is provided by connective tissue elements, structural deviations in the main components, collagen and elastic
fibers, may lead to functional impairment, pre-disposing to dissection of the arterial wall at given points of minor resistance. This is
supported by Brandt et al. (2005), in histopathological studies of skin biopsy samples in patients with CAD. Scientists have discovered
underlying ultrastructural abnormalities similar to those seen in patients with known hereditary connective tissue diseases. They also
showed that about 55 % had an underlying aberrant ultrastructural connective tissue disorder, whereas only 3 % had clinical manifestation of
connective tissue disorder such as Marfan syndrome. At least 5 % of patients with CAD have a member of the family affected with CAD
(Schievink et al. 1996). The embryogenesis of the vertebral artery takes place between 32 and 40 days of development. At the 4 mm embryo
stage, there are seven cervical intersegmental arteries, arising bilaterally from left and right primitive aortic arches. At the 7–12 mm
stage, vascular connections between them exist. In this way the vertebral arteries are formed as fusion of the longitudinal anastomoses of
the cervical intersegmental arteries. In the normal situation almost all intersegmental arteries regress, except the seventh, which forms
the proximal portion of the subclavian artery, including the point of origin of the vertebral artery. Duplication of the vertebral arteries
results from lack of regression of the right or left fifth intersegmental artery (Lie 1972; Padget 1948; Sim et al. 2001). Understanding the
topography and variations of the great vessels of the aortic arch is important for both the endovascular interventionist and the diagnostic
radiologist. Thanks to modern imaging techniques, this knowledge has become more important in the era of carotid artery stents, vertebral
artery stents, and new therapeutic options for intercranial interventions. To the best of our knowledge, extracranial duplication of the
vertebral artery in patients with a coexisting spontaneous dissection of the ICA with Ehlers–Danlos syndrome has not been reported
previously. The lumen of the parts of the duplicated vessel were found to be smaller than normal. In this event, interventional procedures
should be performed from the normal side if possible. The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest. This article is
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author(s) and the source are credited.
