Ceftriaxone is widely used in patients for the treatment of serious gram-negative infections. Ceftriaxone can induce some potential side
effects, including neurotoxicity, however, nonconvulsive status epilepticus has rarely been reported. We report a case of acute reversible
neurotoxicity associated with ceftriaxone. A 65-yr-old woman with chronic kidney disease developed altered consciousness during ceftriaxone
treatment for urinary tract infection. The electroencephalogram demonstrated continuous bursts of generalized, high-voltage, 1 to 2 Hz sharp
wave activity. Neurologic symptoms disappeared following withdrawal of ceftriaxone. The possibility of ceftriaxone-induced neurotoxicity
should be considered in patients developing neurological impairment during ceftriaxone use, and the discontinuation of the drug could lead
to complete neurological improvement. Ceftriaxone is a third-generation cephalosporin, commonly used in the treatment of serious gram-
negative infections due to its broad antimicrobial spectrum, long half-life, and easy penetration into the cerebrospinal fluid (1, 2).
Contrary to other cephalosporins, a dose adjustment is not required for ceftriaxone even in the presence of renal insufficiency, thus it is
prescribed conveniently for patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD) (3). Neurologic adverse effects of ceftriaxone are infrequent,
however, encephalopathy, myoclonus, and seizures may occur as exemplified in other cephalosporins (4-6). Here, we describe a case of
ceftriaxone-induced nonconvulsive status epilepticus (NCSE) with characteristic electroencephalogram (EEG) findings and discuss with
literature review. A 65-yr-old woman with CKD was admitted to our hospital because of abdominal pain and poor oral intake on November 18,
2010. She had been diagnosed with idiopathic membranous glomerulonephropathy on renal biopsy six months prior to admission. Her abdominal
discomfort began two weeks earlier and was located predominantly in the right lower quadrant, and was associated with lower back discomfort.
She described a constant pressure unrelated to food intake that was associated with intermittent nausea and vomiting. Her symptoms were not
relieved by the administration of antacid, acetaminophen, or defecation. Laboratory data at patient admission were as follows: serum
creatinine 3.2 mg/dL (1.7 mg/dL, 8 weeks before admission), albumin 1.8 g/dL (2.7 g/dL, 8 weeks before admission), and random urine protein-
to-creatinine ratio 10.4 g/g (3.3 g/g, 8 weeks before admission), which demonstrated the deterioration of renal function and increase in
urinary protein excretion. Gastroscopy exhibited superficial gastritis and the colonoscopy revealed no observable mucosal lesions. To
identify other potential causes of abdominal pain and exacerbation of renal insufficiency, such as renal vein thrombosis, computed
tomography (CT) scan of abdomen and pelvis was recommended, however she refused further work up being afraid of hemodialysis following CT
scan. On day 15 of the hospitalization, she developed a chill, and her temperature rose to 38.5℃. Because she complained of vague urinary
symptoms and urinalysis demonstrated pyuria and bacteriuria, ceftriaxone (2 g/day) was administered intravenously for empirical treatment of
urinary tract infection. Her temperature returned to normal after three days. On day 20 of the patient's hospitalization, her mental status
deteriorated suddenly into stupor and generalized myoclonic jerks were appeared. There was no history of seizures, and no other relevant
neurological features observed upon neurological examination. The patient exhibited no fever and the C-reactive protein was 3.2 mg/dL
(normal range < 0.3). The serum creatinine level rose to 6.7 mg/dL and the daily urine amount decreased to 300 mL, therefore an emergent
hemodialysis was initiated for progressive uremia. Her consciousness did not improve despite 24-hr intensive hemodialysis. A Brain CT
demonstrated no abnormalities to explain these neurologic findings. An EEG recording on the next day showed generalized slowing with
superimposed almost continuous or periodic bursts of sharp waves or sharp and slow wave activity (Fig. 1A). Under the impression of
ceftriaxone-induced NCSE, ceftriaxone was discontinued on day 22 of the hospitalization, and she returned to a completely alert,
cooperative, and oriented state within two days of cessation of the drug. The EEG on day 24 showed slowing of the background without
epileptiform discharges (Fig. 1B). In addition, the abdomen/pelvis CT revealed extensive thrombosis at the inferior vena cava, both renal
veins, right ovarian vein, and both external iliac veins (Fig. 2), thus anticoagulation was started. The patient was discharged on day 58
without any neurologic signs or symptoms. In this report, we described a case of NCSE following the administration of ceftriaxone in a
patient with progressive renal impairment. The temporal relationship between the start of ceftriaxone therapy and the manifestation of NCSE
as well as the withdrawal of ceftriaxone and the disappearance of the symptom strongly indicated that ceftriaxone was a causative agent.
Moreover, hemodialysis did not improve her mental status, and we could not find any other factors that could explain the neurologic symptom
observed. Neurotoxicity has been reported with both third-generation and fourth-generation cephalosporins (7-9). Epileptogenic activity of
β-lactam antibiotics was first shown in 1945, when seizures were reported in experimental animals following intraventricular injection of
penicillin (10), particularly in the settings of renal failure and excessive dosage (11). The exact mechanism is not fully understood, but
it has been proposed to be mediated by competitive antagonism of brain γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), which is the principal inhibitory
neurotransmitter in the brain (12). Inhibition of GABA action could lead to a low neuronal threshold and subsequent excitation. Other
authors (13) have proposed that cephalosporins might induce the release of cytokines including tumor necrosis factor-α, which could cause
direct cerebral toxicity. Cephalosporin-induced neurotoxicity may manifest in a variety of clinical presentations, such as encephalopathy or
mental status changes, myoclonus, asterixis, and seizures (4-8). The latency of neurotoxicity, the period between the start of cephalosporin
treatment and the resulting neurologic manifestations, varied between one and ten days. All reported neurologic symptoms typically resolved
within two to seven days after discontinuation of the drug. The ceftriaxone-associated neurologic syndrome observed in our patients was
similar to studies previously described in the literature (6-8). Predisposing factors for cephalosporins-induced neurotoxicity include
excessive dosage, renal insufficiency, pre-existing central nervous system (CNS) abnormalities, and increased cerebral penetration of the
drug (12, 14, 15). Different EEG patterns have been described in association with cephalosporin neurotoxicity. EEG findings include diffuse
slow-wave delta activity, semi-periodic triphasic sharp wave activity, or frank periodic discharges (7). These EEG abnormalities serve as
evidence supporting the impact of cephalosporins on the CNS. Given that the majority of patients using cephaloporins have co-morbidity
associated with mental alteration, EEG could be of benefit in the diagnosis and management of antibiotics-associated neurotoxicity. The
prevention of cephalosporin-induced neurotoxicity in high risk patients, as discussed above, is of the utmost importance. The careful
monitoring of medication dosages and serum levels may be helpful in the minimization of this risk (7). As seen in this case report, many
symptoms resolved completely only with discontinuation of the drug. Anticonvulsants such as phenytoin or valproate were administered in two
previously reported cases, and their symptoms improved five days after stopping ceftriaxone (4). Besides, we did not use any anticonvulsants
because of the rapid (< 2 days) clinical improvement after discontinuation of ceftriaxone. Data are still lacking as to whether patients
with cephalosporin-induced NCSE require antiepileptic drug therapy or simple cessation of drugs results in improvement. However, some
authors recommend that anticonvulsant therapy including lorazepam and/or phenytoin might be considered in NCSE until the patient's mental
status returns to normal and periodic discharges or NCSE shown on EEG resolve (7). Since neurotoxicity related to cephalosporins is
reversible, it is unlikely that patients would need long-term anticonvulsant therapy. Ceftriaxone has a distinctive pharmacokinetic property
unlike other cephalsporins (3). While most of cephalosporins are highly dialyzable (70% of a given dose over a 3-hr hemodialysis session),
ceftriaxone is not dialyzed during hemodialysis (3, 7). Moreover, the pharmacokinetics of ceftriaxone in patients with renal insufficiency
differ markedly from those of other cephalosporins. Compared to values in healthy subjects, the half-life of other cephalosporins is
prolonged 6- to 8-fold in patients with end-stage renal disease. However, the half-life of ceftriaxone is not greatly affected by a
progressive decrease in the renal function (3). Accordingly, dose adjustment of ceftriaxone is not required for CKD patients. These
pharmacokinetic characteristics might be related to the characteristics of ceftriaxone neurotoxicity. Only seven cases of ceftriaxone-
induced neurotoxicity have been reported to date (Table 1). All the previous cases had renal impairment and 4 cases of those cases were on
hemodialysis. There were 4 cases of choreoathetosis, 2 cases of NCSE, and one case of encephalopathy. Notably, there was no case of which
the observed neurologic symptoms and signs were improved by dialysis. These findings are compatible with the pharmacokinetic property of
ceftriaxone that is not removable by dialysis. Moreover, given that no dose adjustment is required for ceftriaxone in the patient with renal
impairment, overdose did not seem to play a role in ceftriaxone-associated neurotoxicity. In the previous reports, the elimination half-life
of ceftriaxone was markedly prolonged in some dialysis patients, it might be due to an impaired biliary excretion process that is the
alternative pathway of elimination for ceftriaxone in CKD patients (7,16). These might contribute to the development of infrequent
ceftriaxone neurotoxicity in patients with renal insufficiency. Ceftriaxone can cause NCSE in patients with impaired renal function. This
neurotoxicity should be considered carefully in patients with reduced renal function or prior CNS abnormalities. In addition, EEG should be
performed when a patient receiving ceftriaxone develops neurological symptoms. Early recognition is of the utmost importance because the
discontinuation of ceftriaxone reverts the symptoms completely. Electroencephalogram (EEG) findings during nonconvulsive status epilepticus
and recovery state. (A) EEG on day 22, when the patient presented an altered mental state. An EEG showed generalized slowing of the
background with superimposed almost continuous bursts of generalized, moderate to high amplitude that had an almost periodic pattern
(arrows). (B) EEG on day 24, when the patient's neurologic symptoms resolved completely. Epileptiform discharges had disappeared.
Abdomen/Pevis CT showing the extensive thrombosis (arrowheads). (A) Thrombosis in the inferior vena cava. (B) Thrombosis in the renal vein.
Summary of reported cases of ceftriaxone-induced neurotoxicity *Latency is the period between the start of ceftriaxone treatment and the
onset of neurologic features; †Days to improvement are the period between the cessation of ceftriaxone and improvement of neurologic
findings. RI, renal impairment; CVA, cerebro vascular accident; UTI, urinary tract infection; NCSE, non-convulsive status epilepticus; NA,
not available; AED, anti-epileptic drug.
