While acute internal carotid artery (ICA) occlusions are increasingly being treated with carotid angioplasty and stenting (CAS), the utility
of CAS in subacute stages is unclear. A 65-year-old patient with an acute left ICA occlusion and pre-existing occlusion on the right side
presented with dysarthria and central right-sided facial palsy. Carbon dioxide (CO2) reactivity within the left hemisphere was markedly
reduced. Due to acute deterioration despite maximal conservative therapy CAS was performed 8 days after the initial event with an excellent
result and symptoms subsided. CAS in subacute ICA occlusion is possible. Patients should be selected carefully. Assessment of
cerebrovascular CO2 reactivity might provide valuable information. In stroke patients, an acute thrombotic occlusion of an internal carotid
artery (ICA) is a poor predictor for clinical outcome . It has occasionally been managed by carotid endarterectomy (CEA) or percutaneous
transluminal angioplasty (PTA) with or without stent protection (carotid angioplasty and stenting, CAS). On the other hand, a chronic
thrombotic occlusion (CTO) of the ICA may be treated successfully by external–internal carotid artery (EC–IC) bypass surgery [5, 6].
However, EC–IC together with best medical treatment (BMT) does not reduce the risk of an ipsilateral stroke compared with BMT alone . In
addition, there have also been recent reports on CAS in patients with symptomatic CTO [8, 9] and CAS has a serious role in patients with
high operative risk. We herein report on the diagnostic work-up and subsequent therapeutic management of a patient with symptomatic
thrombotic occlusion of the left extracranial ICA and a pre-existing occlusion of the contralateral ICA . A 65-year-old male with multiple
cardiovascular risk factors presented with dysarthria and central right-sided facial palsy following an episode of syncope. The patient was
admitted to our stroke unit where he experienced blood pressure-dependent right-sided weakness and sensorimotor aphasia, initially
controllable by conservative therapy. Computed tomography (CT)-angiography (CTA; Aquilion, Toshiba Medical Systems Europa, Zoetermeer,
Niederlande) showed bilateral ICA occlusion and the magnetic resonance (MR) scan on a 3Tesla MR-system (TIM TRIO®, Siemens Medical
Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) demonstrated multiple chronic microvascular lesions bilaterally on T2-weighted images. Diffusion-weighted
imaging (DWI) revealed acute infarctions in a watershed distribution with additional significant prolongation of both the mean transit time
(MTT) and time to peak (TTP) in the left hemisphere. Conventional catheter angiography (digital subtraction angiography, DSA) finally
confirmed the diagnosis of bilateral ICA occlusion (Fig. 1) and revealed collateralisations via the ophthalmic arteries as well as via
vertebro-basilar pathways. Importantly, origin and subsequent course of the left external carotid artery (EC) were found to be entirely
normal and an EC–IC bypass was considered accordingly. Fig. 1 Catheter angiography (DSA) demonstrates complete occlusion of the left
internal carotid artery Catheter angiography (DSA) demonstrates complete occlusion of the left internal carotid artery Given the patient’s
recurrent symptoms, assumingly of hemodynamic origin, an urgent intervention was required. To further support such a decision, a Blood
Oxygenation Level Dependent MR scan was obtained (Fig. 2) to evaluate the patient’s cerebrovascular reserve capacity (CRV) [11, 12]: The
experimental set-up had previously been approved by the local ethics committee and included a bottled carbon dioxide (CO2) source and a
dedicated magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) patient-monitoring device (GE Medical Systems Information Technologies, Freiburg, Germany). The
patient was prepared with a conventional facial non-rebreathing mask and a gas bag connected for a 3 min-CO2 challenge to induce
hypercapnia. Fig. 2 Representative supratentorial slices prior to (left) and after (right) carotid artery stenting show a significant
difference in hypercapnia-induced BOLD signal intensity changes between the hemispheres: an initial restriction (left) and the subsequent
improvement (right) of cerebrovascular reactivity can be clearly seen in the left MCA territory Representative supratentorial slices prior
to (left) and after (right) carotid artery stenting show a significant difference in hypercapnia-induced BOLD signal intensity changes
between the hemispheres: an initial restriction (left) and the subsequent improvement (right) of cerebrovascular reactivity can be clearly
seen in the left MCA territory The analysis of BOLD signal intensity changes was performed using an in-house software package (Brainshow ).
The BOLD response was diminished in the left hemisphere, mainly in the middle cerebral artery (MCA) territory, thus indicating a marked
reduction of reserve capacity (Fig. 2). The patient was treated with 100 mg aspirin p. o. before admission. Then, he was given an additional
75 mg clopidogrel p. o. and because of the fluctuating symptoms the aspirin dosage was raised to 300 mg and also low-dose heparin was
administered. Eight days following the initial event, the patient’s symptoms suddenly deteriorated irrespective of maximum conservative
therapy. Since emergency EC–IC bypass surgery was not possible logistically, the patient agreed to attempt a neuroendovascular
revascularisation. Written informed consent was obtained and stent-protected CAS performed. In addition to the established anticoagulation,
further heparin was given via intravenous infusion during the procedure (activated clotting time, ACT = 250 - 300 s). Selective left common
carotid artery catheterisation was performed according to standard aseptic technique using a guide-wire (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) and a 7F
guide catheter (Mach 1™, Boston Scientific, Natick/MA, USA). A microcatheter (FastTracker 18™, Boston Scientific, Natick/MA, USA) with a
0.014-in guide-wire (Synchro 14; Boston Scientific, Natick/MA, USA) was utilised to carefully negotiate the lumen of the occluded vessel
under biplanar fluoroscopic control to a level beyond the occlusion; intraluminal position confirmed by microcatheter series. A 7/40 Carotid
Wallstent™ Monorail™-System (Boston Scientific, Natick/MA, USA) was then deployed, followed by balloon angioplasty using a 5/20 Sterling™
balloon catheter (Boston Scientific, Natick/MA, USA) at an inflation pressure of 8 bar. Fig. 3 Catheter angiography images showing
successful left internal carotid artery (LCI) revascularisation with anterograde filling of MCA branches after stenting and stent position
(un-subtracted image) Catheter angiography images showing successful left internal carotid artery (LCI) revascularisation with anterograde
filling of MCA branches after stenting and stent position (un-subtracted image) The final angiogram series demonstrated a small intimal flap
distal to the stent indicating a minor dissection which was considered to be adequately treated by the present anticoagulation regimen.
However, we attributed the very small post-interventional diameter of the extracranial ICA primarily to the previous collapse (Fig. 3 and
4). The vessel diameter was monitored by duplex-ultrasound and normalised within 48 h. The control CT-angiography after 1 week confirmed a
patent vessel diameter and the very small intimal flap which finally healed without any additional interventional treatment. The patient’s
subsequent course was uneventful. His pre-interventional neurological symptoms subsided. Follow-up MRI showed no new infarct. Cerebral
perfusion as well as CRV (Fig. 2) improved markedly. A follow-up CTA examination of the carotid arteries at 3 months revealed persistence of
excellent luminal reconstruction without recurrent stenosis. After the neurointerventional procedure the anticoagulation regimen was
maintained for 1 week and then reduced to 100 mg aspirin and 75 mg clopidogrel for 3 months. The patient is on 100 mg aspirin since. Fig. 4
The post-interventional DSA image in frontal view shows the filling of the ipsilateral MCA (image quality is considerably diminished as the
patient was only minimally sedated for the procedure and became progressively agitated) The post-interventional DSA image in frontal view
shows the filling of the ipsilateral MCA (image quality is considerably diminished as the patient was only minimally sedated for the
procedure and became progressively agitated) In the setting of acute or chronic carotid artery occlusion, cerebral ischemia may principally
result from either embolic occlusion with resulting territorial ischemia or from reduced regional perfusion with consequent hemodynamically
distributed infarcts. While the value of thrombolysis and fibrinolysis in the acute setting has been shown to be beneficial , the mechanism
underlying the acute deterioration in our case was rather due to hypoperfusion rather than thromboembolism. EC–IC bypass has been reported
in a selected group of patients with poor reserve capacity when CEA was not possible . In our case, EC–IC bypass appeared appropriate but
was not applicable because of the acuteness of the patient’s deterioration. Paty et al. reported on success rates of CEA of the order of
30 % when performed within 14 days after the onset of symptoms. Furthermore, successful CAS and stent-assisted revascularisation of
intracranial vessels in a subacute stage had been reported. In patients with co-existing conditions leading to a higher operative risk, CAS
is not inferior to CEA . However, at this particular time, there is no scientific evidence for the sufficient safety of endovascular
revascularisation of totally occluded ICAs. Measurement of CRV by the means of Xenon-CT has been suggested as a surrogate parameter when
selecting patients for cerebrovascular therapy . Alternatively, the applicability of CO2 exposure-induced hypercapnia in combination with
BOLD-contrast functional MR has been demonstrated [11, 19, 20]. Considering our patient’s symptoms and his restricted cerebrovascular
reserve, an attempt of revascularisation was indicated. Taking the risk of distal embolisation into account, a blood flow manipulation with
proximal balloon occlusion of the common carotid artery was discussed before the intervention but not taken into account because it would
not have added any benefit as long as external artery branches were still open . Furthermore, it would have led to a flow reversal in the
ophthalmic artery with the threat of a steal phenomenon and unpredictable consequences. The only double-balloon device available in our
department has a very small lumen which seemed inappropriate in the present setting. In addition, the pre-operative work-up for the EC–IC
bypass demonstrated a substantial contribution from the external carotid artery to the brain perfusion. Any further reduction of arterial
input should be avoided under those precarious circumstances. The contrast injection through the microcatheter showed no relevant thrombus
load in the ICA distal to the occlusion—in this case the procedure would have had to be adjusted, e.g. applying vacuum thrombectomy [22,
23]. In the past, several reports of reperfusion injury following recanalisation by either CEA or CAS [27, 28] have led to a very careful
selection of patients, especially in cases with prolonged ischemia. For this reason, initial therapy in our patient comprised medical
therapy with anticoagulation as well as blood-pressure elevation only. However, this approach did not yield a satisfactory result: symptoms
were fluctuating and aggravated over time. Following further deterioration with sudden onset of aphasia and hemiparesis, an ultima ratio
decision was therefore made to attempt neuroendovascular revascularisation. CAS in subacute ICA occlusion is feasible and may lead to a
favourable outcome but should be restricted to carefully selected cases. The non-invasive assessment of cerebrovascular CO2 reactivity using
BOLD-contrast MRI might provide valuable information in this setting. The authors (K. Kallenberg, J. Baudewig and P. Dechent) were supported
by the Volkswagen Stiftung (Grants ZN1635 and ZN 2193). The authors (K. Kallenberg and M. Knauth) state the following financial disclosures:
Speakers Bureau (K. Kallenberg [Acandis, Pforzheim/Germany] and M. Knauth [Penumbra, Alameda/USA; Siemens Healthcare, Erlangen/Germany;
Acandis, Pforzheim/Germany; Codman, Norderstedt/Germany]). The authors declare that there is no actual or potential conflict of interest in
relation to this article.
