Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) is one of several phenotypes of the adrenoleukodystrophy spectrum caused by mutations in the ABCD1 gene on the X
chromosome. An inflammatory component is part of the disease complex ranging from severe childhood CNS demyelination to spinal cord and
peripheral nerve degeneration. We present a patient with clinical progressive AMN and severe lower limb pain. Longitudinal brain magnetic
resonance spectroscopy showed a constant slightly elevated myoinositol/total creatine ratio during the five year treatment period, probably
reflecting demyelination, microglial activation and gliosis, indicating an inflammatory response. The pain was refractory to conventional
therapy but intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) treatment was highly efficient. IVIG may be considered as a last resort for treatment of
refractory pain in AMN patients with indications of an inflammatory component. Adrenomyeloneuropathy (AMN) is the adult form of the
progressive neurodegenerative condition, X-linked adrenoleukodystrophy. Mutations in the ABCD1 gene result in a disrupted peroxisomal beta
oxidation causing accumulation of the saturated very long chain fatty acids. The AMN phenotype is found in approximately 45% of the male
patients with ABCD1 mutations . AMN presents in adult age with slowly progressive spastic paraplegia, sphincter disturbances, sensory
disturbances, ataxia, pain and impotence . AMN patients with the cerebral phenotype develop a cerebral inflammatory involvement with a
faster progression, whereas patients with “pure” AMN can present with a mild inflammatory response mainly limited to the spinal cord and
peripheral nerves . We describe a patient with AMN who was treated successfully for severe leg pain with intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG).
During five years of treatment the disease progressed; however, magnetic resonance spectroscopy (MRS) revealed a stable, mildly elevated
myoinositol (mI)/total creatine (Cr) ratio. A 48 year old Caucasian man was referred because of progressing pain, numbness, and stiffness of
his lower limbs during 3-4 years. Lower urinary tract symptoms were absent. Neurological examination revealed hyperactive tendon reflexes in
both arms and legs and bilateral Babinski reflexes. Except from a slightly increased tone distally in his legs he had an overall normal
muscle tone and no limb weaknesses. The only abnormal sensory finding was an impaired sense of vibration in his first toes. He developed
erectile dysfunction and reduced libido at 49 years of age. It was treated with sildenafil, tadalafil and later testosteronundecanoat with
almost no effect. Neurological examination at 55 years of age revealed a moderate lower limb spastic paraplegia, hyperactive deep tendon
reflexes in both arms and legs, Babinski’s sign bilaterally, distally impaired thermal sensation and decreased sense of vibration distally
of the knees, confirming clinical progression during the seven years. The following investigations were normal: Routine blood biochemistry,
including vitamin B12 concentration, methylmalonic acid, glycosylated hemoglobin, HTLV1 and HTLV2 (Human T-cell Lymphotropic Viruses),
p-ANCA and c-ANCA (Anti-Neutrophil Cytoplasmic Antibodies), ANA (Anti-Nuclear Antibodies), HIV, syphilis, and arylsulfatase A activity.
Cerebrospinal fluid analysis showed an increased spinal protein level of 0.78 g/l (normal 0.15-0.50 g/l), absent oligoclonal bands, and no
Borrelia Burgdorferi antibodies. Electrophysiological studies including EMG (electromyography), ENG (electroneurography), SSEP
(somatosensory evoked potentials), and VEP (visual evoked potentials) were normal. MEP (motor evoked potentials) showed increased central
conduction time (CCT) to muscles in the upper and lower extremities. The muscles investigated were biceps brachii (BB), flexor carpi radial
is (FCR), first dorsal interosseus (FDI), tibialis anterior (TA), and abductor hallucis (AH). The CCT was increased by 45% and 34% to the
right and left FCR, respectively. The CCT to the right side FDI was increased by 22% and the left side was normal. The CCT to TA was
increased by 25% and 56% and to AH by 26% and 30% to right and left side, respectively. The CCT to both BB was normal. Peripheral conduction
time was increased by 20% and 23% to right and left TA, respectively, and also to the right AH with 18%. The peripheral conduction times to
BB, FCR and FDI were all normal. The profile of saturated very long chain fatty acid (VLCFA) of serum was diagnostic of AMN, showing a ratio
between C24 and C22 of 146% (normal 40-105%) and a ratio between C26 and C22 of 6.0% (normal 0-3%). The AMN diagnosis was confirmed by
identification of a novel c.2005C>T mutation in the ABCD1 gene (Reference sequence: NM00033.3) predicting an amino acid shift from histidine
to tyrosine at position 669 p. His669Tyr. An ACTH stimulation test showed no adrenal insufficiency, but testosterone was slightly decreased
(9.2 to 13 nmol/l; normal 10.0-28 nmol/l). Repeated MRI’s (magnetic resonance imaging) of the brain and spinal cord during five years were
normal. Short echo time MRS (magnetic resonance spectroscopy) studies were performed at ages 49, 50, 51, 53, and 55 years. The ratios of
N-acetylaspartate (NAA), total choline (Cho), and mI to total Cr were calculated and results deviating more than 2 standard deviations (SD)
from normal were regarded as abnormal. MRS showed elevated mI/Cr. The mI/Cr ratios were stable over time and on average 27% increased
compared to the normal controls during the six years of study. The NAA/Cr ratios were low in the normal range or decreased to just below the
normal range, but the NAA/Cr ratios did not change significantly over time. The Cho/Cr ratio stayed in the normal range all six years of
study (Figure 1). Brain Magnetic Resonance Spectroscopy. Short echo time magnetic resonance spectra acquired at three Tesla from left and
right occipito-parietal primarily white matter and from mid-occipital primarily grey matter in the patient at age 52 years. The patient had
increasing pain from his legs during the years. The pain was described as initially a pricking and tingling sensation but later a constant,
night and day, burning, stabbing pain, which was not precipitated by contact, temperature or movements. The pain in his lower limbs was
initially treated with peripheral analgesics, which had no effect. Later tizanidin, levodopa, amitriptylin, oxacarbazepin, and pregabalin
were tried but all resulting in unacceptable side effects with no benefit. Based on the involvement of an immune/inflammatory process in the
pathogenesis of ALD/AMN, the increased CSF protein and the MRS data, immunosuppressive therapy with IVIG was initiated as a last resort.
Treatment with IVIG was initialized in an in-house standard scheme of 30 g IVIG a day for three consecutive days every third month when the
patient was 49 years old. Trying to increase the interval between treatments was unsuccessful because of worsening of the pain. The
treatment was continued during five years approximately every third month and was administered when the symptoms deteriorated with
increasing pain. The treatment led to clear improvement, reducing his pain from 9 to 3 on a “visual analogue scale” of 10. Here we report on
an AMN patient with a progressive spastic paraplegia, erectile dysfunction and severe pain in the lower limbs refractory to conventional
treatment. A small fiber neuropathy may be the underlying cause of the pain but unfortunately the electrophysiological investigations aimed
at revealing large fiber neuropathy and the patient was reluctant to participate in further electrophysiological investigations, skin biopsy
or sural nerve biopsy. MRI of the brain was normal; however, cerebral involvement was revealed by MRS showing elevated mI/Cr. This finding
probably reflects demyelination, microglial activation and gliosis, indicating a possible inflammatory component. Spectroscopic evidence of
biochemical abnormalities in AMN has previously been reported. Reduction of both NAA/Cho and NAA/Cr were found most severely in the internal
capsule and parieto-occipital white matter, whereas no significant elevation of Cho/Cr was found. These results were suggested to reflect
axonal damage in the brains of pure AMN patients ; however, the long echo time used in the study by Dubey and colleagues (2005), did not
allow detection of mI and consequently a possible inflammatory component. Twenty percent of the “pure” AMN patients develop the cerebral
phenotype and based on the MRS we suggest classifying our patient as an inflammatory cerebral type AMN. Currently, the most efficient
therapeutic opportunity for patients with the cerebral form of adrenoleukodystrophy (ALD) is hematopoietic stem cell transplantation,
whereas applications of immunomodulatory and immunosuppressive drugs have failed to prevent progression of cerebral neuroinflammation .
Heterogeneous peripheral and central mechanisms are presumably involved in the pain related to AMN. The exact pathophysiological mechanisms
are unknown, but might depend of antibodies to neuronal structures as seen in neuropathy associated with diabetes . Furthermore, cytokines
and growth factors have been suggested to play a role in initiating or maintaining neuropathic pain . IVIGs have different actions,
including modulation of pathogenic autoantibodies and inhibition of complement activation and cytokines , which might be related to the
beneficial effect in our patient. IVIG was previously reported to reduce neuropathic pain associated with Sjögren's syndrome, an autoimmune
disease, and to reduce pain and improve motor function markedly in proximal diabetic neuropathy . IVIG treatment has hitherto not been
reported in AMN but previously administered to ALD patients without clear effect on disease progression and it is presently not a
recommended treatment . MRS revealed normal Cho/Cr and the NAA/Cr ratios in our patient and those ratios did not change significantly during
the follow up period. IVIG was highly effective in the pain treatment, but whether the IVIG treatment influenced the disease course,
prevented axonal damage in the brain and stabilized the mI/Cr remains speculative. The present study should be interpreted with caution and
IVIG is not recommended for AMN in general; however, as a last resort for treating otherwise refractory pain in AMN, IVIG may be explored.
The patient with a novel c.2005C>T mutation in the ABCD1 gene had an AMN phenotype with severe leg pain. According to MRS, indicating a
coexisting cerebral demyelination and inflammation he was classified as AMN cerebral phenotype. IVIG treatment relieved the severe pain and
it may be considered in otherwise treatment-refractory pain of AMN, cerebral type. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Series Editor
of this journal. The authors declare to have no competing interests. AEJ: Study concept and design, analysis and interpretation of the data,
acquisition of the data, drafting and revising the manuscript. ERD, CT: Analysis and interpretation of the MR data, acquisition of the data,
drafting and revising the manuscript. KS, PM: Analysis and interpretation of the clinical data, acquisition of the data, drafting and
revising the manuscript. JEN: Study concept and design, analysis and interpretation of the data, drafting/revising the manuscript, study
supervision. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/12/108/prepub The authors wish to thank the patient for his participation.
