Transmission of canine leishmaniasis (CanL), a severe infection caused by L. infantum, usually occurs through the sand fly bite to the
vertebrate host. A venereal route of transmission has also been suggested, but this issue is still controversial. Here, we report a case of
a dog affected by orchitis showing a clinical profile of L. infantum infection. By exploiting a real-time PCR assay, we detected a
significantly higher DNA load of the parasite in the lymph node and testis than in blood and urine samples collected from the dog. Our
results suggest that: 1) L. infantum infection can be associated with testicular lesions in naturally infected dogs; 2) genital involvement
could result in shedding of the parasites in the semen, favoring venereal transmission of the disease. Canine leishmaniasis (CanL) is a
severe sandfly-borne infection caused by the protozoan parasite Leishmania infantum (syn. L. chagasi) widely distributed in temperate and
subtropical countries. The clinical manifestations of the disease range from unapparent subclinical infections to a systemic disease
characterized by weight loss, lymphadenopathy, hemorrhagic diarrhea, ocular lesions, and hyperthermia, frequently associated also with
dermatological lesions. Dogs are the main reservoir of L. infantum and they play a central role in the transmission of the disease to
humans. The prevalence and the incidence of CanL have been underestimated until now . Transmission of the disease usually occurs through the
phlebotomine sand fly bite to the vertebrate host; however, CanL transmission through blood transfusion has been documented . Recent
evidence also suggests a venereal route of transmission due to the presence of parasites in the semen of infected dogs . However, the L.
infantum tropism to the canine genital system is still a controversial question. Here, we report a case of orchitis in a leishmaniotic dog
associated with the presence of Leishmania DNA in the testis. A 6-yr-old male Husky was hospitalized at the Department of Veterinary
Clinical Science of the Federico II University of Naples for the evaluation of a seborrhoeic, pruriginous dermatitis (Figure 1) with a
history of two months of alopecia and pruritus. The dog had been treated for sarcoptic mange without any improvement. Physical examination
showed an enlargement of the right testis (Figure 2). No lymphadenopathy was recorded. Routine fine needle aspiration cytology from the
enlarged testis was performed by the attending pathologist. Air-dried slides were prepared, and immediately stained with May Grunwald-Giemsa
Quick Stain (Bio-Optica, Milan). Clinical laboratory parameters were evaluated. Indirect immunofluorescent antibody test (IFAT) for
Leishmania spp. was carried out, and samples from blood, urine, lymph node, and testis were collected, and processed for the evaluation of
Leishmania DNA load by real-time PCR assay as previously described . A 6-yr-old male Husky dog showing clear evidence of dermatitis. Evident
enlargement of right testis in the Husky dog. Cytological examination of testis samples showed testicular round cells with course nuclear
chromatin, single large, prominent nucleoli, and moderate amounts of basophilic cytoplasm. The presence of many inflammatory cells, such as
neutrophils, with nuclear degenerative changes, several lymphocytes, plasma cells and a large number of macrophages containing intracellular
Leishmania amastigotes was observed. A diagnosis of chronic orchitis due to Leishmania spp. was made. Haematological and biochemical
parameters were consistent with CanL (Table 1) as demonstrated by the anemia, increased levels of total proteins, and high UP/C ratio. Real
time PCR and IFAT results confirmed the infection by L. infantum of the dog (Table 2). Dog laboratory parameters recorded at time 0 (T0) and
after 1 (T1), 2 (T2), 3 (T3), 6 (T6) and 12 (T12) months from the diagnosis Leishmania load (parasite DNA/ml) in blood, lymph node
aspirates, urine and testis samples at time 0 (T0) and after 1 (T1), 2 (T2), 3 (T3), 6 (T6) and 12 (T12) months from the diagnosis The dog
was treated with a combination of miltefosine at a dose of 2 mg/kg/day per 28 days and allopurinol at a dose of 10 mg/kg/day for all the
observation period (1 year). For follow-up assessment, biological samples were collected at the time of diagnosis (T0), and 1, 2, 3, 6, 12
months after the treatment had started (T1, T2, T3, T6 and T12, respectively). Before therapy, a very high parasite DNA load was detected in
lymph node aspirates (23602.83 parasite DNA/ml) and testis biopsy (14406.57 parasite DNA/ml), whereas lower load values were observed in
blood and urine samples (321.91 and 779 parasite DNA/ml, respectively). These results confirmed previous data on the comparative analysis of
different tissues for CanL diagnosis by conventional or real-time PCR . After 1 month of therapy, a progressive clinical improvement was
observed, including a moderate decrease of anti-Leishmania antibody titer together with a strong reduction of Leishmania DNA load in all
biological samples. However, the complete elimination of Leishmania DNA was never observed in all tissues. After the therapy, at 1 month
follow-up, the cytological evaluation of the testis did not show any inflammatory cell. This case report confirms that CanL can be
associated with testis lesions (orchitis) in naturally infected dogs. The Leishmania amastigotes in the testis apparently act as a causing
factor, triggering the inflammatory response. Experimental infection of hamsters with L. donovani resulted in testicular amyloidosis,
degeneration, progressive atrophy, and azoospermy. In this experimental model, the degenerative changes were also associated with
infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages containing amastigotes in the testes . In contrast, testicular amyloidosis was not observed in
our case and in other studies . In human visceral leishmaniasis, testicular involvement has not been extensively studied, but there is one
study reporting amastigotes in macrophages obtained by fine needle aspiration of the testes from a boy with a severe lymphoblastic leukemia
. Genital involvement during visceral leishmaniosis could result in shedding of Leishmania in the semen, favoring venereal transmission of
the disease, such as reported in humans . Venereal and vertical transmission of L. infantum in naturally infected dogs in Germany has been
reported . Inflammation associated with erosions and/or ulcerations and the presence of amastigotes in the penis and prepuce, as well as the
presence of macrophages containing amastigotes migrating through the urethral epithelium might contribute to Leishmania shedding in the
semen. Although the biological vector is the most important route of transmission, the possibility of CanL venereal transmission has
epidemiological significance, mostly in relation to the implementation of an eradication program. This route of transmission in dogs is
particularly relevant in areas where treatment and vaccination of dogs against CanL are frequent, since under those conditions potentially
infective dogs may not be readily identified, thus increasing the chance of using these dogs in reproduction, which may favor spread of the
disease. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. LM conceived the study, participated in the design, data collection, and
analysis of real-time PCR study, and drafted the manuscript. OP performed cytological analysis of testis tissues. RDM participated in the
hematological and biochemical data collection and analysis, and cooperated in drafting the manuscript. AEG participated in the overall study
design and realization. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript. This work was supported by a grant from
University of Naples Federico II (Italy).
