Human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection of the central nervous system (CNS) is a rare but life threatening condition which may follow
hematopoietic stem cell transplantation. Diagnosis, monitoring and treatment approaches rely on anecdotal reports. The different outcomes of
HCMV CNS disease in an adult and a pediatric T-cell depleted hematopoietic stem cell transplant (HSCT) recipient are reported. In the first
case, HCMV encephalitis emerged in the context of simultaneous impairment of the T- and B-cell immunity. Antiviral treatment only reduced
viral load in peripheral blood and the patient died. In the second case, an HCMV radiculopathy was observed and antiviral treatment was
adjusted on the basis of intrathecal drug level. In addition, donor HCMV-specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) were infused. Viral load in
the CNS decreased and the patient recovered from the acute event. In neither case were drug-resistant HCMV variants observed in blood or CNS
samples. T-cell depleted HSCT appears a predisposing condition for CNS HCMV infection since never observed in other HSCT recipients at our
center in the last 15 years. Intensive diagnostic approaches and timely aggressive combination treatments might improve clinical outcome in
these patients. Over the last 15 years at our center roughly 800 pediatric and 400 adult patients have received a hematopoietic stem cell
transplant (HSCT). Recently, T-cell depletion has been introduced both as a graft manipulation before infusion from haploidentical donors
and as an in vivo T-cell depletion in matched unrelated HSCT. While these procedures are not routinely performed, the number of T-cell
depleted HSCT has steadily increased over the last 5 years and consisting now about 25% of all pediatric and 60% of all adult HSCT performed
at out Instition. It should be noted that, depletion of T-cells before graft infusion or in the post transplant period reduces the risk for
graft-versus-host disease (GVHD), but also increases the risk for infectious complications . Human Cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infections of the
central nervous system (CNS) are rare but life-threatening complications following HSCT . The high mortality rate has been associated with
immune system impairment and reduced efficacy of antiviral treatment due to the poor bioavailability of ganciclovir (GCV) and foscarnet
(PFA) in cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) . We report on the different outcomes of CNS HCMV infection in two T-cell depleted HSCT recipients. All
T-cell depleted HSCT recipients undergo frequent virologic monitoring associated with pre-emptive treatment protocols for most common viral
infections, such as HCMV , EBV , and adenovirus . In more detail, in the absence of active HCMV infection or GVHD, real-time PCR for HCMV
DNA quantification in whole blood is performed once a week in the first three months post-transplant, once every two weeks in the next three
months and once every four weeks in the next six months. In the presence of active HCMV infection or GVHD, real-time PCR is performed twice
a week. Treatment with GCV was initiated upon detection of 10,000 HCMV DNA copies in whole blood . The emergence of GCV- and PFA-resistant
HCMV strains is monitored by sequencing HCMV UL97 and UL54 genes . In all pediatric patients receiving haploidentical HSCT, HCMV- EBV- and
adenovirus- specific donor derived CTLs are generated before transplantation and administered in case of refractory infections . A HCMV-
seropositive 58 year old man with high-risk acute myeloid leukemia received a matched unrelated HSCT from a HCMV-seronegative donor.
Transplant conditioning included 200 cGy total body irradiation (TBI), fludarabine, alemtuzumab and melphalan. Cyclosporine and a short
course of methotrexate were given as prophylaxis against GVHD. After engraftment, the patient presented with three recurrent asymptomatic
HCMV DNAemia episodes (>10,000 copies/mL) and pre-emptive treatment (GCV 5 mg/kg/twice a day) was administered at days 15–35, days 69–74 and
days 85–93. Nine months after transplant, prednisone (50 mg/Kg/once a day), polyclonal immunoglobulins (400 mg/Kg/ every four days) and
rituximab (RTX) (600 mg/once a week) were administered to treat thrombocytopenia (PLT 14.000/μL) in the presence of antibodies to platelet
membrane glycoproteins (GPIb/IX and GP IIb/IIIa). On day 396, two months after the last of four RTX doses, the patient showed progressive
memory deficit, temporal disorientation, astenia and weight loss. Expansion of the NK cell subset (1,449 cells/μL), reduced CD4 (132
cells/μL) and CD8 (79.5 cells/μL) T-cell counts and depletion of CD19 cells (0 cells/μL) were observed. Brain Magnetic Resonance Imaging
(MRI) showed several foci of restricted diffusion along the ventricles and the ependyma, consistent with encephalitis. Despite blood brain
barrier damage (albumin 877 mg/L CSF), a higher HCMV DNA level (346,780 copies/mL) in CSF than in blood (8,100 copies/mL) was observed. GCV
treatment (5 mg/kg/ twice a day) was initiated. On day 407, the emergence of a GCV-resistant HCMV strain was hypothesized based on fever and
dyspnoea: thus, GCV was empirically substituted with PFA (90 mg/kg/ twice a day). On day 418, HCMV DNA became undetectable in blood, but
persisted at a high level in CSF (88,920 copies/mL) and PFA treatment was supplemented with anti-HCMV immunoglobulins. Meanwhile,
Staphylococcus epidermidis was isolated in a blood culture. Subsequently, teicoplanin therapy was associated with disappearance of fever and
dyspnoea. Sequencing of HCMV UL97 and UL54 showed the absence of drug-resistant HCMV strains in blood or CSF. However, the patient
experienced progressive deterioration in neurological function, accompanied by a worsening of the brain MRI. On day 449 after
transplantation, HCMV DNA persisted at a high level in CSF (102,860 copies/mL) in parallel with severe blood brain barrier damage (albumin
1,310 mg/L). Severe lymphopenia with a predominance of NK cells (228 cells/μL), low numbers of CD8 (5.4 cells/μL) and CD4 T-cells (8.5
cells/μL), and a complete absence of B-cells was observed. Two days later, the patient became unresponsive, developed fever and eventually
died. The virologic follow-up is summarized in Figure 1A. Virologic monitoring of CNS HCMV infection in (A) an adult HSCT and (B) in a
pediatric HSCT recipient. The sensitivity of the in-house developed HCMV DNA Real-Time PCR is 100 copies/mL for blood specimens and 20
copies/mL for CSF specimens. A HCMV-seronegative 4 year old girl who received a haploidentical T-cell depleted HSCT from a HCMV-seropositive
donor to treat an acute lymphoblastic leukaemia (ALL), which had relapsed five months before. Transplant conditioning included TBI,
fludarabine, thiotepa and antithymocyte globulin. No GVHD prophylaxis was administered. After engraftment, on day 24, an HCMV infection was
detected in blood (2 pp65-positive cells/200,000 cells) and treatement with PFA (90 mg/kg/twice a day) was initiated. Despite antiviral
treatment, HCMV viral load increased (100,500 DNA copies/mL blood on day 59) and donor HCMV-specific CTLs were infused on days 59, 80 and
97. From day 97, GCV (5 mg/kg/ twice a day) was added to PFA. Persistent fever was present from day 90. On day 102, very low CD4 (39
cells/μL) and CD8 (33 cells/μL) T-cell counts were observed. On day 105, cutaneous GVHD was diagnosed, and methylprednisolone (1.5
mg/kg/once a day) was administered, followed by tacrolimus (1 g/once a day) and three doses of polyclonal immunoglobulin. On day 106, the
patient reported acute cervical and right knee pain, accompanied by fever, asthenia and headache. X-ray and CT scan did not show skeletal or
neurologic trauma. Tramadol hydrochloride (15 mg intravenously), ketorolac tromethamine (8 mg intravenously) were ineffective in controlling
pain and morphine (2 mg intravenously) was infused on day 106. A high HCMV DNA load (495,900 copies/mL) was detected in CSF in contrast with
9,200 HCMV DNA copies/mL in blood. Sequencing of HCMV UL97 and UL54 showed the absence of drug-resistant HCMV strains in blood or CSF. On
day 114 the neurological picture improved, but two weeks later viral load was still elevated. GCV was undetectable in plasma, while it was
present at a low basal concentration (0.55 μg/mL) in CSF. On day 132, GCV was administered at an increased dosage of 7.5 mg/kg twice a day.
HCMV DNA load declined progressively until disappearance, initially in blood (day 132) and then in CSF (day 158). From day 150, T-lymphocyte
reconstitution was observed (CD4, 115 cells/μL and CD8, 88 cells/μL, followed by CD4, 208 cells/μL and CD8, 397 cells/μL on day 181).
Unfortunately, on day 214, the patient relapsed ALL and died one month later. The virologic follow-up is summarized in Figure 1B. Following
allogeneic HSCT, HCMV end-organ localization is more commonly characterized by interstitial pneumonia and gastrointestinal disease, while
HCMV encephalitis and radiculoneuropathy have been seldomly reported . The pathogenesis of HCMV CNS disease is still debated. Recurrent
viremic events may lead to end-organ neurologic syndromes. Sub-optimal CNS antiviral drug penetration along with impaired local
immunosurveillance both represent causes of virus latency, uncontrolled viral replication and HCMV disease . In our patients, this serious
complication appeared in the context of persistent and severe T-cell depletion. In addition, in the adult patient, the immune impairment was
worsened by CD20 B-cell depletion. As also observed in other cases , HCMV CNS disease followed the failure of pre-emptive monotherapy to
control disseminated HCMV. The emergence of a drug-resistant HCMV strain was suspected, but excluded in both cases. Rescue treatment was
more aggressive in the pediatric patient, with the combined administration of PFA, high dose GCV and infusions of HCMV-specific CTL. The GCV
dosage was increased due to negligible GCV levels in both blood and CSF. Timely HCMV-specific CTL infusions were possible since at our
Institution viral-specific CTLs are generated in advance from the donor in all cases of haploidentical T-cell depleted pediatric
transplantation. Unfortunately, for the adult patient the graft was from a bank donor and precluded the possibility to generate in advance
specific CTLs. These two cases confirm the severity of CNS HCMV disease in HSCT recipients. However, they also show that frequent monitoring
and timely aggressive treatment interventions based upon combined administration of GCV and PFA and, whenever possible, HCMV-specific CTLs
may alter the course of the disease. Plasmatic and intrathecal antiviral drug levels should be monitored in order to avoid treatment failure
in the absence of drug-resistant HCMV strains. In consideration of the increasing number of patients who will receive an in vivo or in vitro
T-cell depleted transplant, new strategies should be urgently adopted to prevent prolonged HCMV immunodeficiency and the emergence of severe
HCMV-related complications. New antiviral drugs , vaccines , and reconstitution of HCMV cellular immunity should be considered when
designing new models of HCMV disease prevention. Written informed consent was obtained from the two patients (from the parents in the
pediatric case) for publication. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. CNS: Central
nervous system; CTL: Cytotoxic T lymphocytes; GCV: Ganciclovir; GVHD: Graft-versus-host disease; HCMV: Human cytomegalovirus; HSCT:
Hematopoietic stem cell transplant; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; PFA: Foscarnet; TBI: Total body irradiation. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. AAC, GG, PEA and MZ clinical case management and discussion. PV and MRB pharmacokinetics assessment. MF
and VR virological analysis and case discussion. AAC, MZ and FB case discussion, data analysis and manuscript writing. FB fund raising. All
authors discussed the data, read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/12/238/prepub We thank Daniela Sartori for manuscript editing and Laurene Kelly for revision of the
English. This work was partially supported by the Ministero della Salute, Ricerca Corrente (grant no. 80207).
