Spontaneous gastric perforation is a well known surgical emergency which carries significant mortality and morbidity. Well documented causes
in adults include peptic ulcer disease, drugs such as non-steroidal and gastric malignancy. Iatrogenic causes still remain relatively rare.
We report an interesting case of an acutely unwell young man who developed gastric perforation secondary to nasogastric intubation. A 32
year old man initially treated for gastroenteritis underwent laparotomy for acute intra-abdominal bleeding. This was found to be secondary
to a ruptured left hepatic artery aneurysm which was subsequently embolised. Patient had multiple laparotomies, a nasogastric tube inserted
at the second laparotomy was later found to be the cause of gastric perforation. On further investigation the patient’s multiple aneurysms
were histologically confirmed to be secondary to fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD). We present here a case of gastric perforation from a
nasogastric tube in an adult male and discussed its relevance to the diagnosis of FMD. This case highlights the importance of having a high
index of suspicion for this complication when managing patients with severe abdominal sepsis. Spontaneous gastric perforation can be life
threatening and carries significant morbidity and mortality. The mostcommon cause is peptic ulcer disease secondary to pharmacological
agents such as non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) or steroids and, less commonly, neoplasia.1 Iatrogenic causes such as
nasogastric (NG) and orogastric tube placement are extremely rare despite their frequent use in surgical and critically ill patients.1,2 We
present the case of a previously fit and well adult male patient who developed gastric perforation following NG intubation. A 32-year-old
man was admitted under the medical team with a 2-day history of diarrhoea, vomiting and generalised abdominal pain. On admission his
haemoglobin was 12.9g/dl and urea 10.3mmol/l. A working diagnosis of gastroenteritis was made and he was rehydrated with intravenous fluids.
Within hours of admission he became acutely unwell with increasing abdominal pain, distension and signs of shock. His haemoglobin was now
6.3g/dl and clinical examination demonstrated signs of intra-abdominal bleeding. An emergency laparotomy revealed free blood in the abdomen
and a ruptured aneurysm of the left hepatic artery. As it was not possible to control the bleeding by ligation, the abdomen was packed and
the patient taken to the angiography suite, where the left hepatic artery was embolised. In addition to the left hepatic artery aneurysm,
angiography also revealed splenic and renal artery aneurysms. A relaparotomy was performed 48 hours later to remove the abdominal pack and
ligate the large splenic artery aneurysm. An NG tube was inserted during this operation, which also found the left lobe of the liver to be
ischaemic but no gastric or intestinal compromise. One week later, the patient became acutely unwell, developed peritonitis and started to
deteriorate. Abdominal computed tomography was arranged to visualise the liver necrosis after the embolisation and revealed the radiolucent
tip of the NG tube outside the stomach wall (Figs 1 and 2) with extravasation of the oral contrast (Fig 2). The NG tube was pulled back and
an erect chest x-ray demonstrated new free air under the diaphragms (Fig 3). An emergency relaparotomy confirmed gastric perforation, which
was repaired by an omental patch. Figure 1Nasogastric tube tip seen out with the stomach lumen instead of Nasogastric tube tip seen out with
the stomach Figure 2Extravasation of oral contrast from site of gastric perforation Figure 3Erect chest x-ray confirming perforation
following withdrawal of the nasogastric tube Nasogastric tube tip seen out with the stomach lumen instead of Nasogastric tube tip seen out
with the stomach Extravasation of oral contrast from site of gastric perforation Erect chest x-ray confirming perforation following
withdrawal of the nasogastric tube Since discharge, histopathological analysis has confirmed the diagnosis of fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD)
as the cause for this patient’s multiple aneurysms. Oesophageal and pharyngo-oesophageal perforation are known complications of NG
intubation in adults, unlike gastric perforation, which is more common in infants.3 A case series reported by Ghahremani et al in 1980
described six cases of gastric perforation following NG intubation.1 At least three of these patients had clearly documented risk factors,
which could explain why perforation occurred so readily following NG tube placement (salicylate use, gastric anastomosis and metastatic
gastro-oesophageal cancer). In our case report, this previously well patient had no prior history of peptic ulcer disease or use of NSAIDs.
We do not know for certain why an NG tube caused perforation in our patient as the stomach is thick-walled and well perfused in adults.
Combined with the fact that the gastric blood supply was never compromised during embolisation, this renders the possibility of gastric
ischaemia unlikely but not impossible. A case reported by Lee et al2 and one by Ghahremani et al1 describe the occurrence of spontaneous
gastric perforation following NG intubation. The action of gastrointestinal juices on the plastic NG tubing can cause previously flexible NG
tubes to become rigid and potentially cause pressure ischaemia.2,4 Similar presentations have been described following NG intubation by a
transoesophageal echocardiography probe5 and Linton tube.1 The only significant finding in our case was that of the diagnosis of FMD. FMD is
a non-atherosclerotic, non-inflammatory arterial disease of unknown aetiology.6,7 It typically presents in the third to sixth decades with a
3:1 female-to-male preponderance. Muscular hyperplasia and fibrosis cause thickening of the arterial media with multifocal arterial
stenosis. The renal artery is the most commonly affected, with the internal carotid artery being the next most common.8,9 Both of these were
aneurysmal in our patient. Radiologically, FMD is classified into three types (Table 1).10 According to this classification, our patient had
the rare type III FMD, presenting as a ruptured left hepatic artery aneurysm. Table 1Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) classificationFMD
typeDescriptionIAffects 80% of cases consisting of a series of stenosis alternating with areas of dilatation. Histology shows medial
fibroplasias.IIAffects 15% of cases demonstrating unifocal with multifocal tubular stenosis. Histology shows intimal fibroplasias.IIIAffects
5% of cases involving a single wall of the artery but with resultant thinning that can cause true saccular aneurysm formation due to
atypical FMD. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) classification The aetiology of FMD is unknown although pathological studies demonstrate the
involvement of the smooth muscle cells of the arterial media. Changes in the smooth muscle ultrastructure lead to fibrosis, post-stricture
dilatation and subsequent saccular aneurysm formation.9 Little is known about the possible relations between FMD and other smooth muscle
organs in the body. Visceral FMD has been reported in the gut, causing cases of mesenteric ischaemia6 and proctitis.11 However, there are no
reports on its effect on the stomach. In 2001 Vuong et al described a case of gastric ischaemia secondary to fibrodysplasia in von
Recklinghausen’s disease12 while in 2003 Dinan et al reported a case of gastric wall weakening and perforation secondary to Duchenne
muscular dystrophy.13 As we know, the stomach also consists of smooth muscle and it is a possibility that this could also be involved in the
pathogenesis of FMD. Unfortunately, this can only be confirmed for certain by tissue sampling, which was not performed intra-operatively. We
present an interesting case of gastric perforation in an adult caused by NG intubation on a background of FMD. Although extremely rare, one
needs to be aware of this complication, particularly in patients with severe abdominal sepsis.
