Primary myelofibrosis is a myeloproliferative disorder characterized by bone marrow fibrosis, abnormal cytokine expression, splenomegaly and
anemia. The activation of JAK2 and the increased levels of circulating proinflammatory cytokines seem to play an important role in the
pathogenesis of myelofibrosis. Novel therapeutic agents targeting JAKs have been developed for the treatment of myeloproliferative
disorders. Ruxolitinib (INCB018424) is the most recent among them. To our knowledge, there is no evidence from clinical trials of an
increased risk of tuberculosis during treatment with JAK inhibitors. Here we describe the first case of tuberculosis in a patient treated
with Ruxolitinib, a male with a 12-year history of chronic idiopathic myelofibrosis admitted to our Institute because of fever, night
sweats, weight loss and an enlarging mass in the left inguinal area for two months. Treatment with Ruxolitinib may have triggered the
reactivation of latent tuberculosis because of an inhibition of Th1 response. Our case highlights the importance of an accurate screening
for latent tuberculosis before starting an anti-JAK 2 treatment. Primary myelofibrosis is a myeloproliferative disorder characterized by
bone marrow fibrosis, abnormal cytokine expression, splenomegaly and anemia. The molecular mechanisms underlying pathogenesis are poorly
understood. Recent studies have implicated mutations that directly or indirectly lead to a deregulated activation of tyrosine-protein
kinases, Janus-activated kinase 2 (JAK2) . Therefore, the activation of JAK2 and the increased levels of circulating proinflammatory
cytokines seem to play an important role in the pathogenesis of myelofibrosis . Novel therapeutic agents targeting JAKs have been developed
for the treatment of myeloproliferative disorders. Ruxolitinib (INCB018424) is the most recent among them . The suggested mechanism of
action of Ruxolitinib is the attenuation of cytokine signaling via the inhibition of JAK1 and JAK2, resulting in antiproliferative and
proapoptotic effects. The earliest studies showed that Ruxolitinib provides reductions in splenomegaly and constitutional symptoms . To our
knowledge, there is no evidence from clinical trials of an increased risk of tuberculosis during treatment with JAK inhibitors . Here we
describe the first case of tuberculosis in a patient treated with Ruxolitinib. A male with a 12-year history of chronic idiopathic
myelofibrosis was admitted to the Institute of Infectious Diseases, “Paolo Giaccone” University Polyclinic in Palermo, because of fever,
night sweats, weight loss and an enlarging mass in the left inguinal area for two months. Our patient had been enrolled in the COMFORT-II
study, a randomized, open-label Phase III study of oral JAK2 inhibitor Ruxolitinib versus best available therapy in patients with primary
myelofibrosis, post-polycythemia vera myelofibrosis, and post-essential thrombocythemia myelofibrosis. On admission, physical examination
showed a lymph node enlargment in the left inguinal area, crepitations at right lung base and diminished vesicular murmurs at left lung base
on pulmonary auscultation, firm hepatosplenomegaly (DL 22.5 cm), peripheral edema, slow speech without signs of meningeal irritation.
Laboratory test results revealed RBC 2770000 cells/mm3, Hb 8.1 g/dL, WBC 5490 cells/mm3 (N 64.8% L 26% M 8.4%), PLT 69000 cells/mm3, total
and direct bilirubin 3.56/2.49 mg/dL respectively, albumin 2.7 g/dL, erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 15 mm, C-reactive protein (CRP)
6.94 mg/dL. The patient underwent inguinal lymphadenectomy and microbiological examination showed acid-alcohol resistant bacilli and
positive polymerase chain reaction (PCR) for Mycobacterium tuberculosis. The chest radiograph revealed consolidation in the left middle lung
field. A QuantiFERON-TB gold was performed with positive result (11.3 U/mL). M. tuberculosis was cultured from three sputum samples.
Abdominal CT-scan showed confluent and colliquative para-aortic, inter aorta-cava, iliac and left inguinal lymph nodes. The standard
tuberculosis treatment with isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol was started. The main side effect of inhibitors of JAK1 and 2
can be an increased risk of infections, related to a depressed Th1 response and a reduced production of gamma interferon (INF-γ) . IFN-γ is
a key cytokine involved in protective immunity against Mycobacterium tuberculosis, regulating the expression of genes involved in
antimycobacterial effector functions. Mycobacterium tuberculosis leads to the activation of alveolar macrophages, with production of
cytokines that limit the growth of ingested organisms. Alveolar macrophages and dendritic cells produce IL-12 and additional cyto- and
chemokines such as TNF-α, IL-1, IL-6, IL-15, IL-18. IL-12 plays as a master regulator of Th1 response inducing the production of IFN-γ.
IL-12 binds to a high affinity receptor (IL-12R) and activates Janus family tyrosine kinases, leading to phosphorylation of tyrosine
residues of STAT3 and STAT4. The final event is the transcription of IFN-γ mRNA. IFN-γ activated macrophages produce bactericidal superoxide
and reactive nitrogen intermediates, as well as IL-12, IL-1 and IL-6 . Treatment with Ruxolitinib may have triggered the reactivation of
latent tuberculosis because of an inhibition of Th1 response. Our case highlights the importance of an accurate screening for latent
tuberculosis before starting an anti-JAK 2 treatment. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. CC, RR and LT analyzed clinical and therapeutic aspects of the case. LS, FL and MT conceived of the study, and
participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. MT designed and participated as haematology specialist. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
