Renal artery stenosis (RAS) is associated with increased cardiovascular mortality and morbidity and may constitute a treatable cause of
secondary hypertension. Fibromuscular dysplasia is frequently affecting children as the main cause of RAS, but is very rare in adults. We
present the case of a 19-year-old overweight patient, with no known pathological conditions in her medical history or family background,
admitted for severe, pulsing headaches during the past 3 months and increased blood pressure (BP) values for about a month (maximum BP
220/140 mmHg). The initial clinical exam and first-line imagistic methods did not provide a high suspicion for RAS. However, the invasive
methods established the diagnosis of right renal artery medial dysplasia. Balloon angioplasty was the treatment of choice. Renovascular
hypertension is the most common curable cause of secondary hypertension with a 4% prevalence rate in the general hypertensive population.
The renal artery stenosis (RAS), defined as the narrowing of one or both renal arteries, or of their branches, is frequently caused by
atherosclerosis (75% of all cases). More seldom, RAS is related to fibro-muscular dysplasia (FMD), while the remaining etiologies occur very
rarely in medical practice. Atherosclerosis and FMD differ in terms of presentation, clinical consequences as well as treatment: the balloon
angioplasty proved to be efficient and to provide positive results in FMD patients, whereas the best management for atherosclerosis lesions
is still controversial. We present the case of a 19-year-old overweight patient, with no known pathological conditions in her medical
history or family background, suspected of polycystic ovaries few months prior to her admittance. The patient presented severe, pulsing
headaches during the past 3 months, with various locations and increased blood pressure (BP) values for about a month (maximum BP 220/140
mmHg), an alteration of the overall status, nausea and vomiting. The initial clinical exam showed an overweight female patient with normal
cardiovascular, respiratory, and central nervous system examinations and no detectable heart or vascular (including abdominal) bruits. We
described a BP of 190/120 mmHg, a ventricular rate of 99/minute, hirsutism, excessive abdominal adipose tissue, pulsating peripheral
arteries and no neurological signs. The chest X-ray and the electrocardiogram revealed no additional information, ranging within normal
values. While initiating the antihypertensive treatment, we assessed the hypertension etiology for a young, overweight patient, with no
other cardiovascular risk factors. We emphasized a rather high suspicion of secondary hypertension. Biologically, the patient had a slight
hypokalemia (2.78 mmol/l), no inflammatory syndrome and otherwise normal blood tests. No changes were found concerning the plasmatic and
urinary cortisol and thyroid hormones’ dosages. The urine analysis revealed no signs of proteins, red cells or cellular elements. We
evaluated 17 hydroxyprogesterone, testosterone, luteinizing hormone, follicle-stimulating hormone, and prolactin in order to eliminate the
possibility of an 11-hydroxylase deficiency (known to associate elevated BP and hypokalemia tendency). Also, the progesterone was measured
on the 22nd day, in order to document the ovulation and plasma-free metanefrine. The results of the above mentioned tests were not relevant
for any endocrine possible cause of hypertension in this particular case (pheochromocytoma, Cushing disease,11 hydroxylase deficiency).
Moreover, the patient was not using oral contraceptives. Additionally, we attempted to dismiss the possibility of a renoparenchyma
hypertension. Therefore, we performed an abdominal and pelvic ultrasound that did not show any renal or adrenal masses, no major size
difference between the two kidneys (possibly suggesting renal artery stenosis). We tried to identify the other neurologic causes eventually
accounting for the severe headaches. To this end, we conducted a cerebral computer tomography (CT), with normal results and no suggestive
modifications. During the echocardiography investigation, a slight hypertrophy of the ventricular walls was described, without any impact on
the overall and segmented heart function and no hemodynamically significant valvulopathy. The patient was treated using beta blockers,
calcium channel blockers and angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEIs). Additionally, the uncontrolled BP and persisting headaches
imposed the use of a central alpha agonist (rilmenidine). Under these circumstances, we started to suspect a renovascular etiology or
primary hyperaldosteronism (a likely diagnosis, supported by the existing hypokalemia). Consequently, a contrast-enhanced abdominal CT was
performed, which diagnosed a right renal artery stenosis. A characteristic lesion was revealed (string of beads ranging for 10 mm, at 16 mm
from the aortic origin). The renal artery was permeable in the distal portion, with suggestive signs of secondary renal disease. Moreover,
the right kidney was slightly smaller that the left one (by 2.5 cm). This aspect was not established during the previous abdominal
ultrasound (which revealed an only 1 cm difference between the two kidneys) performed prior to CT (Fig. 1). A. Right renal artery stenosis
with a 10 mm moniliform characteristic aspect for DFM and layered, reduced gauge areas (up to 50%). B. Right nephrogram slightly delayed by
comparison to the left one (mostly in the upper half of the right kidney).C. Right kidney (95 mm), smaller than the left one (120 mm) -
bipolar diameter. A digital subtraction angiography confirmed the tight right renal artery stenosis (85%) and mild intra-luminal
irregularity (30%) of the left renal artery. Based on the above-mentioned facts, angioplasty for the stenotic lesion was later applied,
after previously correcting the hypokalemia and controlling the blood pressure with beta-blockers, calcium channel blockers and central
alpha agonists (Fig. 2). Renal artery arteriography A. Irregular, right renal artery stenosis (85%) and mild irregularity of the left renal
artery. B. Specific “string of beads” appearance in the middle part of the right renal artery. C. Subsequent to percutaneous balloon
angioplasty of the right renal artery: normal distal flow, with no residual stenosis. The evolution of the patient improved dramatically
after the procedure, both from the clinical point of view (absent headaches and controlled BP, below 140/90 mmHg) as well as the blood tests
(normal ionogram and kidney function). Two weeks after discharge, the patient’s BP was monitored with a 24 hours Holter that showed values
below 140/90mmHg, under a treatment with beta-blockers and double platelet antiaggregant (clopidogrel and aspirin), without any additional
antihypertensive treatment. A periodic monitoring of the patient was recommended while aiming to follow the evolution of the left renal
artery lesions as well as the eventual recurrence of the right renal artery stenosis. BP was also monitored both in the ambulatory and
through a 24h/BP Holter, at 3, 6 and 12 months. Fibromuscular dysplasia (FMD) is one of the two main causes of RAS, accounting for less than
10% of these cases . It refers to a group of rare, idiopathic, non-atherosclerotic, non-inflammatory conditions, which lead to the narrowing
of the small and medium size arteries. FMD mostly affects women below the age of 40 and more specifically, renal arteries in the distal two
thirds or even segmental segments; bilateral occurrence is quite frequent (60% of cases). Despite various hypotheses linking it to genetic,
mechanic or hormonal factors that are being suggested, the pathogenesis of this disease remains unknown. There is no generally accepted
classification. The histological classification includes 3 up to 5 types of fibro-muscular dysplasia. The most frequent type is the medial
multifocal dysplasia, characterized by the “string of beads” appearance (elastic tissue causing multiple stenosis, separated by aneurisms) .
Radiologists describe 3 aspects which can be observed: multifocal (string of beads) specific to the medial fibro-dysplasia, focal (less than
1 cm long) and tubular (longer than 1 cm). Two forms have been consensually agreed upon in common practice: the multifocal form suggested by
the characteristic aspect (80-90% of all cases) and the unifocal one that includes the other lesions, with no histological specificity . A
recent and sudden onset of severe arterial hypertension in a young female patient with negative pathological personal and family history may
raise the possibility of renal artery stenosis. Likewise, refractory hypertension to aggressive antihypertensive treatment is most likely to
indicate RAS, and this pathology needs to be investigated (class I, evidence level B) . In the present case report, subsequent to the RAS
diagnosis, the fibro-muscular dysplasia was suggested by female gender and age. During the initial evaluation, FMD is often overlooked or
the diagnostic is established incidentally due to an imagistic exam performed for other reasons. Unlike the atherosclerotic renal artery
stenosis, the evolution towards occlusion or ischemic atrophy of the ipsilateral kidney occurs rather seldom. In the study conducted by U.S.
Cooperative, only 2% of the FMD patients also suffered from kidney dysfunction. On the other hand, hypokalemia (due to the hyperreninemia)
can be a helpful predictor for reno-vascular disease, as emphasized by the above-mentioned study. As far as the present case was concerned,
the initial clinical and first-line imagistic evaluations were rather deceiving and poorly linked to the respective pathology (absence of
abdominal bruits and similar renal size). The differential for FMD is set by comparison, to atherosclerotic stenosis, vasculitis, Takayasu
arteritis, various rare family conditions (Ehlers–Danlos syndrome, Marfan syndrome, Alport syndrome, alpha1-antitrypsin deficiency). As far
as our case was concerned, we considered the patient’s age as well as the negative elements for other causes of RAS the absence of plaque,
atherosclerotic risk factors, inflammatory syndrome or thickening of the arterial walls and the lack of family history of the
disease/syndromes. Several imagistic methods are useful in diagnosing fibro-muscular dysplasia. When there is suspicion of RAS, duplex
ultrasonography (DUS) of the renal arteries should be performed as first-line imaging test . However, in the event of a positive result, the
diagnosis shall also be confirmed by other imagistic methods. Two retrospective studies conducted on 20 and respectively 25 FMD patients
revealed an 87% sensitivity for computer tomography angiography (CTA) by comparison to 97% for magnetic resonance angiography (MRA) in
detecting angiographically confirmed lesions . Another prospective study proved the excellent specificity of these two methods (99% and
96%). On the other hand, a sensibility of 28% for CTA and respectively 22% for RMA was established concerning the detection of multifocal
lesions (medial fibro-dysplasia) . The current guidelines for a day-to-day medical practice recommend that the FMD diagnosis should be based
on CTA or MRA (class I, evidence level B). Also, it may be determined due to a digital subtraction angiography (the gold-standard), when
there is high clinical suspicion and the results of the non-invasive tests are inconsistent (class I, evidence level C) . FMD treatment must
follow several goals: renal parenchyma protection while preserving renal function, BP control and the prevention of cardiovascular events.
It is imperative to manage aggressively the additional risk factors by lowering lipid levels, smoking cessation and glucose levels . Medical
treatment is first indicated for the hypertensive patient. The current guideline’ recommendations for angioplasty refer to treatment-
resistant hypertension, drug intolerance, signs of ischemic nephropathy (kidney function alteration and kidney size’ changes) or possible
curable hypertension after revascularization. The prospect of a long-term maximal anti-hypertensive treatment for a young woman with
secondary renal impairment was a strong argument for revascularization, especially when considering the eventual BP control and curable
hypertension. Favorable prognostic predictive factors such as age under 40, less than 5 years of hypertension and maximum BP under 160 mmHg
were considered. There are many controversies regarding the treatment of renal artery stenosis. Although balloon angioplasty remains the
treatment of choice for FMD, primary stent placement for the atherosclerotic RAS is still debatable. Two random studies (Astral and Star)
failed to bring enough evidence in favor of additional stent angioplasty when compared to medical treatment alone, in terms of BP control
and renal function . The results of two ongoing studies (Radar and Coral) enrolling 300 respectively 1080 atherosclerotic RAS patients are
still awaited for, hopefully able to define the role of the revascularization through stent angioplasty . FMD responds well to balloon
angioplasty, with positive long-term outcomes and low risk of restenosis. If distinctively necessary, the current guidelines recommend stent
implantation in FMD patients (class I, level of evidence B). Balloon angioplasty was highlighted by numerous published data as providing
significant reduction in BP values up to normal immediately after the procedure as well as during the long-term follow-up . There are no
controlled studies comparing angioplasty and surgical revascularization. Current guidelines recommend balloon angioplasty for multifocal or
troncular fibro-muscular lesions, and surgery for complex lesions (at the junction or reaching the segmental branches, stenosis associated
with micro-aneurysms) or unsuccessful angioplasty (class IIb, evidence level C) . In 2010, a meta-analysis assessing 2630 FMD patients
revascularized surgically and by angioplasty revealed a 36% and respectively 54% success rate (success defined as BP below 140/90 mmHg).
Periprocedural risks were reported as significant (12% for balloon angioplasty and 17% for surgery). However, in terms of major
complications, the respective percentages were 6% and 15% . Negative prognostic factors after the intervention are related to patient’s age,
long period of arterial hypertension, onset of the renal parenchyma disease, type of lesion and associated atherosclerotic lesions. The
medical treatment involves angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitors (ACEI), calcium channel blockers for unilateral lesions, concomitantly
aiming to control the BP and to prevent the progression of kidney dysfunction (class I, evidence level A) . ACEI are contraindicated in
bilateral severe RAS and single functional kidney. Thiazides, hydralazine, angiotensin II receptor blockers, and b-blockers are also
effective in achieving target blood pressures in individuals with RAS . A recent cohort trial revealed a death rate reduction for patients
treated with ACEIs. Since FMD does not affect the vascular endothelium, there are no indications for anti-aggregate treatment. The case
report underlines the difficulty of reaching a correct diagnosis and its’ importance. In addition, it highlights the multiple imagistic
methods needed in order to accurately identify the respective etiology and reveals the usefulness of the interventional treatment for this
rare pathology. Balloon angioplasty emphasizes favorable outcomes such as increasing life expectancy and improving the quality of life for
these patients, as well as improving their long-term prognosis.
