We encountered a patient with cystoid macular edema (CME) secondary to paclitaxel use. A 57-year-old man presented with gradual decreased
bilateral vision. His chemotherapeutic regimen consisted of bevacizumab, paclitaxel (175 mg/m2 for 5 months), and carboplatin. Optical
coherence tomography imaging revealed bilateral CME greater than 500 µm. However, one year later, visual acuity was improved, best-corrected
Snellen visual acuity was 40 / 80 in each eye, and CME was spontaneously improved. Our study confirmed that macular edema associated with
paclitaxel use shows spontaneous resolution and improvement of visual acuity after a change of chemotherapeutic regimen. Macular edema is a
condition that is usually secondary to an underlying disease and that causes severe visual impairment. It is suspected that cystoid macular
edema (CME) is a result of breakdown of the blood-retinal barrier or accumulation of fluid in the intracellular space . We report a patient
with CME secondary to paclitaxel (Taxol; Bristol-Meyers Squibb Co., New York, NY, USA) use. A 57-year-old man presented with gradual
decreased bilateral vision. The past medical history was significant for stage 4 lung adenocarcinoma. His chemotherapeutic regimen consisted
of bevacizumab, paclitaxel (175 mg/m2 for 5 months), and carboplatin. Six cycles of chemotherapy over five months has been performed and
followed by monthly intravenous bevacizumab injection for maintenance therapy. On initial examination, best-corrected Snellen visual acuity
was 20 / 80 in each eye. Anterior segment examination showed normal findings. Findings of fundus examination were within normal limits
except for bilateral cystic change of the macula. Fluorescein angiograms of the right eye showed weak hyperfluorescence in the parafoveal
area in the late frame, demonstrating macular edema. Optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging revealed bilateral CME with a foveal
thickness greater than 500 µm (Fig. 1). No central scotoma was found in visual field examination, and b-wave amplitude was diminished in
scotopic and mesopic electroretinogram. The CME was thought to be secondary to paclitaxel use, which had been discontinued for one month at
that time. Intravitreal bevacizumab injection in the right eye and intravitreal bevacizumab plus triamcinolone injection in the left eye
were performed. Six weeks later, intravitreal triamcinolone injection in the right eye was performed. Visual acuity had not improved, and
Snellen visual acuity was 20 / 80 in each eye. CME was unchanged in OCT image in both eyes (Fig. 1). However, one year later, visual acuity
was improved, best-corrected Snellen visual acuity was 40 / 80 in each eye, and CME was spontaneously improved (Fig. 2). Paclitaxel is an
anticancer drug used to treat various malignancies including breast and lung cancers. Paclitaxel restricts microtubule mobility and inhibits
mitosis. Toxic effects to bone marrow are the main adverse effect of this agent. Ophthalmic adverse effects include impaired visual acuity,
photopsia, and optic neuropathy . Teitelbaum and Tresley have reported a case of macular edema associated with docetaxel use. Telander and
Sarraf also documented OCT findings of CME secondary to docetaxel therapy and treatment with oral acetazolamide because visual acuity was
not improved after cessation of docetaxel therapy. Joshi and Garretson reported a case of macular edema associated with paclitaxel use.
Paclitaxel is an analogue of docetaxel with similar mechanisms of action. They described spontaneous resolution of CME and improvement of
visual acuity after a change of chemotherapeutic regimen. Our case is the first report to document a case of intravitreal bevacizumab plus
triamcinolone injection in CME secondary to paclitaxel use. Intravitreal bevacizumab plus triamcinolone injection showed no improving effect
on CME secondary to paclitaxel use, and it is suspected that systemic bevacizumab injection was not effective in the prevention and
treatment of CME in this case based on the previous chemotherapeutic regimen. CME is usually associated with intraocular inflammation,
venous occlusive disease, diabetic retinopathy, and cataract surgery. The pathophysiology of CME in this case is unclear, but we propose
that CME secondary to paclitaxel use may be not associated with vascular endothelial grow factor or intraocular inflammation considering the
lack of effectiveness of bevacizumab plus triamcinolone. As in the case of Joshi and Garretson , our study confirmed that macular edema
associated with paclitaxel use shows spontaneous resolution and improvement of visual acuity after a change of chemotherapeutic regimen.
Ophthalmic evaluation is needed in all patients using paclitaxel or docetaxel. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article
was reported. (A-D) The right eye of the patient. (A) Before intravitreal bevacizumab plus triamcinolone injection, fundus showed cystic
change of the macula. (B) Fluorescein angiograms (FA) showed hyperfluorescence in the macula in the late frame. (C) Optical coherence
tomography (OCT) showed cystoid macular edema (CME). (D) Six weeks after the injection, CME was unchanged in OCT. (E-H) The left eye of the
patient. (E) Before intravitreal bevacizumab plus triamcinolone injection, fundus showed cystic change of the macula. (F) FA showed
hyperfluorescence in the macula in the late frame. (G) OCT showed CME. (H) Six weeks after the injection, CME was unchanged in OCT. The
right (A) and left (B) eyes of the patient. One year later, optical coherence tomography showed cystoid macular edema improved. The central
retinal thickness was decreased from 502 µm to 246 µm in the right eye and from 513 µm to 228 µm in the left eye.
