Iodine-131-metaiodiobenzylguanidine (131I-MIBG) therapy combined with allogeneic cord blood stem cell transplantation (SCT) was used to
treat a 4-year-old girl with recurrent neuroblastoma. The patient experienced relapse 2 years after receiving first-line therapies, which
included chemotherapy, surgical resection, irradiation, and autologous peripheral SCT. Although 131I-MIBG treatment did not achieve complete
remission, the size of the tumor was reduced after treatment. Based on our findings, we suggest that 131I-MIBG treatment with myeloablative
allogeneic SCT should be considered as first-line therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma patients when possible. Neuroblastoma is the most
common extracranial solid tumor of childhood. Although dose-intensive treatments have improved the prognosis of patients with advanced
neuroblastoma, the prognosis of this disease remains very poor, and the survival rate is estimated to be 25% . Myeloablative allogeneic stem
cell transplantation (SCT) rescue has not been extensively used to treat neuroblastoma, primarily because of the toxicity of megatherapy
regimens and the risk of graft-versus-host disease (GVHD) . Recent reports have described the use of iodine-131-metaiodiobenzylguanidine
(131I-MIBG) treatment combined with autologous SCT rescue in patients with recurrent neuroblastoma; however, this treatment does not always
yield satisfactory results . The subject was a 2-year-old female with a diagnosis of stage 4 neuroblastoma with unfavorable histology
according to the international neuroblastoma pathology classification, non-amplification of MYCN, and primary localization to the left
adrenal gland with metastasis to the thoracic vertebrae, pelvis, and bone marrow. Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA) was elevated to 448.2 μg/mg
creatinine (Cr) and homovanillic acid (HVA) was increased to 127.8 μg/mg Cr. The patient was treated with chemotherapeutic drugs
(cyclophosphamide, vincristine, therarubicin, and cisplatin), irradiation of the abdominal cavity, and surgical resection of the adrenal
gland, followed by autologous peripheral blood stem cell transplantation (PBSCT). After treatment, VMA and HVA were normalized to 2.4 and
4.6 μg/mg Cr, respectively, and 123I-MIBG accumulation was not detected by scintigraphy. The recurrence, which presented with multiple
metastases in the bone marrow, occurred 2 years after PBSCT (Figure 1A). At this time, VAM and HVA had increased to 273.5 and 87.7 μg/mg Cr,
respectively. After 4 cycles of chemotherapy with topotecan and etoposide, 131I-MIBG treatment was performed at a dose of 18 mCi/kg. We
decided to perform cord blood stem cell transplantation (CBSCT) for hematopoietic rescue after the myeloablative therapies. 123I-MIBG
scintigrams taken before (A) and after (B)131I-MIBG treatment with allo-CBSCT.123I-MIBG accumulation decreased after treatment in the
parietal bone and humerus (black arrows), but it was still detected in the thoracic vertebrae and femur (white arrows). After injection of
131I-MIBG (18 mCi/kg), the patient was isolated in a shielded room for 7 days. Nine days after 131I-MIBG infusion, the patient was treated
with busulfan (1.1 mg/kg/day, 4 times daily on days −8 to −5) and melphalan (90 mg/m2/day, once daily, on days −4 and −3) before cord blood
stem cells with one HLA-DR locus mismatch were transfused . Cyclosporine-A and methylprednisolone were administered as a prophylaxis against
acute GVHD. Although the patient developed grade II acute GVHD with skin erythema which was controlled additional predonisolone, no other
significant complications occurred. The patient’s neutrophil count was >500 /μl at 26 days and the platelet count was >20,000 /μl at 35 days
after CBSCT. VMA and HVA were normalized to 22.6 and 10.1 μg/mg Cr, respectively. 123I-MIBG accumulation was significantly decreased in
parietal bone and humerus (Figure 1, black arrows); however, 123I-MIBG was still detected in the thoracic vertebrae and femur after CBSCT
(Figure 1B, white arrows). Unfortunately, the patient died 12 months after CBSCT, even though VAM and HVA were within the normal ranges for
5 months. Because MIBG is selectively concentrated in sympathetic nervous tissue, 131I-MIBG tends to accumulate in neuroblastoma cells .
Thus, 131I-MIBG is potentially capable of selectively delivering a substantial radiation dose to neoplastic cells while sparing normal
tissues. In our patient, the number of residual neuroblastoma cells decreased after 131I-MIBG treatment and CBSCT. Allo-SCT for the
treatment of neuroblastoma is considered an alternative method when autologous stem cells cannot be harvested in sufficient quantity. The
superiority of allo-SCT to auto-SCT has not been clearly demonstrated , although some studies have reported a graft-versus-tumor (GVT)
effect in patients with advanced neuroblastoma . We believe that although 131I-MIBG treatment combined with allo-CBSCT megatherapy did not
induce complete remission, the normalization of VMA and HVA, which lasted for 5 months, and the prolonged survival for 12 months were due to
the reduction of neuroblastoma cells by 131I-MIBG treatment together with a GVT effect. Our patient experienced relapse in the bone marrow 2
years after auto-PBSCT, suggesting that some minimal residual disease remained, even though VMA and HVA were within normal ranges, and the
accumulation of 123I-MIBG was not observed. Chemotherapy alone has been reported to yield unsatisfactory results when used to target
neuroblastoma cells in the bone marrow . Thus, complete elimination of minimal residual neuroblastoma is an important therapeutic goal.
131I-MIBG and GVT could target neuroblastoma cells by different mechanisms; therefore, they could be synergistically effective against
minimal residual disease. Based on our experience with this patient, we propose that 131I-MIBG treatment combined with allo-SCT may be an
effective first-line therapy for high-risk neuroblastoma (Stage 4 or MYCN amplification); however, the cost and availability of equipment to
perform 131I-MIBG treatment may be prohibitive for some institutions. Treatment of 131I-MIBG with allo-SCT was effective and safe for high-
risk neuroblastoma. Written informed consent was obtained from the parents of the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. All authors have equally participated in drafting of the manuscript and/or critical revision of the
manuscript for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
