Epidermoid tumor of the cavernous sinus is rare. The aim of this case report is to discuss the role of neuroendoscopes in the removal of
such lesions. A 21-year-old man presented with 6-year history of progressive headache, diplopia, and visual disturbance. Work-up revealed an
epidermoid tumor located in the right cavernous sinus. An extradural transcavernous approach was utilized via a traditional frontotemporal
craniotomy with endoscopic assistance. The postoperative course was uneventful with immediate improvement of the patient's headache.
Postoperative magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated complete removal of the tumor. There were no signs of recurrence during a 2-year
follow-up period. The endoscope is a useful tool for removing epidermoid tumors from the cavernous sinus and enhances visualization of areas
that would otherwise be difficult to visualize with microscopes alone. Endoscopes also help minimize the retraction of neurovascular
structures. Epidermoid tumors are rare lesions, accounting for 0.7-1.8% of all intracranial tumors.1,2 They are believed to be non-
neoplastic lesions and to arise from ectopic ectodermal cells. Although the vast majority of epidermoid tumors are intradural, extradural
locations have also been reported.3 The most common locations are the cerebellopontine angle, parasellar area, and middle cranial fossa.1,4
Cavernous sinus (CS) involvement is rare. To the best of our knowledge, there have been only 18 cases in the literature describing the
microsurgical management of epidermoid tumors located in the CS.1-5 We present herein a case in which we used an endoscope to assist
microsurgical removal of an epidermoid tumor from the cavernous sinus. A 21-year-old male presented with progressive headache, diplopia, and
visual disturbance. He exhibited ptosis of the eyelid as well as limited movement of the right eye. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging showed a
well demarcated mass (28×21×21 mm) that was slightly hypointense on T1-weighted images, hyperintense on T2-weighted images, and hyperintense
on diffusion-weighted images. MR spectroscopy showed an increased lactate peak. The patient had undergone gamma knife radiosurgery two years
previously at an another institution for the treatment of his lesion without a tissue diagnosis. A right frontotemporal craniotomy was
performed. An extradural approach to the cavernous sinus was followed after mobilization of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus. The
mass was visualized to protrude laterally through the thickened and fibrotic cavernous sinus wall. The identification of the cranial nerves
within the cavernous sinus was challenging despite the use of an intraoperative microscope. Therefore, a very small incision was made
between what we believed to be the trochlear nerve and the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve. A yellowish-white liquid was egressed
and suctioned out from the incision (Fig. 1). Then, a neuroendoscope, which measured 18 cm in length and 4 mm in diameter with 30° rod
lenses (Karl Storz, Tuttllingen, Germany) was advanced through the small opening. Using the endoscope, a glistening white cauliflower-like
mass adherent to the inner layer of the wall of the cavernous sinus was identified. Under a 0° rod endoscopic view, a micro cup pituitary
forcep 1 mm in diameter (Codman, Raynham, MA, USA) was inserted together into the cavernous sinus for piecemeal resection of the tumor. It
was difficult to manipulate a straight forcep in a single 0° rod endoscopic view. Therefore, at the edge of the inner wall of the cavernous
sinus and the carotid artery, 30° and 70° rod lenses were used to provide a variety of angled views. Wide viewing angles allowed us to
visualize every corner of the cavity without any blind spots, although we worked through a narrow corridor that permitted only one each of
endoscope and a single-shaft micro-forcep. Finally, using a 0° and 30° rod endoscope, gentle irrigation with saline was performed in the
hollowed cavity. Following the gross total removal of the tumor including the capsule, the cavernous segment of the internal carotid artery
(ICA) as well as parts of the thinned nerve fibers on the wall were visualized (Fig. 1). These nerves could not be visualized in their
entirety, likely due to inflammation and fibrosis caused by previous radiosurgery. Even the plane between the nerves and a layer of the
cavernous sinus was impossible to identify beyond dissection. A portion of the tumor encased the ICA and abducens nerve. Nevertheless, this
tumor portion was meticulously dissected away. Another portion of the tumor extended intradurally above the tentorial hiatus, and was
removed with a micro-pituitary forceps without necessitating further incision. The arachnoid was not violated. The patient's postoperative
course was uneventful with immediate improvement of his headache. MR imaging performed on the first postoperative day showed complete
removal and signal change, especially in diffusion-weighted MR images (Fig. 2). However, the patient's oculomotor nerve palsy did not
improve. Histopathologic examination of the surgical specimen revealed a cystic tumor lined with simple stratified keratinizing squamous
epithelium, confirming the diagnosis of epidermoid tumor (Fig. 3). There were no signs of recurrence during a 2-year follow-up. Epidermoid
tumors are benign pearly cystic lesions lined with simple stratified keratinizing squamous epithelium.2,6 According to Kaido, et al.,7
during closure of the neural tube, ectodermal cells are sometimes left within the neural tube, and remain entrapped in the meninges around
the nerves and grow gradually by spreading in the cisterns enveloping neurovascular structures of the skull base. Epidermoid tumors are
rarely located in the cavernous sinus. Gharabaghi, et al.1 describe three different types of epidermoid tumors of the cavernous sinus. The
first is extracavernous in origin and invades or compresses the cavernous sinus. The second originates in the lateral wall of the cavernous
sinus and is located interdurally between the inner and outer layers of the lateral wall of the cavernous sinus.3 The third consists of the
true intracavernous epidermoid tumors, which tend to encase the ICA, encircling and displacing the cranial nerves laterally. Our case falls
into the third group. In general, surgical management of the third type of epidermoid tumors is fraught with challenges, such as limited
exposure without retraction of the cranial nerves. Therefore, a variety of surgical strategies have been described. Ikezaki, et al.5
reported a case of a purely intracavernous epidermoid tumor, which was surgically removed via a pterional approach utilizing Dolenc's
anterolateral triangle. Because of the difficulty encountered in identifying the abducens nerve, the removal of the capsule in its entirety
was not possible so as not to cause abducens nerve palsy. On the other hand, Sekhar, et al.8 described a case of total removal, including
the tumor capsule along with the invaded oculomotor nerve, following the reconstruction of sural nerve. However, the patient in this case
had already oculomotor nerve palsy. Fries and Perneczky9 described the advantages of the endoscope as an adjunct tool in microsurgery,
including reduced surgical trauma, especially in avascular lesions such as epidermoid tumors. Our goal in using the endoscope was to
minimize the risk of neurovascular injury and achieve better exposure. In our case, after intracapsular tumor removal, the remaining parts
of the lesion were visualized through the endoscope without any retraction of the cranial nerves. Despite this advantage, the outcome of the
patient's cranial nerve functions was not as favorable as that of his pain symptoms. It is possible that the patient's previous radiosurgery
might have contributed to this outcome. Although the endoscope offers certain advantages such as better intraoperative visualization,
minimization of surgery-related trauma, shorter hospital stays, shorter recovery periods, and less postoperative discomfort, there are
certainly some limitations. First of all, the images obtained via an endoscope are two-dimensional. Second, it is challenging to maintain
visualization and control in cases of severe bleeding, although epidermoid tumors are not vascular. The third limitation is heat injury to
nearby cranial nerves as a result of high temperature generated on the tip of the endoscope by the light source. Therefore, continuous cold
irrigation or turning off the light periodically during long operations is advisable. In summary, epidermoid tumors are benign lesions,
however, when located in the cavernous sinus, they pose a number of challenges from the standpoint of surgical management. In this context,
endoscopes may assist in achieving adequate exposure, minimizing surgical trauma and improving the extent of resection. The authors have no
financial conflicts of interest. (A) The extradural transcavernous approach, peeling the outer dural layer away from the lateral wall of the
cavernous sinus. (B and C) Exposure of the yellowish-white tumor following a small incision in the membranous layer of the lateral wall of
the cavernous sinus. (D) The advancement of a 4 mm rigid neuroendoscope inside the cavernous sinus through the small incision. (E) 0°-angled
endoscopic visualization of a glistening white cauliflower-like mass adherent to the inner layer of the wall. (F) Following removal of the
tumor, the cavernous segment of the internal carotid artery became visible, under a 30°-angled view. SOF, superior orbital fissure; FD,
frontal dura; TD, temporal dura; IL, inner membranous layer of lateral cavernous sinus wall; T, epidermoid tumor; E, shaft of
neuroendoscope; S, shaft of suction; P, anterior petroclinoidal fold; C, thinned trochlear nerve (dotted lines); I, cavernous segment of the
internal carotid artery (dashed lines). (A) Preoperative magnetic resonance image demonstrates space-occupying slight hyper signal intensity
within the right cavernous sinus and more bright lesions on diffusion-weighted images. (B) Magnetic resonance imaging performed on the first
postoperative day showing complete removal of the tumor and signal change. Histopathologic examination revealed a cystic tumor lined with
simple stratified keratinizing squamous epithelium.
