Malunited intra-articular fracture of the proximal inter-phalangeal (PIP) joint sometimes causes problems, such as range of motion (ROM)
limitation in the joint or lack of digital dexterity; however, the treatment method has not yet been established. We report a juvenile case
of osteochondral autograft tranplantation to treat a malunited intra-articular fracture of the middle finger. A 14-year-old boy was injured
at the right middle finger by a baseball impact and underwent conservative treatment. At 5 months after the injury, he complained of
continuing pain and restricted ROM. Plain X-ray and CT images showed a bony defect in the articular surface of the PIP joint of the right
middle finger. He was diagnosed with malunited intra-articular fracture of the PIP joint and underwent surgical treatment. First, through a
palmar incision, a columnar-shaped drill hole was made at the recipient site of osteochondral defect. Then a cylindrical osteochondral plug,
4.5 mm in diameter, harvested from the knee, was inserted into the recipient hole and press-fitted. One year after surgery, the patient has
neither pain nor ROM limitation of the finger and the knee joint. MRI showed smooth articular surface of the PIP joint. The benefits of our
method include use of articular cartilage as a reconstruction material, availability for a relatively large cartilage defect, and stability
of the autograft for the press-fitting method, which enable early mobilization exercise after surgery. Malunited intra-articular fracture of
the proximal inter-phalangeal (PIP) joint sometimes causes problems, such as range of motion (ROM) limitation in the joint or lack of
digital dexterity. Recent treatment methods for reconstruction of articular cartilage disorder include tissue engineering and gene therapy
as well as conventional arthrodesis, artificial joint replacement, and osteochondral transplantation. Of these, osteochondral autograft
transplantation is believed to be the most reliable treatment method. Donor sites include the costo-osteochondral junction and the
carpometacarpal (CM) joints , although a long-term prognosis is uncertain for the former due to the risk of ossification, while the latter
is not sufficient to reconstruct a wide-range defect due to the limited size of osteochondral plug harvest. In our study, the donor site was
selected from a non-weight-bearing portion of the lateral condyle of the knee joint, as it consists of an articular cartilage and relatively
large osteochondral plug can be harvested. Herein, we report a case of osteochondral autograft transplantation (OAT) to treat a malunited
intra-articular fracture of the proximal interphalangeal joint (PIP) of the right middle finger. Our case was a 14-year-old right-handed boy
who complained of pain in his right middle finger. The finger was injured by a baseball impact, and the treating hospital performed splint
fixation after diagnosing a fracture of the right middle finger. The patient failed to follow up his treatment on his own volition. However,
pain in the right middle finger continued and the range of motion became restricted. He consulted our institution 5 months after injury. At
first consultation, there was swelling in the PIP joint of the right middle finger and displacement of that finger to the ulnar side at
extension position (Fig. 1). The range of motion of the PIP joint was limited between extension 0° and flexion 60°.Fig. 1Photograph at the
first consultation. a Displacement to the ulnar side is seen on extension. b The ROM of the PIP joint was restricted within 60° at flexion
Photograph at the first consultation. a Displacement to the ulnar side is seen on extension. b The ROM of the PIP joint was restricted
within 60° at flexion X-ray images of posterior and anterior views showed bony defect in the articular surface of the PIP joint in the
middle phalanx and displacement of the finger to the ulnar side. X-ray image of the lateral view showed depressed articular surface of the
PIP joint (Fig. 2). CT images showed a bony defect sized 5 × 6.5 × 2 mm in the articular surface of the PIP joint in the middle phalanx
(Fig. 3). From these imaging findings, we diagnosed the case as malunited intra-articular fracture of the PIP joint and decided to conduct
surgical treatment. First, an incision was made by palmar approach and the PIP joint was exposed. A cartilage defect approximately 5 mm in
diameter was seen in the articular surface of the middle phalanx, and a cartilage defect of 1 × 2 mm in size was seen in the palmar side of
the articular surface of the proximal phalanx (Fig. 4). After creating the drilled recipient hole at the osteochondral lesion of the middle
phalanx, a cylindrical osteochondral plug of 4.5 mm diameter harvested from the left knee was inserted and press-fitted to the hole. The
osteochondral plug was harvested using the mosaicplasty autogenous osteochondral grafting system (Acufex, Smith and Nephew, Andover, MA,
USA) from a non-weight-bearing site on the upper lateral femoral condyle. The osteochondral plug was obtained with an obliquely angled
cartilage surface along the long axis to facilitate insertion in the recipient hole (Fig. 4c). The cartilage defect in the proximal phalanx
was left untreated as the range of damage was minimal.Fig. 2X-ray image before treatment. Posterior and anterior view show bone defect in
the articular surface of the PIP joint of the middle phalanx and displacement of the middle finger to the ulnar side. Lateral view shows
similar findingsFig. 3CT images before treatment. a Axial image, b sagittal image, and c 3D image. A bony defect 5.0 × 6.5 × 2.0 mm in size
was seen in the articular surface of the PIP joint of the middle phalanxFig. 4Operative procedure. a PIP joint was exposed by a palmar
incision. Osteochondral defect of approximately 5 mm in diameter is seen in the articular surface of the middle phalanx. b, c Oblique
osteochondral plug of 4.5 mm in diameter was harvested from the knee. d The drilled recipient hole was made in the osteochondral lesion of
the middle phalanx, and the osteochondral plug was inserted and press-fitted X-ray image before treatment. Posterior and anterior view show
bone defect in the articular surface of the PIP joint of the middle phalanx and displacement of the middle finger to the ulnar side. Lateral
view shows similar findings CT images before treatment. a Axial image, b sagittal image, and c 3D image. A bony defect 5.0 × 6.5 × 2.0 mm in
size was seen in the articular surface of the PIP joint of the middle phalanx Operative procedure. a PIP joint was exposed by a palmar
incision. Osteochondral defect of approximately 5 mm in diameter is seen in the articular surface of the middle phalanx. b, c Oblique
osteochondral plug of 4.5 mm in diameter was harvested from the knee. d The drilled recipient hole was made in the osteochondral lesion of
the middle phalanx, and the osteochondral plug was inserted and press-fitted Postoperative splint fixation was done only on the day of
surgery, and mobilization exercise was started from the next day by changing the splint fixation to buddy taping. The buddy taping was
continued up to 3 months after surgery. After removing the buddy taping, the patient gradually resumed sports activity. As of 1 year after
surgery, the patient has no pain, and the ROM of the PIP joint has improved showing extension and flexion to 0° and 90°, respectively.
Although slight displacement to the ulnar side remains in the PIP joint, instability is not noted, (Fig. 5). There are no adverse effects in
the donor site of the left knee. The patient resumed his previous level of baseball activity. Final follow-up X-ray and CT images showed
bone union with no dislocation of the implanted osteochondral plug. Although slight displacement of the finger to ulnar side remained, the
ulnar displacement of the axis improved from preoperative 14° to postoperative 8°. Also, MR images showed a well-maintained joint space by
the transplanted cartilage (Fig. 6).Fig. 5Photograph at 1 year after treatment. a Slight displacement of the PIP joint to the ulnar side
remained. b The ROM of the PIP joint improved to 90° at flexionFig. 6Imaging findings at 1 year after treatment. a, b X-ray and CT images
show bone union with no dislocation of the osteochondral plug. Although slight displacement of the finger to ulnar side remained, the ulnar
displacement of the axis improved from preoperative 14° to postoperative 8°. c MR image shows well-maintained joint space by the cartilage
Photograph at 1 year after treatment. a Slight displacement of the PIP joint to the ulnar side remained. b The ROM of the PIP joint improved
to 90° at flexion Imaging findings at 1 year after treatment. a, b X-ray and CT images show bone union with no dislocation of the
osteochondral plug. Although slight displacement of the finger to ulnar side remained, the ulnar displacement of the axis improved from
preoperative 14° to postoperative 8°. c MR image shows well-maintained joint space by the cartilage Reconstruction methods for the finger
joints include perichondral graft, articular implantation with vessels, an artificial replacement arthroplasty of the finger, arthrodesis,
and osteochondral autograft transplantation (OAT). Currently, OAT is considered the most reliable among those various methods with their
respective benefits and drawbacks . As a donor site for osteochondral autograft, the costo-osteochondral junction, and the carpometacarpal
(CM) joints have been reported . Osteochondral autografts from the knee have been used for surgical repair of osteochondral lesions in the
knee, ankle, and elbow joint; however, no papers have reported the use of the application on osteochondral lesions of the finger joint. The
costo-osteochondral junction can be used for a wide range of cartilage defects; however, manual trimming of the obtained osteochondral
autograft is technically difficult and long-term treatment outcome is not clear due to the differing nature of the cartilage [1, 3, 4].
Grafting from the CM joint is beneficial to reconstruction by using articular cartilage and less invasiveness; however, as the amount of
available cartilage is limited, it is not applicable for a wide range of defects [2, 5–8]. Our choice to harvest a graft from the knee joint
was based on its component of articular cartilage, its usefulness in filling a wide-range of defects, and strong press-fit fixation,
requiring no internal fixation (Fig. 7). Also, devices for harvesting osteochondral plugs from the knee joint are commercially available
(OATS® Arthrex Co., Naples, FL,USA) (MOSAICPLASTY® Smith & Nephew Co., London, England), facilitating ease of operation. The demerits
include the invasiveness to the unaffected knee and requirement for presence of cortical bone in the periphery of the recipient hole.
However, no adverse effects of osteochondral graft harvest on donor knee function were reported after mosaicplasty for capitellar
osteochondritis dissecans in young athletes . Since our case was a juvenile patient, we considered articular cartilage to be the desired
reconstruction material. We also needed a relatively large graft to fill the osteochondral defect which occupied more than half of the
articular surface. Also, as the patient desired to resume sports activity as early as possible, the fixation of the graft should be firm and
rehabilitation exercise should be started early after surgery. Considering these factors, we chose to perform OAT harvested from the knee
joint.Fig. 7Schematic drawing of the osteochondral plug grafting. It can be applied to wide range defects and requires no internal fixation
because of secure press-fitting. The plug can be inserted avoiding the head of phalanx because the osteochondral plug was obtained in an
oblique shape Schematic drawing of the osteochondral plug grafting. It can be applied to wide range defects and requires no internal
fixation because of secure press-fitting. The plug can be inserted avoiding the head of phalanx because the osteochondral plug was obtained
in an oblique shape There may be a concern of slight unevenness between the cartilage surface of the lateral condyle of femur (convexly
curved) and the articular surface of the PIP joint of the middle finger (concavely curved). However, we believe the subtle difference will
pose no problem because the finger joint is not a weight-bearing joint and a more important consideration is to eliminate any step-off of
the cartilage surface. The cartilage of the femoral condyle is thicker than that of the finger joint; however, prevention of a step-off is
possible by the deep insertion of the osteochondral plug. Trimming of the cartilage surface for prevention of a step-off is not recommended,
as it may cause degeneration of the cartilage. To insert the osteochondral plug, the head of proximal phalanx interferes with insertion of
the osteochondral plug perpendicular to the joint surface. Miyamoto et al. reported the oblique osteochondral plug transplantation technique
for osteochondral autograft from the knee to treat osteochondritis dissecans of the elbow to enable insertion by avoiding the radial head.
Utilizing this technique, in the present study, we obtained the osteochondral autograft obliquely and inserted the graft by avoiding the
head of proximal phalanx at hyper-extension position of PIP joint (Fig. 7). We consider osteochondral autograft from the knee to be
effective for treatment of malunited intra-articular fracture of the proximal interphalangeal joint. The authors are grateful to Mrs. Yumiko
Moriyama for her critical reading of this manuscript. The authors did not and will not receive any benefits or funding from any commercial
party related directly or indirectly to the subject of this article. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are
credited.
