A boy aged 4 months 7 days was admitted to the Intensive Care Unit (ICU) of the Dhaka Hospital of icddr,b, Dhaka, Bangladesh, with the
problems of acute watery diarrhoea with some dehydration, pneumonia, lethargy, and hypernatraemia (serum sodium of 201 mmol/L). Correction
for hypernatraemia was tried by using only oral rehydration salt (ORS) solution. Seizures occurred during correction of the hypernatraemia.
These were difficult to control and required three doses of injection lorazepam, a loading dose of injection phenobarbitone, followed by
injection phenytoin and finally two doses of injection mannitol (even though there was no clinical or imaging evidence by ultrasonography or
computed tomography of cerebral oedema). The correction was continued with ORS, and all the anticonvulsants were successfully weaned without
any further seizures, and the patient recovered without any overt neurological sequelae. We present a case report of extreme hypernatraemia,
which was successfully managed using only ORS. Hypernatraemia is a serious ramification of diarrhoea often associated with death (1). Death
may occur either due to hypernatraemia itself or anytime during its correction. Hypernatraemia causes widespread cerebral haemorrhage,
thromboses, and subdural effusions, leading to permanent neurologic deficit and death (2,3). On the other hand, improper and aggressive
rehydration in patients with prolonged hyperosmolality has been shown to result in a rapid fall in extracellular fluid (ECF) osmolality,
leading to cerebral oedema and death (4,5). Ideally, correction should result in a fall of serum sodium of around 10-12 mmol/L/24 hours,
preventing cerebral oedema and convulsion (6,7). However, when hypernatraemia develops over a period of few hours, a rapid correction at a
rate of 1.0 mmol/L/hour prevents the risk of cerebral oedema because accumulated electrolytes are rapidly extruded from the brain cells
(8,9). The choice of fluid for the correction of hypernatraemic dehydration is very difficult. Among various schools of thought about the
choice of fluids, ORS is preferred for a slow and gradual restoration of the deficit because oral or nasogastric (NG) rehydration using ORS
is safe and associated with significant reduction in complications compared to intravenous rehydration (10,11). Correction of hypernatraemic
dehydration using intravenous hypo- or hypertonic solution is often used in preventing a rapid fall of serum sodium and consequent cerebral
oedema. However, there are no conclusive data on the efficacy of the use of either ORS or intravenous hypo- or hypertonic solution for the
safe correction of hypernatraemic dehydration. The Dhaka Hospital of icddr,b admits a large number of diarrhoeal patients, and a number of
them also present with hypernatraemic dehydration. Most of the patients receive only ORS for the correction of hypernatraemic dehydration,
irrespective of the level of serum sodium. A report of a patient whose serum sodium was 201 mmol/L and received only ORS for correction, is
presented here. A boy aged 4 months 7 days from a middle-class family (monthly family-income of Tk 10,000-15,000 equivalent to US dollar
121-181) living in Dhaka district was brought to the Dhaka Hospital of icddr,b on 9 January 2011 and admitted to the Short Stay Unit on the
same day. Immediately after admission, he was shifted to the hospital's ICU for his respiratory distress and irritability. He had a history
of watery diarrhoea for 3 days, associated with vomiting for the same duration, fever and respiratory distress for the last 12 hours. His
stool frequency was 12 times/day, vomiting 2 times/day, and fever was high and continued but not associated with chills and rigours, and
respiratory distress was not associated with cough. The child had passed urine half-an-hour before admission in the ICU. He received 6
packets (3 litre) of inappropriately-prepared (concentrated) ORS at home but no drugs. History of his past illness was unremarkable. He did
not have a history of contact with any persons known or suspected to have tuberculosis, and his family members were in good health. He was
the second and the last issue of his non-consanguineous parents and was delivered normally at home at full term. His weight and height at
birth could not be obtained. He was breastfed at birth, and it continued up to 2 months. Since then, he was given mixed-milk (formula milk
and breastmilk). His developmental milestones were age-appropriate, and his vaccinations were up-to-date according to the local EPI
(Expanded Programme on Immunization) schedule. Both the parents were literate (education of the father and the mother was up to college and
high school level respectively); the father was a garments worker, and the mother was a housewife. They were living in a tinshed house, used
to drink tubewell water but their sanitation was poor. On admission, the infant was initially irritable and excessively thirsty but he
became very lethargic soon after admission. His pulse rate was 146 per minute with normal volume, blood pressure was 85/60 mmHg, capillary
refill time was <2 sec, rectal temperature was 39.5 °C, and respiration rate was 80 per minute. He weighed 6.4 kg and had a length of 60 cm;
his anthropometric measurements showed a z-score of <-2 [>-3 of the median of WHO growth charts] for all of the three indices—weight-for-
age, weight-for-length, and length-for-age. He had some dehydration but did not have pallor, cyanosis, jaundice, oedema, or clubbing. There
was no increased work of breathing (no marked use of accessory muscles of respiration, and he did not have nasal flaring, head-nodding,
stridor, wheezing, grunting respiration, or lower chest-wall in-drawing). His trachea was centrally placed, and the respiration sounds were
vesicular with no adventitious sounds (rales, rhonchi, or pleural rub). Other systemic examinations of the infant were not remarkable. His
blood glucose, measured at bedside, was 7.30 mmol/L, and his arterial oxygen saturation (SPO2) was 96% in room-air (WHO defines SPO2 of <90%
at sea-level as hypoxaemia). Thus, the initial problems were: (a) acute watery diarrhoea with some dehydration, (b) hypernatraemia (on the
basis of history and cardinal clinical signs), (c) pneumonia (according to WHO definition), and (d) lethargy (differentially thought to be
due to hypernatraemia itself, and also sepsis). The laboratory work included: blood for total and differential white blood cell (WBC) count;
blood culture and sensitivity; serum electrolytes, including serum total calcium, total magnesium, serum creatinine; rectal swab culture for
isolation and identification of enteric pathogens; urine for routine and microscopic examinations (RME); and urine for culture and
sensitivity (as a part of routine investigations in a febrile infant); and a chest x-ray. We started management of dehydration with ORS
following WHO guideline (12). Parenteral ceftriaxone and levofloxacin was also started to cover aetiologic agent in pneumonia and probable
sepsis. Feeding was initiated according to standard protocolized management of diarrhoea. His total WBC was 9,600/mm3, with 55.1%
neutrophils, 0.0% bands, 33.5% lymphocytes, 11.2% monocytes, 0.1% eosinophil, and 0.1% basophil. Serum sodium was 201.0 mmol/L, chloride
165.3 mmol/L, potassium 3.6 mmol/L, TCO2 20.3 mmol/L, total calcium 1.94 mmol/L, total magnesium 1.31 mmol/L, and serum creatinine 66.6
micromol/L. The chest x-ray and urine RME revealed normal findings. After receiving the electrolyte report (around 4 hours after initiation
of hydration), we re-evaluated the dehydration status and found no signs of dehydration. Then we decided to manage the correction of
hypernatraemic dehydration, using ORS only. The volume required was calculated following a formula [10÷(molecular concentration of sodium in
a given solution–measured serum sodium)/(0.6×weight in kg+1)=litre/24 hours] (2) aiming not to reduce the serum sodium by >10 mmol/L/24
hours. We also maintained hydration by replacing the ongoing loss of each purging. ORS was administered through a nasogastric tube. In spite
of having his dehydration under control, the patient was still experiencing fast breathing, indicating pneumonia even in absence of
radiological evidence (13). Correction of hypernatraemia was started with a calculated rate of ORS of 15 mL per hour through nasogastric
tube, and the correction of hypocalcaemia was tried with 10% calcium gluconate injection (0.5 mL/kg), and oral supplementation with calcium
carbonate tablet was continued during hospitalization. Ten hours after initiating the treatment of hypernatraemia (14 hours after
admission), the patient developed a generalized tonic clonic seizure. The seizure was difficult to control and required a total of three
doses (0.1 mg/kg/dose) of injection lorazepam (10 minutes apart), followed by a loading dose of injection phenobarbitone (20 mg/kg) and
injection phenytoin (20 mg/kg). Simultaneously, a maintainance dose of phenobarbitone (5 mg/kg/day in two divided doses) and phenytoin (2.5
mg/kg/dose 12 hourly) were continued to prevent further convulsions. After cessation of the convulsion, we re-examined the child and did not
find any signs of meningism except extreme lethargy. We differentially thought that convulsion was either due to hypernatraemia itself or
due to cerebral oedema from a probable rapid fall in sodium. The serum sodium level after 24 hours was 185 mmol/L, and the fall was >0.5
mmol/L/hr. We examined the fundi and did not find any evidence of cerebral haemorrhage or cerebral oedema. However, there was another
episode of generalized tonic clonic convulsion which was not controlled by an additional dose of injection lorazepam (0.1 mg/kg/dose), and
an empirical dose of 20% mannitol injection [0.5 g (2.5 mL)/kg/dose] was given due to the likelihood of cerebral oedema; the convulsion was
controlled after infusion of mannitol. We gave another dose [0.5 g (2.5 mL)/kg/dose] of mannitol 6 hours after the initial dose. We re-
examined the fundi and still did not find any evidence of cerebral oedema and, therefore, stopped mannitol. Then approximately every 24
hours, the serum sodium was checked (which was 174 mmol/L, 157 mmol/L, 152 mmol/L, and 145 mmol/L), and the volume of ORS needed for the
correction of hypernatraemic dehydration was re-calculated each day. On average, the fall was <0.5 mmol/L/hr for the next 4 days during the
correction. In the mean time, by day 3, diarrhoea was controlled, and clinical signs of pneumonia disappeared but the patient was still
lethargic. The lethargy might have been due to the use of two anticonvulsants and as there were no further episodes of convulsion, the
anticonvulsants were weaned after a convulsion-free period of 48 hours; all the anticonvulsants were gradually weaned successfully by day 7.
On day 7, the patient was active and alert, took food orally and was gradually becoming afebrile. There were no CNS abnormalities. In the
mean time, no organism was isolated from blood, rectal swab or urine culture, and we stopped antibiotics and planned to discharge the
patient. Before discharge (on day 12 of his hospitalization), a computed tomography scan of brain was performed, which revealed mild
ischaemic changes in both the temporal lobes (Fig. 1). After review by a paediatric neurologist from a local tertiary-care centre, a
Magnetic Resonance Image (MRI) scan was performed, which revealed ischaemic changes in left temporal lobe (Fig. 2), and this was consistent
with the CT scan findings. The patient has been under regular follow-up at our hospital and at the last follow-up on 15 November 2011, the
patient was found to be playful, and his developmental curve was up-to-date. However, there was a history of occasional episodes of absence
seizure persisting for a few seconds over the last two months. CT scan: Bilateral low-attenuation areas are seen in both temporal poles,
overlying cortex is spared We have a few distinct observations from this case study. This febrile young infant with acute watery diarrhoea
had the highest serum sodium reported in the literature that was successfully managed using only ORS, though we had difficulty in
controlling seizure during the initial correction. MRI scan: T2 hyper-intense area is seen in the left temporal pole The presence of 201
mmol/L of serum sodium was probably due to a combination of several factors, including early infancy, taking concentrated ORS after each
purging, high fever, pneumonia with fast breathing, and probably having rotavirus diarrhoea—the most common pathogen during the winter
season. Taking concentrated ORS gives rise to hyperosmolality of the extracellular fluid, causing hypernatraemia, simultaneously leading to
the movement of water from the intracellular fluid (ICF) to the ECF, resulting in intracellular dehydration and excessive thirst (14,15). In
Bangladesh, early January is within the winter season while the main aetiologic agent in diarrhoeal stool is rotavirus (16,17). Although
rotavirus was not isolated from this case as it was not part of the routine workup in our ICU, hospital surveillance data among children
below two years of age during the same period (January 2011) revealed the highest incidence (67%) of rotavirus diarrhoea (personal
communication, Faruque ASG, 2012). Moreover, no other aetiologic agents could be isolated from the stool. The faecal loss of sodium in
rotavirus diarrhoea is often below 40 mmol/L (18,19) whereas the molecular concentration of sodium in the reduced-osmolarity ORS available
in the market is 75 mmol/L (12,20). This is quite high for the hydration of a patient with rotavirus diarrhoea, and the use of ORS in an
appropriate concentration and volume might give rise to hypernatraemia. Moreover, in winter, the low humidity in the atmosphere causes
increased insensible loss of water in patients, especially in young infants, contributing to hypernatraemic dehydration (5,21). These
factors might have an impact on the extreme hyprnatraemia in this case. High fever and fast breathing with pneumonia were responsible for
the evaporative loss of water that occured through lungs, skin, and urine in this infant (5,21). Young infants have a larger surface area in
relation to height or weight than adults; they lose relatively more water by evaporation, especially when cared for on radiant warmers which
may raise the level of hypernatraemic dehydration (5,21). Our observation of the successful use of ORS through a nasogastric tube for the
slow correction of hypernatraemic dehydration in this infant might be the secret for the successful correction of extreme hypernatraemia.
The formula that we have used for the correction of hypernatraemic dehydration has been well-tested in adults (2) but this is the first time
that the formula was tested in an infant, using only ORS with such level of serum sodium. The infant experienced an initial setback with the
development of seizure that was hard to control. This might be due to either hypernatraemia itself or cerebral oedema developed during the
correction of hypernatraemic dehydration. Hypernatraemia causes hyperosmolar ECF and shift of ICF to ECF, leading to intracellular
dehydration and potentially causes cerebral haemorrhage and convulsion (4,5,15). On the other hand, rapid correction of hypernatraemic
dehydration in this case might cause a rapid fall in ECF osmolality due to rapid shift of serum sodium into cells. A fall in the
concentration of other osmotically-active substances such as glucose may lead to excessive movement of water into cerebral cells, leading to
cerebral oedema as well as haemorrhage potentially responsible for the development of seizure (3-5,10,22). However, we did not have any
clinical evidence of cerebral haemorrhage or cerebral oedema, although both CT scan and MRI were consistent with left temporal lobe
ischaemia. Although the convulsions in our patient were finally controlled by the management of cerebral oedema, we are not quite sure
whether the left temporal lobe ischaemia was due either to the hypernatraemia itself or due to cerebral oedema caused by the rapid fall of
serum sodium. However, we stopped mannitol after just 2 doses, and it is very unlikely that cerebral oedema with such uncontrolled seizure
would be controlled only with the two doses of mannitol. The logical use of multiple anticonvulsants might have had a real impact in
ultimately controlling the seizure. On the other hand, a rapid fall in serum sodium is usually associated with a high case fatality but in
this case, the patient survived, became playful, and remained well after discharge, although he developed episodes of absence seizure
persisting only for a few seconds 9 months after discharge. This suggests that the hypernatraemic dehydration might have developed acutely
and potentially warranted rapid correction (fall of serum sodium was at a rate of 1 mmol/L/hr) (8,9). However, the scrupulous adherence to
the use of ORS following the above formula is safe for the successful correction of hypernatraemic dehydration. The safe use of ORS for the
correction of hypernatraemic dehydration has also been reported previously (7,23). The child might develop problems of speech perception,
with difficulty in discriminating speech in advancing age but young children have an ability to let the remaining part of the brain take
over the function of a damaged part (24). The child will be kept under regular follow-up by a paediatric neurologist to keep a close eye on
his speech development. The use of only ORS for the correction of extreme hypernatraemia in a young infant has been found to be very
successful. Thus, scrupulous adherence to the use of ORS in such a case may be the choice for the management of hypernatraemic dehydration.
However, before making a final recommendation, a randomized clinical trial to evaluate the efficacy of ORS compared to intravenous solution
is imperative.
