Idiopathic carotidynia or Fay syndrome is a little known pathology, which in the past was the subject of much controversy. Even though
carotydinia was removed as a pathological entity from the second International Headache Society classification in 2004, recent reports seem
to confirm that the disease demonstrates unusual radiological findings. The presence of a typical amorphous enhancing soft tissue
surrounding the carotid artery by MRI, CT and ultrasonography in patients with carotidynia has reopened discussion on the hypothesis that
carotidynia may represent a distinctive inflammatory process. The aetiology of carotidynia is unknown. We report a case of carotidynia that
developed after an upper airway infection, wherein MR studies demonstrated typical enhanced tissue surrounding the common carotid artery in
contiguity with pathological enhancement in laryngeal tissue. La carotidodinia idiopatica o sindrome di Fay è una patologia poco conosciuta
ed in passato oggetto di molte controversie. Anche se il termine carotidodinia è stato rimosso come entità patologica dalla seconda
classificazione delle emicranie della Società Internazionale di Emicrania del 2004, studi recenti sembrano confermare che questa malattia
presenta aspetti radiologici del tutto peculiari. La presenza alla RM, TC ed ecografia di un tipico incremento del segnale a livello del
tessuto molle circostante l'arteria carotide riapre la discussione sull'ipotesi che la carotidodinia possa rappresentare una distinta entità
nosologia. L'eziologia della carotidodinia è ancora sconosciuta. Riportiamo un caso di carotidodinia insorta dopo un'infezione delle vie
aeree superiori, nel quale lo studio RM dimostra il tipico tessuto che circonda l'arteria carotide comune in contiguità con un aumento
patologico del segnale a livello del tessuto laringeo. Carotidynia or Fay syndrome was described by Fay 1 in 1927 as an atypical neuralgia
in the neck and face. It was classified by the International Headache Society (HI S) in 1988 as an idiopathic neck pain syndrome associated
with tenderness over the carotid bifurcation without structural abnormality 2. This entity was mainly previously acknowledged by
neurologists as a variant of a migraine, and often treated accordingly with prophylactic medications 3. However, some authors believed
carotidynia to be a clinicopathological entity, suggesting that it was merely a symptom of various and heterogeneous causes of neck pain 4.
These controversial aspects led the Headache Classification Subcommittee of HI S to remove carotidynia as a distinct entity from the main
classification in 2004 5. Several recent publications have demonstrated that carotidynia not only represents a symptom, but probably a
distinct pathological entity with structural abnormalities and characteristic radiological findings 6-10. The presence of focal eccentric
thickening of the carotid wall by enhancing tissue, generally without haemodynamic changes, is a typical pattern found in imaging studies in
patients suffering from carotidynia. These findings have reopened discussion on the hypothesis that carotidynia is a distinct disease
entity, possibly caused by inflammation of the carotid adventitia. We report a case of carotidynia that developed after an upper airway
infection where MR studies demonstrated the typical enhanced tissue surrounding the common carotid artery in contiguity with pathological
enhancement in laryngeal tissue. A 70-year-old male came under our observation complaining of localized cervical pain in the anterior-right
area of the neck, aggravated by swallowing, coughing, headache and low-grade fever that was preceded by a flulike episode of an upper
respiratory tract infection with dysphonia. The patient was treated by his general practitioner with oral amoxicillin-clavulanate for one
week. The respiratory illness had also affected other members of his family. Clinical history included hypercholesterolaemia and a surgical
procedure for a left posterior tibial artery thrombosis 10 years ago. Physical examination revealed a right swelling and tenderness
overlying the right carotid bifurcation, painful to the touch, while no associated-lymphadenopathy was noted. The remaining ENT examination
was normal and endoscopy of the upper aerodigestive tract did not reveal any macroscopic signs of inflammation. A neck abscess was
suspected. The patient was therefore admitted and intravenous ceftriaxone and metronidazole was administered. A cervical CT scan performed
on admission revealed the presence of abnormally enhanced inflammatory tissue surrounding the symptomatic right common carotid artery. No
cervical lymphadenopathy was noted. Laboratory findings demonstrated normal peripheral blood cell counts. C-reactive protein (CRP) was
elevated at 101 mg/l, and erythrocyte sedimentation rapidity (ESR) was increased at 84 mm/h. Serum amyloid A (SAA) protein was also elevated
to 467 mg/l (normal range < 10) and fibrin degradation product D-dimer was 866 mg/l (normal range < 225). Ultra-sonography of the carotid
artery (Fig. 1) showed hypoechoic wall thickening of the right common artery with a slight narrowing of the vessel. The internal profiles of
the vessel lumen were normal. Ultrasonography of the carotid artery with hypoechoic wall thickening. MRI of the neck in T1 weighted axial
imaging revealed an abnormal gadolinium-enhancing tissue surrounding the right common carotid artery (Fig. 2). The enhanced tissue extended
cranio-caudally in sagittal imaging (Fig. 3) for 7 cm, and laterally displaced the internal jugular vein. In axial projections, an abnormal,
substantial, hypervascularized area was visible in the region of the piriform sinus apparently in contiguity with the involved carotid
artery (Fig. 4). Angio-MRI confirmed the ultra-sonographic findings of the complete integrity of the vessel lumen (Fig. 5). T1 weighted
axial MRI imaging. T1 weighted sagittal MRI imaging. T1 weighted axial MRI imaging with abnormal hypervascularized area in the region of the
piriform sinus. Angio-MRI showing the complete integrity of the vessel lumen. Serum IgM antibodies against cytomegalovirus, Epstein Barr
virus, Varicella Zoster virus, parotitis virus, Treponema pallidum, Mycoplasma pneumoniae, Toxoplasma gondii and Histoplasma capsulatum were
negative. Hepatitis B surface–antigen and hepatitis C virus-antibody tests were negative. Human immunodeficiency virus antibodies 1-2 were
negative. Nasopharyngeal culture for adenovirus, influenza type A-B virus, para-influenza type 1-2-3 virus, respiratory syncytial virus and
metapneumovirus was negative. Diagnosis of Fay syndrome was finally confirmed and antibiotic therapy, which was unsuccessful in controlling
pain and tenderness, was stopped. Intramuscular nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory therapy with ibuprofen 100 mg/ day was administered and after
two weeks of treatment there was progressive, rapid improvement of symptoms. MRI performed after 10 days after revealed the reduction of the
pericarotideal enhancing tissue (Fig. 6), and the pathological enhancement in the larynx had completely disappeared. CRP and SAA values,
four weeks later, were within normal limits. Follow-up MRI, 10 days after therapy. Syms et al. 11, in 1997, first described MR findings in a
patient with carotidynia. The subject experienced abnormally enhanced tissue surrounding the symptomatic carotid artery. The same findings
were confirmed by Burton et al. 6 in 2000, in a series of MR imaging of five patients with carotidynia. More recently, a published series of
cases 7-10 defined some structural abnormalities demonstrated by different imaging techniques. MRI and angio- MRI allow detailed analysis of
the typical pathological tissue surrounding the involved artery and clearly show the integrity of the vessel lumen. It was observed that the
structural changes were limited to adventitia of the carotid artery 12. In the unique histological study of the abnormal perivascular tissue
surrounding the carotid, Upton et al. 12 in 2003, demonstrated the presence of non-specific inflammatory changes including vascular
proliferation, proliferation of fibroblasts and low-grade chronic active inflammation. MRI also allows the exclusion of other pathological
conditions of the artery, and in particular arterial dissection, intra-luminal haemorrhage, thrombosis and aneurysm. Duplex ultra-sonography
confirms the absence of haemodynamic changes in the lumen. A positron-emission tomography CT study of a series of patients suffering from
carotidynia by Amaravadi et al. 13 revealed that the enhancing soft tissue around the carotid corresponds to a focus of glucose
hypermetabolism. Glucose hypermetabolism, in absence of a cervical mass and with the self-limiting course of the disease, is further
confirmation of the inflammatory nature of the lesion. The elevated value of CRP and SAA in the acute phase of carotidynia and their gradual
decrease with the improvement of the disease observed in our case, are in agreement with the findings of Taniguchi et al. 14. Very recently,
another marker of inflammation related to vasculitis has been noted to increase in carotidynia. It has been reported 15 that the level of
serum soluble intracellular adhesion molecule-1 (sICAM-1), a marker of activity of large-vessel vasculitis in giant cell arteritis and
Kawasaki disease, is correlated, as well as CRP and SAA, with the clinical stage of carotidynia. These findings have led some authors to
hypothesize that carotidynia is a subset of vasculitis. Our case confirms all the findings recently reported in literature, although it
differs from previous reports in the MRI evidence of a pathological enhancement of the laryngeal tissue contiguous with the involved carotid
artery. Figure 4 clearly shows that the enhancement involves the area of the right piriform sinus, arytenoid and reaches the carotid
adventitia posteriorly to the thyroid cartilage to create a barrier for direct contact. These findings, together with the history of a
preceding upper airways flu-like episode with dysphonia lead to the hypothesis that carotidynia may develop after an upper airway infection
for contiguity. Laboratory tests for a possible viral agent was however unsuccessful. A history of upper airway infection is not a common
finding in patients suffering from carotidynia. Woo et al. 16 reported a case of carotidynia preceded by a flu-like illness with low-grade
fever, chills, fatigue and myalgia, but without MRI evidence of involvement of the upper airways. They described a previously unreported
finding, namely resolution of an intimal plaque noted on imaging at the time of initial presentation. In conclusion, our case seems to
demonstrate, as suggested by Tardy et al. 17, that the term carotidynia may be confusing and the term carotiditis is more appropriate. An
increasing number of reports on carotidynia may produce new investigations on the infective aspects of this little known pathology.
