Two Italian adults arrived at the Emergency Department referring diarrhea, nausea and vomiting for 4 days; weakness, fatigue and visual
hallucinations were also complained of. Patients reported the ingestion of some leaves of a plant, which they supposed to be “donkey ears”,
a week before. Physical examination showed hypotension and bradycardia and ECG examination disclosed sinus rhythm and repolarization
abnormalities (scooping of the ST-T complex) in both patients and a 2:1 AV block in the man. Digoxin concentration was evaluated twice for
each patient (at the admission and after 4 hours) by the automated immunoassay system ADVIA Centaur®. Digitoxin concentration was evaluated
by liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry (LC-MS/MS). Despite clinical picture was suggestive of digitalis intoxication, digoxin levels
were undetectable. Due to the more severe clinical picture, the male patient was treated with anti-digoxin antibodies (Digifab®) achieving a
good clinical improvement and remission of the AV block within two hours. Initial diagnosis was confirmed by LC-MS/MS showing high digitoxin
concentrations, but digoxin was undetectable. Patients remained stable and 48 hours later were discharged from the hospital. Whereas digoxin
determination frequently relies on monoclonal antibodies which do not cross-react to digitoxin, polyclonal antibodies constituting Digifab®
recognize a large spectrum of cardiac glycosides, including digitoxin. This report emphasizes the primary role of the clinical approach to
patients in the emergency setting and how an active communication and a continuous sharing of professional experiences between Laboratory
and Clinicians ensure an early and correct diagnosis. Cardiac glycoside poisoning is a potentially life-threatening problem which frequently
occurs in patients on digitalis or following deliberate or fortuitous ingestion of leaves of Digitalis lanata (Woolly foxglove), Digitalis
purpurea (Common foxglove), or other plants, containing molecules with similar effects, collected from home-grown gardens for homemade
herbal preparations (1–3). In some reported cases glycoside ingestion was due to erroneous identification of leaves, not always easily
distinguishable from those of other edible plants (3). Whereas a typical clinical presentation of digitalis toxicity in a patient on
digitalis may easily address a relatively simple diagnosis, difficulties arise in case of unintentional poisoning. Laboratory tests based on
anti-digoxin antibodies are widely available and significantly support the clinician in establishing the diagnosis; however these
immunoassays frequently rely on monoclonal antibodies which do not cross-react to other cardioactive glycosides, potentially delaying or
complicating diagnosis and therapy (4,5). Further complexity is due to heterogeneity of glycosides present in different plants, either as
percentage amount or as chemical properties and pharmacokinetics (1,3). Aim of this work is to show the importance that the clinical
approach still has in the emergency setting and to emphasize how the interplay between laboratory and clinicians may guide or support
patient treatment. A married couple (a 61 year old man and his wife aged 60) arrived at the Maggiore della Carità Hospital (Novara, Italy)
because of diarrhea, nausea and vomiting for 4 days; they also complained weakness, fatigue and visual hallucinations (orange and purple
halo around lights). The subjects reported the ingestion of some leaves of a plant that they supposed to be “donkey ears” (Plantago minor;
scientific name Plantago lanceolata) a week before; they collected these herbs still in leaf buds and used them for tea and for a pasta
sauce. In the emergency room physical examination showed bradycardia in both, most pronounced in the male (35/min) combined with hypotension
(80/60 mmHg blood pressure). ECG examination disclosed sinus rhythm and repolarization abnormalities (scooping of the ST-T complex) in both
and a 2:1 AV block was detected in the male patient. He was treated with atropine (two doses of 0.5 mg, i. v.) without any effect. ECG
pattern, history and clinical findings were consistent with digitalis toxicity (6), but standard plasma digoxin assay was repeatedly
negative for both patients (both at the admission and after 4 hours). Nonetheless, given the high probability of digitalis toxicity, even if
not confirmed by a laboratory test, after consulting with the clinical pathologist that could not exclude or confirm at that time glycoside
intoxication, the male patient was treated with anti-digoxin antibodies (Digifab®, Digoxin Immune Fab (Ovine), 3 vials containing 40 mg of
antibody each, infused i. v. in 30 minutes), in addition to supportive care (6–10). The AV block was reverted in two hours after the
beginning of treatment. Anti-digoxin antibodies were not administered to woman because she was clinically stable. The presence of cardiac
glycosides in plasma of both patients was subsequently confirmed by Liquid Chromatography-Mass Spectrometry (LC-MS/MS) (11,12). Digitoxin
was identified in both patients (woman: 50 ng/mL, man: 100 ng/mL) at toxic plasma levels compatible with the severity of the clinical
picture (digitoxin therapeutic range: 10–30 ng/mL) (Figure 1). Colchicines and protoveratine, as possible alternative toxic drugs, were
excluded by LC-MS/MS patient plasma analysis. Digoxin was confirmed as negative by LC-MS/MS. After 48 hours of monitoring, both patients
were discharged. Interestingly, a sample of the plants collected by the couple, brought to the Hospital some weeks later, was analyzed by an
expert botanist and found to be Digitalis purpurea. Digoxin test was performed by the automated immunoassay system ADVIA Centaur® by Siemens
Healthcare Diagnostics Inc (Deerfield, IL, USA). ADVIA Centaur Digoxin test is a commercial competitive immunoassay using direct
chemiluminescent technology. Digoxin in the patient sample competes for a limited amount of acridinium ester-labeled monoclonal mouse anti-
digoxin antibody. Cross-reactivity to digitoxin, precision and limit of detection, as declared by the Manufactures, are respectively < 1%,
3–5.5% and 0.1ng/mL. Digoxin concentration was evaluated twice for each patient (at the admission and after 4 hours) using BD Vacutainer®
Lithium Heparin tubes. Digitoxin (purity ≥ 92% (HPLC) powder) was purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). LiChrosolv® water (for
LC-MS) and LiChrosolv® hypergrade acetonitrile (for LC/MS) were purchased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). All other solvents were of
analytical grade or HPLC grade when appropriate. Sample preparation was slightly modified from the method of Xue et al. (12). Briefly,
digitoxin was dissolved in methanol:water (50:50, v/v) and standard solutions or homemade controls were obtained by spiking blank plasma.
500 μL of plasma (blank, calibrators, controls or samples) and 100 μL of ammonium hydroxide were mixed with 5 mL of ter-butylmethylether.
After centrifugation, 4 mL of supernatant were evaporated and mixed with 300 μL of water:acetonitrile (50:50). The LC-MS/MS system consisted
of an Agilent 6410 triple-quadrupole mass spectrometer (Agilent Technologies Inc., Santa Clara, CA, USA) equipped with ESI interface and an
HPLC Agilent 1290 Infinity (digitoxin transition: 782.5>635.5; fragmentor 135; collision energy 10). LC-MS/MS parameters were optimized by
injecting a solution of digitoxin 1 mg/mL in methanol:water. Analytes were separated at 50 °C on a Zorbax Eclipse XDB-C18 column (2.1 mm ×
50 mm; 1.8 μm) using elution gradient of 5 mM ammonium formate, 0.01% formic acid in water (buffer A) and formic acid 0.01% in acetonitrile
(buffer B). A partial and rapid validation process was performed. Selectivity was tested by analysing blank plasma obtained from different
sources and no significant interference was observed at the expected retention time. Method linearity was verified up to 200 ng/mL using
replicates at different concentrations (different sample preparative). Precision ranged over 7–10% and recovery, following liquid–liquid
extraction procedure, ranged over 80–85%. Digifab® (Digoxin Immune Fab (Ovine), Protherics Inc. Brentwood, TN USA) is a purified preparation
of immunoglobulin fragments with high digoxin affinity, obtained from healthy sheep immunized with a digoxin analogue. The drug, designed
specifically for digoxin poisoning, acts also in cases of digitoxin and other cardiac glycoside overdose. Digifab® works through a
competitive mechanism since its affinity for digoxin is greater than the affinity of digoxin for the sodium-potassium pump receptor.
Digifab®, cleared primarily by kidneys (plasma half-life of 15-20 hours), acts rapidly (1–2 hours) and is usually administered by slow
intravenous infusion (2,4). In this case 3 vials, containing 40 mg of antibody each, were infused i. v. in 30 minutes. Two critical aspects
should be mentioned here. Firstly, in the emergency setting, where urgent decisions are needed, careful history and complete physical
examination are still the most important tools for proper diagnosis and should guide patient treatment, even when clinician is not supported
by laboratory data or when more sophisticated tests are not readily available. Secondly, in these last years laboratory systems have rapidly
evolved with the development of newer instruments and more sensitive and specific assays. LC-MS/MS is now available in many hospitals,
routinely used for therapeutic drug monitoring, and may be easily applied to clinical toxicology, particularly to the targeted screening of
several toxic compounds. Although this technology may not be available 24 hours a day, it can support clinician’s decision even when medical
treatment has already been initiated, as shown here. An undetectable plasma level of digoxin in the presence of typical ECG and clinical
presentation may be confusing for the clinician, particularly when he could falsely assume that a digoxin test could also detect other
cardiac glycosides. However, whereas polyclonal antibodies constituting Digifab® recognize a large spectrum of cardiac glycosides (it has
been successfully used to treat life-threatening digitoxin overdose), digoxin determination frequently is based on monoclonal antibodies
which do not cross-react to digitoxin. Due to the rapid development of new diagnostic tests, it can be difficult for the clinician to know
the method by which analytical data have been obtained, as well as drawbacks and limitations, and ultimately how to correctly translate
laboratory data into sound clinical information. In such a complexity, it is highly recommended to always discuss unexpected results with
the laboratory physician. A critical point is why digoxin was not identified by immunoassay and did not appear in LC-MS/MS even if Digitalis
purpurea contains digitoxin as well as digoxin. A possible explanation may be found in the different half-life of these two substances
(30–50 hours for digoxin vs. 5–8 days for digitoxin) (3,13). With this regard, plants were consumed some days before arriving at the
emergency department and, since the standard laboratory test for digoxin gave negative results, the clinician decided to measure digitoxin
in the hypothesis that, due to its longer half-life, this cardiac glycoside would have been still present and responsible for the clinical
picture. Although anti-heterophile antibodies present in human plasma could theoretically interfere with digoxin ADVIA Centaur immunoassay,
possibly leading to both a falsely high or a falsely low result, this was not the case here because undetectable digoxin levels were also
confirmed by LC-MS/MS. In conclusion, in addition to the primary role of the clinical approach to patients in the emergency setting, this
case report emphasizes how an active communication and a continuous sharing of professional experiences between laboratory and clinicians
may ensure an early and correct diagnosis and guide or support patient treatment. Potential conflict of interest None declared. LC-MS/MS
digitoxin chromatographic assay. At 3.77 min, from bottom to top, it is possible to observe chromatographic peaks corresponding respectively
to blank, digitoxin standard sample at 20 ng/mL, female sample (50 ng/mL), digitoxin standard sample at 100 ng/mL and male sample (100
ng/mL).
