Corresponding author: Yoshitaka Narita, MD, PhD Neurosurgery Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, 5-1-1 Tsukiji, Chuo-ku, Tokyo
104-0045, Japan Phone: +81-3-3542-2511, Fax: +81-3-3542-2551, E-mail: yonarita@ncc.go.jp 2Present address: Hiroyuki Momota, Department of
Neurosurgery, Nagoya University Hospital, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan Phone: +81-52-744-2353, Fax: +81-52-744-2360,
E-mail: momota-nsu@umin.ac.jp A 67-year-old woman presented with an acute onset of left-sided weakness. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging
revealed multiple cerebral infarctions and gadolinium-enhanced lesions in both cerebral hemispheres. Her symptoms once improved after
starting steroid treatment; however, soon developed consciousness disturbance and hemiparesis on the left side. She was referred to our
hospital where she underwent stereotactic needle biopsy, that revealed an intravascular large B-cell lymphoma in the cerebrum. She received
high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy followed by whole-brain radiation therapy, and the MR findings improved. However, her medical condition
gradually worsened, and she died 6 months after disease onset. Intravascular lymphoma (IVL) limited to the central nervous system (CNS) is
very rare, and the optimal treatment for this medical condition has not been established yet. IVLs showing only neurologic manifestations
might be overlooked or misdiagnosed as cerebral infarctions. Here, we present a case of CNS IVL, with its radiographic and pathologic
features and treatment with high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy. Intravascular lymphoma (IVL) is a rare variant of mature B-cell neoplasms
restricted to the vascular lumina, and this condition preferentially affects the central nervous system (CNS) and skin. One-third of IVL
patients presents with heterogeneous neurological symptoms at diagnosis.1) In cases of CNS involvement, most of the common symptoms observed
are related to ischemia and infarction due to small vessel occlusion by the tumor cells. However, IVL limited to the CNS is an extremely
rare condition as IVL is usually found with systemic lesions. Only a few such cases have been reported thus far.2) Regional differences of
IVL are also known; for example, CNS and cutaneous involvement are less common in the Asian variant than in the Western variant.1,3) Under
these conditions, isolated IVL of the CNS tends to be overlooked or misdiagnosed as cerebral infarctions, especially in Asian countries. The
optimal treatment of CNS IVL has not been established yet, and only a few reports are available on the treatment with high-dose
methotrexate-based chemotherapy in the literature.4,5) Here, we report the case of an IVL patient with similar neurologic and radiographic
findings of cerebral infarctions at the onset of disease, who received high-dose methotrexate chemotherapy and radiotherapy. A 67-year-old
Japanese woman, without previous medical history, developed left-sided weakness and was admitted to the hospital. Brain magnetic resonance
(MR) images showed multiple ischemic lesions, and she was treated for cerebral infarctions, despite the coexistence of gadolinium-enhanced
lesions (Figs. 1A and 1B). Her symptoms once improved after steroid administration (betamethasone 4–8 mg/body); however, she developed
consciousness disturbance and hemiparesis on the left side. Five weeks after disease onset, she was transferred to our hospital. On the
second admission, laboratory examination of her blood revealed high levels of serum lactate dehydrogenase (LDH; 256 U/L) and soluble
interleukin-2 receptor (sIL-2R; 5,896 U/mL). Her electronic cardiogram indicated either acute myocardial infarction or cardiomyopathy,
wherease serum troponin T was negative. Bone marrow aspiration and fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography (FDG-PET) did
not show any evidence of systemic malignancy. Cerebrospinal fluid cytology was performed, and no malignant cells were observed. A repeat MR
imaging performed 6 days after the second admission showed progressive ischemic lesions detected by fluid-attenuated inversion recovery
imaging (Fig. 1C), whereas MR angiography did not show any abnormality in the major cerebral arteries. Because the MR imaging results and
the patient’s history of the present illness indicated a neoplastic disease, stereotactic needle biopsy of her right frontal lobe (enhanced
lesion in Fig. 1B) was performed on day 7 after admission. Hematoxylin and eosin staining of the specimen revealed intravascular
accumulation of tumor cells (Fig. 2A). Immunostaining for the endothelial cell marker CD31 and the pan-B-cell marker CD20 showed neoplastic
B-cells exclusively located in the blood vessel lumina (Figs. 2B and 2C). A pathological diagnosis of intravascular large B-cell lymphoma
was concluded. Further immunohistochemical analysis was performed, and revealed that the tumor was negative for CD5, CD10, and BCL-6, and
positive for MUM-1, indicating the post-germinal center B-cell subtype. She received 3 cycles of high-dose methotrexate (3.5 g/m2)
chemotherapy followed by whole-brain radiation therapy (30 Gy in 10 fractions). Although the gadolinium enhancement on MR images decreased,
her general condition worsened and she died without regaining consciousness 6 months after disease onset. A postmortem pathological
examination was not performed. (A) Diffusion weighted magnetic resonance (MR) image at disease onset showing multiple high intensity lesions
in both cerebral hemispheres. (B) Gadolinium-enhanced T1 weighted MR image at disease onset showing the lesions with contrast enhancement
mainly in the right frontal lobe. (C) Fluid-attenuated inversion recovery MR image performed 6 weeks after onset demonstrating multiple high
intensity areas progressing in both cerebral hemispheres. (A) Hematoxylin and eosin staining showing intravascular accumulation of the
neoplastic lymphoid cells. (B) CD31 staining demonstrating surrounding vascular endothelial cells. (C) Tumor embolisms consisting of
CD20-expressing B-cells. Original magnifications, A and B: ×400, C: ×200. In the present case, the initial manifestation of neurologic signs
and the ischemic findings on brain MR imaging made differential diagnosis difficult. Domizio et al. reported the 79 cases of IVL in 1989 and
found that 32% of the patients had symptoms attributable to CNS lesions alone, whereas 12% had CNS and systemic symptoms.6) This frequency
of CNS symptoms alone seems high. However, as IVL is a systemic disease and owing to advances in imaging technology in the past 2 decades,
asymptomatic lesions of other organs have been found in most cases. In fact, Ferreri et al. reported in 2004 that CNS lesions were detected
in 40% of European IVL patients as multiorgan infiltration but lesions limited to the CNS were found only in 5%.7) An Asian retrospective
study of 96 patients with IVL reported that CNS involvement accounted for 27%, and 2 of 81 (2.5%) IVL patients underwent brain biopsy,
providing another evidence of this rare condition with restricted CNS involvement.8) Heart involvement is also relatively rare. Reports from
Western countries have described heart involvement in 11% of the cases, and cardiac dysfunction, as a presenting symptom, in 5% of the
cases.1,7) In our case, electronic cardiogram indicated the possibility of acute myocardial infarction, suggesting small vessel occlusion by
tumor cells in the heart. However, serum cardiac troponin T, a diagnostic marker for myocardial infarction, was negative, and bone marrow
aspiration and FDG-PET did not detect any systemic lesions. Radiologic findings are nonspecific in IVL. In the present case, the initial
findings of MR imaging was similar to multiple cerebral infarctions, while other rare CNS diseases such as mitochondrial encephalopathy,
lactic acidosis and stroke-like episodes (MELAS) should be considered in the differential diagnosis. Cranial computed tomography (CT)
scanning has been reported to reveal multifocal hypodense lesions in up to 86% of histologically confirmed IVL cases.9) However, CT is
generally considered nondiagnostic in the early stage of IVL in the CNS because of possible false-negative results.10) Hyperintense white
matter lesions on T2-weighted MR images are suggestive of small-vessel ischemic condition in CNS IVL. On the other hand, others reported
that neuroimaging, including MR imaging, did not detect brain lesions in half of the patients with neurological symptoms and an in vivo
diagnosis of IVL.7) Although T2-weighted MR images may be normal, cranial contrast-enhanced T1-weighted MR images have been reported to
increase the sensitivity for detecting IVL involving the CNS.10,11) Therefore, MR imaging of the CNS has been recommended to be routinely
included in the diagnosis and staging of IVL.7) Serum and immunohistochemical markers of IVL have been tested, and the results have been
reported from several groups. High serum LDH level (higher than the upper limit of the standard range) and sIL-2R level (5 × 103 U/mL or
higher) were observed in 93% and 56% of Asian patients with IVL, respectively.8) Immunopositivity for CD5, CD10, BCL-6, and MUM-1 were
reported in 38%, 13%, 26%, and 95% of Asian IVL patients in the same series, respectively.8) However, none of these serum and
immunohistochemical markers had a significant effect on prognosis in IVL. These results of high CD5 and low BCL-6 positivity rates seem to
differ from the rates reported in systemic or primary CNS diffuse large B-cell lymphomas.12-16) The positivity rates and prognostic values
of the immunohistochemical markers in IVL limited to the CNS remains to be elucidated because of the rarity of this disease. The treatment
for CNS IVL has not been established yet. Anthracycline-based chemotherapy has been reported to improve clinical outcomes for systemic IVL
patients17) and has been considered a standard treatment for IVL with a 3-year overall survival rate of 33%.18) More recently, the effect of
rituximab-containing chemotherapy has been indicated in a study of 106 patients with systemic IVL.19) In contrast, the standard treatment
for primary CNS lymphoma is methotrexate-based chemotherapy alone or in combination with whole-brain radiotherapy,20) and it remains unclear
whether IVL should be treated as primary CNS lymphoma when limited to the CNS. The intravascular growth pattern has been hypothesized to be
secondary to defects in homing receptors present on the neoplastic cells, such as the lack of b1 integrin and intercellular adhesion
molecule-1 (ICAM-1).21,22) However, IVL seems to have the potential to lead to the development of an extravascular mass in the CNS.23)
Therefore, high-dose methotrexate therapy can be a treatment option for IVL limited to the CNS. In conclusion, IVL with restricted CNS
involvement is a rare condition, the treatment for which has not been thoroughly discussed in the literature. We here showed a case of IVL
presenting with cerebral infarctions. While the symptoms and neuroimaging findings were confounding, the gadolinium enhancement on MR
imaging was a clue to the diagnosis of IVL in this case. High-dose methotrexate therapy seemed to be a treatment option for CNS-limited IVL.
Careful differential diagnosis is required when multiple acute cerebral infarctions with gadolinium enhancement are observed on MR imaging.
We thank Dr. Akiko M Maeshima (Clinical Laboratory Division, National Cancer Center Hospital, Tokyo, Japan) for her pathology expertise.
