To the Editor: Streptomyces spp. are aerobic, gram-positive bacteria of the order Actinomycetales, known for their ability to produce
antimicrobial molecules such as streptomycin. Streptomyces spp., usually saprophytic to humans, can cause local cutaneous fistulized nodules
known as actinomycetoma or mycetoma. Severe invasive infections have seldom been reported, but most cases reported have occurred in
immunocompromised patients (1–5). We report a case of invasive pulmonary infection caused by a Streptomyces sp. in a splenectomized patient
with sarcoidosis. In 2003, multiorgan sarcoidosis was diagnosed in a man, 57 years of age; the disease involved lungs, skin, joints, and
lymph nodes. Corticosteroids were initially given but quickly discontinued because of a severe psychiatric reaction. In 2007, a splenectomy
was performed on this patient to remove an intestinal obstruction caused by a severely enlarged spleen, identified as a specific
localization of sarcoidosis. In April 2008, the patient was admitted to the internal medicine unit of Saint-André Hospital in Bordeaux,
France with fever (38.9°C/102°F), progressive asthenia, anorexia, weight loss, productive cough, and New York Heart Association grade III
dyspnea. Bilateral basal crackles could be heard in the lungs; physical examination findings were otherwise within normal limits. Biological
tests showed inflammatory syndrome with elevated C-reactive protein (74 mg/L, reference value <5 mg/L) without any other consequential
abnormality. Gamma globulin levels were normal. A chest radiograph showed bilateral interstitial infiltrate. A computed tomography scan of
the chest confirmed an interstitial micronodular infiltrate with thickening of the peribronchovascular interstitium, associated with
paratracheal and left anterior mediastinal supracentimetric lymph nodes. To determine whether this infiltrate was linked to sarcoidosis,
tuberculosis, or another opportunistic infection, bronchoscopy and bronchoalveolar lavage (BAL) were performed and showed multiple submucous
nodules of the left superior bronchus. Biopsy samples contained epithelioid granulomas and a nonspecific, amorphous eosinophilic material
without focal necrosis, but no bacteria, by using periodic acid–Schiff, Ziehl–Neelsen, and auramine-rhodamine stains. BAL culture isolated a
Streptomyces sp. (2 × 105 CFU/mL) but no other pathogens. Treatment with intravenous imipenem (2 g/day for 14 days) and amikacin (1 g/day
for 3 days) was initiated. After antimicrobial susceptibility tests, the treatment was changed to oral rifampin (1.2 g/day) and
ciprofloxacin (1.5 g/day) for 6 months. After 3 days of treatment, clinical signs and symptoms resolved; a thoracic computed tomography scan
performed 6 months later showed complete regression of pulmonary infiltrates. Bronchoscopy at that time showed no nodules, and BAL culture
showed no pathogens. Streptomyces spp. are widespread environmental bacteria that rarely cause severe invasive infections. During our
literature search, we found 21 cases of invasive Streptomyces infections, including 8 pulmonary infections. A contributing factor was found
for all cases: immunosuppression linked to HIV infection (1), antineoplastic chemotherapy (2), Crohn disease (3), use of oral (4) or inhaled
corticosteroids (5), and presence of foreign material such as a central venous catheter (6) or a prosthetic aortic valve (7). Specific
features of pulmonary Streptomyces infection are summarized in the Technical Appendix Table. Death related to such an infection is mostly
dependent on the underlying disease associated with Streptomyces infection. Deaths have not been linked to Streptomyces infections described
in the literature when Streptomyces sensibility testing was performed and treatment length recommendations were followed. To understand how
the patient was infected with a Streptomyces sp., we explored 2 possibilities. First, sarcoidosis induces immune deficiency (8). This
phenomenon is clinically well known as anergy to tuberculin or other immunogenic haptens after subcutaneous injections. Expansion of
regulatory T lymphocytes (8) and attenuated myeloid dendritic cell functions (9) decrease cellular immunity efficiency and increase
infectious episodes in affected patients. Second, splenectomy can increase susceptibility to infection, such as bloodstream infections with
encapsulated bacteria or opportunistic infections with Campylobacter jejuni, Pneumocystis jiroveci, or Babesia spp. The lung infection with
Streptomyces in the patient described was not acquired through the bloodstream, but through direct airway contact. However, we could not
exclude other immune mechanisms not related to blood, such as dysregulation or lack of some lymphocyte populations. A pathologic feature of
pulmonary infections with Streptomyces spp. is the presence of granulomas sometimes associated with focal necrosis. This feature makes
differentiating infection with these species from that of tuberculosis difficult. Bacterial culture is often used to confirm the diagnosis.
Histologic differences between the 2 entities are not well defined because of the rarity of invasive Streptomyces infections. In our
observation of this patient, histologic examination revealed granulomas potentially linked to sarcoidosis and a nonspecific, amorphous
eosinophilic material that was not caseous necrosis. Both lesions could have also resulted from the Streptomyces infection. For further
identification, Dunne et al. added the presence of sulfur granules to the specific histological description of Streptomyces infection (1).
An overall literature review for results of in vitro testing for Streptomyces spp. identified a common susceptibility to aminoglycosides,
macrolides, imipenem, or trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole. This finding suggests that the first-line treatment against invasive Streptomyces
infections should begin with imipenem and aminoglycosides for at least 6 weeks (Technical Appendix Table). Quinolones have an
immunomodulatory effect that might be therapeutic in patients with disease-induced immunosuppression such as sarcoidosis or after
splenectomy (10). In conclusion, invasive Streptomyces infection of the lungs should be included in differential diagnoses of interstitial
pneumonia in immunocompromised patients. Contributing factors, presence or absence of fever, results of CT scans of the chest, diagnostic
methods and results, and treatment of patients with pulmonary Streptomyces spp. Infection. Suggested citation for this article: Riviere E,
Neau D, Roux X, Lippa N, Roger-Schmeltz J, Mercie P, et al. Pulmonary Streptomyces infection in patient with sarcoidosis, France, 2012 .
Emerg Infect Dis . 2012 Nov [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1811.120797
