Segmental testicular infarction (STI) is a rare cause of acute scrotum. The spectrum of findings on gray-scale and color Doppler
ultrasonography differ depending on the time between the onset of testicular pain and the ultrasonography examination. We are not aware of
the usefulness of shear-wave elastography for the diagnosis of STI. We report the shear-wave elastography features in a case of STI and
discuss the role of this diagnostic modality in the differential diagnosis. A segmental testicular infarction (STI) is a rare cause of acute
scrotum. The etiologic mechanism is largely considered idiopathic, but cases have been associated with hypercoagulability disorders,
vasculitis, torsion, trauma, infection, and iatrogenic vascular injury (1, 2). A STI usually presents with acute scrotal pain and may
resemble epididymoorchitis or torsion. Clinically, a STI presents with acute scrotal pain and is indistinguishable from other causes of
scrotal pain. Ultrasonography (US) is the imaging method of choice for scrotal diseases. Variable appearances on US have been described
previously depending on the evolution of a STI over time (1-4). The major concern in those studies was that the differentiation between a
STI and testicular neoplasm could be challenging (4). Shear-wave elastography (SWE) is a new imaging modality that estimates tissue
stiffness in real time (5). It was previously used for the assessment of breast, prostate, liver and thyroid diseases (6). Few reports
concerning the efficacy of elastography for scrotal mass assessment are available (7). Testicular cancers were found to be harder than the
normal testicular parenchyma on elastography (7). Therefore, our assumption was that a testicular neoplasm would be stiffer than the normal
testicular parenchyma on SWE. We are not aware on the use of SWE for diagnosing a STI. Herein, we report a case diagnosed to have a STI
based on the SWE features and emphasized its role in the differential diagnosis. A 35-year-old man presented with left sided acute scrotal
pain. He was previously healthy without any hematological disorder and had no prior trauma to the scrotum. He had no fever, and a
urinalysis, serum electrolytes and blood count were normal. Clinical examination revealed tenderness of the upper pole of the testis. US
examination was performed with a 4-15 MHz linear transducer (SuperSonic Imagine, Aix en Provence, France). An almost round inconspicuous
isohyperechoic area was seen at the upper pole of the left testis on gray-scale US and color and power Doppler US revealed absent flow in
this area (Fig. 1A). The remaining part of the left testicle and the right testis had a homogenous appearance. SWE was performed and showed
soft areas on color mode in the central portion of this area with a mean elasticity value of 1.7 kPa (Fig. 1B). The normal testicular
parenchyma had an elasticity value of 2.6 kPa. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging of the testis revealed an avascular zone at
the upper periphery of the left testis with perilesional hypervascularity (Fig. 1C). The tumor markers, including β human chorionic
gonadotropin (<1.20 mIU/mL) and α fetoprotein (4.53 IU/mL), were unremarkable. A STI was the presumed diagnosis and a follow-up
ultrasonography performed 10 days after the initial examination revealed that the size of the lesion decreased with an ill-defined wedge
shaped hypoechoic appearance. The SWE showed a wedge shaped stiff area corresponding to a testicular lobule. SWE at the control examination
showed an increased elasticity value (mean, 22.3 kPa) compared to the previous examination (Fig. 1D). Based on the US, color Doppler US and
SWE findings, a STI was diagnosed. The spectrum of findings on gray-scale and color Doppler US imaging of a STI differs depending on the
time between the onset of testicular pain and the US examination (1, 3, 8). It was shown that lesions identified earlier were more often
rounded and nearly isoechoic to the testis and have ill-defined margins (8). Based on the gray-scale US features at an early presentation,
differentiation from a testicular neoplasm is difficult. Interestingly, we found a softer area compared to the normal testicular parenchyma
at the initial SWE examination (within 24 hours after onset of pain). Increase in water content and swelling of the tissues secondary to
ischemia may be the pathophysiological mechanism for the infarcted area that appeared soft on SWE led us to follow the patient rather than
to go to surgery. On gray-scale US, a STI became more conspicuous and smaller over time, hypoechoic to testis, and often having a wedge
shape (8). A follow-up of our case showed that the lesion became wedge-shaped but still had ill-defined margins. On SWE, the lesion appeared
stiffer than the testicular parenchyma, probably due to the organization of hemorrhage and necrosis and the shrinkage in size of the lesion.
Interestingly, the lesion had the shape of a testicular lobule on SWE images that was more easily appreciated than the gray-scale US,
enabling us to confidently diagnose a STI. On color Doppler US, a typical STI has complete loss of vascularity; however, diminished
vascularity has also been reported (1). Presence of color Doppler signal within the lesion results in diagnostic difficulties, with a tumour
being a possibility (4, 9). Testicular tumours are normally vascular on color Doppler ultrasonography and may demonstrate a characteristic
pattern of vascular flow (10). The demonstration of vascularity in a focal testicular mass is thought to be dependent on the size of the
abnormality. Horstman et al. (10) failed to demonstrate an increase in lesion vascularity when the lesion was smaller than 16 mm in
diameter. However, with modern ultrasonography equipment, color Doppler flow may be demonstrated in focal, solid lesions as small as 5 mm
(11). In our case, at the initial examination, there was complete loss of vascularity; however, on follow-up Doppler US, there was some
vascularity within the lesion. In our case, without knowing the previous Doppler US findings, the presence of vascularity within the lesion
at follow-up may cause difficulties for the diagnosis. Contrast-enhanced US was successfully used to improve lesion conspicuity and depict
the anatomic characteristics in a STI (8). Infarction presents as one or more avascular areas separated by normal vessels at contrast-
enhanced US, which is consistent with ischemic testicular lobules. The perilesional rim enhancement is a useful finding frequently seen in
patients with a STI on contrast-enhanced US (8). A more pronounced perilesional rim enhancement and lobular distribution differentiates STI
from an abscess. Similar to contrast enhanced US, gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging demonstrates an enhanced halo delimiting
the avascular area in a STI (3). In summary, similar to gray-scale and Doppler US, the SWE features may depend on the evolution of a STI
that is soft at initial presentation and hard the late stages compared to normal testicular parenchyma. The use of SWE in addition to gray-
scale and Doppler US may prevent unnecessary orchiectomies. Segmental testicular infarction in 35-year-old man. A. Power Doppler
Ultrasonography (US) at initial presentation demonstrates absent flow in upper pole of left testis with perilesional hypervascularity. B.
Gray-scale US of upper pole of left testis shows inconspicuous isohyperechoic almost round area (white arrows) with softer central part
(asterisk) on shear-wave elastography (mean stiffness, 1.7 kPa). C. Gadolinium-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging reveals avascular area
with perilesional hypervascularity (arrow). D, E. Follow-up US examinations were obtained 10 days later. Power Doppler US examination (D)
demonstrates presence of intralesional vascularity (white arrow). Gray-scale and shear-wave elastography examinations (E) demonstrate that
lesion is ill-defined but has wedge shape (white arrows) on gray-scale component of image. Elastography depicts more conspicuous triangular
wedge shaped area corresponding to infarcted testicular lobule. Note that lesion is stiffer than normal testicular parenchyma.
