There are reports of de novo development or exacerbation of obsessive-compulsive symptoms in patients with schizophrenia treated with
atypical antipsychotics, although this is widely debated. We report one such case where a patient with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia,
treated with olanzapine, developed de novo obsessive-compulsive disorder, with convincing evidence for its causality due to the drug. There
are reports of de novo production or exacerbation of obsessive-compulsive symptoms (OCS) in patients with schizophrenia treated with
atypical antipsychotics. This issue has been debated owing to the lack of clarity about the causality of OCS. Since OCS occurs in a
proportion of schizophrenia patients without the influence of any drug, it becomes difficult to substantiate the drug-induced causality of
OCS. To establish directionality of causation, one needs to demonstrate in a longitudinal manner the occurrence of OCS after initiation of
an atypical antipsychotic. We report one such case where a patient with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia treated with olanzapine,
developed de novo obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD), with convincing evidence for its causality due to the drug. A 30-year-old married
woman presented with symptoms such as suspiciousness, fearfulness, and significant hallucinatory behavior, which impaired her daily
functioning, persisting for 3 years. She suspected that the neighbors had been trying to harm her through black magic. She had third person
discussing type of auditory hallucinations with derogatory content. The Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS) score was 48. A diagnosis of
paranoid schizophrenia was made and she was started on olanzapine with 10 mg initially, later increased to 15 mg. After 3 weeks of therapy,
significant improvement was noted in her symptoms [hallucinations and suspiciousness (BPRS score: 10)]. At this point of time, she started
having recurrent sexual thoughts and pathological doubts. She reported significant anxiety associated with these thoughts and felt them to
be irrational and uncontrollable. The Yale Brown Obsessive Compulsive Symptoms (YBOCS) score was 18. She fulfilled a diagnosis of OCD with
predominant obsessions. Due to the de novo emergence of severe obsessions, olanzapine was stopped and aripiprazole was started for psychotic
symptoms. After 2 weeks of treatment with aripiprazole, patient's psychotic symptoms worsened within 5 weeks and the BPRS score reached 51.
However, the OCD symptoms improved drastically with the YBOCS score reaching 4. Considering the worsening of psychotic symptoms, it was
decided to restart olanzapine. While the patient's psychotic symptoms improved dramatically within 2 weeks of treatment, the obsessive
symptoms reemerged with the same intensity as earlier. We started the patient on a trial of fluoxetine to 60 mg for OCD. At the end of 8
weeks after starting fluoxetine, OCD remitted and the YBOCS score reached zero. The patient is currently being followed-up for 2 years.
There are no psychotic or OCD symptoms and her socio-occupational functioning is normal. Given the emergence of de novo obsessive-compulsive
symptoms after starting olanzapine, their resolution after stopping the drug and re-emergence of the symptoms on re-challenge with
olanzapine, it was concurred that OCD in this patient was induced by olanzapine. The use of Naranjo et al. adverse drug reaction probability
scale (score = 8) indicated that the adverse effects were probably related to olanzapine itself. Antiserotonergic properties of atypical
antipsychotics have been implicated as the underlying mechanism causing obsessions, with an emphasis on their 5-HT2A and 5-HT2C receptor
antagonism. In the case reported here, the obsessive thoughts emerged only after an optimal clinical dosage (15 mg/ day) was reached,
suggesting a clear cut relationship between OCD symptom production and drug institution. Compared with the earlier reported cases, the use
of a structured and validated scale to ascertain the causal relationship is an advantage in this report. Also this case follows a “removal-
rechallenge” strategy to establish the same unlike the earlier reports. Since it is known that OCD may cooccur in a substantial proportion
of schizophrenia patients, this aspect must be considered in differentiation of drug-induced OCD symptoms due to the fact the treatment of
schizophrenia is primarily with atypical antipsychotics. Close monitoring needs be exercised while starting atypical antipsychotics in
schizophrenia since occurrence of OCS as a comorbid condition would affect the prognosis. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No.
