Uremic encephalopathy is a well-known disease with typical MR findings including bilateral vasogenic or cytotoxic edema at the cerebral
cortex or basal ganglia. Involvement of the basal ganglia has been very rarely reported, typically occurring in uremic-diabetic patients. We
recently treated a patient who had non-diabetic uremic encephalopathy with an atypical lesion distribution involving the supratentorial
white matter, without cortical or basal ganglia involvement. To the best of our knowledge, this is only the second reported case of non-
diabetic uremic encephalopathy with atypical MR findings. Uremic encephalopathy (UE) may result from multiple metabolic derangements
associated with renal failure and is characterized by acute or subacute onset of reversible neurologic symptoms. Previous studies have
reported that imaging findings of UE indicate either 1) cortical involvement or 2) basal ganglia (BG) involvement (1-5). UE, involving the
cortical region in particular, can cause reversible posterior leukoencephalopathy syndrome (PRES). BG involvement is quite rare. We recently
encountered a case of non-diabetic UE with supratentorial white matter (WM) involvement, without any cortical or BG involvement indicated on
MRI. To the best of our knowledge, only one case with atypical Magnetic resonance (MR) findings similar to our case has been reported
previously (6). Hence, we report this case along with a literature review. A 36-year-old man visited the emergency department of our
hospital. He presented with subacute onset of right facial palsy and motor weakness of the ipsilateral extremities. On admission, the
patient developed acute dysarthria. On the same day, he showed similar symptoms, which spontaneously disappeared within 5 minutes. The
patient had no medical history of diabetes mellitus (DM) or hypertension but was born mentally retarded. According to his guardian, he
developed dysuria after suffering a bladder injury as a child. A neurologic examination revealed central-type facial palsy on the right side
and mild motor weakness of the right upper and lower limbs (motor grade 4+). Laboratory examinations revealed elevated blood urea nitrogen
(BUN) (58.7 mg/dL), creatinine (6.0 mg/dL), and parathyroid hormone (190.3 pg/mL) levels, and a mild decrease in the serum calcium level
(6.7 mg/dL). The results of cerebrospinal fluid analysis, blood sugar detection, and other laboratory tests were normal.
Electroencephalography did not show epileptiform discharge or electrophysiologic evidence of a conduction defect in either visually evoked
potential pathway. On admission, the patient underwent brain MRI and noncontrast-enhanced abdominal CT. The latter showed chronic
obstructive uropathy with a distended bladder, severe hydronephrosis, and dual renal atrophy. The initial T2-weighted and fluid-attenuated
inversion recovery MR images showed bilateral symmetric confluent areas of hyperintense signal alteration involving the supratentorial WM
without cortical or BG involvement (Fig. 1A). They also showed diffusion restriction, indicative of cytotoxic edema (Fig. 1B-E). The patient
was hospitalized for treatment and a cystostomy was performed. After 5 days, the neurological symptoms were gradually and completely
reversed and the BUN level (29.8 mg/dL) decreased. Seven days after admission, the patient underwent follow-up MRI, which demonstrated
complete resolution of the lesions (Fig. 1F-I). Uremic encephalopathy is a well-known complication in renal failure patients and is
characterized by a brain syndrome with various neurologic symptoms resulting from brain edema. These symptoms manifest acutely or subacutely
and are usually reversible (1, 2, 5, 6). According to reports thus far, UE can be classified into 2 types: 1) showing cortical involvement
or 2) showing bilateral BG involvement. The former is more common and it is linked to PRES. Cortical involvement may develop in any uremic
patient, and DM does not have a great effect on the involvement (1, 5, 6). The latter type is rarer and Asian patients with DM are usually
affected by it (1-5). Further, in the cortical type, the radiological manifestation mainly includes vasogenic edema, but in the BG type, it
can include vasogenic and cytotoxic edema (7). The pathogenetic association between the types of UE is unclear. Factors such as uremia,
methylguanidine, parathyroid hormone, aluminum, neurotransmitters, brain osmolality, metabolic acidosis, hypo- or hyper-glycemia, changes in
cerebral blood flow, and metabolic acidosis have been cited as causes of UE (1, 8-10). Typically, it is a complex combination of these
factors that contributes to the pathophysiology of UE rather than any one factor acting alone. Previous works on UE have explained some
possible mechanisms: 1) hyperglycemia increases blood-brain barrier permeability in diabetic-uremic patients; 2) increased levels of uremic
molecules and toxins may inflict toxic and metabolic injury on brain tissue that has been weakened by microangiopathic changes, energy
utilization failures, or vascular autoregulation collapse (BG is particularly vulnerable to toxins); 3) the cerebral oxygen consumption is
significantly reduced in uremia, and this may affect focal cellular metabolism and result in cellular edema (1-8). In most reported cases,
lesions on neuroimaiging and symptoms disappeared when uremia was treated. One patient, in particular, showed residual neurologic
impairments characterized as cystic degeneration at the medial BG (globus pallidus) on a follow-up MR scan and very low apparent diffusion
coefficient (ADC) values on the initial MR scan (2). Some previous reports suggest that the long term prognosis of UE is not good because
many patients die or require prolonged intensive care because of the complications related to UE but not UE itself. Also, prognoses of
patients who have UE with BG involvement and very low ADC values, or diabetic UE, are poorer (1, 2). The MRI results of our case were unlike
those of most reported cases (1-5, 7, 8). Our case showed bilateral confluent reversible cytotoxic edema at the cerebral WM and did not
involve the cortex or BG. Moreover, our patient had facial palsy and transient ipsilateral motor weakness instead of the typical changes in
mental status or movement symptoms. In the past, only one other case had similar reports of subacute onset of facial palsy and nonfluent
aphasia (6). Excluding that case and ours, all the cases documented to date involved diabetic uremic patients. Several conditions including
delayed anoxic encaphlopathy, hypoglycemia, extrapontine myelinolysis, toxic encephalopathy, and metabolic acidosis present similar imaging
findings. However, these conditions are associated with specific laboratory findings or clinical history. In our case, the patient did not
have hypoglycemia, hyponatremia, and any history of anoxia or exposure to toxins. Therefore, we could exclude the effect of other
conditions. On the basis of the symptoms presented here, we believe our findings are divergent from the two known types of UE. Thus, we
propose that UE can be classified into 3 types on the basis of radiological manifestations: 1) the cortical type, which is the most common,
2) the BG type, which is uncommon and usually develops in diabetic-uremic patients, and 3) the atypical or WM type, which is the rarest. UE
may develop in non-diabetic uremic patients with different neurologic symptoms such as facial palsy. Moreover, non-diabetic UE can show
unique and atypical imaging findings. Even these lesions are considered cytotoxic edema. However, if adequate treatment, including removal
of uremic toxins and correction of metabolic acidosis, is provided, complete neurological and radiological recovery can be achieved. Brain
MRI in 36-year-old man with right facial palsy and motor weakness. Brain MRI performed upon admission. Initial FLAIR reveals confluent high
signal intensities of cerebral white mater, sparing cortex and basal ganglia (A). These lesions show high signal intensities on DWI and
decreased ADC values (B-E). FLAIR = fluid-attenuated inversion recovery, DWI = diffusion-weighted imaging, ADC = apparent diffusion
coefficient. Follow-up magnetic resonance (MR) scan obtained after 7 days, when symptoms had improved. MR images show that lesions, which
showed abnormal signal intensities, are completely resolved (F-I).
