Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection We
hypothesized that there would be a good response to relative beta training, applied to regulate the dynamics of brain function in a patient
with benign partial epilepsy with Rolandic Spikes (BPERS), associated with neuropsychiatric deficits resembling the symptoms of attention
deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD). The patient, E.Z., age 9.3, was suffering from neuropsychiatric symptoms, cognitive dysfunction,
especially attention deficits, and behavioral changes, rendering him unable to function independently in school and in many situations of
everyday life. He was treated for epilepsy, but only slight progress was made. The patient took part in 20 sessions of relative beta
training combined with behavioral training. We used standardized neuropsychological testing, as well as ERPs before the experiment and after
the completion of the neurotherapy program. Neuropsychological testing at baseline showed multiple cognitive deficits. Over the course of
neurotherapy, E.Z.’s verbal and non-verbal IQ increased significantly. His cognitive functions also improved, including immediate and
delayed logical and visual recall on the WMS-III, maintaining attention on the WMS-III, and executive functions, but remained below norms.
Physiologically, the patient showed substantial changes after neurotherapy, including fewer spikes and an increased P300 NOGO component. The
cognitive deficits characteristic for ADHD in a child with BPERS may be unresponsive to antiepileptic treatment, but are reversible after a
carefully selected neurotherapy program, combined with antiepileptic treatment. Event Related Potentials (ERPs) in the GO/NOGO task can be
used to assess functional brain changes induced by neurotherapeutical programs. Rolandic epilepsy (RE) is the most common epilepsy syndrome
affecting children . It is a developmental epilepsy with a complex genetic inheritance that has yet to be elucidated . Centrotemporal spikes
(CTS) are the electroencephalographic hallmark . RE is also known as benign rolandic epilepsy of childhood (BREC) or benign epilepsy with
centro-temporal spikes (BECTS) . ‘Rolandic’ means that the seizures begin in the part of the brain called the Rolandic area. The seizures
are classified as a partial seizure because only this one part of the brain is involved . The syndrome is called ‘benign’ because it has a
good outcome: nearly all children with RE will outgrow it during puberty. It affects almost one in five of all children who have epilepsy.
which makes it is one of the most common types of epilepsy in children. It affects boys and girls equally. RE usually begins between the
ages of 3 and 10 years, and often stops around puberty (age 14–18) . Some children who have this type of epilepsy are usually well otherwise
and do not have learning difficulties, although some may have specific difficulties with reading and language or with drawing and visuo-
spatial skills , and some have associated neuropsychiatric deficits resembling the symptoms of attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder
(ADHD), the most common neurobehavioral disorder of childhood . It was gradually realized that there was a close relationship between benign
partial epilepsy with Rolandic Spikes (BPERS) and acquired epileptic aphasia (Landau-Kleffner syndrome), which was the first example of a
mainly “cognitive” epilepsy in children . Prolonged reversible oral-motor deficits were subsequently recognized during the active epilepsy
phase in some children with an otherwise typical syndrome and good final prognosis. These cases showed that this epilepsy syndrome could
cause prolonged “epileptic” deficits. Several neuropsychological studies confirmed the clinical experience that children with BPERS had
normal intelligence but that a certain percentage of them showed variable attention or selective deficits (linguistics, visuospatial etc.),
as compared to normal controls . Recent studies on the frequent temporary cognitive-behavioral disorders encountered in BPERS have placed
emphasis on their probable direct epileptic origin . This was thought to possibly explain some of the learning and school problems that many
of these children experienced in the active phase of the syndrome. Rare longitudinal correlative EEG-neuropsychological studies have
recently shown that acquired temporary cognitive-behavioral problems correlate with epileptic activity (EEG) in some children . It is now an
open question whether this epilepsy can cause a specific developmental learning disability, or more general cognitive disability, if the
onset is severe, early, and affects brain areas other than the strictly “rolandic” . To this end, event-related potentials (ERPs) were
measured during a visual 1-backmatching task. EEG spectra and ERPs in a patient with Rolandic interictal spikes were compared with the
normative data (HBIdatabase) in order to estimate the main neurophysiological deficits found in this patient. The deviations from the
normality are discussed in term of well-known pathophysiological patterns in the ADHD population, such as increased in the theta-beta ratio
, decrease of the P3b component and decrease of the P3 NOGO potential . A quantitative analysis technique to analyze the ERP data, without
any “a priori” decisions on “peak” presence, amplitudes or latencies, is used. The frequency of rolandic spikes in children with ADHD is
significantly higher than that expected from epidemiologic studies. Also, ERPs are of significantly higher amplitude in the epilepsy group
compared to the control group over frontal and central regions within the time window between 250 and 425 ms post-stimulus, which coincides
with the time window of target-nontarget stimulus discrimination . The question arises how ADHD symptoms are related to rolandic spikes in
this ADHD subgroup and how these symptoms can be treated by neurotherapy. What follows is a case study, in which we address this question.
The aim of this study was to find out: whether this boy with rolandic epilepsy shows different cortical activation patterns compared to non-
epileptic children during the performance of a working memory task; does relative beta training, which activates the frontal cortex by
enhancing beta activity recorded over the frontal electrodes, helps: to decrease the number of spikes? to reduce the neuropsychiatric
symptoms, executive dysfunction, and behavioral changes, rendering him able to function independently in school and in many situations of
everyday life. This patient with rolandic epilepsy, E.Z. age 9.3. suffered from neuropsychiatric symptoms, cognitive dysfunction, especially
attention deficits1, and behavioral changes, rendering him unable to function effectively in school and in many situations of everyday life.
In the initial descriptions of the syndrome, his mother and teachers observed behavioral and learning disabilities which caused serious
school problems. At the age of 7.5. he developed severe handwriting problem. It was diagnosed as acquired isolated graphomotor deficit, as
an example of selective “epileptic” developmental deficit (Figure 1). At the age of 7.6. the first seizure was observed, and later active
epilepsy (mainly in sleep), which was slowing the normal process of his development. At the age of 9.9. the epilepsy was worsening. The
seizures were simple partial motor and sensory seizures involving the lower face and the pharyngeal region, the so-called “sylvian”
seizures, and tended to occur during sleep (after falling asleep or before arousal in the morning) sometime with extension to the hemibody
or with generalization. Such seizures sometimes started as the child was waking up in the morning. There was a feeling of tingling (like
pins and needles) on one side of the mouth involving the tongue, lips, gum and inner side of the cheek. Sometimes the seizure also involved
the throat which may have caused speech to be unclear and therefore difficult to understand. The child made strange throaty or gurgling
noises from time to time, and it was often this which alerted the parents to the fact that something may be wrong. He often knew what he
wanted to say but he was not able to speak properly. Although he was treated for epilepsy (carbamazepine), his condition was worsening, and
a dramatic regression of acquired skills occurred (Figure 2). However, all this could be explained by the psychological consequences of the
disease . In brain MRI, frFSET2 sequence, coronal plane dysgenesis of the fornix was found, along with asymmetry of the lateral ventricles,
more prominent on the left. In the axial plane, there were subarachnoid cysts in the posterior fossa. In 3DFSPGRT1 sequence, after contrast,
in the axial plane there was local atrophy of the brain parenchyma in the right frontal area parasagittal. In frFSET2 sequence, coronal
plane, local atrophy of the brain parenchyma was found in the right frontal area parasagittal (Figure 3A–D). The patient took part in the
neurotherapy program which included 20 sessions of relative beta training; the goal of the training was to activate the frontal cortex by
enhancing the beta activity recorded over the frontal electrodes. In more detail the procedure was as follows: electrodes were placed at Fz
and Cz – bipolar recording. The procedure was to increase the ratio of beta EEG power/EG power in the theta and alpha frequency bands. The
beta frequency band was from 13 to 21 Hz. The combined theta and alpha frequency bands were from 4 to 12 Hz. Each session included
approximately 20 min of neurofeedback training . The entire program was administered by the same therapist team, simultaneously. We used
neuropsychological testing as well as ERPs before the experiment, as well as after the completion of the program. The basic clinical
background is provided in Table 1. The experiment was reviewed and approved by the respective medical ethics committees, and the parents
gave written informed consent for the anonymous publication of his case history. The patient underwent standardized neuropsychological
testing: electroencephalogram recording, Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children-revised, Wechsler Memory Scale-III Polish version (WMS-
III, Polish version), Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test-III (PPVT-III) and Boston Naming Test, Polish version (BNT-vPl), at baseline during
active disease (Exam 1) and at follow-up after the completion of the neurotherapy program, during which recovery from epilepsy occurred
(Exam 2). Neuropsychological testing at baseline (Exam 1) showed multiple deficits (see Table 1). At follow up, after conclusion of the
neurotherapy program (Exam 2), patient E.Z. showed improvements in neuropsychological functioning. His verbal and non-verbal IQ, and most of
his cognitive functions increased significantly, including immediate and delayed logical and visual recall on the WMS-III (cf. Table 1). His
results for maintaining attention on the WMS-III also improved (34/40 points). In other cognitive functions E.Z’s results also improved in
the 2nd examination. On the auditory learning task, he had forgotten all the words after a 15-minute filled delay in the 1st examination,
and achieved 5 words in recognition; however, in the 2nd examination he remembered 2 words after the delay, and achieved all the words in
recognition. This general pattern was repeated in nearly all the neuropsychological parameters. Neuropsychological testing at baseline (Exam
1) showed also executive dysfunction in drawing of Semantic Figure (Figure 4). Patient E.Z. was not able to copy the semantic figure (Figure
4A), as he worked very fast and then abandoned the task. However, at follow up, after completion of the neurotherapy program (Exam 2), the
child showed major improvement in executive functions (Figure 4C), even though these were the most disturbed of all his neuropsychological
functions. Event related potentials (ERPs) were used to assess the functional changes in the patient induced by rehabilitation programs. We
used this approach for the following reasons. First, ERPs have a superior temporal resolution (on the order of milliseconds) as compared to
other imaging methods, such as fMRI and PET (which have time resolution of 6 seconds and more) , Secondly, ERPs have been proven to be a
powerful tool for detecting changes induced by neurofeedback training in ADHD children . And finally, in contrast to spontaneous EEG
oscillations, ERPs reflect the stages of information flow within the brain . The diagnostic power of ERPs has been enhanced by the recent
emergence of new methods of analysis, such as Independent Component Analysis (ICA) and Low Resolution Electromagnetic Tomography (LORETA) .
A modification of the visual two-stimulus GO/NO GO paradigm was used (Figure 5). Three categories of visual stimuli were selected: 20
different images of animals, referred to later as “A”; 20 different images of plants, referred to as “P”; 20 different images of people of
different professions, presented along with an artificial “novel” sound, referred to as “H+Sound”. All visual stimuli were selected to have
a similar size and luminosity. The randomly varying novel sounds consisted of five 20-ms fragments filled with tones of different
frequencies (500, 1000, 1500, 2000, and 2500 Hz). Each time a new combination of tones was used, while the novel sounds appeared
unexpectedly (the probability of appearance was 12.5%). The trials consisted of presentations of paired stimuli with inter-stimulus
intervals of 1 s. The duration of stimuli was 100 ms. Four categories of trials were used (see Figure 2): A-A, A-P, P-P, and P-(H+Sound).
The trials were grouped into four blocks with one hundred trials each. In each block a unique set of five A, five P, and five H stimuli were
selected. The child practiced the task before the recording started. The child sat upright in an easy chair looking at a computer screen.
The task was to press a button with the right hand in response to all A-A pairs as fast as possible, and to withhold button pressing in
response to other pairs: A-P, P-P, P-(H+Sound) (Figure 5). According to the task design, two preparatory sets were distinguished: a
“Continue set,” in which A is presented as the first stimulus and the subject is presumed to prepare to respond; and a “Discontinue set,” in
which P is presented as the first stimulus, and the subject does not need to prepare to respond. In the “Continue set” A-A pairs will be
referred to as “GO trials,” A-P pairs as “NO GO trials.” Averages for response latency and response variance across trials were calculated.
Omission errors (failure to respond in GO trials) and commission errors (failure to suppress a response to NO GO trials) were also computed.
EEGs were recorded from 19 scalp sites. The electrodes were applied according to the International 10–20 system. The EEG was recorded
referentially to linked ears, allowing computational re-referencing of the data. The analysis consists of the following steps: 1) eye
movement artifact correction and elimination: a) using a spatial filtration technique based on zeroing the activation curves of individual
Independent Component Analysis (ICA) components corresponding to horizontal and vertical eye movements, as well as b) excluding epochs with
an excessive amplitude of EEG and excessive faster and slower frequency activity; 2) Fast-Fourier Transformation (FFT) of the corrected EEG
for extracting EEG power and coherence for all 0.25 Hz bins in the frequency band from 0.5 to 30 Hz; 3) computation of event related
potentials by averaging EEG over trials for each category of trial and each channel with a time resolution of 4 ms; 4) decomposition of an
individual ERPs into independent components by applying spatial filters extracted by means of the ICA from the collection of ERPs computed
for the corresponding group of healthy subjects; 5) comparison of each extracted electrophysiological and behavioral variable against the
corresponding variable computed for a carefully constructed and statistically controlled age-regressed, normative database in which the
variables have been transformed and confirmed for their Gaussian distribution. Visual inspection of raw EEG was made in order to search for
paroxysmal patterns that pop out of the background EEG. Besides the visual inspection, an automated spike detection was performed. The
method of automated spike detection is based on the temporal parameters of spikes, and the spatial location of the corresponding spike
dipole2. The amplitude-temporal parameters have been defined on the basis of comparison spike detection by the program and by experienced
experts from a data base of more than 300 EEG recordings in epileptic patients; paroxysmal character, high degree of sharpness, and short
duration. These are its paroxysmal character, high degree of sharpness and short duration. These parameters are presented in Figure 6. For
this patient the automatic spike detection was performed on EEG in the common average montage for both eyes open and eyes closed conditions.
The results of automatic spike detection in the fragment of EEG recorded during 22 min of the GO/NOGO task are presented in Figure 7. As one
can see from Figure 7. the number of spikes dramatically decreased after treatment, especially at the left temporal and central electrodes.
Moreover, in EEG after treatment we were not able to detect any spikes at the Cz electrode. The results of a comparison of the patient’s
behavioral parameters during the GO/NOGO task are presented in Table 2. The number of omission errors decreased by more than 50% after
treatment, so that no deviation in behavior from norms was observed after treatment. Deviations from normality in the EEG spectra computed
for 20 minutes of the GO/NOGO task before treatment are presented in Figure 8 left. As one can see the EEG pattern is characterized by
excessive slow (around 6 Hz) activity over frontal-temporal areas. Quite large and statistically significant changes occurred after
treatment. The excessive slow activity decreased after treatment (Figure 8, right). The results of ERP changes are presented in Figure 9.
One can see dramatic changes of the NOGO ERPs with increase of the NOGO potential over the Cz electrode and decrease over the left temporal
areas. Rolandic epilepsy, in which interictal epileptiform discharges appear, is associated with neuropsychological disorders such as
cognitive impairment and behavioral problems, even in the absence of clinical epilepsy . Uncontrolled reports and three preliminary
randomised controlled trials of the antiepileptic treatment of interictal epileptiform discharges have suggested that suppression of
discharges is associated with a significant improvement in psychosocial function. However, a greater number of controlled studies needs to
be carried out in order to confirm this hypothesis . The etiology is multifactorial, being affected by the type of epileptic syndrome, the
cause of epilepsy, the high frequency of epileptic seizures, a previous history of status epilepticus, the age at the onset of epilepsy, the
antiepileptic treatment selected, and the role of interictal epileptiform discharges . Several studies have sought to analyze to what extent
cognitive impairment can be attributed to interictal epileptiform discharges among the other epilepsy factors . The disruptive effect of
interictal epileptiform discharges on cognition is supported by a wide range of factors, such as the concept of transient cognitive
impairment, the definition of epileptic encephalopathy, the natural course of epileptic syndromes with continuous spike and wave activity
during slow sleep, the concept of autistic regression related to epileptiform activity, the cognitive profile of benign rolandic epilepsy,
and the cognitive impact of non convulsive status epilepticus. According to this information it has been suggested that the treatment of
interictal epileptiform discharges with antiepileptic drugs could improve cognition and behaviour in these children . Convergent clinical
data and new evidence drawn from electrophysiological studies and functional imaging suggest that the cognitive and behavioral dysfunction
is directly related to the particular role that the affected cortical area plays when the epileptic process becomes active. The mechanisms,
however, are not well understood . The Continuous Spike-Waves during Slow Wave Sleep phenomenon is probably due to a disturbance of the
corticothalamic oscillatory mechanisms at work during slow sleep, which seem to play a role in the consolidation of material acquired during
waking . One especially dramatic example of how partial epilepsy can lead to a progressive dementia and/or a massive behavioral regression
in children is the “acquired epileptic frontal syndrome” . Cases of partial epilepsy with CSWS are increasingly described in a variety of
developmental and acquired focal cortical pathologies in children (also in association with thalamic lesions) . However, as in our case,
acquired focal cortical pathologies may be not in association with thalamic lesions , however, the child may have an increased frequency of
rolandic spikes as in other ADHD children, as was confirmed by Kropotov , and have associated neuropsychiatric deficits resembling the
symptoms of attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), the most common neurobehavioral disorder of childhood . Graphomotor deficit is
not indicated to be criterial for ADHD, though it occurs almost commonly . However, it is still not clear whether there lie at its basis
motor activity problems or rather the planning and organisation of behaviour. Long term observation and the carrying out of
neuropsychological tests on the boy E.Z. point rather to a connection of the disturbances with all these factors cumulatively. Not without
significance is the fact that the lack of allocation of brain resources in the case of performing the most difficult tasks is linked with
the occurrence of epileptic brain activity. Traditional therapies for the recovery of a child with benign partial epilepsy with Rolandic
Spikes (BPERS), associated with neuropsychiatric deficits resembling symptoms of attention deficit-hyperactivity disorder (ADHD), are still
not satisfactory . To date the best approach seems to be cognitive therapy and behavioral training , however, the results are limited .
Adjunct interventions that can augment the response of the brain to the behavioral and cognitive training might be useful to enhance
therapy-induced recovery in patients with rolandic epilepsy. In this context, neurofeedback self-regulation appears to be an additional
intervention to standard neuropsychological therapies. BPERS is a model for the study of the cognitive manifestations of focal epileptic
discharges in a developing brain, although the prolonged fluctuating and cognitive manifestations and their dynamics of onset and recovery
cannot be explained in terms of simple ictal-postictal symptoms which suggest that several different mechanisms are probably involved.
Microgenetic theory makes it possible to interpret the results we have achieved. This theory differs from other theories of brain function
in that it emphasizes: process and change, rather than data processors connected to each other by neural “cables,” as though the brain were
a computer; the creative nature of perception, which is not just a passive collection of stimuli, but a process of creating an image of
reality; understanding the symptom as a segment of normal behavior that is revealed prematurely by pathology, and is not just a deficit,
that is, the absence of the correct behavior; the development of mental processes that evolve on different scales of time, assuming that the
laws of behavior are the laws of evolution expressed on another temporal plane; processing of information from whole to part, and not, as in
standard theory, from “bits” to “stacks” of information. In particular, a fuller understanding of the essence of ADHD brings us closer to
grasping the process of symptom formation. In Figure 10, the afferent pathways bring impulses received from the sense organs to the
brainstem, which constitutes the oldest and most primitive part of the brain. The brainstem reacts with a general activation of the
organism, which is transmitted upwards (A), to the limbic system and cerebellum. From these somewhat younger structures the activation
signal becomes more complex (B), so that in the cortex it spreads to highly specialized areas. Signals from the cortex then travel by
pyramidal pathways back down to the brainstem, and from there by efferent pathways to effectors in the musculoskeletal system. Understanding
this somewhat simplified diagram of activation makes it easier to interpret the mosaic of diverse disturbances that occur in children with
AD/HD, associated with disturbances that are both structural (involving different areas and different levels of the brain) and functional
(resulting from changes on the level of neurotransmission), as well as the resolution of these disturbances in the course of rehabilitation.
The process of symptom formation responsible for the heterogeneity and changeability of behavioral disturbances in ADHD children is
explained by Figure 11, which illustrates the bidirectional transition from emotion to mentation and action. The state of arousal in the
mind, which in a healthy brain can be reinforced or inhibited by the executive functions, cannot be controlled in the brains of ADHD
children. Thus the behavior which these children exhibit can be diverse, variable, and capricious, depending on a whole range of factors
both structural and functional in nature. Deficits of cognitive functions characteristic for ADHD are detected in a child with benign
partial epilepsy with Rolandic Spikes (BPERS). The attentional dysfunctions are independent of the effects of antiepileptic treatment. The
parameters of attention were improved after the neurotherapy program intended to activate the frontal lobes. The improvement in attention
induced by the neurotherapy program was accompanied by a decrease in the number of spikes and an increase of the P3NOGO component of event
related potentials in the GO/NOGO task. Event related potentials can be used to assess functional brain changes induced by
neurotherapeutical programs. The mechanisms underlying attention deficits are still unknown and appear to be different between focal and
generalized epilepsy . Ktonas P.Y. Automated spike and sharp wave (SSW) detection. In Methods of analysis of brain electrical and Magnetic
signals. EEG handbook (revised series) Gevins AS, Remond A (eds.), Elsevier Science Publishers B.V. 1987; 1: 211–41 Source of support:
Departmental sources Writing sample: acquired isolated graphomotor deficit in E.Z. at the age of 7.5 as an example of selective “epileptic”
developmental deficit. Acquired isolated graphomotor deficit in E.Z. at the age of 7.5 as an example of selective “epileptic” developmental
deficit. EZ (9;9) with benign partial epilepsy with Rolandic Spikes (BPERS) and the diagnosis of ADHD. (A) Brain MRI, frFSET2 sequence,
coronal plane. Fornix dysgenesis, lateral ventricles asymetry – left more prominent. (B) Brain MRI, frFSET2 sequence, axial plane.
Subarachnoid cysts in posterior fossa. (C) Brain MRI, 3DFSPGRT1 sequence post contrast medium injection, axial plane. Local atrophy of the
brain parenchyma in the right frontal area parasagital. (D) Brain MRI, frFSET2 sequence, coronal plane. Local atrophy of the brain
parenchyma in the right frontal area parasagital. Drawing of Semantic Figure by EZ (9.3 years old) with benign partial epilepsy with
Rolandic Spikes (BPERS) and the diagnosis of ADHD. (A). in the 1st examination (before the treatment). (B) The pattern for drawingc) in the
2nd examination (after the treatment). Schematic representation of the two stimulus GO/NOGO task. From top to bottom: time dynamics of
stimuli in four categories of trials. Abbreviations: A, P, H stimuli are “Animals”, “Plants” and “Humans” respectively. GO trials are when
A-A stimuli require the subject to press a button. NOGO trials are A-P stimuli, which require suppression of a prepared action. GO and NOGO
trials represent “Continue set”, in which subjects have to prepare for action after the first stimulus presentation. Ignore trials are
stimuli pairs beginning with a P, which require no preparation for action. Novel trials are pairs requiring no action, with presentation of
a novel sound as the second stimuli. Ignore and Novel trials represent “Discontinue set”, in which subjects do not need to prepare for
action after the first stimulus presentation. Time intervals are depicted at the bottom. The amplitude-temporal characteristics used for
automatic spike detection. Averaged spikes detected in the EEG during the GO/NOGO task pre- and post-neurotherapeutic intervention. (A)
Averaged spikes for electrodes T3, T6 and Cz before the treatment. (B) Maps taken at the peak of the spike before the treatment. (C) sLORETA
images of spikes taken at the peak of the spike before the treatment. (D) Averaged spikes for electrodes T3, T6 after the treatment. No
spikes at Cz were detected. (E) Maps taken at the peak of the spike after the treatment. (F) sLORETA images of spikes taken at the peak of
the spike after the treatment. Numbers on the graphs – number of averaged spikes. Differences of EEG spectra in the GO/NOGO task. Left –
difference between the EEG spectra in pre-treatment condition and the average norm. (A) Map of the difference taken at 6.1 Hz. (B) The
spectra difference with confidence levels below the graph (small vertical bar – p<0.05, medium vertical bar – p<0.01, large vertical bar –
p<0.001). Right difference between EEG spectra in post and pre treatment. (C) Map of the difference taken at 6.1 Hz. (D) The spectra
difference with confidence levels below (small vertical bar – p<0.05, medium vertical bar – p<0.01, large vertical bar – p<0.001). The ERPs
and ERP difference waves (post-pre) in the GO/NOGO task. (A) ERP for GO condition computed at Pz for pre (red line) and post (green line)
conditions and ERP difference wave Post-Pre (blue line) with the confidence levels of the difference below (small vertical bar – p<0.05,
medium vertical bar – p<0.01, large vertical bar – p<0.001). (B) The map of the difference wave taken at 300 ms (peak latency of the GO P3
wave). (C) ERP for NOGO condition computed at Cz for pre (red) and post (green) conditions and ERP difference wave (Post-Pre) with the
confidence levels of the difference below (small vertical bar – p<0.05, medium vertical bar – p<0.01, large vertical bar – p<0.001). (D) The
map of the difference wave taken at 400 ms (peak latency of the NOGO P3 wave). Schematic diagram of the pathways and brain regions involved
in behavior . The bidirectional transition from emotion to mentation and action . Neuropsychological testing of the patient E.Z. in
examination 1, and 2. TMT – trial making test. Level of performance corresponding to the percentiles 98–99% – very superior; 91–97 % –
superior; 75–90% – high average; 25–74% – average; 9–24% – low average, 3–8% – borderline; 2nd% ; below – impaired. Behavioral parameters in
the GO/NOGO task.
