*Wan Y. Lin and Chia H. Kao contributed equally to this work. Neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma is a rare subtype of cervical cancer. These
tumors exhibit an aggressive behavior with early regional lymph node and distant metastases. The purpose of our study was to describe five
cases of neuroendocrine cervical-vaginal carcinoma and to discuss the potential of the 2- fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission
tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan for the detection of this rare malignancy. Five cases of cervical-vaginal
neuroendocrine tumor were retrospectively collected, during a two year (from September 2009 to August 2011) period in our hospital. The
clinical staging distributions were International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage IB2 (1 of 5), stage IIA (3 of 5) and
stage IVA (1 of 5). Two cases (cases 1 and 4) were restaged after 18F-FDG PET/CT scan in the initial staging process. Post-treatment 18F-FDG
PET/CT scans, in three patients, revealed positive findings for tumor recurrence or lymph node metastases. Two patients (cases 2 and 3) died
of tumor within two years. 18F-FDG PET/CT scan is a useful tool in cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor. In its initial staging, the
18F-FDG PET/CT scan may help assess the possible nodal involvement or early hematogeneous spreading. We can also use the 18F-FDG PET/CT to
detect local recurrence and to evaluate the treatment response after clinical manipulation. Neuroendocrine tumors arise from cells of the
endocrine and nervous systems. The incidence has been estimated to be 2.5-5 per 100000 people per year with a prevalence of 35 per 100000
(1). Neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma is a rare subtype of cervical cancer with a high proliferation rate and a marked propensity for
regional lymph node metastases and distant metastases, which is similar to its counterpart in the lung and other anatomic locations. Growing
evidence indicates that 2- fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) scan is feasible for
assessing the pre-treatment staging, detecting lymph node metastases, and evaluating the treatment response in squamous cervical carcinoma.
To the best of our knowledge, there are no 18F-FDG PET/CT studies with cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor. Here, we describe five cases
of neuroendocrine cervical-vaginal carcinoma, and discuss the potential of the 18F-FDG PET/CT scans for the detection of this rare
malignancy. From September 2009 to August 2011, five patients were diagnosed with neuroendocrine tumor in our hospital (four subjects had a
tumor in the uterine cervix and one subject had a tumor in the vagina). The diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma was made, according to the
recently proposed classification of neuroendocrine tumors (2). All of the patients underwent 18F-FDG PET/CT scans for the initial staging
procedure and three subjects received post-treatment 18F-FDG PET/CT scans for detecting possible tumor recurrences or distal metastases.
This study was approved by the Ethics Committee of our Hospital (DMR-99-IRB-010). The patients were asked to fast for at least 4 hours
before scanning. Each of them was intravenously injected with 370 megabecquerel (MBq) of 18F-FDG and rested on a supine position in a quiet,
dimly lit room. Imaging was performed with a PET/CT scanner (Discovery STE, General Electric Healthcare, Milwaukee, WI, USA). Scanning began
approximately 40 minutes after the injection of 18F-FDG. When patients were positioned in the scanner, a molded headrest and a head-
restraining Velcro band were applied to firmly secure their heads, in order to reduce motion artifact. We used four-phase 18F-FDG PET/CT
imaging protocol to improve the lesion detectability in patients with pelvic carcinoma. This protocol included the following: 1) saline
infusion was given before the tracer injection. Whole-body 18F-FDG PET/CT scan was acquired, approximately 40 minutes after the intravenous
injection of 370 MBq of 18F-FDG; 2) post-void delayed abdominal and pelvic 18F-FDG PET/CT images were obtained, approximately 70 minutes
after 18F-FDG injection; 3) after voiding of the urinary bladder again, the patients were injected with 20 mg of furosemide intravenously.
Focal supine abdominal and pelvic diuretic 18F-FDG PET/CT images were obtained, approximately 90 minutes after 18F-FDG injection; 4)
additional focal imaging of the abdomen and pelvis was performed, approximately 110 minutes after 18F-FDG injection, with the patients in
the prone position. The PET/CT examinations started with the acquisition of a topogram of CT that is used to define the axial examination
range of the PET/CT study. After the definition of the axial imaging range, a spiral non-contrast-enhanced low-radiation-dose CT scan
(0.8-second rotation time, 120 kVp, variable mA with AutomA technique, 3.75-millimeter slice thickness and 1.75 : 1 pitch) were acquired,
first, for anatomical references and attenuation correction. Then, the PET emission images were acquired after CT scans at 2 minutes per
field of view (FOV) in the 3-dimensional acquisition mode with eleven-slice overlap at the borders of the FOV. The CT images were
reconstructed onto a 512 × 512 matrix, and then converted to a 128 × 128 matrix, 511-keV-equivalent attenuation factors for the attenuation
correction of the corresponding PET emission images. Then, the PET images were reconstructed to the same thickness of CT images, 3.27
millimeter transaxial slice thickness for further interpretation. A semiquantitative parameter, standardized uptake value (SUV), was defined
as the "tracer activity in the target region per unit mass, divided by the amount of injected radioactivity, per unit body mass". The
maximum standardized uptake value (SUVmax) was calculated from each region of interest with increased 18F-FDG radioactivity. A 46-year-old
female of gravida 3 and para 3 visited our emergency department with complaints of massive vaginal bleeding and abdominal fullness in July
2011. The pelvic examination revealed an exogenous mass lesion over the upper third of the vagina with malodorous discharge. Colposcopic
biopsy of the cervical lesion revealed a poorly differentiated, large-cell neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma. An 18F-FDG PET/CT scan was
performed, subsequently, for the demonstration of possible metastases and shown in Figure 1. The tumor was clinically staged as
International Federation of Gynecology and Obstetrics (FIGO) stage IVA. The patient is currently receiving palliative radiotherapy. A
28-year-old female suffered from malodorous vaginal spotting for one month. Pelvic examination found an area of easy bleeding over the
uterine cervix, without parametrial extension, 4 cm in its largest dimension (FIGO stage IB2). The colposcopic biopsy showed neuroendocrine
cervical carcinoma. A pre-treatment primary lesion was detected on the 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, as shown in Figure 2. The patient received CCRT
and brachytherapy after laparoscopic bilateral ovarian transposition. Four months later, the progression of disease was evidenced by
multiple lymph node and bone metastases. She was admitted for salvage chemotherapy, and was given cisplatin (500 mg/m2) and 5-FU (1000
mg/m2). Disease progression was again documented. She expired 24 months after the initial diagnosis. A 66-year-old postmenopausal woman,
with a diagnosis of stage IIA large-cell neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma was treated with radical hysterectomy, concurrent chemotherapy
and radiation. Ten months after she completed her treatment, general weakness and abnormal laboratory data were noted. 18F-FDG PET/CT scan,
as shown in Figure 3 was arranged for detecting possible metastases, and it revealed multiple 18F-FDG-avid lesions in the mediastinum,
liver, and abdominal lymphatic chain. The patient expired from disseminated intravascular coagulopathy 21 months after diagnosis. A 46-year-
old woman was presented to our gynecology department with complaints of intermittent vaginal spotting and a malodorous vaginal discharge for
2 months. Pelvic examination, which was done under anesthesia on Dec. 3rd, 2010, showed a bulky tumor of about 4.0 cm in diameter. The
pathological finding was small-cell neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma. Computed tomography scan revealed enlarged lymph nodes in the
bilateral internal iliac and the left common iliac regions. The patient was treated in the outpatient setting with daily pelvic radiation
therapy. However, she developed oliguria and was found to have acute renal insufficiency related to obstructive nephropathy. Bilateral
double-J stents were placed to ensure the patency of the ureters. The 18F-FDG PET/CT scan of this patient is shown in Figure 4. In addition
to the primary tumor seen in the pelvis, the enlarged lymph nodes shown on a CT scan were hypermetabolic. Incidentally, a hypermetabolic
lesion was also noted in the left breast. The biopsy of this lesion showed metastastic neuroendocrine carcinoma. The patient is currently
receiving palliative chemotherapy consisting of cisplatin (50 mg/m2), doxirubicin (50 mg/m2) and etoposide (75 mg/m2). A 42-year-old female
presented with a right vaginal septum of about 2.3 × 2.0 × 0.5 cm in size, around the middle to lower third of the vagina on the annual
exam. According to her statement, she suffered from painful sensation during sexual intercourse and post-coital bleeding for nearly 2 years.
Radical resection was done on December 7th, 2009. The first 18F-FDG PET/CT scan is shown in Figure 5. The final diagnosis was stage IIA
large-cell neuroendocrine carcinoma. The treatment plan for this patient, which consisted of six courses of chemotherapy with concurrent
radiation and four courses of brachytherapy, was completed on March 4th, 2010. However, mildly elevated carcinoembryonic antigen, 19.13
ng/dL, was noted six months later. She underwent a second 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, which showed an 18F-FDG-avid lesion in the right side of the
uterine cervical region. Ongoing salvage chemotherapy was subsequently arranged in another hospital. The clinical characteristics, treatment
modalities and outcome data of the five patients with neuroendocrine cervical-vaginal carcinoma are listed in Table 1. The histopathological
findings of case 2 are shown in Figure 6. Five cases of cervical neuroendocrine carcinoma were retrospectively collected within two years
(from September 2009 to August 2011) at our hospital. The mean age of these patients at initial diagnosis was 44.8 years (range, 28-62
years). The clinical staging distributions were FIGO stage IB2 (1/5, 25%), stage IIA (3/5, 75%) and stage IVA (1/5, 25%). Only one patient
underwent radical hysterectomy (1/5, case 3), followed by postoperative concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy. Two patients (2/5,
cases 2 and 5) received concurrent chemotherapy and radiation therapy, one patient (1/5, case 4) received palliative chemotherapy and one
patient (1/5, case 1) received palliative radiotherapy. Two patients (cases 2 and 3) died of tumor within two years. Four primary tumors
were detected by 18F-FDG PET/CT scan. The 18F-FDG PET/CT scan was performed after radical hysterectomy in case 3; therefore, no primary
lesion was detected. The SUVmax of these tumors were as follows: 6.08 (Fig. 1), 9.66 (Fig. 2), 5.62 (Fig. 4), 2.21 (Fig. 5), respectively.
The mean SUVmax of primary lesions was 5.89 in the early images, and 8.68 in delayed images. Distant metastases were presented in the
pretreatment 18F-FDG PET/CT scan in case 1 and 4. In case 1, the highest SUVmax (11.46) was noted in the right sacroiliac joint in the 3rd
phase. In case 4, the FDG-avid lesion with a highest SUVmax (5.08) in the 3rd phase was noted in the right iliac lymph nodes. The restaging
18F-FDG PET/CT in case 2 and 3 revealed previous unknown distant metastatic disease. The highest SUVmax in case 2 and 3 were 12.34 and 8.93,
respectively. The mean SUVmax of the metastatic lesions was 9.45 in the 3rd phase. Carcinoma of the uterine cervix is a common gynecologic
malignancy with squamous cell histology, accounting for the majority of the cases. Rare cervical tumors include lymphoma, neuroendocrine,
and signet cell tumors. Most cases of the uterine cervical carcinoma can be detected at an early stage of the disease by a Pap smear test.
Staging and treatment in uterine cervical carcinoma greatly depends on the FIGO staging system. Early-stage squamous cell carcinoma of the
uterine cervix has good prognosis and outcome. However, cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumors show evidence of distal metastases in the
early stage disease (3-5). These tumors exhibit aggressive behavior, with early hematogenous and lymphatic metastases. In a recent analysis
of the data from the Surveillance Epidemiology and End Results Program of the U.S. National Cancer Institute, it was stated that the
neuroendocrine tumors of the uterine cervix are extremely aggressive, and that the survival is poor regardless of the stage at diagnosis,
when compared with squamous cell types (6). A retrospective study, which enrolled 31 patients in northern Taiwan, demonstrated that the
2-year and 5-year survival rates were 54.8% and 31.5%, respectively, for all types of cervical neuroendocrine tumor (7). This phenomenon,
including poor prognosis and metastases in the early stages, was also observed in our patients. The staging methods of the FIGO system
depend on conventional procedures, including plain chest radiography, barium enema, intravenous urography, lymphangiography, cystoscopy,
proctoscopy, and physical examination, under general anesthesia. However, the FIGO system is inherently inaccurate in the advanced stage
disease, and does not address nodal involvement. Therefore, the expected roles of preoperative imaging are evaluation of invasion to the
adjacent organs and assessment of the nodal involvement and distant metastases. Some recent studies reported that primary uterine cervical
cancers have an avid uptake of 18F-FDG with the SUVmax, ranging from 4.0 to 33 (8-10). In our study, the SUVmax of the primary cervical-
vaginal neuroendocrine tumor ranged between 2.2 and 9.6. Apparently, we cannot differentiate the primary cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine
tumors from primary uterine cervical cancers empirically based on SUVmax. However, the metastatic patterns of these two types of tumors may
have different appearances. The carcinoma of the uterine cervix is believed to typically advance with local growth and lymphatic spread
initially, and by blood-borne metastases in the late stages. Dissemination generally follows an orderly sequence (11). Cervical cancer can
direct an invasion to the vagina, paracervical and paramatrial areas. Tumor emboli spread orderly to peri-cervical, obturator, presacralthe
hypogastric, external iliac, para-aortic, and then supraclavicular lymph nodes (12). In the late stages, hematogeneous dissemination could
happen, and mostly commonly, to the lung, liver, and bone. On the contrary, the dissemination of cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor seems
not develop in an orderly manner. The neuroendocrine tumor can be associated with hematogeneous spread even when no evidence of lymphatic
spreading of the tumor is noted. In our study, there are multiple bone metastases without lymph nodes involvement in case 1. In case 4,
metastatic lesion in the left breast was confirmed without the lung, brain or bone involvement. There are few articles concerning MRI
findings in cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor (13, 14). Yan et al. demonstrated preoperative MRI findings in seven patients with small
cell neuroendocrine cervical carcinoma. In their study, 71% of patients had parametrial invasion and 86% of patients had lymphadenopathy
even with small size of primary tumor. These findings may confirm the needs of further treatment after surgical manipulation. To the best of
our knowledge, no study has been made to compare the diagnostic accuracies of cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor, between 18F-FDG PET
scan and magnetic resonance (MR) images. However, for the common types of squamous cervical cancer, a prospective study investigated the
efficacy of 18F-FDG PET scan in comparison with MR images of patients, with newly diagnosed (35%) or recurrent (65%) cervical cancer (15),
which showed 18F-FDG PET scan with significant superiority to that of the MRI-CT in identifying metastatic lesions, although, the diagnostic
accuracy was similar for local tumors. The pretreatment 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, which can reveal abnormal 18F-FDG uptake, consistent with nodal
disease, is a robust predictor of disease recurrence and may alter the therapeutic management (16). The advantage of the whole body survey
in an 18F-FDG PET/CT scan may be more important in the staging of cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor, since hematogenous spread can occur
early in this type of tumor. Therefore, we considered that 18F-FDG PET/CT scans may be more appropriated than the local MR images for
detecting the possible distant metastases, despite no evidence of local lymph node involvement. In our study, two cases were restaged (cases
1 and 4, shown in Table 1) after 18F-FDG PET/CT scan. In case 4, the initial FIGO stage was IIA. However, several 18F-FDG-avid areas in the
bilateral iliac, the retroperitoneal regions, and the left breast were demonstrated in the 18F-FDG PET/CT scan, which altered the
therapeutic management. The patient received palliative chemotherapy for systemic metastases, and is still alive (as of November 2011, 11
months after initial treatment). Multiple modalities, such as radical hysterectomy and node dissection, adjuvant chemotherapy,
chemoradiation and brachytherapy for neuroendocine tumors, have recently been shown to improve local control and survival rates. However,
the optimal treatment has not yet been completely clarified. Approximately 30% of uterine cervical cancers eventually relapse, after the
initial treatment (17). The recurrence rate in cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor is even higher (18). However, the follow-up
surveillance is not standardized. Follow-up protocols, including physical examination, evaluation of the serum tumor markers,
ultrasonography, CT and/or MRI, have certain limitations. 18F-FDG PET scan or 18F-FDG PET/CT scan is a valuable tool in the case of
suspected recurrence of cervical cancer. Cumulative data on 431 patients showed that 18F-FDG PET scan had the mean sensitivity of 94.7%, the
mean specificity of 83.7% (60-100%), and the mean diagnostic accuracy of 87.9% (70-97.2%) for the detection of recurrences in the uterine
cervical cancers (19). A retrospective study enrolled 40 patients, who were suspected of having cervical cancer recurrence (20). The 18F-FDG
PET/CT scans in these patients (squamous or adenosquamous type on histology examination) provided higher sensitivity and accuracy rates than
that of the conventional imaging (p < 10-3), with a sensitivity of 94% for PET/CT scan, compared to 42.5% for the conventional imaging.
Three patients (cases 2, 3, and 5) were suspected of having recurrence in our study, and they underwent a second 18F-FDG PET/CT scan.
Despite completion of the treatment (both chemotherapy and radiotherapy), rapid recurrence and metastases were found. In cases 2 and 3,
lymph node metastases in the pelvis, para-aortic lymphatic chain and mediastinum were demonstrated in the second 18F-FDG PET/CT scan. Two
patients died from the disease within two years (21 months and 24 months), despite the ongoing treatment. Stage and treatment in cervical-
vaginal neuroendocrine tumor remain to be determined because of the rarity of this type of cancer. Here, we described five cases of
cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor with early lymph node metastases and poor prognosis, despite multiple modalities of treatment
planning. 18F-FDG PET/CT scan is a useful tool in cervical-vaginal neuroendocrine tumor. In initial staging, the 18F-FDG PET/CT scan may
assess the possible nodal involvement or early hematogenous spreading, which altered the FIGO stage. We can also use the 18F-FDG PET/CT scan
to detect local recurrence and to evaluate the treatment response after clinical manipulations. The limitations of our study are small case
numbers and short-term follow-up. Further evaluation, which includes larger case numbers, is necessary. This study was supported by grants
from China Medical University Hospital (DMR-100-076 and DMR-100-077), the Taiwan Department of Health Clinical Trial and Research Center for
Excellence (DOH101-TD-B-111-004), and the Taiwan Department of Health Cancer Research Center for Excellence (DOH101-TD-C-111-005). 2-
fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography images showed multiple hypermetabolic areas in skeleton (including
axial bones and long bones of four limbs), retroperitoneal lymph nodes, liver, lung, uterine cervix, and posterior wall of urinary bladder.
Renal cortex, hepatic parenchyma, and soft tissue uptake were faintly visualized. PET = positron emission tomography 2- fluoro-2-deoxy-D-
glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography images showed lesion in uterine cervix and no distal metastases. PET = positron
emission tomography 2- fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) images after radical
hysterectomy showed multiple 18F-FDG-avid lesions in mediastinum, liver and left kidney, which were consistent with metastases. 2-
fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography (18F-FDG PET/CT) images showed huge 18F-FDG-avid mass in posterior
pelvis, which was compatible with cervical cancer. Several hypermetabolic lesions in bilateral iliac and retroperitoneal regions were
demonstrated, which were mostly related to metastatic lymph nodes. Incidentally, hypermetabolic lesion in left breast was also noted. Biopsy
of this lesion showed metastatic neuroendocrine carcinoma. 2- fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography
images showed lesion in vagina. PET = positron emission tomography This is 28-year-old woman. Histopathological examination (× 100) of tumor
showed infiltration of blue round cells with vesicular nuclei, scanty cytoplasma, high nuclear/cytoplasma ratio and extensive necrosis
arranged in nest on hematoxylin and eosin stain (A); and positive immunohistochemical stain for synaptophysin (B). These features confirmed
diagnosis of neuroendocrine carcinoma. Clinical Characteristics, Treatment Modalities, Outcome Data of Five Patients, and Changes in FIGO
Stage Based on 18F-FDG PET/CT Scans Note.- CEA = carcinoembryonic antigen, FIGO stage = International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, SUV = standardized uptake value, 18F-FDG PET/CT = 2- fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose positron emission tomography/computed tomography,
N/A = not available, CCRT = concurrent chemoradiotherapy
