Subthreshold depressive disorders (minor and subthrehold depression) have been defined in a wide range of forms, varying on the number of
symptoms and duration required. Disability associated with these conditions has also been reported. Our aim was to review the different
definitions and to determine factors associated with these conditions in order to clarify the nosological implications of these disorders. A
Medline search was conducted of the published literature between January 2001 and September 2011. Bibliographies of the retrieved papers
were also analysed. There is a wide heterogeneity in the definition and diagnostic criteria of minor and subthreshold depression. Minor
depression was defined according to DSM-IV criteria. Regarding subthreshold depression, also called subclinical depression or subsyndromal
symptomatic depression, between 2 and 5 depressive symptoms were required for the diagnosis, and a minimum duration of 2 weeks. Significant
impairment associated with subthreshold depressive conditions, as well as comorbidity with other mental disorders, has been described.
Depression as a disorder is better explained as a spectrum rather than as a collection of discrete categories. Minor and subthreshold
depression are common conditions and patients falling below the diagnostic threshold experience significant difficulties in functioning and
a negative impact on their quality of life. Current diagnostic systems need to reexamine the thresholds for depressive disorders and
distinguish them from ordinary feelings of sadness. Despite the relevance of Major Depression (or Depressive Episode) as a highly prevalent
condition in clinical practice and community settings, its subthreshold forms that do not meet current classificatory thresholds have been
less studied. This in large part is due to current diagnostic systems which set the boundary of the disorder based on the presence of a
certain number of symptoms. Consequently, persons falling below the threshold are not recognized in primary care settings or community
surveys and often not included in biological (imaging and genetic) studies as they are considered to be distinct from those meeting the
clinical threshold defined by these systems. Thus, the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, 4th Edition requires the
presence of 5 or more symptoms of depression, out of a list of 9, during at least 2 weeks for the diagnosis of Major Depressive Episode, as
well as additional criteria such as significant distress and impairment, the absence of direct physiological effects of a substance or a
general medical condition that can explain the symptoms. The International Classification of Diseases, 10th edition classifies Depressive
Episode into three different groups according to the number of symptoms present, distinguishing between mild, moderate and severe Depressive
Episode (with or without psychotic symptoms). Both systems include other diagnostic categories for subjects not meeting the full criteria
for the diagnosis of Major Depression or Depressive Episode. The underlying assumption is that categories thus defined have set the
threshold at an appropriate place that best separates those with the disorder from those without the disorder in question. These categories
then become the basis of both clinical, biological and public health research and the design and delivery of individually directed
interventions and policies. In the last two decades, however, increasing recognition of subthreshold forms of depression (minor and
subthreshold depression) in various settings has led to attempts to delineate and describe them better and to highlight the necessity of
studying their characteristics as a significant clinical entity . There is a wide range of definitions of these subthreshold conditions, and
not all of them share the same criteria related to the number of symptoms needed or the impairment present in individual functioning. This
heterogeneity leads to a lack of comparability of studies with regard to identification and management of subthreshold depressive disorders.
Further agreement in the definition and conceptualisation of sub-threshold depression is also needed in order to achieve a better
understanding of the boundaries of depression. The aim of this paper is to carry out a review of studies examining definitions, prevalence
and associated factors (impairment, comorbidity, course and outcome) related to subthreshold depression and minor depression from 2001 to
now in order to unravel their implications for their place within the classification of depressive disorders. A Medline search of the
literature published between January 2001 and September 2011 was conducted. The index terms were “minor depression”, “subclinical
depression”, “subsyndromal depression”, “subthreshold depression”, “subthreshold depressive symptoms” and “subclinical depressive
conditions” and those terms were searched both in the title and in the abstract. We carried out the same search in PsychInfo and we found a
near complete overlap and no papers of significance that met our selection criteria were missed. We included original researches
(observational and epidemiological studies) examining definition, prevalence and associated characteristics of minor and subthreshold
depression in general population (not in specific age ranges), in both community and primary care settings. Papers written in a language
other than English and Spanish were excluded. Bibliography of retrieved papers was examined. 597 papers were considered. 19 studies were
selected as they were population-based studies examining subthreshold depressive conditions in general population. The remaining 578 papers
were excluded due to several reasons: the type of paper; restriction to specific age ranges, evaluation of interventions (effectiveness of
different therapies); studies of the biology of subthreshold depressive disorders; or studies of the psychometric properties of instruments.
The data were selected, extracted and analysed by an investigator (MSc in Psychology) and the quality of papers was evaluated in terms of
the quality of journals they were published (journals indexed for Medline and peer-reviewed papers) ( Additional file 1: Annexe 1 and
Additional file 2: Annexe 2). Many definitions and names were associated with these conditions (see Table 1). Minor depression was defined
according to DSM-IV criteria in the nine studies examining it: at least two weeks of symptoms but the total number of symptoms not exceeding
4 i.e . Subthreshold depression (also named “subsyndromal symptomatic depression” in one study, “subsyndromal depression” in four studies,
“subclinical depression” in one study and “nonspecific depressive symptoms” in another one) was defined in most cases as depressed mood or
loss of interest but having less than five more symptoms or not reporting significant impairment. Despite the heterogeneity of
conceptualizations, several studies shared the definition of subsyndromal symptomatic depression proposed by Judd et al. in 1994 : “any two
or more simultaneous symptoms of depression, present for most or all of the time, at least two weeks in duration, associated with evidence
of social dysfunction, occurring in individuals who do not meet criteria for diagnoses of minor depression, major depression, and/or
dysthymia” . Definition and duration of minor and subsyndromal depressive disorders Some definitions explicitly excluded depressed mood or
anhedonia as an inclusion criterion for subthreshold depressive conditions , whereas other studies did include those symptoms . The minimum
number of symptoms required for the diagnosis ranged from two to five, the most common minimum being two. As regards prevalence rates, they
were highly variable across the various studies, ranging in primary care from 1.3 % to 17% for minor depression. In community settings they
ranged from 2.8% to 6.1% . Prevalence rates for subthreshold depression ranged from 2.9% to 9.9% in primary care and from 1.4% to 17.2% in
community settings (Table 2). Prevalences and settings Regarding subthreshold depression, two studies did not require a minimum duration of
symptoms . In the eight studies that did report a duration criterion, at least two weeks of symptoms were needed. In the nine studies
examining minor depression a minimum duration of two weeks was required. Minor depression is overrepresented in women in five out of the six
studies examinig it, with percentages of 78.9% in Al-Windi , 72% in Fils et al. and 56.1% in De Graaf et al.; and so is subthreshold
depression in four studies, such as the 79.2% reported in Da Silva Lima and De Almeida Fleck . Three studies examined this issue in minor
depression: Fils et al. reported that minor depression was more frequent in married people than in divorced/separated/widow (47% vs. 31%),
De Graaf et al. found a 68.3% of people with minor depression to have a partner and Cuijpers et al. also found a higher prevalence in people
in this familiar situation. Goldney et al. found no significant differences in those with subsyndromal depression compared with no
depressive patients regarding socioeconomic status. Regarding employment status, two studies examined this issue. Fils et al. reported a
higher proportion of unemployed respondents (47%) in a sample of people with minor depression. However De Graaf et al. found 83.4% of their
sample to be employed. There is an association between quality of life and the presence of depressive symptoms not fulfilling the criteria
for the diagnosis of Major Depression or depressive episode. Rucci et al., found that disability in daily activities was increased in
individuals with subthreshold depression, which was also associated with significant psychological distress and poor health perception. In
2007, Da Silva Lima and De Almeida Fleck stated that patients with subsyndromal depression had a lower quality of life than subjects without
depression while patients with major depression had the lowest quality of life. Goldney et al. reported that the average of days in the
previous month in which patients with subsyndromal depression were unable to work was higher compared to control subjects. They found a
continuum of disability related to depression with those with major depression showing the most severe level impairment. In elderly patients
Chachamovich et al. found that subthreshold levels of depression were associated with a decreased quality of life and negative attitudes
toward aging in a sample of older adults from 20 different countries, along the same line as the previous studies of Beekman et al., which
also showed that in older adults minor depression was associated with higher levels of disability and well-being. Similarly, Hybels et al.
found that subthreshold depression in older adults was associated with impairment in physical functioning, disability days and poorer self-
rated health. Regarding minor depression, Cuijpers et al. found that functional disability was significantly worse than in those patients
with only depressive symptoms but better than in patients with a full episode of major depression along a continuum. Howland et al. to the
contrary, stated that patients with minor depression had a level of functional impairment comparable to those with major depression.
Nieremberg et al. suggested that decreased quality of life and psychological well-being may be an intrinsic cognitive aspect of minor
depression. As Ayuso-Mateos et al. found, subthreshold depressive conditions produce a decrement in health status that does not differ
within levels of depression but is significant when compared to non-depressed individuals. In 2004, Goldney et al. concluded that patients
with subsyndromal depression had a significantly greater use of health services than those with no depression. Cuijpers et al. also found a
higher health service use in patients with minor depression compared to non-depressed people. However, Baumeister and Morar found only a
weak association between subthreshold depression and increased health care utilization. Comorbidity with other physical and mental
disorders, is frequently associated with sub-threshold depressive disorders. Rucci et al., in their study of the prevalence and associated
characteristics of subthreshold psychiatric disorders in primary care, found comorbidity with one or more ICD-10 disorders in 39.6% of
individuals with subthreshold depression. Current classificatory systems need to revisit issues of setting the threshold for depressive
disorders both in terms of duration and persistence of symptoms, as well as with regard to the number of symptoms required to qualify for a
diagnosis. This is because, as shown in our review, these ‘formes-frustes’ of full blown episodes of depression are common and are
associated with significant disability and have significant impact on individual health status. Moreover, by not considering the entire
spectrum of depression, classificatory schemes that are used for research may fail to detect biological associations that may underlie the
entire spectrum of this condition. Currently, subthreshold depression is defined in heterogeneous ways, a fact which makes it very difficult
to discern a clinical category that is useful in day to day practice. In addition to research settings, subthreshold depression is of
particular importance in primary care settings since a large majority of patients with this condition are likely to first seek help in
primary care and they are likely to form the bulk of persons with depression seeking care . Sensitising primary care providers to these
conditions may help in early recognition of depression, delivery of interventions, both pharmacological and interpersonal or problem solving
therapies, and perhaps in the identification of persons who are at highest risk of worse outcomes in the future. This would then have the
potential of preventing secondary disability associated with depressive disorders. Cuijpers et al. have reported the positive effects of
psychological treatment for subthreshold depression including its effect in reducing the risk of developing major depression. In addition,
the need to better measure the continuum of depression severity has been emphasized while evaluating the effects of antidepressant
interventions as current approaches may underestimate the efficacy of antidepressants in less severe forms of depression . However, it is
important to distinguish between ordinary human suffering and depressive states, which are qualitatively different, in order to avoid
medicalisation of normal adversities and difficulties causing distress and discomfort . Comparing prevalence rates of subthreshold
depression based on symptom counts alone with dimensional clinical significance criteria, Baumeister and Morar found lower prevalence rates
when clinical significance was considered. In a recent editorial, Maj mentions three possible ways to determine when depression becomes a
disorder. The first one emphasises the context where depressive symptoms occur, the second one focuses on the qualitative difference between
ordinary sadness and depressive feelings and the last one proposes a distinction based on pragmatic grounds. This last option conceptualises
depression as a continuum and two thresholds are proposed: one determining a clinical condition that deserves clinical attention and the
other that enables decisions regarding when pharmacological intervention may be needed. We have only considered the quality of the journal
of publication in order to select the papers (journals indexed for Medline and peer-reviewed papers) as we considered it enough quality
guarantee. However, we did not examine in depth other measures of individual studies such as power calculation, method of assessment, etc.,
which means a limitation of the present study. The aim of this paper is to consider the question of the boundaries between depression, its
subthreshold conditions and normal suffering. To do so we have reviewed literature on this topic and showed data on prevalence, number of
symptoms, duration, impact on quality of life and other factors associated. There is a wide heterogeneity of definitions of subthreshold
depression considering nomenclature and number of symptoms needed. Nevertheless, all studies report an impact on quality of life and a
decrement in health status associated to these conditions. This may lead to support the idea of a continuum of the depressive spectrum and
functioning, ranging from non-depression (no impact on quality of life and functioning) to major depression. Categorical models of
classification of mental disorders underestimate the importance of subthreshold conditions by not considering their impact on the lives of
individuals. Dimensional approaches eliminate an arbitrary threshold and ease the boundaries of mental disorders. This improves precision
and mild states of the illness are better identified. Depression seems to be a continuous entity instead of a collection of categories each
with its clearly defined boundaries . Disability associated with depression is also continuously distributed . Although subthreshold
depressive conditions have a smaller impact on quality of life than Major Depression, the impact is, nonetheless, significant as compared to
non-depressed subjects . However recent studies show that the impact on health status does not differ significantly between levels of
depression but, rather, between depressed and non-depressed subjects. So, if a boundary has to be established, it should be between
depressive disorders and asymptomatic states with the accompanying implications for management. The distinction with ordinary suffering
inherent to several situations is crucial for its implications in diagnosis and treatment. There is a risk of medicalising normal reactions
to adversity and it is difficult many times to distinguish this issue. It calls to the knowledge and responsibility of clinicians and
therapists to decide whether individual reactions are understandable according to their vital situation or on the contrary they imply a
certain degree of psychopathology and are qualitatively different from them. Proposals to integrate subthreshold depressive conditions in
future classificatory systems are being developed. In the DSM-V Development Web site of the American Psychiatric Association there are
several proposals to improve the “Depressive disorder not otherwise specified” category in DSM-IV, renaming it as “Depressive conditions not
elsewhere classified”. Future recommendations in the field of subthreshold depressive conditions involve reaching an agreement in the
definition of these conditions in terms of their operationalization, number of symptoms and duration required for the diagnosis. Revising
the systems of diagnosis and classification of mental disorders is advisable in order to achieve a better understanding of the nature of
depression. All authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest. MRR managed the literature searches and wrote the first draft of
the manuscript. JLAM, RN and SC revised the manuscript and contributed to write the second draft. All authors contributed to and have
approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-244X/12/181/prepub Annexe 1. Number of papers excluded and why. Click here for file Annexe 2. PRISMA 2009
Flow Diagram. Click here for file Mar Rivas is supported by the fellowship “Programa propio para la formación del profesorado universitario,
FPU-UAM”, Autónoma University of Madrid, Spain. Funded by the Instituto de Salud Carlos III, Centro de Investigación Biomédica en Red de
Salud Mental, CIBERSAM Spain. This study was partially supported by the PARADISE project trough Coordination Theme 1 (Health) of the
European Community's FP7, Grant Agreement no. HEALTH-F2-2009-241572.
