A 26-year-old Brazil-born woman was hospitalized because of severe headaches that increased in severity when she moved her head. T2-fluid
attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging showed a cystic-like lesion in the right occipital horn of the lateral ventricle
(Figure 1 Figure 1.T2-fluid attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging (transverse section) of the patient, showing a free-
floating Taenia solium cyst (arrow) in the right occipital horn of the lateral ventricle (supine position).). Repeat magnetic resonance
imaging of a ventral decubitus position showed that the free-floating cyst shifted anteriolaterally to the base of the lateral ventricle
(Figure 2 Figure 2.Repeat T2-fluid attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging of the patient in a prone position, showing a
Taenia solium cyst (arrowhead) shifting anteriolaterally to the base of the lateral ventricle.) and partially occluded the interventricular
foramen (Figure 3). Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay identified IgG against Taenia solium cysticercosis in cerebrospinal fluid and serum
samples. T2-fluid attenuated inversion recovery magnetic resonance imaging (transverse section) of the patient, showing a free-floating
Taenia solium cyst (arrow) in the right occipital horn of the lateral ventricle (supine position). Repeat T2-fluid attenuated inversion
recovery magnetic resonance imaging of the patient in a prone position, showing a Taenia solium cyst (arrowhead) shifting anteriolaterally
to the base of the lateral ventricle. T1-magnetic resonance imaging (sagittal section) of the patient, showing a Taenia solium cyst (*)
partially occluding the third ventricle. She underwent uneventful neuroendoscopic removal of a 1.3-cm cyst (Figure 4) that was
histologically compatible with a T. solium larval stage infection. Positional headaches, a characteristic feature of spontaneous
intracranial hypotension, cluster headaches, and various brain tumors such as colloid cysts, are commonly self-reported by patients with
intraventricular neurocysticercosis. Infections with this parasite result in partial and temporary cerebrospinal fluid obstruction of the
ventricular system.1 Neuroendoscopic removal has been performed in persons with intraventricular neurocysticercosis and shows minimal
perioperative complications,2 such as in our patient. Larval stage of Taenia solium removed from the right lateral ventricle of the patient
by neuroendoscopic surgery. Authors' addresses: Vicente Maco, Division of Infectious Diseases, Beth Israel Medical Center, Albert Einstein
College of Medicine, New York, NY, and Institute of Tropical Medicine, Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Av.
Honorio Delgado 430, Lima 31, Peru, E-mail: vicente_maco@hotmail.com. Jose A. Cortes, Division of Infectious Diseases, Beth Israel Medical
Center, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York, NY, E-mail: jcortes@chpnet.org.
