Parenteral nutrition has transformed the outlook for patients with intestinal failure, but is associated with serious long-term
complications, including catheter-related blood stream infection, liver disease and loss of venous access. Risks can be significantly
reduced by strict adherence to management regimens, such as catheter-care protocols, but intestinal transplantation is indicated when
complications threaten survival. The responsibility of home parenteral nutrition as an alternative to long-term hospitalisation is welcomed
by many parents, but represents a huge burden of care that sometimes proves beyond their capacity. We report two children with recurrent
life-threatening central venous catheter infections who were removed from the intestinal transplant list following virtual cessation of
infective episodes after going into foster care. These cases raise important issues about the level of family support offered, the role of
non-compliance with treatment routines in relation to risk of complications, and how this should be assessed and monitored. Home parenteral
nutrition (HPN) has transformed the management of intestinal failure (IF), improving quality of life for patients.1 However, PN not only
places a major burden of care on parents, but is associated with serious complications, such as catheter-related blood stream infection
(CRBSI), liver disease, loss of venous access and thromboembolism.2 Intestinal transplantation (ITx) is indicated when complications
threaten survival. We report two children with recurrent life-threatening CRBSI who were removed from the ITx list when foster care
placement led to virtual cessation of septic episodes. These cases raise important issues about the level of family support offered for IF
patients, the role of non-compliance with treatment routines in relation to risk of complications, and how this should be assessed. Patient
1 was an 8-month-old girl with short bowel syndrome (SBS) from complicated gastroschisis (25–30 cm small bowel, no ileo-caecal valve, distal
colon) who was discharged on HPN to willing and technically competent parents. The family was assisted by the hospital nutrition support
team (NST) and community nurses in managing complex social, financial and housing issues. Over the next 3 years, she experienced 32 episodes
of CRBSI requiring admission for a total of 655 days, intensive care on 3 occasions, and 10 central venous catheter (CVC) changes. After
assessment in a supraregional transplant unit, ITx was recommended on the basis of recurrent life-threatening sepsis. Parents had shown
increasing reluctance to respond to signs of sepsis and seek medical attention, and visited the ward infrequently. Our perception was that
they struggled to maintain the high standard of care required, and following discussion, they admitted difficulty in coping with the demands
of HPN. Social care agencies declined further support until child protection concerns were emphasised; she was subsequently discharged into
foster care aged three-and-a-half years, and transplantation deferred pending review of clinical progress. Over the next 5 years, she
experienced only one episode of CRBSI, spending around 10 days in hospital each year for assessment and CVC replacement following fracture
or occlusion. Patient 2 was a 3 -month-old infant with SBS secondary to neonatal volvulus (11 cm small bowel, intact ileo-caecal valve,
colon) was discharged on HPN to her motivated and competent single mother. Over the first 15 months, she had 5 episodes of CRBSI, requiring
68 days in hospital; during the next 15 months she had 16 episodes of CRBSI, 4 admissions to intensive care; 7 CVC changes and 144 inpatient
days. Following assessment in the transplant unit, she was also recommended for ITx. The NST and community nurses became increasingly
concerned over changes in the mother's behaviour, including delay in seeking medical attention, poor compliance with treatment, substandard
CVC care, and inappropriate administration of medications in mistaken attempts to prevent hospital admission. The mother agreed she was
struggling to meet the demands of HPN; depression was subsequently diagnosed and treated. Following discussions with the family and social
care agencies, the child went into voluntary foster care with grandparents. Over the next 3 years, there were no further episodes of CRBSI,
and one CVC change after dislodgement. During this time, she was taken off the transplant list. Patient 1 has recently undergone ITx because
of poor venous access from widespread venous thrombosis, while patient 2 has returned to mother's care, and is doing well with three nights
of PN weekly. Developments in home care have transformed the management of chronic illnesses, but place immense responsibilities on
families. While arrangements vary in different countries, in the UK, what support is made available to carers (home care ‘packages’) is
jointly funded by the community medical service (Clinical Commissioning Group) and welfare services (social care). A scoring system is used
to ascertain the level of dependency for each patient, and this in turn, determines the level of support accorded to carers. For instance,
children requiring 24 h care (eg, tracheostomy) automatically score highly, so that parents are then eligible for respite care and
additional support that might include home nursing. By contrast, HPN currently attracts a low score, and parents are deemed to merit little
extra help. However, few parents when faced with the alternative of long-term hospitalisation express unwillingness to take on
responsibility for HPN. The inherent life-threatening risks of HPN are reduced by careful training of carers and compliance with care
protocols.1 Safe and effective delivery of home care is, therefore, dependent on the ability and motivation of carers to follow the
prescribed regimens. Parents need to be adept at daily routines of setting up and flushing off PN, enteral tube feeding, administration of
medications, responding to infusion pump alarms and managing symptoms, such as diarrhoea, high stoma output and vomiting. The need to work
in conjunction with the NST in a common endeavour to keep the child healthy and out of hospital must be acknowledged; this involves regular
exchange of information, and compliance with outpatient visits. In reality, it is difficult to convey to parents the likely impact of home
care on family life. A recent review has highlighted three themes from parental experiences of HPN: physical exhaustion due to troublesome
and often nocturnal symptoms; psychosocial and emotional stress due to social isolation; feelings of guilt and financial burden due to job
loss.3 At times, the burden of responsibility, in addition to other family pressures, may result in poor compliance and adverse outcomes,
yet carers can appear technically competent when HPN skills are formally reassessed. Non-compliance arises from an inability to cope
emotionally with the stresses surrounding the recommended treatment. Parents may find it difficult to admit to feeling under stress from
fear of losing the child and also feelings of guilt.4 More extreme parental non-compliance may represent a special form of child abuse;4 5
neglect is the most prevalent form of maltreatment in children with chronic illnesses; foster care is the most frequent form of
intervention.5 Our impression is that those parents with complex family and social circumstances (eg, single parent; unemployment; debt;
substance abuse) experience the most difficulties. This problem (which might be termed ‘carer fatigue’) should be anticipated and discussed
from the outset, so that carers are able to raise concerns openly if they feel more help is required. Close supervision by the NST, and
working in partnership with families, is essential. In our experience, home visits by the nutrition nurse specialists are very valuable in
terms of identifying problems and troubleshooting at an early stage, yet this outreach or community role for hospital-based staff is not
always acknowledged by hospital management, or remunerated by commissioners. Welfare and community agencies need to have a better
understanding of the burden of care represented by HPN, and be proactive in providing support; this might need to encompass home nursing and
respite care. Change in clinical condition, such as recurrent life-threatening infections, must alert professionals to the possibility of
carer fatigue and non-compliance, even though this may initially be denied by the carers themselves. Help for parents should come before
blame for inadequacy, and clinical teams need to focus on preventing complications that otherwise become indications for small bowel
transplantation. Poor compliance with the management of HPN may well predict poor compliance with complex post-transplantation care
regimens. Our cases indicate that a change of carer can sometimes circumvent the need for intestinal transplantation, however, providing
additional home care support for families may be more appropriate than instituting child protection proceedings with a view to foster care.
Contributors: JWLP was responsible for the original idea and final approval of the manuscript. VZ and GL acquired the information. VZ was
responsible for the drafting of the manuscript and subsequent revision with help from JWLP. Funding: None. Competing interests: None.
Patient consent: Obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed.
