Knowledge that liver tumours preferentially take their blood supply from the arterial blood supply rather than the portal venous system can
be used for local delivery of treatment or for embolisation to cut off the blood supply to tumours. To present histological evaluation of
malignant and non-malignant hepatic tissue of one such therapy, selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT) with yttrium-90 microspheres, to
decipher its principal mechanism of action. The H&E stained sections of hepatic resection specimens from three patients with liver
metastases from colorectal (CRC) cancer, who underwent hepatic surgery 4–9 months following SIRT, were examined and the pathological changes
documented. Resin microspheres were identified in the vascular tumour bed and vessels within the portal tracts of the background liver
parenchyma. Microspheres were usually associated with giant cell reaction or histiocytes. In the tumour bed, tumour necrosis, mucinous
alteration, collections of foamy histiocytes, ectatic vessels, calcification and fibrosis were observed. There was minimal cellular
inflammatory response observed, suggestive of direct radiation injury as a non-immune mediated process. We describe in detail the spectrum
of histopathological changes in malignant tissue and liver parenchyma in patients with metastatic CRC treated with SIRT. Our findings are
consistent with the hypothesis that the principal mechanism of action of SIRT appears to be via arterially directed delivery of highly
radioactive microspheres in and around the vascular tumour bed rather than by micro-arterial embolisation. Therapies directed specifically
into the arterial blood supply of the liver, such as hepatic arterial infusional chemotherapy, trans-arterial chemo-embolisation (TACE) and
radio-embolisation, are today used as anatomically selective treatments to treat inoperable malignancies or to downstage primary and
secondary liver cancers to respectability.1–3 The scientific basis for the first postulation that locally directed therapies could be
selectively delivered to malignancies via the arterial blood supply of the liver is an example from medical history of how meticulous
anatomical and pathological observation can eventually impact on the treatment of patients with cancer. In this report, we describe the
historical background to anatomically targeted liver therapies and histological changes associated with the most recently developed form of
this therapy, selective internal radiation therapy (SIRT). In 1774, Herman Boerhaave first described the dual blood supply to the liver from
the hepatic artery and the portal vein.4 In the 19th century, it was discovered that the portal vein supplied most of the liver's nutrients
and this knowledge led anatomists to assume that the portal vein was also primarily responsible for supplying blood and nutrients to
malignancies of the liver.5 Indeed, the turning point in our understanding of the blood supply to liver tumours, and how they might
potentially be selectively targeted by virtue of their blood supply, came about in 1937 when R Douglas Wright published a seminal study in
the Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology.6 Prior to Wright's work, it was generally accepted that the majority of metastatic carcinomas
metastasise to the liver via the portal vein and therefore derive their blood supply from the same vessels.5 In his landmark paper, Wright's
key observation was the identification of vessel structures in the stroma of liver carcinomas, which corresponded more closely to arteries
and arterioles than to normal vessels in the venous system.6 He thus postulated that carcinomas derived their blood supply from the arterial
system. To provide evidence in support of this hypothesis, he developed a novel method to determine the source of the blood supply to liver
carcinomas. Livers were resected from human cadavers with hepatic arteries and portal veins intact and the vessels were subsequently
perfused and washed with saline. Red gelatine masses were then injected into the portal vein while blue gelatine masses were injected into
the hepatic artery at much higher pressures, followed by sectioning the next day (figure 1). Using this method, Wright was able to clearly
demonstrate that: Colour photomicrograph of a liver metastasis. R Douglas Wright developed a way of injecting blue gelatine via the hepatic
artery and red gelatine via the portal vein to demonstrate the junction of hepatic artery capillaries and portal venules.6 Reproduced with
permission from the Journal of Pathology and Bacteriology. When a fibrovascular stroma develops in secondary carcinomata in the liver, the
afferent blood supply to these vessels is from the hepatic artery.6 Following up Wright's observations, Breedis and Young7 suggested the
concept of arterially directed therapy to selectively target the blood supply of malignancy and posed the following research question to the
next generation of researchers:Would ligation of the hepatic artery cause regression of hepatic neoplasms by cutting off their blood supply?
Would ligation of the hepatic artery cause regression of hepatic neoplasms by cutting off their blood supply? From the 1950s onwards,
various drugs were used for intra-arterial hepatic chemotherapy, demonstrating regression of primary or secondary malignancies in some
cases.8 9 In parallel, other clinical researchers developed ways of cutting off the arterial blood supply to tumours, such as trans-arterial
embolisation.10 The development of modern interventional radiology from the 1980s onwards permitted arterial approaches to therapy to be
performed in a minimally invasive way. An oily contrast medium, lipiodol, was mixed with chemotherapeutic drugs as the basis for TACE in the
1980s.11 Various forms of TACE are now considered routine therapy for primary liver cancer. The most recent development in arterially
directed liver therapy is SIRT using radioactive microspheres. It is a technique that has been developed to target multiple sites of disease
within the liver as a form of arterially delivered brachytherapy.3 TheraSpheres (MDS Nordion, Kanata, Ontario, Canada) are glass
microspheres, and SIR-Spheres (Sirtex Medical, Sydney, Australia) are resin microspheres, both of which contain the β-emitter, yttrium-90,
and have a mean diameter of 20–35 μm. The technique of SIRT involves an outpatient procedure in which trans-femoral catheterisation is
performed and microspheres are injected into the arterial supply of liver malignancies under fluoroscopic guidance. SIRT is currently
offered as a treatment option to patients with inoperable primary or secondary liver malignancies, and is being tested in randomised,
multicentre clinical trials in combination with first-line systemic chemotherapy.3 12 There is current debate regarding the principal
mechanism of action of SIRT in treating cancer.13–15 Does it act primarily via arterially directed delivery of high dose radiotherapy in and
around the vascular tumour bed, or by micro-arterial embolisation, cutting off the blood supply to malignancies similar to the mechanism
described by Breedis and Young? Although large case series of patients having surgery after SIRT are difficult to obtain since SIRT is not
used to treat patients with resectable disease, that is, only patients downsized from inoperable disease are considered for subsequent liver
surgery, we describe three clinical cases in detail to help to inform the current debate. We reviewed the case notes of 24 patients treated
with SIRT at the Oxford University Hospitals NHS Trust between April 2010 and April 2012 in order to identify three patients with metastatic
colorectal cancer (CRC) who were downsized from inoperable disease by SIRT to have hepatectomy or liver segmentectomy. This patient
initially presented acutely with colonic obstruction due to a stenosing proximal sigmoid colon cancer, for which the patient underwent a
Hartmann's resection. Postoperative histopathological assessment revealed a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, pT4bN2, with
extramural vascular invasion and margin-negative resection. On MRI scan, synchronous multiple bilobar hepatic metastases were documented.
The patient received one cycle of systemic chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and flurorouracil, but developed coronary vasospasm and further
chemotherapy was contraindicated. She received SIRT 17 days later at a dose of 0.4 GBq to the right side of the liver and 0.5 GBq to the
left side. Six weeks later, the patient commenced six cycles of irinotecan chemotherapy and cetuximab therapy. Two months from the last dose
of chemotherapy, she underwent a left hepatectomy with segment VI resection. The patient developed postoperative chest infection, which
required intravenous antibiotic treatment for full recovery, but there were no other postoperative complications. This patient presented
with rectal bleeding and was discovered to have a moderately differentiated rectosigmoid adenocarcinoma (T3 N2 on pelvic MRI) and two
synchronous liver metastases (in segments 7 and 8 on liver MRI). She received systemic chemotherapy with oxaliplatin and fluorouracil. SIRT
was delivered 15 days after commencement of chemotherapy (0.5 GBq to the right side of the liver) in order to treat the metastatic disease
evident on scans and to cause compensatory hypertrophy of the left lobe of the liver. She received six cycles of chemotherapy over 3 months
and underwent a right hepatectomy and cholecystectomy 6 weeks after her last dose of chemotherapy. There were no postoperative
complications. Three months later, the patient had a laparoscopic anterior resection to remove the primary tumour. Pathology showed pT3N1
moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma, no extramural vascular space invasion was identified and resection margins were negative. This
patient presented with right upper quadrant pain, 5 years after she had had a moderately differentiated adenocarcinoma of the rectum removed
by anterior resection. The final pathology stage was pT3N0, and extramural vascular invasion was seen. The resection margins were negative.
MRI of the liver confirmed extensive metastases involving the right lobe of the liver and segment IV. Initially, the patient received six
cycles of oxaliplatin and fluororouracil chemotherapy over 3 months, which resulted in a partial response and decreased fluorodeoxyglucose
(FDG) uptake in the liver metastases on positron emission tomography (PET)-CT, but the disease remained inoperable. One month later, the
patient received SIRT (1.0 GBq to the right side of the liver) with two cycles of concomitant oxaliplatin and fluorouracil chemotherapy
followed by further two cycles of fluorouracil alone (oxaliplatin omitted because of peripheral neuropathy). SIRT resulted in a 25% increase
in the volume of the left lobe of the liver (not treated with microspheres) and the metastatic disease became technically resectable on the
subsequent scans at 3 months and 6 months. The patient underwent a right hemihepatectomy 9 months after SIRT. No complications were recorded
within 30 days of liver surgery. The H&E slides of sections taken from the resected liver specimens of these three patients were examined.
The volume of residual viable tumour cells (total amount present in all sections taken of each tumour deposit) and histopathological
features in tumour and non-tumour liver tissue were recorded. We examined the histopathological changes in five metastatic CRC tumour
deposits in three patients who underwent liver surgery after SIRT. The time between SIRT and surgery in our series ranged from 4 to
9 months. Three tumour deposits from all three patients showed good partial pathological response. One of the two deposits of case 2
exhibited complete pathological response while the second deposit of case 1 demonstrated minimal response. Microspheres were identified in
the vascular tumour bed as well as in vessels within the portal tracts of the background liver parenchyma. The characteristic microspheres
were usually associated with giant cell reaction or histiocytes (figure 2). Consistent with this timescale, we observed radiation effects
which were subacute and delayed/chronic. The spectrum of changes observed in individual tumour deposits are illustrated and described in
detail in the legends to figure 3 (case 1), figures 4 and 5 (case 2) and figure 6 (case 3). In summary, within the tumour bed, foci of
stromal fibrinous exudate typical of delayed radiation injury, composed of delicate collagen and fibroblasts, were present in all three
patients but was least appreciable in the lesion showing the least response (case 1). Other treatment effects included tumour necrosis,
mucinous alteration, aggregates of foamy histiocytes, calcification and fibrosis. In general, there was minimal cellular inflammatory
response; this observation is supportive of direct radiation injury as a non-immune mediated process.16 H&E section of liver tissue in
patient with metastatic colorectal cancer 4 months after selective internal radiation therapy (200×). Shows characteristic microspheres in
association with giant cell reaction (block arrow). Surrounding ‘sea’ of foamy histiocytes (fine arrows) is also seen. Case 1. (A)
Representative section of lesion 1 (20×) in segment IV, 40 mm in size, showing minimal tumour response (70% viable tumour cells) and few
scattered foci of calcification. (B) Representative section of lesion 2 in left hepatectomy, 12 mm, with partial tumour response (30% viable
tumour cells seen in entire lesion sampled). (C) Residual well demarcated metastatic colorectal adenocarcinoma next to responsive area
showing fibrosis (20×), calcification and paucicellular fibrinous exudate adjacent to microspheres (D, 100×). Case 2. Right hepatectomy with
two synchronous tumours. (A) Representative section of lesion 1, 15 mm, showing complete pathological response. (B) No viable tumour cells
were seen and the ‘intratumoural’ zone contains marked fibrosis, calcification and paucicellular fibrinous exudate. (C) Ectatic vessels with
the larger calibre vessels showing hyalinisation and intimal thickening. (D) Gapping ectatic vessels in association with loose fibrinous
exudate and foamy histiocytes. Case 2. Right hepatectomy with two synchronous tumours. (A) Representative section of lesion 2, 10 mm,
showing good partial pathological response. (B) (10×) and (C) (100×). Residual tumour (20% viable tumour cells), fibrosis and calcification
are seen. (D) Mucinous change and foamy histiocytes (100×) are identified. Case 3. Right hepatectomy with tumour nodule 40 mm showing good
partial pathological response (30% viable tumour cells). (A) Tumour necrosis (10×) with inset (200×), to demonstrate the lack of
inflammatory cells such as polymorphs within necrotic debris. (B) Fibrosis and ectatic vessels. (C) Foamy histiocytes in association with
haemosiderin pigment. (D) Larger calibre vessels showing tortuosity and intimal alteration. In the background non-tumour liver parenchyma,
tumour mass effect-related changes, such as sinusoidal dilatation and bile ductular reaction, were noted in the immediate vicinity of the
tumour. Severe background liver steatosis was observed in one patient (case 3), which may be related to the use of oxaliplatin-based
combination chemotherapy in addition to SIRT.17 One patient (case 2) had features of veno-occlusive disease (VOD) and although this has been
described in hepatic radiation injury, it may also be attributed to oxaliplatin-based combination chemotherapy in this case.17 It should be
noted that no severe bridging fibrosis was observed in any of the cases studied. The historical evolution of arterially-directed therapies
for primary and secondary malignancies of the liver demonstrates that meticulous observation may lead to the development of effective new
ways of treating cancer. Wright's pioneering work led from the courage of an individual to question commonly held beliefs of the time.
Breedis and Young generated hypotheses which led to the development of arterially directed therapies. The advent of modern diagnostic
radiology several decades after Breedis and Young's paper has confirmed that primary and secondary malignancies of the liver preferentially
take their blood supply from the arterial system rather than the portal venous system. Preclinical and clinical evidence in support of this
hypothesis has been reported from a variety of model systems.7 18 Of particular note is a research study reported in the American Journal of
Pathology, the same journal in which Breedis and Young's paper appeared, 55 years earlier.19 In this study, researchers experimentally
induced liver tumours in mice and applied vascular corrosion casting to show that, after a tumour grows to 2.0–2.5 mm in diameter, its
arterialisation is inevitable.19 Importantly, this study described at the sub-mm level the architectural changes in the liver by which
malignancy can co-opt the host arterial vasculature. In patients with cancer, the application of ultrasound angiography in patients with
liver tumours has demonstrated that established malignancy can take its blood supply from the portal venous system as well as the arterial
system, but that the arterial blood supply to a malignancy appears to determine its growth rate.20 Investigators studied a group of patients
with well differentiated hepatocellular carcinomas, in whom they found that tumours that had a faster rate of progression had a
predominantly arterial blood supply.20 The importance of arterial blood supply in preference to portal venous blood has been corroborated by
another clinical study that used a different imaging modality, perfusion CT.21 The most recent development in arterially directed therapy of
primary and secondary liver cancer is SIRT and the histopathological changes observed following SIRT treatment of the liver have not been
reported in detail. Our paper is the first to describe in detail the spectrum of histopathological changes in CRC liver metastases after
SIRT therapy (table 1). Summary of histological findings in liver resection specimens after SIRT for metastatic colorectal carcinoma mCRC,
metastatic colorectal cancer; SIRT, selective internal radiation therapy; VOD, veno-occlusive disease. In a study by Whitney et al, the
investigators have briefly described the histology in four patients with metastatic disease to the liver from different primary sites who
underwent hepatic resection.15 Their emphasis was predominantly on the percentage of tumour necrosis, which ranged from 45% to 80%, but the
authors did also note moderate to severe hepatic inflammation and fibrosis. Specific details describing the ‘hepatic inflammation’ referred
to were not included in the paper. In a case report by Hadaki et al, the clinical team describe a patient with two synchronous colonic liver
metastases.22 The post-SIRT resected specimen showed complete pathological response in the two tumour deposits. Fibrosis and a small amount
of extracellular mucin was identified. This case report is consistent with the changes we describe here. The collective experience of this
limited number of patients so far would suggest that complete pathological response can be achieved and that SIRT is potentially an
effective treatment option for patients with liver metastases from CRC. SIRT has also been termed ‘radio-embolisation’ by an international
consortium23 and there is current debate as to whether it acts primarily via arterially directed delivery of high dose radiotherapy in and
around the vascular tumour bed, or by micro-arterial embolisation, cutting off the blood supply to malignancies. The microspheres can limit
the blood supply to tumours by being physically lodged in the tumour vasculature. On the other hand, the path length for the β-radiation
emitted from the yttrium-90 is several mm in human tissue.3 In our series, with the time from SIRT to surgery ranging from 4 to 9 months,
the final resected specimens showed predominantly histological evidence of a local radiotherapy effect such as fibrosis, ectatic vessels,
vascular changes and fibrinous exudate. The lack of cellular inflammatory cell infiltrate, such as granulocytes, is a useful feature in
distinguishing these radiation related changes from histopathological changes induced by embolisation or by chemotherapy.16 Our findings
support the hypothesis that the main mechanism of action of this form of therapy is via arterially directed delivery of high dose
radiotherapy in and around the vascular tumour bed. Take-home messagesMeticulous anatomical observation can lead to the development of
effective new ways to treat cancer.The afferent blood supply to malignant fibrovascular stroma originates from the hepatic artery rather
than the portal vein.Arterially directed therapies for primary and secondary liver malignancies are in routine clinical use, such as trans-
arterial chemo-embolisation and selective internal radiotherapy (SIRT).We present clinical evidence that the principal mechanism of action
of SIRT appears to be via arterially directed delivery of high dose radiotherapy in and around the vascular tumour bed, rather than via
micro-arterial embolisation. Meticulous anatomical observation can lead to the development of effective new ways to treat cancer. The
afferent blood supply to malignant fibrovascular stroma originates from the hepatic artery rather than the portal vein. Arterially directed
therapies for primary and secondary liver malignancies are in routine clinical use, such as trans-arterial chemo-embolisation and selective
internal radiotherapy (SIRT). We present clinical evidence that the principal mechanism of action of SIRT appears to be via arterially
directed delivery of high dose radiotherapy in and around the vascular tumour bed, rather than via micro-arterial embolisation.
Contributors: All authors contributed to the analysis, interpretation of data and writing of the paper. Funding: NIHR Biomedical Research
Centre Oxford: funding of SIRT treatment and clinician time. RAS is funded by the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre Oxford, the Higher
Education Funding Council for England, the Bobby Moore Fund of Cancer Research UK and the UK Medical Research Council. Competing interests:
RAS has received research funding from Sirtex Medical Ltd. Patient consent: Obtained. Ethics approval: Clinical audit: individual consent
obtained. Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; externally peer reviewed. Open Access: This is an Open Access article distributed in
accordance with the Creative Commons Attribution Non Commercial (CC BY-NC 3.0) license, which permits others to distribute, remix, adapt,
build upon this work non-commercially, and license their derivative works on different terms, provided the original work is properly cited
and the use is non-commercial. See: http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/
