Various forms of hypogammaglobulinemia can occur in patients with autoimmune diseases and vice versa. We report a 13-yr-old boy with
membranous nephropathy and common variable immunodeficiency. He presented with the nephrotic syndrome, pneumonia with bronchiectasis, and
profound hypogammaglobulinemia. Renal biopsy showed diffusely thickened glomerular capillary walls with 'spikes' suggesting a membranous
nephropathy. Secondary causes were ruled out by laboratory studies; however, heavy proteinuria persisted with steroid therapy. Cyclosporine
and intravenous immunoglobulin were added, and the patient was discharged with decreased proteinuria. Hypogammaglobulinemia may have a
deleterious impact on the immune dysregulation in some patients with membranous nephropathy. It is becoming widely accepted that membranous
nephropathy (MN) is an organ-specific autoimmune glomerular disease (1). Various forms of hypogammaglobulinemia including common variable
immunodeficiency (CVID) can occur in patients with autoimmune diseases whereas persistent antigen stimulation due to defective immune system
is the leading cause of the development of autoimmunity in patients with primary immunodeficiency states (2). Here, we describe a rare case
of CVID and MN presenting as nephrotic syndrome, pneumonia with bronchiectasis, and hypogammaglobulinemia. A 13-yr old boy was admitted with
generalized edema over the past two months on July 24, 2009. During infancy, he had been treated intermittently for bronchiolitis and otitis
media. On presentation, he had mild respiratory symptoms, and had taken no medication. The physical examination revealed abdominal
distension and pretibial pitting edema. The chest radiographs showed an ill-defined opacity in the right middle and lower lobes suggesting
pneumonia. The results of the laboratory tests revealed: a leukocyte count, 13.8 × 103/µL; hemoglobin, 12.0 mg/dL; platelets, 297 × 103/µL;
c-reactive protein, 5.54 mg/L; blood urea nitrogen, 14.5 mg/dL; creatinine, 0.39 mg/dL; serum total protein, 3.6 g/dL; serum albumin, 1.8
g/dL; total cholesterol, 396 mg/dL; 24-hr urine protein, 7,700 mg/day; and the urinalysis showed no abnormal findings except proteinuria.
The C3, C4, CH50, C1q, rheumatoid factor, anti-neutrophil antibody, anti-dsDNA antibody, anti-glomerular basement membrane antibody, and
anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody were all normal. Hepatitis B and C virus antigens were negative, and the antibody titer for mycoplasma
was not increased. Immunological studies showed: IgG, 138 mg/dL; IgA, < 5 mg/dL; IgM, 100 mg/dL; IgD, < 0.41 mg/dL; IgE, 2.4 × 10-4 mg/dL.
The IgG subclasses were markedly decreased (IgG1 238 mg/dL, IgG2 19.2 mg/dL, IgG3 14.3 mg/dL, IgG4 1.12 mg/dL). The CD3-, CD4- and
CD8-positive T cell counts showed no specific findings. The abdominal ultrasound was non-specific. A diagnosis of nephrotic syndrome and
CVID was made and oral deflazacort was started. The renal biopsy showed diffusely thickened glomerular capillary walls with short 'spikes'
on silver staining suggesting MN. IgG, IgM, C3, C4, C1q, Kappa and Lambda deposits were stained on immunofluorescence. On electron
microscopy, the glomerular basement membranes were diffusely thickened with subepithelial electron dense deposits and perpendicular
extension of a basement membrane substance to form short "spikes" (Stage II). Mesangial dense deposits were occasionally observed (Fig. 1).
Methylprednisolone pulse therapy was administered from the 15th hospital day. Cyclosporine was added after seven steroid pulses because the
hypoalbuminemia and heavy proteinuria persisted (5,600 mg/day). The chest CT showed bronchiectasis, pneumonia and atelectasis in right
middle lobe and left lower lobe. The cultures for fungus, tuberculosis and pneumocystis carinii were all negative. On the 29th hospital day,
intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) was administered due to the persistent hypogammaglobulinemia, pneumonia and severe proteinuria. The IgG
increased to low normal values. The IgM was normal. The IgA deficiency was unchanged. On the 39th hospital day, the patient was discharged
with decreased proteinuria (825 mg/day) with normal renal function. The patient reported here initially had profound hypogammaglobulinemia
as a form of CVID and MN presenting as nephrotic syndrome. The serum IgG increased after IVIG therapy; however, the IgA deficiency
persisted. Heavy proteinuria also decreased after adding cyclosporine with IVIG followed by steroid treatment. CVID is characterized by low
serum levels of IgG, IgA and/or IgM, and normal or decreased B cell numbers, which results in recurrent infections mostly of the respiratory
and gastrointestinal tracts. CVID may develop from IgA deficiency and vice versa (3, 4). IgA deficiency is occasionally connected with IgG
subclass deficiency that may cause bacterial infections and could signal the onset of CVID. Interestingly, there have been several case
reports on MN combined with selective IgA deficiency (5). Recent studies have substantially strengthened the idea that MN is an autoimmune
disease of the kidney. Since MN has been reported as an IgG4 mediated disease, autoantibodies of the IgG4 subclass to at least three
podocyte membrane proteins including phospholipase A2 receptor, aldose reductase, and manganese superoxide dismutase have been detected (6).
Autoimmune diseases affect about 20% of CVID patients and are frequently the first manifestation of immune deficiency. Renal involvement is
rare in CVID, despite common involvement of other organ systems. Interstitial nephritis, granulomas, immune complex glomerulonephritis or
membranoproliferative glomerulonephritis have been described in patients with CVID (7, 8). To our knowledge, this is the first case report
of a child who had combined findings of MN and CVID. Most cases of MN are idiopathic; however, a number of secondary processes can also
cause MN that is clinically and histologically similar to idiopathic MN. Generally, characteristics of secondary forms of MN include
mesangial proliferative features, full-house pattern of immunoglobulin staining including staining for C1q, glomerular deposits
predominantly containing immunoglobulin other than IgG4, and electron-dense deposits at the subendothelial location of the capillary walls
and mesangium. In our case, the findings of staining for C1q and mesangial electron-dense deposits showed the inability to exclude secondary
MN completely. Although secondary causes of MN were ruled out by laboratory studies in our case, inflammatory activation associated with
immune dysregulation might contribute to the development and progression of MN primarily or secondarily. Similar to our patient, the case of
a 23-yr-old man with X-linked agammaglobulinemia who developed MN has been reported recently (9). There are no specific treatment guidelines
for MN. Although several immunosuppressive drugs often are employed to manage individual patients, the treatment of idiopathic MN remains
empiric. Our patient had persistent heavy proteinuria despite steroid pulse therapy. Cyclosporine therapy with IVIG appeared to be effective
during the clinical course. Cyclosporine treatment has been achieved remission in MN patients with steroid-resistant nephrotic proteinuria
(10). IVIG has also been utilized in several types of glomerulonephritis in the case of being resistant to conventional therapy, but there
is no controlled study supporting its use in MN. However, remission of nephrotic syndrome has been reported in some patients (11). In our
patient, IVIG contributed to control the clinical course of MN as well as CVID and pneumonia. Long term follow-up for the progression of MN
and re-appearance of severe hypogammaglobulinemia should be done. In conclusion, the association between CVID and MN was suggested by
several findings. A failure to eliminate microbial antigens in our patient with hypogammaglobulinemia may lead to chronic immunological
activation and the development of autoimmunity with MN. Because various forms of hypogammaglobulinemia can also occur in patients with
autoimmune diseases, the question of which came first, the chicken or the egg remains unclear. Hypogammaglobulinemia may be an important,
but largely unrecognized factor, in the pathogenesis and progression of MN in some patients. Renal biopsy findings. (A) Capillary walls are
diffusely thickened in the absence of significant glomerular hypercellularity (periodic acid-Schiff, original magnification × 100). (B)
Short spikes along the outer aspect of the glomerular basement membrane (arrow) (Jones' silver stain, original magnification × 400). (C)
Electron micrograph showing multiple electron-dense deposits along the subepithelal side of the glomerular basement membrane (black arrows)
and mesangial area (white arrows) (orginal magnification × 3,500).
