Few studies have included magnetoencephalography (MEG) when assessing the diagnostic value of presurgical modalities in a nonlesional
epilepsy population. Here, we compare single photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), positron emission tomography (PET), video-EEG
(VEEG), and MEG, with intracranial EEG (iEEG) to determine the value of individual modalities to surgical decisions. We analyzed 23 adult
epilepsy patients with no abnormal MRI findings who had undergone surgical resection. Localization of individual presurgical tests was
determined for hemispheric and lobar locations based on visual analysis. Each localization result was compared with the ictal onset zone
(IOZ) defined by using iEEG. The highest to the lowest hemispheric concordance rates were MEG (83%) > ictal VEEG (78%) > PET (70%) > ictal
SPECT (57%). The highest to lowest lobar concordance rates were ictal VEEG = MEG (65%) > PET (57%) > ictal SPECT (52%). Statistical analysis
showed MEG to have a higher hemispheric concordance than that of ictal SPECT (P = 0.031). We analyzed the effects of MEG clustered-area
resection on surgical outcome. Patients who had resection of MEG clusters showed a better surgical outcome than those without such resection
(P = 0.038). It is suggested that MEG-based localization had the highest concordance with the iEEG-defined IOZ. Furthermore, MEG cluster
resection has prognostic significance in predicting surgical outcome. It is well known that the presence of a specific lesion predicts a
favorable surgical outcome (1-3). However, about 20%-30% of refractory epilepsy patients show no lesions in magnetic resonance (MR) images
(4, 5), and only about 40% of them achieve seizure freedom after surgery (6-8). The diagnostic values of various presurgical evaluation
modalities have been studied separately in nonlesional epilepsy populations (6, 9-11). However, few studies have concurrently compared
various modalities (12). Moreover, even though magnetoencephalography (MEG) is a useful tool for epileptogenic zone localization, few
electrophysiological studies have investigated MEG for its diagnostic value in a nonlesional epilepsy population, especially in an adult
group. In a study into the use of MEG in nonlesional epilepsy, Garcia-Morales et al. only included four children with startle epilepsy (13).
In another MEG study which included 22 patients; all subjects were children in which the authors compared scalp electroencephalography (EEG)
with intracranial EEG (iEEG), not with other modalities, such as positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon emission computed
tomography (SPECT) (14). Seo et al. compared various presurgical modalities, including SPECT, PET, scalp EEG, and iEEG, within one study;
however, their patients were also limited to children (12). Regarding studies that include an adult nonlesional epilepsy population, one
study focused on reevaluation of MR imaging (MRI) results using MEG results (15), while another study only compared MEG results with those
of invasive EEG (16). The purpose of the present study is, therefore, to compare findings from various presurgical evaluation modalities,
including SPECT, PET, video EEG (VEEG), and MEG, with those from iEEG to determine the relative value of those individual modalities to
surgical decisions on nonlesional neocortical epilepsy in adult patients. Initially included were 37 adult patients with intractable
epilepsy with no abnormal MRI findings who underwent MEG examination and resective surgery between 2005 and 2011 at Seoul National
University Hospital, Korea. Of that total, 8 patients who had fewer than 3 MEG interictal spikes, 2 patients with less than a 1 yr follow-up
period, and 4 patients who had hippocampal sclerosis or tumor, based on pathology examination results, were excluded. As a result, 23
patients (mean age at surgery = 30.7 yr; standard deviation = 9.0; 10 females) were included in our retrospective study of nonlesional
neocortical epilepsy. The mean postoperative follow-up period was 2.9 yr (SD = 1.3). All patients were examined using either a GE 1.5 T or 3
T MRI system (GE Horizon Echospeed; GE Healthcare, Little Chalfont, UK) or a Siemens 1.5 T scanner (MAGNETOM Avanto; Siemens, Erlangen,
Germany). Our standard MRI protocol included T2 and fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) axial, T2 and FLAIR oblique coronal, fast
inversion recovery with myelin suppression (FIRMS), and three dimensional (3D) gradient echo coronal T1 images with whole brain coverage.
The 3D gradient echo T1 images were reconstructed to a slice thickness of 1 mm, while the T2 images were acquired by using a 3 mm thickness
with a 1 mm inter-slice gap. Preoperative MRI results were reviewed separately and confirmed by two neuroradiologists specializing in
epilepsy and blinded to seizure focus. Both interictal PET and ictal SPECT were performed in all patients (6). The FDG-PET and ictal SPECT
scans were reviewed by a nuclear medicine specialist blinded to seizure focus. Both scalp VEEG and invasive iEEG were done in all patients.
Ictal scalp VEEG data were recorded by using a VEEG monitoring system (Grass-Telefactor, West Warwick, RI, USA) with electrodes placed
according to the International 10-20 system and with additional anterior temporal electrodes. We used a combination of grids and strips for
iEEG. Grid and strip placements were determined on the basis of results of presurgical evaluations including ictal scalp VEEG, PET, ictal
SPECT, and clinical semiology. The signals were recorded with a bandpass filter of 0.3-70 Hz and digitized at 200 Hz. At least three
habitual seizures were recorded during scalp VEEG and iEEG monitoring. Both scalp VEEG and iEEG results were reviewed by two
epileptologists. The intracranial ictal onset zone (IOZ) was defined as the area with the first sustained rhythmic change in EEG results
that could be differentiated from background and interictal waves. Spontaneous cortical magnetic activity and EEG activities were
simultaneously recorded over approximately 60 min using a whole-head MEG system (VectorView™; Elekta Neuromag) consisting of 306 channels
arranged in triplets of two planar gradiometers and one magnetometer. The location of the subject's head in the MEG sensor space was
determined by measuring the magnetic signals from four head-position indicator coils placed on the scalp. The coil locations with respect to
three anatomical landmarks, i.e., the nasion and two preauricular points, were identified by using a 3D digitizer (FASTRAK™; Polhemus,
Colchester, VT, USA). The obtained information was used to co-register the MRI, MEG, and head coordinates so that the MEG signal sources
could be superimposed on the subject's MR image. The signals were recorded with a bandpass filter of 0.1-200 Hz and digitized at 600 Hz. MEG
interictal spikes were inspected visually. Two epileptologists specialized in MEG had to reach a consensus before confirming an
epileptogenic spike. The dipoles of these spikes were then localized using the single equivalent current dipole (ECD) method, implemented in
the Neuromag software (Elekta Neuromag, Helsinki, Finland). Only ECDs with a goodness-of-fit value > 85% and a confidence volume < 3 µL were
accepted. MEG ECDs were clustered using a hierarchical clustering method with the input of Euclidean distance between ECDs in each patient
in SPSS 19.0 (17). In addition to the presurgical results, we also compared the MEG ECD clustered area with the surgically resected area as
determined from a postoperative MR image. We evaluated surgical outcome after a follow-up period of at least 1 yr. Surgical outcome was
classified according to modified Engel criteria (10). Pathology was reviewed in all patients who underwent resection. Interpretation of the
surgical specimens was completed by a neuropathologist. All patients had focal cortical dysplasia (FCD), except one who was found normal. We
classified FCD according to Blumcke's criteria (7). There were 18 patients with FCD type IA, 2 patients with type IB, and 2 patient type
IIA. All analysis was performed by using SPSS 19.0 software (IBM, Armonk, NY, USA). Localization of individual presurgical tests was
determined for hemispheric and lobar locations based on visual analysis. The localizing and lateralizing results from each
electrophysiological modality were compared with the iEEG IOZ in order to calculate concordance rates. We used the chi-squared test or,
where appropriate, Fisher's exact test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. This study was approved by the
institutional review board of Seoul National University Hospital (IRB No.H-0607-029-178). All patients provided informed consent.
Postoperative seizure outcome was Engel class I in 5 (22%) patients, class II in 3 (13%), class III in 10 (43%), and class IV in 5 (22%)
patients. Table 1 presents a summary of the patients' profiles. Of the 23 patients, 9 had frontal lobe epilepsy (FLE), 11 had neocortical
temporal lobe epilepsy (nTLE), 1 had parietal lobe epilepsy (PLE), 1 had occipital lobe epilepsy (OLE), and 1 had multifocal epilepsy (Table
2). The seizure-free rate for FLE patients (0/9) was less than that for nTLE (5/11) (P = 0.02, Table 2). Compared to the iEEG-defined IOZ,
the highest to the lowest hemispheric concordance rates among the electrophysiological modalities were MEG (83%) > ictal VEEG (78%) > PET
(70%) > ictal SPECT (57%), and the highest to lowest lobar concordance rates were ictal VEEG = MEG (65%) > PET (57%) > ictal SPECT (52%).
The MEG results showed the highest concordance rate with the IOZ at the hemispheric and lobar levels (Table 3). Moreover, the hemispheric
concordance of the MEG results with the iEEG IOZ was significantly higher than that from ictal SPECT (P = 0.031). The relationship between
hemispheric and lobar concordance rates and surgical outcome are presented in Table 3. We regarded patients with Engel class I or II as
having a good outcome, while Engel class III or IV patients had a poor outcome. Among patients with a good surgical outcome, MEG results
showed the highest concordance rate at both hemispheric (100%) and lobar (88%) levels. PET results had the lowest hemispheric concordance
rate (50%), while ictal SPECT had the lowest lobar concordance rate (38%). However, no significant differences among the four modalities
were found in the concordance rates for patients with a good outcome. Table 4 presents the number of patients, stratified by surgical
outcome, in which the presurgically identified ECDs were included in the final resection area. Fig. 1 shows the example of MEG ECDs
superimposed on the post-operative MRI. Patients who underwent resection of the MEG ECDs had a significantly better surgical outcome (P =
0.038). Table 5 presents the number of patients, by individual modality, in whom there was concordant and discordant localization of MEG
ECDs at the hemispheric and lobar levels. None of the patients who showed MEG discordance with the iEEG IOZ, but in whom the IOZ was
concordantly localized in the other presurgical evaluation modalities, had a good surgical outcome, with the exception of one patient for
whom there was no concordant localization in any of presurgical examination modalities. In this study, we determined concordance rates
between the iEEG-defined IOZ and the localization results from four other presurgical modalities (SPECT, PET, VEEG, and MEG) in order to
identify the relative value of individual modalities to surgical decisions made for adult nonlesional neocortical epilepsy patients. In
addition, we elucidated the value of preoperative MEG interictal spike clusters in predicting surgical outcome in those patients. In our
study, 23 adult epilepsy patients with no abnormal MRI findings, who had undergone surgical resection, and who had at least of 1 yr of
follow-up were retrospectively analyzed. The MEG results showed the highest concordance with the iEEG IOZ at both hemispheric (83%) and
lobar (65%) levels. In patients with a good surgical outcome, MEG also showed the highest concordance rate at both hemispheric (100%) and
lobar (88%) levels. Our analysis of MEG ECD resection and surgical outcome showed that patients who had resection of MEG ECDs had a better
surgical outcome. Furthermore, none of patients who showed MEG discordance, but in whom the IOZ was concordantly localized by other
presurgical evaluation modalities, had good surgical outcome, except for one patient in whom concordant localization was not shown in any of
the presurgical examinations. Despite the importance of understanding intractable nonlesional epilepsy in patients whose seizure-free rates
are limited to around 40% after surgery, studies concurrently comparing various presurgical evaluation tools are rare (6, 12, 18). Moreover,
there is only one study that includes MEG in its comparison of epileptogenic focus-localizing sensitivity in various modalities (12). That
study concluded that MEG and SPECT are better tools than PET for such localization; however, their patient group was limited to children.
The present study is the first to compare the localizing value of various presurgical modalities (MEG, VEEG, SPECT, and PET) with iEEG in
adult nonlesional epilepsy patients. In our comparison of those modalities with the iEEG IOZ, MEG had the highest concordance rate in both
hemispheric (83%) and lobar (65%) levels. The hemispheric and lobar concordance rates of the other modalities were, respectively, 78% and
65% for ictal VEEG, 70% and 57% for PET, and 57% and 52% for ictal SPECT. In a multimodal comparison study of 89 nonlesional epilepsy
patients, Lee et al. reported that ictal EEG (70.8%) had the highest sensitivity in locating the epileptogenic focus (6). Their concordance
rate for PET and SPECT were 44.3% and 41.1%, respectively. Although MEG was not compared in their study, their concordance rates were
similar to, or lower than, our rates. In a study of interictal spike source localization, Brodbeck et al. evaluated 10 nonlesional epilepsy
patients, and found a high correspondence (88.9%) between EEG interictal spike source localization and the iEEG IOZ (18). In their study,
correspondences of interictal and ictal SPECT, and PET with the iEEG IOZ were 25%, 62.5%, and 55.6%, respectively. Although their source
localization correspondence via EEG was greater than that from other presurgical modalities, EEG has an inherent signal conduction problem
that makes accurate localization difficult. Compared to conventional EEG, MEG has advantages in localizing epileptogenic zones because MEG
magnetic signals can pass through the human skull and other tissues without significant distortion (15). Previous studies have shown that
MEG is particularly useful in the characterization of neocortical epilepsy (19-21). Some studies have compared MEG with other presurgical
evaluation tools in nonlesional epilepsy patients. Seo et al., in a comparison with iEEG, reported that MEG and SPECT had the highest
concordance rates (79%, 11/14) while PET had a correspondence rate of 13% (3/14) (12). However, they included only 14 children in their
patient group. Zhang et al. included 20 adult nonlesional epilepsy patients in their study (16), and reported MEG to have the highest
concordance rate with iEEG (65%). However, they only compared two modalities (MEG and EEG) with iEEG. Garcia-Morales et al. explored the
role of MEG in the localization of epileptiform activity in four patients with startle epilepsy and normal brain MRI results (13). They
found MEG localizations were similar to the results of VEEG monitoring. MEG concordance rates in our series are similar to those in recent
reports, showing that localization via MEG is well matched with iEEG IOZ in nonlesional epilepsy. These results imply that MEG more useful
than other modalities when planning epilepsy surgery. Zhang et al. reported more favorable patient outcome when MEG findings are concordant
with MRI or iEEG findings than when they are discordant (16). In our results, patients with a good surgical outcome had high concordance
between MEG and iEEG IOZs at both hemispheric (100% vs 70%) and lobar (88% vs 53%) levels; however, the differences were not statistically
significant. Since MEG had the highest localization value, we looked at the concordance in the other modalities when MEG results were
concordant or discordant with iEEG IOZ. In our study, 4 patients displayed hemispheric discordance of MEG localization with the iEEG IOZ, 3
had concordant localization of an ictal onset hemisphere in ictal VEEG, and 3 had concordant localization in PET (Table 5). None of patients
with MEG discordance but with concordant localization in the other presurgical evaluation modalities had a good surgical outcome. One good
outcome patient did not have concordant localization in any of the presurgical examinations. Of the 8 lobe-discordant patients, ictal VEEG
provided concordant localization in the iEEG IOZ lobe in 4 patients, ictal SPECT localization was concordant in 3 patients, and PET
localization was concordant in 3 patients. Although the concordance rate was highest in MEG, we found that other modalities may localize
concordantly, when MEG provides inaccurate information. We conclude that multimodal approaches are desirable when attempting to improve the
accuracy of epileptogenic foci localization in nonlesional epilepsy patients. A study investigating the consequences of clustered MEG ECDs
resection on surgical outcome suggested that there is tendency to have a seizure-free outcome in patients who had MEG ECDs in the final
resection area (14). Although that study focused on children, in our series of adult patients, we observed similar results; i.e., patients
who had resection of MEG ECDs had a better surgical outcome (P = 0.038) than those without such resection. As there are few studies on the
effect of MEG ECD resection, especially in nonlesional adult patients, it is difficult to apply these results directly for clinical
purposes. Based on our results, however, we suggest that using MEG localization information could improve success rate of that surgery when
planning a resective surgery. Researchers who have investigated the relationship between seizure onset lobe and surgical outcome agree that
FLE patients generally have a poorer outcome than that in patients with other types of epilepsy (22-25). Our results support those findings
as the surgical outcome for FLE in our study were significantly worse than that for nTLE or other types of epilepsy (P = 0.031). FLE is
often characterized by a widespread epileptogenic zone, rapid propagation, wide areas of the frontal lobe, the presence of an eloquent
cortex, and a variety of seizure semiologies. Due to these inherent impediments to the identification of epileptogenic foci, the delineation
of the epileptogenic zone is more difficult, and surgical outcome is less successful in patients with nonlesional FLE compared to FLE
patients with lesions (22, 23, 25). These FLE characteristics may have had an impact on surgical outcome in our FLE patients. Histological
examination revealed that all but one of the patients had FCD. There were 18 patients with FCD type IA, 2 with type IB, and 2 with type IIA.
After hippocampal sclerosis and tumor, FCD is one of the most frequent pathologies in epilepsy surgery. The incidence of FCD in our series
is similar to that in a previous report in which 91% (10/11) of the nonlesional epilepsy patients had type I FCD (12). In other reports, FCD
type I was often associated with negative MRI results and a poor surgical outcome, while FCD type II was associated with visible MRI
findings and a better outcome (26, 27). Several previous studies have found a high incidence of cortical dysplasia in patients with normal
MRI findings who underwent surgery (6, 10, 25, 28-30). However, the high incidence of FCD in our nonlesional epilepsy patients is in line
with those previous reports. A major limitation of this study is a patient selection bias toward surgery, which is inherent in a
retrospective study design at a single institute. As Lee et al. noted, because patients with localized ictal VEEG could have been recruited
more easily for surgery, especially in the absence of a structural lesion, every presurgical modality showed a high concordance rate with
the IOZ (6). Such high concordance rates may result in a lack of statistically significant differences among the different presurgical
evaluation tools. Another limitation of our study is that iEEG placement can be influenced by the results of presurgical tests. Thus, and as
previously discussed by Seo et al., iEEG findings are not completely independent from the other presurgical tests (12). In addition, there
is a possibility that iEEG placement may not cover a sufficient area to localize the epileptogenic foci, which may result in inaccurate foci
localization. Nevertheless, this study has clinical relevance because we compared patients that were treated according to a current
diagnostic paradigm. In this study, we compared results from various presurgical evaluation modalities with iEEG-defined IOZs to elucidate
the value of individual modalities to surgical decisions. By computing the concordance rate of each modality, we showed that MEG has the
highest concordance with the iEEG IOZ. Furthermore, resection of MEG ECDs has prognostic significance in predicting surgical outcome. The
present study is the largest study that concurrently compares various presurgical modalities in a nonlesional intractable adult epilepsy
population. From the results, we conclude that MEG provides information that is important to decisions regarding surgical candidacy in
intractable nonlesional epilepsy patients. This research was supported by a grant of the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of
Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea (A111406). MEG spike sources superimposed on the post-operative MRI in patient 4. Axial (A), coronal
(B), and sagittal image (C) show MEG spike sources clustered around the surgically resected area. R, right; L, left; H, head; F, foot; A,
anterior; P, posterior. Patient profiles M, male; F, female; FCD, focal cortical dysplasia. Resection lobe in relation with seizure outcome
Concordance of focal abnormality to iEEG IOZ by surgical outcome of individual modalities *Good (n = 8), Engel classes I + II; poor (n =
15), Engel classes III + IV. Resection of MEG ECDs Complementary role of concordancy to iEEG IOZ among various modalities
