Case report. This study reports if shortening reconstruction procedure through posterior approach only can be used in osteoporotic unstable
fracture as well as post-traumatic burst fracture. An 80-year-old female patient with unstable burst osteoporotic fracture of L1 underwent
posterior approach corpectomy and shortening reconstruction of the spinal column by non-expandable cages. The surgery was uneventful, with
average blood loss. Using of small profile cages has helped us to avoid root injury. Augmentation of the screw with cement and the
compressive force applied to the spine column aids in obtaining a rigid construct with good alignment without any neurological complication.
Shortening reconstruction procedure through only posterior approach is a viable option in treating unstable osteoporotic fracture as well as
post-traumatic fractures. Using non-expandable cage is advocated to avoid cage subsidence. Osteoporotic compression fractures are a leading
cause of disability and mortality in the elderly . Vertebral fracture contributes to pain and disability and is associated with decline in
physical performance even when the pain is not reported. Indeed, the adverse effect of vertebral fracture on most activities of daily living
is almost as great as that seen in hip fracture . If a complex osteoporotic fracture is present which means a concomitant neurological
compression and/or a severe spinal deformity, open surgical treatment is advocated. In this case, a combination of cement reinforcement and
internal fixation might be necessary to achieve sufficient stability . One option for the treatment of unstable thoracolumbar burst
fractures is a single posterior corpectomy and reconstruction using various recently introduced cages . We present this case to report that
this approach can be used also in unstable thoracolumbar osteoporotic fracture as well as post-traumatic types. An 80-year-old female
patient presented to our hospital complaining of progressive back pain not responding to conservative treatment which disabled her from
walking. She has a recent history of post-traumatic osteoporotic compression fracture L1 type A1-1 according to AO Classification. This was
diagnosed and treated conservatively at another institution 4 months back. The patient was evaluated both clinically and radiologically by
X-ray and MRI. She was found to have non-consolidated burst fracture L1 type A3-2 with hyperkyphotic angle 30° (measured between the
superior endplate of the level above and the inferior one of the level below), beside an old consolidated compression fracture T9 (Fig. 1).
MRI showing damaged both superior and inferior endplate with severe instability and retropulsed fragment into the spinal canal
(Fig. 2).Fig. 1Showing the fractured L1 body with sever kyphosis. Also the old consolidated T9 fracture that produce more kyphotic
deformityFig. 2MRI showing the damaged both endplates with the retropulsed fragment Showing the fractured L1 body with sever kyphosis. Also
the old consolidated T9 fracture that produce more kyphotic deformity MRI showing the damaged both endplates with the retropulsed fragment
Patient was placed prone, and posterior midline incision is made. Pedicular screws augmented with cement are inserted into two levels above
and below the fractured L1. The lamina and the bilateral articular processes of the affected segment are resected carefully; lower half of
the lamina above and upper half of the lamina below are resected too. Both pedicels are removed, then the fractured vertebral body is
drilled and resected by a rongeur. The cranial and caudal discs are removed including the cartilaginous end plates. Rods are applied to the
screws, two un-expandable cages filled with milled bone are inserted followed by compressive force to correct the angular deformity,
shortening the spinal column and fix the cages. All of these steps were done under neuromonitoring. The remaining milled bone is embedded on
the postero-lateral side for facet fusion. Post-operatively patient was vitally stable, fully neurologically intact with controllable pain
at the surgical site. She was fitted with a thoracolumbar orthosis. The post-operative X-ray shows good stable alignment spine with nice
cage position, the kyphotic angle between T12 and L2 increased to 170° (Fig. 3).Fig. 3Post operative X ray showing good alignment and stable
implants Post operative X ray showing good alignment and stable implants In older women with vertebral fracture, hyperkyphosis predicts an
increasable risk for death, independent of underlying spinal osteoporosis . Thoracolumbar fracture, mid portion fracture type and
involvement of vertebral posterior wall are risk factors for progressive collapse following acute osteoporotic spinal fracture . Our
objectives for this case were to correct the angular deformity and stabilize the spinal columns through single surgical approach to avoid
the disadvantages of anterior approach in this old patient. Anterior decompression and shortening reconstruction with a titanium mesh cage
using only a posterior approach offer several advantages over traditional anterior or combined anterior–posterior approach for the unstable
lumber burst fractures. However, further modification is required for the procedure to prevent the subsidence of the cages, especially in
patients with low BMD either by inserting a cage larger than 22 mm which seems to be difficult without injuring the nerve roots, or usage of
multiple cages may be a solution . During our surgery, it was so easy to insert two un-expandable cages from right and left with minimal
root retraction. After compression, we checked the cages position by applying some force on them and they were stable enough to support the
spinal column Haiyan et al. reported a similar three-column reconstruction of thoracolumbar fractures above L2 through single posterior
approach. They noted that use of an adequate shorter non-expandable cage can provide sufficient biomechanical stability. Shortening
reconstruction for unstable burst fracture with a shorter cage appears to offer several advantages; acute spinal column shortening within
safe range increases the spinal cord blood flow which is important for cord function recovery . Biomechanical compression among different
cages has no significant difference . Resected local bone maintains bone grafting without donor site morbidity. The current case
demonstrates that the shortening spinal column reconstruction procedure through only posterior approach can be used safely for the unstable
osteoporotic fractures as well as post-traumatic burst features type to avoid the complication of anterior approach in such fragile patient.
To avoid the cage subsidence in such fragile bone, the usage of one or more non-expandable cage is advocated.
