Phyma is the last stage of rosacea and is due to chronic inflammation and edema. It can affect nose (rhinophyma), chin (gnatophyma),
forehead (metophyma), ears (otophyma) and eyelids (blepharophyma). Rhinophyma is the most frequent location and there are few reports about
gnatophyma. We report the case of a female patient, 41 years old, who had an infiltrated, erythematous, edematous plaque around the chin and
lower lip for two years. Histopathology showed perivascular lymphocytic infiltrate, hypertrophied follicles and sebaceous glands, dilated
vessels and fibrosis. She was treated with oral tetracycline, oral ivermectin and metronidazole cream with a satisfactory response. The
clinical, histopathological and therapeutic response correlation confirmed the diagnosis of gnatophyma, a rare variant of phyma. Fima é o
estágio final da rosácea e ocorre devido ao edema e inflamação crônica. Pode acometer nariz (rinofima), mento (gnatofima), fronte
(metofima), orelhas (otofima) e pálpebras (blefarofima). Rinofima é a localização mais encontrada e há raros relatos de gnatofima.
Relataremos paciente feminina, 41 anos, que apresentava placa infiltrada, eritêmato-edematosa, em todo o mento e lábio inferior há dois
anos. Histopatológico com infiltrado linfocitário perianexial e perivascular, folículos e glândulas sebáceas hipertrofiadas, vasos
ectasiados e fibrose perianexial. Foi instituído tratamento com tetraciclina via oral, ivermectina via oral e metronidazol creme com
resposta satisfatória. Através da correlação clínica, histopatológica e resposta terapêutica confirmou-se o diagnóstico da variante rara de
fima, gnatofima. Rosacea is a chronic skin condition, characterized by redness, telangiectasia, papules, pustules, skin thickening and
phymas.1,2 The etiology is unknown.1 It is believed that tissue damage, oxidative stress, decreased superoxide dismutase, and production of
vasoactive substances such as serotonin, prostaglandins and substance P are involved in its pathogenesis, as well as opioid peptides and
Helicobacter pylori infections, Demodexbrevis and Demodex folliculorum.1,2 Phyma is considered the last evolution stage of rosacea. 1-6 It
affects mostly men and is characterized by fibrosis, sebaceous glands hyperplasia and lymphedema.3 It most frequently affects the nose
(rhinophyma), and rarely the chin (gnatophyma), forehead (metophyma), ears (otophyma) and eyelids (blepharophyma).2,3 This report is about
gnatophyma, a rare form of phyma with both clinical and histopathological characteristics and a satisfactory response to treatment, but
which is difficult to diagnose because of the rarity of its occurrence. A 41-year old female patient presented growth and redness of the
chin two years ago. Dermatological examination showed well-defined infiltrated, erythematous, edematous, asymptomatic plaque on the chin and
lower lip. The skin was thickened on the chin and the rest of the face was unaltered (Figures 1 and 2). The patient reported periods of
exacerbation but was unable to relate it to psychological factors, stress and hot food or alcohol. She had been taking captopril,
hydrochlorothiazide, metformin and fluoxetine for five years. The initial diagnosis was contact dermatitis, so she was instructed to stop
wearing makeup, creams, nickel jewelry and nail polish, associated with oral corticosteroids for 30 days, but no improvement was noted. A
skin biopsy of the chin showed corneal plugs, dense lymphocytic perifollicle, periadnexal and perivascular infiltrate in the dermis,
sebaceous glands hyperplasia, hypertrophied hair follicles, dilated vessels and outline of giant cells (Figures 3 and 4). This
histopathological result suggested Syndrome of Mekelsson-Rosenthal, thus, in addition to oral corticosteroids, we introduced intralesional
steroids as part of the treatment, but there was no improvement. Another possible diagnosis was rosacea, in its rare variant, gnatophyma.
The treatment prescribed was tetracycline 1 g/day, ivermectin 12 mg single dose and metronidazole cream 1 %, with improvement of the
clinical status (Figure 5). Through clinical and histopathological correlation and a satisfactory therapeutic response the diagnosis of
gnatophyma was confirmed. Infiltrated erythematous and edematous plaque on chin and lower lip, without other facial changes Erythematous and
edematous plaque on chin and lower lip. Skin looks like orange peel HE – perianexal lymphocytic infiltrate, hypertrophied follicles,
sebaceous glands and increased dilated vessels HE- Outline of giant cell Patient after treatment Rosacea is a common disease that affects
mostly middle aged women. It is manifested by transient or persistent erythema, telangiectasia, edema, papules and / or pustules on the
face, most typically in the middle. There are several subtypes that include erythematotelangiectatic, papular-pustular, nodular-
infiltrative, fulminating, ocular, granulomatous and phymas. 1,2 Phymas, which means swelling or masses, are described as the last stage of
rosacea, due to edema and chronic inflammation, which result in tissue hypertrophy and hyperplasia of sebaceous glands. 2,3 They affect
mostly males above 40 years of age. 3 Rhinophyma is the most common form of phyma and rarely affects the chin (gnatophyma), forehead
(metophyma), one or both ears (otophyma), and one or both eyelids (blefarophyma). 3 The clinical severity of the phyma variant is based on
the deformity degree. 4 Gnatophyma has been rarely reported, there are only three cases in the scientific literature, and it may manifest
alone or coexist with rosacea lesions. 4,5,6 In those reported cases, one patient is male and two are female, and all of them have injuries
exclusively on the chin. The patient reported here is female and also has lesions exclusively on the chin. The process of diffusion and
extension of the chin can be attributed to lymphedema, which is a chronic inflammation, due to mechanical failure of the lymphatic system,
caused by persistent inflammation of rosacea. 7 Demodex was found in two of three cases mentioned in scientific literature and its presence
in rosacea may be due to localized immune deficiency caused by lymphoedema and / or Demodex could serve as a source for antigenic persistent
inflammation.4,5,6 These hypotheses explain the predisposition to the development of skin cancer on phyma. 7 There are few reports in
literature that show association between rosacea and dental diseases. 5,8 They indicate a significant clinical improvement in rosacea after
a dental treatment. 8 Histologically, phyma can be divided into the common type, which shows fibrosis and hyperplasia of sebaceous glands,
and the severe forms, which resemble elephantiasis caused by chronic lymphedema. 3,7 Our patient had histopathological fibrosis and
hyperplasia of sebaceous glands, corresponding to the common type. An important consideration in this case as a differential diagnosis is
the Syndrome of Mekelsson-Rosenthal, which is characterized by lip edema, plicated tongue and facial paralysis associated with epithelioid
granulomas in histopathology. The classical triad occurs in less than 30% of the cases, and the remainder is represented by mono or
oligosymptomatic forms. 9 However, in this case, this diagnosis was excluded because of the other findings in histopathology, hyperplasia of
sebaceous glands, perifollicle, periadnexal and perivascular infiltrate, dilated vessels and hypertrophy of the hair follicles associated
with non-response to treatment for Syndrome of Mekelsson-Rosenthal, leading to the diagnosis of rosacea. Possible treatments for rosacea
include metronidazole cream, azelaic acid or permethrin, atenolol, clonidine, oral antibiotics, including metronidazole, minocycline,
doxycycline, clarithromycin, cephalosporins, ivermectin, oral isotretinoin and treatment of Helicobacter Pylori. 1,2,10 However, only
antibiotics and oral isotretinoin are capable of reducing the phymas. 1,2,3 To treat the severe type of phyma one can make use of carbon
dioxide laser and surgery. 3,4,5,6 Due to the rare occurrence of gnatophyma, the ideal treatment still represents a challenge. The treatment
prescribed was tetracycline 1g / day, ivermectin 12 mg single dose, and metronidazole cream 1%. Clinical improvement was observed after one
month treatment. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None * Study carried out at the University of Santo Amaro (Universidade de
Santo Amaro - UNISA) - São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
