We report a clinical case of a rare variant of pemphigus - pemphigus herpetiformis - which combines the clinical features of dermatitis
herpetiformis with the immunological findings of pemphigus. Due to its atypical presentation, it is frequently misdiagnosed as dermatitis
herpetiformis. It is basically characterized by the herpetiform pattern of skin lesions, severe pruritus and by the presence of eosinophilic
spongiosis confirmed on histopathology. We call attention to the excellent response to dapsone. Descrevemos um caso clínico de uma variante
rara de pênfigo - pênfigo herpetiforme - que combina os aspectos clínicos da dermatite herpetiforme com os achados imunológicos do pênfigo.
Devido à sua apresentação atípica, é frequentemente diagnosticado equivocamente como dermatite herpetiforme. Caracteriza-se essencialmente
pelo padrão herpetiforme das lesões cutâneas, prurido intenso e presença de espongiose eosinofílica no exame histopatológico. Enfatizamos a
excelente resposta terapêutica à dapsona. A 63-year-old Caucasian man presented with a two-month history of an intensely pruritic, symmetric
and polymorphous skin eruption. His past medical history was unremarkable. On examination, we observed multiple papules, vesicles, pustules
and crusted excoriations on an erythematous base, especially over the buttocks, legs and arms (Figure 1). The oral and genital mucosas were
spared. Nikolsky's sign was negative. Clinical features showing multiple papules, vesicles, pustules and crusted excoriations on an
erythematous base over the buttocks Tzanck smear showed abundant eosinophils with absence of acantholytic cells. Histopathological
examination revealed eosinophilic spongiosis and intraepidermal vesicles filled with eosinophils and neutrophils (Figure 2). Direct
immunofluorescence microscopy showed intercellular deposits of IgG (Figure 3). High titers of circulating anti-desmoglein 1 autoantibodies
were demonstrated by immunoblot study. The remaining workup, which included blood tests, imagiologic studies and gastrointestinal endoscopy,
was normal. Histopathological examination revealing eosinophilic spongiosis and intraepidermal vesicles filled with eosinophils and
neutrophils (Hematoxylin and Eosin staining 40x) Direct immunofluorescence performed on perilesional skin revealing IgG deposits at the
keratinocyte cell surface The patient was treated with 100 mg/day dapsone and showed an excellent response. After a year, he was free of the
disease on a maintenance dose of 50 mg dapsone daily. Pemphigus herpetiformis (PH) was diagnosed based on clinical, histopathological and
immunological findings. PH was first introduced by Jablonska et al. in 1975. 1 It is considered a rare variant of pemphigus which combines
the clinical features of dermatitis herpetiformis with the immunological findings of pemphigus. Due to its rarity and atypical presentation,
PH is frequently misdiagnosed as dermatitis herpetiformis, pemphigus foliaceus, bullous pemphigoid and several other autoimmune bullous
conditions. Clinically, patients present with severe intractable pruritus with cutaneous lesions arranged in a herpetiform pattern,
resembling the clinical picture of dermatitis herpetiformis. Histological findings vary according to the evolution of skin lesions, and
typical findings of pemphigus emerge only later in the disease process. 2 Therefore, several biopsies may be needed to establish a correct
diagnosis. In the early stages, biopsy specimens show eosinophilic spongiosis with or without acantholytic cells and intraepidermal vesicles
and bullae filled with neutrophils and eosinophils. This is an important but non-diagnostic histological reaction and it may be the initial
pattern of a pre-acantholytic inflammatory stage. The finding of eosinophilic spongiosis should prompt a recommendation for other diagnostic
studies. Because the clinical presentation of the disease and the histological findings are often atypical, the most consistent test for
diagnosis of PH is immunofluorescence. 3 Direct immunofluorescence (DIF) performed on perilesional skin revealed intraepithelial
intercellular IgG deposits, which is the typical finding. 3 Most PH autoantibodies target desmoglein (Dsg) 1, with exceptional cases
manifesting autoantibodies against Dsg 3, implicating the predominant autoimmunity similar to pemphigus foliaceus rather than pemphigus
vulgaris. 4 Several cases of PH without anti-Dsg 1-3 autoantibodies were reported. 4 More recently, it has been found that many patients
with PH also show autoantibodies against desmocollin. 5 Several papers have reported clinical cases of HP associated with some neoplasms,
HIV infection and medication. 6,7,8 Diagnostic investigations in our patient showed no evidence of associated systemic disease, and he was
not taking any drugs. In general, the disease shows a benign course, with a good response to treatment. Our patient had been initially
treated with prednisolone without any benefit. Therefore, he was started on dapsone with total response. Dapsone is considered the best drug
for the treatment of PH with doses ranging from 100 to 300 mg daily. 2 It may be given as monotherapy or in association with corticosteroids
and immunosuppressant drugs. It is known that superficial forms of pemphigus, those with low or negative antibody titers and histological
features of eosinophilic spongiosis, respond well to dapsone. 9 However, some cases of PF and PV in patients with PH have been reported. 2,9
In these cases, systemic corticosteroids in combination with immunosuppressants may be required. Conflict of interest: None Financial
funding: None * Work conducted at Centro Hospitalar do Porto, EPE - Hospital Geral de Santo António - Porto, Portugal.
