Segmental neurofibromatosis is a rare clinical finding generally with no family history and facial involvement. There are four subtypes of
segmental neurofibromatosis: true segmental, localized cases with deep involvement, hereditary segmental and bilateral segmental
neurofibromatosis. Here we report three patients from the same family (father, son and granddaughter) with segmental bilateral
neurofibromatosis on the face. This form hasn't noticed in the literature. A neurofibromatose segmentar é um achado clínico raro, geralmente
com história familiar negativa e raro envolvimento facial. Existem quatro subtipos de neurofibromatose segmentar: segmentar verdadeira,
segmentar com envolvimento visceral profundo, segmentar com história familiar e segmentar cutânea bilateral. Aqui nós reportamos três
pacientes de uma mesma família (pai, filho e neta) com neurofibromatose segmentar bilateral na face. Esta forma ainda não foi relatada na
literatura. Segmental neurofibromatosis (SN) is a rare disorder. It is characterized by neurofibromas and /or cafe'-au-lait macules limited
to an area or segment of the body. Facial involvement is very rare. It was initially defined as involvement of "one side of the body", but
not all cases are unilateral. Segmental neurofibromatosis occurs in four subtypes, described as a true segmental type (Riccardi's
neurofibromatosis 5), a localized type with deep involvement, a hereditary type, and a bilateral type. 1 Segmental cases are explained by
somatic mutations occurring in late embryonic development. At present, 150 segmental cases of neurofibromatosis have been described in the
literature. Familial occurrence has been reported in only eight families.2 We present a case with familial occurrence of segmental bilateral
neurofibromatosis on the face. Three patients from the same family (father, son and granddaughter) were admitted to our clinic with lesions
on their faces (Figure 1). Family (right - father, middle - son and left - granddaughter) with segmental bilateral neurofibromatosis on the
face The 61-year-old father presented multiple small and discrete elevated lesions on his forehead and nasolabial areas, which had developed
progressively on the nose and cheek over the past 22 years (Figure 2). On examination, coalescing pink and shiny colored papulonodular
lesions (0.5 - 1cm) were observed distributed over the nasolabial area. On palpation, lesions were mostly soft in consistency and nontender.
There were no telangiectasia, ulceration or other surface changes. No other abnormalities were detected on the rest of the body. His general
physical examination was normal including intelligence, speech, and auditory functions. Neurological examination did not reveal
abnormalities. Slit lamp examination of the eyes did not detect any abnormality. Imaging did not reveal any bone abnormality or malignancy.
A 37-year-old son presented multiple small elevated lesions over his forehead and nasolabial areas (Figure 3). A 12-year-old granddaughter
also had lesions over her nasolabial areas (Figure 4). Father with diffuse facial lesions of his whole face Son with multiple small elevated
lesions over his forehead and nasolabial areas Granddaughter with lesions over her nasolabial areas Their lesions had developed since early
childhood. Surgical treatment was applied to both father and son for tumour reduction. Histologic examination of skin biopsies taken from
lesions revealed a proliferation of fusiform cells in a loose fibrous stroma, consistent with neurofibroma (Figure 5). Photomicrograph
showing a proliferation of fusiform cells in a loose fibrous stroma (H&E, X400) Within a follow-up period of 2 years there was progression
of the lesions of the father. Surgical treatment of nasolabial lesion was performed again. SN was first described by Gammel in 1931. 3
Following this Crowe et al. described additional patients with neurofibromas and cafe'-au-lait macules in a dermatomal distribution and
suggested the nomenclature "sectorial neurofibromatosis". 4 Miller and Sparkes proposed the SN term, which is still used in contemporary
literature.5 According to Riccardi's classification, SN is included in Type V neurofibromatosis that includes unilateral SN. 6 However, many
apparent cases could not fulfill these stringent criteria. Roth et al. further classified SN into four subtypes: true segmental, localized
cases with deep involvement, hereditary segmental and bilateral SN. 1 The etiology of SN is poorly understood. Early somatic mutations cause
generalized disease, clinically indistinguishable from nonmosaic forms. Later somatic mutation gives rise to localized disease often
described as segmental. In individuals with mosaic or localized manifestations of SN, disease features are limited to the affected area,
which varies from a narrow strip to one quadrant and occasionally to one half of the body. Distribution is usually unilateral but can be
bilateral, either in a symmetric or asymmetrical arrangement. To date more than 100 cases of SN have been reported, and facial involvement
is very rare. To the best of our knowledge, there are only four earlier published reports on facial involvement in SN.7-9 Common affected
sites reported for SN are the thorax and abdomen in 55% of cases, upper extremities and inguinal⁄axillary in 20% each, lower limb and face
in 10% each.10 Cases of SN have been reported in association with extracutaneous manifestations including visceral neurofibromas, soft
tissue hypertrophy, skeletal abnormality, and unilateral renal agenesis. Generally, there is no family history of similar disorder in
patients with SN and it has been reported in only eight cases.2 This is probably the fifth reported case of SN affecting the face and ninth
reported case of familial occurrence, as well as the first report in which an individual is affected with hereditary segmental and bilateral
neurofibromatosis. To conclude, this case of SN is reported for its rarity and atypical occurrence. Conflict of interest: None Financial
funding: None * Study carried out at the Clinic of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Clinical Center Nis, Serbia.
