Norwegian scabies is a highly contagious skin infestation caused by an ectoparasite, Scarcoptes scabiei var. Hominis, which mainly affects
immunosuppressed individuals. Clinically, it may simulate various dermatoses such as psoriasis, Darier's disease, seborrheic dermatitis,
among others. This is a case report of a 33-year-old woman, immunocompetent, diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder (cancer phobia),
who had erythematous, well-defined plaques, covered with rupioid crusts, on her neck, axillary folds, breast, periumbilical region, groin
area, besides upper back and elbows, mimicking an extremely rare variant of psoriasis, denominated rupioid psoriasis. A sarna norueguesa é
uma infestação cutânea altamente contagiosa causada pelo ectoparasita Sarcoptes scabiei var. hominis, que atinge principalmente indivíduos
imunossuprimidos. Clinicamente, pode simular várias dermatoses, tais como psoríase, doença de Darier, dermatite seborréica, entre outras. O
artigo relata o caso de uma mulher de 33 anos, imunocompetente, porém com diagnóstico de transtorno de ansiedade generalizada e
cancerofobia, que apresentava placas bem delimitadas, sobre base eritematosa, recobertas por crostas rupioides, nas regiões cervical,
axilar, mamária, umbilical, inguinal, além de dorso superior e cotovelos, mimetizando uma variante extremamente rara de psoríase, denominada
psoríase rupioide. Crusted or Norwegian scabies is an uncommon, highly contagious, ectoparasitic infection transmitted by Sarcoptes scabiei,
mainly affecting immunosuppressed patients. 1 Immunocompetent individuals rarely develop crusted scabies. 2 As a reaction to the massive
infestation, the horny layer thickens, mimicking other dermatoses such as psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, Darier's disease, dermatitis
herpetiformis and drug- induced eruptions. 3,4 Rupioid or ostraceous psoriasis is an extremely rare variety of psoriasis with few
publications in the literature. This form of psoriasis is characterized by sharply demarcated, erythematous, well-defined plaques, covered
with scales and crusts, sometimes in a cone-shaped appearance. 5 We describe the case of a 33-year-old woman, immunocompetent, with improper
hygiene habits, diagnosed with generalized anxiety disorder (cancer phobia), who had erythematous, well-defined plaques, covered with
rupioid crusts, on her neck, axillary folds, breasts, periumbilical region, groin area, upper back and elbows, mimicking rupioid psoriasis.
A 33-year-old woman presented with a 9-month history of a painful erythematous scaly eruption on her trunk and extremitites, associated with
slight pruritus. Despite these symptoms, she did not seek medical help due to an extreme fear of being diagnosed with a malignant disease.
Besides the anxiety disorder, the patient had no other medical problems, such as underlying immunosuppression. She also denied systemic
complaints and similar cases among family members. Physical examination revealed sharply demarcated, erythematous, well-defined plaques
covered with crusts, producing a wart-like appearance, on her neck, chest, periumbilical region, axillary folds, elbows, upper back and
groin area (Figures 1 and 2). Erythematous, well-defined zplaques, covered with rupioid crusts, on the neck, chest and periumbilical region
errucous plaque on the elbow At first, the eruption was misdiagnosed as generalized ostraceous psoriasis and the patient was initially
treated with methotrexate 7.5mg/week and the application of 6% liquor carbonis detergens, 3% salicylic acid and 0.05% clobetasol cream. A
couple of weeks later, unexpected histopathological findings were revealed: epidermal hyperparakeratosis and acanthosis; numerous adult
mites transected in the stratum corneum; the dermis showed superficial perivascular infiltrate, predominantly by lymphocytes (Figure 3).
These findings supported the diagnosis of crusted Norwegian scabies. Numerous scabies mites transected in the stratum corneum As a result, a
microscopic examination was made. Scrapings of the lesions showed an abundance of adult mites, eggs and faecal pellets of Sarcoptes scabiei
by KOH mount (Figure 4). Adult mites of Sarcoptes scabiei by KOH mount Laboratory tests were requested in order to exclude severe systemic
diseases and immunosuppressive disorders. A white blood cell count showed 20110/mm3, with 56% neutrophils, 11% eosinophils, 30% lymphocytes.
HIV, antinuclear antibodies and rheumatoid factor were negative. The previous treatment was discontinued. Aggressive therapy was performed
with three doses of 200mcg/kg oral ivermectin 1 week apart in combination with topical permethrin 5% lotion applied once daily for three
days in a row, one week apart for three weeks. This extensive treatment cleared the crusted skin lesions (Figure 5). Clinical results four
weeks after treatment Crusted or Norwegian scabies is a highly contagious, ectoparasitic infection transmitted by Sarcoptes scabiei, mainly
affecting immunosuppressed patients, such as individuals with human T-cell lymphotropic virus 1, human immunodeficiency virus, leukemia,
lymphoma, organ transplant recipients, and during the use of immunosuppressive therapy. 1,6,7,8,9,10 Among this group, the weak immune
response fails to contain the disease and there is no impulse to scratch, resulting in fulminant hyper-infestation. 2,4,6 Additional non-
immunosuppressive conditions like neuropathy, severe arthropathies, mental retardation and psychiatric disorders are also risk factors
because of the inability to scratch in response to itch. 1,7 Scratching is important to remove scabies mites and to destroy its burrows. 4,7
As a reaction to the massive infestation, the horny layer thickens, forming crusted and warty hyperkeratotic lesions, mimicking other
dermatoses such as psoriasis, seborrheic dermatitis, Darier's disease, dermatitis herpetiformis, and drug- induced eruptions. 3,4 Given the
large number of mites in the epidermis and the hyperkeratotic skin, the Norwegian scabies can be very difficult to treat, especially if the
patient is immunosuppressed. Therefore, this condition generally requires repeated application of topical and systemic scabicidal agents.
2,4 Rupioid or ostraceous psoriasis is an extremely rare variety of psoriasis, with few publications in the literature. This form of
psoriasis is characterized by sharply demarcated, erythematous, well-defined plaques, covered with scales and crust, sometimes in a cone-
shaped appearance. 5 In our case, although immunocompetent, the patient had generalized anxiety disorder and skin cancer phobia. Therefore,
since she started to present the first lesions, nine months ago, she ended up not being well-cleaned and not manipulating the injuries,
which caused the exuberant and unusual presentation. Due to the presence of rupioid crusts and lesion distribution in a few areas
traditionally affected in psoriasis, the eruption was misdiagnosed as ostraceous psoriasis. Our case highlights the importance of keeping an
open mind about Norwegian scabies in the differential diagnosis of skin diseases coursing with hyperkeratotic and verrucous plaques, even in
immunocompetent individuals with no obvious risk factor for the disease. A high index of suspicion and early diagnosis help in successfully
curing and containing the spread of this highly contagious and deceptive form of scabies. 2 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding:
None * Study carried out at the Teaching Hospital Onofre Lopes - Federal University of Rio Grande do Norte (Hospital Universitário Onofre
Lopes - Universidade Federal do Rio Grande do Norte - HUOL-UFRN) - Natal (RN), Brazil.
