This is a report of the first Plasmodium vivax congenital malaria case in Guatemala and the first case in Latin America with genotypical,
histological and clinical characterization. The findings show that maternal P. vivax infection still occurs in areas that are in the pathway
towards malaria elimination, and can be associated with detrimental health effects for the neonate. It also highlights the need in very low
transmission areas of not only maintaining, but increasing awareness of the problem and developing surveillance strategies, based on
population risk, to detect the infection especially in this vulnerable group of the population. Congenital malaria (CM) has been an often
neglected consequence of malaria in pregnancy. It occurs when malaria parasites cross the placenta either during pregnancy or at delivery .
There is not much consensus regarding its definition. It has been defined as the presence of asexual parasites in the neonate’s peripheral
blood within the first seven days of life or later if there is no exposure to infected mosquito bites, with or without clinical symptoms or
signs . Also, CM is often reported as the presence of malaria parasites in cord blood . Congenital malaria has been predominantly reported
for Plasmodium falciparum and from sub-Saharan Africa . The precise prevalence of CM remains unclear, as it varies widely across endemic
areas, ranging from 0.2% to 46.7% . The use of PCR methods have revealed a higher frequency than it was previously reported . Little
information exists on its consequences for infant’s health, although it has been described that CM may lead to increased morbidity and
mortality of the newborn if not accurately diagnosed and treated . Moreover, prompt and effective malaria treatment during pregnancy has
proven to be a protective factor for CM . In Latin America, reports on CM have been scarce ; also, the effects of Plasmodium vivax
congenital mono-infection on the neonate’s health have not yet been reported. This is the first P. vivax CM case from Guatemala and the
first case in Latin American in which a comprehensive clinical, histological and genotypical investigation has been carried out. On
September 2010, a 21-days-old female baby with a two-day history of fever was admitted to Fray Bartolomé de las Casas (FBC) District
Hospital. FBC is a rural low-transmission malaria endemic area (population 55,073 inhabitants) in Northern Guatemala. FBC was a high-risk
area where malaria transmission has been greatly reduced over the last years due to a scale-up of control interventions. Long-lasting
insecticide-treated nets (LLITNs) and the improvement of the case management system implemented from 2006, resulted in a dramatic reduction
in malaria parasite incidence from 91/1,000 population in 2006 to 1.9/1,000 population in 2010. Since 2009, no case of P. falciparum has
been reported in the FBC area (National Malaria Control Program, Guatemala; unpublished data). Malaria transmission is sustained in the
population by the temporal succession of the main vectors, Anopheles albimanus, Anopheles vestitipennis and Anopheles darlingi. On admission
physical examination of the baby revealed paleness, hepatosplenomegaly (1 cm), dusky skin appearance and desquamation, and a body
temperature of 36.7°C which increased to 38.9°C in the next 24 hours. Neurological, respiratory and cardiac examinations were unremarkable.
Main laboratory findings were anaemia (Hb 7.2 g/dL), severe thrombocytopaenia (45,000 platelets/μL on the 1st day of admission, 24,000
platelets/μL on the 2nd day of admission), and leucopaenia (white blood cells 3.5x103/μL) with relative lymphocytosis (66.8%). Yet, the
newborn did not show any signs or symptoms of haemodynamic failure nor evidence of bleeding throughout admission or after discharge.
Biochemical and microbiological examinations were not available in the hospital. Based on initial suspicion of neonatal sepsis, the baby was
started on intravenous (IV) ampicillin along with IV fluids and antipyretics. The thick blood smear examination showed P. vivax infection
(parasite density 2,079 asexual parasites/μL), and then she was started on anti-malarial treatment with oral chloroquine (CQ) (¼ tablet of
CQ 150 mg base, daily for five days). The neonate was treated with CQ only, following national guidelines in Guatemala that do not recommend
the administration of primaquine to infants less than six months. Clinical progress was adequate and the baby was discharged after treatment
completion. National guidelines also recommend therapy with ¼ tablet of CQ 150 mg base every 21 days until the patient is six months of age,
so the infant kept on with CQ prophylaxis until that age after treatment completion. Follow-up during household visits two and eight months
after hospital discharge was also favourable. The 23-year-old primigravid mother was a FBC permanent resident. She was enrolled at the first
antenatal clinic (ANC) visit, at 16 weeks of gestational age, in a multi-centre descriptive study –PregVax study- aimed to determine the
burden and impact of P. vivax infection in pregnancy. As part of the PregVax study, maternal peripheral blood was collected at each ANC
visit and at delivery for active detection of Plasmodium infection by microscopy and molecular methods. Samples were also collected from
cord, placental, and newborn’s peripheral blood by heel prick at delivery for parasitaemia determination by microscopy and molecular
methods, and placental impression smear and biopsy were taken for microscopic and histological examination, respectively. This is a
retrospective congenital malaria case report that mainly builds on the hospital clinical data available during its management. Molecular
analyses, which were available due to the mother’s participation in the main study and carried out after the detection of CM infection,
allowed the confirmation of the malaria case. Plasmodium infection was not detected in the mother, either actively or passively, during
pregnancy, neither by microscopy nor by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) at any of the ANC at 16, 21 and 26 weeks of gestational age.
Delivery was at term (40 weeks), and the birth weight was 2,839 g. At delivery, the mother reported fever within the last 24 hours. Physical
examination showed an axillary temperature of 38°C, paleness, and laboratory tests showed thrombocytopaenia (46,000 platelets/μL) and
haemoglobin of 12.4 g/dL. Plasmodium vivax asexual parasites (6,429 parasites/μL) were detected in peripheral blood (see Table 1). She was
treated with oral CQ (1,500 mg given over three days) and oral primaquine (15 mg daily for 14 days), following national guidelines. A
follow-up home visit was conducted by the National Malaria Control Programme staff to assess treatment compliance and confirm parasite
clearance. Plasmodium vivax parasitaemia and molecular results from the different compartments and time points 1 Parasitaemia density was
estimated using the patients white blood count. 2 RT = Real-time PCR: + presence of P. vivax DNA. 3 Molecular analyses were carried out
after the detection of the congenital malaria case in hospital. All samples at delivery (maternal, cord, placental and newborn blood) and
during admission (newborn) were tested for P.falciparum (microscopy and real-time PCR) and were negative. A placental biopsy sample was
collected at delivery from the maternal side of the placenta, kept at 4°C in neutral buffer formalin, processed for histological
examination, and stained with haematoxylin and eosin as previously described . No evidence of parasites or malaria pigment deposition was
found in the histological examination. Placental impression smears were not assessable due to lack of quality of the samples. Immediately
after birth, physical examination of the newborn revealed no clinical abnormalities. No Plasmodium infection was detected in the blood thick
smear collected at delivery from the newborn. Examination of the cord blood thick smear showed P. vivax asexual parasites (50 parasites/μL).
Cord blood parasitaemia determination is not routinely done at this health facility. In this case, cord blood parasitaemia determination was
done later after birth at the study referral laboratory as part of the study objectives. DNA extraction (Purelink TM Genomic DNA Kit –
Invitrogen) was done on one whole blood-spot on filter paper from each of the following compartments: maternal peripheral blood at delivery,
placental and cord blood, and neonate’s blood at the time of birth and during hospital admission. Plasmodium vivax infection was detected by
conventional PCR for specific P. vivax merozoite surface protein 1 gene (Pvmsp1) in all samples except in the newborn’s blood at the time of
birth (Figure 1) . Also, confirmation of the presence of P. vivax and absence of P. falciparum infection was carried out on all samples by
Real-Time PCR with a LightCycler® 480 system (Roche). Species-specific primers and probes were used as previously described by Veron et al.
, selected from sequence of the small subunit of 18S rRNA, according to the following steps: pre-incubation at 95°C for 10 min;
amplification at 95 °C for 10 sec, 50°C for 20 sec and 72°C for 5 sec for 50 cycles. All reactions were done in duplicate in a final volume
of 20 μL. Molecular detection of Plasmodium vivax in blood samples from mother and newborn by the amplification of Pvmsp1 gene. PCR products
were separated by electrophoresis through a 2.2% agarose gel stained with ethidium bromide and flanked by a 100 bp DNA ladder (Fermentas) as
size marker. Lane MM = Molecular marker 100 bp. Lane M = Maternal peripheral blood at delivery. Lane C = Umbilical cord blood. Lane
P = Placental blood. Lane N0 = Newborn's blood at birth. Lane N21 = Newborn’s blood at 21 days of life. Lane C + = Positive Control. Lane
C- = Negative Control. Seven P. vivax microsatellites (MS) were amplified from P. vivax positive samples as described in Karunaweera et al.
. Briefly, PCR amplifications were performed in a 10-μL reaction mixture containing 2 μL of DNA, 1x reaction buffer, 1.75 mM MgC12, 200 μM
of each deoxynucleotide triphosphate, 5 picomoles of each primer and 2.5U of FastStar Taq polymerase (Roche). To determine the amplicon
length variation, PCR products were analyzed by CEQ 8000 Genetic Analysis System (Beckman Coulter) using CEQ 8000 software for fragment
analysis. Identical allelic profiles were obtained at the seven MS loci tested (MS1:231 bp, MS2:210 bp, MS3:177 bp, MS7:139 bp, MS8:243 bp,
MS10:222 bp, MS20:187 bp), confirming that the same genotype was present in all compartments. This is the first reported case of P. vivax
congenital malaria in Guatemala and the first one from Latin America with clinical, histological and genotypical characterization. Co-
infection with P. falciparum was excluded by molecular diagnosis, and the same parasite genotype in maternal blood at delivery, in placental
and cord blood and in peripheral blood of the 21-days-old neonate was detected by microsatellite genotyping. Several reports have been
published from Latin America on malaria infection during the neonatal period most of them due to P. vivax, but only three were reported as
CM cases . In none of these cases co-infection with other Plasmodium species was excluded. Most of the information on CM comes from high
malaria transmission areas and indicates that CM is rarely symptomatic . Although CM may be associated with non-specific symptoms shortly
after birth, in most cases the infection is cleared spontaneously without symptoms. On rare occasions, clinical manifestations may appear
within 10 to 42 days after birth . In high endemic areas, passive transfer of maternal anti-malarial antibodies and the presence of foetal
haemoglobin are thought to prevent disease by helping clearing parasitaemia in the newborn . In the case outlined here, the onset of
symptoms occurred 21 days after birth. The possibility that the neonate’s infection was acquired in the short period after birth from an
infected mosquito bite is very low given the low malaria transmission in the FBC area. The microsatellite genotyping showing identical
allelic profiles at all MS loci tested does reinforce the vertical transmission of the P. vivax infection, however, the possibility of a new
infection, although very unlikely, it cannot be totally ruled out. The physiopathology of CM is not well known. It has been hypothesized
that, although the placenta functions as an effective barrier, maternal micro-transfusions into the foetal circulation, and direct
penetration of the parasite through the placental villi could lead to vertical transmission of malaria . In this case, vertical transmission
is likely to have occurred around delivery, since the mother had symptoms at that time and parasitaemia was detected in maternal and cord
blood . The histological evaluation of the placenta did not reveal the presence of parasites or pigment, nor inflammation. The lack of
placental features associated to malaria infection could be explained by the low density of maternal P. vivax infection and/or by the
absence of a placental binding phenotype of P. vivax parasites . In a malaria pre-elimination context, as is the case of the FBC area, the
level of acquired anti-malarial immunity in the population may decreased and waned dramatically leading to increased susceptibility and risk
of more severe forms of malaria when infection occurs. This may be particularly frequent and serious in vulnerable groups of the population,
such as pregnant women and neonates. In the current case, the baby presented with severe thrombocytopaenia and anaemia, both being potential
life-threatening haematological complications. This report highlights the need of establishing epidemiological and clinical surveillance
strategies as malaria control programmes are reducing transmission to near-elimination levels, to effectively and promptly detect infections
. The latter would have avoided that malaria infection in this neonate would have developed into a life-threatening condition. These
measures could include, firstly increasing clinical awareness since congenital malaria may not be considered a cause of illness in the
neonate in such areas, and secondly, the identification of the most adequate strategy for active surveillance. This strategy would need to
be evidence-informed on the population risk and based on a cost-effectiveness approach. Research needs to be done assessing the feasibility
and cost-effectiveness of strategies, such as screening for all febrile babies and follow-up of those born to mothers who had malaria during
pregnancy, whom should not be so many in low endemic areas. Mother-to-child transmission of P. vivax malaria occurs in very low malaria
endemic settings, and it may be detrimental for the infant’s health. These findings emphasize the relevance in very low transmission areas
of not only maintaining, but even increasing clinical and epidemiological awareness of this preventable and treatable disease in pregnancy
and in the neonate. They also highlight the need for establishing active surveillance strategies in the areas that are in the pathway
towards malaria elimination. The case study protocol was approved by the Universidad del Valle de Guatemala Ethics Review Committee. Written
informed consent was obtained from the mother for her participation and that of her baby for the publication of this case report. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. All authors have made substantial contributions to the investigations presented in this manuscript. MEC supervised all data
collection and participated in drafting the manuscript, AB drafted the manuscript, and NP conceived and designed the report. MM and CS
carried out the molecular and genotyping studies. AB, NP, AM, MD and CM revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript. We want to thank the patient who participated in this study, the study field team and the staff of FBC hospital for their work,
with especial thanks to Rosario Méndez and Pedro Peralta. We would also like to thank the pathologists Dr. Werner de León from Hospital San
Juan de Dios de Guatemala, and Dr. Jaume Ordi from CRESIB-Hospital Clínic, for the histological evaluation of the placenta. The research
leading to these results has received funding from the European Union Seventh Framework Programme (FP7/2007-2013) under grant agreement n°
PREGVAX 201588 (www.pregvax.net). It has also received co-funding from the Malaria in Pregnancy Consortium (MiPc) through a grant from the
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation [Grant No. 46099], and in Guatemala by the Centro de Estudios en Salud of Universidad del Valle de
Guatemala. The PregVax project is coordinated by Fundació Clìnic per a la Recerca Biomèdica (FCRB)-Barcelona Centre for International Health
Research (CRESIB) led by Prof. Clara Menéndez as Coordinating Investigator, and co-coordinated by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) and the CDC Foundation, with Dr. Meghna Desai as the co-Coordinating Investigator.
