*Won Ho Kim and Jin Ho Choi contributed equally to this work. A 42-year-old man was involved in a motor vehicle collision. Imaging studies
revealed the presence of a post-traumatic aortic pseudo-aneurysm (about 34×26 cm) arising from the descending thoracic aorta at the level of
the left subclavian artery (LSA), prone to rupture. Thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (TEVAR) was the only feasible option due to his
poor overall medical status. In this case, LSA needed to be covered in order to extend the proximal landing zone. Eventually, modified TEVAR
was successfully performed by means of the chimney technique to preserve flow to the LSA and to prevent flow into the pseudoaneurysmal sac.
Pseudoaneurysm after trauma is an out-pouching of the blood vessel, resulting from a deficiency in the tunica media and intima. The risk of
rupture is high, and surgery has traditionally been recommended in all patients with thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm irrespective of symptom
status.1 Thoracic endovascular aneurysm repair (TEVAR) is an alternative to open surgery for patients with the significant risk of
surgery,2,3 however, the lack of adequate landing zones for stent grafts, and close proximity to supra-aortic branches make effective and
safe delivery of endovascular therapy technically challenging. We describe a case of successful TEVAR with the chimney technique for blunt
traumatic pseudoaneurysm of the aortic arch in a no-option patient. 42-year-old man was involved in a motor vehicle collision. On arrival,
he was hypotensive and tachycardic. Further diagnostic work-up revealed multiple injuries including suspected intra-peritoneal hemorrhage,
and multiple pelvic bone fracture. A computed tomography (CT) scan showed the presence of a post-traumatic aortic pseudo-aneurysm (about
34×26 cm) arising from the descending thoracic aorta (DTA). The neck was located immediately after the origin of the left subclavian artery
(LSA) on the lesser curvature of the aorta (Fig. 1). Because of his poor overall medical status, difficulty of maintaining low blood
pressure, and suspected coagulopathy, TEVAR remained the only feasible option. But, the presence of an inadequate proximal landing zone was
an important limiting for endovasucular repair. LSA needed to be covered in order to extend the proximal landing zone, improve fixation and
achieve an adequate seal. Therefore, modified TEVAR was planned by means of the chimney technique to preserve flow to the LSA and to prevent
flow into the pseudoaneurysmal sac. Thus, left common femoral artery (CFA) was prepared with the preclosing technique using two closure
devices (ProGlide, Abbott Vascular Devices, Redwood, CA, USA) in an off-label fashion by deploying the devices before insertion of the 18 Fr
sheath (UltimumTM EV, St. Jude, Minnetonka, MN, USA). For the chimney technique of the LSA, the left brachial artery was punctured with a
7-F sheath, and the chimney stent-SMART-Control stent (Cordis; Johnson & Johnson Medical, Miami, FL, USA) of 10 mm diameter and 40 mm in
length was delivered in advance into the LSA, with a short segment protruding into the aortic arch lumen. For TEVAR, the diameter of the
endoluminal graft was based on the diameter of the true lumen-aortic arch and the healthy aorta just before the lesion with an oversizing of
about 10-20% to permit adequate proximal seal and fixation. With injection contrast medium for visualizing the position of the stent graft
with a 5 F pigtail catheter via right femoral access in the ascending aorta, a Thoracic SEAL stent graft (S&G Bio Tech CO., Seongnam, Korea)
made of 34-30 mm tapered diameter and 110 mm length was deployed. The landmark for stent graft placement was the origin of the left common
carotid artery (CCA). Next, the chimney stent was deployed in the LSA (Fig. 2). Completion angiography revealed widely patent LSA and left
CCA, exclusive of the pseudoaneurysm without evidence of endoleak. Then, the left CFA was closed with preformed knots of two sutures of
closure devices. A follow-up CT performed after 7 days indicated no proximal endoleak with complete exclusion of the thoracic aortic
pseudoaneurysm, as well as free flow into the LSA and left CCA (Fig. 3). TEVAR is difficult and problematic when the aortic arch is
involved. Because the main challenge lies in maintaining blood flow to the vital supra-aortic branches while the arch is being covered by
the stent graft, combined stent-grafting and surgery with extra-anatomic bypass grafts could be an excellent approach in such cases.4,5
However, these techniques also obviate the need for an open surgical approach and are not suitable for urgent cases. Thoracic aortic
pseudoaneruysm is a rare and potentially fatal problem.6 A perfused pseudoaneurysm may partially clot and organize with a fibrous wall
potentially evolving into a large pseudoaneurysm which is prone to rupture.7 In our patient, TEVAR remained the only feasible option. The
main challenge was that intentional covering of the LSA needed to extend the proximal landing zone and achieve an adequate seal. A few
studies report that intentional coverage of the LSA without revascularization is not associated with additional morbidity, whereas many
studies report a higher incidence of postoperative arm ischemia and posterior circulation strokes compared with patients who did not undergo
intentional coverage.8-10 We, therefore, aimed to perform the chimney technique, which is based on previously reported intentional LSA.11,12
The chimney device is defined as a bare or covered stent graft that is implanted parallel to the main aortic stent graft and extends into an
over-stented vital side branch in order to preserve its perfusion.11 The chimney technique was originally introduced by Greenberg, et al.,13
who used renal stents to depress the proximal edge of stent-graft fabric that protruded a few millimeters above the renal artery ostium.
Since then, it has been used for preservation of vital supra aortic branches during TEVAR.14,15 For the chimney device type, a covered stent
graft would seem to provide a better seal than a bare stent. However, Feng, et al.16 state that covered stent grafts offer no additional
benefits, except that a long channel is required for the branch. Few data are available concerning the superiority and matching of different
chimney devices. We, therefore, believe that any type of chimney device, readily available in any interventional suite, can be used to form
the chimney. Also, our team believes that self-expanding stent also has sufficient crush resistance and remains open after placement. To our
knowledge, this is the first report to show that traumatic aortic arch pseudoaneurysm after blunt trauma with intra-peritoneal hemorrhage
and multiple bone fractures was successfully treated by TEVAR with chimney technique. Long term results are needed before this technique can
widely be applied. However, it seems to be an alternative treatment option in urgent-traumatic pseudoaneruysm, and can be used in rescue
procedures to salvage aortic side branches over-stented during TEVAR. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Pseudoaneurysm
and its relationship with surrounding structures. (A) Saccular pseudoaneurysm was noted just distal to the orifice of the LSA on the lesser
curvature of the aorta on the three-dimensional reconstruction image of the CT. (B) Axial CT scan showed the presence of a post-traumatic
aortic pseudo-aneurysm (about 34×26 cm) arising from the DTA at the level of the LSA. LSA, left subclavian artery; CT, computed tomography;
DTA, descending thoracic aorta. Endograft deployment resulted in near-total coverage of the LSA (A), followed by retrograde chimney stenting
of the LSA origin via the trans-brachial approach (B). The landmark for stent graft placement was the origin of the left CCA. Note that the
chimney stent was delivered in advance into the LSA, with protruding into the aortic arch lumen. LSA, left subclavian artery; CCA, common
carotid artery. 7 days follow-up CT showing good device morphology and no leakage, patent left CCA, LSA (A), and complete exclusion of the
thoracic aortic pseudoaneurysm (B). CT, computed tomography; CCA, common carotid artery; LSA, left subclavian artery.
