Symptomatic nonunion of the lateral epicondyle of the elbow is a rare injury. We present the case of a 36-year-old woman who complained of
elbow pain and instability several months after a conservatively treated lateral epicondyle fracture that evolved into nonunion. In order to
reestablish elbow stability, the patient underwent removal of the nonunited epicondylar fragment and ligament repair, with excellent
clinical outcome. Fractures of the lateral epicondyle are commonly seen in the pediatric population but are rare injuries in adults . They
occur more frequently as avulsion fractures during an episode of acute posterolateral or varus instability in which the lateral collateral
ligament complex avulses a bone fragment with its attachment . Nonunion after a conservatively treated lateral epicondylar fracture has been
previously described in adults, but typically, these patients are asymptomatic without any complaint of elbow instability. We present the
case of a 36-year-old woman with a symptomatic lateral epicondyle nonunion who underwent removal of and epicondylar fragment and ligament
repair with an excellent clinical outcome. The patient gave informed consent to participate and was informed that data concerning the case
would be submitted for publication. A 36-year-old right-hand-dominant woman sustained a fracture of the lateral epicondyle of her left elbow
after a fall on the outstretched hand. The patient denied symptoms consistent with elbow dislocation or subluxation (Fig. 1). She was
treated conservatively with 3 weeks’ immobilization in a cast. She was lost to follow-up, and 8 months later, she presented to our office
with lateral elbow pain and a sensation of instability that were limiting her ordinary activities. Physical examination revealed pain to
palpation over the lateral side of the elbow; range of motion was normal. When the elbow was compared with the uninjured side, there was
increased varus laxity in extension and 30° of flexion, both in pronation and supination. The lateral pivot shift test was positive .
Neurovascular examination was normal.Fig. 1Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the injured elbow showing an avulsion fracture of the
lateral epicondyle of the humerus Anteroposterior and lateral radiographs of the injured elbow showing an avulsion fracture of the lateral
epicondyle of the humerus Radiographs of the elbow showed a displaced bony fragment compatible with nonunion of the lateral humeral
epicondyle. There were also some very mild chronic osteoarthritic changes secondary to an old radial-head fracture and calcification in the
area of the medial collateral ligament (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Radiographic examination 8 months after the original injury showing a nonunion of the
epicondylar fragment extending distally and communicating with the joint Radiographic examination 8 months after the original injury showing
a nonunion of the epicondylar fragment extending distally and communicating with the joint With the patient under general anesthesia, the
elbow was examined under fluoroscopy and instability was confirmed, showing obvious instability at the nonunion site, with displacement of
the epicondylar fragment when the elbow was stressed in varus (Fig. 3). Through a posterior skin incision, the lateral aspect of the elbow
was approached. Once the nonunion site was identified, a sclerotic bone fragment that included the attachment of the extensor muscles and
the lateral collateral ligament complex was isolated. A subperiosteal resection of the epicondyle was performed while trying to maintain as
much ligament length as possible. After the sclerotic area of the distal humerus was refreshed until bleeding, the lateral ligament complex
was reattached at the point of isometry with a transosseous suture through bone tunnels. The repair was augmented with a suture anchor and a
running nonabsorbable suture within the ligament and capsule. At the end of the procedure, the elbow was checked for stability and motion. A
standard closure was performed, and the limb was placed into a long-arm splint with the elbow flexed 90° and the forearm pronated. The
patient was kept in the splint for 3 weeks, after which she started a 3-month active range of motion exercise and rehabilitation
program.Fig. 3Varus stress to the elbow showed lateral instability, and fluoroscopy confirmed instability at the nonunion site Varus stress
to the elbow showed lateral instability, and fluoroscopy confirmed instability at the nonunion site At final follow-up, 2 years afterward,
the patient was free of pain and the feeling of instability was no longer present. On physical examination, the elbow had full range of
motion and was stable (Fig. 4). The patient had a Mayo Elbow Performance Score of 100, had resumed her usual job, and denied any functional
limitation in activities of daily living. Radiographs revealed no evidence of arthritic changes apart from sequelae of the radial-head
fracture sustained 10 years earlier. (Fig. 5).Fig. 4At final follow-up, 2 years after surgery, the patient was asymptomatic with full range
of motionFig. 5Radiographic examination after lateral epicondylectomy and reattachment of the lateral ligament complex with transosseous
fixation and suture anchors At final follow-up, 2 years after surgery, the patient was asymptomatic with full range of motion Radiographic
examination after lateral epicondylectomy and reattachment of the lateral ligament complex with transosseous fixation and suture anchors
Avulsion fractures of the lateral humeral epicondyle in adults are rare. Although they can be caused by a direct blow to the elbow, they
more frequently represent a bony avulsion of the lateral collateral ligament complex after a varus stress [3, 4]. The preferable treatment
for these fractures remains controversial. Kobayashi et al. presented a series of 12 fractures of the lateral and medial epicondyles in
adults ; they suggested that although surgical treatment provides good clinical results, conservative management could be selected for
patients in whom the maximum diameter of the bone fragment is 13 mm or when displacement is <9 mm. Nonunion occurred in the majority of
their patients treated conservatively, but none of them had any complaints or functional limitation. However, Gilchrist and McKee presented
five adult patients with valgus instability of the elbow secondary to medial epicondyle nonunion . To our knowledge, posterolateral elbow
instability has not been previously described after an epicondylar nonunion. The reasons for an epicondylar nonunion becoming symptomatic
are not known. It might be more frequent in throwing athletes and heavy laborers in whom the elbow is subjected to high-strain stresses at
the fracture site . However, it is probably more related to fragment size and extent of intra-articular involvement that may lead to
communication of the fracture site with intra-articular fluid, which impairs bone healing. In this regard, we believe that examination under
fluoroscopy may be helpful in identifying fractures with joint involvement and acute instability. The combination of intra-articular extent
of the fracture and instability are probably the most determinant factors in nonunion development. As this is a rare clinical scenario, the
optimal treatment for established epicondylar nonunion with symptomatic instability remains unknown. Surgical treatment would be preferred
if there is radiographic evidence of nonunion and the patient has significant functional impairment. Fracture fixation with or without bone
grafting was been successfully used in children . However, bone healing may be difficult to achieve in an adult due to small fragment size,
limited contact area available with sclerotic avascular surfaces, and presence of a very high degree of strain. Excision of the epicondyle
fragment and ligament advancement has been previously described for acute fractures and symptomatic medial epicondyle nonunion . Excellent
clinical results have been reported, obviating the need of bone grafting or a secondary procedure for hardware removal. Once the bone
fragment is removed, the ligament is usually shortened to some degree, and it may be difficult to reattach it to its original position.
Meticulous preservation of the entire available length and reattaching the ligament under the appropriate tension are essential. In our
case, we combined a transosseous standard technique with a running suture to reinforce the repair. In conclusion, lateral epicondyle
fractures are rare injuries that merit careful evaluation in the acute setting. Large fragment size, evidence of instability, and fracture
extension into the joint are probably the most predisposing factors for nonunion. If there is a symptomatic nonunion, fragment excision and
ligament reattachment may lead to an excellent functional outcome. None. This article is distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons
Attribution License which permits any use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original author(s) and the source are
credited.
