Ultrasound-guided percutaneous renal biopsy is an important technique for diagnosis of glomerular diseases, and the biopsy-induced life-
threatening bleeding rarely happens. Primary systemic amyloidosis is a rare disease which may lead to organ dysfunction including arterial
stiffness. The accessory renal artery is a kind of renal vascular variation which goes into the renal parenchyma directly or via the renal
hilum. Here we reported a rare case of percutaneous renal biopsy-induced accessory renal artery life-threatening bleeding in a renal
amyloidosis patient, and our experience of successful rescue in this patient. http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1524207344817819
Ultrasound-guided percutaneous renal biopsy is an important technique for diagnosis and providing evidence for the treatment plans for
glomerular diseases. However, percutaneous renal biopsy may also have some side effects and kidney damage such as pain at the puncture site,
microscopic or gross hematuria, and perirenal hematoma . Usually these side effects can be alleviated after bed rest and treatment of
hemostasis, and life-threatening bleeding rarely happens. Renal amyloidosis is a rare disease accounting for 0.21%-1.0% of all the patients
with renal biopsy. Primary systemic (AL) amyloidosis is a clonal plasma cell disorder in which the N-terminal fragments of monoclonal light
chains form fibrils that accumulate in various organs ultimately leading to organ dysfunction and death . This disease is difficult to
recognize and differentiate from other renal diseases with poor prognosis because of its broad range of manifestations and vague symptoms.
The accessory renal artery is a kind of renal vascular variation, which has been seen in 28-30% of normal subjects. It goes into the renal
parenchyma directly or via the renal hilum, and happens more in the left than the right kidney . Here we reported a rare case of
percutaneous renal biopsy-induced accessory renal artery bleeding in a renal amyloidosis patient, and our experience of successful rescue in
this patient. A 67-year old male was found having abnormalities in urine tests (blood -, protein ++) during treatment for his “mixed
hemorrhoids” in the inpatient unit two months ago. But these abnormalities were not further investigated at that time. 20 days ago, the
results of urine tests were: blood ++; protein +++; albumin 32.9 g/L. Eight days ago, the results were: blood +, protein +++; albumin
28.94 g/L, uric acid 568 umol/L. Patient did not have any of the following symptoms: fever, joint pain, hair loss, mouth ulcers, rash, gross
hematuria, urinary discomfort or dysuria, skin purpura, abdominal pain, melena, headache, dizziness, chest tightness, suffocation,
palpitation, lumbar pain, or other symptoms. The patient has had hypertension and token antihypertensive drugs for 10 years. But in the past
six months, his blood pressure was normal and he stopped antihypertensive drugs. He had repeated diarrhea with body weight loss of about
25 kg in the past six months. His father passed away 10 years ago due to “uremia”, and he denied any familial genetic history. The diagnosis
was “nephrotic syndrome”. Physical examination when hospitalized did not find anything abnormal in his lungs, heart, abdomen, and limbs.
There was no bleeding or ecchymosis of the skin. Body temperature 36.4°C, pulse 82 beats/min, respiratory 20 beats/min, blood pressure
108/68 mmHg. Urine test: protein ++, blood -. Fecal occult blood test: negative. Blood test: WBC (white blood cell) 4.9 × 109/L, HB 130 g/L,
platelet 122 × 109/L, albumin 29.57 g/L, BUN (blood urea nitrogen) 6.0 mmol/L, serum creatinine 98 μmol/L, uric acid 490.7 μmol/L, total
cholesterol 5.2 mmol/L, triglycerides 2.89 mmol/L. Humoral immune function: complement C3: 0.876 g/L (slightly lower); urine total protein
5.30 g/24 h; The results from all the following tests were normal: erythrocyte sedimentation rate, coagulation, urine red blood cell
morphology, hepatitis B, autoantibodies, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies (ANCA), proteinase-3 (PR3), MPO (myeloperoxidase), urine and
blood light chain. Echocardiography showed left ventricular dilatation and diastolic dysfunction. Other tests showed the hyperactivity of
bone marrow cell proliferation, 3% of mature plasma cells. To provide further evidence for the diagnosis and treatment plans, we performed
ultrasound-guided percutaneous renal biopsy at the lower pole of right kidney. At half an hour after the biopsy, the patient had nausea,
vomiting, abdominal pain, sweating, and discomfort on the right side of the waist. Blood pressure decreased to 90/50 mmHg. Hemoglobin was
110 g/L. Ultrasonography showed a 4.5 cm × 6.0 cm of hematoma in the lower pole of right kidney. After treatments with hemostasis, blood
transfusion and the pressor agent, symptoms were improved and blood pressure rose up to 98/70 mmHg in four hours. 24 hours later, he walked
around his bed and had abdominal pain again with sweating. Blood pressure decreased, hemoglobin dropped to 78 g/L. Abdominal computed
tomography (CT) showed hematoma in perinephric and retroperitoneal area. Renal artery angiography found severe bleeding from the accessory
renal artery at the lower pole of the right kidney (Figure 1B). After the application of the accessory renal artery embolization with
gelatin sponge particles, bleeding was stopped and blood pressure increased to normal in ten minutes (Figure 1C). Hemoglobin returned to
normal in 10 days after the surgery. Images from right renal arteriography. (A) The arrow points to the lower pole of right kidney without
renal blood flow. (B) The arrow points to an accessory renal artery from the abdominal aorta with bleeding in the lower pole of right
kidney. (C) The right accessory renal arterial bleeding stopped after the vascular embolization with gelatin sponge particles. Microscopy
with immunostaining showed positive staining of IgG + and IgM + in the glomerular mesangial areas and capillary loops. Clumped distribution
of light chain κ++ and λ + were seen in the mesangial area, capillary loops, interstitial vascular wall and parts of the tubular basement
membrane. AA protein (amyloid protein A) was negative. Light microscopy showed three out of 16 glomeruli with global sclerosis, and
mesangial cells and matrix mildly and diffusely proliferated in other glomeruli. Unstructured homogeneous nodules with mild pale staining
have been seen in the mesangial area and the basement membrane. The capillary lumen was poorly open. Bowman’s capsule wall was segmentally
thickening and its epithelial cells proliferated with adhesion to Bowman’s capsule. PASM-MASSON staining showed that the glomerular basement
membrane was segmental thickening with tubular atrophy. The tubular wall without atrophy was mild thickening. Vacuolation and granular
degeneration appeared in the tubular epithelial cells. Some of the tubular epithelial cells became flat, with expanded lumen, protein cast
in the lumen, and brush border’s defluvium. Other pathological findings: focal tubulointerstitial fibrosis (++), inner layer of the
interstitial arterial wall thickening, and deposited amorphous materials with mild staining in middle and outer layers (Figure 2). Congo Red
staining showed deposition of uniform brick red material in glomerular mesangial and tubulointerstitial regions, the basement membrane, and
renal interstitium vascular wall (Figure 3A-B). Congo Red staining in intestinal tissue was positive (Figure 3C). Hematoxylin and eosin
staining (X400). The arrows point to lightly stained homogeneous structure in glomerular mesangial areas. Congo red staining (X400). The
arrows point to Congo red positive material deposition in glomerular mesangial areas (A), walls of the renal arteries (B), and the intestine
(C). (D) A polarization image of the Congo red stain shows positive material deposition in glomerular mesangial areas (red arrows) and walls
of the renal arteries (yellow arrows). Electron microscopic examination revealed mild increase of segmental space without visible cells in
the glomerular mesangial area, visible clutter of amyloid fibrils in the cavity, segmental fusion of the foot processes of podocytes,
increased lysosome in renal tubular epithelium, renal interstitial few lymphocytes and mononuclear cells infiltration with collagen fiber
hyperplasia. Primary systemic amyloidosis is a malignant plasma cell disease. Classification of the amyloidosis is based on the precursor
protein that forms the amyloid fibrils and the distribution of amyloid deposition as either systemic or localized. To date, 25 structurally
unrelated proteins are known to cause amyloidosis . The major types of systemic amyloidosis are Ig light chain (AL), Ig heavy chain (AH),
amyloid A (AA), the familial or hereditary amyloidosis, senile systemic amyloidosis, and β2-microglobulin (β2m) amyloidosis. In AL
amyloidosis, an immunoglobulin (Ig) light chain or light chain fragment produced by clonal plasma cells deposits in tissue as amyloid . In
this case, the immunohistochemistry study showed renal IgG+, IgG light chain κ++ and λ+, suggesting it was AL amyloidosis in this case. The
incidence of AL amyloidosis in the United States is estimated to be between 5.1 and 12.8 per million persons per year . The kidney is
affected in 50 to 80% of AL amyloid individuals . The spectrum of renal symptoms and signs in amyloidosis is variable such as isolated
proteinuria, nephrotic syndrome, hypertension, hypotension, renal insufficiency . Compared with other glomerular diseases, the kidney
disease with primary systemic amyloidosis has poor prognosis, gets progressively worse over time and the kidney lesions are irreversible.
The amyloidosis can also induce the damages in the heart, autonomic nervous system, gastrointestinal tract and other tissues, resulting in
arrhythmia, heart failure, refractory orthostatic hypotension, severe diarrhea and other organ dysfunctions. Patient’s overall conditions
are usually poor. It was reported that the median survival time was only 1.2 years . Early diagnosis and treatment is critical for the
prognosis of this disease. Renal involvement is diagnosed through the evidence of renal amyloid deposits detected through biopsy, together
with laboratory evidence of kidney dysfunction. Positive Congo red staining in the lesion area and the specific apple green birefringence
under polarized fluorescence microscope provide evidence for the diagnosis of this disease. Combined with blood and urine electrophoresis
analysis for immunoglobulin free light chain or the quantitative analysis of serum free light chain which confirms the presence of
monoclonal free light chain, the sensitivity of diagnosis of systemic light chain amyloidosis is up to 99% . The treatment principles and
prognosis are different among different types of renal amyloidosis. Reducing the production of amyloidogenic precursor protein (AA and AL
amyloidosis) and enhancing the clearance of amyloidogenic precursor protein (Aβ2M amyloidosis) as well as trying to break down the amyloid
deposits are the aims of the therapy. Once end-stage renal disease develops, patients can be treated with either dialysis or renal
transplantation. In patients with adequate criteria, stem cell transplantation has shown encouraging results in several recent studies, and
the five-year survival rate has been estimated to be approximately 60% . The old male patient in this report had repeated diarrhea for six
months and resisted to a variety of drug treatment. Colonoscopy showed nothing abnormal. He had the history of hypertension, but in the past
six months his blood pressure was normal and he did not take any antihypertensive drugs. Lab tests found urine protein and decreased serum
albumin, without evidence of myeloma. Renal biopsy and histological study showed the deposition of homogeneous material in the glomerular
mesangial area and interstitial vessel wall (Figure 2), and positive Congo red staining (Figure 3). The immunofluorescence staining showed
light chain κ++, λ+, pervaded in the mesangium, capillary loops, interstitial vessel wall and part of the tubular basement membrane. Amyloid
protein A (−) confirmed for the AL-type renal amyloidosis. Electron microscopy showed mild segmental mesangial widened, amyloid fibers
cluttered in the cavity, which further confirmed the diagnosis of renal AL-type amyloidosis. It also confirmed that amyloidosis not only
affected glomeruluser, but also the interstitial blood vessels. Due to the tendency of the amyloid deposition in small blood vessels, the
bleeding risk induced by kidney biopsy is increased. So the 18X16G fine puncture needle was used in the process of puncture. In this
patient, there was more amyloid deposition in the vessel walls, which might be the main reason for the difficulty to stop bleeding. The
reason for the repeated diarrhea in this patient was not clear. However, the intestinal amyloid deposition has been found by the Congo red
staining in colonic tissue (Figure 3). As the systemic symptoms improved after the subsequent treatment, the diarrhea had stopped
completely. The anatomical variations of renal vasculation are common and it is easy to be found in Urologic Surgery. But because the renal
arteriography is not routinely performed before the kidney biopsy in the department of nephrology, the situation of accessory renal artery
is difficult to be assessed. The incidence of accessory renal artery in left kidney is higher than that in the right kidney . The diseases
related to the renal accessory artery include: (1) stenosis: renal accessory artery is tenuous and tortuous, which results in ischemia in
the related area. The local blood flow reduction in the kidney stimulates the macula densa cells and juxtaglomerular cells to increase the
synthesis and release of renin, and the subsequent renal vascular hypertension. (2) bleeding: non-traumatic renal bleeding is very rare. As
the accessory renal artery is tenuous, it is difficult for the diagnosis and the localization for the hemorrhage. New techniques, such as
multidetector CT angiography (MDCTA) which can clearly show the accessory renal arteries, provide better approaches for the accessory renal
artery disease. (3) Accessory renal artery going to the lower pole of the kidney in front of ureter may compress the ureter and cause
hydronephrosis. In this patient, we did renal biopsy from the lower pole of the right kidney and unfortunately hurt the accessory renal
artery resulting in bleeding (Figure 1). There has been seldom damage to the renal artery during the puncture because a healthy artery is
contractive with hemostatic function when a fine needle hits it. But in this patient of amyloidosis with the amyloidosis deposition mainly
in blood vessel walls, the puncture caused serious bleeding. The conservative treatments were difficult to stop the bleeding. So the renal
arteriography and the vascular embolization with gelatin sponge particles has been finally used (Figure 1). We have learned from this case
that once large amount of bleeding occurred during renal biopsy for the patient with renal amyloidosis, renal arteriography and vascular
embolization should be performed immediately to avoid adverse consequences. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and any accompanying images. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. QZ conceived the
study and wrote the manuscript. YJ, TH, and JW performed the microscopic sections and analysis. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript.
