Mycetoma is a chronic, localized, slowly progressing infection of the cutaneous and subcutaneous tissues caused either by fungi (eumycetoma
or implantation mycosis) or by aerobic actinomycetes (actinomycetoma). It is acquired by traumatic implantation, most commonly in the
tropics and subtropics, especially in rural agricultural communities. Although well recognized elsewhere in Asia, it has not been reported
from the Lao People’s Democratic Republic (Laos). A 30 year-old female elementary school teacher and rice farmer from northeast Laos was
admitted to Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, with a massive growth on her left foot, without a history of trauma. The swelling had progressed
slowly but painlessly over 5 years and multiple draining sinuses had developed. Ten days before admission the foot had increased
considerably in size and became very painful, with multiple sinuses and discharge, preventing her from walking. Gram stain and bacterial
culture of tissue biopsies revealed a branching filamentous Gram-positive bacterium that was subsequently identified as Actinomadura madurae
by 16S rRNA gene amplification and sequencing. She was treated with long-term co-trimoxazole and multiple 3-week cycles of amikacin with a
good therapeutic response. We report the first patient with actinomycetoma from Laos. The disease should be considered in the differential
diagnosis of chronic skin and bone infections in patients from rural SE Asia. Mycetoma, commonly known as Madura foot, is a chronic,
localized, slowly progressive, granulomatous infection of the deep dermis and subcutaneous tissue caused either by fungi (eumycetoma or
implantation mycosis) or by aerobic actinomycetes (actinomycetoma) . It was first described in India by Gill in 1842 and the term mycetoma
was first used by Carter in 1860 . Mycetoma occurs unevenly worldwide but is endemic in tropical and sub-tropical regions, particularly
between latitudes 15° S and 30° N, known as the ‘Mycetoma belt’. The belt includes Sudan, Somalia, Senegal, India, Yemen, Mexico, Venezuela,
Colombia and Argentina. In Sudan, 1231 cases were reported within a 2.5-year period and it was found to be the third commonest cause of
amputation . Cases imported from endemic areas are occasionally seen in temperate countries . More than 20 species of bacteria and fungi
have been identified as aetiologic agents of mycetoma: approximately 60% of cases are due to bacteria and 40% are caused by fungi. The
predominant cause varies geographically, probably because of environmental factors . In India, Mexico and Brazil, actinomycetoma is the most
common but in Sudan most cases are implantation mycoses. The agents most often responsible for causing actinomycetoma are Actinomadura
madurae, Actinomadura pelletieri, Nocardia brasiliensis and Streptomyces somaliensis. Madurella mycetomatis, M. grisea and Pseudallescheria
boydii are the most common causes of implantation mycoses . Actinomycetoma tends to progress more rapidly, with greater inflammation and
tissue destruction and earlier invasion of bone than implantation mycosis. Initially, the patient may feel pain or discomfort at the
inoculated site. After traumatic inoculation, painless subcutaneous nodules slowly develop and spread. Later, the nodules increase in size
and quantity with accompanying sinuses that drain serous, sero-sanguineous or purulent fluid . The main route of infection is uncertain but,
as organisms are usually present in the soil , it is likely that they are implanted into the host tissue by traumatic inoculation such as
thorn pricks or splinters, although only half of the patients can remember a history of trauma preceding the disease . This theory is
supported by the facts that cases are common among farmers, herdsmen, field labourers or people walking bare foot and that the main affected
areas are foot and hand, although other parts may be involved less frequently . The incubation period is variable, from three months to nine
years in natural infections. Since the mean duration before the first medical evaluation is five years, patient recall of trauma may often
be unreliable . Mycetoma is more common in males than females, with an overall sex ratio of 3:1, possibly relating to differences in
occupational and other outdoor activities rather than gender differences in susceptibility . The condition is also commonest in young adults
(16–40 years old) . Irrespective of the causative agent, the clinical presentation is similar, with tissue swelling and draining sinuses
that usually discharge visible grains. It is important to determine the causative agent of mycetoma in order to choose the appropriate
treatment. The colour of the grains in the discharge from the sinuses may be helpful for presumptive identification of the aetiology,
although this is not entirely reliable. Black grains are said to be associated with Madurella mycetomatis, Madurella grisea, Exophiala
jeanselmei, Curvularia species, Leptosphaeria species and Pyrenochaeta species, white grains with Nocardia species, Actinomadura madurae,
Pseudallescheria boydii, Acremonium species, Cylindrocarpon species and Fusarium species, yellow grains with Streptomyces somaliensis and
red with Actinomadura pelletieri. Differential diagnosis includes soft tissue tumours such as lipoma, fibroma, sarcoma, malignant melanoma
and chronic osteomyelitis caused by pyogenic bacteria or mycobacteria, and other mycoses such as chromoblastomycosis, lobomycosis,
paracoccidioidomycosis, phaeohyphomycosis and sporotrichosis . Although cases have been reported from neighbouring countries, mycetoma has
never been reported in Laos: we report here the first case. An otherwise healthy 30-year-old female elementary school teacher and rice
farmer from Namun village (19.6552435·° N, 103.5781784·° E), Kham District, Xiengkhuang Province, northeast Laos, presented to Mahosot
Hospital in October 2011 with tumefaction, pain and multiple draining sinuses on her left foot. The lesion had started 5 years previously,
initially with an uncomfortable feeling and itching on the left plantar surface that over a few days became indurated and developed a
spontaneously draining sinus. She remembered no specific injury to her foot. Over the next five years, the lesion slowly and painlessly
progressed, with swelling and multiple draining sinuses. Ten days before admission she developed acute swelling of the foot with severe pain
associated with multiple sinuses and discharge from the foot that prevented her from walking. Foot X-ray done at a local hospital showed
signs of osteolysis of the left metatarsal bones. With a diagnosis of chronic osteomyelitis of the left foot she was treated with oral
cloxacillin for a few days, but when branching Gram positive rods were demonstrated on a Gram stain of an aspirate from the lesion at the
provincial hospital she was transferred to Mahosot Hospital. On examination, she was orientated, afebrile with normal vital signs, and
physical examination was unremarkable except for a massive tumour-like lesion of the left foot with multiple sinuses on the dorsal and
plantar surfaces. The overlying skin was moderately erythematous and was tender and painful on palpation with evidence of a sero-sanguinous
discharge containing no obvious grains (Figures 1 and 2). There was no regional lymphadenopathy or lymphangitis present. Admission
laboratory investigation (normal ranges in parentheses) revealed a total white blood cell count of 6.1 × 109/L (6.0-8.0 × 109/L), 68%
neutrophils (45-70%), haematocrit 28% (37-47%), haemoglobin 75 g/L (120–160 g/L), mean corpuscular volume 59 fL (80-95fL), platelets 449 ×
109/L (150-300 × 109/L), creatinine 72 μmol/L (53-120 μmol/L), urea 4.3 mmol/L (5.3-16 mmol/L), aspartate transaminase 50 U/L (0–37 U/L),
alanine transaminase 34 U/L (0–45 U/L) and blood glucose 4.2 mmol/L (4.1- 6.4 mmol/L). A radiograph of the left foot confirmed partial
osteolysis of the metatarsal bones (Figure 3). Four 3 mm diameter tissue biopsies were taken from her left foot under local anaesthesia.
Smears from these samples underwent microscopy after Gram stain, Ziehl-Neelsen stain and the 20% potassium hydroxide technique. The samples
were cultured aerobically on blood, chocolate, MacConkey, Sabouraud and Ashdown’s agars and were submitted for mycobacterial culture and
histopathology. The Gram stain revealed scanty branching filamentous Gram positive bacteria (Figure 4), which grew after 5 days’ incubation
on chocolate and blood agar. She was presumptively diagnosed as suffering from actinomycetoma and started on amikacin (15 mg/kg/day)
combined with trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole (7/35 mg/kg/day), both in two daily doses. One biopsy sample, which had been immediately frozen
at −80°C, and the organism were both identified by 16S rRNA amplification and sequencing as Actinomadura madurae (Figure 5) by the Health
Protection Agency (HPA), UK . Broth dilution MICs for the organism, performed by the HPA, gave the following results (mg/l): amikacin ≤ 0.25
(S), gentamicin 2 (S), tobramycin ≤ 0.25 (S), amoxicillin/clavulanate 4 (S), cefotaxime 4, ceftriaxone 0.25 (S), imipenem ≤ 0.125 (S),
meropenem 0.5 (S), co-trimoxazole 0.032 (S), clarithromycin 4 (I), ciprofloxacin ≤ 0.25 (S), moxifloxacin ≤ 0.25 (S) and doxycycline ≤ 0.25
(S). After 21 days of intravenous amikacin and oral trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, the patient’s left foot showed some evidence of healing
with decreasing pain, swelling and discharge without any side effects from treatment. She was transferred for further treatment at a
district hospital close to her home. On the basis of published recommendations, amikacin was given for sequential cycles of 3 weeks with 2
week breaks, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole was continued throughout: creatinine and hearing were monitored weekly without abnormalities
. After 5 cycles of treatment there had been a marked reduction in swelling (Figures 6 and 7), considerable symptomatic improvement, and the
patient was able to walk and to return to teaching. The patient continued on oral co-trimoxazole alone until a total of 12 months of
treatment had been completed, at which stage she had no pain at rest and there were no sinuses or discharge from the foot, although there
was still considerable residual bony abnormality evident radiologically (Figure 8). Left foot of the patient showing classic features of
mycetoma: tumefaction, sinus tracts and discharge. Left foot of the patient showing classic features of mycetoma: tumefaction, sinus tracts
and discharge. X-ray of the left foot showing sign of destruction of the metatarsal bones. Gram stain of smear from left foot tissue biopsy
revealed branching, filamentous Gram positive bacteria. Unrooted tree of Actinomadura spp. partial 16S rRNA sequences (bases ~1200 bp,
accession numbers after species name). Left foot of the patient after 5 cycles of amikacin showing considerable resolution of swelling and
healing of sinus tracts. Left foot of the patient after 5 cycles of amikacin showing considerable resolution of swelling and healing of
sinus tracts. X-ray of the left foot after 1 year of treatment showing considerable residual bony abnormalities. Our patient represents a
fairly typical, albeit severe, case of actinomycetoma caused by A. madurae, with involvement of the underlying bone. Bone involvement is
common in advanced stages of the disease (an incidence of 73% was reported in one series), leading to deformity and disability of the
affected area . Even a classic clinical presentation and typical colours of grains in mycetoma does not reliably distinguish actinomycetoma
from implantation mycosis, so laboratory investigations, including microscopy, histology and extended cultures are indicated. Other
investigations including fine needle aspiration cytology, imaging (X-ray, magnetic resonance and ultrasound), sero-diagnosis (counter-
immunoelectrophoresis and ELISA) and molecular detection and identification may also be useful . Although the evidence base is poor, without
clinical trials, combined treatment with multiple antibiotics is usually recommended in order to prevent drug resistance and eradicate any
residual infection. Reported cure rates vary widely ranging from 60% to 90%. Sulphonamides and sulphonamide combinations are recommended as
the first line treatment. Aminoglycosides, tetracyclines, rifampicin, ciprofloxacin and amoxicillin-clavulanate have also been used
successfully. The combination of amikacin and co-trimoxazole, the former given in cycles, has produced excellent clinical results,
especially in those at risk of pulmonary spread or vertebral involvement . Five to ten cycles may be needed to achieve cure. Furthermore,
surgery may be considered for small lesions, infections that fail to respond to antibiotics and to help medical treatment by reduction of
the infective load or deal with life-threatening lesions . This is the first case of mycetoma reported from Laos. Cases have been reported
infrequently from Southeast Asia, the majority of which has a prolonged rainy season unlike the arid regions usually associated with
mycetoma. Mycetoma has, however, been reported from Singapore, Malaysia, Philippines, Indonesia, Cambodia, Thailand and Vietnam. Table 1
shows cases identified by searching PubMed using the terms ‘Mycetoma’ AND ‘Southeast Asia’ or ‘Mycetoma’ AND the names of individual
countries (‘Lao’, ‘Thai’, ‘Cambodia’, ‘Burma’, ‘Myanmar’, ‘Malaysia’, ‘Singapore’, ‘Indo’, ‘Philip’, ‘Timor’, ‘Brunei’, ‘Vietnam’). The true
incidence in the region, however, is unknown. Summary of reports of Mycetoma in Southeast Asia NOTES 1. The nomenclature used in the
original publications has been retained. In several cases this was a presumptive identification based on histology alone. 2. NA: not
available. This patient confirms the existence of mycetoma caused by Actinomadura madurae in Laos. Approximately 78% of the Lao population
works mainly in agriculture and there are, as elsewhere in the rural tropics, few microbiology laboratories, making it likely that the
condition is under-diagnosed. Isolation of the causative organism enabled medical treatment, which almost certainly saved this young woman
from amputation and lifelong disability. Mycetoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of chronic skin and bone infections in
Laos and elsewhere in Southeast Asia. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review from the Series Editor of this journal. All authors declare that
they have no competing interest. SR wrote the manuscript with DD, who made the laboratory diagnosis. JG, KB and SV made the initial clinical
diagnosis and referred the patient for further management. SR, SV, IE, MM, RP, PN and DD helped with patient management. JL identified the
organism by 16S rRNA amplification and sequencing and RH undertook the susceptibility testing. All authors were involved in revising the
manuscript and approved the final version. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/12/349/prepub We are grateful to the patient and all the staff of the Microbiology Laboratory and
surgeons and nurses of the Surgery Ward, Mahosot Hospital, Vientiane, Laos, and to the Minister of Health and the Director of the Curative
Department, Ministry of Health, for their support. This work was part of the Lao-Oxford-Mahosot Hospital-Wellcome Trust Research Unit funded
by the Wellcome Trust of Great Britain.
