Pituitary metastasis from renal cell carcinoma is rare and has never been reported for renal cell carcinoma primarily treated with
sorafenib. Herein, we present a case of an advanced clear-cell renal cell carcinoma in which pituitary metastasis progressed but
extracerebral metastases showed partial response to sorafenib treatment. Metastasis to the pituitary gland is an infrequent complication
typically seen in elderly patients with diffuse malignant disease. In large autopsy studies, the incidence of pituitary metastasis was 1% to
4% in all cancer patients and occurred most commonly in patients with neoplasms of the breast (49.8%), lung (20.2%), and gastrointestinal
tract (6.4%). Pituitary metastasis from renal cell carcinoma (RCC) is rare, and the response of pituitary metastasis from RCC to new
targeted drugs like sorafenib (Nexavar, BAY 43-9006) and sunitinib is unknown. Here, we describe a case of pituitary and extracerebral
metastases from clear-cell RCC treated with sorafenib. A 51-year-old man originally presented with an asymptomatic tumor in his left kidney
revealed by a routine abdomen ultrasonography in October 2005. His medical history was unremarkable except for 11 years of hypertension,
which was controlled well with calcium antagonist. Radical nephrectomy was then undertaken and pathologic examination showed clear-cell RCC
(Figure 1), staged T3N0M0. He underwent cytokine therapy with interleukin-2 for 3 months after surgery and felt well. However, in subsequent
routine examinations, a computed tomographic (CT) scan suggested metastases to bilateral adrenal glands (Figure 2), retroperitoneal lymph
nodes, and multiple bones. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) was then performed and showed diffuse enlargement of the pituitary gland
(Figure 3), which was considered pituitary nonfunctional adenoma or pituitary hyperplasia. In June 2006, the patient began treatment with
sorafenib, taking 400 mg orally twice daily. Treatment was interrupted in the third week and then between the 12th and 16th week because of
grade 3 hand-foot reaction syndrome and aggravated hypertension accompanied by grade 2 alopecia and arthralgia according to Common
Terminology Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE) v3.0. After the interruption, the dose of sorafenib was reduced to 400 mg orally once daily.
After 8 weeks of sorafenib treatment, CT scan of the abdomen showed tumor shrinkage and partial response (Figure 2), which was evaluated
according to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors (RECIST). This partial response status was verified 4 weeks later. In the 20th
week, the patient felt rapid deterioration with blurry vision. Physical examination revealed left-sided temporal hemianopia, ptosis of the
left upper lid, left sixth nerve palsy, and diplopia. Hormonal evaluation suggested adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) deficiency and
hyperprolactinemia (Table 1). Additional brain CT scan showed a Sellar mass with suprasellar extension compressing the optic chiasm and
eroding the Sellar base (Figure 4). In November 2006, transsphenoidal surgery revealed a vascular tumor that invaded the Sellar base and the
normal pituitary gland. Only biopsy was performed, and pathologic examination showed clear-cell carcinoma consistent with pituitary
metastasis of RCC (Figure 1B). Treatment with sorafenib was stopped when disease progression was detected. The patient underwent conformal
radiotherapy to the pituitary tumor bed at a dose of 3,000 cGy in 10 fractions and then 600 cGy in 3 fractions. After radiotherapy, his
visual acuity and visual field recovered partially. One month later, multiple bilateral lung nodules were suggested by chest CT scan. In
September 2007, the patient died due to dyspnea. Survival time was 23 months from nephrectomy, 16 months from initial diagnosis of
metastases and use of sorafenib, and 9 months from diagnosis of symptomatic pituitary metastasis. A, computed tomography before sorafenib
treatment. B, computed tomography after 8 weeks of sorafenib treatment. TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone; T4, tetraiodothyronine; T3,
triiodothyronine; ACTH, adrenocorticotropic hormone; GF, growth factor. Computed tomography shows a 2.0-cm Sellar mass with suprasellar
extension compressing the optic chiasm and eroding the Sellar base. Symptomatic metastases to the pituitary from RCC are rare. To our
knowledge, only 28 cases have been reported in the literatures, among which only 3 patients received targeted drugs including sorafenib and
sunitinib after pituitary surgery and/or radiotherapy. Using targeted drugs as the initial course of treatment in patients with pituitary
metastasis from RCC has never been reported before. In the case reported here, the patient was initially asymptomatic, and brain MRI was
performed when metastases to his extracerebral sites were identified according to the previous recommendations. Diffuse enlargement of the
pituitary gland was mistaken as pituitary nonfunctional adenoma or pituitary hyperplasia, as pituitary adenoma has much higher incidence
than pituitary metastasis, even in patients with known systemic malignancy. In clinical terms, preoperative diagnosis of metastases to the
pituitary is difficult. The rapidity of symptom development and rapidly growing sellar tumor may contribute to the diagnosis of metastases
to the pituitary from RCC. There is limited information on the proper treatment for the metastases to the pituitary from RCC. National
Comprehensive Cancer Network guidelines recommended traditional surgery, stereotactic radiotherapy, and whole brain irradiation in RCC
patients with brain metastases. As the lesions of pituitary metastases from RCC tend to be firm, diffuse, invasive, vascular, and
hemorrhagic, total resection is considered impossible. However, local radiotherapy improves symptom control and survival, but long-term
local control has been poor. Targeted therapy is now widely used in metastatic RCC. As patients with brain metastases from RCC were
frequently excluded from most clinical trials, their effects on RCC patients with brain metastases are unclear. Some small clinical trials
and cases were reported, but these results are controversial. In the current case, extracerebral lesions showed partial response during
sorafenib treatment, while pituitary metastasis progressed rapidly. This suggests a difference in pharmacokinetic behavior and less activity
of sorafenib within the brain. Data from an expanded access trial, including 321 patients with brain metastases out of 4,371 patients with
RCC, revealed that sunitinib was effective and safe in subgroups of patients with brain metastases. However, no data was provided on prior
central nervous system radiation. Helgason et al. reported that sunitinib does not influence the incidence of brain metastases. We propose
that, as sole treatments, targeted drugs like sorafenib are inadequate for control of brain metastases, including metastases to the
pituitary from RCC. This case illustrates two important points. First, metastases to the pituitary from RCC is extremely rare, but it should
be considered when rapidly developing symptoms and a rapidly growing sellar tumor occur. Also, asymptomatic abnormality in pituitary images
should be monitored regularly to diagnose metastases to the pituitary at an early stage. Second, patients diagnosed with metastases to the
pituitary should receive local, pituitary-specific treatment, including surgery or radiotherapy, before initiation of systematic treatment.
Primary treatment with targeted drugs, like sorafenib, might not be adequate for control of metastases to the pituitary from RCC. Studies of
far more aggressive treatment strategies, like new drugs for new targets, are needed.
