Bacterial surface proteins switch the orientation of IgG binding depending on the antibody concentration of their environment. Several of
the most significant bacterial pathogens in humans, including Streptococcus pyogenes, express surface proteins that bind IgG antibodies via
their fragment crystallizable (Fc) region, and the dogma is that this protects the bacteria against phagocytic killing in blood. However,
analysis of samples from a patient with invasive S. pyogenes infection revealed dramatic differences in the presence and orientation of IgG
antibodies at the surface of bacteria from different sites. In the throat, IgG was mostly bound to the bacterial surface via Fc, whereas in
the blood IgG was mostly bound via fragment antigen-binding (Fab). In infected and necrotic tissue, the Fc-binding proteins were removed
from the bacterial surface. Further investigation showed that efficient bacterial IgGFc-binding occurs only in IgG-poor environments, such
as saliva. As a consequence, the bacteria are protected against phagocytic killing, whereas in blood plasma where the concentration of IgG
is high, the antibodies preferentially bind via Fab, facilitating opsonization and bacterial killing. IgG-poor environments represent the
natural habitat for IgGFc-binding bacteria, and IgGFc-binding proteins may have evolved to execute their function in such environments. The
lack of protection in plasma also helps to explain why cases of severe invasive infections with IgGFc-binding bacteria are so rare compared
with superficial and uncomplicated infections. It has been estimated that Streptococcus pyogenes, a major bacterial pathogen in humans,
causes >700 million cases of throat and skin infections annually. Compared with these very common and mostly uncomplicated infections, the
cases where the bacterium invades the blood stream and induces a powerful inflammatory response (Kotb et al., 2002; Herwald et al., 2004;
Macheboeuf et al., 2011) are rare (∼0.6 million annually), but connected with high mortality rates (Carapetis et al., 2005; Cole et al.,
2011). Apart from the frequent superficial infections mentioned above, there are also hundreds of millions healthy carriers of S. pyogenes
(predominantly colonized in the throat). Although a most relevant question, little is known about the mechanisms that convert a
nonsymptomatic colonization or a superficial infection into an invasive and life-threatening condition. Opsonization, the process where
antibodies bind to and target microorganisms to facilitate their killing by phagocytes, is vital for the defense against infections.
However, many bacterial species, Gram-positive and Gram-negative, aerobic and anaerobic, and pathogenic as well as commensal bacteria
(Forsgren and Sjöquist, 1966; Björck and Kronvall, 1984; Lindahl and Kronvall, 1988; Björck, 1988; Mintz and Fives-Taylor, 1994; Sandt and
Hill, 2001), interfere with this mechanism by expressing surface proteins that bind antibodies outside the antigen-binding region. Among
these proteins some of the most well-known are those that bind to the constant fragment crystallizable (Fc) part of IgG (IgGFc) antibodies
with high affinity and specificity, including protein A from Staphylococcus aureus (Forsgren and Sjöquist, 1966), protein G from group G and
C streptococci (Björck and Kronvall, 1984; Reis et al., 1984), and the M and M-like proteins from Streptococcus pyogenes (Heath and Cleary,
1989). Apart from these Gram-positive species, IgGFc-binding proteins have been identified also in other pathogenic bacteria such as
Pseudomonas maltophilia (Grover et al., 1991), Yersinia pestis (Zav’yalov et al., 1996), and Escherichia coli (Leo and Goldman, 2009).
IgGFc-binding proteins were described in the 1960s (Forsgren and Sjöquist, 1966), but nothing is known about the orientation of IgG
antibodies at the surface of IgGFc-binding bacteria under in vivo conditions at different sites, and the consequences this may have for the
host–bacterial relationship. It has generally been assumed that, regardless of the setting, bacteria equipped with IgGFc-binding surface
proteins preferentially bind IgG via Fc, providing protection against phagocytic killing. However, when analyzing samples of S. pyogenes
from a patient with asymptomatic colonization of the throat who developed sepsis and necrotizing fasciitis, the presence and orientation of
IgG was markedly different depending on the origin of the samples (throat, blood, or necrotic tissue). This observation and a series of
experiments define a biological role for IgGFc-binding bacterial proteins in IgG poor environments, and describe how these proteins in S.
pyogenes contribute to toxic invasive disease. A 31-yr-old woman felt pain in her right thigh after working in her garden. A day later she
developed high fever, chills, and profuse vomiting. Her family members had suffered from milder upper respiratory tract infections; she had
no such symptoms. 36 h after she fell ill, the patient was admitted to our infectious diseases clinic. At this point she was seriously
unwell and in shock, and intravenous fluids and antibiotics were given. There were no clinical signs of pharyngitis, but a throat swab was
positive for S. pyogenes, and she had a tender well-demarcated erythema on the right ventral thigh. Throat and blood samples were collected
for culture and electron microscopy. The patient was operated on 12 h after admittance (7 h after initial treatment with antibiotics),
revealing necrotizing fasciitis. Necrotic tissue was removed from the thigh, and wound fluid and tissue samples were collected. The patient
survived and fully recovered (for more details of the case see Doc. S1). There was growth of S. pyogenes (of the M1 serotype) in the throat
and necrotic tissue, but not in blood. Negative staining electron microscopy showed the presence of S. pyogenes also in blood, and this
technique was used to investigate the presence and orientation of IgG antibodies at the surface of S. pyogenes in the three different
samples (Fig. 1). In the throat, IgG was bound predominantly via the Fc region (63%, n = 300), whereas in the blood sample the antibodies
mostly interacted with the bacterial surface through fragment antigen-binding (Fab; 61%, n = 300). Notably, most of the bacterial surfaces
in blood were covered by aggregates containing IgG and fibrinogen bound to fibrous M1 proteins at the bacterial surface (detected by
immunogold labeling). In the necrotic tissue, most of the M1 proteins had been cleaved off the surface, with too few antibodies visible to
allow quantification. In this sample the bacteria were surrounded by large protein complexes, which, by immunogold labeling, consisted of
M1, fibrinogen and IgG. This indicates that complexes formed at the bacterial surface had been released by proteolytic cleavage of M1
proteins, which is consistent with earlier reports showing that M1 protein can form complexes with fibrinogen and IgG (Kantor, 1965; Åkesson
et al., 1994; Kahn et al., 2008). Such released complexes have previously been shown to induce a massive vascular leakage (Herwald et al.,
2004), a cardinal symptom of necrotizing fasciitis and streptococcal toxic shock. These human in vivo data indicated that the role of IgGFc-
binding proteins, such as the M proteins, is different depending on the phase of infection, and that the IgG concentration in the
environment should influence their function. Antibodies at the surface of S. pyogenes isolated from a patient with invasive disease. (A–C)
Negative staining electron microscopy was used to visualize the localization and orientation of IgG antibodies bound to the surface of
bacteria isolated from the throat (A), blood (B), and necrotic tissue fluid in the thigh (C) of a patient suffering from necrotizing
fasciitis and streptococcal toxic shock. Bar, 100 nm. The top right images are pseudocolored to better illustrate the single IgG molecules
(red) and bacterial IgGFc-binding proteins H/M1 (green). The arrowhead in the bottom left panel of B indicates a typical area from which the
top left panel of B was taken. For the tissue sample, most of the M1/H proteins have been cleaved off of the surface, making the analysis of
antibody orientation uncertain. The composition of protein complexes found at the bacterial surface in the blood sample (most of the surface
was covered by these aggregates) and released from the bacterial surface in the necrotic tissue (B and C, bottom; bars, 50 nm), were
analyzed by negative staining electron microscopy (no protein complexes were present in the throat sample). The blown-up regions to the
right (indicated with a box to the left) show the presence of gold-labeled IgGFab fragments against H/M1 protein (small bead), IgG (medium
bead), and fibrinogen (large bead). The surface of wild-type S. pyogenes bacteria are dominated by M and M-like proteins (Fischetti, 1989;
McNamara et al., 2008). Many of these proteins, including the M1 protein of the strain isolated from the patient described above, bind to
the Fc region of human IgG. In addition, some of the M1 strains express an additional IgGFc-binding M-like protein called protein H (Frick
et al., 1994; Åkesson et al., 1994), and the strong IgGFc-binding of these strains makes them particularly suitable to study the biological
consequences of IgGFc-binding. The bacterial strain infecting the patient described above was of the M1 serotype and expressed protein H
(has the emm1 gene and showed high binding of radiolabeled human IgG). We have previously generated mutants in a wild-type S. pyogenes
strain (AP1) expressing both M1 and protein H, these mutants were used in the studies described below. On electron micrographs, proteins M1
and H can be seen as long (∼50 nm) hair-like structures at the bacterial surface. Isogenic mutants lacking M1 or protein H have visibly
lower amounts of these fibrous structures, whereas they are completely absent in the double mutant (Fig. 2 A). Electron micrographs of S.
pyogenes strains and analysis of bacterial IgG binding. (A) Transmission electron microscopy of wild-type S. pyogenes (wt) and isogenic
mutants lacking M1 protein (M-), protein H (H-) and both proteins (M- H-). Bar, 100 nm. (B) 125I-labeled monoclonal IgG subclasses were
incubated with live or heat-killed S. pyogenes bacteria that had been harvested at exponential growth phase. IgG binding to bacteria is
shown as the percentage of added radiolabeled IgG. Bacterial concentration is given as fractions of 4 × 108 CFU. Data are represented as
mean ± SEM of three independent experiments. (C) Wild-type and mutant S. pyogenes bacteria were preincubated with increasing concentrations
of pooled polyclonal IgG, and surface-associated IgG was measured by flow cytometry. The range of IgG levels in human plasma and saliva are
indicated in the figure. Data are represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments. (D) Wild-type and the M-H- S. pyogenes mutant,
wild-type protein G–expressing group G Streptococcus, and wild-type protein A–expressing S. aureus, were separately preincubated with
monoclonal IgG1 (10 µg/ml) or polyclonal IgG (10 or 10, 000 µg/ml), and surface-bound IgG was measured by flow cytometry. Data are
represented as mean ± SEM of three independent experiments. To test the IgGFc-binding properties of proteins M1 and H, human monoclonal IgG
of the four subclasses was separately incubated with decreasing numbers of live bacteria, and the radioactivity bound to the bacteria was
measured (Fig. 2 B). The results show that the wild-type strain and the M- mutant bound human monoclonal IgG of all four subclasses, whereas
the protein H mutant and the double mutant bound poorly, suggesting that protein H is mainly responsible for the IgGFc-binding activity of
wild-type bacteria. The results with the H strain indicated that M1 protein itself has a low affinity for IgGFc, but enhances the binding of
IgG (except for the IgG3 subclass) to protein H. Very similar results were obtained in binding experiments with heat-killed bacteria (Fig. 2
B, bottom). Next, heat-killed bacteria were incubated with human polyclonal IgG. Throughout this study we used a therapeutic polyclonal IgG
preparation (IVIG; Octapharma) pooled from >3,500 healthy individuals with the normal IgG subclass composition, at concentrations ranging
from 1 to 1,000 µg per ml. The amount of bound IgG was measured using flow cytometry, and polyclonal IgG bound to all strains in a
concentration-dependent manner (Fig. 2 C). Differences in IgG binding between the strains were observed only at low concentrations (<10
µg/ml). With increasing concentration binding also increased for all strains, gradually reducing the differences, and at IgG concentrations
>100 µg/ml the strains bound IgG to the same extent. For the wild-type strain, the IgG interaction appeared to be biphasic, with a
saturation of binding at lower concentrations (3–30 µg/ml), before aligning with the pattern observed for the mutant strains at high IgG
concentrations. As mentioned, many important bacterial pathogens apart from S. pyogenes express IgGFc-binding proteins. Protein A of
Staphylococcus aureus and protein G of group C and G streptococci are two well-known examples, and wild-type bacteria expressing these
proteins showed the same interaction pattern as S. pyogenes when tested against monoclonal and polyclonal IgG (Fig. 2 D). The continued work
was focused on S. pyogenes, but these results suggest that the data obtained could be relevant also for other bacterial species with IgGFc-
binding surface proteins. To investigate the localization and orientation of bacteria-bound IgG, we incubated wild-type bacteria with pooled
human plasma or saliva samples. The reduced contribution of proteins H and M1 to antibody binding at a high IgG concentration suggests that
their function is to be found in settings with low IgG concentration. In the pharynx, S. pyogenes is exposed to saliva where the reported
IgG concentration is considerably lower than in blood. To determine the amount of IgG in the samples used here (pooled saliva and plasma
from five individuals), we used heavy labeled reference peptides and selected-reaction monitoring mass spectrometry (SRM MS) to quantify the
different subclasses of IgG (Fig. 3 and Fig. S1). The results confirmed the very large difference (10,000-fold) in IgG concentration between
saliva and plasma, and also showed the distribution of the four IgG subclasses (Table S1). After washing, negative staining electron
microscopy with gold-labeled anti-IgG Fab fragments was performed to locate IgG bound to the bacterial surface. After plasma incubation, IgG
was found all over the bacterial surface, and to a high degree in the region of the hairlike projections representing proteins M1 and H
(Fig. 4 A). In saliva, however, the antibodies strictly interacted with the central region of these surface proteins (Fig. 4 B), a region to
which previous studies have mapped the binding site for IgGFc (Frick et al., 1994; Åkesson et al., 1994) (Fig. 4 E). This indicates that
specific IgG antibodies in plasma bind to bacterial surface structures via their antigen-binding Fabs, whereas the highly localized binding
in saliva suggests binding via Fc. The orientation of individual IgG molecules was visualized by analyzing the negative staining images at
higher magnification. The analysis confirmed that the majority of IgG antibodies interacted with the bacterium via Fab in plasma (87%, n =
300; Fig. 4 C) and via Fc in saliva (84%, n = 300; Fig. 4 D). To test whether the orientation at the bacterial surface is directly linked to
the IgG concentration, bacteria were incubated with polyclonal IgG at plasma (10,000 µg/ml) and saliva level (1 µg/ml), respectively. The
results mimicked those obtained with plasma and saliva, with Fab binding dominating at high IgG concentrations and Fc binding dominating at
low concentrations (Fig. 5). Collectively, these experiments suggest that the vast majority of IgG antibodies in plasma that bind to S.
pyogenes surface structures, including proteins H and M1, do so through Fab. In contrast, the low total concentration of IgG, and thereby
the low number of specific IgG antibodies in saliva, results in predominant binding of IgG via Fc, effectively reversing the normal antibody
orientation at the bacterial surface. Profiling of IgG subclass distribution using targeted and quantitative mass spectrometry. (A)
Quantification by SRM of IgG bound to the surface of wild-type and mutant S. pyogenes after incubation with either human plasma or saliva.
Data are represented as numbers of molecules (femtomole) measured in each paired adsorption experiment (eight independent experiments). (B)
Number of IgG molecules per bacterium based on average values from paired samples. The pie charts represent the subclass distribution for
IgG bound to wild-type bacteria as compared with the IgG subclass composition of the plasma and saliva samples used for preincubation (eight
independent experiments). Localization and orientation of IgG at the bacterial surface. (A and B) Negative staining EM was used to visualize
the localization and orientation of IgG bound to the bacterial surface. Gold-labeled IgG is found either widely scattered (A, plasma) or in
the midsection of the protrusions representing proteins H and M1 (B, saliva) of wild-type S. pyogenes. Bar, 100 nm. Images are
representative of two independent experiments. (C and D) High magnification shows single IgG molecules bound either via Fab (c, plasma) or
via Fc (d, saliva). Pseudo-color variants are shown to better visualize bound IgG (red) and proteins M and H (green). Bar, 25 nm. 300
bacterial surfaces were analyzed. (E) The wild-type S. pyogenes strain has two surface proteins, M1 protein and protein H, that both bind
IgG via the Fc region as indicated in the figure (sequence data adapted from Åkesson et al. and Frick et al. ). Localization and orientation
of polyclonal IgG at the bacterial surface. (A and B) Negative staining EM was used to visualize the localization and orientation of IgG
bound to the bacterial surface. Gold-labeled IgG is found either widely scattered (A, 10,000 µg/ml IgG) or found along the midsection of the
surface proteins (B, 1 µg/ml IgG) of wild-type S. pyogenes. Bar, 100 nm. Images are representative of two independent experiments. (C and D)
High magnification shows single IgG molecules bound either via Fab (C, 10,000 µg/ml IgG) or via Fc (D, 1 µg/ml IgG). Two representative
images with pseudocolor variants are shown of each experiment. Bar, 25 nm. The significance of IgGFc-binding proteins for the orientation of
surface-bound IgG was further analyzed by a flow cytometry–based method relying on the highly specific activity of the IgG-degrading enzyme
IdeS, a cysteine proteinase secreted by S. pyogenes that cleaves human IgG of all four subclasses in the hinge region (von Pawel-Rammingen
et al., 2002), generating two Fc halves and one F(ab’)2 fragment (Vincents et al., 2004). By adding IdeS to bacteria with surface-associated
IgG, the enzyme will remove the Fc part from IgG that is bound via Fab, and Fab from IgG bound via Fc (Fig. 6 A). In these experiments the
bacteria were incubated with different IgG-containing solutions, and after incubation and washing, the samples were split into two groups;
one was treated with IdeS and the other served as a paired control. Fc and Fab fragments at the bacterial surface were detected with
fluorescently labeled Fab fragments directed toward either human IgGFc or IgGFab. The samples were then subjected to flow cytometry, and the
fluorescence was presented as relative to the control sample. To verify the method, we first used monoclonal IgG, which should only be able
to bind via the Fc region to the bacterial surface, and confirmed that we could detect bound Fc fragments after treatment with IdeS (Fig. 6
B). When wild-type bacteria were preincubated with increasing concentrations of IgG, the dominating signal shifted from IgGFc to IgGFab
(Fig. 6 C). Specific antibodies binding to and blocking the Fc-binding regions of proteins H and M1 could explain the observed decrease of
Fc fragments at high IgG concentrations. The concentration-dependent shift from IgGFc to IgGFab was further supported by the experiments
summarized in Fig. 6 D, where the IdeS-based method was applied to investigate the interactions of IgG with wild-type and mutant S. pyogenes
bacteria preincubated with human monoclonal and polyclonal IgG, plasma, or saliva. As expected, monoclonal IgG bound exclusively via Fc to
bacteria expressing protein H, whereas the interaction between monoclonal IgG and the H- and M-H- mutants was below detection limit. At high
concentration of polyclonal IgG (including plasma), Fab interactions prevailed for all the strains, whereas at low concentration (1 µg/ml
and saliva) especially wild-type and, to a lesser extent, the M- mutant lacking M1 protein but expressing protein H, bound a significant
fraction of IgG via Fc. In contrast, the H- and M-H- mutants bound IgG through specific Fab interactions, also at a low concentration of
IgG. The results demonstrate that protein H in particular is required to effectively reverse the orientation of IgG antibodies binding to
the wild-type S. pyogenes bacteria. It is also clear that this mechanism is functional only in environments with low concentration of
specific S. pyogenes IgG antibodies. Analysis of IgG orientation at the bacterial surface. (A) Bacteria were preincubated with IgG, washed,
and treated with IdeS, a proteinase of S. pyogenes that specifically cleaves IgG in the lower hinge region generating two half-Fc fragments
and one F(ab′)2 fragment. Each sample was measured before and after IdeS treatment to determine which fragments of the bound IgG antibodies
remained at the bacterial surface after proteolytic cleavage. IgG fragments were identified and measured by flow cytometry with
fluorescently labeled Fab fragments raised against human IgGFc or IgGFab fragments. (B) The detection of monoclonal IgG fragments was
analyzed after adding precleaved Fc and F(ab′)2 fragments, intact IgG, or the Fc and F(ab′)2 fragments that remain bound after IdeS
cleavage. (C) After preincubation with increasing concentrations of polyclonal IgG, wild-type S. pyogenes bacteria were treated with IdeS
and the presence of Fc and F(ab′)2 fragments at the bacterial surface was determined. (D) Wild-type and mutant bacteria were preincubated
with monoclonal IgG, polyclonal IgG, plasma, or saliva, and the IgG fragments remaining at the bacterial surface after IdeS treatment,
compared with paired control samples, were measured. Values are mean ± SEM of three independent experiments. The IgG subclasses have
different roles in the human immune response, where IgG1 and IgG3 are the most important for activating the complement system (Brüggemann et
al., 1987), as well as triggering Fc-mediated phagocytosis (Nimmerjahn and Ravetch, 2008). The subclass profile of IgG antibodies bound to
the bacterial surface may therefore indicate how the bacterium is recognized and handled by the immune system. Thus, S. pyogenes was
incubated with pooled and paired plasma and saliva samples from 10 individuals, and the IgG subclasses and complement proteins adsorbed to
the bacteria (8 independent experiments) were eluted and quantified by SRM MS. The amounts of IgG (Fig. 3 A) and complement proteins (Fig. 7
and Fig. S1 and S2) bound to the mutant strains after incubation with plasma or saliva were considerably higher for the plasma samples (in
most cases >1,000 fold). In contrast, the difference for the number of IgG molecules adsorbed by the wild-type strain in plasma or saliva
was only about 10 fold; approximately 106 compared with 105 per bacterium (Fig. 3 B). In plasma, the binding of complement proteins (Fig. 7)
showed high levels of C4b-binding protein, which has previously been reported (Carlsson et al., 2003). However, components of the membrane
attack complex (C5-C9) and C3 also accumulated, indicating efficient opsonization. Compared with plasma, fewer complement proteins were
adsorbed to the bacterial surface in saliva (Fig. 7). In the saliva samples, the dominant protein found at the bacterial surface was
complement factor H. This binding has been reported for M protein, and was suggested to be a mechanism for the bacteria to inhibit
complement activation (Horstmann et al., 1988), as factor H is a negative regulator of the alternative pathway of complement, and inhibits
C3b deposition (Liszewski et al., 1996). The antibody subclass distribution after plasma incubation showed that the levels of bound IgG1 and
IgG3 were significantly higher for wild-type bacteria compared with the other strains except for the M- mutant, where the amount of IgG3 was
very high (Fig. 3, A and B). The subclass profile of the wild-type strain represents a clear shift from the profile of the pooled human
plasma sample (Fig. 3 B). As described above, the vast majority of the IgG bound to the surface of S. pyogenes in plasma are specific
antibodies binding via Fab. The considerable increase of IgG3 interacting with the M- mutant indicates that the binding of specific IgG3
antibodies directed against protein H is partially blocked by the simultaneous presence of the M1 protein at the bacterial surface. The
subclass distribution was very similar in the plasma and saliva samples, which is in contrast to the IgG subclasses adsorbed to the surface
of wild-type bacteria (Fig. 3 B). Especially notable was the difference of bound IgG3, which was threefold higher in plasma versus in
saliva. Among the IgG subclasses, the Fc of IgG3 has a lower affinity for bacterial Fc-binding proteins, including protein H (Fig. 2 D).
Again, the data in saliva suggest that proteins H and M1 are both required for efficient Fc binding (Fig. 6 D, saliva). These results
further underline the observation that the binding of IgG in an environment with a low IgG concentration is mediated mainly through Fc. In
plasma, however, IgG is bound via Fab, and these antibodies are predominantly of the most efficiently opsonizing IgG1 and IgG3 subclasses.
This orientation and subclass profile indicate that the bacteria normally are phagocytosed and killed when they appear in the blood stream.
Complement deposition at the bacterial surface in plasma and saliva. (A) Heat map over bacteria-bound complement proteins from SRM
adsorption experiments. Data are represented as mean values from paired adsorption experiments (eight biological replicates with four
bacterial strains after incubation with plasma or saliva). The heat map was constructed by comparing values between or within either plasma
or saliva conditions. All values <500 were difficult to separate from background noise and were set to 0. Sample peptides were prepared as
described in the Materials and methods. (B) Relative complement deposition after plasma or saliva adsorption. Data are represented as
percentage of total SRM signal for the mean of eight replicate adsorption experiments (plasma/saliva; wt = 7,091,682/159,629; M- =
7,956,055/41,216; H- = 6,719,836/88,078; M-H- = 6,638,641/56,181). To investigate how IgG orientation and subclass distribution influence
uptake and killing by neutrophils, we used a combination of techniques including flow cytometry, fluorescence microscopy, and plating
assays, where wild-type and protein H deletion mutant bacteria were analyzed and compared under plasma and saliva conditions. Fig. 8 (C and
D) show representative examples of neutrophils that have interacted with wild-type S. pyogenes preincubated with plasma or saliva. Compared
with the massive phagocytosis of plasma-treated wild-type bacteria, the uptake after incubation with saliva was much lower (see
representative images in Fig. 8 B). Phagocytosis and intracellular survival of S. pyogenes. (A) Gating strategy for the flow cytometry-based
method to measure phagocytosis. Human neutrophils were gated based on light scatter properties (1) and then gated for CD18 (2) before
analysis of Oregon Green/DyLight647-labeled bacteria (3). The top right quadrant represents neutrophils associated with extracellular
bacteria; the bottom right quadrant represents neutrophils associated with only intracellular bacteria; and the bottom left represents cells
that are not associated with bacteria. (B) Two representative image series from three independent experiments are shown for wild-type
bacteria opsonized with either human plasma or saliva (30 min phagocytosis, MOI 25). Differential interference contrast images (top left)
show the localization of the neutrophils; this is represented as a thin white line in the other images. All bacteria (Oregon Green–labeled)
are shown in green, and extracellular bacteria are shown in magenta (Cy3-labeled anti-IgG). Bars, 10 µm. (C and D) Wild-type and H- mutant
bacteria were analyzed after opsonization with either plasma, saliva, heat-inactivated (56°C) plasma and saliva, or saliva samples
supplemented with pooled polyclonal IgG (10,000 µg/ml). The bars in groups of five represent MOI 1, 5, 10, 25, and 50 (30 min phagocytosis)
and the inset in C shows the same data as a line graph. (C) Percentage of the neutrophil population that has fully internalized at least one
bacterium. (D) Mean fluorescence intensity of intracellular bacteria as a relative measure of the number of internalized bacteria per
neutrophil. Data are representative of two independent experiments. (E) Intracellular survival of wild-type and H- S. pyogenes was measured
after 1 h of phagocytosis by human neutrophils. The bacteria (MOI 10) were opsonized with plasma, saliva, or saliva supplemented with
polyclonal IgG (10,000 µg/ml). The data show survival relative to the starting point. Significant differences were recorded when wild-type
bacteria preincubated with saliva were compared with either wild-type bacteria treated with plasma (P = 0.023), or to the three samples of
H- bacteria preincubated with plasma, saliva, or saliva supplemented with polyclonal IgG (P = 0.034, 0.033, and 0.027, respectively). Data
are from three independent experiments. To characterize the time course of phagocytosis, wild-type bacteria were compared with the H-
mutant. The kinetics were stable after 30 min, and the two strains exhibited similar patterns in terms of the percentage of neutrophils with
phagocytosed bacteria (not depicted); thus, 30 min was chosen as the time point for the continued phagocytosis experiments. To more
accurately account for differences between strains and conditions, the impact of varying the bacterial load (multiplicity of infection ) was
evaluated. The percentages of neutrophils with only intracellular bacteria (Fig. 8 A, bottom right quadrant) were recorded to assess
complete phagocytosis (Fig. 8 C). Wild-type and H- bacteria preincubated, respectively, in plasma or saliva (untreated and heat-inactivated
for 30 min at 56°C), as well as in saliva samples supplemented with polyclonal IgG (10,000 µg/ml), were tested. The addition of IgG to
saliva results in high numbers of correctly (Fab) oriented IgG molecules at the bacterial surface (Figs. 2–4) in the presence of low amounts
of complement proteins (Fig. 7 B). With increasing MOIs, three data trends emerged (Fig. 8 C, inset) that were independent of the bacterial
strain used: (1) preincubation in plasma resulted in very efficient phagocytosis, (2) preincubation in heat-inactivated plasma or saliva
supplemented with IgG lead to less, but still effective, uptake, whereas (3) saliva exhibited a lower degree of phagocytosis. This indicates
that phagocytosis under the conditions studied is enhanced by Fab-bound IgG and that the uptake is further increased by complement. To
assess the number of internalized bacteria, we analyzed neutrophils with no adherent bacteria and measured their mean fluorescence
intensities (Fig. 8 D). The results with plasma-opsonized bacteria (Fig. 8 D, pink bars) stress the importance of complement for the uptake.
Moreover, internalization after saliva treatment was low, unless IgG was added. In saliva, which is a less complex environment compared with
plasma, high levels of IgG were obviously sufficient to induce efficient phagocytosis. The large difference in phagocytosis between plasma-
and saliva-treated bacteria and the finding that phagocytosis of S. pyogenes is largely independent of IgGFc-binding proteins, left us with
an unanswered question: what is the role of IgGFc-binding proteins in an environment with low IgG concentration, such as saliva? Because
wild-type S. pyogenes bacteria are known to survive intracellularly in neutrophils (Staali et al., 2003), this was investigated under the
aforementioned conditions. Wild-type and H mutant bacteria, preincubated with plasma, saliva, or saliva supplemented with polyclonal IgG
(10,000 µg/ml), were phagocytosed by neutrophils and the intracellular survival was determined after 1 h (Fig. 8 E). The results show that
wild-type bacteria survived significantly better after opsonization with saliva compared with plasma (P = 0.023), and also compared with H-
bacteria preincubated with plasma (P = 0.034), saliva (P = 0.033), or IgG-supplemented saliva (P = 0.027). This suggests that IgGFc-binding
proteins in an environment with low IgG concentration promote intracellular survival of S. pyogenes. The patient described in this study was
colonized by S. pyogenes in the throat but showed no local symptoms. During an asymptomatic carrier state, it is likely that small numbers
of bacteria occasionally invade the microcirculation of the epithelium. Normally such bacteria are rapidly recognized and eliminated, but if
they reach a damaged tissue site via the blood stream, this could provide a protected environment rich in nutrients where the pathogen can
colonize and grow. After working in the garden, our patient felt pain in her right thigh, probably caused by a muscular bleeding. In this
region, the infection was established and rapidly expanded into necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock. The fact that the patient has
diabetes and was under immunosuppressive treatment for rheumatoid arthritis could have contributed to this development. However, in many
cases of severe invasive S. pyogenes infections there are no such underlying factors. Whether the bacteria identified in the blood
originates from the throat or from necrotic tissue in the thigh remains an open question. However, the access of bacteria-containing samples
that could be analyzed directly by electron microscopy from the three sites offered a unique opportunity to follow the presence and
orientation of IgG antibodies at the bacterial surface during different phases of infection. The observation that IgG antibodies in the
throat sample are associated with the surface mostly via Fc, but in blood through immune Fab-binding, provided a clue to the function of
IgGFc-binding proteins. Moreover, and as mentioned above, previous work has indicated that the M protein–fibrinogen–IgG complexes released
from the bacterial surface by proteolytic enzymes in the inflamed and necrotic tissue play an important role in the systemic vascular
leakage that often has fatal consequences in patients with necrotizing fasciitis and toxic shock. S. pyogenes is an exclusive human
pathogen, and for the first time the whole chain of events could now be followed and clarified in a human being. This is important because
the IgGFc-binding proteins in S. pyogenes do not bind mouse and rat IgG (Åkesson et al., 1994), which underlines the specificity for the
human host and makes it virtually impossible to find a relevant animal model for S. pyogenes infections. Most individuals develop specific
antibodies early in life against the various common bacterial species that are equipped with IgGFc-binding proteins, and the present study
demonstrates that at high concentrations of IgG, such as in blood plasma, most of the antibodies bind to S. pyogenes in an opsonizing
manner. The reduced contribution of IgGFc-binding could be explained either by saturation of IgGFc-binding sites or by the presence of IgG
that bind to their specific antigen with a higher affinity compared with the Fc-binding bacterial protein. Our results favor the latter
explanation. The affinity of protein H for IgGFc is high, Kd = 1.6 × 10−9 M (Åkesson et al., 1990), and relatively low for M1 protein, Kd =
3.4 × 10−6 M (Åkesson et al., 1994). Neither is as strong as the affinity reported for many antibodies for their specific antigen (Ka > 1010
M−1). At the bacterial surface there will be a constant equilibrium exchange, and the molecules with the strongest interactions will be
enriched over time, likely favoring antibodies binding via Fab. This notion is supported by the binding curves for polyclonal IgG (Fig. 2
C), where the strains lacking protein H exhibit a sigmoidal binding pattern, indicating a single type of specific interaction. In contrast,
Fc-binding would generate a linear relationship on a log–log scale. The two protein H–expressing strains exhibit a bi-modal pattern, with an
apparent saturation at low-mid concentrations, and then joining the sigmoidal response at higher concentrations. This correlates well with
the shift from Fc- to Fab-binding observed in Fig. 6 C. Compared with an IgG-rich environment, the binding pattern at low IgG concentration,
such as in saliva, was very different with preferential interaction through Fc. To obtain a complete and quantitative map of both IgG
subclasses and complement proteins binding to the streptococcal surface in plasma and saliva, mass spectrometry techniques were used. Some
interesting conclusions can be drawn from the results, especially for wild-type bacteria. In plasma, the bacteria are perfectly opsonized
for phagocytosis, as they are coated with Fab-bound IgG1 and IgG3 and large amounts of complement proteins of the classical and alternative
pathway (no proteins from the lectin pathway were identified). In contrast, there is only one complement protein present at high levels in
saliva; factor H, an inhibitor of the alternative and classical pathways (Liszewski et al., 1996) that was found to interact with M proteins
(Horstmann et al., 1988). Otherwise, the wild-type bacteria are covered with Fc-bound IgG1 and IgG2. With this background, the results from
the phagocytosis experiments are as expected: efficient neutrophil–bacteria interaction, uptake and killing after opsonization with human
plasma, and the opposite after incubation with human saliva from the same donors. It is more difficult to distinguish between the exact
contributions of IgG orientation and/or complement inhibition. The protein H mutant behaved similarly in plasma, indicating that IgGFc-
binding proteins are superfluous in plasma, probably because of IgG antibodies binding to surface antigens via Fab. In saliva, there is a
small increase of phagocytosis of H- bacteria in normal saliva as compared with wild-type, but not in heat-inactivated saliva. This
indicates that complement might play a role also in saliva, but the effects are small compared with the plasma samples. To be able to
evaluate phagocytosis and intracellular survival correctly, it is important that the bacterial load is the same when comparing samples.
However, we could only make sure that the starting conditions were the same, and in the case of the survival assays, the actual numbers per
neutrophil will be different because of differences in the internalization process as shown by the flow cytometry assays. Nevertheless,
despite fewer bacteria per neutrophil in the saliva samples, they still survived better than in the plasma samples. This emphasizes that the
bacteria are protected in saliva; it should be easier for the neutrophils to kill the few saliva-incubated bacteria that are internalized as
compared with the large numbers per neutrophil in plasma samples. Even if the difference is smaller, the same holds true when comparing
wild-type with H mutant bacteria. Therefore, the survival of wild-type bacteria is probably underestimated in saliva, showing that bacteria
binding factor H and IgG via Fc not only avoid detection and internalization more effectively, they also survive better intracellularly.
Bacterial sepsis is a clinically highly significant condition estimated to kill several million individuals annually (Cohen, 2002; Rittirsch
et al., 2008), and a deeper understanding of the molecular and cellular bacterial–host interactions in the blood stream during sepsis will
be required to identify novel therapies against one of the leading causes of death world-wide. However, bacteria–host relationships are in
general well-balanced and, compared with the healthy carrier state and uncomplicated local infections, sepsis is an extremely rare
condition, implicating that the evolution of human bacterial pathogens is taking place in environments other than blood. At the same time,
local infections, including bacteria of the normal flora, regularly spill over to the microcirculation in low doses without causing disease.
The effective elimination of these should be beneficial to the host, but could also add selective advantages to the bacteria; why kill your
host or induce an inflammatory response that may negatively influence your preferred habitat (Sansonetti, 2004)? The present results support
this view, and suggest that IgGFc-binding proteins of S. pyogenes have evolved to protect the bacteria in their natural setting. In
contrast, they do not provide protection in the blood stream with its high concentration of complement proteins and specific IgG antibodies.
Although not studied in such detail as S. pyogenes, the data concerning S. aureus and group G streptococci (Fig. 2 D) suggest that their
IgGFc-binding proteins (A and G, respectively) play a similar biological role. These species are also normally found in IgG-poor
environments in the skin, the nostrils, and the pharynx (Wertheim et al., 2005). Likewise, E. coli expressing the more recently discovered
IgGFc-binding EiB proteins (Leo and Goldman, 2009), are exposed to low concentrations of IgG in the gastrointestinal tract (Kaper et al.,
2004). Another fact that may also support a similar function for IgGFc-binding proteins in general, and at the same time shed light on an
old observation, is their convergent evolution. Thus, proteins A, G, and H all bind to the Cγ2–Cγ3 interface of IgGFc despite a complete
lack of sequence homology in their Fc-binding regions (Frick et al., 1992). Before this investigation, we and our colleagues in the field
had been puzzled by the fact that S. pyogenes is equipped with several highly specific IgG-interacting and -degrading proteins despite the
low concentration of IgG in the skin and the pharynx. Apart from the IgGFc-binding proteins of the M protein family, IdeS, which has been
such a valuable tool in this study, cleaves IgG with a unique degree of specificity (von Pawel-Rammingen et al., 2002); no other substrate
has been identified. In addition, S. pyogenes secretes EndoS, a glucosidase that specifically removes the glycan from IgGFc (Collin and
Olsén, 2001). The powerful effect of proteins H and M1 in an IgG-poor environment in contrast to blood plasma helps to clarify this apparent
paradox. In more general terms, and perhaps self-evidently, the data indicate that the biological consequences of a molecular microbe–host
interaction is to be found in the ecological niche where the microbe has evolved. S. pyogenes, Group G streptococci (G148; Björck and
Kronvall, 1984), and S. aureus (Cowan I; Forsgren and Sjöquist, 1966) were cultured in TH medium (Todd Hewitt Broth; Bacto; BD) at 37°C in
an atmosphere supplemented with 5% CO2. The wild-type S. pyogenes AP1 strain (40/58) is of the M1 serotype and was provided by the World
Health Organization Streptococcal Reference Laboratory in Prague, Czech Republic. Three isogenic AP1 mutant strains were used; the MC25
strain expresses protein H at the surface but lacks cell wall–anchored M1 protein (Collin and Olsén, 2000), the BM27.6 strain expresses M1
protein but completely lacks protein H (Berge et al., 1997), and the BMJ71 strain is devoid of both surface proteins (Kihlberg et al.,
1995). Whenever required, suitable antibiotics were added to the medium at the following final concentrations: 150 µg ml−1 kanamycin (MC25),
1 µg ml−1 erythromycin (BM27.6), and 5 µg ml−1 tetracycline (BMJ71). Bacteria were generally harvested at early log phase and washed three
times in PBS. Bacterial concentrations were determined using flow cytometry (FACSCalibur; BD) with CountBright beads (Invitrogen) added as
volume standard. The bacteria were then either used immediately or heat-killed at 80°C for 5 min in a heat block (agitation at 800 rpm),
followed by rapid cooling of the samples in ice-cold water. The patient strain was isolated from a throat swab and from wound fluid, and its
serotype was determined to be of the M1 serotype by PCR and sequencing. The presence of protein H at the surface of the patient strain was
determined by measuring binding of radiolabeled human IgG. At a bacterial concentration of 4 × 108 CFU CFU, >50% of the radioactive signal
was detected; this represents strong binding in comparison with earlier studies (Åkesson et al., 1990). Whole human blood from healthy
donors was layered on Polymorphprep (Axis-Shield) and centrifuged at 400 g for 35 min at 18°C. The neutrophil layer was recovered and
suspended in 50 ml Ca2+- and Mg2+-containing PBS. After centrifugation at 350 g for 10 min, erythrocytes were removed by hypotonic lysis for
20 s. The cells were then pelleted at 250 g (5 min), counted using a hemocytometer, and resuspended in Na-medium (5.6 mM glucose, 127 mM
NaCl, 10.8 mM KCl, 2.4 mM KH2PO4, 1.6 mM MgSO4, 10 mM Hepes, and 1.8 mM CaCl2; pH adjusted to 7.4 with NaOH) at a concentration of 107 cells
ml−1. After purification, the neutrophils were gently rotated end-over-end at room temperature. Heparin-treated human plasma and saliva
samples from 10 healthy individuals were prepared as described by Rai et al. (2005) and Henson and Wong (2010), respectively. EDTA-free
Complete Mini protease inhibitor cocktail (Roche) was added to both sample types before aliquotation and storage at −20°C. Intravenous
immunoglobulin (IVIG; Octagam, Octapharma) consists of human IgG from >3,500 pooled plasma samples from healthy individuals. Bacteria were
incubated with plasma, saliva, or IVIG for 30 min at 37°C in a shaking heat block (500 rpm), and then washed three times (5,000 g, 5 min,
swing-out) with Na-medium. For some experiments, the bacteria were first sonicated (VialTweeter; Hielscher) to disperse large aggregates.
Bacteria were incubated with DNA-probe Syto9 (Invitrogen) and anti-IgG Fab fragments (DyLight649-conjugated anti–human IgG; Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratory). Flow cytometric analysis was performed using a FACSCalibur flow cytometer (BD) equipped with 488- and 633-nm
lasers. Bacteria were sorted using a side-scatter threshold and gated for bacterial DNA in FL-1. IgG-signal was recorded in FL-4. For each
sample at least 10,000 events were recorded, and the results were analyzed using the CellQuest Pro software (BD) and FlowJo 8.8.6 (Tree
Star). Bacterial overnight cultures were washed twice in PBST (10 mM sodium phosphate buffer, pH 7.2, containing 0.12 M NaCl and 0.05%
Tween-20), and resuspended in PBST to a concentration of 2 × 109 CFU/ml. A serial dilution of bacteria (200 µl) was mixed with 25 µl of
125I-labeled protein (10,000 cpm) and incubated at room temperature for 1 h. Cells were spun down, and the radioactivity associated with the
pellet was determined in a gamma counter (PerkinElmer). Bacteria were incubated with IgG-containing solutions as described above and washed.
The samples were split and one fraction was incubated with IdeS (0.5 µg/ml, 2 h, 37°C), with the other serving as internal control. Both
fractions were washed and split once more so that each bacteria condition generated four samples. These samples were analyzed with flow
cytometry as described above, except with detection of IgGFc and IgGFab (DyLight649-conjugated anti–human IgGFc or IgGFab; Jackson
ImmunoResearch Laboratory) instead of whole IgG. The data are presented as percentage signal of the internal control. Bacteria were
incubated with IgG-containing solutions as described above and stained with 20 µM Oregon Green 488-X succinimidyl ester (Invitrogen) for 30
min in the dark at room temperature. Excess fluorochrome was then removed by washing the bacteria three times in Na-medium. Neutrophils were
incubated with f-MLF (1 µM, 10 min, 37°C) before bacteria were added at different MOIs (1, 5, 10, 25, or 50). The samples were put on over-
end rotation in a 37°C incubator, and aliquots were withdrawn at indicated time points and placed on ice. Samples were kept on ice until
flow cytometry analysis or fixed with 2% PFA for microscopy analysis. Samples were incubated with PE-conjugated anti-CD18 (integrin β2
subunit) and DyLight649-conjugated anti-IgG Fab fragments. Gating was performed using forward scatter versus side scatter, and gating for
cells positive for phagocytosis was performed by selecting for Oregon Green–positive and DyLight649-negative cells in the gate corresponding
to neutrophils (CD18-positive). For each sample, 10,000 events were analyzed using FlowJo (Tree Star). Intracellular survival of S. pyogenes
was analyzed similarly to what has been described previously (Nordenfelt et al., 2009). In brief, before presentation to cells, bacteria
were opsonized (see above) and then gently centrifuged (200 g, 2 min, swing-out) to remove aggregates (checked by microscopy). After
equilibration at 37°C, neutrophils were presented to the bacteria by centrifugation (12,000 g, 30 s, fixed angle). The phagocytic process
was halted by placing the samples on ice, and extracellular bacteria were removed by thorough washing (200 g, 2 min, swing-out). After
washing, the temperature was raised to 37°C to allow continued phagosomal maturation. Samples were withdrawn after 30 min, and the
neutrophils were lysed by incubating the samples for 5 min at pH 11.0 with water as previously described (Decleva et al., 2006). The samples
were serially diluted in TH, and then plated on TH-agar plates. After an overnight incubation at 37°C, the number of CFUs was determined.
SRM transition lists were generated using a previously published method (Lu et al., 2007; Picotti et al., 2010). Protein samples were
denatured using 8 M urea, reduced with 5 mM TCEP, and alkylated with 10 mM iodoacetamide before overnight trypsinization. Trypsin was
inactivated by lowering the pH to 2 and the peptides were immobilized onto C18 columns (UltraMicro Spin Silica; Vydac). After multiple
washes, the peptides were eluted (acetonitrile/formic acid) and solvents were evaporated in a SpeedVac centrifuge. After resupension, the
samples were briefly sonicated before storage at −80°C. The samples were loaded onto an RP-HPLC column for peptide separation and
subsequently introduced into the mass spectrometer through electrospray ionization. The peptide ions are filtered through the three
quadropoles guided by the previously generated SRM assays to collect measurements for each selected peptide. Identified IgG peptides (Fig.
S1) were synthesized (Aqua QuantPro; Thermo Fisher Scientific), and the known concentrations were used to absolutely quantify the peptides
used for IgG measurements (DTLMISR, NQVSLTCLVK, GPSVFPLAPSSK, GLPAPIEK, SCDTPPPCPR, and GLPSSIEK). The SRM measurements were performed on a
TSQ Vantage triple-stage quadrupole mass spectrometer (Thermo Fisher Scientific) equipped with a nanoelectrospray ion source (Thermo Fisher
Scientific). Chromatographic separations of peptides were performed on an Eksigent 2D NanoLC system (Eksigent) with a PicoTip Emitter (10-µm
tip, 75 µm × 12 cm; New Objective) packed with Reprosil-Pur C18-AQ resin (3 µm; Dr. Maisch GmbH). The mobile phase consisted of solvent A,
0.1% aqueous formic acid, and solvent B, acetonitrile with 0.1% formic acid. Peptides were eluted with a flow rate of 300 nl/min with a
gradient of 97% solvent A at 0–5 min, 85% solvent A at 8 min, 65% solvent A at 42 min, and 10% solvent A at 45–50 min. The mass spectrometer
was operated in SRM mode with Q1 and Q3 set at unit resolution (FWHM 0.7 D). A spray voltage of +1,700 V was used with a heated ion transfer
setting of 270°C for desolvation. Data were acquired using the Xcalibur software (version 2.1.0). The dwell time was set to 10 ms, and the
scan width to 0.01 m/z. All collision energies were calculated using the formula: CE = (Parent m/z) × 0.034 + 3.314. A scrape from the
throat was obtained with a plastic wire loop. The material at tip of the loop was resuspended and fixed in 100 μl EM fix (2.5%
glutaraldehyde, 0.15 M Na-Cacodylate, pH 7.2). 10 ml of blood was centrifuged at 200 g for 10 min. The supernatant was collected and
centrifuged at 3,000 g for another 10 min, and the resulting pellet was fixed and resuspended in 50 μl EM fix. Wound fluid (200 μl) was
resuspended in EM fix (800 μl). The location of IgG antibodies binding to bacterial surface proteins was analyzed by negative staining and
transmission electron microscopy, as previously described (Engel and Furthmayr, 1987). IgG samples were either used directly or conjugated
with 10 nm colloidal gold. Suspensions of bacteria (1%) were mixed with of IgG, or IgG-Au conjugates, and then incubated for 1 h at room
temperature. 5-µl aliquots were adsorbed onto carbon-coated grids for 1 min, washed with two drops of water, and stained on two drops of
0.75% uranyl formate. The grids were rendered hydrophilic by glow discharge at low pressure in air. Bacterial suspensions were fixed (1.5%
paraformaldehyde and 0.5% glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer, pH 7.4) for 1 h at room temperature, followed by washing with 0.1 M
phosphate buffer, pH 7.4. The fixed and washed samples were subsequently dehydrated in ethanol and further processed for Lowicryl embedding
(Carlemalm et al., 1985). Sections were cut with an LKB Ultratome and mounted on gold grids. Sections were washed with distilled water and
post-stained with 2% uranyl acetate and lead citrate. All samples were examined with a JEOL JEM 1230 electron microscope operated at 80-kV
accelerating voltage. Images were recorded with a Gatan Multiscan 791 charge-coupled device camera. Acquisition of images was performed
using a fluorescence microscope (Nikon Eclipse TE300 equipped with a Hamamatsu C4742-95 cooled charge-coupled device camera, using a Plan
Apochromat 100× objective with NA 1.4) and a N.A 1.4 oil condenser. The acquisition software used was Nikon NIS-Elements 3. Images were
processed using Adobe Photoshop CS5 and ImageJ. In all figures, acquisition of images was made using the same exposure time for each
fluorophore. During post-processing (only linear changes), the images were treated identically to maintain the relative intensity. In Fig.
8, GraphPad Prism 5 was used for repeated measure one-way ANOVA with Bonferroni multiple comparison correction. Fig. S1 shows SRM analysis
of IgG subclass distribution. Fig. S2 shows a heat map over bacteria-bound complement system molecules from SRM adsorption experiments.
Table S1 shows IgG levels in saliva and plasma. The supplemental text details the patient’s case history. Online supplemental material is
available at http://www.jem.org/cgi/content/full/jem.20120325/DC1. We thank Ingbritt Gustafsson, Monica Heidenholm, Maria Baumgarten, and
Kristoffer Sjöholm for technical assistance. The work was funded by the Swedish Research Council (project 7480 and 2008:3356), the Swedish
Foundation for Strategic Research (grant no. FFL4), Crafoordska Stiftelsen (grant no. 20090802 and 20100892), the Swedish Government Funds
for Clinical Research (ALF), Hansa Medical AB, the Medical Faculty at Lund University, the Foundations of Knut and Alice Wallenberg, Torsten
and Ragnar Söderberg, Alfred Österlund, Greta and Johan Kock, Lars Hiertas Minne, and the Royal Physiographic Society. The sample collection
was approved by the ethics committee of Lund University Hospital (project number LU 790/2005 ) and informed consent was obtained from the
patient. We declare no competing financial interests. Author contributions: P. Nordenfelt, J. Malmström, and L. Björck designed the study,
analyzed the data, and wrote the manuscript with input from the other co-authors. P. Nordenfelt performed flow cytometry, binding assays,
adsorption experiments, antibody orientation assays, heavy peptide selection, fluorescence microscopy, phagocytosis, and intracellular
survival studies. S. Waldemarson performed and analyzed SRM quantification experiments. A. Linder identified patients with potential
invasive S. pyogenes infection and collected clinical samples. C. Karlsson participated in heavy peptide selection and analysis. M. Mörgelin
performed the electron microscopy. Abbreviations used: Fab fragment antigen-binding Fc fragment crystallizable IgGFab Fab region of IgG
IgGFc Fc region of IgG MOI multiplicity of infection SRM selected-reaction monitoring fragment antigen-binding fragment crystallizable Fab
region of IgG Fc region of IgG multiplicity of infection selected-reaction monitoring
