A case of surgically induced necrotizing scleritis (SINS) after manual small incision cataract surgery that was associated with peripheral
ulcerative keratitis (PUK) at a different site. Neither pathology responded to systemic steroids and progressed to become sight threatening,
which is unusual. Progression of SINS was aggressive enough to cause a limbal wound gape, similarly PUK extended up to Descemet's membrane
and emergency amniotic membrane transplantation (AMT) was required to save the globe. AMT may regress the scleral and corneal melting
successfully. It is not common to observe SINS with PUK at a different site that is unresponsive to systemic steroids. AMT, though
palliative treatment, was effective at treating this condition successfully. Surgically induced necrotizing scleritis (SINS) is a rare but
serious complication of ocular surgery. It has been observed with most types of ocular surgeries.1–5 It typically occurs postoperatively as
intense scleral necrosis adjacent to the site of previous scleral or limbal incision.16 It may or may not be associated with serious ocular
complications such as peripheral ulcerative keratitis (PUK), which is always present adjacent to the SINS site.7 This may progress to
perforation with poor visual prognosis. Therefore early diagnosis and prompt management in the form of immunosuppressant and/or surgical
treatment in the form of amniotic membrane transplantation (AMT) is required for successful management.89 SINS was first recognized in 1976
by Arensten et al., who described four patients who developed marginal corneal ulceration after cataract surgery.10 Lyne and Lloyd-Jones11
in 1979 described a series of patients without a history of scleritis who developed scleral inflammation around a surgical wound. In this
case report, we present an interesting case of postcataract surgery SINS at the superior limbus with exacerbation of PUK at a nasal site
during the course of SINS. SINS and PUK were unresponsive to medical therapy and continued to progress. We document management of these
pathologies with globe saving AMT. A 65-year-old male presented with complaints of gradual diminished vision that was greater in right eye.
He gave history of blurring of vision with watery discharge bilaterally and was diagnosed with PUK and treated successfully 2 years prior to
presentation. On examination his visual acuity was counting finger at 2 feet in right eye and 20/100 in the left eye. Intraocular pressure
in both eyes was 16 mmHg with applanation tonometry. Slit-lamp examination showed both eyes with peripheral degeneration at the nasal limbus
without thinning of cornea, with nuclear sclerosis grade III with posterior subcapsular opacity in the right eye and nuclear sclerosis grade
II in left eye. Fundus examination was normal. The patient underwent uneventful manual small incision cataract surgery in the right eye. He
was discharged with instruction to instill topical prednisolone acetate six times a day, moxifloxacin four times a day and cyclopentolate at
night. At the 5 days postoperatively, the patient presented with scleral melting and thinning of the superior sclera from 11 o’ clock to 1
o’ clock at the incision site. The patient was diagnosed with SINS and systemic immunosuppression in the form of a pulse of
methylprednisolone 500 mg followed by prednisolone 20 mg was started along with topical steroid drops. Ageneral physical examination was
performed that was negative for systemic vasculitis or arthritis. A chest X-ray and blood tests including a full blood count, erythrocyte
sedimentation rate, C-reactive protein, rheumatoid factor, antinuclear antibody, and anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibody tests were
performed. These tests were normal. Urinanalysis was normal. SINS did not respond to steroid therapy and progressed further to create wound
gap and a shallow anterior chamber. Simultaneously, the nasal corneal periphery showed PUK in the form of crescent shaped superficial
corneal thinning at the previous site of corneal degeneration [Figure 1]. To prevent globe perforation, a multilayered AMT with conjunctival
resection was performed at the site of scleral necrosis. PUK was superficial, hence no active surgical treatment was performed. Systemic
steroids were continued along with topical steroid drops. Three days after AMT, scleral necrosis began to resolve with a well formed
anterior chamber however, PUK increase in depth up to Descemet's membrane [Figure 2]. Again, to prevent perforation, a multilayered AMT was
performed with conjunctival resection. Systemic steroids were reduced to 10 mg maintenance dose within a week. Topical prednisolone was
continued. Steroids were tapered down and stopped within a month. Scleral as well as corneal melting improved after AMT. Complete healing
took place within 15 days of AMT [Figure 3. There was no recurrence of SINS and PUK after 6 months follow-up. SINS on 5th day of surgery
with thin PUK After AMT at SINS site, SINS healing and PUK progressing Complete healing after AMT for SINS and PUK Surgically induced
necrotizing scleritis has been reported to occur after cataract extraction, trabeculectomy, squint surgery, pterygium surgery, and surgery
for retinal detachment.1–5 In SINS there is a variable latent period between surgery and presentation, which may vary from 1 day to 51
years.7 The area of scleral melt tends to develop adjacent to the surgical wound16 and may extend to involve the cornea and whole anterior
segment. These cases may or may not be associated with inflammation and PUK adjacent to SINS.7 Causative factors such as local ischemia due
to disruption of episcleral vasculature during ocular surgery and excessive use of cautery have been implicated in the pathogenesis of SINS.
However, the rapid response to immunosuppressive agents also supports the view of an immunologic reaction involved in the pathogenesis.812
The pathogenesis of PUK and SINS has not been fully elucidated, but both T cell and antibody mediated pathways have been implicated in the
disease process.1314 This pathogenesis explains the simultaneous presence of SINS and PUK. Medical management of SINS and PUK has included
immunosuppression with oral steroids, methylprednisolone + cyclophosphamide and more recently tacrolimus8 in a patient who was unresponsive
to cyclophosphamide and azathioprine. Surgical intervention in the form of tectonic scleral or corneal tissue patch grafts and amniotic
membrane grafts8 has been reported. Our patient presented with SINS following manual small incision cataract surgery on the 5th
postoperative day. There was no history of over-cauterization. The inflammation in the form of scleral necrosis was noted adjacent to the
limbal incision from 11 o’ clock to 1 o’ clock. Additionally PUK was noted at the nasal limbus at the 3 o’ clock position which corresponded
to the site of preoperative peripheral corneal degeneration (perhaps a healed PUK). No side port incision was performed at the 3 o’ clock
position, hence it was not surgically induced but reactivation of PUK due to SINS. This can be explained on the basis of a common
pathogenesis for both diseases.1314 The patient had no serological evidence for connective tissue disease. Therefore the patient was
diagnosed with SINS and reactivation of PUK on the basis of ocular surgery, absence of clinical or serological signs of systemic auto-immune
disease and development of necrotizing scleritis close to the previous surgical injury.9 SINS and PUK did not respond to local and systemic
steroid therapy, which was very unusual. AMT was performed to reduce inflammation and to prevent globe perforation keeping in mind that the
surgical treatment, although palliative and temporary, is an important adjuvant for treating these cases.9 The resection of the conjunctiva
adjacent to the necrotic area has been described as an efficient technique for diminishing the concentration of proteases, as well as for
the temporary interruption of the local inflammatory process, reducing the input of pro-inflammatory cytokines.4 In a severe case, the
amniotic membrane helps in controlling the inflammation in the area of the implant. The patient responded well to AMT and both scleral as
well as the corneal melt completely healed within 15 days. No further immunosupressants were required. Though SINS is a rare postoperative
complication, it can occur in association with PUK which required prompt diagnosis and early treatment to achieve good prognosis. SINS is a
serious entity which can reactivate PUK and requires prompt and aggressive therapy to prevent the potentially devastating ocular sequalae.
Conjunctival resection and amniotic membrane grafting may be essential to prevent complications such as globe perforation by interrupting
the local immunologic events in severe cases. We are highly thankful to the OT and OPD staff of department of ophthalmology, for helping us
to provide amniotic membrane and details of the patient. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No
