Rituximab, a monoclonal antibody to the B cell marker CD20, is becoming increasingly popular in the treatment of various orbital disorders.
In this university-based interventional case series, we describe two patients with bilateral orbital and extra-orbital reactive lymphoid
hyperplasia (RLH) treated with rituximab. Initially both had favorable responses; but roughly a year later recurrent disease necessitated
maintenance therapy in both cases. Both again responded to additional courses of rituximab. Although recalcitrant disease may persist after
treatment, rituxmab may play a role in the management of RLH with widespread involvement. Reactive lymphoid hyperplasia (RLH) is
characterized by the proliferation of a polymorphic lymphocytic infiltrate without an identifiable monoclonal subpopulation or other markers
of malignancy.1 RLH is distinguished from orbital inflammatory syndrome clinically and histologically.2 RLH is a proliferation of
lymphocytes within a structure as opposed to an inflammatory response. Accordingly it usually presents more indolently with less pain,
discomfort, and other inflammatory associates.2 Traditional treatment modalities for RLH include corticosteroids and external beam radiation
therapy (EBRT).3 Rituximab is a chimeric humanized monoclonal antibody directed against CD20 receptors, found on B lymphocytes.4 Variably
successful treatment of orbital RLH has been described with rituximab.5–7 In the largest series, 10 out of 11 patients (91%) with orbital
RLH refractory to steroids were reported to have responded favorably.5 Disease recurrence was seen in six patients, between 4 and 70 months
after initial treatment. In this manuscript, we present our experience with two patients with widespread multisystem RLH who presented with
orbital involvement. A 63-year-old man was referred for the management of bilateral orbital infiltrates. He reported a 7 year history of
steadily progressive bilateral painless proptosis and visual loss. He had no additional complaints and an unremarkable past medical history.
Best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 20/40 oculus uterque (OU). He had a mild relative afferent pupillary defect on the right and mild
optic disk pallor bilaterally. Anterior and posterior segment examinations were otherwise unremarkable. Extraocular motility was mildly
limited in all direction of gaze OU. Exophthalmometry measured 20 mm oculus dexter (OD) and 17.5 mm oculus sinister (OS) [Figure 1a].
Patient #1, pretreatment: (a) External photograph demonstrating bilateral proptosis (b) Humphrey visual field demonstrating a superior
arcuate defect and general constriction OD; normal field OS (c) Axial (left) and coronal (right) MRI of the orbits demonstrating bilateral
diffuse infiltration involving the extraocular muscles and lacrimal glands (d) Pretreatment positron emission tomography (PET) demonstrating
increased metabolic activity in the orbits (left) and paraspinal region (right) Visual field testing was abnormal in the right and normal in
the left eye [Figure 1b]. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) demonstrated diffuse infiltration of both orbits. [Figure 1c] Several
extraorbital sites of involvement were detected on positron emission tomography (PET). [Figure 1d] Biopsies of both the orbital and
paraspinal masses were consistent with RLH. [Figure 2] Patient #1: Orbital biopsies demonstrating lymphoid hyperplasia (a) Hematoxylin and
eosin stain showing lymphoid follicles with well-formed germinal centers surrounded by mantle zones composed of a polymorphous mixture of
small lymphocytes (b) CD20 immunohistochemical stain: CD20 positive B-cells are prominent in scattered follicles (c) CD21
immunohistochemical stain: highlighted dendritic cells underlie the follicles (d) CD3 immunohistochemical stain: T-cells are seen in both
follicles and inter-follicular areas Following failed treatment with steroids (roughly 1 mg/kg for 1 month) and doxycycline, two cycles of
rituximab (370 mg/m2 weekly for 4 weeks) were given. The patient improved with little clinical evidence of persistent disease. His visual
acuity improved to 20/20 OU. Exophthalmometry measurements decreased to 13 mm OD and 14 mm OS. The visual field resolved with the exception
of a slight depression OD [Figure 3a]. Much improved but persistent abnormality was detected on MRI. [Figure 3b]. Patient #1, post
treatment: (a) Humphrey visual field demonstrating a normal field OS and near complete normalization OD (b) MRI demonstrating improved but
persistent areas of abnormality Ten months after the last rituximab treatment returned with periocular discomfort. Exophthalmometry
measurements had increased to 15 mm OU and progression of disease was seen on MRI. Following repeat rituximab therapy using a similar dosing
regimen, the patient was again asymptomatic and remains so 11 months following treatment. A 66-year-old man was referred with a 3 month
history of progressive proptosis [Figure 4a]. A right submandibular mass had progressively enlarged since detection several years prior.
BCVA was 20/40 OU. Extraocular motility was full with the exception of limited supraduction OU. Anterior and posterior segment examinations
were unremarkable with the exception of early nuclear sclerosis. He had bilateral blepharoptosis with a margin reflex distance (MRD) of 1 mm
OD and 3 mm OS. Exophthalmometry measurements were 17 mm OU. Visual field testing was normal. MRI showed bilateral lacrimal gland and
extraocular muscle enlargement. [Figure 4b] PET scan demonstrated abnormalities in both orbits and the right submandibular area. Multiple
abnormal areas were also identified in the chest, most densely within the right hilum. [Figure 4c] Biopsies of the right orbital and
submandibular masses were consistent with RLH. Patient #2, pretreatment: (a) External photograph demonstrating bilateral proptosis (b)
Pretreatment axial (left) and coronal (right) orbital MRI demonstrating bilateral infiltration involving the lacrimal glands (c) PET scan
demonstrating increased metabolic activity of the right submandibular space (left) and at multiple focal areas in the chest (right).
Multiple bilateral mediastinal foci are seen and likely represent lymph node involvement Two cycles of rituximab (370 mg/m2) were given. The
patient responded promptly with normalization of most findings: proptosis improved to 14 mm OD and 13 mm OS, supraduction returned to
normal, and blepharoptosis improved with MRD of 2.5 OD and 3.5 OS. MRI showed marked reduction in the soft tissue infiltrate of the lacrimal
glands and extraocular muscles. PET scan no longer demonstrated any abnormal uptake. Sixteen months following initial treatment, the patient
returned with recurrent symptoms. MRI demonstrated increased orbital infiltration and PET scan identified increased activity within the
submandibular, hilar, and mediastinal lymph nodes. Following repeat rituximab therapy, the patient was again asymptomatic and remains so 9
months following treatment. Although variable success has been reported in the management of orbital RLH;5–7 this is the first report
specifically addressing orbital involvement in widespread RLH. In this study we present two patients with systemic with orbital involvement.
Although clinical resolution was achieved with rituximab, in both patients, recurrent disease necessitated maintenance therapy. This
recalcitrant disease emphasizes the limitations of rituximab therapy and could arguably be interpreted as failure. However, both of our
patients responded to subsequent rituximab therapy and remain clinically asymptomatic years after presentation. Until definitive treatment
of widespread RLH is available, rituximab remains a viable option for such patients. Source(s) of Support: Supported in part by an
unrestricted grant to the Wilmer Ophthalmological Institute from Research to Prevent Blindness Inc, New York Conflict of Interest: None
declared
