Abscess formation of the falciform ligament is incredibly rare and perplexing when encountered for the first time. It is reported to occur
in the setting of cholecystitis and cholangitis, but the pathophysiology is poorly understood. In this case report, we present a 73-year-old
man with falciform ligament abscess following cholangitis from an obstructive ampullary carcinoma. The patient was referred to the Royal
Adelaide Hospital from a country hospital, with progressive jaundice, anorexia and nausea. Prior to transfer, he deteriorated with
cholangitis, dehydration and renal failure. On arrival, his abdomen was exquisitely tender along the course of the falciform ligament. His
blood tests revealed an elevated white cell count of 14.9 x 103/μl, bilirubin of 291μmol/l and creatinine of 347 μmol/l. His CA 19-9 was
markedly elevated at 35,000 kU/l. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) demonstrated gross biliary dilatation and a collection tracking
along the path of the falciform ligament to the umbilicus. The patient was commenced on intravenous antibiotics and underwent an urgent
endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP) with sphincterotomy and biliary stent drainage. Cholangiogram revealed a grossly dilated
biliary tree, with abrupt transition at the ampulla, which on biopsy confirmed an obstructing ampullary carcinoma. Following ERCP, his
jaundice and abdominal tenderness resolved. He was optimized over 4 weeks for an elective pancreaticoduodenectomy. At operation, we found
abscess transformation of the falciform ligament. Copious amounts of pus and necrotic material was drained. Part of the round ligament was
resected along the undersurface of the liver. Histology showed that there was prominent histiocytic inflammation with granular acellular
eosinophilic components. The patient recovered slowly but uneventfully. A contrast CT scan undertaken 2 weeks post-operatively
(approximately 7 weeks after the initial CT) revealed left portal venous thrombosis, which was likely to be a delayed discovery and was
managed conservatively. We present this patient’s operative images and radiographic findings, which may explain the pathophysiology behind
this rare complication. We hypothesize that cholangitis, with secondary portal pyaemia and tracking via the paraumbilical veins, can cause
infectious seeding of the falciform ligament, with consequent abscess formation. Abscess formation of the falciform ligament is incredibly
rare and perplexing when encountered for the first time. It has been reported to occur in the setting of cholecystitis and cholangitis, but
the pathophysiology of this occurrence is poorly understood. In this case report, we present a 73-year-old man with falciform ligament
abscess following cholangitis from an obstructive ampullary carcinoma, whose clinical presentation we believe sheds light on the
pathophysiology of falciform abscess formation. A 73-year-old man was referred to the Royal Adelaide Hospital from a country hospital, with
a 2-week history of progressive jaundice, anorexia and nausea. Prior to transfer, the patient deteriorated with worsening jaundice,
cholangitis, tachycardia, dehydration and renal failure. His comorbidites included morbid obesity, hypertension and a blind left eye from
previous trauma. On arrival, his abdomen was exquisitely tender to palpation and percussion along the upper midline, with tenderness along
the liver margin. The patient’s blood tests demonstrated an elevated white cell count of 14.9 x 103/μl, bilirubin of 291μmol/l and
creatinine of 347 μmol/l. His CA 19-9 was markedly elevated at 35,000 kU/l. A non-contrast computed tomography (CT) was performed due to
renal failure. This demonstrated gross biliary dilatation and a collection that appeared to track along the path of the falciform ligament
to the umbilicus (Figure 1A). CT abdomen. (A) The enlarged gall bladder (red arrow head) and dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts (red
arrow). A fluid collection is seen tracking from the liver along the path of the falciform ligament (white arrow) to a collection on the
anterior abdomen (white arrow head). (B) Operative view of the rind of thickened inflammatory falciform tissue (black arrow) after abscess
drainage. The patient was commenced on intravenous antibiotics, and underwent an urgent endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram (ERCP)
with sphincterotomy and biliary stent drainage. Cholangiogram revealed a grossly dilated biliary tree, with abrupt transition at the
ampulla. There was no evidence of contrast leakage from the intrahepatic biliary radicles. Biopsy confirmed an obstructing ampullary
carcinoma. He recovered well following ERCP, and his jaundice and abdominal tenderness settled. He was treated with antibiotics and was
optimized over 4 weeks for an elective pancreaticoduodenectomy. At operation, we found abscess transformation of the falciform ligament.
Copious amounts of pus and necrotic material was drained (Figure 2). The enveloping layers of the falciform ligament had formed a thick rind
extending from the umbilicus to the liver (Figure 1A). Part of the round ligament was resected along the undersurface of the liver (Figure
2B). Histology showed that there was prominent histiocytic inflammation with granular acellular eosinophilic components. No organisms grew
on culture. Operative view. (A) Necrotic tissue excised from the round ligament. (B) The eventually resected round ligament. A contrast CT
scan was performed at 2 weeks following pancreaticoduodenectomy (approximately 7 weeks after the initial non-contrast CT scan). This
demonstrated resolution of his collection and evidence of left sided portal thrombosis, which extended into the left portal branches (Figure
3). The left sided portal thrombosis was likely to have been a delayed discovery and was managed conservatively without anticoagulation. The
patient recovered slowly but uneventfully and remained well at 8 months follow-up. Postoperative CT abdomen with contrast showing left
portal venous thrombosis (arrows) on axial and sagittal views. Pathologic lesions of the falciform ligament were first described in 1909 and
there have been few reports in the literature since. Falciform ligament abscess presents a difficult and perplexing problem when encountered
clinically for the first time. It has been reported to occur in the setting of cholecystitis , cholecystolithiasis and cholangitis . The
pathophysiology of this occurring secondary to cholecystitis or cholangitis is poorly understood . Biliary infection or thrombophlebitis may
spread via the portal venous system. In general, the cholecystic veins flow directly into the portal vein and the pericholedochal venous
system . We suspect that this patient may have had left sided portal pyaemia secondary to cholangitis, with spread of this infection via the
paraumbilical veins to the falciform ligament, resulting in abscess formation. The paraumbilical vein is most relevant in portal
hypertension, when recanalization of the paraumbilical vein enables spontaneous portosystemic collateralization, known as Cruveilhier-
Baumgarten syndrome . The paraumbilical vein originates from the umbilical portion of the left portal vein in the falciform ligament, and
heads towards the umbilicus and periumbilical veins . This patient’s left sided portal vein thrombosis may have been a consequence of
thrombophlebitis from cholangitis . This was managed without anticoagulation since it was likely to have been a delayed finding from his
initial septic process, 7 weeks prior. The thrombosis extended into the portal branches of the left portal vein, and the patient was
asymptomatic with no clinical consequence from this, both at time of discovery and after. The abscess in this patient may have been
sterilized following his initial treatment with biliary drainage and intravenous antibiotics, which would explain why culture and
histological assessment did not reveal bacterial contamination. Falciform ligament abscess should be considered as a rare but important
complication of biliary tract obstruction and infection. In this setting, it may present with upper midline abdominal pain. Diagnosis is
largely made on imaging and treatment may be surgical, although improvement with endoscopic biliary drainage and antibiotics was effective
in this case. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images. CT:
Computed tomography; ERCP: Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatogram. The authors declare that they have no competing interest. All
authors were involved in the care of the patient and reviewed and edited the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
We would like to acknowledge Dr Tony Pearce for the operative images. This case has been presented as a poster in the Australian Health and
Medical Research Congress 2012.
