Pseudomembranous necrotizing bronchial aspergillosis (PNBA) is a rare form of invasive aspergillosis with a very poor prognosis. The
symptoms are non-specific, and the necrotizing plugs cause airway obstruction. Atelectasis and respiratory failure can be the initial
manifestations. Recently, we treated an immunocompromised patient with PNBA, who presented with a sudden onset of atelectasis and acute
respiratory failure. There were no preceding signs except for a mild cough and one febrile episode. Bronchoscopy revealed PNBA, and
Aspergillus nidulans was cultured from the bronchial wash. Pseudomembranous necrotizing bronchial aspergillosis (PNBA) is a rare
manifestation of Aspergillus infection. Since the first report of this condition in a patient with hemophilia and acquired immune deficiency
syndrome , most cases have occurred in immunocompromised patients , and it is identified in an immunocompetent host only rarely . The
clinical manifestations are usually non-specific, and include fever, cough, chest pain, hemoptysis, and dyspnea . On physical examination,
wheezing may be a sign of PNBA, since the necrotizing material produced can cause airway obstruction. However, initial suspicion of PNBA is
uncommon since wheezing has many other possible causes. Clinicians might thus neglect consideration of PNBA and delay diagnosis, resulting
in a poor treatment outcome . Thus, a high index of suspicion and early diagnosis are important. We recently treated an immunocompromised
patient with PNBA who presented with a sudden onset of atelectasis and acute respiratory failure. A 39-year-old female with a diagnosis of
acute myeloid leukemia with multi-lineage dysplasia was treated with induction chemotherapy including idarubicin (12 mg/m2 for 3 days) and
cytarabin (100 mg/m2 for 7 days). She failed to achieve complete remission, and was referred to our hospital for salvage chemotherapy, which
was carried out with a FLAG-Ida regimen (fludarabine 30 mg/m2 for 5 days, cytarabin 2 g/m2 for 5 days, and idarubicin 12 mg/m2 for 3 days,
with granulocyte colony-stimulating factor support). While the patient had neutropenia due to bone marrow suppression after chemotherapy,
she had no episodes of febrile neutropenia. On the 21st day after chemotherapy, she complained of a mild cough. There was no fever and her
breathing sounds were smooth on auscultation. Two days later the patient developed a fever of 38.3℃; however, her physical examination was
unremarkable. We initiated empirical antibiotics, with cefepime 1 g q 12 hours and vancomycin 1 g q 12 hours for febrile neutropenia. Her
chest X-ray showed a focal atelectasis (Fig. 1). The following morning, the patient complained of a sudden onset of dyspnea. Her vital signs
were as follows: blood pressure 100/60 mmHg, heart rate 102 beats/min, respirations 32/min, and body temperature 37.0℃. By auscultation,
breath sounds were nearly absent in the left-lung field. Laboratory findings, including arterial blood gas analysis, showed severe hypoxia
and pancytopenia: pH 7.47, PaCO2 29.9 mmHg, PaO2 32.5 mmHg, HCO3 21.3 mmol/L, saturation 67.7%, hemoglobin 7.4 g/dL, white blood cell count
100/µL, absolute neutrophil count 0/µL, and platelet count 25,000/µL. Chest X-rays showed a diffuse radiopaque density with volume decrease
of the entire left-lung field, suggesting the development of total left-lung atelectasis (Fig. 1). The patient was transferred to the
intensive care unit and mechanical ventilator support was provided. Fiber-optic bronchoscopy revealed a large quantity of necrotic material
at the distal trachea. The orifice of the left main bronchus was not visible because of a large quantity of grayish necrotic material
covering the opening of the main bronchus (Fig. 2A). Bronchoscopic biopsy, at the necrotic membrane, was performed. Due to suspicion of
PNBA, we started intravenous administration of amphotericin B (0.5 mg/kg/day for the first day, 0.75 mg/kg/day on the subsequent day, and 1
mg/kg/day for the following 8 days). Serum galactomannan was also positive, with a level of 2.0 (normal range, 0 to 0.5). Biopsy of the
necrotic membrane revealed the presence of fungus with hyphae suggestive of Aspergillus (Fig. 2B). In spite of vigorous treatment in the
intensive care unit for 5 days, the lung lesions rapidly progressed with worsening hypoxia. This infection was likely associated with the
patient's persistent neutropenia, which was characterized by an absolute neutrophil count < 100/µL. We changed the antifungal agent to
voriconazole due to the poor response to amphotericin B. Voriconazole was administered at 6 mg/kg q 12 hours for the loading dose and 4
mg/kg q 12 hours for the maintenance dose. However, respiratory distress progressed and the patient died 3 days later. Culture of the
bronchial washing yielded Aspergillus nidulans. Aspergillosis is a common opportunistic infection in immunocompromised patients; it is
usually transmitted by the inhalation of spores . Pulmonary aspergillosis is characterized by four major clinical syndromes, as follows: 1)
invasive pulmonary aspergillosis, 2) chronic necrotizing aspergillosis, 3) aspergilloma, and 4) allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis .
PNBA is an unusual clinical form of invasive aspergillosis . Most cases of PNBA occur in patients with a hematologic malignancy. However,
some cases are associated with other chronic diseases, including chronic obstructive lung disease, diabetes, and lupus . Therefore, the
predisposing factors associated with the occurrence of PNBA include malignancy, AIDS, neutropenia for more than 3 weeks, transplant
recipient status, and treatment with immune suppressive and cytotoxic drugs . Acute leukemia and myelodysplastic syndrome with prolonged
neutropenia are also risk factors for invasive aspergillosis. Thus, PNBA was a possible etiology, in this patient, from the first signs of
respiratory failure and radiological abnormalities. However, her clinical presentation was atypical for PNBA due to the presence of only a
mild cough and a small amount of whitish sputum, and only a single febrile episode prior to acute respiratory failure. Thus, the
presentation was abrupt and progressed rapidly with no prior signs. When we first noted her acute respiratory failure and abnormal X-ray
findings, a massive pulmonary hemorrhage could not be excluded, because of her low platelet count. In a few previous reports of Aspergillus
tracheobronchitis, chest radiographic findings showed atelectasis rather than infiltration . However, the patients reported previously had
preceding signs, including cough, dyspnea, and fever that persisted for a few days, and their clinical courses were not as rapid as that of
our case. The present patient did not complain of dyspnea prior to acute respiratory failure. Bronchoscopy is the diagnostic procedure used
for PNBA . The most pathognomonic feature is the presence of a well-defined pseudomembrane covering the bronchial tree . Thus, immediate
bronchoscopy could facilitate early diagnosis of PNBA. Among the PNBA cases reported previously, the most common Aspergillus species was
Aspergillus fumigates . A few cases were associated with other Aspergillus spp.: Aspergillus flavus , Aspergillus niger , and Aspergillus
terreus . In our case, A. nidulans was cultured from the bronchial wash fluid. Infections by A. nidulans are relatively rare even in
immunocompromised hosts. The standard treatment is aggressive antifungal therapy with amphotericin B, liposomal amphotericin B,
voriconazole, or itraconazole . One study reported topical amphotericin B application in patients with bronchial aspergillosis . Recently,
novel strategies for the early treatment of invasive fungal infections have been reported . Currently, voriconazole is considered for
initial therapy of invasive aspergillosis . A. nidulans and A. terreus are frequently resistant to amphotericin B . Thus, amphotericin
B-based treatment could result in failure of treatment for A. nidulans and A. terreus infections. We used amphotericin B as the initial
therapy, and changed to voriconazole due to the patient's poor response. A. nidulans was cultured after the patient died. Although the main
treatment is an antifungal agent, penetration into the pseudomembranous necrotizing material is poor, so bronchoscopic removal might be an
effective aid to treatment . In this case, bronchoscopic removal was attempted, but failed. Aspergillus tracheobronchitis is fatal in about
40% of cases despite appropriate therapy; a higher mortality rate, of above 90%, is reported in the PNBA subgroup. Another study reported an
overall mortality rate of 80%, and 94% in ventilated patients . This case report illustrates atypical manifestations of PNBA. When sudden
atelectasis is found in an immunocompromised patient, especially in association with a hematologic malignancy, physicians should consider
the possibility of PNBA, as this might be its initial manifestation. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported.
(A) Subsegmental atelectasis in the left mid-lung zone (arrows). (B) The atelectasis had rapidly progressed on the following day, together
with development of left total lung atelectasis. Bronchoscopic appearance of pseudomembranous Aspergillus tracheobronchitis. The opening of
the left main bronchus was completely obliterated by mucosal necrotic inflammation; however, (A) the opening of the right main bronchus was
intact. (B) Degenerated Aspergillus hyphae were observed (H&E, × 200).
