A 39-year-old female with elevated serum cobalt levels from her bilateral hip prostheses presented with a 3-week history of blurred vision
in her left eye. Optical coherence tomography revealed patchy degeneration of the photoreceptor-retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) complex.
The lesions were hypofluorescent on indocyanine green angiography. We postulate that this is a case of implant-related chorio-retinal cobalt
toxicity. Cobalt toxicity, although rare, is an emerging problem given the increasing number of cobalt-alloy prostheses used for joint
replacement in particular metal-on-metal hip implants. Ocular, cardiac, nervous, and endocrine manifestations have been reported in
association with implant-related cobalt toxicity. Ophthalmic complications in humans, namely optic nerve atrophy, have been described in
patients with toxic serum levels of cobalt. Chorio-retinal damage, however, has only been documented in animal studies. Here, we present a
case of chorio-retinal changes presumably caused by implant-related toxic serum levels of cobalt. A 39-year-old female with bilateral
development dysplasia of the hips, for which she had undergone bilateral hip replacements (ASR™ Hip System, DePuy Orthopaedics , Warsaw, IN,
USA) 2 and 5 years ago, presented with a 3-week history of a paracentral scotoma in her left eye and bilateral ocular discomfort. She also
complained of occasional metallic taste in her mouth and early morning nausea. She denied taking any medication and was not aware of any
occupational exposure to toxic substances. She had no other significant medical or ocular history. The family history was unremarkable. The
type of implant present in this patient has recently been recalled owing to wear-related toxic cobalt and chromium release and hazardous
metallosis. On examination, the patient had good central visual acuity of 20/16 in both eyes. No relative afferent pupillary defect was
noted. Intraocular pressures were within normal limits. Both anterior segments and fundi were unremarkable under slit lamp examination and
indirect fundoscopy. Automated visual field testing (Humphrey 24-2) did not reveal any visual field defect. The patient proceeded to have a
high-resolution optical coherence tomography (OCT) scan, which showed several circumscribed lesions of the outer retina at the level of the
retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and the photoreceptors [Fig. 1]. These patchy lesions were hypofluorescent on indocyanine green (ICG)
angiography [Fig. 2] but could not be demonstrated with fluorescein angiography. The thickness map showed diffuse mild thickening of the
macula, predominantly perifoveal. a and b represent retinal thickness of the right and left eye, respectively. Perifoveal diffuse thickening
is seen in the left eye. c. The infrared image reveals multiple hyporeflective lesions. d. The OCT shows discrete lesions with thinning of
the photoreceptor-RPE complex (arrows) The ICG angiography shows numerous hypofluorescent lesions in the affected eye Electrophysiology
testing was also performed. Occipital pattern reversal visual evoked potentials were recorded for right and left eyes, monocularly using
standard 35’ checks and also with the very small 9’ checks. The responses were well developed with normal latencies for both eyes. No
significant interocular or interoccipital asymmetries were noted. Cutaneous electroretinograms were recorded using a Color Dome Ganzfeld
stimulator and lower eyelid electrodes without pupil dilation. Dark adaptation was standard for 20 minutes. Electroretinograms were well
developed for both eyes with responses for the left were generally of slightly lower amplitudes in comparison to the right. Pattern
electroretinograms recorded using 140’ check reversal stimulation (4/s) showed equal and well developed responses for both eyes. The
electro-oculograms were well developed with a well-defined dark trough and light peak. The light peak was higher for the right eye compared
to the left. The Arden index was satisfactory for the right eye (2.9) whereas borderline normal for the left eye (1.9). Laboratory testing
showed elevated serum cobalt and chromium levels, 757 nmol/L (0-20 nmol/L), and 595 nmol/L (10-200 nmol/L) respectively at the time of
presentation. Physician assessment did not reveal any signs of other system involvement and electrocardiograph and thyroid function tests
were within normal limits. The diagnosis of toxic chorio-retinal degeneration presumably secondary to toxic serum levels of cobalt was made.
The patient was advised to monitor her vision with the Amsler grid. No progression was noted on subsequent reviews, one and six months
later. Thorough examinations by her orthopedic surgeon confirmed a good functional result of the implants. The serum cobalt and chromium
levels remained stable. Given the lack of clinical progression, no intervention was considered necessary as yet. The patient continues to
have regular follow-up with her family doctor, orthopedic surgeon, and ophthalmologist. The retina, one of the most metabolically active
tissues in the body, requires a continuous oxygen supply to maintain optimal function. Photoreceptor cells found in the outermost layers of
the retina rely mainly on choroidal blood supply. The high demand for oxygen renders these cells particularly vulnerable to hypoxia. Hence,
choroidal ischemia will lead to hypoxic injury of the outer retina and consequently photoreceptor degeneration. Cobalt chloride is a
hypoxia-mimicking compound, which exerts hypoxia-like effect on the local retina microenvironment. Several animal studies have shown that
toxic level of cobalt will induce photoreceptor degeneration. Hara et al. reported photoreceptor cell degeneration following intravitreal
cobalt chloride injection in both rat and mouse retinas. Monies et al. experimentally demonstrated choroidal vessel obliteration and
alteration in the photoreceptor nucleus in rabbit retinas after intraperitoneal cobalt chloride injection. We postulate that toxic serum
cobalt concentrations have a similar effect on the human retina and can cause retinal degeneration. In our patient, degenerative alterations
of the photoreceptor-RPE complex were noted on OCT. The ICG angiography findings were suggestive of choroidal infarction. The distribution
of the lesions noted on ICG angiography corresponded with the OCT findings and was consistent with patient's paracentral scotomas.
Satisfactory visual evoked potentials and pattern electroretinograms indicated normal ganglion cells and optic nerve function. The
electroretinograms showed a tendency toward slightly reduced amplitudes in left eye responses and the electro-oculograms findings suggested
reduced RPE function in the left eye. Mild RPE dysfunction in the left eye demonstrated by electrophysiology testings reinforced our
clinical diagnosis. The asymmetric ocular manifestation may be explained by differences in choroidal perfusion, which can vary between eyes.
Asymmetric presentation had also been previously described for systemic lead toxicity. We believe that this is the first case report of
implant-related cobalt toxicity to the outer retina. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: No.
