We report an anterior megalophthalmos case with decreased corneal thickness and show the findings using Scheimpflug imaging. A 25-year-old
male was diagnosed with anterior megalophthalmos. In both eyes, enlarged corneal length was measured. Beside a comparatively good visual
acuity, a thin but clear cornea, a fairly deep anterior chamber, and central lens opacity were found. Scheimpflug images were taken using
Pentacam HR. Scheimpflug-based imaging can provide us new data at the examination of this syndrome affecting the whole anterior segment. In
case of simple megalocornea, the enlargement of the cornea is a unique finding. Mostly, it is a bilateral, non-progressive state, with a
good visual acuity and common with-the-rule astigmatism. Corneal diameter ranges between 13.0-16.5 mm, corneal thickness is normal, cornea
is clear. The anterior chamber depth is increased. The lens-iris diaphragm positioned posteriorly, the intraocular pressure is at normal
range. The phrase “anterior megalophthalmos” was used by Vail for the first time to describe bilateral anterior segment enlargements, which
was not accompanied by increased intraocular pressure. However, in case of anterior megalophthalmos, an enlarged lens–iris diaphragm can be
found next to the megalocornea, and gonioscopy reveals that the ciliary body band is wider than the trabecular meshwork and scleral spur
(=enlarged ciliary ring and crystalline lens). Besides the aforementioned, central mosaic corneal dystrophy, iridodonesis, iris stromal
hypoplasia, phacodonesis caused by zonular streching, ciliary body dysplasia, ectopia lentis, cataract, posterior embryotoxon, excessive
mesenchymal tissue in the angle, glaucoma (not congenital), vitreoretinopathy predisposing to retinal detachment are well-known findings. In
literature, it is our study that reports an anterior megalophthalmos case for the first time, which was conducted using Scheimpflug camera.
The interest of the case is the decreased corneal thickness that has not been mentioned before. Our aim was to describe a case of a
25-years-old male diagnosed with anterior megalophthalmos in both eyes and present the usefulness of Pentacam HR in such a case. At birth,
the lengths of both corneas of the proband were found specifically enlarged. At examination under anesthesia, buphthalmus was excluded with
intraocular pressure measurement and optic disc examination. Ultrasound biomicroscopy and topography were done at the age of 15. Pentacam HR
measurements were done at the age of 25 of the patient. He had a visual acuity of 15/20 and 14/20 with myopic correction at the age of 25.
Anterior and posterior keratometry map was done with Pentacam HR (Oculus, Wetzlar, Germany) in both eyes. Anterior keratometry values were
40.4/41.4 D on the right eye, 40.2/41.9 D on the left eye. Posterior keratometric data were -5.5/-5.7 D on the right eye, -5.8/-5.3 D on the
left eye [Fig. 1]. At corneal aberration examination, the total RMS (root mean square) was 132.71 μm in the right eye and 134.26 μm in the
left eye, the spherical aberration value was 4.51 μm and 5.16 μm. Anterior and posterior keratometry map obtained with Pentacam HR in both
eyes. Image was taken at the age of 25 At slit lamp examination, an optically clear cornea was detected. The horizontal diameter of the
cornea was 17.0 mm in both eyes [Figs. 2–4] at the age of 1, 9, and at the age of 25, too. Corneal pachymetry maps were obtained with
Pentacam HR using the Scheimpflug imaging method, which showed a central pachymetry value of 390 μm and a corneal thickness between 450-500
μm in the periphery [Fig. 5] in both eyes. Specular microscopy (EM-1000, Tomey) measured endothelial counts of 2450 cell/mm2 in both eyes.
Anterior megalophthalmos at the age of 1. Corneal diameter is 17 mm Bilateral anterior megalophthalmos. Image was taken at the age of 9.
Significantly increased corneal diameter can be seen Anterior megalophthalmos. Image was taken at the age of 3. Clear cornea and the
significantly deep anterior chamber can be seen Scheimpflug picture of anterior megalophthalmos. Scheimpflug picture and corneal pachymetry
map shows the cornea thinner than the average. The extreme depths of the anterior chamber on both eyes are clearly shown The anterior
chamber was found deep measured with ultrasound, 7.24 mm in the right eye and 7.47 mm in the left eye. Ultrasound biomicroscopy (HT 35-50
UBM system, Ophthalmic Technologies Inc.) (which was done at the age of 15) showed anterior chamber depth of 7.95 mm and 7.9 mm [Fig. 6].
With Pentacam HR, 8.04 mm anterior chamber depth was measured in the right eye, and 8.31 mm in the left eye, the volume of the chamber was
721 mm3 in the right eye and 742 mm3 in the left eye. The angle of the chamber measured with Pentacam HR is an average of 50.70 and 54.90
(between 34.50 és 58.70 degree in both eyes) in the right and left eye [Fig. 5]. Ultrasound biomicroscopy picture in case of anterior
megalophthalmos: The similar images taken of both eyes show the really deep anterior hall and central lens opacities Significant
iridodonesis was observed, but phacodonesis was not detected. Central opacity was observed in the lens in both eyes, of which ultrasound
biomicroscopy images were taken [Fig. 6]. The thicknesses of the lens were 3.61 and 3.43 mm in the right and left eye, measured with
ultrasound biomicroscopy. Indirect gonioscopy detected wide ciliary band, dense pigmentation was observed on the trabecular meshwork in both
eyes [Fig. 7]. Wide ciliary ring can be observed on both eyes with indirect gonioscopy The axial length was 28.4 mm in the right eye and
29.06 mm in the left, the vitreous index (vitreous length/axial length x100) was 61.8% in the right eye and 62.5% in the left eye.
Intraocular pressure was within normal interval in both eyes. No fundus deviation was found. Only few readings have been published on
anterior megalophthalmos in literature. Among the image scanning methods, only ultrasound biomicroscopy examinations have been performed so
far. During Scheimpflug imaging used by us, the lens of the device is tilted relative to the film plane, so the lens plane, film plane, and
the plane of focus are not parallel to one another. The 3 planes intersect in a common straight line. Due to this configuration, anterior
segment structures (lying in the same plane of focus) from the corneal surfaces to surface of the lens can be sharply focused. This type of
imaging causes distortion of measurements in the photographs. The high-resolution Scheimpflug system used by us automatically corrects data
of the anterior and posterior corneal surfaces for optical and geometric distortion, so all data presented by Pentacam HR are valid. The
anterior segment rotating Scheimpflug camera rotates along the optical axis of the eye. This device uses 475 nm monochromatic blue light for
imaging, the camera captures 25, 50, or 100 scans in 2 seconds with 2760 measuring points. The software allows for automatic analysis of the
anterior segment, anterior and posterior topography of the cornea, pachymetry, calculation of the chamber angle, volume, chamber height
(anterior chamber depth), and analysis of the lens. Finally, the instrument creates a 3D model of the anterior segment. Scheimpflug analysis
demonstrates clearly that the cornea is uniformly thinner than the normal and aberrometric values, such as spherical aberration are high.
The depth of anterior chamber and also the angle of the chamber can be observed with Pentacam HR. We would like to demonstrate that all
anterior segment parameters can be obtained with an easy, noncontact device. In many cases, anterior megalophthalmos involves cataract, as
in our case, too. Beside central lens opacities, our patient had relatively good and acceptable visual acuity, so no cataract surgery was
needed. In these cases, the application of a cataract surgery and precise biometry is rather complicated. Beside cataract surgery, a few
study reported photorefractive keratectomy performed in case of anterior megalophthalmos and penetrating keratoplasty conducted due to a
developed bullous keratopathy. In summary, anterior megalophthalmus is a rare disease affecting the whole anterior segment, in whose
detailed description Scheimpflug imaging can play an important role. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: No.
