Long-term complications of sympathomimetic drug overdosing have not been adequately investigated in infants and young children. Despite
reports discouraging their use in children, these formulations are frequently administered for “cold-like symptoms”. Their frequent adverse
events are different forms of arrhythmias, including multifocal atrial tachycardia. A 3-year-old toddler developed multifocal atrial
tachycardia following an iatrogenic overdose of epinephrine accidentally administered intravenously. His ECG showed wandering atrial
pacemaker (p-waves with different origins and configurations) that persisted for at least one year. This event demonstrated the sensitivity
of young children to the sympathomimetic drugs, especially overdosing. Health care providers and parents should be warned of toxicities
associated with sympathomimetic drug overdosing. Future studies are needed to determine whether wandering atrial pacemaker is a potential
long-term complication of high-dose sympathomimetics. Sympathomimetic drugs are known to induce arrhythmias, including multifocal atrial
tachycardia, re-entry tachycardia, atrial fibrillation and wandering atrial pacemaker . The mechanism is thought to be due to sinus node and
atrial tissue sensitivity to α- and β-adrenergic stimuli as well as to decreased cardio-vagal reflex. The mechanisms involve autonomic
transmitters, changes in impulse formation, conduction and refractoriness . Supraventricular tachycardia may induce left ventricular
dysfunction and cardiomyopathy, which are usually reversible once the tachycardia resolves . Multifocal atrial tachycardia and wandering
pacemaker have already been reported in association with sympathomimetic drug overdosing . Multifocal (chaotic) atrial tachycardia is
defined as multiple distinct P-wave morphologies, irregular P-P intervals and isoelectric baseline between P-waves with a rapid ventricular
rate. Patients with a wandering atrial pacemaker are usually asymptomatic and have irregularly irregular rhythm. The normal heart rate in
wandering atrial pacemaker differentiates this condition from multifocal atrial tachycardia . Multifocal atrial tachycardia has been
described in association with respiratory viruses . The fate of the aberrant atrial electrical activity is unknown. This report describes a
toddler with iatrogenic intravenous epinephrine overdose. This accidental exposure resulted in a lasting wandering atrial pacemaker. A
previously healthy 3-year-old boy (weight 17.5 kg and height 102.5 cm) presented with viral laryngo-tracheobronchitis (croup). His initial
heart rate was 120 beats per minute (bpm). One milligram epinephrine was administered via a nebulizer without significant changes in his
heart rate. As respiratory symptoms persisted, a second dose of epinephrine (1 mg) was prescribed, but was inadvertently administered by
intravenous push into a peripheral line. This amount was approximately 6-times the recommended dose (0.01 mg/kg body weight). The child
suddenly developed facial flushing, tachycardia (187 bpm), hypertension (110/75 mmHg), hypoxemia (O2 saturation 90% in room air) and
worsening of his dyspnea. There was neither gallop nor hepatomegaly. Chest x-ray showed increased vascular markings, which improved after a
dose of furosemide. The child developed multifocal atrial tachycardia with multiple distinct P-wave morphologies, irregular P-P intervals,
isoelectric baseline between P-waves and rapid ventricular rate (187 bpm). The QRS complex ≤ 100 ms and ST-segment elevation ≥ 3 mm were
evident on the rhythm strip (Figure 1, upper panel). Tachycardia persisted for about 12 hours although the wandering pacemaker persisted
after normalization of the heart rate. This was confirmed on 24-hour Holter tape recording from 12 to 36 hour after the IV epinephrine
administration; the ventricular rate and QRS duration were normal. ECG (Figure 1, lower panel) and 24-hour Holter tape recording at 2, 12
and 18 months showed persistent wandering pacemaker with normal QRS duration and ventricular rate (about 100 bpm). ECG findings.Upper panel,
rhythm strip (lead II) immediately after the intravenous injection of epinephrine, showing a heart rate of 187 bpm, multifocal atrial
tachycardia and ST elevation of 4 mm. Notice the different P-wave morphologies; flat (junctional), negative and positive p-waves are evident
(arrows). Lower panel, ECG (leads II and V5) two months later showing a ventricular rate of 115 bpm and persistent wandering atrial
pacemaker. The same findings were present at 12 and 18 months. During the acute episode, echocardiogram showed normal heart structure and
ventricular function. Serum Troponin-T and creatine kinase-MB were also normal. His vital signs (including heart rate and blood pressure),
O2 saturation and ECG were closely monitored. His blood pressure normalized 4 hours after the epinephrine dose. He received a dose of
intravenous furosemide and oxygen supplementation. He was discharged after 48 hours with normal vital signs. Another cardiac event noted in
this patient was an elevated ST-segment (~4 mm, a sign of coronary spasm), Figure 1. Fleming et al. have published evidence-based centile
charts from birth to 18 years of age for normal heart rates . Between 1 and 5 years, the heart rate (mean ± SD) is 109 ± 14 bpm for males
and 108 ± 15 bpm for females. The corresponding values for infants are 132 ±12 bpm and 135 ± 14 bpm . Thus, the heart rate noted for this
patient (187 bpm) was 5 SD above the mean. Children with marked tachycardia (≥4 SD) should be monitored (vital signs, pulse oximetry and
ECG). Serum troponin-T, serum creatine kinase-MB and chest x-ray may be necessary based on clinical and ECG findings. Echocardiography is
also needed to rule out underlying cardiac pathology. Treatment with adenosine, beta-blockers or calcium-channels blockers should be
individualised. Therapeutic interventions are justified in symptomatic children (e.g., heart failure, chest pain and dyspnea), persistent
tachy-arrhythmia, ischemic changes on ECG or abnormal serum cardiac biomarkers. In specific cases, electrophysiological studies may be
necessary to rule out sinus node re-entry or right atrial tachycardia. Follow-up by a pediatric cardiologist may be necessary, especially in
the presence of abnormal ECG. This report illustrates the potential seriousness of sympathomimetic overdosing. Young children are especially
vulnerable due to high-sensitivity of their sinoatrial node and atrial tissue to catecholamines. The wandering atrial pacemaker in this
patient could be a long-term consequence, since it persisted at least 18 months after the incident. The epinephrine overdose as the cause of
his p-wave abnormality (wandering atrial pacemaker) could not be confirmed: as he had no ECG prior to the episode, this finding may have
existed before the administration of epinephrine. We can only speculate that the multifocal atrial tachycardia present during the acute
episode, instead of resolving, persisted and lead to a wandering atrial pacemaker. This sequel could result from a significant damage to the
SA-node or atrial tissue, which persisted for at least 18 months. Sympathomimetics overdosing might be relatively common in infants and
children, since these medications are frequently used in emergency settings and also at home because of their availability “over-the-
counter”. Health care providers and parents should be warned of toxicities associated with sympathomimetic drugs. Future studies are needed
to determine whether wandering atrial pacemaker is a potential long-term complication of high-dose sympathomimetics. There are no potential,
perceived, or real conflicts of interest. No financial or non-financial interests. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript.
EHA collected and analyzed the patient’s data, including the ECG and played a major role in writing the manuscript; HN aided in the editing
of the manuscript. A-KS played a major role in writing the manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/13/1/prepub Written consent was obtained from the father, for all teaching and academic purposes,
namely for publication of study. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
