Sunitinib interacts with radiation therapy, leading to synergism of the toxicities of these treatments. Radiation recall pneumonitis is a
rare but serious complication of targeted therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitors. The case of a patient with metastatic renal cell cancer
(RCC) who developed recall pneumonitis on the first cycle of systemic sunitinib treatment is reported here. A 65-year-old man with RCC and
bone metastasis underwent radiation therapy on his thoracic vertebrae (Th5-8) with a total dose of 24 Gy. Sunitinib (37.5 mg) was started 14
days after completing the radiation therapy. On the 14th day of sunitinib treatment, the patient developed progressive fever with worsening
of dyspnea and general weakness. Treatment with pulse administration of prednisolone 1,000 mg for 3 days was initiated. Thereafter, the
symptoms and the radiological findings regarding the interstitial filtration gradually improved over 7 days. To our knowledge, this is the
first report of early onset recall pneumonitis during sunitinib therapy. At present, how sunitinib interacts with radiation therapy remains
unclear. The possibility that tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy, including with sunitinib, after radiation therapy may lead to adverse
effects should be kept in mind. Renal cell cancer (RCC) is the most lethal of the urological malignancies, and its incidence is currently
increasing . Recently, several new targeted agents were introduced in the clinical treatment of metastatic RCC. One of these agents,
sunitinib, is an orally administered tyrosine kinase inhibitor with multiple targets, including vascular endothelial growth factor receptor
(VEGFR)-1, VEGFR-2, VEGFR-3, platelet-derived growth factor receptor (PDGFR)-α, and PDGFR-β. Sunitinib is one of the most widely prescribed
drugs for the treatment of metastatic RCC . The adverse effects of sunitinib include fatigue, bone marrow suppression, hand-foot syndrome,
stomatitis, hypertension, and hypothyroidism . Interstitial lung disease is a rare but serious complication of targeted therapy with
tyrosine kinase inhibitors, including sunitinib. The case of a patient with metastatic RCC who developed recall pneumonitis on the 14th day
of systemic sunitinib treatment is described here. There is currently only one report of recall pneumonitis during sunitinib therapy in the
literature . The time of onset in that case was quite different from that in the present case. A 65-year-old man with clear cell RCC and
lung metastasis was initially treated by right nephrectomy on November, 2011 (pT2b, N0, M1). On January, 2012, during the follow-up period,
bilateral lower limb paralysis occurred due to spinal compression from RCC bone metastasis (Figure 1A). He underwent radiation therapy on
his thoracic vertebrae (Th5-8) with a total dose of 24 Gy that was divided into six fractions (Figure 1B and C). Sunitinib (37.5 mg) was
started 14 days after completing the radiation therapy. On the 14th day of sunitinib treatment, the patient complained of high fever and the
chest CT disclosed bilateral lung consolidation (Figure 2A). At this time, blood culture examinations did not reveal any significant
bacteria or fungi, and serum levels of anti-cytomegalovirus antibody, pulmonary surfactant protein-D, and sialylated carbohydrate antigen
KL-6 were within the normal range. Although he was observed without sunitinib administration, the patient developed progressive fever with
worsening of dyspnea and general weakness (Figure 2B). Treatment with pulse administration of prednisolone 1,000 mg for 3 days was initiated
along with antifungal agent (voriconazole) and antibiotic (meropenem hydrate) treatment. After the steroid pulse therapy, the symptoms
gradually improved over 7 days. The radiological findings revealed that the interstitial filtration was localized within the previously
irradiated area (Figure 2C). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with radiation recall pneumonitis that was induced by sunitinib. During
the treatment, serial sputum specimen and blood culture examinations did not reveal any significant bacteria or fungus. The patient
recovered from the interstitial lung disease completely during the 2 months of follow-up (Figure 2D). Currently, he is undergoing targeted
therapy with another tyrosine kinase inhibitor, sorafenib, with no evidence of relapse of the tyrosine kinase inhibitor-associated recall
pneumonitis. The patient underwent radiation therapy for spinal bone metastasis. The spinal compression from the RCC bone metastasis (A).
The irradiated region is shown in the horizontal section (B) and the coronal section (C). Radiation recall pneumonitis induced by sunitinib.
On the 14th day of sunitinib induction, bilateral lung consolidation appeared (A). During follow-up without sunitinib, consolidation
developed along with progressive fever (B). After steroid pulse therapy, the CT findings revealed that the interstitial filtration was
localized in the previously irradiated area (C). No evidence of relapse of recall pneumonitis during sorafenib treatment was observed (D).
The radiation recall phenomenon has been reported in the skin, lung, and mucosa . Causal agents have been reported to be cytotoxic agents,
including actinomycin D, gemcitabine, taxanes, and anthracyclines, and the estrogen receptor antagonist tamoxifen . In most cases,
dermatitis is reported. Radiation recall pneumonitis appears to be relatively rare. The mechanism of the recall response remains to be
clarified. It has been proposed that it is the result of the inhibition of cellular recovery by cytotoxic agents after damage caused by
radiation . It is possible that prevention of angiogenesis by sunitinib reduces the recovery from the radiation-induced cell damage.
Alternatively, radiation injury may induce hypersensitivity to sunitinib . Alternatively, radiation injury may induce hypersensitivity to
sunitinib . A case of interstitial pneumonitis during targeted therapy with sunitinib is reported here. Pulmonary damage commonly occurs
with doses more than 30 Gy and usually develops 1–6 months after cessation of radiation therapy to the lung. In the present case, the total
dose of the radiation that was administered to the patient was only 24 Gy. Since the volume of lung that received more than 20 Gy (V20) was
only 2% (Figure 1C) and the patient had received radiation therapy within one month before the onset of the pneumonitis, it was considered
to be unlikely to be radiation-induced pneumonitis. Therefore, it was concluded that the pneumonitis was recall pneumonitis induced by
sunitinib. There is currently only one report of recall pneumonitis during sunitinib therapy . In that report, a female patient with RCC
developed pneumonitis more than 6 months after sunitinib induction and the completion of radiation therapy (30 Gy: 5 fraction) . Her
pneumonitis resolved completely when the dose of sunitinib was reduced (from 50 mg/day to 37.5 mg/day); steroids were not administered .
Thus, this case differs from the present case in terms of the time of onset, the radiation dose that was administered, and the severity of
the pneumonitis. Although how sunitinib interacts with radiation therapy remains unclear, this interaction may lead to synergistic
toxicities. There has been a report of lethal small bowel perforation after radiation for lumbar metastasis during sorafenib administration;
moreover, the case of a lethal bronchial fistula that occurred after radiation for mediastinum lymph node metastasis during sunitinib
therapy was published . The current knowledge about the combination of tyrosine kinase inhibitors with radiation therapy has been reviewed
by Niyazi et al. . At present, it seems that none of the tyrosine kinase inhibitors have been approved for simultaneous use with radiation
therapy. In conclusion, a case of early onset recall pneumonitis during targeted therapy with sunitinib was reported here. At present, how
sunitinib interacts with radiation therapy remains unclear. The possibility that tyrosine kinase inhibitor therapy, including with
sunitinib, after radiation therapy may lead to adverse effects should be kept in mind. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Series
Editor of this journal. RCC: Renal cell cancer; VEGFR: Vascular endothelial growth factor receptor; PDGFR: Platelet derived growth factor
receptor. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Conception and design: TY; Manuscript writing: TY; Final approval: SK,
GS, SY, KK, KM, TK, SH, and JY; Pathological explorations: NI; Patient’s management: TY, SK, GS, SY, JY; All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2407/13/3/prepub The
work was partly supported by the Smoking Research Foundation, the Takeda Science Foundation, and Grants-in-Aid for Scientific Research from
the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology, Japan.
