Yilmaz M followed up and treated the patient and drafted the manuscript. Kaptanogullari OH and Erturk K performed data collection and wrote
the manuscript. Caliskan C performed the radiological examinations. Arar AS, Akgol C, and Unsal A followed-up and treated the patient.
Leriche syndrome, also referred to as aortoiliac occlusive disease, results from thrombotic occlusion of the abdominal aorta immediately
above the site of its bifurcation (1). The characteristic symptoms include intermittent bilateral claudication with ischemic pain and absent
or diminished femoral pulses, along with pallor, coldness and fatigue of both lower extremities, and inability to maintain penile erection
(1). Risk factors include hyperlipidemia, hypertension, diabetes mellitus, and smoking (2). Physical examination reveals weak or absent
femoral and distal pulses. Pathologically, the most common cause of Leriche syndrome has been found to be luminal narrowing of the abdominal
aorta and/or iliac arteries by atherosclerotic obstruction (3). The syndrome typically begins at the distal aorta or common iliac artery
origins and slowly progresses proximally and distally over time (4), rarely affecting the visceral or renal arteries (5). In this paper, we
report a patient with Leriche syndrome who suffered from bilateral renal artery occlusion-induced resistant hypertension and could not be
treated by revascularization procedures or angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) blockade. Eventually, maintenance hemodialysis (HD) was
initiated, with accompanying renin-angiotensin blockers, to control the hypertension. A 53-year-old male patient was admitted to the
outpatient clinic with a history of uncontrolled hypertension despite antihypertensive treatment, consisting of diltiazem 120 mg qd,
amlodipine 10 mg qd, and doxazosin 4 mg qd. The patient stated that he suffered from bilateral calf and buttock claudications with a 100-m
walk as well as erectile dysfunction. He had been a heavy smoker (40 pack-years) but never experienced angina. He did not suffer from
diabetes or hypercholesterolemia. The patient's brachial, radial, ulnar, and femoral pulses were palpable bilaterally; however, his dorsalis
pedis, tibialis posterior and popliteal pulses were absent. There was no evidence of atrophic or ischemic changes in the lower extremities.
Carotid bruits were heard on both sides of the neck, and an audible bruit was noted over the left renal artery. His blood pressure was
190/90 mmHg, and grade-2 hypertensive retinopathy was found. Blood chemistry analysis revealed a urea level of 108 mg/dl and a creatinine
level of 3.6 mg/dl; serum triglycerides, cholesterol, glucose, HbA1c, and other biochemical parameters were within normal limits. The tests
for AT III and proteins C and S were negative. Ultrasonography revealed that the right kidney was 95.6 mm, with a cortex width of 13.8 mm;
the left kidney was 69.9 mm, with a cortex width of 8.8 mm. The echogenicity was increased in both kidneys. Color Doppler ultrasonography
did not detect blood flow in either renal artery. A 40-60% carotid stenosis was diagnosed bilaterally. Doppler ultrasonography revealed high
resistance and normal triphasic waveforms in the bilateral subclavian, axillary, brachial, radial and ulnar arteries. Magnetic resonance
angiography (MRA) revealed aortoiliac occlusive disease (Leriche syndrome), concurrent with severe bilateral stenosis of the renal and
common iliac arteries. MRA also demonstrated significant collateral circulation (Figure 1). Tc99m DTPA perfusion scintigraphy revealed a
delay in the initiation of perfusion and a deterioration of function in both kidneys, particularly in the left kidney (Figure 2). A two-
dimensional transthoracic echocardiography revealed mild left atrial enlargement (LAd: 4.3 cm) and concentric left ventricular hypertrophy.
The patient was hospitalized due to uncontrolled hypertension. A balloon angioplasty and stenting procedure via the axillary artery was
attempted. However, the aortography revealed complete occlusion of the abdominal aorta immediately below the superior mesenteric artery
(SMA), and the renal arteries could not be observed (Figure 3). An attempt to introduce the catheter into the renal arteries using a 0.035
inch nitinol guide was unsuccessful; thus, the procedure was terminated. By-pass grafting was discussed with the patient, with an emphasis
on the high risk of the procedure and the potentially limited beneficial effects. Valsartan (at a dosage of 80 mg/day) was added to the
current antihypertensive therapy. A very close follow-up was indicated. A dramatic drop in blood pressure was observed the next day;
however, the renal function continued to deteriorate, with urea and creatinine levels escalating up to 298 and 8.5 mg/dl, respectively. The
valsartan was withdrawn, which resulted in a decrease in urea and creatinine levels to 234 and 4.6 mg/dl, respectively. As soon as the
valsartan was stopped, the patient's blood pressure again increased up to 200/110 mmHg, despite conventional antihypertensive treatment
without ACE blockade. Considering that ACE blockade improved the patient's uncontrolled hypertension but deteriorated kidney function, the
patient was enrolled in a maintenance hemodialysis program. An ACE-inhibitor (ramipril 2.5 mg/day) was initiated, which resulted in a
dramatic improvement in blood pressure. He was discharged in good clinical condition with no subjective complaints and was placed on a
thrice-weekly hemodialysis regimen. Leriche syndrome, which is characterized by the triad of claudication, decreased pulses due to
aortoiliac occlusion and impotence, mostly occurs in men and is generally diagnosed between 40 and 60 years of age (6,7). The occlusion is
usually due to atherosclerotic plaques in the aorta with associated thrombi. Because the progression of the disease is slow and collaterals
develop, limb-threatening ischemic disease does not tend to occur (8). In our patient, because arterial perfusion of the lower extremities
was achieved via arterial collaterals, there were no atrophic or ischemic changes in the lower extremities. Leriche syndrome typically
begins at the distal aorta or common iliac artery origins and slowly progresses proximally and distally over time. This progression is quite
variable but may ultimately extend to the level of the renal arteries or result in complete aortic occlusion (4). Proximal propagation of an
occlusive distal aortic thrombus to the suprarenal level is rare (9). Bergen and Trippel (10) suggested that aortic thrombosis may progress
to involve one or both renal arteries in 3-15% of patients with distal aortic occlusion. As it progresses, the thrombosis may gradually
encroach upon a renal artery and cause increasingly severe hypertension. The patient in this case had uncontrolled blood pressure and
bilateral renal artery occlusion, with an occlusion of the abdominal aorta below the SMA. MRA was indicated for imaging the renal
vasculature; however, the risk of nephrogenic systemic fibrosis was quite high for this patient. The possible benefits and drawbacks were
first discussed extensively among the attending doctors, and it was decided that the potential benefits outweighed the risks. Afterward, the
risks were discussed with the patient, and only after having his verbal consent, the MRA was performed using Dotarem (gadoterate meglumine),
which is least likely to cause nephrogenic systemic fibrosis (11). Revascularization of the renal arteries should be considered a radical
treatment modality in all cases of renal artery stenosis; renal angioplasty combined with stenting is the preferred procedure (12-14).
Because successful revascularization via the brachial or axillary artery has been reported in the literature (15-17), we attempted to place
a stent in the renal arteries bilaterally via the axillary artery; however, the procedure was unsuccessful because the catheter could not be
introduced into the occluded segment. Another option may be to place a by-pass graft between the proximal and distal segments of the
stenotic region. However, this option was abandoned because the patient did not give consent for the intervention when he was informed about
the risks of the operation. At this time point, we were faced with the dilemma of either leaving the patient with the risks of hypertension,
which was resistant to conventional antihypertensive medications, or administering an ACE blockade medication, despite the risks of acute
kidney injury superimposed on chronic renal failure. After discussing the options with the patient, we decided to administer the
angiotensin-II receptor blocker valsartan at a dosage of 80 mg/day. His blood pressure decreased rapidly to 110/70 mmHg; however, acute
renal function deterioration superimposed on chronic renal failure developed. This acute renal dysfunction could be due to nonspecific
effects of hypotension, which may have caused a sudden deterioration in kidney perfusion. In contrast, the dysfunction may have been due to
ACE inhibition-related acute renal failure due to bilateral renal artery stenosis. The incidence of significant azotemia complicating ACE
inhibition therapy in patients with renovascular disease is uncertain. ACE inhibitor-induced renal failure has been reported in 23% of
patients with bilateral renal artery stenosis and in 38% of patients with only one kidney with a stenotic artery (18). This problem is
usually reversed by stopping the ACE blockade, although some patients may suffer from permanent renal failure. After stopping the valsartan,
the previous clinical/laboratory findings (i.e., hypertension and moderately high levels of serum urea and creatinine) reversed. At this
time point, the initiation of maintenance hemodialysis was inevitable. This strategy provided the opportunity to control volume overload
while also applying an ACE blockade to satisfactorily control blood pressure. This patient deserves special mention because the only way to
manage his condition was to initiate HD and prescribe an ACE inhibitor. The patient was discharged with well-controlled hypertension, but he
would need thrice-weekly HD for the rest of his life. In conclusion, in patients with Leriche syndrome and bilateral renal artery occlusion,
hemodialysis accompanied by antihypertensive therapy with a renin-angiotensin blocker may be inevitable if renal revascularization is not an
option. No potential conflict of interest was reported. Magnetic resonance angiography of the abdominal vessels, which reveals total
occlusion of the abdominal aorta just below superior mesenteric artery. The lower extremities and the abdomen are perfused by means of the
collateral arteries. A Tc99m DTPA perfusion scintigraphy revealed a delay in the initiation of perfusion and deterioration of function for
both kidneys, affecting left kidney particularly. An AP view of the abdominal aorta by aortography. The distal portion of the a. mesenterica
superior (SMA) is completely occluded. The proximal of the SMA, the coeliac truncus and its branches can be seen clearly.
