Zhu J and Xi EP wrote the manuscript first draft. Zhu SB, Liu Y, Jiang W and Xia F contributed to the patient treatment and took part in the
care of the patient. Liu Y participated in data collection and analysis. Zhu J conceived the study and performed the literature search. Xi
EP revised the manuscript. Zhu SB was the first surgeon who provided clinical expertise, reviewed the manuscript and approved the manuscript
final version. Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) is a rare hematologic syndrome. It is a multisystem disorder characterized by
microangiopathic hemolytic anemia and thrombocytopenia and may be accompanied by fever and renal or neurologic abnormalities (1,2). Most
adult patients acquire (3) the disease as a result of autoantibodies against ADAMTS13 (i.e., idiopathic TTP), or it is observed in
association with collagen vascular disease, bone marrow transplantation, systemic sclerosis, infections, polymyositis, pregnancy, or drug
treatment, including cyclosporine, tacrolimus, ticlopidine, and antineoplastic agents (i.e., non-idiopathic TTP) (1,4). However, TTP
associated with mitral valve replacement surgery has not been reported. In this paper, we describe a case of a 41-year-old female who
developed acute TTP after mitral valve replacement surgery. The patient was treated with plasma exchange (PE) and recovered following an
uneventful course. A 41-year-old woman with a four-year history of shortness of breath and chest tightness was admitted to our hospital for
evaluation. Echocardiography revealed mitral valve stenosis (mitral valve area 1.06 cm2) as a result of rheumatic heart disease. The patient
underwent mitral valve replacement via a right atriotomy with a mechanical mitral valve (tissue annulus diameter of 27 mm; St. Jude Medical,
St. Paul, Minnesota USA). Cardiopulmonary bypass lasted for 115 minutes, and the aortic clamp time was 43 minutes. Postoperative
echocardiography revealed satisfactory valve function and confirmed the successful removal of the intracavitary lesion. Cefoxitin (3 g/day)
was initiated on postoperative day 1 for prophylaxis. A complete blood count (CBC) was obtained daily and revealed a low platelet count
(Table 2) on day 2. Platelets (400 ml) were transfused, but the patient developed fever (Table 1), and the platelet count dropped
continuously (Table 2). In addition, the patient developed neurological symptoms and subcutaneous ecchymosis. A blood biochemical analysis
revealed a serum lactate dehydrogenase of 821 U/L and 7.7 μmol/L total bilirubin (direct bilirubin, 2.1 μmol/L; indirect bilirubin, 5.6
μmol/L). Her urine exam was positive for protein (3+), leukocytes (normal), hemoglobin (2+), and bilirubin (1+). A direct Coombs test was
negative, and PT and aPTT were within the normal range. Liver and renal function tests were normal. Physical examinations of the
cardiovascular and respiratory systems and abdomen were normal. Abdominal ultrasonography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance
imaging of the brain revealed no abnormalities. The patient was diagnosed with acquired TTP and received a bolus of dexamethasone (10 mg),
an infusion of a high volume of fresh frozen plasma, and a red blood cell transfusion. However, the patient did not respond adequately.
Until eight hours after one-volume (2000 ml fresh frozen plasma) PE was treated, the patient's body temperature began to normalize, and her
neurologic and respiratory parameters improved. The patient was discharged after an additional eight days of hospitalization without plasma
exchange. TTP is a rare hematologic emergency with an abrupt onset, and it is potentially fatal. It is clinically characterized by five
typical symptoms: hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, renal impairment, fever, and neurological disorders. Although TTP is associated with a
severe deficiency of ADAMTS13 activity (5), measurements of ADAMTS13 activity are not required to conclusively confirm the diagnosis (6).
Therefore, the diagnosis of TTP is based on the presenting clinical features (1). As in this case, there is typically insufficient time to
evaluate ADAMTS13 activity, and a prompt diagnosis of TTP is critical for initiating treatment and reducing patient mortality. Mitral valve
replacement is one of the best treatments for mitral stenosis. It has been performed successfully with excellent results and limited
complications. The major complications of mitral valve replacement surgery include postoperative bleeding, ischemic stroke, myocardial
infarction and death. This is the first case report of TTP as a complication of mitral valve replacement surgery. Although ADAMTS13 activity
was not measured in our case, the clinical course was not affected by PC transfusion, and the rapid response to plasma exchange supports the
TTP diagnosis. We will follow up this case and evaluate plasma ADAMTS13 activity and autoantibodies to exclude the possibility of hereditary
ADAMTS13 deficiency, which is extremely rare, or acquired autoantibodies against ADAMTS13, which often persist despite clinical resolution
or remission (7). Daily plasma exchange remains the mainstay of treatment for acquired TTP regardless of its etiology (1). However, plasma
infusion once every two weeks appears to be sufficient for hereditary TTP (8). Our patient recovered with one plasma volume and showed a
good clinical outcome, with a normal temperature and improvement of neurological and respiratory parameters eight hours later. The course
over the next eight days of hospitalization was uneventful and did not require a second plasma exchange. Although the occurrence of TTP
associated with mitral valve replacement surgery is extremely rare, it is important to recognize TTP as a cause of thrombocytopenia and
hemolytic anemia in any patient with mitral valve replacement surgery. The prompt initiation of treatment with plasma exchange remains the
cornerstone of TTP treatment. Despite the prognosis of TTP associated with mitral valve replacement surgery, the schedule for PE remains
poor, and further studies are necessary to improve the management of this disease. The authors thank X. Long Zheng at The Children's
Hospital of Philadelphia and University of Pennsylvania for his careful revision of the manuscript. No potential conflict of interest was
reported. Patient body temperature over the course of treatment. Patient platelet counts over the course of treatment.
