Giant inguinoscrotal hernias are rare but still exist even in developed countries. Although accompanied by a higher perioperative mortality,
an elective surgical approach should be undertaken. In critically ill patients, however, the surgical intervention requires specific
demands. We report a case of a 45-year-old man who was referred to the hospital after perforation of the hernia with concomitant peritonitis
and sepsis. After initial stabilization of the patient, a subtotal colectomy and a partial small bowl resection was performed. In a second
step after stabilization of organ functions, the hernia sac was resected, and the abdominal cavity was reconstructed. The patient was
discharged and is doing well until today but still refuses any plastic surgery. Resection of giant inguinoscrotal hernia is feasible even in
patients being administered in an emergency setting. Especially in case of an intra-abdominal infection, intestinal resection is the therapy
of choice to allow the reconstruction of the abdominal cavity. A two-step approach should be considered to allow a successful recovery. A
well-known complication of groin hernias is the increase in size advocating an early surgical treatment. However, in rare cases, patients
refuse operative procedures. As a consequence, giant inguinoscrotal hernias develop. Over the past, different surgical repairs have been
suggested. In this report, we now present a patient who initially refused surgery with subsequent scrotal perforation and septic
complication followed by emergency hernia repair. A 45-year-old man was taken to the emergency ward. Fourteen months before, he presented
with a giant inguinoscrotal hernia but refused surgery. He was now recovered from his apartment due to his inability to walk by a gradually
loss of strength and progressive increase of his hernia that now reached the calves. Within the last months, he used a small wagon to
transport his hernia leading to an ulcer continuously discharging putrid liquid. Clinical and blood tests revealed a systemic inflammatory
response syndrome with impairment of coagulation, anemia, severe hyponatremia, and a complete left-sided pleural effusion. Within the
following hours, intubation and catecholamine therapy became necessary, and the patient was transferred to the intensive care unit.
Excluding acute ischemia, the CT scan (Fig. 1) revealed a complete dislocation of the small and the large bowel, descending of the duodenum
and the pancreas, and intra- and extrahepatic cholestases and confirmed the congestion of the right kidney as initially seen on ultrasound.
The ureter descended into the hernia sac and was dilated up to its return into the abdominal cavity.Fig. 1Representative CT scan showing
dislocation of intra-abdominal organs from ventral to dorsal (left to right) Representative CT scan showing dislocation of intra-abdominal
organs from ventral to dorsal (left to right) Within the next 5 days, the patient was further stabilized, and surgery was attempted.
Exploration of the abdominal cavity showed signs of peritonitis. Within the hernia sac, purulent liquid remained, and the penis was
identified intra-abdominally. In a first step, the majority of the mobile large bowel (ascendens down to the sigmoideum) and distal parts of
the ileum (200 cm behind the ligament of Treitz) were resected. After 48 h of stabilization, the majority of the hernia sac was resected.
Identification of the testes was not possible. Due to the inability to close the fascia and due the inflammatory situation, the abdominal
cavity was reconstructed using absorbable mesh grafts (Fig. 2).Fig. 2Patient prior to first (above) and after second operation (below)
Patient prior to first (above) and after second operation (below) During the following days, the patient recovered slowly. Mobilization was
complicated by an a priori existing lesion of the nervus peroneus and a polyneuropathia. Five weeks after the initial surgery, the patient
could be discharged from the hospital. In the following rehabilitation program, he regained the ability to walk and care for himself again.
Until today, he refused any further plastic reconstruction. Giant inguinoscrotal hernias might be considered as negligible. However, they
still occur, even in developed countries, and then present a challenging surgical problem. Defined as the extension below the midpoint of
the inner thigh in the standing position,1 giant inguinoscrotal hernias still vary widely in their size and appearance. Depending on the
comorbidities of the patients, different surgical approaches have been reported. They are all sharing the same strategy of relocating the
organs into the abdominal cavity that have lost their “right of domain” without increasing the abdominal pressure excessively and thus
reducing the venous return or a compromising of the pulmonary or cardiac function. In the past, two general principles have been advocated.
On the one hand, the abdominal space is increased by (1) progressive pneumoperitoneum,2,3 (2) abdominal wall separation,4 or (3) combined
mesh and flap techniques (including mesh repair to create an abdominal wall defect for increasing the intra-abdominal capacity).5,6 On the
other hand, abdominal organs are resected to reduce the size of organs that need to be relocated.7 Endoscopic techniques have been reported
but should be assessed very critically.8 The enlargement of the abdomen by pneumoperitoneum, in general, showed to be a valid method.
However, in very large giant hernias, it failed several times.9,10 In situations of infected hernia sac, pneumoperitoneum should be
avoided,11,12 and a stepwise procedure has previously been suggested.13 In these special situations, nonabsorbable meshes should be avoided
due to their potential infection.14 Orchiectomy of non-necrotic testis is still controversy discussed as chances of testicular torsion or
infection, or even recurrence is increased if left in place.15 With regard to the resection of the hernial sac, the development of scrotal
hematoma and/or massive lymphedema is possible.9 Otherwise, redundant scrotal skin has the possibility to save as a safety net in case of
recurrence of increased intra-abdominal pressure.10 Accompanied by an increased mortality rate, surgery should be advocated even for giant
inguinoscrotal hernias. In septic patients, the inflammatory focus needs to be resected. An initial stabilization is advantageous if
incarceration can be ruled out. To reconstruct the abdominal cavity, a two-step procedure should be pursued to allow a recovery from the
initial resection and to regain organ function. To further reduce surgical trauma and operation time, subtle plastic reconstruction should
be performed after complete recovery.
