Possible complications of parotid gland surgery are numerous, just as the reasons for aneurysms of the superficial temporal artery. The
occurrence of such an aneurysm as a consequence of parotidectomy, however, has so far only been published once. Here, we report of an
aneurysm of the superficial temporal artery following parotid gland surgery. It presented as a pulsating mass in the preauricular region.
Combining clinical examination, duplex ultrasound, and CT scan, the diagnosis was readily established and treated with a circumscribed
revision at low risk and without complications. To treat benign or malignant tumors of the parotid gland, generally a parotidectomy is
performed. Despite sophisticated surgical techniques, the occurrence of complications is not uncommon. Their incidences depend on the
underlying disease and thereby on the extent and the severity of the surgical procedure. Common complications include paralysis or palsy of
the facial nerve, Frey’s syndrome, parotid fistula, hematoma, infection, and hypoesthesia (for review, see Marchese-Ragona et al.) . The
development of an arterial aneurysm is, however, not typically seen after surgical treatment, with the exception of vascular catheterization
and vascular surgery. In 75 % of cases, the aneurysm of the superficial temporal artery results from blunt trauma and is the most common
(85 % of cases) traumatic aneurysm in the head and neck region . A recent review reported a total of 166 superficial temporal artery
aneurysms published from 1861 to December 2010 . Preferential sites of occurrence are the zygomatic arch and above the linea temporalis,
where the vessel is exposed to higher mechanical stress due to the close vicinity to the bone. Clinically, a slowly growing pulsating tumor
can be found within a few weeks to month after the trauma. For the diagnosis, duplex ultrasound, CT, and MRI as well as angiography can be
used. The differential diagnosis includes benign and malignant neoplasms, infection, abscess formation, and arteriovenous fistula of the
facial nerve. The aneurysm can be treated by compression, by surgery, by embolization via vascular intervention catheter, or by direct
injection of thrombin [4, 5]. In 2010, Bernstein et al. were the first to publish the observation of an aneurysm of the superficial temporal
artery as a complication of parotid surgery. In this report, a pseudoaneurysm had developed in a 61-year-old male patient 4 weeks after
superficial parotidectomy, which was treated by excision . A 46-year-old male underwent surgery of the left parotid gland due to
cystadenolymphoma. After a postoperative interval of 6 weeks free of complications, a pulsating tumor of the preauricular region had
developed. Complaints included a feeling of pressure, sharp pain, and recurrent swelling. The lesion was found to be an aneurysm of the
superficial temporal artery by using duplex ultrasound (Fig. 1) and a contrast enhanced spiral CT scan of the head (Fig. 2). The aneurysm
was treated by circumscribed revision surgery of the upper parotid region under general anesthesia. Afferent and efferent vessels were
identified and ligated. The aneurysm was then excised to prevent any further discomfort (Fig. 3). After surgery, no further complications,
particularly no facial nerve paralysis, were observed, and the patient was dismissed on the second day after surgery. The following
histopathological analysis revealed, as expected, a false aneurysm of approximately 10 mm in diameter. It was almost completely filled-out
by a thrombus consisting of layered fibrin and erythrocytes (Fig. 4).Fig. 1 a Two-dimensional B-mode ultrasound images showing the size of
the aneurysm measured to be approximately 13 × 8 × 11 mm. b, c Duplex and Doppler scan visualizing the pulsating blood flow of the
aneurysmFig. 23-D reconstruction of contrast enhanced spiral CT scan of the head showing the aneurysm located in the left preauricular
region. The perfused part of the aneurysm measures approximately 6 × 7 mm in size and is fed by the relatively strong superficial temporal
arteryFig. 3The aneurysm was removed by revision surgery of the upper parotid region. a Location of aneurysm (circle) and intended incision
(line) have been marked. b Operative view before mobilization. c Higher magnification of operative view before removal of the aneurysm with
the draining vessel being liftedFig. 4 a On the cut surface, the resected specimen showed an aneurysmatic dilation (asterisk) of the
superficial temporal artery (arrow) which was almost completely filled-out with thrombotic material. b, c On microscopic examination, the
thrombus was attached to the intima (asterisk) and comprised layered erythrocytes and fibrin, leaving only a small lumen (hematoxylin–eosin,
×20, ×40) a Two-dimensional B-mode ultrasound images showing the size of the aneurysm measured to be approximately 13 × 8 × 11 mm. b, c
Duplex and Doppler scan visualizing the pulsating blood flow of the aneurysm 3-D reconstruction of contrast enhanced spiral CT scan of the
head showing the aneurysm located in the left preauricular region. The perfused part of the aneurysm measures approximately 6 × 7 mm in size
and is fed by the relatively strong superficial temporal artery The aneurysm was removed by revision surgery of the upper parotid region. a
Location of aneurysm (circle) and intended incision (line) have been marked. b Operative view before mobilization. c Higher magnification of
operative view before removal of the aneurysm with the draining vessel being lifted a On the cut surface, the resected specimen showed an
aneurysmatic dilation (asterisk) of the superficial temporal artery (arrow) which was almost completely filled-out with thrombotic material.
b, c On microscopic examination, the thrombus was attached to the intima (asterisk) and comprised layered erythrocytes and fibrin, leaving
only a small lumen (hematoxylin–eosin, ×20, ×40) A tumorous swelling in the preauricular region following parotid surgery can occur for
different reasons. Especially hematoma, seroma, abscess, a local recurrence of the tumor, or neuroma of the great auricular nerve have to be
considered . In the case presented here, it was the clinical presentation that led to the diagnosis of an aneurysm. Due to the pulsation of
the tumor, a process other than vascular could be excluded. However, in case of extensive thrombus formation within the aneurysm, the
pulsating character of the swelling can be difficult to detect or completely lacking. Hence, in addition to the clinical examination, at
least duplex ultrasound investigation should be performed to clarify the nature of the observed complication. Treatment of such a
pseudoaneurysm is recommended to prevent expansion harboring the risk of bleeding as well as persisting complaints. We preferred a surgical
revision to embolization in order to gain local control and at the same time minimizing risk. The revision surgery was performed under
general anesthesia to minimize the risk of damage to the facial nerve. Since the most common reason for aneurysms of the superficial
temporal artery is blunt trauma, one might assume a sharp injury to the wall of the vessel during surgery as the underlying event in this
case. In 2010, Bernstein et al. reported a similar case of an aneurysm of the superficial temporal artery occurring 4 weeks after
superficial parotidectomy, also suggesting an intraoperative trauma to the vessel. Although in both so far observed and published cases the
aneurysms emerged after superficial parotidectomy, we would expect the likelihood of injury to the superficial temporal artery to be higher
in surgery of cranial inner lobe tumors because of the greater probability to come in close contact with the vessel. In conclusion, the
occurrence of a false aneurysm of the superficial temporal artery following parotid surgery is an extremely rare event. It can be easily
detected using noninvasive diagnostic methods. Treatment should be carried out either by revision surgery or by embolization of the artery.
