The pathology of postoperative granulomatous peritonitis is poorly understood, but a hypersensitivity reaction may be a likely mechanism. A
patient's history is important, because surgeons should be aware of this rare cause of ascites. Granulomatous peritonitis may indicate a
number of infectious, malignant, and idiopathic inflammatory conditions. It is a very rare postoperative complication, which is thought to
reflect a delayed cell-mediated response to cornstarch from surgical glove powder in susceptible individuals. This mechanism, however, is
much more likely to occur with open abdominal surgery when compared with the laparoscopic technique. We report a case of sterile
granulomatous peritonitis in an 80-y-old female after a laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Management was conservative, and no relapse was
observed after over 1-y of follow-up. We propose that peritoneal exposure to bile acids during the laparoscopic removal of the gallbladder
was the trigger of granulomatous peritonitis in this patient. Severe complications, such as peritoneal adhesions, intestinal obstruction,
and fistula formation, were observed, but no fatalities were reported. We should be aware of this rare cause of peritonitis in the surgical
setting. Granulomatous peritonitis has been described as a rare postoperative complication with clinical presentations, varying from life-
threatening ascites to mild and nonspecific abdominal pain.1 Histologically, this disorder is characterized by a granulomatous reaction that
is thought to reflect a delayed cell-mediated response in individuals hypersensitive to cornstarch.1 This indefinable condition is often
confused with a malignancy, and a wide spectrum of infectious and noninfectious causes of peritoneal involvement need to be ruled out. The
clinical relevance of granulomatous peritonitis is still undefined in the field of laparoscopic surgery, and its pathophysiology also
remains uncertain. We report the case of a patient with severe, self-remitting granulomatous peritonitis following laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. An 80-y-old woman presented with a 2-wk history of lower abdominal pain, low-grade fever, and progressive abdominal
swelling. A laparoscopic cholecystectomy had been performed 20 d earlier to remove gallstones; no gross bile contamination of the peritoneum
or any obvious bile leaks were detected. In addition, no peritoneal or omental nodules were observed at that time. The postoperative course
was unremarkable except for poor glycemic control that was managed with intravenous fluids and regular insulin. The patient was discharged
free of symptoms 5 d after surgery. Her medical history included hypertension and diabetes that were controlled with glimepiride and
ramipril. She denied taking any other drugs, including over-the-counter drugs, recreational medications, or herbal remedies, and had no
personal or family history of gastrointestinal and liver disorders, serositis, or allergies. Physical examination was normal except for a
distended and diffusely tender abdomen with a shifting dullness. White blood cells (WBCs) were 12.8 × 103/L (normal, 4–10 × 103/L) with a
normal differential value, erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 90mm/hr, and C-reactive protein levels were 12mg/dL (normal <0.5mg/dL). The
remaining variables, including enzymes and liver and kidney function tests, were normal. An electrocardiogram and a transthoracic
echocardiography were also normal. Ultrasonography, computed tomography, and magnetic resonance imaging revealed abundant ascites and
diffuse thickening of the omentum. A paracentesis value of 1500mL showed that ascitic fluid contained 8200WBCs/mm3, with a normal
differential and no malignant cells. Bacterial, mycobacterial, and fungal culture and staining, were negative. Since abdominal swelling and
tenderness were deteriorating, we performed a laparoscopy with a midline incision that revealed a large amount (4000mL) of green, turbid
fluid in the peritoneal cavity along with diffuse and nodular thickening of the peritoneum and omentum. Microscopy of peritoneal biopsies
showed many noncaseating, eosinophil-rich granulomas with sparse multinucleated foreign body giant cells, lymphocytes, and macrophages
(Figure 1). Starch granules, vasculitis, and thrombosis were not present. There were also no signs of viral cytopathic effects or
intracellular parasites. Special stains and cultures for microorganisms were also negative. Full-thickness biopsy specimen of the
peritoneum. Fibrous-adipose tissue fragments partially lined by mesothelial cells with epithelioid giant cells granulomas (arrow) (Panel A,
hematoxylin and eosin, 5 x). A higher-power view (40 x) shows numerous eosinophils (arrows), which are characteristically deep pink on
staining with hematoxylin and eosin (Panel B). After administering furosemide (50 mg daily) and spironolactone (100 mg daily for 2 wk), the
patient recovered and no longer showed symptoms. Ultrasonography showed no ascites and diuretics were gradually tapered and interrupted
after 6 wk. One year later, the patient was examined and appeared well with no evidence of ascites or active serositis. Massive ascites was
caused in this patient by a sterile granulomatous peritonitis that developed a few weeks after a minor laparoscopic cholecystectomy. She had
no prior liver disease or any other risk factors for ascites. We also ruled out infectious, malignant, and idiopathic inflammatory
conditions, including tuberculosis, sarcoidosis, Crohn's disease, Wegener's granulomatosis, and lymphoproliferative disorders that may
suggest granulomatous peritonitis. Clinical and pathological features as well as the timeline of the condition we observed in our patient
were similar to those described in other reports on this rare postoperative complication.1 Of note is that only one previous report
describes a patient who underwent a laparoscopic cholecystectomy.2 The true extent of the incidence of postoperative granulomatous
peritonitis is unknown, because milder cases may go undetected. Laparoscopic surgery may affect both the integrity and biology of the
peritoneum through a range of different mechanisms. Examples are increased abdominal pressure, insufflation of gases, most notably CO2, use
of dissection devices, duration of procedure and temperature shifts, ultimately leading to peritoneal hypoxia, acidosis, and cell
apoptosis.3 There is evidence from experimental models that a pneumoperitoneum, particularly if created with either CO2 or helium, may
downregulate the inflammatory response after laparoscopic surgery through decreased production and release of proinflammatory cytokines,
such as tumor necrosis factor-α and interleukin-1 and increased production of transforming growth factor-β.4–6 CO2 pneumoperitoneum may also
be associated with an increased formation of postoperative adhesions.7 Despite these advances in our knowledge of peritoneal metabolism and
immunology, the pathophysiology of postoperative granulomatous peritonitis remains poorly understood with a hypersensitivity reaction being
the most likely mechanism.8 Spillage of bile, sludge, or gallstones may occur during laparoscopic cholecystectomy, but they generally have
no detrimental consequences in most patients. Of note, the peritoneal granulomas from the patient described by Merchant and colleagues2
stained for bile suggest that peritoneal exposure to bile acids may trigger a florid granulomatous reaction in susceptible individuals. This
view is indirectly supported by the observation that the spillage of abdominal cysts into the peritoneal cavity during open or laparoscopic
removal may also elicit a granulomatous inflammation of the peritoneum.9,10 Remarkably, no gross bile contamination of the peritoneum or an
obvious bile leak was detected in our patient during the laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The accidental intraperitoneal introduction of talc
or corn starch from surgical glove powder has the potential to trigger a delayed hypersensitivity inflammatory response with formation of
foreign body granulomas, peritoneal fibrosis, and ascites.1 The starch granules are usually readily identified in tissue sections when
polarized light, periodic acid-Schiff, or iodine stains are used.1 This mechanism is more likely to occur with open than with laparoscopic
surgery. In addition, talc or cornstarch granules were not seen in biopsy samples of peritoneum from our patient. Moreover, magnesium oxide
and magnesium carbonate powder, added in concentrations varying between 2% and 30% as dispersing agents to the starch, may themselves
produce a foreign body reaction that represents an additional confounding point.8 Other potential triggers of a hypersensitivity
granulomatous reaction involving the peritoneum include chemical antiseptics, such as octenidine dihydrochloride and phenoxyethanol, which
are commonly used for peritoneal lavage during abdominal surgery, iodinated contrast media used for hysterosalpingography, and cotton lint
from disposable surgical drapes and laparotomy pads.11–13 Peritoneal dialysis may also cause granulomatous peritonitis.8 It is still unknown
if the presentation and clinical course of postoperative granulomatous peritonitis is similar to those of other immune-mediated inflammatory
peritoneal disorders, but observations from our case suggest they may differ. For example, our patient had no recurrence of ascites after
the peritoneal fluid was mechanically removed, so we decided not to start the patient on corticosteroids or any other anti-inflammatory
therapy. Watchful observation confirmed she achieved a full and complete recovery, and this spontaneous remission was maintained after more
than 1-y of follow-up. The risk of long-term sequelae in postoperative granulomatous peritonitis is still unknown. Severe complications,
such as peritoneal adhesions, intestinal obstruction, and fistula formation have been described.1,14 However, no fatalities have been
reported so far.1,14 Corticosteroids and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs like indomethacin have been used in the treatment of this
disorder, but it is unclear whether these strategies could prevent the formation of adhesion and fistulas.1
