Pseudocyst formation following acute and chronic pancreatitis is a well known complication. A pancreatic pseudocyst fistulating into the
portal vein is a rare and potentially fatal complication. We report a case of pancreatic pseudocyst – portal vein fistula, which was managed
with a conservative approach. A 45-year-old man presented with severe acute alcoholic pancreatitis. Computed tomography revealed extensive
inflammation around the head of the pancreas with a small 1.5cm × 2.3cm area of pancreatic necrosis. The gallbladder, liver and biliary tree
were normal. He improved on conservative management and was discharged home with advice to abstain from alcohol. The patient presented again
two months later with acute pancreatitis (severe on Ranson scoring) and ascites. He underwent ultrasonography-guided drainage of amylase
rich ascites and a lesser sac collection. The hospital stay was complicated by acute inferolateral myocardial infarction, which was managed
medically. He subsequently required percutaneous drainage of fluid collections and a left lobe liver abscess. A tubogram through the liver
drain showed the residual liver abscess cavity communicating with the first part of duodenum with concomitant pancreatography and portal
venography (Fig 1). At this stage, he was only draining a small amount of haemoserous fluid. Conventional angiography through the superior
mesenteric artery (portal venous phase) showed the drain to be abutting and possibly compromising the branches of the portal vein with a
partial occluding thrombus in the left portal vein (Fig 2). A conservative ‘watch-and-manage’ approach was therefore adopted. Figure
1Tubogram through the drain in the left hepatic lobe abscess demonstrating contrast delineating branches of portal vein, second part of
duodenum and the pancreatic duct Figure 2Angiography demonstrating the drain tube abutting the branches of the portal vein and a thrombus in
the portal vein branch Tubogram through the drain in the left hepatic lobe abscess demonstrating contrast delineating branches of portal
vein, second part of duodenum and the pancreatic duct Angiography demonstrating the drain tube abutting the branches of the portal vein and
a thrombus in the portal vein branch Upper gastrointestinal endoscopy (for haemoptysis) showed a large anterior duodenal ulcer with visible
blood vessels and active bleeding at the base, which was treated via sclerotherapy. The patient had two further episodes of haematemesis
requiring endoscopic management. Once he had stabilised, endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) demonstrated an irregularly
dilated duct in the body and tail of the pancreas with multiple filling defects and a possible small segment stricture in the head of the
pancreas (Fig 3). The accessory pancreatic duct could not be visualised. A 7cm, 5Fr pigtailed plastic pancreatic stent was inserted in the
main pancreatic duct to establish pancreatic drainage. The liver drain was removed and the patient was discharged from hospital three months
after his admission with plans for surgery following sufficient recovery from his acute coronary event. He underwent an elective change of
the pancreatic stent eight weeks following discharge. Figure 3Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography demonstrating pancreatic duct
stricture and multiple filling defects (possibly stones) Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography demonstrating pancreatic duct
stricture and multiple filling defects (possibly stones) Approximately six months following his initial admission, the patient underwent an
elective pancreaticojejunostomy (Puestow procedure) to manage pancreatic duct stricture and establish pancreatic drainage. The surgery was
performed through a rooftop incision. A 5cm Roux-en-Y pancreaticojejunostomy to the distal pancreatic duct was performed with interrupted
4/0 PDS® (Ethicon, Somerville, NJ, US) suture and a second layer of continuous 4/0 Vicryl® (Ethicon). The proximal pancreatic duct was
strictured and the stent could not be removed. A splenectomy was also performed owing to splenic vein thrombosis. The patient made a slow
but uncomplicated recovery and was discharged home after two weeks. He required another ERCP for stent removal. He then continued to improve
and was discharged from follow-up after six months. Pancreatic pseudocyst–portal vein fistula are a rare but life-threatening sequel of
pancreatitis and have been reported previously in the literature. 1–7 This rare complication seems to effect predominantly men with a strong
history of alcohol abuse. 8 The mechanism by which the pseudocyst fistulates into the portal vein remains unclear. While some postulate
thrombosis of the portal vein as the initiating factor, the case mentioned by Dawson et al demonstrates portal vein thrombosis developing
after the fistula formation. 8 Although portal vein thrombosis was also demonstrated in our case, the proximity of the drain to the portal
vein branches may have contributed to fistula formation by direct erosion. Most commonly, patients present with acute pancreatitis on a
background of chronic pancreatitis but it may be their first presentation with acute pancreatitis. All patients present with abdominal pain
with additional signs and symptoms of associated complications such as dyspnoea secondary to pleural fistula or abdominal distension due to
ascites. One would expect severe haemorrhage as a result of the fistula with the portal vein but it is interesting that none of the reported
cases have described catastrophic haemorrhage secondary to the fistula. One explanation for this may be that the pseudocyst acts as a high
pressure system, emptying its contents into the portal vein rather than vice versa. In the majority of cases, the diagnosis is made by
invasive methods such as ERCP or surgery. Four cases report postmortem examination. In only one case diagnosis was made by a non-invasive
method such as magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography. In our patient, the diagnosis was made by a tubogram through a drain in the left
liver lobe abscess cavity. Most reported cases who survived required aggressive surgical treatment including portal vein plasty (for primary
closure of the fistula) or pancreatectomy and pancreaticojejunostomy (for blocking the flow of pancreatic juice) as a definitive treatment.
In one reported case, a pancreatic stent alone was used to treat the fistula successfully. 7 Improvement from conservative management is
seen only in a minority of patients who are asymptomatic or have mild symptoms. In our case, a catastrophic haemorrhage from the fistula
might have been averted owing to the plastic drain abutting the fistula site. The presence of a thrombus in the adjacent portal vein
supports this. The stricture of the proximal pancreatic duct may have contributed to the persistence of the pseudocyst and the formation of
the pseudocyst–portal vein fistula. ERCP and pancreatic stent insertion were used to effectively block the flow in the pseudocyst and to
improve pancreatic drainage. The presence of pancreatic duct stricture with upstream dilatation and stones in the distal pancreatic duct
meant that long-term management with a pancreatic stent was not an option. An interval definitive surgical procedure (Puestow procedure) was
therefore performed once the patient had recovered from acute events. Formation of a pancreatic pseudocyst–portal vein fistula is a rare but
life-threatening complication of pancreatitis. A conservative or minimally invasive approach should be adopted initially as surgery carries
a high risk of mortality and morbidity. Catastrophic bleeding should be managed radiologically whenever possible with surgery as a last
resort. A surgical approach to establish pancreatic duct drainage should be attempted once the acute insult has subsided.
