Tuberculosis of bone is an uncommon entity in the Western world. We present a case of tuberculosis of the patella mimicking prepatellar
bursitis in an otherwise fit and well woman of Bangladeshi origin. We believe tuberculosis of bone should form a differential diagnosis of
the swollen knee in high risk patients. A 25-year-old woman of Bangladeshi origin presented with an insidious onset of swelling over her
right knee. This had been present for three months following a fall. She had been treated previously with oral flucloxacillin by her general
practitioner with no resolution of symptoms. Walking had become increasingly difficult. She had no other respiratory or systemic symptoms of
note. She had no history of contact with infectious diseases and there had been no recent travel or family illness. On examination, the
patient had a large fluctuant prepatellar swelling with extensive surrounding erythema. There was a central punctum with a small amount of
pus discharge. Range of movement was 0–110° but there was marked quadriceps wasting. The white cell count was normal, C-reactive protein
(CRP) was 11mg/l and the erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) was 30mm/hr. An x-ray showed a large prepatellar swelling but no obvious bony
pathology (Fig 1). Figure 1Plain lateral x-ray of the knee showing prepatellar soft tissue swelling; no obvious bony lesion Plain lateral
x-ray of the knee showing prepatellar soft tissue swelling; no obvious bony lesion The patient was diagnosed with an infected prepatellar
bursitis, and taken to theatre for incision and drainage. At the time of surgery, 10ml of pus was drained and sent for microbiology, growing
Staphylococcus aureus. No note was made of any patella abnormality at the time of surgery. After clinical improvement and a week of
intravenous antibiotics she was discharged. A month later, the patient was admitted with a persistently painful discharging knee sinus.
Respiratory examination revealed symmetrical breath sounds without crackles. There was no lymphadenopathy detectable on clinical
examination. Chest x-ray showed no obvious pulmonary lesion. Further knee radiography showed a central nidus of necrotic bone in the patella
(Fig 2). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed osteomyelitis (Fig 3). She was taken to theatre where a necrotic area of bone was found
in the patella with granulomatous material surrounding it. There was no communication with the knee joint itself. A sinus excision and
sequestrectomy was performed. Microbiology of the sequestered bone grew acid-fast bacilli, later confirmed as Mycobacterium tuberculosis.
Figure 2Lateral x-ray of the knee showing a focal lytic lesion in the patella with overlying soft tissue swelling and minor periosteal
reaction; features consistent with a Brodie’s abscess Figure 3T1 weighted magnetic resonance imaging showing a 16mm × 12mm well defined
lucency with central calcific densities, suggesting chronic osteomyelitis with sequestrum Lateral x-ray of the knee showing a focal lytic
lesion in the patella with overlying soft tissue swelling and minor periosteal reaction; features consistent with a Brodie’s abscess T1
weighted magnetic resonance imaging showing a 16mm × 12mm well defined lucency with central calcific densities, suggesting chronic
osteomyelitis with sequestrum The patient had an uneventful recovery from surgery, and was commenced on oral antituberculous medication of
pyrazinamide and ethambutol by the respiratory team. No primary lung focus was found and no tuberculosis (TB) positive contacts were
identified. She made a good clinical recovery with no recurrence of infection. At six months postoperatively, she has no pain in the knee, a
full range of movement and return of quadriceps bulk. TB of the patella is rare. Although the knee is the third most common site for
skeletal TB after spine and hip involvement, the literature reports an incidence of patella TB of 0.09–0.15%. 1 Although mostly reported in
India, there have been other case reports from Europe 2–4 but we found no case reported in the literature in a UK setting. In our case, the
patient was well systemically and gave no symptoms suggestive of chronic infection. Despite being from a country with a high prevalence of
TB, she had no previous known contact with the disease. In TB, as in this case, CRP and ESR are often only mildly elevated or even normal.
Suspicion of osteomyelitis was not expected owing to the delay in radiographic changes. X-ray features can vary. MRI is seen as the imaging
of choice as it detects early bone marrow and soft tissue abnormalities although computed tomography has a role in detecting calcifications
in abscesses. Ultimately, a tissue diagnosis is needed for diagnosis. Fluid aspirate may be negative or show normal skin flora unless
specific TB microbiological tests are requested, as was shown in this case. Treatment options depend on the extent and spread of
osteomyelitis. Curettage can be used to remove sequestered bone and establish a tissue diagnosis. However, subsequent antituberculous
therapy is seen as the mainstay of treatment. Prepatellar bursitis is frequently associated with the minor trauma of repetitive kneeling,
often occupational. Other common causes include infection, inflammatory causes (eg rheumatoid arthritis) and crystal deposition diseases (eg
gout). Prepatellar bursitis as a sequela to patella osteomyelitis is not uncommon and should be considered on acute presentation. We could
find one case of M tuberculosis presenting as prepatellar bursitis in the literature. 5 Other rare causes of prepatellar bursitis should be
considered such as sarcoidosis, arteriovenous malformation and pathology mimicking prepatellar bursitis (eg neoplasia or Morel-Lavallée
lesions). The incidence of TB in the developed world remains high owing to immunosuppression (particularly with human immunodeficiency virus
infection), the emergence of multidrug resistant TB and newly settled immigrants to Europe from highly endemic areas. We believe that all
surgeons assessing patients from TB endemic regions presenting with an acute joint swelling should be suspicious of TB as a differential
diagnosis. Prepatellar bursitis is often used as a blanket term to steer management in the emergency setting. In high risk patients with
prepatellar bursitis, when x-rays and blood tests are unremarkable, further diagnostic tests and imaging are required, to aid diagnosis and
management.
