This report indicates that regression in visceral fat, left ventricular mass, diastolic dysfunction, and aortic stiffness may represent a
potential mechanism to explain the reduction in mortality rates with significant effective weight loss after laparoscopic surgery. Obesity
is associated with cardiac hypertrophy and increased aortic stiffness, which are independent predictors of cardiovascular risk. In the
setting of obesity, bariatric surgical weight loss has been shown to reduce mortality. We present a case showing that, in a severely obese
individual without comorbidities, these cardiovascular responses to excess weight are reversible during weight loss over a period of 1 year.
Obesity, defined by a body-mass index (BMI) >30kg/m2, is associated with increased mortality rate, and even greater risk is associated with
a BMI of ≥35kg/m2.1 Both ventricular hypertrophy and aortic stiffness are present in obesity,2–4 and a growing body of literature has
demonstrated a strong relationship between left ventricular hypertrophy and all cause mortality on one hand,5,6 and between impairment of
aortic elastic function and cardiovascular events in healthy and diseased populations on the other hand. Excess adiposity is associated with
a hyperdynamic circulation and increased blood volume which, in combination with the hormonal changes in obesity, including leptin,7 produce
a spectrum of cardiac changes ranging from asymptomatic left ventricular hypertrophy through diastolic dysfunction to overt systolic heart
failure.2,6,8,9 Because obesity is linked to left ventricular hypertrophy, diastolic dysfunction, and aortic stiffness (all independent
predictors of cardiovascular mortality3,10) and increased mortality, this hypertrophic response provides a potential mechanism by which
obesity modulates cardiovascular risk. Bariatric surgical weight loss is now known to confer mortality benefit,11 and left ventricular
hypertrophy aortic stiffness and diastolic function are seen to improve with laparoscopic bariatric surgical weight loss.9 Here we present
anthropometric data, serum markers of obesity, and cardiovascular magnetic resonance imaging data of the left ventricular structure and
function as well as aortic distensibility of a 38-y-old Caucasian female before and after laparoscopic adjustable gastric banding for the
treatment of obesity to highlight the effects of weight loss on left ventricular structure. Prior to the surgery, the patient weighed 108kg
(BMI of 37.3kg/m2), had no history of cardiovascular disease, no history of smoking, and was normotensive. Her fasting plasma glucose, total
cholesterol, and insulin were within the normal adult range (Table 1). Calculated insulin resistance using the Homeostasis Model of Insulin
Resistance (HOMA) was 2.69. Serum leptin, and C-reactive protein (CRP) levels were however elevated above the normal range (Table 1).
Anthropometric, Serum Markers of Obesity, Left Ventricular Characteristics, and Aortic Distensibility Before and After Weight Loss Twelve
months after bariatric surgery she had lost 28kg in weight, representing a 79% loss of her excess body weight. After weight loss, blood
pressure, glucose, total cholesterol, insulin, and HOMA levels were similar to those at before weight loss (Table 1). In comparison, serum
leptin and CRP levels were markedly lower. Figure 1A shows a midventricular short axis cardiac magnetic resonance image prior to surgery
demonstrating left ventricular mass and cavity size at the upper end of the normal range (LV mass 130g, [upper normal limit 138g] LV end-
diastolic volume 164mL [upper normal limit 187mL]). Figure 1B was taken 12 mo after weight loss surgery, at the same midventricular level
and image magnification. The postoperative image shows both a 25% reduction in left ventricular mass and the decrease in cavity size that
occurred as a consequence of the weight loss surgery (LV mass 102g, LV end-diastolic volume 154mL). The gastric band is clearly visible in
the image below the left ventricle (labelled GB). In addition to this, left ventricular diastolic function and aortic distensibility were
seen to increase (at all 3 levels measured) indicating improved aortic elastic function (Table 1). Given the reduction in serum leptin and
CRP, both of which have been linked to left ventricular hypertrophy and aortic stiffness, it is plausible that these hormones and their
reduction with weight loss play at least some role in the cardiovascular changes that occur with obesity and subsequent weight loss. T1
weighted TSE images (A) pre and (B) post-laparoscopic adjustable gastric band showing a large reduction in visceral and subcutaneous fat.
Short axis MRI view showing the reduction of left ventricular mass and size following weight loss due to laparoscopic adjustable gastric
banding. Before gastric banding (C) and clearly visible gastric band (GB) in the right lower quadrant of the image (D). These images
illustrate succinctly the left ventricular adaptations to obesity next to a gastric band, an effective and safe surgical method of weight
reduction associated with reduced long-term mortality in obese subjects.11 The regression in visceral fat, left ventricular mass, diastolic
dysfunction, and aortic stiffness represents a potential mechanism to explain the reduction in mortality rates seen with significant
effective weight loss highlighting the benefits of laparoscopic surgery in the fight against obesity related heart disease.
