Calciphylaxis (calcific uremic arteriolopathy) is rare and its pathogenesis is not fully understood. Indeed, Calciphylaxis presents a
challenge through the course of its management which involve different specialities but unfortunately this disease so far has a poor
prognosis. We herein present, in this case report, a multidisciplinary approach involving plastic surgeons with special regards to
reconstructive approach after debridement procedures. We present a 21 years old male with a BMI of 38,2, who was transferred to our
department from another hospital. Calciphylaxis has been diagnosed after receiving anticoagulation with phenprocoumon after a single event
of pulmonary embolism. The INR on admission was 1,79. He had necrotic spots on both sides of the abdominal wall and on both thighs medially.
During this time he underwent several reconstructive procedures in our department. It can be suggested that this agonizing disease needs
indeed a multidisciplinary approach involving Nephrologists, Dermatologists, Intensive Care Physicians and Plastic Surgeons, taking into
consideration that surgical correction can achieve further improvement in a specialized centre. Notwithstanding, further cohort studies
should be approached clinically to insight the light on this disease with special regard to the prognosis after this approach. Calciphylaxis
(calcific uremic arteriolopathy) is a rare and poorly understood disease which demonstrates a challenge for different specialities. Media
calcifications of arterioles and fat tissue are distinctive and primarily affect the skin but in some cases involvement of nerve sheaths,
visceral organs and muscles have been described. Even if diagnosed in an early phase, the chances of success in healing are very low and the
mortality is exceptionally high . It is characterized by extremely painful, partly necrotic skin ulcerations, which can be found almost on
any part of the body. Hallmark of this disease is a fortified calcification of the arterioles mainly in the subcutaneous tissue and
sometimes even calcification of peripheral nerve sheaths and fat cell bodies can be found . The primary clinical picture is multifaceted and
can delay diagnosis. The differential diagnosis is challenging and includes vasculitis, cholesterol emboli and diabetic ulcers.
Calciphylaxis can be staged into two phases. Phase one is characterized by pruritus, cutaneous laminar erythemas, which is unspecific and
therefore can easily be misinterpreted in the first place. Phase two shows painful ulceration and necrosis . Preferably affected areas are
the lower extremities. There are some cases described where also the abdomen and visceral organs were affected. The mortality in phase one
is about 30%, but the mortality in phase two is extended up to 80% . These typical ulcerations and necrosis were predominantly presented on
the abdomen and both thighs of the patient we treated. This rare disease was first described by Bryant and White in 1898, where a condition
of calcifications and cutaneous necrosis was circumscribed . Selye et al. were the first, who highlightened the pathophysiology of
calciphylaxis, labelled the disease in 1962 and characterised it as a systemic hypersensitivity reaction. In animal experiments, Selye et
al. could show an induction of calcification of various organs via the combination of sensitizing agents, like Dihydrotachysterol, Vitamin
D2,D3 and parathyroid hormone followed by exposure to a challenger, as there are for example metallic salts (iron, aluminium)or trauma .
Ketteler et al. referred the condition can lead to an imbalance of two calcification inhibiting proteins; Matrix-Gla and Fetuin A, which are
Vitamin K dependant . In animal experiments it could be shown that an essential lack of these proteins can lead to calcification of arteries
and even rupturing of the aorta . Even the risk factors seem to be controversial. Predisposing factors are an acute or chronic renal
failure, obesity, diabetes, hyperparathyroidism, female Caucasians and an elevated calcium phosphorus product. Further presumably risk
factors are phenprocoumon, vitamin K deficiency (phytonadione), lack of fetuin A protein, malignancy, alcoholic liver disease, connective
tissue disease, protein C and S deficiency . Interestingly the majority of these patients had normal serum calcium, normal serum phosphorus,
normal calcium phosphorus product, normal serum parathyroid hormone levels and normal serum creatinine levels. The mortality rate in this
study was 52% with sepsis being the leading cause . Although the risk remains to cause another complicated ulcer, a histological sample
excision also including subcutaneous tissue is mandatory. The sample has to be stained with alizarin red or silver-nitrate to differentiate
Calciphylaxis from different diseases . Fine et al. suggested bone scintigraphy as one of the first steps to substantiate the diagnosis. In
their study, only one of the investigated cases had negative bone scan .The mortality in phase one was 33%. After development of ulcers the
mortality reached 80% . In this case report, we highlight a multidisciplinary treatment of a patient, suffering from Calciphylaxis, which
after 10 months led to a successful result. We report on an obese 21 years old male with a Body Mass Index (BMI) of 38,2, who presented to
our department with Calciphylaxis after phenprocoumon intake in consequence of pulmonary embolism. The target partial thrombin time (pTT)
was between 50-60s. In addition the patient lost overtime 100 kg body mass after getting a gastric banding in 2007. Comorbidities were a
dilative cardiomyopathy, insulin dependant diabetes, obesity, allergic asthma, hypothyreoidism and lack of anithrombine factor III (AT3).
Calciphylaxis was already diagnosed histologically in the former hospital, where he was treated with Natriumthiosulphate intravenously for
about 9 weeks. Initial symptoms were tender and painful lesions with defined edges in the upper and lower thighs and the abdomen, where some
showed signs of necrosis. Further histological examinations showed typical signs of microthrombosis and calcification of the arterioles
subcutaneously and substantiated the diagnosis of calciphylaxis. The patient needed high doses of opiates over the whole duration of
inpatient treatment. Unfortunately the initial calcifications became necrotic and possible surgical options were evaluated. A combination of
Natriumthiosulphate was administered intravenously, which is a common therapy for calciphylaxis and a specific surgical approach to this
complex disease was initiated when the patient arrived at our department. The patient had necrosis on the abdomen and both thighs as well as
partially superinfected wounds with oxacillin resistant staphylococcus aureus (Figure 1). A bone scintigraphy revealed no increased activity
of calcium carbonate in thighs or the abdominal area. Shows the patient's wounds on both thighs and the abdominal wall on admission in our
department. After the patient consented to a surgical treatment we started our surgical approach with extensive debridement of the affected
areas on the abdominal wall and both thighs (Figure 2). A consecutive VAC therapy for the lesions on the thighs was mandatory to establish a
clean environment. At this level, attempt to close the wounds on the abdomen via advancement flaps were unsuccessful. Shows exemplary the
wounds on the thigh after initial debridements in our department. A main problem to deal with was not only a permanent level of extensive
pain which was encountered through our pain specialists in concordance with the WHO – pain schedule with opiates but also the recurrent
wound infections with complicated germs, which were treated with different antibiotic patterns. Over time the Calciphylaxis therapy was
adjusted and complemented with Pamidronat, a biphosphonate agent to reduce decomposition of osseous structures and Renagel (Sevelamer), a
phosphate binder. Initial skin grafts did not show satisfactory results in the beginning of the surgical treatment; hence another attempt
with skin grafts in buried chips technique was preceded 6 months after admission. From the plastic surgical point of view, the complexity of
the wounds demanded a combination of consecutive debridements, jet lavages, repetitive VAC therapies and Buried chip skin grafting (both
thighs and abdomen). In addition dressings were changed with an ointment pad and silver coating dressing (Atrauman Ag, Paul Hartmann
Ges.m.b.H, Wiener Neudorf – Austria) as well as antiseptic solution (Polyhexanid, Lohmann & Rauscher GmbH & Co. KG, Neuwied – Germany) on a
daily basis. The patient could be sufficiently mobilized and had no further signs of infection. Daily sea salt baths and physiotherapy
sessions improved the patient’s status until he was able to walk alone on the ward. Finally, pain medication could be reduced drastically
and sedoanalgesia was not further necessary for dressing changes. The laboratory on discharge showed a single slight elevated phosphate of
1.88 (0.84-1.48 mmol/l). Calcium was in normal range (2.10-2.60 mmol/l). Creatinine was 1.5 (0.7-1.2). We could successfully discharge the
patient into rehabilitation, where his status was further improved by mobilization, physiotherapy and lymphatic drainage massages.
Calciphylaxis still remain a challenge and need further investigation to understand this disease although different causes and numerous
therapeutic strategies have been described. A further challenge in the clinical setting is that the therapy for Calciphylaxis is not clearly
defined. Independently of the causing agent (factor), the present therapeutic strategy enfolds pain control, surgery, calcium binding
agents, phosphorus reducer, cortisone, and antibiotic therapy. Regarding our patient, we treated him with a combination of surgical approach
with intravenous application of binding agents which have led to a successful outcome. However, it should be stated that local flap
techniques showed no benefit but merely buried skin grafting was finally crowned with success. Therefore an interdisciplinary approach to
this disease via supporting drug therapy and surgical measures may be a promising way to treat patients suffering from Calciphylaxis. The
patient was then discharged into rehabilitation centre without further wound problems in his soft tissues and until recently showed no signs
of a relapse of Calciphylaxis (Figure 3 ). Shows the clinical setting after successful skin grafting procedures. The wounds were closed.
Notwithstanding, despite the fact that this surgical approach may lead to a satisfactory result in our patient further studies with a larger
patient cohort will be needed to determine its efficiency for these patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case presentation and any accompanying images. The authors have declared that no conflict of interest exists. ST drafted
the manuscript and participated in the analysis. GG, AP, ZA and DS conceived the design and participated in the treatment and contributed in
the revision process. ED treated the Patient in the intensive care unit. NP participated in the operations as well as revised and edited the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-5945/13/1/prepub The authors would like to thank Mr. Werner Kriegel for the great work in photo selection
for the selected patient.
