Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: ABA PS PR EG RH CH
LS YY AT JK BE DH. Performed the experiments: ABA PS SB PR EG RH KG CH OH AT JPL. Analyzed the data: ABA PS PR LS YY JK BE DH. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: FH HN KK MI MF. Wrote the paper: ABA DH JK YY BE LS. Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMSs) are a
heterogeneous group of genetic disorders affecting neuromuscular transmission. The agrin/muscle-specific kinase (MuSK) pathway is critical
for proper development and maintenance of the neuromuscular junction (NMJ). We report here an Iranian patient in whom CMS was diagnosed
since he presented with congenital and fluctuating bilateral symmetric ptosis, upward gaze palsy and slowly progressive muscle weakness
leading to loss of ambulation. Genetic analysis of the patient revealed a homozygous missense mutation c.2503A>G in the coding sequence of
MUSK leading to the p.Met835Val substitution. The mutation was inherited from the two parents who were heterozygous according to the notion
of consanguinity. Immunocytochemical and electron microscopy studies of biopsied deltoid muscle showed dramatic changes in pre- and post-
synaptic elements of the NMJs. These changes induced a process of denervation/reinnervation in native NMJs and the formation, by an adaptive
mechanism, of newly formed and ectopic NMJs. Aberrant axonal outgrowth, decreased nerve terminal ramification and nodal axonal sprouting
were also noted. In vivo electroporation of the mutated MuSK in a mouse model showed disorganized NMJs and aberrant axonal growth
reproducing a phenotype similar to that observed in the patient’s biopsy specimen. In vitro experiments showed that the mutation alters
agrin-dependent acetylcholine receptor aggregation, causes a constitutive activation of MuSK and a decrease in its agrin- and
Dok-7-dependent phosphorylation. The NMJ is a highly specialized structure formed by a motoneuron, a terminal Schwann cell and a muscle
fiber. The contact between the nerve terminal and the muscle membrane constitutes a privileged zone in which neurotransmission occurs. At
this synapse, the nerve terminal organizes postsynaptic differentiation by releasing a proteoglycan called agrin which binds to its
receptor, a low-density lipoprotein receptor (LDLR)-related protein (Lrp4) located on the postsynaptic membrane . Lrp4 forms a complex with
the muscle-specific tyrosine kinase (MuSK) which plays a central role in the organization of the postsynaptic scaffold. MuSK activation is
required to recruit downstream signaling components that trigger the local aggregation and synthesis of postsynaptic nicotinic acetylcholine
receptors (nAChRs) and several other proteins, such as the cytoskeletal protein rapsyn . MuSK is a tyrosine kinase receptor with an
ectodomain containing three immunoglobulin (Ig)-like domains and a Frizzled-like cysteine-rich domain (initially described as a C box plus a
fourth Ig-like domain), a transmembrane-spanning region, and the intracellular region including a juxtamembrane domain, a kinase domain, and
a short C-terminal tail . In general, ligand binding to the extracellular portion of tyrosine kinase receptors results in
autophosphorylation of specific tyrosine residues, which in turn increases the catalytic activity of the receptor and creates binding sites
for other signaling proteins. The kinase activation loop (so-called “A loop”), whose conformation is changed for substrate interaction, and
the juxtamembrane region located between the transmembrane helix and the tyrosine kinase domain are important regulatory regions for MuSK
kinase activity . The juxtamembrane region of MuSK also contains a NPXY binding motif for the phosphotyrosine binding (PTB) domain of the
cytoplasmic adapter-like protein Dok-7, which plays an essential role in the regulation of MuSK phosphorylation . The critical role of MuSK
signaling is supported by the fact that mice deficient in agrin, Lrp4, MuSK, or Dok-7 lack NMJs and die at birth from respiratory failure ,
, . Consistently, RNA interference directed against MuSK or conditional postnatal inactivation of the musk gene causes disassembly of the
postsynaptic components of NMJs , . Congenital myasthenic syndromes (CMSs) are a heterogeneous group of genetic disorders that give rise to
neuromuscular transmission defects. CMSs are conveniently classified according to their target as presynaptic, synaptic (basal lamina-
associated) or postsynaptic . Postsynaptic CMSs are currently the most common category of CMSs and are usually the consequence of mutations
in genes encoding the four adult muscle nAChR subunits or rapsyn , . It has recently been shown that mutations in genes encoding proteins
involved in the critical signal transduction pathway of MuSK requiring neural agrin, the muscle cytoplasmic protein Dok-7 and MuSK itself
can also result in severe forms of CMSs . Since our first demonstration that mutations in MuSK underlie a CMS, two other reports implicating
MuSK mutations have been published: a homozygous missense mutation in the ectodomain of MuSK and heterozygous missense mutations in its
kinase domain . Here we describe and characterize a patient with a novel homozygous mutation in MUSK affecting the kinase domain. Muscle
biopsy and/or blood samples of patients were obtained after informed written consent by the parents for themselves and on behalf of their
children was secured in accordance with the protocol approved by the ethics committee of La Salpêtrière Hospital (CCPPRB #93-02).
Experimental procedures on mice were performed in accordance with European legislation (L358-86/609/EEC) and approved locally by the Inserm.
Open biopsy was performed on the deltoid muscle. The NMJ-containing zone was determined by small twitches provoked by the scalpel tip and
confirmed by the presence of cholinesterase activity using the classic technique of Koelle and Friedenwald . Whole fibers fixed in 4%
paraformaldehyde were stained for AChRs with TRITC-labeled alpha-bungarotoxin (α-BGT) (Molecular Probes, Leiden, The Netherlands), and for
neurofilaments with an anti-168 kD neurofilament antibody (2H3 clone, Hybridoma Bank, Iowa City, IA) or an anti-200 kD neurofilament
antibody (RT 97 clone, Boehringer Ingelheim, Reims, France). In addition, cryostat sections were labeled with α-BGT and an anti-MuSK
antibody (kindly donated by Markus Rüegg, Basel, Switzerland). Both whole fibers and cryostat sections were observed with a confocal
microscope (Zeiss, LSM 510) and images were acquired with the equivalent settings (laser power, gain, magnification, thickness of the
stacks). The area of synaptic gutters per NMJ and the mean α-bungarotoxin fluorescence intensity within that area were measured using
Metamorph software (Universal Imaging, Westchester, PA, USA). Fluorescence intensity quantification of MuSK was not feasible on whole mount
preparation because of the lack of sample and was therefore performed on cryostat section using the same software. Electron microscopy of
the NMJ was performed by conventional methods. Total RNA was extracted from 10 consecutive 10 µm cryostat sections of biopsied deltoid
muscle using the Qiagen RNAeasy mini kit (Qiagen), with DNase treatments. QRT-PCR was performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions
with the Quantitect one-step RT-PCR SYBRGreen DNA detection kit (Qiagen) in a Light-Cycler (Roche Diagnostics, France). Primer sequences
were as follows. γ-subunit AChR: forward 5′-AACGAGACTCGGATGTGGTC-3′, reverse 5′-GTCGCACCACTGCATCTCTA-3′; actin: forward
5′-GGACTTCGAGCAAGAGATGG-3′, reverse 5′-AGCACTGTGTTGGCGTACAG-3′. All mRNA measurements were normalized to the expression level of β-actin.
DNA from the patient and his family members was extracted from peripheral blood lymphocytes by standard protocols. Fifteen sets of primers
were designed according to the published sequence of MUSK (GenBank accession number # AF006464). PCR was carried out with: DNA 50 ng, dNTP 1
µM, each primer 0.5 µM, Enhancer (Tebu, Le Perray en Yvelines, France) 1X MgCl2 1.5 mM, and Ampli Taq Gold 1 unit (Applied Biosystems,
Courtaboeuf, France). All fragments (exons and flanking intronic regions) were amplified in a single set of conditions consisting of a
touch-down protocol including a hybridization step at 65°C to 55°C (10 cycles, 1°C per cycle) followed by 25 cycles at 55°C. PCR fragments
were then sequenced using the Big Dye Terminator (V3.1) Cycle Sequencing Kit (Applied Biosystems). Sequencing reactions were loaded on an
ABI PRISM 3100 genetic analyzer and analyzed with Seqscape software. Because of the high homology between rat and human MuSK sequences, we
used a pcDNA3.1 vector (Invitrogen) containing rat musk cDNA kindly provided by the late Prof. Werner Hoch. We added an HA-tag to the
C-terminal extremity before the STOP codon by site-directed mutagenesis (GeneCust, Dudelange, Luxembourg). The M835V mutation of human MuSK
was reproduced in the rat MuSK cDNA using site-directed mutagenesis. Because of the sequence numbering difference, the homologous mutation
in rat MuSK cDNA is M834V. We also introduced the mutation K608A (KA), which is known to suppress MuSK kinase activity . All animal studies
were approved by animal use procedures adopted by INSERM. Swiss Webster mice, 5–6 weeks old, were anesthetized with 300 µl of 0.05%
xylazine–1.7% ketamine in 0.9% NaCl. Seven µg of DNA containing 5 µg of the wild-type or mutated MuSK expression vectors and 2 µg of
reporter plasmid were injected into the tibialis anterior muscle using a 1 ml syringe with a 27 gauge needle. Caliper electrode plates
(Qbiogen, Illkirch, France) were then applied to each side of the muscle, and a series of eight electrical pulses (2 Hz, 20 ms each) was
delivered with a standard square-wave electroporator (ECM 830, Qbiogen) . Electrical contact was ensured by shaving and conductive gel
application. The reporter construct allowed the identification of electroporated fibers, and consisted of expression vectors for a nuclear
CFP (pECFPnuc, Clontech, Ozyme) . Morphological analysis of the endplate was performed by confocal microscopy as described above for the
patient muscle biopsy. We used both a 168 kDa and a 200 kDa neurofilament antibody. To prepare muscle cell lines stably expressing WT- and
MV-MuSK constructs, MuSK −/− muscle cells were obtained from the limbs of MuSK −/−; H-2Kb-tsA58 E18 embryos . As described previously,
retroviral infection of MuSK −/− myoblasts was performed following transfection of Bosc 23 cells with pBabe/puro-MuSK WT-HA and
pBabe/puro-A/G MuSK-HA . Infected myoblasts were selected in growth medium containing puromycin and selected clones, after verification for
their ability to form myotubes and expression of MuSK, were subsequently cultured at 33°C on Matrigel-precoated dishes. Growth medium was
DMEM containing 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS), 10% horse serum (HS), 0,5% chicken embryo extract (CEE) (MP Biomedicals), supplemented with 20
U/ml of recombinant mouse interferon-γ (Roche Diagnostics, France) and 50 µg/ml of gentamicin. To induce myotube formation, cultures were
transferred to nonpermissive conditions by increasing the temperature to 39°C and removing FBS and IFN-γ from the medium. Myotubes were
treated or not with a recombinant rat agrin (0.1 nM; R&D Systems Europe, UK). Seven hours later, they were washed with PBS, fixed with 4%
paraformaldehyde in PBS for 10 minutes, washed three times with 0.1 M glycine in PBS and then blocked in PBS-3% BSA. Myotubes were then
incubated for 1 h with TRITC-α-BGT (Invitrogen, France), washed three times with PBS and mounted with Vectashield DAPI (Vector Laboratories,
USA). To quantitate clusters, culture dishes were observed using a 40x objective of an inverted Olympus IX70 fluorescence microscope
(Olympus Europa, Hamburg, Germany). Images were recorded with a CCD camera (Princeton Cool SNAP Fx, Trenton, NJ) and processed with ImageJ
software. The number of AChR clusters of more than 3 µm length in each field was divided by the number of labeled myotubes that crossed the
field. Data from three independent experiments were used to calculate means ± SD. 293T cells, transfected with Lrp4 (kindly provided by Dr.
Lin Mei), HA-tagged WT, WT/KA, MV and MV/KA MuSK expression vectors (2 µg each) via Lipofectamine 2000 (Invitrogen), were switched to DMEM
without serum for three hours prior to stimulation with various concentrations of agrin (5 to 10 nM) for one hour. Cells were rinsed with
ice-cold PBS and extracted in lysis buffer. Lysates were pre-cleared by centrifugation and incubated with anti-HA monoclonal antibody HA7;
Sigma) overnight. Antibody was captured with protein G-Sepharose beads, which were subsequently washed four times in lysis buffer. Bound
proteins were eluted from the beads with SDS sample buffer, resolved by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to Immobilon-P membranes (Millipore).
Membranes were blocked in Tris-buffered saline (TBS) containing 5% skim milk and incubated with 4G10 antibody for anti-phosphotyrosine
detection in TBS +3% skim milk and with HA (HA7) antibody for MuSK detection in TBS +1% skim milk. Phosphorylation was estimated with ImageJ
software. 293T cells were transfected with HA-tagged WT or mutated MuSK and/or Dok-7 expression vectors using Fugene6 (Roche). Two days
later, whole cell lysates from 293T cells were prepared with solubilization buffer (20 mM Tris-HCl, pH 7.5, 120 mM NaCl, 0.05% SDS, and 1%
Triton X-100, 1 mM Na3VO4). Immunoprecipitation and immunoblotting were performed basically as described above. The following antibodies
were used: anti-HA rat monoclonal antibody (3F19; Roche); anti-Dok-7 (H-77), anti-HA rabbit polyclonal antibody (Y-11) and horse-radish
peroxidase (HRP)-conjugated anti-goat IgG (Santa Cruz Biotechnology); anti-phosphotyrosine (4G10; Upstate Biotechnology); HRP-conjugated
anti-mouse and rat IgG (GE Healthcare). Relative signal intensity of MuSK proteins was measured using NIH Image (v. 1.63) software, and the
densitometric measurements of tyrosine phosphorylation levels for MuSK were normalized to the total amount of MuSK proteins. A 12-year-old
boy presented with congenital bilateral ptosis and slowly progressive muscle weakness, particularly in the lower limbs, which had been
observed since the age of 4. He had no sucking problems during infancy and started to walk at 14 months. A history of nocturnal sleep apnea
during childhood was mentioned by the parents. There was aggravation of symptoms following infections or exposure to cold without
fluctuation of weakness during the day. There were neither swallowing problems nor any crisis requiring hospitalization. His parents were
cousins from north-western province of Qazvin in Iran. He had a healthy younger sister. There was no history of similar diseases in the
family. Neurologic examination revealed severe bilateral symmetric ptosis and upward gaze palsy, without involvement of the orbicularis
oculi. Atrophy of distal lower limb muscles and the tongue was noted. There were no fasciculations, scoliosis, or joint contractures. Bulbar
and masticatory muscles were intact, while exertional dyspnea and mild axial muscle weakness were noted. Muscle weakness in all four limbs
was more marked proximally and there was a waddling gait as well as positive Gowers’ sign. Based on the quantitative myasthenia gravis score
, proximal upper limbs showed moderate clinical fatigability and lower limb proximal muscles revealed mild clinical fatigability. Deep
tendon reflexes and sensory data were normal. The anticholinesterase test with ambenonium chloride (Mytelase) or edrophonium chloride
(Tensilon) showed no dramatic positive response. Serum creatine kinase concentration was 53 U/L and anti-nAChR antibodies were not present.
Electrocardiography and echocardiography showed no significant abnormality, while vital capacity on spirometry was 68% of the normal value.
Sensory and motor nerve conduction velocities were normal. On electromyographic examination, motor units showed a myopathic pattern with low
amplitude short duration polyphasic potentials detected in several muscles. No significant decremental response was noted on 3 Hz repetitive
stimulation of forearm and spinal muscles. Computerized tomography of limb muscles showed diffuse, global amyotrophy, predominantly in the
lower limbs without any density abnormalities in the observed muscle masses. Treatment with cholinesterase inhibitors (pyridostigmine) was
not successful. The patient underwent muscle biopsy and blood samples were taken for genetic studies. Six years after his first visit (at 18
years of age), he lost ambulation and could walk only with help. The patient had one episode of generalized tonic-clonic seizure at the age
of 18 and two successive (within four hours) seizures at 19 years old, which were then controlled by carbamazepine. Three months later, he
developed a severe pulmonary infection and died at a local intensive care unit within one week. Initial screening for mutations in the
epsilon subunit of AChR and rapsyn genes was negative. Based on the histopathologic findings and the previous report of a family with a
mutation in MUSK, coding sequences of MUSK and their flanking regions were sequenced. A homozygous mutation consisting of an A to G
transition at nucleotide 2503 of the coding sequence in exon 15: c.2503A>G was identified (Figure 1 A). This mutation leads to the missense
substitution p.Met835Val (M835V). Analysis of family members showed that the mutation was transmitted by each heterozygous parent (Figure 1
A, B). None of the 200 control chromosomes from a sample of the Iranian population, nor the 200 French control chromosomes harbored this
mutation. (A) Sequence chromatograms from a normal individual (control), affected proband IV: 1 and his parents (parents) are shown. (B)
Pedigree of the Iranian family. The proband is indicated by an arrow. The expected nucleotide change c.2503A>G transmitted in this
consanguineous Iranian family is indicated below the symbols when determined. (C) 3D model of the cytoplasmic kinase domain dimer of human
MuSK built by homology modeling based on the structure of rat MuSK (PDB code: 1LUF) superimposed on the structure of the Insulin-like Growth
factor 1 (PDB code 3D94), as proposed recently . The model is shown in cartoon representation; also represented in sticks are the catalytic
residues (Tyrosines 751, 755 and 756, Aspartate 725 and Arginine 729) and residues whose mutations are associated with myasthenic syndromes
A727/M605, V790 and M835). N-terminus, C-terminus and a loop not resolved in the structure are also indicated. The mutation is located near
the C-terminal of MuSK and leads to a methionine to valine substitution at codon 835. A model of the human cytoplasmic kinase domain dimer
of human MuSK was built by homology modeling based on the structure of rat MuSK (PDB code: 1LUF) superimposed on the structure of the
Insulin-like Growth factor 1 (PDB code 3D94), as proposed recently . Inspection of the model reveals that the residue M835 is not exposed to
the solvent, and is close to residues already known to be involved in myasthenic syndromes (V790, and A727) , , but not in direct proximity
to the catalytic residues or interface of dimerisation (Figure 1 C). Whole fibers of the biopsied deltoid muscle were studied by
coimmunolabeling of nAChR and neurofilaments then observed by confocal microscopy. Major alterations were observed in different compartments
of the NMJ. In the presynaptic compartment, unlike a normal nerve terminal which ends by dividing into several branches, the terminal axon
at best bifurcated in contacting small scattered synaptic cups (Figure 2 A). From this primary innervation axonal sprouts had emerged and
contacted nAChR cups, so increasing the synaptic territory. 66% of the axonal sprouts were nodal and 34% terminal or ultraterminal (Figure 2
B). In ultrastructural analysis, myelinated axons exhibited a network of smooth endoplasmic reticulum that could represent a sign of
perturbed axonal flow (Figure 3 C&D) . (A) Whole-mount preparations stained with α-bungarotoxin for nAChR in red and with an anti-
neurofilament (NF) antibody for axons in green. In the normal NMJ, the axonal branch typically ends as a fork innervating a well-defined
synaptic structure. In denervated NMJ, axons are absent. In some cases, axonal sprouts induce aggregation of nAChR forming ectopic junctions
as a rosary. The histogram shows the classification of the NMJs observed in the patient muscle-biopsy specimen into four categories
(expressed as percentage of the 25 NMJs examined). (B) In remodeled NMJs, nodal (arrow) or terminal (asterisk) axonal sprouts reinnervate
synaptic gutters. The histogram shows the classification of the sprouting profiles observed into two categories (expressed as a percentage
of the 16 NMJs exhibiting sprouts identified amongst the 25 NMJs analyzed). Scale bar = 10 µm and applies to all prints in A and B. (A)
Control endplate Patient’s endplates: (B) reinnervated endplate shows decreased and enlarged post-synaptic folds, a vanished basal lamina,
and absence of active zones. (C) Ectopic NMJ is characterized by the total absence of subneural folds indicating that they are at an early
stage of synaptogenesis. (D) An axon with a smooth endoplasmic reticulum (SER) network, a sign of impaired axonal flow. Zooms show
aggregation of unidentified proteins on SER networks. Scale bars represent 500 nm for the four low-magnification prints and 3 µm for both
zooms. The basal lamina as seen by electron microscopy was undefined with an unorganized granular substance at the synaptic cleft or,
sometimes, a duplication of its structure in enlarged subneural folds (Figure 3 B). In the post-synaptic compartment, 25 NMJs were analyzed
and classified into categories according to the structural state of this compartment: only 1 (4%) had a normal shape, 5 (20%) were
“denervated” with fragmented and dispersed synaptic gutters with evanescent borders and absence of nerve terminals, 13 (52%) “remodeled”
with partially denervated and reinnervating profiles, and 6 (24%) showing “neoformed”synaptic cups (Figure 2 A). In the ultrastructural
study, these neoformed NMJs were very immature and characterized by total absence of subneural folds (Figure 3 C). In the remodeled NMJs,
the subneural folds were enlarged and markedly decreased in both number and length (Figure 3 B). In control muscle, nAChR and MuSK were
colocalized (Figure 4). In the patient muscle MuSK labeling was not strictly colocalized with nAChR since it extended beyond the NMJ area.
In addition, nAChR staining was reduced in comparison with the control while no obvious difference of MuSK staining could be observed. In
the control, nAChR and MuSK are strongly expressed and perfectly colocalized. In the patient, nAChR expression is reduced whereas MuSK
expression remains normal and extends slightly in the perisynaptic area. The scale bar represents 10 µm and applies to the six prints. As
there was a decreased concentration of nAChR, we measured the total area of the synaptic gutters of each NMJ and the mean fluorescent
intensity of the α-bungarotoxin staining in patient versus control confocal images and noted a ∼50% decrease in nAChR in the patient versus
control (Figure 5 A). Using quantitative real-time PCR (qRT-PCR), we quantified the expression levels of nAChR γ-subunit mRNA in
extrasynaptic sections. We found an increased expression of the γ-subunit mRNA compared with the control (Figure 5 B), which reflects the
functional denervation state of muscle. (A) nAChR expression in MuSK mutated muscle from the patient was decreased by about 50% compared
with biopsied control muscle. (B) The nAChR γ-subunit mRNA level, which is synonymous with denervation, was measured in the extrasynaptic
zone in patient and was increased by 5-fold compared with the control. The mean value of control AChR (A) or AChR γ-subunit mRNA levels were
defined as 1 in arbitrary units. Error bars indicate mean±SD (**, P<0.01, Student t test). In order to evaluate the pathogenicity of the
mutation of methionine 835 of human MuSK into a valine, this mutation was reproduced in a rat MuSK cDNA using site-directed mutagenesis.
Because of the sequence numbering difference, the homologous mutation in rat MuSK cDNA is M834V. For simplification, we will use the symbol
MV to describe the M834V mutation. To evaluate the effect of the MV mutation in MuSK, wild-type (WT) or mutant (MV) MuSK expression vectors
were electroporated in mouse tibialis anterior muscle. NMJ morphology was studied by confocal microscopy following immunolabeling for nAChR
and neurofilaments. NMJs were then classified into several morphological categories according to the NMJ categorization used for the
patient. Among the NMJs counted, 12% were normal, 24% denervated, 56% remodeled and 8% neoformed (Figure 6 A). As in the patient biopsy
specimens, denervated NMJs exhibited fragmented gutters with evanescent borders and absence of nerve terminals (Figure 6 A). (A). Denervated
junctions were fragmented and dispersed without terminal axons. Remodeled junctions were partially reinnervated and showed nodal sprouts
forming more or less mature ectopic junctions (B). The arrow shows a mature ectopic junction with well-defined borders synonymous with
subneural fold formation. The asterisk and the zoom show the first steps of ectopic junction formation characterized by very simplified AChR
clusters induced by emergent nodal sprouts or axonal varicosity. Histograms show the distribution of different types of NMJs and sprouting
in MV MuSK electroporated mice. The scale bar represents 10 µm and applies to all prints except to the blowup where the scale bar represents
2.5 µm. In a remodeled NMJ, the terminal axon showed reduced nerve ramification which contacted some synaptic gutters. Furthermore, a nodal
sprout budded from this axon contacting an ectopic ring-shaped junction with well-defined borders synonymous with maturation (Figure 6 B).
We observed the first stage of ectopic NMJ formation. These NMJs are small clusters of AChRs induced by short nascent axonal nodal sprouts
(Figure 6A). The breakdown of axonal sprouts was similar to what was seen in patient NMJs: 64% nodal and 36% terminal or ultraterminal
(Figure 6 C). We also measured the total area of the synaptic gutters of each NMJ and the mean fluorescent intensity of the α-bungarotoxin
staining in MV- versus WT- MuSK electroporated animals and noted a ∼50% decrease in nAChR per NMJ with MV versus WT MuSK. To test whether
the mutation could affect nAChR aggregation, MuSK −/− cells expressing similar levels of WT- or MV-MuSK were used. MuSK −/− cells were used
as control. Differentiated myotubes (2–6 nuclei) were treated or not with agrin (0.1 nM). Without agrin stimulation, nAChR aggregation was
absent in MV and WT myotubes and virtually no clusters were observed. After agrin treatment nAChR aggregation became evident in WT myotubes
and reached ∼3 nAChR clusters per myotube whereas it remained unchanged, i.e. close to the baseline in MV myotubes (Figure 7). (A) MuSK −/−
cells failed to aggregate nAChR with or with agrin treatment. We observed some aneural nAChR clusters in both WT and MV MuSK cells. After
agrin treatment, nAChR clusters of more than 3 µm length appeared in WT MuSK cells while they remained almost undetectable in MV MuSK cells.
Scale bar = 20 µm. (B) Histogram showing the number of nAChR aggregates of more than 3 µm per myotube that crossed the field from 3
independent experiments (20 fields in each Petri dish were randomly counted for each set of experimental conditions). Error bars indicate
mean±SD (**, P<0.01, Student t test). To investigate if MuSK activation was impaired by the mutation, MuSK phosphorylation was measured in
293T cells transfected with WT- or MV-MuSK constructs in combination or not with Lrp4. The cells were further treated or not with agrin (10
nM). MuSK was immunoprecipitated from the cell lysate with an anti-HA antibody, and visualized on western blots with the same antibody as
well as with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (Figure 8). As expected, Lrp4 was required for WT-MuSK phosphorylation in response to agrin.
However, it had no effect on MV-MuSK phosphorylation. Indeed, the MV-MuSK mutant, either alone or in combination with Lrp4, was already
strongly phosphorylated in the absence of agrin, and agrin treatment did not further stimulate its phosphorylation. In other words the MV-
MuSK mutant was always more phosphorylated (3 times more) than WT MuSK, except in the presence of both Lrp4 and agrin where WT-MuSK reached
the same level of activation as MV-MuSK mutant. This suggests that the mutation impairs the activation of MuSK phosphorylation by agrin by
conferring to MuSK elevated basal levels of phosphorylation. To test whether this unexpected phosphorylation of MV MuSK was due to the
phosphorylation of normally unexposed tyrosine residues, unmasked by a change in the conformation of MV MuSK, by another cellular kinase, we
expressed a kinase-dead MV-MuSK. We concluded that this was not the case since phosphorylation of MV MuSK was completely abolished in the
context of an inactive MuSK kinase activity (Figure 9). HEK 293 cells expressing both Lrp4 and MuSK were incubated with recombinant rat
agrin. (A) HA-MuSK was immunoprecipitated (IP) with an anti-HA antibody (α HA) and immunoblots (IB) for MuSK (α HA) and phosphorylated MuSK
(α pTyr) were performed. A representative experiment out of three realized in duplicate is shown. MuSK amount and phosphorylation were then
estimated with ImageJ software. (B) Phosphorylation is expressed as n-fold activation as compared to WT MuSK without Lrp4 and agrin. Error
bars indicate mean±SD (n = 3; **, P<0.01, paired t test). Comparison between MV and WT MuSK shows that while WT MuSK needs the presence of
both agrin and Lrp4 to be phosphorylated, MV MuSK is already phosphorylated even in the absence of Lrp4 and agrin. HEK 293 cells expressing
both Lrp4 and MuSK were incubated with recombinant rat agrin. HA-MuSK was immunoprecipitated (IP) with an anti-HA antibody (α HA) and
immunoblots (IB) for MuSK (α HA) and phosphorylated MuSK (α pTyr) were performed. A representative experiment out of three realized in
duplicate is shown. As expected the introduction of the dead-kinase mutation in WT MuSK (WT/KA) abolishes the phosphorylation observed in
the presence of both Lrp4 and agrin. The introduction of the kinase-dead mutation together with the MV mutation (MV/KA) abolishes the
spontaneous phosphorylation of MV MuSK (MV) seen in the absence of Lrp4 and agrin. Since phosphorylation of MuSK is critically influenced by
its co-activator Dok7 , the agrin-independent phosphorylation of MuSK was evaluated after the co-transfection of WT or MV MuSK constructs
with Dok-7 in 293T cells. V790M, another MUSK mutation was also studied . Immunoblotting of whole cell lysates (WCLs) with anti-HA antibody
(to reveal MuSK), anti-Dok7 antibody, and anti-phosphotyrosine antibody showed that the levels of expression of WT, VM and MV MuSKs were
similar as was that of Dok7 in all lanes. However, immunoblotting with an anti-phosphotyrosine antibody revealed that MV-MuSK was
significantly less activated by Dok7 than WT-MuSK, and even less than V790M-MuSK (Figure 10 A, B). HA-MuSK (WT, VM, or MV) and/or WT-Dok-7
proteins were exogenously expressed in 293T cells and the whole cell lysates (WCLs) were subjected to immunoprecipitation (IP) of MuSK
proteins with anti-HA rabbit polyclonal antibody (α HA pAb) and immunoblotting (IB) with anti-HA rat monoclonal antibody (α HA mAb), anti-
Dok-7 antibody (α Dok-7), or anti-phosphotyrosine antibody (α pTyr). (A) Representative data from 3 independent experiments are shown. (B)
Ratios of the tyrosine phosphorylation of MuSK to total amount of MuSK were quantified and shown. The mean value of Dok-7-dependent MuSK
(WT) phosphorylation levels was defined as 1 in arbitrary units. Error bars indicate mean±SD (n = 3; *, P<0.05; **, P<0.01, paired t test).
Immunoprecipitation of WCLs with anti-HA antibody, followed by immunoblotting with the same antibody showed that WT, VM and MV MuSKs were
expressed at similar levels. In addition, immunoblotting of the immunoprecipitate with a Dok7 antibody showed that Dok7 was well co-
immunoprecipated with WT MuSK. Conversely, Dok7 did not co-immunoprecipitate efficiently with MV-MuSK, and even less than with V790M-MuSK.
This suggests that the binding of Dok-7 to MuSK was impaired for both V790M-MuSK and MV-MuSK mutations (Figure 10 A). We report a novel
mutation in MUSK leading to a CMS. We formerly described two CMS siblings with a frameshift and a missense mutation in MuSK (c.220insC and
V790M) . Since then, only two other families have been described with CMS due to MuSK mutations , . The one reported in this paper is a
homozygous missense mutation M835V located in the kinase domain, like the previously reported mutations V790M , M605I and A727V . The
patient had a progressively deteriorating course starting from infancy with some worsening in cold weather and during infections, and
finally died of a pulmonary infection, while the previous MuSK patient (bearing c.220insC with V790M mutations) showed, apart from her
infancy, a more favorable course during the first two decades of life and at the present time is only suffering from ptosis and upper limb
weakness. However, it should be noted that our Iranian patient was never treated by the combination of pyridostigmine and diaminopyridine
(DAP), which was very efficacious for our first case and mildly beneficial for the Sudanese siblings . In contrast to many myasthenic
patients, our patient did not show daytime fluctuation of symptoms with worsening in the evening, bulbar symptoms or frank decremental
response on electromyography. Tongue atrophy, which is a characteristic sign in the anti-MuSK antibody positive type of autoimmune
myasthenia , was a remarkable finding in our patient and has also been reported in two CMS patients with Dok-7 mutations . MuSK is known to
be a key component in orchestrating both formation and maintenance of NMJs. The patient’s biopsy exhibited high plasticity of the NMJs with
about 70% of denervated or remodeled NMJs. It also showed a 50% decrease of the average number of nAChR (-50%) and a compensatory increase
of axonal sprouts, as was observed in mouse, where MuSK perturbation in adult muscle by RNA interference also induced sprouting of
presynaptic nerve terminals . Two types of sprouting can be distinguished in the biopsies: terminal and nodal, with a major predominance of
the latter. It is assumed that terminal sprouts may be due to NMJ local factors related to insulin-like growth factors (IGFs) . Muscle IGFs
could play a role in intramuscular nerve sprouting and are probably signaling factors from inactivated muscle to promote local restorative
reactions , . Nodal sprouts appear far from the synaptic cleft and are therefore unlikely to be under direct influence of NMJ local factors.
We assume that their formation is partly controlled by factors released by muscle or Schwann cells. Such factors could be modified then
transported by the retrograde axonal flow. Muscle-derived retrograde signals might also be passed to motor neuron terminals via terminal
Schwann cells, which are essential components for growth, maturation, and maintenance of the NMJ , . The hypothesis of disturbed axonal
flows is particularly supported by the presence of a smooth endoplasmic reticulum network in the patient’s axons. This smooth endoplasmic
reticulum network has already been described in frontal biopsy specimens from patients with Alzheimer's disease and in motor axon from
Trembler mice and can be attributed to disturbances of axoplasmic flow. Evidence that the M835V mutation is responsible for high NMJ
remodeling capacity, decreased number of nAChR and both nodal and terminal compensatory innervation is provided by reproducing these same
results in electroporated mouse muscle. The fact that the mutated MuSK was expressed in the presence of endogenous MuSK could suggest that
the mutated MuSK had a dominant negative effect on wild-type MuSK. This would be in contradistinction with the recessive expression of the
mutation in human. The most probable explanation is that, owing to the electroporation efficiency, the number of mutated MuSK molecules
sufficiently exceeded that of endogenous MuSK to displace it from all its cellular partners and thus, that only the mutated MuSK was
functional at the NMJ. In other words, the fact that elevated levels of mutated MuSK generated the same effect as in the patient likely
shows that the phenotype is not attributable to reduced levels of MuSK, but rather to an altered ability of the mutated MuSK to perform its
physiological function. An interesting observation was that agrin had almost no effect on the ability of the MV MuSK mutant to induce nAChR
aggregation, while a twofold reduction of the clusters was observed in agrin-treated muscle cells expressing either MuSK V789M or MuSK M605I
as compared with cells expressing MuSK WT , . To address this point, MuSK phosphorylation was measured in heterologous cells in the absence
of agrin and we found that MV MuSK was already phosphorylated and that agrin treatment did not significantly increase its phosphorylation.
This “spontaneous” phosphorylation was not due to phosphorylation of other residues than those phosphorylated in WT-MuSK since introducing
the kinase-dead mutation K608A completely abolished phosphorylation both in WT and MV-MuSK. It is generally accepted that the activation of
MuSK is linked to its dimerization . Consistently, the expression of the MuSKneuTMuSK homodimer in the extrasynaptic zone of a muscle
induces the formation of AChR aggregates . Whether or not conformational changes of MuSK, which are induced by the mutation - and discussed
below - could lead to such spontaneous homodimerization of MuSK remains speculative, especially in vivo. As opposed to other RTKs which are
only activated by their ligand, MuSK phosphorylation is known to be also increased by Dok-7, at least when overexpressed , , . We therefore
asked if the induction of MuSK phosphorylation by Dok-7 was impaired by the mutation. Interestingly, MV MuSK phosphorylation in the presence
of Dok7 was 60% lower than with WT MuSK. MuSK-Dok-7 co-immunoprecipitation experiments further showed that this could be due to reduced
binding of Dok-7 to the mutated MuSK. It therefore appears that mutations in DOK7 or MUSK leading to a CMS can impair at various levels MuSK
phosphorylation and MuSK binding to Dok-7 , , . This impairment was striking for the present homozygous M835V MUSK mutation, more than for
our previously described mutation (MUSK V790M) . Being faced with the end-result in the patient, which is a twofold decrease of AChR number
at the NMJ, knowing which combination of the above mechanisms (agrin/LRP4 and Dok-7 interaction with mutated MuSK) is actually taking place
in the patient remains a question. According to the 3D model of MuSK structure , the M835 residue is neither exposed to the solvent nor
proximal to the catalytic residues. The effect of the mutation of this residue on MuSK phosphorylation is therefore likely to be allosteric
rather than steric. An allosteric effect may be related to a loss of stability of the protein or a modification of its structure; however
the M to V mutation might not be strong enough to induce such a drastic change at the molecular level because Methionine and Valine are both
small hydrophobic residues. The mutation could also alter the conformational equilibrium associated with MuSK function. A similar
explanation has been suggested in the case of the nAChR , following the observation that myasthenic mutations are not randomly distributed
in the structure but rather clustered in zones that can control the activation of the receptor. Interestingly, the M835 residue is in the
vicinity of V790 and A727, which are also associated with myasthenic syndromes; this proximity might be interpreted as an argument in favor
of an allosteric effect modifying the conformational equilibrium. We can therefore speculate that the M835V mutation induces a change in
function that counteracts agrin- and Dok-7-dependent typical activation of MuSK and that, in fine, is responsible for the patient’s
myasthenic syndrome.
