A 46-year-old Vietnamese woman received embolization therapy in order to control postpartum hemorrhage. Angiography revealed an aberrant
ovarian artery arising from the right common iliac artery. Superselective catheterization and subsequent embolization of the aberrant
ovarian artery and bilateral uterine arteries were performed. Precise knowledge of the anatomic variations of the ovarian artery is
important for successful embolization. Uterine artery embolization (UAE) is a safe and effective procedure for the control of postpartum
hemorrhage (1). Detailed knowledge of uterine vascularization and ovarian artery supply to the uterus is necessary for the management of
postpartum hemorrhage. The ovarian arteries usually arise from the anterior circumference of the abdominal aorta at the level of the renal
arteries (2). Anatomic variations of the ovarian arteries are relatively common (2), and awareness regarding these variants is essential for
successful UAE. Few studies have reported the abnormal origin or course of ovarian arteries (2, 3). Here, we present a very rare case of an
aberrant ovarian artery arising from the common iliac artery. A 46-year-old pregnant woman at 31 weeks gestation was referred to the
gynecology department of our hospital for premature membrane rupture with uterine atony and placenta accreta. She had no significant past
medical history, except a previous caesarean section. After an emergency caesarean section, the patient presented severe postpartum
hemorrhage secondary to uterine atony and was referred to our department (interventional radiology). Embolization was performed using the
single femoral artery approach with insertion of a 5-Fr introducer sheath (Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). At the beginning of the procedure, flush
aortography (Fig. 1A) with a 5-Fr pigtail catheter (Cook, Bloomington, IN) positioned at the level of the celiac trunk showed a single
aberrant artery arising from the right common iliac artery. Selective angiography of the aberrant artery using a 5-Fr Yashiro catheter
(Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) revealed that it had a sinuous course and was tortuous (Fig. 1B). This artery showed the typical ovarian blush and
abundant collateral perfusion to the markedly enlarged uterine fundus (Fig. 1C). Both ovarian arteries could not be observed on pelvic
aortography, and anastomosis with the uterine artery was not clearly defined. The diameter of the aberrant artery was larger than the
diameters of both uterine arteries. Selective angiography of both the internal iliac arteries and both uterine arteries showed markedly
increased uterus vascularity. The aberrant ovarian artery (Fig. 1D) and both uterine arteries (Fig. 1E, F) were embolized with 1 × 1 mm
gelfoam pledgets (Johnson & Johnson, Skipton, UK) by using a 2.7-Fr microcatheter (Progreat®, Terumo, Tokyo, Japan). Vaginal bleeding ceased
after this successful embolization procedure. Three days after embolization, the patient underwent a contrast-enhanced abdominal-pelvic
computed tomography (CT) scan, and no associated unusual findings such as anomalies of the kidney or renal arteries were noted. The
patient's condition rapidly stabilized after the embolization procedure, and she was discharged in a good condition. Anatomic variations in
the origin of ovarian arteries are relatively common (2), and awareness regarding these variants is essential to ensure successful UAE. Few
cases of an aberrant ovarian artery originating from the inferior mesenteric artery or renal artery have been reported (2, 3). In the
present report, we described an aberrant artery originating from the common iliac artery. We suggested that this aberrant artery was an
ovarian artery because of its characteristic sinuous course and tortuous shape. This artery supplied the right adnexa and a large portion of
the enlarged uterine fundus. Its diameter was larger than the diameters of both uterine arteries. We believe that the enlargement of the
aberrant ovarian artery was a response to pregnancy. One of the reasons underlying embolization failure is non-embolized aberrant branches
continuing to perfuse the uterus (4-6). If vaginal bleeding persists after UAE, aberrant arteries or collateral blood supply must be checked
for and these arteries should also be embolized. In conclusion, we described a very rare case of an aberrant ovarian artery arising from the
common iliac artery supplying a large portion of the uterus. Currently, ovarian artery embolization is frequently performed, ever since the
advent of UAE for treating postpartum hemorrhage. Therefore, precise knowledge of the anatomic variations of the ovarian artery is important
for embolization to be successful. Images of 46-year-old female patient with postpartum hemorrhage. Flush aortography (A) showing aberrant
ovarian artery arising from right common iliac artery (arrow). Selective angiography (B) showing that artery has sinuous course and is
tortuous (arrows). This artery shows typical ovarian blush (arrow) and abundant collateral perfusion to markedly enlarged uterine fundus
(open arrow) (C). Embolization of aberrant ovarian artery demonstrating occlusion of uterine branches of artery (D). Selective angiography
of right uterine artery (E) and post-embolization state of this artery (F).
