Borderline para-ovarian cysts (PCs) are rare entities. They are commonly present in the third decade. Borderline PCs are often discovered
fortuitously on routine ultrasound examination or they are common incidental findings during a laparotomy. They must be differentiated from
simple ovarian cysts, peritoneal inclusion cysts and hydrosalpinges on ultrasound sonography. Papillary projections on the cyst wall should
be searched carefully to suggest diagnosis. The treatment is surgical including fertility -sparing operation or more radical surgery
depending on the case. The prognosis is good because borderline PCs are usually early-stage at diagnosis. Here is a report of a 38- year old
woman with a borderline paratubal cyst. Adnexal torsion of hydrosalpinx was suspected; thus, she underwent an urgent surgery. Cystectomy was
performed without rupture. The final diagnosis revealed a borderline PC. The patient underwent a radical surgery. Currently, she has had no
evidence of disease recurrence. Paraovarian or paratubal cysts constitue about 10-20% of adnexial masses. They are usually asymptomatic and
benign [1, 2]. Borderline paratubal cysts are identified as epithelial proliferation without stromal invasion; these rare tumors have been
reported only as case reports in the literature. We report a case of a 38 - year woman with a borderline paratubal cyst. She underwent an
urgent surgery since we suspected an adnexal torsion of hydrosalpinx. A 38-year old woman, mother of three children was referred to our
gynecological emergencies with an acute onset of persistent sharp right lower quadrant pain as well as nausea and vomiting. Her
gynecological exam findings were right lower quadrant pain and rebound tenderness with right lateral uterine wheelbase. Sonographic
evaluation revealed a 100/52mm right oblong adnexal cyst, clearly separated from the ipsilateral ovary suggesting a hydrosalpinx (Figure 1,
Figure 2). The patient underwent laparotomy due to a torsion indicated by the clinical and paraclinical examination. We opted for laparotomy
for two reasons.First, the patient had a triple cicatricial uterus. Second, laparoscopy colomn is not available at the emergencies. During
the surgery, a 10cm twisted right paratubal cyst and normal bilateral ovaries were diagnosed (Figure 3). Cystectomy was performed without
rupture (Figure 4) and the cyst was sent to pathology. Grossly, the paraovarian cyst measured 10X5cm, contained serous fluid, rare papillary
projections measuring 0,5cm were noted in the outer surface of the cyst. The sonographic evaluation showed a 100/52mm right oblong adnexal
cyst suggesting a hydrosalpinx Ultrasound showed that the cyst is clearly separated from the ipsilateral ovary At surgery, a 10cm twisted
right paratubal cyst were diagnosed Cystectomy was performed without rupture Histologically, papillary epithelial proliferation was
recognized. The epithelium showed nuclear stratification, gland formation and atypical papillary proliferations. No invasive features were
recognized. The tumor was pathologically diagnosed as borderline serous papillary tumor within PC (Figure 5). Abdominal pelvic CT scan and
tumor markers (CA125) were normal. The patient underwent radical surgery: washings, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy,
omentectomy, biopsies. During the final pathology review, no metastatic disease was observed. After one year of follow up, the patient was
free of disease recurrence. Borderline paratubal cyst: The epithelium showed nuclear stratification, gland formation and atypical papillary
proliferations. No invasive features were recognized Paraovarian cysts (PCs) account for about 10-20% for all adnexal masses [1, 2]. They
may be wolffian duct or paramesonephrotic duct remains, they arise from the broad ligament between the fallopian tube and the ovary .
Although Paraovarian cysts are common disorders, borderline PCs are rare, they have been reported only as case reports in the literature.
The average age noted by most authors is 31years . Borderline PCs are often discovered fortuitously on routine ultrasound examination or
they are common incidental findings during laparotomy, however sometimes they become symptomatic with acute abdominal pain when they are
torsed or ruptured [5, 6]. Transvaginal sonography(TVS) may raise some signs that enable a correct differential diagnosis. It also has the
advantage of allowing a dynamic evaluation of the patient in comparaison with any other imaging modality (computed tomography, magnetic
resonance imaging). The differential diagnosis includes a simple ovarian cyst, peritoneal inclusion cyst and hydrosalpinx; In fact, the
proximity to the ovary, the possible presence of septations and small parietal papillae, should be considered in the differencial diagnosis
along with peritoneal inclusion cyst and hydrosalpinx (Table 1). Peritoneal inclusion cysts are multilocular cystic masses with an
irregular, star like morphology and no proper wall; septations are multiple and free to oscillate when moving the probe (flapping sail
sign). Hydrosalpinges are tortuous convoluted cystic adnexal masses delimited by a distinct wall and showing small hyperechoic mural nodules
on the cross-section of the salpinx, named (beads-on -a-string). Both hydrosalpinges and paraovarian cysts have the (split sign) identified
by pushing the tip of the vaginal probe between this structures and ipsilateral ovary . Differential diagnosis of paraovarian cysts,
hydrosalpinges and peritoneal inclusion cysts Although little is known regarding the findings of preoperative imaging studies of patients
presenting borderline paraovarian cysts, the authors described low-level echoes seen within the cyst and papillary projections on the cyst
wall which should be searched carefully . However, paraovarian cysts are sometimes removed, and are considered as benign; it is not until
pathological assessment that the borderline tumor is recognized. This is exactly what happened in our case. When ultrasound shows papillary
projections in the cyst, frozen section analysis must be performed. Unfortunately, in some cases, the absence of typical ultrasound features
leads to misdiagnosing these cysts as benign lesions. Borderline paraovarian cysts are usually early-stage at diagnosis. It has been
suggested that the histologic appearance of those tumors is identical with that of borderline ovarian tumors; however, it is not known
whether their biological behavior is also similar . The intraoperative management includes salpingostomy with tubal cystectomy, partial or
complete salpingectomy, hysterectomy and bilateral oophorosalpingectomy, or salpingectomy along with pelvic-aortic lymphadenectomy or pelvic
nodal sampling and omentectomy or biopsy with pelvic nodal sampling . In review of the literature, no positive lymph nodes or metastatic
disease were found in patients undergoing more comprehensive staging and no recurrence was observed in the follow-up of these patients. .
While the optimal procedure is unknown, patients desiring future childbearing may be applying for fertility -sparing operation.If patients
have no desire for fertility, more radical surgery may be preferred (washings, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, pelvic-aortic
lymphadenectomy, omentectomy, biopsies) . Pelvic aortic lymphadenectomy is still a controversial subject : in our case the treatment was:
washings, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy and biopsies without pelvic aortic lymphadenectomy. However, close
follow-up is needed to detect recurrent disease after conservative, fertility-sparing surgery. Combining routine ultrasonography and markers
(CA125 in serous tumor and 19.9 in mucinous tumor) during follow-up examinations and prolongation of such follow-ups after 10 years were
suggested . Some cases of relapse have been observed but this had no impact on survival . Paraovarian cysts are usually asymptomatic and
benign. They can become symptomatic when they are torsed or ruptured. Paraovarian cysts are very difficult to diagnose with sonography: The
differential diagnosis includes a simple ovarian cyst, peritoneal inclusion cyst and hydrosalpinx. Papillary projections on the cyst wall
should be searched carefully to suggest borderline PC diagnosis which still a very rare entity. The treatment included fertility -sparing
operation or more radical surgery depending on whether the patient wishes future childbearing or not. Borderline paraovarian cysts are
usually early-stage at diagnosis; thus the prognosis still good. Continued reporting of these tumors is essential to understanding the
diagnosis and management of this rare neoplasm. The authors declared no competing interest. Fatima Zohra Fdili Alaoui was in charge of the
patient; she also conducted the bibliography research and wrote the article. Hinde El Fatemi, Hekmat Chaara, Molay Abdilah Melhouf, Afaf
Amarti were in charge of the patient. All the authors have read and approve thf inal version of the manuscript.
