The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Immunosuppression, which has become an increasingly relevant clinical condition
in the last 50 years, modifies the natural history of Trypanosoma cruzi infection in most patients with Chagas disease. The main goal in
this setting is to prevent the consequences of reactivation of T. cruzi infection by close monitoring. We analyze the relationship between
Chagas disease and three immunosuppressant conditions, including a description of clinical cases seen at our center, a brief review of the
literature, and recommendations for the management of these patients based on our experience and on the data in the literature. T. cruzi
infection is considered an opportunistic parasitic infection indicative of AIDS, and clinical manifestations of reactivation are more severe
than in acute Chagas disease. Parasitemia is the most important defining feature of reactivation. Treatment with benznidazole and/or
nifurtimox is strongly recommended in such cases. It seems reasonable to administer trypanocidal treatment only to asymptomatic
immunosuppressed patients with detectable parasitemia, and/or patients with clinically defined reactivation. Specific treatment for Chagas
disease does not appear to be related to a higher incidence of neoplasms, and a direct role of T. cruzi in the etiology of neoplastic
disease has not been confirmed. Systemic immunosuppressive diseases or immunosuppressants can modify the natural course of T. cruzi
infection. Immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids have not been associated with higher rates of reactivation of Chagas disease. Despite
a lack of evidence-based data, treatment with benznidazole or nifurtimox should be initiated before immunosuppression where possible to
reduce the risk of reactivation. Timely antiparasitic treatment with benznidazole and nifurtimox (or with posaconazole in cases of
therapeutic failure) has proven to be highly effective in preventing Chagas disease reactivation, even if such treatment has not been
formally incorporated into management protocols for immunosuppressed patients. International consensus guidelines based on expert opinion
would greatly contribute to standardizing the management of immunosuppressed patients with Chagas disease. Immunosuppression has gained
increasing clinical relevance in the last 50 years. The list of neoplastic and systemic diseases that cause immunosuppression is increasing,
as is the use of new immunosuppressive drugs. Furthermore, the exponential increase in the incidence of AIDS cases in the last 30 years has
contributed to a significant increase in the number of immunosuppressed patients . In most cases, immunosuppression modifies the natural
history of other diseases, predisposing patients to the development or reactivation of opportunistic infections, with special, and often
severe, clinical features . The management of emerging infectious diseases, often unfamiliar to the clinician, becomes relevant in this
context. One of the most prevalent parasitic infections that has spread from Latin America to non-endemic areas such as the United States,
Canada, and Europe is Chagas disease, or American trypanosomiasis , . Its etiological agent, Trypanosoma cruzi, has not traditionally been
considered an opportunistic agent, but in recent decades there have been many reports of reactivation in immunocompromised patients (mainly
those with AIDS) . With increasing migratory flows from poor, rural areas to large cities and developed, non-endemic countries, a growing
number of patients with chronic Chagas disease are being diagnosed with other conditions that cause immunosuppression or require treatment
with immunosuppressants; under these conditions, reactivation of the parasite is a likely outcome . Reactivation is defined as an increase
in parasitemia that can be detected by direct parasitological and/or PCR techniques, even in the absence of clinical symptoms . The
appearance of symptoms represents a worsening of the underlying disease. The most common symptoms of Chagas disease reactivation are
subcutaneous nodules (chagoma), panniculitis, myocarditis with signs of heart failure, fever, meningitis, encephalitis, and stroke , but
other symptoms, such as fatigue, anorexia, and diarrhea, are also seen . In cases of reactivation, timely antiparasitic treatment with
benznidazole has proven to be highly effective . Several guidelines for the treatment of immunosuppressed patients with Chagas disease have
been published recently , but there is no international consensus on the management of reactivation in these patients. While treatment with
benznidazole is highly effective in reactivations , , it has not been formally incorporated into the management protocols of HIV/AIDS . In
this article we describe our experience with three immunosuppressive conditions (HIV infection, neoplastic disease, and systemic autoimmune
disease) in patients with T. cruzi infection and provide some practical recommendations for the management of these patients based on our
experience and a review of the literature. The aim is to contribute to the pool of knowledge in this area and to help improve the quality of
care of patients with T. cruzi infection and any of the immunosuppressive conditions analyzed. We analyzed three immunosuppressive
conditions in patients with T. cruzi infection: HIV/AIDS, neoplastic disease, and systemic autoimmune disease. For each category, we have
included a review of the relevant literature, a description of all the clinical cases seen at our clinical care center between June 2007 and
December 2010, and some recommendations for management based on our experience and the data in the literature. The cases were diagnosed and
treated at a specialist facility for the management of Chagas disease at the International Health Centre of Hospital Clínic in Barcelona,
Spain. Screening for all patients includes T. cruzi and HIV tests, and general analyses. Of 1,310 patients screened in the study period, T.
cruzi infection was diagnosed in 715 patients. Of these, three had concomitant HIV infection, five had a neoplastic disease, and three had a
systemic autoimmune disorder. According to our in-hospital protocol for Chagas disease, all the patients signed informed consent before
blood collection for diagnosis and before initiation of treatment with benznidazole. The therapeutic regimen in all cases was 5 mg/kg/day of
benznidazole for 60 days. The literature search was performed in the MEDLINE database using the terms Chagas disease and T. cruzi, with the
subheadings immunosuppression, HIV, systemic diseases, systemic lupus erythematosus, rheumatoid arthritis, reactivation, neoplasia,
corticoids, chemotherapy, benznidazole, nifurtimox, PCR, and management. T. cruzi infection has been classified as an AIDS-defining
opportunistic parasitosis by the US Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention since 2004 . Considering the increasing number of cases of
Chagas disease reactivation and the severity of the pathological manifestations associated with reactivation in patients with a low CD4+
T-cell count (usually <200 cells/mL) , , it is particularly important to consider T. cruzi infection as a potential opportunistic parasitic
infection in patients in or from Chagas disease–endemic countries. Even in asymptomatic patients, T. cruzi parasitemia is higher in those
with concomitant HIV infection than in those without , and specific treatment with benznidazole or nifurtimox is recommended in such cases.
The persistent immune activation induced by T. cruzi has been related to a sustained increase in HIV replication, with several studies
showing an increase in plasma HIV-1 viral load in patients with parasitemia, indicating reactivation of T. cruzi infection , . Reactivation
in immunosuppressed patients is usually associated with more severe clinical manifestations (e.g., central nervous system involvement,
chagomas, meningoencephalitis, and severe myocarditis) than those observed in immunocompetent patients with acute Chagas disease , . CNS
infection by T. cruzi is more common than myocardial damage in HIV-immunosuppressed patients , , , . Space-occupying lesions in the white
matter of the brain are the most common clinical finding, but meningitis and meningoencephalitis may also occur . CNS involvement was
reported in 75%–80% of patients with concomitant T. cruzi and HIV infection between 1990 (when del Castillo et al. described the first case
of a young man with HIV infection and a lesion in the right frontal lobe with inflammatory perivascular infiltrates and clusters of T. cruzi
amastigotes) and 2007 , , . Cardiac compromise is the second most prevalent manifestation of reactivated Chagas disease, occurring in
25%–44% of patients coinfected with T. cruzi and HIV , , . The most common cardiac manifestation is myocarditis, sometimes as a major
presentation, but usually with CNS involvement masking heart involvement , . Isolated reports of reactivation in other organs, such as the
gastrointestinal tract, pericardium , peritoneum , skin , and cervix uteri , have been published. The epidemiological and clinical
characteristics of the three patients with T. cruzi and HIV infection are shown in Tables 1 and 2, together with details of treatment and
follow-up. Reactivation was not observed in any of the patients, but it should be noted that their CD4+ T-cell count remained above 200
cells/mL throughout follow-up. ND, no data; EFV, efavirenz; EMC, emtricitabine; TDF, tenofovir; ABV, abacavir; 3TC, lamivudine. Mild chronic
cardiac disease according to Kuschnir classification . Relevant comorbidities: asymptomatic strongyloidosis diagnosed in 2006 treated with
albendazole and ivermectin; type 2 diabetes mellitus and high blood pressure, well controlled by oral antidiabetic and antihypertensive
drugs; macrocytic anemia due to folic acid deficiency. VC, contact with vector; VT, mother with T. cruzi infection; TF, transfusion in
endemic area; BZD, benznidazole; CCC, chronic cardiac disease stage; ND, no data; NA, not accomplished. HIV-positive patients with moderate
immunosuppression and latent Chagas disease are usually asymptomatic, and parasitemia normally increases before the appearance of symptoms .
Nevertheless, treatment with benznidazole or nifurtimox should be initiated as soon as any symptoms of T. cruzi infection reactivation are
noted, even in the absence of an increase in parasitemia , , , . Direct microscopic examination of blood and cerebrospinal fluid may reveal
the presence of T. cruzi trypomastigotes, which usually, but not always, precedes clinical manifestations . Parasitological and/or PCR
follow-up are thus mandatory in patients with HIV infection . In some patients with myocardial involvement, the clinical manifestations are
heart failure and arrhythmias, but findings from autopsy studies suggest that a significant proportion of patients with Chagas disease and
HIV/AIDS have clinically silent cardiac disease, even though they have inflammatory foci associated with T. cruzi–infected cardiomyocytes ,
. Brain imaging techniques are theoretically useful for exploring CNS involvement, but considering the lack of specificity of brain imaging
and the large variability in the space occupied by T. cruzi–induced lesions in individuals with AIDS, a brain biopsy provides better
guarantees of accurate diagnosis and appropriate therapy. Histopathologic examination of the space-occupying lesions of the brain shows
severe inflammation in association with heavily parasitized glial cells and occasionally neurons . Specific treatment with benznidazole or
nifurtimox is recommended when there is strong evidence of T. cruzi infection reactivation. The recommendation grade is AII (treatment
should always be offered) in patients with reactivated T. cruzi infection and HIV/AIDS or another immunosuppressive disorder, and BII
(treatment should generally be offered) in those with impending immunosuppression . Despite a lack of evidence-based data, T. cruzi–specific
treatment should be considered at the moment of HIV diagnosis, prior to severe immunosuppression, in order to prevent or minimize the risk
of Chagas disease reactivation. The duration of Chagas therapy has not been standardized in HIV/AIDS, but some groups recommend maintaining
treatment throughout immunosuppression , as is done in many patients with Chagas disease who undergo organ transplantation. Specific
chemotherapy in Chagas disease is still unsatisfactory, and while benznidazole and nifurtimox can be effective in reducing parasitemia,
controlling clinical manifestations, and reducing mortality (and thereby improving prognosis) during reactivations in immunocompromised
individuals, they have frequent adverse side effects and limited capacity for achieving a parasitological cure; such facts should be taken
in account to decide the length of treatment , . T. cruzi infection is an opportunistic parasitic infection indicative of AIDS. Clinical
manifestations are more severe in reactivation than in acute Chagas disease, and usually involve the CNS. Parasitemia should be considered
the most important defining feature of reactivation, because it usually increases before the onset of symptoms. Treatment with benznidazole
and/or nifurtimox is strongly recommended in cases of clinical and/or parasitological suspicion of reactivation. Little is known about the
relationship between the incidence of neoplastic disease and T. cruzi infection, or about whether the immune response induced by this
infection modifies the development or location of neoplasms. The relationship between immunosuppression and neoplastic disease in patients
with T. cruzi infection has been analyzed from three perspectives: 1) neoplastic disease as a potential immunosuppressive condition that
increases the likelihood of reactivation of infection; 2) neoplastic disease occurring as a result of treatment with benznidazole, either
alone or combined with immunosuppressive drugs; and 3) neoplastic disease as a condition that is potentially more common in patients with
Chagas disease. In our opinion, the most relevant issue regarding the association between neoplastic disease and Chagas disease is the
potential for T. cruzi reactivation and the management of this reactivation in order to prevent serious consequences. Based on clinical
observations, some authors have speculated as to whether benznidazole treatment in immunosuppressed patients might actually cause neoplasms
, . However, several clinical studies with long follow-up have found no evidence of a higher incidence of histological signs of malignancy
in such patients , , . The conclusions of these studies are clear: benznidazole is not related to the development of neoplasms and the
association between benznidazole and other immunosuppressive drugs does not contribute to an increased incidence of neoplastic disease. A
higher prevalence of esophageal carcinoma and uterine cervix leiomyoma has been reported in patients with chronic Chagas disease than in
individuals without T. cruzi infection . Esophageal carcinoma is more common in patients with Chagas disease and megaesophagus than in those
without Chagas disease , but a similar prevalence has been reported in patients without megaesophagus, regardless of whether or not they
have Chagas disease . The association between esophageal carcinoma and Chagas disease in patients with megaesophagus is probably a
consequence of the chronic esophagitis caused by alimentary stasis. Although some clinical studies have claimed an association between
megacolon due to Chagas disease and colon cancer , , an experimental study in mice with chagasic megacolon, where fecal stasis was observed,
failed to reveal a higher incidence of colon cancer In our series, four patients with T. cruzi infection had bone marrow cancer and one had
breast adenocarcinoma. The characteristics of the patients and the diseases are summarized in Table 3. Two of the patients died, one due to
myeloid acute leukemia and the other due to lymph node metastasis from primary breast adenocarcinoma. None of the patients had clinical
evidence of reactivation during follow-up. Severe chronic cardiac disease according to Kuschnir classification. ND, no data; NA, not
accomplished; NR, no reactivations; VC, contact with the vector; VT, mother with T. cruzi infection; IND, indeterminate stage of Chagas
disease; CCC, chronic cardiac disease stage; R-MEGACHOP, Rituximab-MEGACHOP; R-ESHAP, Rituximab-ESHAP; IDICE-G, idarubicin, ARA-C,
etoposide; MTX, intrathecal methotrexate; Mitox, mitoxantrone; VBCMP or M2, vincristine, carmustine, melphalan, cyclophosphamide,
prednisone; LN: lymph node. Reactivation of T. cruzi infection must be considered in patients with chronic Chagas disease and neoplastic
disease requiring intensive or long-term pharmacological immunosuppression. It is not possible, however, to make a general evidence-based
recommendation for the management of such patients or for the prevention of reactivation. The risks of toxicity associated with trypanocidal
treatment are well known and efficacy in patients with chronic disease is variable and limited, which renders risk/benefit analyses
difficult. Based on reports in the literature and on our experience, it would seem reasonable to administer trypanocidal treatment only to
asymptomatic immunosuppressed patients with detectable parasitemia (Strout method or PCR) at the moment of evaluation, or to patients with
clinically defined reactivation. Trypanocidal treatment at the moment of diagnosis and prior to immunosuppression might minimize the risk of
reactivation, but this indication is controversial and is not supported by evidence-based data. Experience in this area is limited to
isolated case reports and series. Specific treatment for Chagas disease does not appear to be related to a higher incidence of neoplasms,
and a direct role of T. cruzi in the etiology of neoplastic disease has not been confirmed. Reactivation, however, might be an unavoidable
consequence of immunosuppressive treatment. Patients with T. cruzi infection who need immunosuppressive therapy must thus be closely
followed, and treatment with benznidazole or nifurtimox is strongly recommended in cases of confirmed reactivation. Systemic autoimmune
diseases such as systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) and rheumatoid arthritis (RA) are considered rare in patients with T. cruzi infection,
but this may be due to the underdiagnosis of autoimmune diseases in low-income areas/countries. The coexistence of Chagas disease and these
two conditions has been rarely reported in the scientific literature, with only 12 cases of SLE and one of RA described to date . Barousse
et al. reported on a series of ten patients with SLE and T. cruzi infection treated with nifurtimox. Five of the patients were receiving
concomitant immunosuppressive therapy and three of these died. Reactivation was not identified in these patients (autopsy did not show T.
cruzi amastigotes, so Chagas disease was not identified as cause of death for any of them) or in the remaining seven patients monitored
during follow-up. Dos Santos-Neto et al. described a patient with mesangial proliferative lupus glomerulonephritis and Chagas disease
treated with prednisone (1 mg/kg) and monthly pulses of cyclophosphamide (1 g/m2 of body surface). They reported reactivation in the form of
CNS involvement and high parasitemia determined by xenodiagnosis, and treated successfully with benznidazole. After 8 years of follow up,
the patient died of generalized lupus vasculitis. The twelfth case of SLE in association with Chagas disease was described by our group in
2010 . In the only case of concomitant Chagas disease and RA in the literature , the patient developed polymyositis 28 years after the
diagnosis of RA. Benznidazole was not prescribed. The detection of parasites in the muscle lesions suggested Chagas disease etiology, and
the worsening clinical condition and disease progression could have been related to the use of corticosteroids. Two studies have provided
valuable information about the use of corticosteroids at immunosuppressive doses in patients with T. cruzi , . Rassi et al. described the
effectiveness of benznidazole in reducing reactivation rates in patients with T. cruzi infection treated with corticosteroids, but they also
described higher rates of parasitemia that appeared to be related to higher doses of corticosteroids. Nevertheless, in all the cases, there
were other causes of immunosuppression besides the long-term use of corticosteroids. There has just been one case reported of reactivation
of Chagas disease in which corticosteroids were the only immunosuppressive factor: that of a child receiving dexamethasone for a cranial
traumatism . Currently, there is no firm evidence of an association between immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids alone and higher
rates of T. cruzi reactivation . Our experience with Chagas disease in association with autoimmune diseases consists of three patients with
SLE and one with RA (Tables 4 and 5). All the patients received benznidazole from the moment of diagnosis, and no episodes of reactivation
were observed during follow-up. In one patient with SLE and chronic Chagas disease (the one coming from Misiones, Argentina) who was
diagnosed with lupus nephritis requiring immunosuppressive treatment, response to benznidazole was not achieved, but subsequent treatment
with posaconazole led to a successful resolution of the infection. In fact, despite maintenance of immunosuppressive therapy due to renal
involvement, parasitemia became negative and no episodes of reactivation were observed in a follow-up period of 36 months. AM, acid
mycophenolic; AZA, azathioprine; CYC, cyclophosphamide; HDX, hydroxychloroquine; MP, methylprednisolone; PDN, prednisone; RA, rheumatoid
arthritis; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus. Mild chronic cardiac disease according to Kuschnir classification . PCR was negative in nine
determinations between 03/18/2008 and 07/02/2010, after treatment with posaconazole. VC, contact with the vector; TF, transfusion in endemic
area; BZD, Benznidazole; CCC, chronic cardiac disease stage; ND, no data. The most relevant consequences of continuous immunosuppressive
treatment in patients with systemic autoimmune disease and Chagas disease is the risk of reactivation of T. cruzi infection and the
development of severe, chronic forms of the disease. Unfortunately, guidelines for the management of T. cruzi infection in this setting do
not exist. In immunosuppressed patients, trypanocidal treatment with benznidazole or nifurtimox is indicated (BII recommendation) . This
treatment should be initiated before immunosuppression where possible to decrease the risk of reactivation. The use of benznidazole in
patients who require long-term corticosteroid therapy is controversial due to the lack of supporting evidence. Clinicians should bear in
mind that the natural course of T. cruzi infection can be modified by other diseases or their treatment. Immunosuppressive doses of
corticosteroids have not been associated with higher rates of reactivation of Chagas disease. Furthermore, there have been no reports of a
relationship between Chagas disease reactivation and other immunosuppressive drugs used in the treatment of systemic autoimmune diseases,
and it has not been shown that these diseases have a direct role in the progression of T. cruzi infection. The number of patients under
immunosuppressive therapy is increasing and timely management is important to reduce the risk of comorbidities. The main goal in T.
cruzi–infected patients with an immunosuppressive condition is to prevent serious consequences of reactivation of T. cruzi infection by
close monitoring, and in the event of reactivation, to start early treatment with benznidazole and/or nifurtimox to minimize clinical
complications. Currently there is no international consensus on how to manage the clinical situations described in this article, and it is
difficult to develop evidence-based recommendations due to the small number of Chagas disease patients diagnosed with an immunosuppressive
condition besides HIV. As in other clinical situations, consensus guidelines based on expert opinion could greatly contribute to
standardizing the management of patients with T. cruzi infection and a concomitant immunosuppressive condition. Early diagnosis of T. cruzi
infection in immunosuppressed individuals is extremely important, and should be assessed prior to immunosuppressive treatment. In T.
cruzi–infected patients with an immunosuppressive condition, the main goal is to prevent reactivation by close monitoring. Parasitemia
measured by PCR techniques is recommended in immunosuppressed patients during follow-up. In cases of reactivation, early treatment with
benznidazole and/or nifurtimox is strongly recommended, and posaconazole should be indicated when this fails. de Freitas VL, da Silva SC,
Sartori AM, Bezerra RC, Westphalen EV, et al. (2011) Real-time PCR in HIV/Trypanosoma cruzi coinfection with and without Chagas disease
reactivation: association with HIV viral load and CD4 level. PLoS Negl Trop Dis 5(8): e1277. doi:10.1371/journal.pntd.0001277 Cordova E,
Boschi A, Ambrosioni J, Cudos C, Corti M (2008) Reactivation of Chagas disease with central nervous system involvement in HIV-infected
patients in Argentina, 1992–2007. Int J Infect Dis 12: 587–592. Galhardo MC, Martins IA, Hasslocher-Moreno A, Xavier SS, Coelho JM, et al.
(1999) Reactivation of Trypanosoma cruzi infection in patients with acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 32: 291–294.
Nishioka S de A (2000). Benznidazole in the primary chemoprophylaxis of the reactivation of Chagas' disease in chronic chagasic patients
using corticosteroids at immunosuppressive doses: is there sufficient evidence for recommending its use? Rev Soc Bras Med Trop 33: 83–85.
Bern C, Montgomery SP, Herwaldt BL, Rassi A Jr., Marin-Neto JA, et al. (2007) Evaluation and treatment of Chagas disease in the United
States: a systematic review. JAMA 298: 2171–2181. The research team would like to thank those who teach us every day and motivate our
investigation: our patients.
