The effectiveness of below-the-knee (BTK) percutaneous transluminal angioplasty to obtain successful revascularization in patients with
critical limb ischemia has been well established, and many of these patients with chronic lower-extremity disease have been treated by
endovascular intervention as the firstline treatment. Dorsal-plantaer loop technique is one of the new BTK interventional techiniques, and
includes recanalization of both pedal and plantar arteries and their anatomical anastomoses. This method generally needs two approaches
simultaneously, including antegrade and retrograde. In this report, however, we describe a case in which dorsal-plantar loop technique with
only one antegrade approach, using chronic total occlusion devices via anterior tibial artery, was used to successfully recanalize BTK
arteries. We think that this new technique, which may represent a safe and feasible endovascular option to avoid more invasive, time-
consuming, and riskier surgical procedures, especially in end-stage renal disease and diabetes, should be considered whenever the foot is at
risk, and results of above-the-ankle percutaneous transluminal angioplasty remain unsatisfactory or insufficient to achieve limb salvage.
Peripheral arterial disease of the lower extremities usually results from extensive atherosclerotic occlusive disease of the lower limb
arteries, and presents with claudication or critical limb ischemia (CLI). In patients with end-stage renal disease (ESRD) and diabetes, this
disease is accompanied with foot ulcers and/or gangrene and represents the leading cause of requiring a lower limb amputation.1 Improvement
in arterial circulation of the foot is essential to accelerate the healing of trophic alterations and to relieve the pain.2 We report a case
of successful recanalization of below-the-knee (BTK) arteries which was treated by dorsal-plantar loop technique using chronic total
occlusion (CTO) devices via anterior tibial artery. A 61-year-old male was admitted to our hospital due to a nonhealing diabetic ulcer
management and transferred from orthopedics. He had a history of hypertension, diabetes, and 40 pack years smoking, and had received
percutaneous transluminal angioplasty with stent implantation at right superficial femoral artery. He presented with extensive ulceration
localized at dorsum, sole and toes of the left foot, persistent rest pain, and a Rutherford classification of grade 5.3 On physical
examination, we could feel the arterial pulse at the femoral and popliteal levels, but the pulse of left dorsalis pedis artery was not
palpable. Before angiography, we checked computed tomography of the lower-extremities, but the result was confusing because of severe
calcification. The left common femoral artery was punctured, and a 5 Fr Ansel sheath (Cook, Bloomington, IN, USA) was moved into the left
popliteal artery and then diagnostic angiography was performed. Baseline angiography showed total occlusion of the left infrapopliteal
artery with proximal portion of three distal run-off vessels (Fig. 1A and B). The first target vessel for recanalization was posterior
tibial artery (PTA) because of the site of the ulcer. However, we could not see the ostium of PTA, and wiring through PTA and anterior
tibial artery (ATA) was difficult. Therefore, wiring through the peroneal artery was done, and balloon angioplasty was then conducted at the
left peroneal artery. After peroneal artery balloon angioplasty, we could see distal flow of PTA, however, an attempt to move the wire to
the ostium of PTA was unsuccessful. Since diffuse wound was distributed on the entire area of the foot and we could not find the puncture
site (Fig. 1C and D), transpedal retrograde approach could not also be performed. Therefore, we tried to pass the wire through the ATA, but
wiring through ATA failed. We decided to pass the wire using subintimal approach method. The wire through the true lumen of ATA was
confirmed by the use of contrast injection, and then balloon angioplasty was performed using 3.0×100 mm EverCross balloon (ev3 Inc.,
Plymouth, MN, USA). Next, we tried to pass the wire through the ostium of PTA again, but failed. Finally, dorsal-plantar loop technique via
the anterior tibial artery with CTO devices was performed as an alternative method. A 300-cm-long 014-inch hydrophilic guidewire (PT2;
Boston Scientific, Natick, MA, USA) using the Corsair microcatheter (Asahi Intecc Co. Ltd., Aichi, Japan) could be advanced antegradely from
distal ATA via dorsal-plantar loop (consisting of dorsalis pedis artery, deep plantar artery, deep plantar arch and lateral plantar artery)
to proximal PTA. When balloon angioplasty was tried with 2.0×120 mm NanoCross balloon (ev3 Inc., Plymouth, MN, USA), the balloon could not
penetrate toward proximal PTA because of resistance. Therefore, we extracted the wire, which was retrogradely passed from ATA via the left
femoral sheath by using snare catheter (pfm medical ag, Koln, Germany). After successful wire passage, balloon angioplasty was performed
with 3.0×100 mm EverCross balloon, penetrating from proximal to distal part of PTA (Fig. 2). Final angiography demonstrated a well
visualized anterior tibial artery, dorsal-plantar loop, and posterior tibial artery with improved flow (Fig. 3). After 24 hour of
observation, the patient was transferred to an orthopedics without complications, and then wound healing was achieved by surgical repair by
necrotic tissue debridement and skin graft. Peripheral percutaneous transluminal angioplasty is a method for treating CLI, especially
infrapopliteal level, with outcomes similar to those of bypass surgery.4,5 Ultimate aim of revascularization in patients with CLI is to
prevent limb loss, including major amputation to improve patient's quality of life, and to prolong survival. However, BTK intervention may
be very challenging until recently because it is often necessary to treat very long occlusions of BTK vessels. The typical patient group of
complex BTK lesions represents an increasing population of patients due to increasing prevalence of diabetes and ESRD. In addition to that,
although limb salvage rates are low, the endovascular intervention have the advantage of safety and low morbidity, and might offer
economical benefits, especially in patient with ESRD and diabetes. Diabetic foot ulcer occupy about 15% in patients with type 2 diabetes
during their lifetime, and approximately 20% of these end up with some kind of amputation.6 Therefore, multiple interventional devices and
techniques available can offer patients with treatment options for diseased arterial territories that have not traditionally been amenable
to treatment, especially BTK interventions. Dorsal-plantaer loop technique is one of the new BTK interventional techiniques and includes
recanalization of both pedal and plantar arteries and their anatomical anastomoses, and this method generally needs two simultaneous
approaches, including antegrade and retrograde.7,8 Manzi, et al.9 reported excellent results in clinical study showing 85% of acute success
rate, 86% of limb salvage rate and 7.5 to 8% of repeated target vessel percutaneous transluminal angioplasty among 135 patient approached
with dorsal-plantar loop techinique. Most of diabetic ulcers are formed in distal part of the foot, and the arteries of the foot are
terminal branches of ATA and PTA, dorsal and plantar arteries, respectively, and these arteries are the major source of blood supply to
toes, dorsum and sole of foot.10 Therefore, revascularization of these arteries plays an important role in limb salvage and is a treatment
for patients with non-healing ulcers and possible limb loss. This patient underwent complex interventions with dorsal-plantar loop
techinique, which included only one antegrade approach using CTO devices via ATA, with good results. The authors have no financial conflicts
of interest. Baseline peripheral angiography. (A) Baseline angiography revealed total occlusion of the left infrapopliteal artery with
proximal portion of three distal run-off vessels. (B) The flow of distal posterior tibial artery and lateral plantar artery is shown. (C and
D) A diffuse wound is distributed on the entire area of the foot including the transpedal puncture site. Balloon angioplasty. (A and B)
Balloon angioplasty of ATA using 3.0×100 mm EverCross balloon. (C) A 300-cm-long 014-inch hydrophilic guidewire was passed from ATA via a
dorsal-plantar loop to PTA using the Corsair microcatheter. (D, E and F) Balloon angioplasty of dorsal-plantar loop (consisting of dorsalis
pedis artery, deep plantar artery, deep plantar arch and lateral plantar artery) using 2.0×120 mm NanoCross balloon. (G and H) Balloon
angioplasty of PTA using 3.0×100 mm EverCross balloon. ATA, anterior tibial artery; PTA, posterior tibial artery. (A-D) Final angiography.
Final angiography reveals a well visualized anterior tibial artery, dorsal-plantar loop and posterior tibial artery with improved flow.
