This study investigated whether weekly teriparatide (TPTD) injections are as effective as daily teriparatide injections for the treatment of
stage 3 bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (BRONJ) and compared serum markers of bone turnover between the two treatment
regimens. Daily TPTD treatment has recently been reported to be effective for BRONJ, but there are no reports describing the effectiveness
of weekly TPTD injections. We report two patients with stage 3 BRONJ. One patient was successfully treated with weekly TPTD injections and
the other with daily TPTD injections. Changes in the levels of serum N-telopeptide of type I collagen (s-NTX) and serum N-terminal
propeptide of type I collagen (P1NP) were studied. Two patients with stage 3 BRONJ that was refractory to conservative treatment were
treated with TPTD. Their medical records were reviewed and the patients were interviewed. There was complete mucosal coverage of the
intraoral defects after 3 months of TPTD treatment in both patients. Progressive bone regeneration in an area of mandibular fracture was
identified after 4 months of treatment. The s-NTX level increased slightly in both patients. This is the first report of successful
treatment of stage 3 BRONJ with weekly TPTD injections. Either daily or weekly TPTD injections may effectively treat stage 3 BRONJ and
should be considered before or perhaps even in lieu of undertaking major resection and reconstruction. Nitrogen-containing bisphosphonates
(N-BP) are prescribed for the treatment of bone diseases such as osteoporosis, multiple myeloma, cancer metastases, and Paget’s disease.
However, bisphosphonate-related osteonecrosis of the jaws (BRONJ) has been reported as a rare complication. BRONJ occurs at a much higher
rate in patients receiving intravenous N-BPs for cancer treatment versus oral N-BPs. The incidence of BRONJ in patients treated for
osteoporosis is low at 0.1 %, but the incidence of BRONJ in cancer patients treated with high doses of intravenous N-BP is higher at 3 to
10 % . Currently, conservative treatment is recommended for BRONJ, in accordance with the American Association of Oral and Maxillofacial
Surgeons (AAOMS) Position Paper . Recently, however, it has been reported that daily parathyroid hormone treatment is effective for BRONJ.
Weekly teriparatide (TPTD; human parathyroid hormone peptide 1–34) injections have been used to treat osteoporosis in Japan , but there are
no reports describing the effectiveness of weekly TPTD injections for the treatment of BRONJ. Management of BRONJ is challenging and
controversial, and there is currently no established drug treatment for this condition. We report two patients with stage 3 BRONJ. One
patient was successfully treated with weekly PTD injections, and the other with daily TPTD injections. Changes in the levels of serum
N-telopeptide of type I collagen (s-NTX) and serum N-terminal propeptide of type I collagen (P1NP) were studied. An 87-year-old Japanese
woman with a 4-year history of alendronate therapy (35 mg/week orally) was referred for the treatment of multiple fistulas with purulent
discharge over the left maxillary ridge. She was diagnosed with stage 3 BRONJ according to the AAOMS guidelines (2009). She initially
received conservative treatment, including instruction on oral hygiene, administration of antibiotics, antimicrobial mouth gargles, and
local irrigation. N-BP therapy was discontinued at the time of her first visit. Three months later, she underwent sequestrectomy and
extraction of the maxillary left first and second molars because of high tooth mobility (Fig. 1a, d, g). We continued conservative therapy
and debridement for 1 year. However, her disease was persistent and progressive (Fig. 1b, e, h). She was then treated with TPTD by
subcutaneous injection (56.5 μg weekly). After 3 months of TPTD treatment, there was complete coverage of the necrotic tissue and exposed
bone with normal mucosa. Computed tomography showed that her maxillary sinusitis attributed to stage 3 BRONJ had resolved (Fig. 1c, f, i).
Her s-NTX levels were slightly higher than the pretreatment level at 1 and 3 months after the initiation of TPTD treatment, and her serum
P1NP level decreased after the initiation of TPTD treatment (Fig. 1j).Fig. 1Case 1. An 87-year-old Japanese woman with a 4-year history of
alendronate therapy. a At presentation, there were multiple fistulas with purulent discharge over the left maxillary ridge (arrowheads).
After 3 months of conservative therapy, the unhealed wound was surgically debrided, and two teeth were extracted. b After 12 months of
conservative treatment, there was still exposed bone in the upper jaw. c After 10 weeks of teriparatide treatment, the necrotic bone had
healed, and there was complete soft tissue coverage of the intraoral wound. d, g Computed tomography (CT) images showing the maxilla before
tooth extraction and debridement. e, h CT images after 1 year of conservative treatment, showing expansion of the BRONJ area. f, i CT images
after 10 weeks teriparatide treatment, showing improvement of the maxillary sinusitis. j Levels of serum N-telopeptide of type I collagen
(s-NTX) and serum N-terminal propeptide of type I collagen (P1NP) Case 1. An 87-year-old Japanese woman with a 4-year history of alendronate
therapy. a At presentation, there were multiple fistulas with purulent discharge over the left maxillary ridge (arrowheads). After 3 months
of conservative therapy, the unhealed wound was surgically debrided, and two teeth were extracted. b After 12 months of conservative
treatment, there was still exposed bone in the upper jaw. c After 10 weeks of teriparatide treatment, the necrotic bone had healed, and
there was complete soft tissue coverage of the intraoral wound. d, g Computed tomography (CT) images showing the maxilla before tooth
extraction and debridement. e, h CT images after 1 year of conservative treatment, showing expansion of the BRONJ area. f, i CT images after
10 weeks teriparatide treatment, showing improvement of the maxillary sinusitis. j Levels of serum N-telopeptide of type I collagen (s-NTX)
and serum N-terminal propeptide of type I collagen (P1NP) An 81-year-old Japanese woman with a 5-year history of alendronate therapy
(35 mg/week orally) was admitted for the treatment of a pathological mandibular fracture. After hospitalization, the teeth of the right
mandible were naturally detached after cutting the bridge; consecutively, metal crowns were used. She was diagnosed with stage 3 BRONJ and
stopped her alendronate therapy after consultation with her physician. She had infection of both the bone and soft tissues (Fig. 2a, b, c).
We advised surgical treatment, but this was refused by the patient and her family. We administered conservative treatment for BRONJ and the
mandibular fracture, including infection control and use of a chin cap to limit movement of the jaw. After 2 months, her disease was
persistent and the fracture was still mobile. We started TPTD treatment by subcutaneous injection (20 μg per day). Three months later, her
symptoms had resolved. The osteonecrosis had healed and was covered by normal mucosa. Computed tomography showed partial healing of the
mandibular fracture (Fig. 2d, e, f). Her s-NTX and P1NP levels were low at the first visit. Her s-NTX levels were slightly increased
compared with the pretreatment level at 2 and 4 months after the initiation of TPTD treatment, and her serum P1NP level was significantly
increased at 2 months after the initiation of TPTD treatment (Fig. 2g).Fig. 2Case 2. An 87-year-old Japanese woman with a 4-year history of
alendronate therapy. a External view showing submental redness. b Intraoral view showing exposed bone after the teeth were lost. c CT image
at presentation. d External view after 3 months of teriparatide treatment. e Intraoral view after 2 months of teriparatide treatment,
showing that the necrotic bone has healed and the defect is covered with normal mucosa. f CT image after 3 months of teriparatide treatment.
g Levels of serum N-telopeptide of type I collagen (s-NTX) and serum N-terminal propeptide of type I collagen (P1NP) Case 2. An 87-year-old
Japanese woman with a 4-year history of alendronate therapy. a External view showing submental redness. b Intraoral view showing exposed
bone after the teeth were lost. c CT image at presentation. d External view after 3 months of teriparatide treatment. e Intraoral view after
2 months of teriparatide treatment, showing that the necrotic bone has healed and the defect is covered with normal mucosa. f CT image after
3 months of teriparatide treatment. g Levels of serum N-telopeptide of type I collagen (s-NTX) and serum N-terminal propeptide of type I
collagen (P1NP) BRONJ is a rare condition than can be debilitating. The most frequent presentation of BRONJ is a small amount of bare bone
that is not painful or inflamed, which may heal quickly, slowly, or not at all. Most cases are not as severe as in the patients presented
above. Recently, it has been suggested that N-BP treatment may cause BRONJ . BRONJ is much more frequent in patients receiving intravenous
N-BP for the treatment and prevention of cancer-related skeletal conditions than in patients receiving oral N-BP for the treatment of non-
malignant disease . BRONJ may be associated with the type and total dose of N-BP treatment, and with a history of trauma, dental surgery,
and dental infection . We described an 87-year-old female with stage 3 BRONJ that persisted after control of the bone and soft tissue
infections, who required tooth extractions 3 months after the withdrawal of N-BP treatment. The main effects of N-BP are at the lumbar spine
and proximal femur, where they stop bone loss, reduce fracture risk, and increase bone mineral density. Local trauma and infection in the
jaw increase the demand for bone repair, which may exceed the low turnover rate of the bone, resulting in the accumulation of necrotic bone
that is recognized as osteonecrosis of the jaw. There are some previous reports of TPTD treatment in patients with osteonecrosis of the jaws
associated with N-BP therapy . Additionally, several patients treated with daily TPTD injections have now been reported, but the number of
reports is limited and the evidence to date is mostly anecdotal . TPTD injection is a unique pharmacological treatment for patients with
primary osteoporosis. TPTD treatment stimulates bone formation and increase bone mineral density . TPTD may counteract the mechanisms
causing BRONJ by stimulating bone formation. An increase in the number of remodeling units and increased bone formation within each unit may
promote healing and the removal of damaged bone. In case 2, the mandibular fracture and bone necrosis were successfully treated with daily
TPTD injections, without the need for surgery, which is similar to the patient reported by Cheung and Seeman , who received the
administration of TPTD for osteonecrosis of the jaw in association with alendronate therapy. In both our patients, TPTD treatment was
effective and achieved soft tissue coverage of exposed bone. This is the first report describing successful treatment of BRONJ with weekly
TPTD injections. In conclusion, the outcomes of the cases presented suggest that weekly TPTD injections can be effective for the treatment
of stage 3 BRONJ. If weekly and daily TPTD injections are both effective, we can choose the TPTD treatment regimen according to the
condition of the patient. In our patients, stage 3 BRONJ was successfully treated by either weekly or daily TPTD injections, thereby
improving their quality of life. This indicates that weekly TPTD injections might result in resolution of stage 3 BRONJ by increasing the
rate of bone remodeling. Our data indicate that when it is determined that a stage 3 BRONJ patient’s condition does not improve under
conservative therapy and there are no other medical contraindications, daily, or weekly TPTD treatment should be considered. Our data also
suggest that it may now be appropriate to initiate limited investigation of the response to weekly PTH treatment, of uncomplicated stage 2
BRONJ cases with persistent bare bone. None.
