A 5-year-old girl was diagnosed with neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF-2) due to multiple neurofibromas, cafe-au-lait spots, and schwannomas of
the brain. During ophthalmologic evaluation, a posterior subcapsular cataract and a gray-green colored subretinal lesion were found in right
eye. Fluorescein angiography (FA) revealed a combined hamartoma of the retina and retinal pigment epithelium (CHRRPE). At age 9, she
underwent cataract surgery. At this time FA and spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) were taken. The SD-OCT showed an
elevated hyperreflective mass in the retina with prominent attenuation of the inner and outer retina, but minimal attenuation in the
photoreceptor layers. The underlying retina appeared to be disorganized and thick (791 µm). This is the first case report of SD-OCT imaging
of a CHRRPE associated with NF-2 in a pediatric patient. By using SD-OCT in this patient, we could obtain detailed tumor characteristics,
and SD-OCT may be helpful in the diagnosis and management of CHRRPE. Neurofibromatosis is the most common phakomatosis, with an estimated
prevalence of approximately one case per 3000 in the general population . Neurofibromatosis type 2 (NF-2) is a rare autosomal dominant
disease with a birth incidence estimated to be one in 33,000 to 40,000 . Ocular features of NF-2 include juvenile posterior subcapsular
cataracts, combined hamartoma of the retinal and retinal pigment epithelium (CHRRPE), epiretinal membrane (ERM), optic nerve meningioma,
optic disc glioma, intraocular schwannoma, and neurotrophic keratopathy . CHRRPE is an uncommon, benign hamartomatous malformation involving
the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE), neurosensory retina, retinal vessels. and adjacent vitreous . Loss of heterozygosity for the NF-2 gene
has been demonstrated in dysplastic or hamartomatous lesions of the retina and optic disc . Here, we present spectral-domain optical
coherence tomography (SD-OCT) findings of a CHRRPE associated NF-2 in a pediatric patient. A 5-year-old girl visited the ophthalmology
clinic for an ophthalmologic evaluation under the diagnosis of NF-2. Multiple neurofibromas, café-au-lait macules, and multiple schwannomas
of both trigeminal nerves from brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) lead to the diagnosis of NF-2. At the initial presentation, the visual
acuity was 0.05 logarithm of minimum angle resolution (logMAR) of right eye and 0.4 logMAR of left eye. Posterior subcapsular cataract and a
gray-green colored subretinal lesion were found in the right eye. There were no specific signs in the left eye. Fundus photography and
fluorescein angiography (FA) were performed. FA showed tortuosity of the vessels with localized areas of pinpoint hyperfluorescence and late
retinal vascular leakage, corresponding to the retinal lesion in the right eye. These findings were suggestive of a CHRRPE. During follow-
up, bilateral acoustic schwannomas and multiple neurogenic tumors in both lungs were found. Also, DNA test revealed pArg198term mutation on
the NF-2 gene, which is known to cause NF-2. At age 9, she underwent phacoemulsification and posterior chamber intraocular lens implantation
surgery under general anesthesia. B-scan ultrasonography of the right eye revealed no choroidal excavation or extrascleral extension. After
operation, visual acuity was 0.1 logMAR OD and 0.6 logMAR OS. FA and SD-OCT were performed for evaluation of the retinal lesion. FA showed
no significant change (Fig. 1). SD-OCT revealed a hyperreflective ERM with traction and retinal folds. Perimacular posterior vitreous
detachment was also found. The inner layers of the underlying retina were irregularly thickened (up to 791 µm), but the photoreceptor inner
segment/outer segment (IS/OS) junction and RPE layers were not significantly attenuated (Fig. 2). By these examinations, we confirmed the
diagnosis of CHRRPE, with relatively less involvement of the photoreceptor layer. We recommended surgical intervention, including pars plana
vitrectomy with membrane peeling, but the parents of the patient refused to do so. Therefore, we continued to conduct regular checkups. NF-2
is a dominantly inherited disorder prone to tumors characterized by the development of multiple schwanommas, meningiomas, and ependymomas,
with the great majority of patients developing bilateral schwannoma involvement of the superior vestibular branch of the eighth cranial
nerve. The first sign of a more severe multi-tumor disease in early childhood is often a non-8th nerve tumor (including cutaneous tumor) or
an ocular presentation. Ophthalmic features are prominent in NF2. Patients often suffer from reduced visual acuity from various causes.
Between 60% and 80% of patients have cataracts, which are usually presenile posterior subcapsular cataracts. Optic nerve meningiomas can
cause visual loss in the first years of life, and extensive retinal hamartomas can also affect vision. CHRRPE is a congenital and relatively
stable, but it can evolve slowly with age. CHRRPE are usually unilateral. The pigmented elevated masses of CHRRPE are frequently associated
with overlying glial tissue that produce retinal distortion, striae, and decreased visual acuity . Histopathologically, CHRRPE lesions
demonstrate disorganized retina, hyperplastic glial cells, and vascular tortuosity. The abnormal vitreoretinal interface can cause traction
and distortion of the sensory retina. Lesions can also be characterized by predominant tissue subtypes, including melanocytic, vascular, or
glial . The glial subtype presents with prominent ERM proliferation and is most amenable to surgical intervention. The clinical presentation
can differ based on varying degrees of retinal elevation, vascular tortuosity, and retinal distortion. Diagnosis is most commonly made in
childhood by clinical examination and fundus photography. Complications can include retinoschisis, retinal holes, vitreous hemorrhage,
choroidal neovascularization, retinal hemorrhages, and exudative retinal detachment . One report presented the vitreoretinal interface and
retinal microarchitecture findings of CHRRPE using the conventional time domain OCT. Of the 11 patients, 10 had a preretinal membrane, with
retinal striae in 9 patients. Retinal anatomic disorganization with loss of identifiable retinal layers at the site of the mass was noted in
all patients . After widespread use of SD-OCT, one report described SD-OCT findings of CHRRPE . Compared with the previous report, our
patient showed less attenuation of the RPE and photoreceptor IS/OS junction by SD-OCT. Also, prominent thickening and attenuation of the
inner retina was noted. We could find out that hamartomatous change affects the inner retina more by SD-OCT. ERM, one of the frequent
findings associated with CHRRPE, was another SD-OCT finding in this patient. Partial posterior vitreous detachment was noted at the
parafoveal area. Several studies have concluded that pars plana vitrectomy with membrane peeling has a limited role in the treatment for
CHRRPE . The literature regarding the surgical repair of CHRRPE in children is limited, but recent reports of vitrectomy with membrane
peeling for vitreomacular traction and macular distortion associated with CHRRPE have shown promising results . Some reports demonstrated
improved or stabilized vision after early surgical intervention of ERM in both adults and pediatric patients by vitrectomy and membrane
stripping . Because there was less attenuation of the photoreceptor IS/OS junction integrity, removal of the ERM could be helpful in this
patient, which may help to release the tractional effect of the ERM. In conclusion, this is unique case report which describes the SD-OCT
findings in a Korean child with CHRRPE associated with NF-2. By using the non-invasive SD-OCT that has better resolution, detailed
structural images of CHRRPE can be obtained. One unique feature is that the inner retina was more prominently involved than the RPE and
photoreceptor IS/OS junction. If the photoreceptor layers are less attenuated in CHRRPE patients, it may be associated with better visual
prognosis. Therefore, additional studies using SD OCT would be necessary to fully answer these questions. No potential conflict of interest
relevant to this article was reported. At age 9, (A) fundus photography of the right eye reveals a moderately pigmented and elevated lesion
at the inferotemporal vascular arcade, involving the macula. (B) Fundus fluorescein angiography of the right eye demonstrates some areas of
pinpoint hyperfluorescence. (C) Late phase of fluorescein angiography demonstrates mild retinal vascular leakage, and shows no significant
progression compared with the previous examination. Spectral-domain optical coherence tomography reveals an elevated hyperreflective mass in
the retina with mild attenuation of the retinal pigment epithelium and photoreceptor inner segment/outer segment junction. Prominent
thickening and attenuation of the inner retina is also noted (A,B). The arrow in (A) represents the hyperreflective epiretinal membrane.
