The author reports a case of orbital Sarcoidosis in a 70-year-old female that initially presented as diffuse swelling of the lower eyelid.
The patient complained of painless swelling of the left lower lid without palpable mass, and a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the
orbit was unremarkable. A serum angiotensin converting enzyme level was elevated, and hilar lymphadenopathy was noted on the chest CT. The
patient underwent surgical debulking for histologic confirmation, which led to a final diagnosis of sarcoidosis involving the orbital fat.
Unexplained chronic eyelid swelling without a mass should be considered a possible ophthalmic manifestation of orbital sarcoidosis.
Sarcoidosis is a multisystem granulomatous disorder of unknown etiology. Ocular involvement of Sarcoidosis mainly includes uveitis and
conjunctival granulomas, whereas orbital tissue involvement is rarely reported, varying from lacrimal gland infiltration to optic nerve
sheath involvement . Most lesions have granulomatous masses, but infiltration of the orbital adipose tissue without a mass lesion has not
been reported. We managed a patient with sarcoidosis involving the orbital fat, and present the clinical features and outcomes here. A
70-year-old female presented with a history of painless swelling of the left lower eyelid for one year (Fig. 1A). She had no systemic
complaints. On examination, her visual acuity was 20 / 20 (left eye), and a slitlamp examination of the left eye revealed no abnormalities
except for corneal granular dystrophy. The lower eyelid of the left eye was diffusely swollen without any palpable mass. The left upper
eyelid showed a 3-mm ptosis with 10-mm levator function, without swelling, and the ptosis resolved after administration of 2.5%
phenylephrine in the left eye. No exophthalmos was present, and the extraocular movements were normal. A fundus examination revealed no
abnormalities. A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the orbit was unremarkable (Fig. 1B and 1C). The patient's white blood cell count,
chemistry panel, and thyroid function tests were normal. The erythrocyte sedimentation rate was 31 mm in the first hour, and serum
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) levels were 58 units (normal, 8 to 52 units). A chest radiograph revealed an old tuberculous lesion
without hilar lymphadenopathy (Fig. 2), and a Mycobacterium tuberculosis antigen-specific interferon gamma assay was negative. As these
results were inconclusive, surgical debulking of the swollen lower eyelid via an inferior conjunctival fornical approach for diagnosis and
treatment was performed, as well as a conjunctivo-mullerectomy for ptosis correction. The operative findings showed stiff and coarse orbital
fat particles, and the histopathologic examination demonstrated non-caseating granulomas consisting of epitheloid histiocytes in the orbital
fat, most likely caused by sarcoidosis (Fig. 3). Special stains for acid-fast bacilli and fungi were negative. The patient was further
reviewed by a pulmonologist who noted hilar lymphadenopathy on the chest CT. The patient was diagnosed with orbital sarcoidosis, and started
on prednisolone (10 mg/day) in consideration of the significant improvement in eyelid swelling after surgical debulking (Fig. 4). The
symptoms completely resolved within one month, and she has been followed for 12 months without a recurrence. The distinctive feature of our
case is the initial presentation of diffuse eyelid swelling without mass lesions, even on CT examination. Despite the suspicion of
sarcoidosis with a slightly elevated ACE level, inconclusive laboratory and radiologic results necessitated a biopsy to verify the
diagnosis. In our patient with diffuse inflammatory lesions without any signs of a mass effect, surgical debulking of the lower lid was
considered diagnostic and curative. The histologic examination showed non-caseating granulomatous infiltration in the orbital fat, which was
consistent with sarcoidosis, and infectious etiologies were ruled out, as well as foreign body granulomatous disease. Subsequent
investigations revealed hilar lymphadenopathy on a chest CT. A prompt response to systemic steroids also supported the diagnosis of
sarcoidosis. Systemic corticosteroids are known to be effective in the treatment of orbital sarcoidosis. Although an initial dose of 1 mg/kg
of body weight of oral steroids and gradual tapering is recommended , our patient was initially treated with 10 mg of oral prednisolone in
consideration of the improvement in eyelid swelling after surgical debulking, and she responded promptly without a recurrence. Surgical
debulking might reduce the required dose of steroids by eliminating the amount of inflammatory tissues and enhancing drug diffusion. To the
best of our knowledge, the case reported here is the first report of orbital fat infiltration of sarcoidosis without palpable mass in lower
lid. A few examples of soft tissue involvement in orbital sarcoid have been reported, but most of them occurred within cutaneous or
connective tissue, and isolated orbital fat infiltration has rarely been documented . A case of retrobulbar fat infiltration of sarcoid
mimicking a superior orbital fissure syndrome has been reported , our case is unique in that only the lower eyelid was involved, and there
were no remarkable findings on the orbital CT scan. In conclusion, unexplained chronic eyelid swelling without clinical evidence of an
orbital mass should be considered as a possible ophthalmic manifestation of orbital sarcoidosis. No potential conflict of interest relevant
to this article was reported. (A) Photograph of a 70-year-old female with diffuse swelling of the left lower eyelid. Computed tomographic
scans, (B) axial and (C) coronal, showed no evidence of a mass lesion or soft tissue infiltration. Chest radiograph shows multiple confluent
irregular opacities (arrow) in right upper lobe. There are no remarkable findings in hilar region with shadow of aortic arch (arrowhead).
(A) There are multifocal granulomas with lymphocytic infiltration in the fat (H&E, ×40). (B) High magnification view shows a well-formed,
non-caseating granuloma composed of epithelioid histiocytes with surrounding lymphocytes (H&E, ×400). (A) The patient showed significant
improvement of the left lower lid swelling after surgery. (B) Left lower lid swelling was completely resolved after low dose steroid
treatment.
