We describe a new technique to prevent spillage of cyst fluid in patients undergoing surgery for cystic ovarian tumors. The cyst is first
covered with a sterilized surgical sheet applied with quick-drying glue and is then punctured. This technique completely prevents spillage
of cyst fluid into abdominal cavity. Spillage of ovarian cyst fluid during surgery is associated with a number of risks, including chemical
peritonitis, gliomatosis peritonei, pseudomyxoma peritonei, tumor recurrence, and dissemination of malignant cells . Several reports have
described the use of a suction tube such as a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter to prevent spillage of cyst fluid, but the reliability of some
procedures has been questioned because the direct puncture of cysts unavoidably results in the release of some cyst fluid. We developed a
new technique to completely prevent spillage of cyst fluid. This technique also allows a smaller surgical incision, resulting in good
cosmetic results. With the patient under general anesthesia, a small Pfannenstiel incision is made, and the surgical field is maintained
with the use of a wound retractor (Alexis®). After wiping the surface of the tumor located just under the wound with gauze, the rough side
of a sterilized surgical sheet (ELS-102S) is attached to the cyst using quick-drying glue (Aron Alpha A <Sankyo>®) with careful attention
not to spread the glue into the abdominal cavity (Fig. 1a). (Quick-drying glue cannot work when applied to the vinyl coating side of the
sheet.) After the sheet is glued tightly to the tumor, requiring several seconds, the cyst is punctured with a suction tube, and the cyst
fluid is aspirated as extensively as possible (Fig. 1b). The cyst shrinks, and the tumor is then brought outside of the body, while tightly
clamping the punctured site to prevent spillage of cyst fluid remaining in the tumor. This procedure is applicable to multiocular cyst by
puncturing septums successively in direct vision after part of the cyst is brought outside of the body. Finally, an ovarian cystectomy is
performed, while safely preserving the healthy ovarian tissue on the affected side (Fig. 1c).Fig. 1a A small Pfannenstiel incision is made,
and the surgical field is maintained with the use of a wound retractor (Alexis®). After wiping the surface of the tumor located just under
the wound with gauze, the rough side of a sterilized surgical sheet (ELS-102S) is attached to the cyst using quick-drying glue (Aron Alpha A
<Sankyo>®) (Aron Alpha cannot work when applied to the vinyl coating side of the sheet). b After the sheet is glued tightly to the tumor,
requiring several seconds, the cyst is punctured with a suction tube, such as a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter, and the cyst fluid is aspirated
as extensively as possible. c The cyst shrinks, and the tumor is then brought outside of the body, while tightly clamping the puncture site
to prevent spillage of cyst fluid remaining in the tumor. Finally, an ovarian cystectomy is performed, while safely preserving the healthy
ovarian tissue on the affected side a A small Pfannenstiel incision is made, and the surgical field is maintained with the use of a wound
retractor (Alexis®). After wiping the surface of the tumor located just under the wound with gauze, the rough side of a sterilized surgical
sheet (ELS-102S) is attached to the cyst using quick-drying glue (Aron Alpha A <Sankyo>®) (Aron Alpha cannot work when applied to the vinyl
coating side of the sheet). b After the sheet is glued tightly to the tumor, requiring several seconds, the cyst is punctured with a suction
tube, such as a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter, and the cyst fluid is aspirated as extensively as possible. c The cyst shrinks, and the tumor is
then brought outside of the body, while tightly clamping the puncture site to prevent spillage of cyst fluid remaining in the tumor.
Finally, an ovarian cystectomy is performed, while safely preserving the healthy ovarian tissue on the affected side A 15-year-old girl with
a large abdominal mass was referred to our hospital. Physical examination showed a distended abdomen, but the patient had no complaints.
Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 33 × 25 × 15 cm multiocular ovarian cystic tumor without
calcification or fat tissue (Fig. 2). Neither ascites nor dissemination was evident. A serous cystadenoma or mucinous cystadenoma was
suspected, and operation was performed. We made a 6 cm Pfannenstiel incision and punctured the cyst using a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter after
covering the lesion with sterilized surgical sheet, applied using quick-drying glue (Fig. 3). After we aspirated about 7,200 ml of serous
yellowish cyst fluid, we performed an ovarian cystectomy while preserving the healthy ovarian tissue, with no spillage of cyst fluid
(Fig. 4). The histopathological diagnosis was a mucinous cystadenoma without malignancy including borderline lesions. The postoperative
course was good, and the patient was discharged on the fourth postoperative day.Fig. 2Patient 1: MRI (T2WI) showed a large multiocular
ovarian cystFig. 3Patient 1: Puncturing the cyst using a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter after covering the lesion with sterilized surgical sheet
(ELS-102S), applied using quick-drying glue (Aron Alpha A <Sankyo>®)Fig. 4Patient 1: A large ovarian cyst after aspiration of the cyst fluid
Patient 1: MRI (T2WI) showed a large multiocular ovarian cyst Patient 1: Puncturing the cyst using a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter after
covering the lesion with sterilized surgical sheet (ELS-102S), applied using quick-drying glue (Aron Alpha A <Sankyo>®) Patient 1: A large
ovarian cyst after aspiration of the cyst fluid A 5-year-old girl with abdominal pain was diagnosed with torsion of a 7.5 × 7.3 × 4.7 cm
ovarian tumor on CT. Neither ascites nor dissemination was apparent. She was referred to our hospital and underwent emergency surgery. We
made a 3 cm Pfannenstiel incision and punctured the cyst using a needle connected to a suction after covering the surface of the tumor with
a sterilized surgical sheet, applied using quick-drying glue. After aspiration of about 140 ml of serous cyst fluid, we performed a
cystectomy, preserving the healthy ovarian tissue without spillage of cyst fluid. The histopathological diagnosis was a mature cystic
teratoma. She was discharged without any complications on the fourth postoperative day. A 14-year-old girl with inferior abdominal pain was
found to have bilateral multiocular ovarian tumors (right: 6.5 × 4.8 × 4.3 cm, left: 17 × 13 × 9.0 cm) on CT and MRI. Physical examination
showed a distended abdomen, but there were no complaints. Mature cystic teratomas were suspected, and operation was performed. We made a
6 cm Pfannenstiel incision and punctured the cyst using a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter after covering the surface of the left large cystic
tumor with a sterilized surgical sheet, applied using quick-drying glue. After we aspirated about 940 ml of yellowish, turbid cyst fluid
(Fig. 5), we performed a cystectomy. The healthy ovarian tissue was preserved. There was no spillage of cyst fluid. We subsequently
performed a right ovarian cystectomy. The procedure was completed uneventfully. The histopathological diagnosis was a mature cystic
teratoma. She was discharged without any complications on the fifth postoperative day.Fig. 5Patient 3: After covering the cystic tumor with
a sterilized surgical sheet (ELS-102S), applied using quick-drying glue, the cyst was punctured with a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter. About
940 ml of yellowish, turbid cyst fluid was aspirated, with no spillage Patient 3: After covering the cystic tumor with a sterilized surgical
sheet (ELS-102S), applied using quick-drying glue, the cyst was punctured with a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter. About 940 ml of yellowish,
turbid cyst fluid was aspirated, with no spillage A 13-year-old girl with inferior right abdominal pain was found to have a 16 × 12 × 9.0 cm
right multiocular ovarian tumor on CT. Mature cystic teratoma was suspected, and operation was performed. We made a 4.5 cm Pfannenstiel
incision and punctured the cyst using a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter after covering the surface of the tumor with a sterilized surgical sheet,
applied using quick-drying glue. After we aspirated about 1,000 ml of dark red, turbid cyst fluid, we performed a cystectomy. The healthy
ovarian tissue was preserved. There was no spillage of cyst fluid. The procedure was completed uneventfully. The histopathological diagnosis
was a mature cystic teratoma. She was discharged without any complications on the fifth postoperative day. The treatment of choice for
ovarian cystic tumors is generally surgical excision owing to the risks of ovarian torsion, spontaneous rupture, and malignancy .
Traditionally, open laparotomy was the standard procedure for ovarian cystectomy. However, laparoscopic procedures have recently become more
popular, similar to other surgical specialties. Many reports have documented advantages of laparoscopic procedures for ovarian cystectomy,
such as enhanced visualization of the entire pelvis, reduced need for analgesia, shorter hospital stay, early recovery and resumption of
routine activities, and improved cosmetic outcomes . But the rate of cyst rupture during laparoscopic surgery has been reported to range
between 6 and 100 % [7, 9, 10, 12], and consequently, laparoscopic surgery can be associated with increased risks of chemical peritonitis,
gliomatosis peritonei, pseudomyxoma peritonei, tumor recurrence, and dissemination of malignant cells caused by spillage of ovarian cyst
fluid during surgery . There are some reports that gliomatosis peritonei derived from the component of ovarian teratomas following rupture
of their capsules [1, 2]. Recently, it is said that pseudomyxoma peritonei does not correlate to mucinous ovarian tumors , but there were
some cases where it was associated with intestinal mucinous cystadenomas of the borderline malignancy . In addition, regarding the
recurrence, there was a significantly higher rate of intraoperative cyst rupture in the cases of cyst recurrence, compared with those with
no recurrence in the study of the benign ovarian mucinous cystadenoma . Thus, complete prevention from spillage of cyst fluid is necessary
for cystic ovarian tumors. In response to such problems, many studies have reported on ways to prevent spillage of the cyst fluid during
open [14, 15] as well as laparoscopic abdominal surgery [5, 6, 16]. However, whether all procedures are completely reliable has been
questioned because spillage of some cyst fluid is unavoidable when surgeons directly puncture the cysts. The spillage of large amounts of
cyst fluid in patients who already have spillage becomes a particularly high risk, especially in laparoscopic operations. Therefore, much
safer methods are needed, particularly in pediatric surgery. We developed a new technique to completely prevent spillage of cyst fluid.
Quick-drying glue used in our procedure is made from cyanoacrylate which is widely used in surgical field . In addition, quick-drying glue
has never dropped into abdominal cavity, because requirement of glue is not so much. In all four patients described above, there was no
spillage of cyst fluid, and the healthy ovarian tissue could be preserved without any complications (Table 1). Inexperience on the part of
surgeons has been linked to a high risk of cyst rupture during laparoscopic procedures . On the other hand, we believe that our technique is
much safer and more feasible for all surgeons not only for conventional but also for laparoscopic surgery. As for cosmetic results, a small
single incision is better than laparoscopic surgery because the latter requires another incision through which the excised cyst is
exteriorized. Moreover, additional costs associated with our technique are considered minimal.Table 1Clinical characteristics of four
patients in our experienceCaseSideTumor size (cm)OperationSkin incision (cm)SeptumCyst fluid
(ml)SpillageDiagnosis1Left33 × 25 × 15Cystectomy6+7,200−MC2Left7.5 × 7.3 × 4.7Cystectomy3−140−MCT3LeftRight17 × 13 × 9.06.5 × 4.8 × 4.3CystectomyCystectomy6a++9,400−−MCTMCT4Right16 × 12 × 9.0Cystectomy4.5+1,000−MCTMC
mucinous cystadenoma, MCT mature cystic teratomaaLarger incision was needed because bilateral tumors existed Clinical characteristics of
four patients in our experience MC mucinous cystadenoma, MCT mature cystic teratoma aLarger incision was needed because bilateral tumors
existed In patients with large cystic ovarian tumors, puncturing the cyst after it is covered with a sterilized surgical sheet applied using
quick-drying glue not only prevents spillage of cyst fluid into the abdominal cavity, but also has good cosmetic results. To our knowledge,
this is the first report to describe the use of both a suction tube such as a S.A.N.D. balloon catheter and quick-drying glue for the
treatment of abdominal cystic tumors. Our experience suggests that our technique is a safe and reliable procedure that can be used by all
surgeons to prevent spillage of cyst fluid in patients undergoing surgery for cystic ovarian tumors. We declare that we have no conflicts of
interest.
