Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common hereditary renal disorder. In most cases, ADPKD similarly affects
bilateral kidneys. Among the 605 ADPKD patients that were followed up by our center, we identified two male patients with unilateral ADPKD.
The cases were remarkable because the patients also had ectopia and multicystic dysplasia in the contralateral kidney, which are generally
sporadic disease conditions. Both patients tested positive for polycystic kidney disease 1 mutation, but negative for hepatocyte nuclear
factor 1 beta mutation. Moreover, the deterioration of their kidney function seemed to be quicker than their age- and sex-matched controls
and siblings. Both patients had started a long-term hemodialysis in their 40s. Anatomical and genetic abnormality in patients with ADPKD may
be more frequent and complex than previously believed. The compensatory capacity in patients with ADPKD is fragile, and missing one kidney
could accelerate the deterioration of renal function. Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease (ADPKD) is the most common hereditary
renal disorder and the fourth cause of death of end-stage renal disease, accounting for 10% of patients on dialysis . The disease is caused
by mutations in the PKD1 (85% of cases) or PKD2 (15% of cases) . In most ADPKD patients, bilateral kidneys are similarly affected, with
numerous fluid-filled cysts arising from different nephron segments. Only a few cases of ADPKD with unilateral renal agenesis or severe
hypoplasia have been reported . Among the 605 ADPKD patients followed by our center, we report two cases of ADPKD patients with pelvic
ectopic unilateral multicystic dysplastic kidney (MCDK), which refers to a sporadic disease condition and is related to transcription factor
2 (TCF2) mutations . The clinical characteristics of these two rare cases were compared with their siblings and other male ADPKD patients
with similar ages; these characteristics were then summarized and analyzed. The PKD1 and PKD2 mutations and the relevant MCDK (TCF2)
mutations were also measured. A 48-year-old man with ADPKD was admitted for long-term hemodialysis because his estimated glomerular
filtration rate (eGFR) dropped to 14 ml/min/1.73 m2. His blood pressure was within the normal range. The patient was diagnosed with ADPKD
10 years earlier with a positive family history (Figure 1). He and his relatives had no history of intracranial aneurysm. He had no
albuminuria and did not complain of renal pain. During diagnosis, an enlarged polycystic left kidney was found, but the right kidney was
absent. An ultrasonography after admission detected a fist-sized, multi-cystic mass located before his right iliac artery. An enlarged
polycystic liver was also detected. The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan confirmed a 6 cm diameter polycystic mass in the right pelvis
(Figure 2, Panels A and B, triangles), and the left kidney was significantly enlarged, measuring 18 cm × 12 cm × 8 cm. A renal volume
assessment was then performed. The renal volume for the left kidney was 1127.6 cm3 and that for the right was only 74.6 cm3. Further MR
urography revealed a tubular structure connecting the pelvic polycystic mass to the bladder with a fluid signal along the tubular lumen area
(Figure 2, Panels B and C, arrows). This ADPKD patient had a right pelvic multicystic kidney with congenital aplasia, and the tubular
structure was his right ureter. Family tree of Case 1 patient. (Arrow): affected proband with unilateral ADPKD; (filled square, filled
circle): male/female affected by ADPKD with two kidneys; (blank square, blank circle): male/female did not have ADPKD; (?): unsure for
ADPKD; (box with a stripe): family member passed away. MRI scans showing a solitary left polycystic kidney with contralateral MCDK in Case 1
patient. (Triangle): right ectopic MCDK; (arrow): right ureter. A 45-year-old male with fatigue and elevated creatinine (542 μmol/l,
eGFR = 14 ml/min/1.73 m2) was admitted to set up long-term vascular access. The patient had hypertension controlled with nifedipine. No
history of intracranial aneurysm was reported. He had a positive family history (Figure 3) and was diagnosed with ADPKD through an
ultrasonography 16 years prior this study. He had no albuminuria and did not complain of renal pain. During diagnosis, an exaggerated right
kidney was found. However, the left kidney was absent. After admission, MR urography detected a 22.8 cm × 12.2 cm × 10.5 cm right kidney
with a typical polycystic phenotype, and a 5.8 cm × 4.2 cm × 3.9 cm multicystic space-occupying lesion before the left psoas (Figure 4,
Panels A and B, triangles), with signals similar to the right polycystic kidney, indicating a small left pelvic kidney with multicystic
aplasia. Based on renal volume assessment, the left kidney measured 2290.7 cm3, whereas the right one only measured 44.0 cm3. A polycystic
liver was also detected. The CT scan result agreed with that of MR urography. Family tree of Case 2 patient. (Arrow): affected proband with
unilateral ADPKD; (filled square, filled circle): male/female affected by ADPKD with two kidneys; (blank square, blank circle): male/female
not had ADPKD; (?): not sure for ADPKD; (box with a stripe): deceased family member. MRI scans showing a solitary right polycystic kidney
with contralateral MCDK in Case 2 patient. (Triangle): left ectopic MCDK. No ectopic aplastic cystic kidney was detected among the family
members of these two patients, both affected and non-affected, who were screened using abdominal ultrasonography. These two patients were
the only ones with this presentation among their families. A genetic analysis of PKD1 and PKD2 was performed by Athena Diagnostics (MA,
U.S.A.) and verified at the Zhejiang University affiliated Gynecology and Obstetrics Hospital (Hangzhou, Zhejiang, China). Genotyping of the
two cases indicated that each had different mutations in the PKD1 gene. Case 1 had a proline in place of leucine at amino acid 55 and a
premature termination signal in codon 60 in exon 1 [NM_000296.3 P.L56PfsX60 (168_174dupCGCGGGC,novel,Het)]. Case 2 had a 7 bp duplication
mutation (11650_11651) in exon 41, resulting in a frameshift at amino acid 3814, which is a predicted disease-associated mutation. He also
had two nonsense mutations in exon 15 (an A in place of a G at nucleotide position of 6625) and exon 23 (an A in place of a G at nucleotide
position of 8851). None of these polymorphisms had been previously reported. Both patients tested negative for TCF2 mutation, also known as
hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta (HNF1β). A matched control group for each case was defined among the remaining 603 patients with ADPKD
followed up by our center. All patients with the same sex and age (with no more than a five-year difference) from the respective ages of the
cases were recruited. Three of their age- and sex-matched siblings were also chosen as another control group (Table 1). The single-kidney
volume (SKV) and eGFR were expressed as mean and 95% confidence interval (CI). Compared with the matched bilateral ADPKD controls, the
median SKV of the ectopic MCDK kidneys of the two reported cases were significantly smaller [Case 1: 74.6 vs. 692.4 95% CI (611.3, 781.3)
cm3; Case 2: 44.0 vs. 657.1 95% CI (566.9, 743.4) cm3]. However, the SKV of their normal contralateral kidneys seemed to be significantly
larger [Case 1: 1127.6 vs. 692.4 95% CI (611.3, 781.3) cm3; Case 2: 2290.7 vs. 657.1 95% CI (566.9, 743.4) cm3]. The mean eGFR of the two
cases were significantly lower than their age- and sex-matched siblings (14.0 vs. 68.3, 39.6, 65.0 ml/min/1.73 m2) and bilateral ADPKD
controls [Case 1: 14.0 vs. 84.7 95% CI (77.7, 91.7) ml/min/1.73 m2; Case 2: 14.0 vs. 88.8 95% CI (81.7, 96.4) ml/min/1.73 m2]. Kidney
volumes and renal function in two patients with ectopic unilateral MCDK compared with their age- and sex-matched siblings and bilateral
ADPKD controls MCDK: multicystic dysplastic kidney; ADPKD: autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; SKV: single-kidney volume; eGFR:
estimated glomerular filtration rate; NA: not available. In most cases, bilateral kidneys are involved in ADPKD patients. No previous report
has been conducted on unilateral ADPKD with contralateral ectopic MCDK. Among the 605 patients followed up by our center, we identified two
subjects with unilateral ADPKD. No kidney tissue on the contralateral location was found on both patients’ kidneys. MRI revealed ectopic
dysplasia kidney remnants with multiple cysts in the pelvis. Both patients had advanced disease during presentation. Compared with their
matched bilateral ADPKD controls, the median SKV of the ectopic MCDK kidneys of the two reported cases were significantly smaller (Table 1),
whereas their contralateral kidneys were significantly larger. The mean eGFR of the two cases (Table 1), which indicated a more advanced
stage of disease progression with the unilateral ADPKD, were significantly lower than their age- and sex-matched siblings and bilateral
ADPKD controls. In a cohort of 182 patients with ADPKD, Poster et al. identified three patients with unilateral renal agenesis or severe
hypoplasia. These three cases had different truncating mutations in their PKD1 gene. Although their kidney volumes and volume progression
rates were greater than the mean values of their two polycystic kidney controls, which is normally associated with an accelerated decrease
in renal function, the eGFR in these patients was remarkably well-preserved . This characteristic may be partly due to compensatory
parenchymal hypertrophy. However, renal parenchyma is unlikely to make a large contribution to the total kidney volume because the enlarged
single cystic kidneys were grossly cystic, as shown in the MRI images . Moreover, all their patients were much younger than ours (23 years
old, 38 years old, and 40 years old), and the disease progressions of the three subjects after long-term follow-up remain unknown. The two
patients in the present study had different mutations on the PKD1 gene. The relationship between the PKD1 mutation sites and the disease
progression was difficult to explain because of the small sample size limitation of the reported cases. Apart from unilateral ADPKD, our
patients also had concurrent ectopic MCDK. MCDK generally refers to a sporadic disease condition of abnormal metanephric differentiation.
The incidence is approximately 1 in 4300 in the general population . We identified two cases of MCDK among the 605 ADPKD patients,
indicating an incidence rate of 3.3%. Generally, the total kidney function of many subjects with MCDK could be well-maintained . However,
both our patients prepared for long-term hemodialysis when they were in their 40s, mainly in consideration of the kidney structure
destruction by the continuous cyst growth in their contralateral kidneys. TCF2 (HNF1β) abnormalities cause congenital anomalies of the
kidney and urinary tract . Some studies have reported that MCDK is related to TCF2 mutation . However, both of our patients tested negative
for TCF2 mutation. Mutations in genes such as EYA1, SIX1, and PAX2 are related to the occurrence of MCDK. However, neither of our patients
had concomitant ear and eye structural abnormalities or dysfunction (data not shown). Their MCDK could be related to other genetic
abnormalities. We conclude that the anatomical and genetic abnormality in patients with ADPKD could be more frequent and complex than
previously believed. Patients with ADPKD have fragile compensatory capacities, and missing one kidney could accelerate the deterioration of
the renal function. The clinical information of the two patients and their relatives were provided by the index patients or their relatives
after obtaining their consents. The study was conducted following the Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consents were obtained from
the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. Copies of the written consents are available for review by the
editor of this journal. ADPKD: Autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease; CI: Confidence interval; eGFR: Estimated glomerular filtration
rate; HNF1β: Hepatocyte nuclear factor 1 beta; MCDK: Multicystic dysplastic kidney; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; SKV: Single-kidney
volume; TCF2: Transcription factor 2 The authors declare that they have no competing interests. XJ participated in the conception and design
of the study, data acquisition, and data analysis and interpretation, performed the statistical analysis, and drafted the manuscript; CDP
participated in the data acquisition and statistical analysis; MZG participated in the conception and design, as well as in data
acquisition; HHF, XCM, WCR, and JWP carried out the genetic studies on mutations; MCL participated in the design and coordination and helped
revise the study critically for important intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication
history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2369/14/38/prepub This work was funded in part by the
National Nature Science Fund of China (Nos. 30971368, 81000281, and 81200499) and the Outstanding Young Investigator Fund of the Second
Military Medical University, Shanghai, China.
