Dear Editor, Retained foreign matter introduced perioperatively is believed to play a causative role in postoperative intraocular
inflammation in uncomplicated surgery. Processed reusable ophthalmic instruments, and particularly lens introducers, have been shown to
retain debris such as denatured viscoelastic and are a major source of retained foreign matter. We present a case of postoperative fibrinous
anterior uveitis presumed secondary to debris transferred from the lens introducer onto the intraocular lens implant (IOL). A 9-year-old boy
underwent uncomplicated cataract surgery for juvenile cataract associated with hypoparathyroidism-related-hypocalcemia. Left-sided surgery
was performed first, and an AcrySof MA60AC (22 Dioptre) standard lens was inserted. The child had an uneventful postoperative recovery.
Right eye cataract surgery was done a month later, and an AcrySof SN60WF (24 Dioptre) lens (blue light filter IOL) was implanted due to a
change in the model of IOL used by the hospital. Both IOLs were folded and then inserted using John Weiss lens introducer (model number
0109163). Two weeks post-right cataract surgery, despite excellent compliance, the patient developed photophobia and ache in the right eye
during tapering of topical steroids. When he presented, his right visual acuity was reduced to 20/40 (from 20/25 one week postoperatively).
Slit lamp examination revealed anterior uveitis and fibrin deposits closely related to crystalline debris seen on the anterior surface of
the IOL [Fig. 1]. The debris was noted to be in the configuration of the contact surfaces of the lens introducer used during surgery. The
fibrinous anterior uveitis was treated aggressively with topical steroids (1% prednisolone acetate) and resolved completely within three
weeks. The debris marks on the IOL persisted without causing any further effects. No uveitis or debris was noted in the left eye. Slit lamp
photograph of the anterior segment of the right eye showing crystalline debris transferred from lens folder onto the anterior surface of the
IOL with surrounding secondary fibrinous uveitis We believe the debris on the IOL played a causative role in the postoperative fibrinous
uveitis in this patient. Although causality is not certain, the alignment of the fibrin strands to the debris strongly suggests this. The
delay in presentation may have been due to partial treatment of the inflammation by the tapering postoperative topical steroids. A potential
confounding factor is that the patient received a tinted IOL in the right eye only. Beauchamp et al. demonstrated a higher rate of
postoperative inflammation observed in pediatric eyes, which received the tinted AcrySof SN60AT IOL in comparison to non-tinted AcrySof
SA60AT IOL. However, this is unlikely to explain our findings as the localized fibrin deposits on the IOL indicated a focal inflammatory
trigger and not a generalized one such as a tint chromophore. This case highlights the issue of retained foreign matter on processed
ophthalmic instruments, which could precipitate vigorous post-operative inflammation, if deposited intraocularly. We support the suggestion
of Dinakaran et al. that instruments are inspected under the microscope by the surgeon prior to use, and that special attention must be paid
to contact surfaces.
