Low-grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma (LGCCC) is a recently described rare tumor of salivary gland which exhibits clinically indolent
behavior. This tumor predominantly consists of intraductal components and frequently exhibits papillary-cystic or cribriform proliferation
pattern. Considering the histological features of LGCCC, it should be distinguished with papillocystic variant of acinic cell carcinoma,
conventional salivary duct carcinoma, cystadenocarcinoma, polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma, carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma and
mammary analogue secretory carcinoma. Herein, we presented two cases of LGCCC. One arose in the left parotid region in a 48-year-old male,
and the other one arose in the right parotid gland in a 59-year-old female. For both cases, immunohistochemically, the luminal tumor cells
showed diffuse expression of CK and S100; p63 and smooth muscle actin displayed a continuous rim of myoepithelial cells around all tumor
islets; no myoepithelial cells were admixed with the luminal cells. Both patients were alive with no tumor recurrence or metastasis at
follow-up. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/2593621568999135 Low-grade
cribriform cystadenocarcinoma (LGCCC) is a rare neoplasm of salivary gland. Originally, it was described as a variant of salivary duct
carcinoma (SDC) by Delgado et al. in 1996 . LGCCC usually occurs in elder people with a female predominance of 2:1. Parotid gland is the
most common site of involvement . Presentation in the palate , submandibular gland , intraparotid lymph node and accessory parotid gland may
occur but rare. LGCCC is characterized by the papillary-cystic or cribriform proliferation pattern and resembles the low-grade ductal
carcinoma in situ or atypical ductal hyperplasia of the breast in histology and biological features. LGCCC was originally denominated as
low-grade salivary duct carcinoma (LGSDC) in order to distinguish with the conventional SDC. In contrast with the LGCCC, conventional SDC
exhibits highly aggressive malignancy and high-grade histology similar to an invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast. However, no definite
association was found between LGCCC and conventional SDC; therefore, the third WHO classification regards this neoplasm as a variant of
cystadenocarcinoma due to its cystic morphology . Histologically, LGCCC was composed of single or multiple cystically enlarged ducts
accompanied by adjacent intraductal proliferation. Various structures, such as cystic structures, loose cribriform and micropapillae pattern
or solid area, could be observed in LGCCC. The typical cyst structures are lined by small or multilayered mild ductal cells with finely
dispersed chromatin and small nucleoli. These tumor cells are diffusely strong positive for S100. Myoepithelial markers highlight the tumor
cells rimming the cystic spaces, confirming the intraductal nature of LGCCC. Based on the histological features, LGCCC should be
distinguished with other common parotid tumors including papillocystic variant of acinic cell carcinoma (PCV-ACC), conventional SDC,
cystadenocarcinoma, polymorphous low-grade adenocarcinoma (PLGA), carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma and mammary analogue secretory carcinoma
(MASC). A 48-year-old male was admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University in August of 2011 for further
examination because of the mass in the left parotid region. The mass was soft, non-tender and did not adhere to the skin. Ultrasound
examination revealed a nonhomogenous hypoechogenic mass with anechogenic areas measuring 21×12 mm. Examination by fine needle aspiration
cytology was not performed. The patient underwent parotidectomy without radiotherapy. The patient was alive with no tumor recurrence or
metastasis at 16 months of follow-up. The surgical specimen measured 3.5 cm in the greatest diameter. On cut surface, it showed a
nonencapsulated tumor measured 2×1 cm. The tumor was whitish in color. The tumor was demarcated from the surrounding slightly lipomatous
parotid glands with a relative boundary (Figure 1A and B). The lesion was dominated by a large cystic space with multiple small well
demarcated tumor islets in the fibrous stroma close to the central cyst. The architecture of these islets varied from solid (Figure 1C) to
cribriform and micropapillary (Figure 1D). Within the lumen, pink secretions could be observed, but no comedo necrosis was identified. The
tumor cells were uniform without significant cytologic and nuclear atypia. They displayed round to oval nuclei with fine chromatin and
prominent nucleoli and pale to amphophilic cytoplasm. Apocrine differentiation of tumor cells was not obvious. No atypical mitosis was
observed. Histological features and immunohistochemical staining of both cases. A-B: Case 1, the tumor was demarcated from the surrounding
slightly lipomatous parotid glands with a relative boundary. C-D: Case 1, within the tumor, solid and micropapillary pattern were observed.
E-F: Case 2, the tumor was demarcated from the surrounding parotid glands with a clear boundary. G: Case 2, the tumor cells were uniform
without significant cytologic and nuclear atypia. They displayed round to oval nuclei with fine chromatin and pale to amphophilic cytoplasm.
H: Case 2, Apocrine differentiation of tumor cells was observed focally. I: The luminal tumor cells showed diffusive expression of S100
(Case 1 and 2). J: Immunostaining for p63 displayed a continuous rim of myoepithelial cells around all tumor islets (Case 1 and 2).
Immunohistochemically, the luminal tumor cells showed diffuse expression of CK and S100 (Figure 1I). Immunostaining for p63 (Figure 1J) and
SMA displayed a continuous rim of myoepithelial cells around all tumor islets. No myoepithelial cells were admixed with the luminal cells.
Tumor cells were negative for CEA, AR, ER, PR, EGFR, and Her-2/neu oncoprotein. Ki67 index was less than 5%. A 59-year-old female was
admitted to the First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical University in May of 2012 for further examination because of the mass in the
right parotid region. The physical examination showed a solid mass in the right parotid with slight tender and the mass did not adhere to
the skin. Ultrasound examination revealed a homogenous hypoechogenic mass measuring 35×21×22 mm. Examination by fine needle aspiration
cytology was not performed. The patient underwent parotidectomy without radiotherapy. The patient was alive with no tumor recurrence or
metastasis at 7 months of follow-up. The surgical specimen measured 4 cm in the greatest diameter. On cut surface, it showed a well-
circumscribed tumor measured 3×2 cm. The tumor was whitish in color. The tumor was demarcated from the surrounding parotid glands with a
clear boundary (Figure 1E and F). The lesion was mainly composed of solid to cribriform and micropapillary structures, while the dilated
cystic structures were rarely seen. No comedo necrosis was identified. The tumor cells were uniform without significant cytologic and
nuclear atypia. They displayed round to oval nuclei with fine chromatin and pale to amphophilic cytoplasm (Figure 1G). Apocrine
differentiation of tumor cells was observed locally (Figure 1H). No atypical mitosis was observed. Immunohistochemically, the luminal tumor
cells showed diffuse expression of CK, CK7 and S100 (Figure 1I). Immunostaining for p63 (Figure 1J) and smooth muscle actin (SMA) displayed
a continuous rim of myoepithelial cells around all tumor islets. No myoepithelial cells were admixed with the luminal cells. Tumor cells
were negative for CK20, AR, ER, PR, EGFR, and Her-2/neu oncoprotein. Ki67 index was less than 5%. Like other rare tumors in parotid glands,
LGCCC is a low-grade malignant tumor with indolent clinical behavior . In the third WHO classification, it is listed under a separate
heading although regarding as a variant of cystadenocarcinoma . To date, there are nine papers totally reported 35 cases of LGCCC. The
reported cases and the two cases in this paper were summarized in Table 1. In these patients, the majority of LGCCC occurred in older
patients (median 62 years) without obvious gender preponderance (Male: Female=15:21; one case with gender unavailable) though the third WHO
classification described that the tumor had a female predominance. Among the cases listed in Table 1, thirty-five tumors arose from parotid
glands both in the superficial and deep lobes, including three cases occurred in the intraparotid lymph node and one occurred in accessory
parotid gland. The remaining two tumors arose in the palate and submandibular gland. Therefore, all the LGCCCs reported by now occurred in
large salivary glands except one controversial report on hard palate. The tumor size varied from 0.9 to 4 cm. Among the cases with follow-up
available, no one had recurrence or died because of the tumor. According the clinically indolent behavior, most of the cases were treated
with parotidectomy without radiotherapy. Reported cases of the low-grade cribriform cystadenocarcinoma in the English-Language Literature
and their prognosis M male; F female; U gender unavailable; NED no evidence of disease; mos months. Grossly, the clinical suggestion of
LGCCC is used to be Warthin tumor according to the morphologic feature, that is, a slowly growing cystic mass. Histologically, the tumor is
unencapsulated and composed of single or multiple cysts with an intraductal proliferation. The cystic cavity is in line with cytologically
bland ductal cells. The intraductal proliferation has a cribriform pattern with “sieve-like spaces” similar to breast proliferations. The
majority of the tumor is intraductal; however, small areas of invasion may be present. A total of 7/37 (19%) cases summarized in Table 1
have focal stromal invasion. The tumor cells usually display little cytologic atypia and low mitotic rate . Sometimes, the tumor cells have
PAS-positive/diastase-resistant microvacuoles and yellow-brown, lipofuscin-like pigment. There is often associated hemorrhage, cholesterol
clefts and hemosiderin-laden macrophages due to cyst rupture, while vascular and/or perineural invasion and comedonecrosis is absent in this
tumor. Immunohistochemically, LGCCC is characterized by diffusely strong positive for S100. However, Weinreb et al. and Arai et al. reported
two cases of LGCCC with rarely negative for S100. All tumors examined for Her-2/neu oncoprotein, including our case, were negative. Most of
the tumor structures have continuous myoepithelial rim confirmed by detection of myoepithelial markers, such as, CK5/6, CK14, SMA, and p63,
thus clarifying an in situ nature of the neoplasm. Typically, admixture of luminal and myoepithelial cells is absent. The differential
diagnosis of LGCCC includes PCV-ACC, conventional SDC, cystadenocarcinoma, PLGA, carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma and MASC. PCV-ACC
resembles LGCCC according to the intracytoplasmic PAS-positive/diastase-resistant granules (zymogen) and hemosiderin . In contrast to LGCCC,
the more common microcystic growth pattern in PCV-ACC is usually seen adjacent to cystopapillary areas and display granular basophilic
cytoplasm. PCV-ACC does not exhibit predominance of the intraductal component in histology and the intracytoplasmic vacuoles are uniform in
size. Compared with LGCCC, PCV-ACC is predominantly negative (about 90%) for S100 and focally expressed if present . In addition, PCV-ACC
mainly occurs in young people, while LGCCC usually affects older people. Conventional SDC is a high-grade adenocarcinoma that is common in
elder people over 50 years of age . Histologically, SDC resembles a high-grade invasive ductal carcinoma of the breast, frequently
accompanied by comedo necrosis and cribriform proliferation . SDC exhibits an apocrine-like appearance with positivity for GCDFP-15 and
androgen receptor, which is occasionally observed in LGCCC, but SDC is negative for S-100. In addition, SDC usually exhibits a high Ki-67
labeling index. Occasional cases of SDC in situ (SDCIS) have been described . The in situ–like appearance or noninvasive cribriform growth
pattern make it hard to distinguish between SDCIS and LGCCC. In contrast to LGCCC, the atypical cells in SDCIS exhibit high nuclear
pleomorphism and AR-positive/S100-negative profile. Weinreb et al. reported a series of 3 intraductal neoplasms interpreted as LGCCC with
some nuclear atypia of the tumor cells, all expressing AR and in 2 cases also showing S100 expression. Thus, they consider their LGCCC cases
to be a low-grade variant of SDC with a potential for transformation into a high-grade carcinoma. At present, the relationship between LGCCC
and SDCIS remains unclear although the current WHO classification considering LGCCC as a variant of cystadenocarcinoma. LGCCC may be either
a separate entity based on distinctive immunohistochemical profile or an extremely low-grade end of the spectrum of SDCIS. Recently, a new
entity in the salivary gland called MASC has been described , which shows a similar microvacuolar appearance to LGCCC and may have any of
solid, cystic and papillary architectures. Similar to LGCCC, MASC is also positive for S100. All these characteristics make it difficult to
distinguish between LGCCC and MASC. Although no cases of MASC with an intraductal growth pattern have been described, it should be noted
that only one IDC/LGCCC was included in the control group tested for the ETV6-NTRK3 fusion in Skalova et al’s original description of MASC.
For now, the presence of a complete myoepithelial layer around tumor nests is considered specific to LGCCC instead of MASC. In the current
WHO classification, LGCCC is regard as a variant of cystadenocarcinoma according to the histological features. However, conventional
cystadenocarcinoma tends to be an invasive tumor and lacks the overall resemblance to intraductal breast proliferation. PLGA and carcinoma
ex pleomorphic adenoma should also be considered when rendering a diagnosis of LGCCC. PLGA can be distinguished from LGCCC by its
distinctive neurotropism and infiltrative lobular, trabecular, and tubular patterns. The transition from myoepithelium to stromal spindle
cell and myxoid or cartilaginous stroma is the typical features of carcinoma ex pleomorphic adenoma, which is not observed in LGCCC. Both of
the cases exhibited the typical features of LGCCC, that is, intraductal proliferation and bland ductal cells arranged in a cribriform
pattern whichresembled the low-grade breast lesions. Most of the tumor nests or cribriform structures in these two cases were rimming by the
continuous myoepithelialium which confirmed by p63, thus, clarify an in situ nature of the neoplasm. The tumor cells in both cases were
diffusely strong positive for S100. In addition, the Ki67 index in our cases was under 5%. All these findings supported the diagnosis of
LGCCC, although the dilated cystic structures were not observed in Case 2. Our report illustrated two cases of LGCCC which was a rare
salivary tumor. LGCCC should be considered in the differential diagnosis of salivary tumors to avoid rendering a wrong diagnosis of other
highly aggressive malignant tumor of salivary gland. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case
report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in Chief of this Journal. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. LW analyzed the data and wrote the manuscript as a major contributor. YL, XL and DZ helped to
perform the immunochemical staining. QL, XQ and EW helped to revise the discussion section of this manuscript. All authors have read and
approved the final manuscript.
