This research has been supported by grants 421-2009-1773 and 349-2007-8695 from the Swedish Research Council. This is an Open Access
article. Non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly attributed, cited, and
is not altered, transformed, or built upon in any way, is permitted. The moral rights of the named author(s) have been asserted. The present
study investigated hierarchical lexical semantic structure in oral descriptions of concrete word meanings produced by a subject (ZZ)
diagnosed with anomic aphasia due to left occipital lesions. The focus of the analysis was production of a) nouns at different levels of
semantic specificity (e.g., “robin”–“bird”–“animal”) and b) words describing sensory or motor experiences (e.g., “blue,” “soft,” “fly”).
Results show that in contrast to healthy and aphasic controls, who produced words at all levels of specificity and mainly vision-related
sensory information, ZZ produced almost exclusively nouns at the most non-specific levels and words associated with sound and movement.
Concrete nouns (e.g., “table”) and verbs (e.g., “kick”) activate brain regions involved in experiencing their referred objects and actions
(Hauk, Johnsrude, & Pulvermüller, 2004; Khader, Jost, Mertens, Bien, & Rösler, 2010; Martin, Haxby, Lalonde, Wiggs, & Ungerleider, 1995;
Pulvermüller, Preissl, Lutzenberger, & Birbaumer, 1996; Sabsevitz, Medler, Seidenberg, & Binder, 2005; Shapiro, Moo, & Caramazza, 2006).
This activation has been suggested to be either an effect of associative learning where words automatically activate sensory or motor neural
circuits (Pulvermüller & Fadiga, 2010) or a post-lexical simulation of the words’ associated action (Tomasino et al., 2010). In both cases,
it can be expected that lesions in areas involved in sensory processing may result in modality-specific word processing problems. The
present study investigated word production in a man (ZZ) diagnosed with anomic aphasia due to occipital lesions, in order to see if the
damage to visual areas would selectively affect production of words with visually related semantic content. Left occipital lesions may lead
to a syndrome known as optic aphasia, characterized by difficulties in naming visually presented stimuli, (e.g., pictures, objects and
colors), whereas naming stimuli perceived through other sensory modalities (i.e., touch, hearing, taste or smell) as well as naming from
verbal definitions is unimpaired (Gainotti, 2004; Girkin & Miller, 2001; Manning, 2000). However, although naming from visual presentation
is selectively impaired in optic aphasia, naming from verbal definitions may be more or less successful depending on the sensory modality of
their semantic content. At least two case studies indicate that individuals with optic aphasia seem to perform more poorly in tasks
involving responding to verbal definitions rich in visual information (Forde, Francis, Riddoch, Rumiati, & Humphreys, 1997; Manning, 2000).
Nouns with a relatively high degree of semantic specificity (e.g., “robin”) can be assumed to be more closely related to visual information
as opposed to relatively abstract nouns belonging to the same lexical semantic hierarchy (e.g., “animal”) (Rosch, 1978). Although the effect
of degree of specificity has not previously been investigated in persons with occipital lesions, studies of persons with lesions in other
areas suggest that different brain regions are involved in processing words associated with subordinate, basic and superordinate semantic
categories. For example, individuals with semantic dementia have shown an advantage in picture categorization using superordinate level
words, in contrast to persons with aphasia due to lesions involving frontal or temporoparietal regions, who have been seen to perform better
using subordinate level words. Both groups appear to differ from healthy controls, who have been observed to categorize stimuli at the basic
level with greatest speed and accuracy (Crutch & Warrington, 2008; Rogers & Patterson, 2007). In semantic dementia, difficulties with
processing more specific words can be explained by a loss of amodal semantic representations stored in the anterior temporal lobes (Crutch &
Warrington, 2008; Jefferies & Lambon Ralph, 2007; Marques, 2007; Patterson, Nestor, & Rogers, 2007). In aphasia due to occipital lesions,
problems with processing more specific words would also be expected; however, the difficulties would instead be assumed to be the result of
deficits in activating modality-specific (visual) semantic representations. The present study investigated content word production in a man
(ZZ) diagnosed with anomic aphasia due to left occipital lesions. ZZ was compared to healthy speakers as well as persons diagnosed with
aphasia following lesions in left perisylvian regions. In contrast to previous studies investigating the effect of presentation modality on
naming performance, a purely verbal task (orally describing the meanings of concrete nouns) was used in order to see whether ZZ had problems
accessing words with visual semantic content. Furthermore, in contrast to testing access to specific target words (e.g., by naming from
definitions), word meanings were described freely, making it possible to analyze the lexical semantic content produced in running speech.
Free oral descriptions of pictures have previously been used in a case study by Crutch and Warrington (2003) to elicit running speech in an
anomic participant, but to the authors’ knowledge, the study of free oral descriptions of test words presented orally has not previously
been done. A semantic analysis of the oral word descriptions was carried out where concrete words referring to more specific objects and
entities, (e.g., “tulip,” “parrot”) as well as words directly describing visual properties (e.g., “red,” “round”) were assumed to be
dependent on semantic processing in visual brain regions, whereas words referring to abstract, high-level categories (e.g., “thing,”
“animal”) and words describing other sensory and motor experiences (e.g., “soft,” “sweet,” “buzz”) were assumed to not directly involve the
visual cortex. The assumption that specific/subordinate level words used in the descriptions would also involve visual information was based
on the fact that these words were hierarchically related to the highly imageable stimulus nouns, which all referred to visually perceivable
entities. Following this, specific words throughout this paper will refer to nouns whose referents are visually mediated and not to specific
words related to other modalities (e.g., words for specific smells, tactile experiences etc.). Due to ZZ's occipital lesion, he was expected
to produce fewer words describing visual properties and nouns associated with specific (subordinate and basic) levels of categorization. In
contrast, his production of more general nouns at higher (superordinate) levels of lexical semantic categorization was expected to be
undisturbed. ZZ was also expected to rely on sensory modalities other than vision when processing semantic information associated with
concrete nouns. Thus, ZZ was expected to produce fewer words with vision-related meaning components and a relatively greater number of words
with meaning components from other sensory modalities as well as words with motor-related meaning components. The participants in the
present study (Table 1) were all native speakers of Swedish and informed consent was obtained from them prior to the test. The aphasic
participants were recruited via the Stroke Clinic at Malmö University Hospital. Description of participants: occipital aphasic participant
ZZ, perisylvian aphasic controls, and healthy controls. All data collection for the present study was carried out during 2009 and 2010 ZZ is
a right-handed male born in Sweden in 1932. He was admitted to the stroke clinic at Malmö University Hospital on 1 April 2004, and diagnosed
with a cerebral infarct due to a posterior cerebral artery stroke. A CT scan performed on 6 April 2004 showed a low attenuating area in the
left occipital lobe. Neurological examinations revealed a right-sided homonymous hemianopia, but no visual perceptual deficits. Based on
language testing after the stroke using PAPAP (Apt, 1997), the Swedish equivalent of the Boston Diagnostic Aphasia Examination and SBP (Apt,
1999), the Swedish equivalent of the Boston Naming Test, he was diagnosed with light to moderate anomic aphasia including semantic dyslexia
(alexia without agraphia). ZZ's auditory language comprehension was within normal limits and his speech was fluent, with normal syntax and
phonology. He had a mild to moderate anomia with particular difficulties in finding proper names. He produced verbal (semantic) paraphasias.
A full evaluation of his naming abilities could not be made since he discontinued the SBP test before it was completed. In a previous study
on word associations (Mårtensson, Roll, Apt, & Horne, 2011), ZZ was observed to produce mainly associations which were on an abstract
superordinate level (13/30) in relation to test words (e.g., blomkål “cauliflower”→ mat “food,” leopard “leopard”→ djur “animal”). In
several cases (7/30) he could not produce any association at all for concrete nouns and the remaining responses (9/30) were not
categorically related to the test word. Participants were instructed to freely describe orally the meanings of orally presented Swedish
nouns in as much detail as possible and told that there were no right or wrong answers. This approach was based on a method used by Barsalou
and Wiemer-Hastings (2005), who investigated descriptions of abstract and concrete concepts in healthy individuals. Compared to traditional
methods such as naming tests, this method has the advantage that the participants have the possibility to respond more freely, thus
providing the opportunity to gain insight into different strategies used to express word meanings involving different levels of semantic
specificity as well as different sensory features. Since the material analyzed in the present study was part of a larger study investigating
the effect of words’ imageability and emotional arousal, the concrete test nouns were presented mixed with abstract and emotional nouns.
Responses to 20 concrete nouns, i.e., nouns rated high in imageability (M = 641, SD = 26) (Mårtensson, Öberg, & Horne, manuscript, 2012, see
Appendix A) were analyzed. The test words included mainly visually related nouns (e.g., fjäril “butterfly,” näckros “waterlily”) as well as
nouns which, in addition to their salient visual features, could also be experienced through other sensory modalities (e.g., varg “wolf” and
hasselnöt “hazelnut” [touch, taste] [Appendix A]). An approximately equal number of test words denoting living and non-living things were
included (cf. Warrington, 1984). The oral descriptions were recorded with a Marantz PMD660 Portable Solid State Recorder. Approximately one
minute of speech produced as response to each test word was orthographically transcribed. Nouns belonging to the same lexical-semantic
hierarchy as the test word were then analyzed with respect to their degree of specificity and content words describing the test word's
semantic properties were analyzed with respect to their sensory and motor features. Content words (adjectives, verbs and nouns) in the
participants’ descriptions were coded according to a coding scheme reflecting five degrees of semantic specificity. These are summarized
below in Table 2. Words were coded as Level 1, the most specific level, if they were associated with specific sensory or motor related
properties of the test words’ referents. Levels 2–5 correspond to increasingly higher levels of semantic generality (levels of
categorization in Rosch's (1978) terms) in relation to Level 1. To allow for a more fine-grained analysis, the properties on one were
further coded as regards the modality of their sensory and motor-related meaning components (vision, sound, touch, taste/smell, movement.
See Appendix B and C for examples). Examples of a test word and response words at different levels of semantic specificity (level 1 = most
specific, level 5 = most general) Descriptive data analysis was carried out using SPSS. ZZ's and control participants’ words coded for
different levels of specificity were compared using Fisher's exact tests.1 The more specific levels (1–3), assumed to be associated with
sensory and motor features, were compared to the more general levels (4–5), assumed not to be associated with sensory and motor information.
The distribution of words related to different sensory and motor modalities was also investigated using two-tailed Fisher's exact tests. A
qualitative analysis of responses was also made. The majority of the test words were described by ZZ using words at the superordinate, most
general level 5, e.g., mat “food,” djur “animal,” växt “plant,” art “species,” sak “thing,” instrument “instrument” or apparat “device.” For
the test words diamant “diamond,” silver “silver,” tegelsten “brick,” ZZ could not access any information at all, and responded only by
saying that he did not know those words or that he could not say anything about them. He produced very few nouns at the basic level 3 (hus
“house” and blomma “flower”). The word blomma “flower” was produced only after having repeated the test word näckros “waterlily” together
with other types of flowers in a song line several times (Appendix D). Whereas 45–70% of the coded words produced by healthy as well as
aphasic controls were at the lowest level (1 = property/part-of-whole), only 26% of ZZ's were at level 1. However, over 60% of ZZ's coded
content words were level 5 (superordinate) words. This difference in distribution between ZZ and controls is visualized in Figures 1a–b. ZZ
clearly stands out from the rest with his use of words at relatively high levels of semantic abstractness, mainly at the most general level
(5). Comparing the production of words at the more specific, perceptually detailed levels (1–3) with words at the more general levels (4–5)
using two-tailed Fisher's exact tests, ZZ was seen to differ significantly from each of the healthy and aphasic controls. Whereas all
controls produced more words at the lower levels, ZZ produced more words at the higher levels (p < .0001). ZZ produced relatively few
related content word types per token (see Table 3). Distribution of word tokens at different levels of semantic specificity (% of coded
words produced by the individual subjects; ZZ = occipital; 1a–4a = aphasic controls; 1b–5b = healthy controls). Level 1 = most specific,
level 5 = most general. Heat map showing the distribution of mean levels of semantic specificity associated with words produced in
descriptions of each test word for the individual subjects (ZZ = occipital; 1a–4a = aphasic controls; 1b–5b = healthy controls). Level 1 =
most specific, level 5 = most general. White cells indicate that no words coded as level 1–5 were used in the description. Average number of
types and tokens of produced content words for each test item Some of ZZ's responses which contain nouns from the same lexical semantic
hierarchy as the test word were qualitatively different from the other responses and were thus excluded from the quantitative analysis. They
are listed in Appendix D below, together with a motivation as to why they were excluded. In one case (example 1, Appendix D), ZZ produced a
word belonging to the wrong superordinate category, växt “plant” as a response to the test word fjäril “butterfly,” but at the same time
produced a correct motor-related property, kan flyga “can fly.” He also in some cases produced nouns at low levels of specificity that were
embedded in song lines (examples 2–3, Appendix D) or in lexicalized phrases (example 4, Appendix D). This was the case for all subordinate
level words he produced. As a follow-up analysis, all words coded as being at the most detailed level (1) of specificity were subjected to a
more fine-grained analysis in order to see which sensory and/or motor properties they expressed. ZZ produced a total number of 14 content
word tokens (only nine different words) which were coded as belonging to level 1 (see Appendix C). Figure 2 shows the distribution of
sensory and/or motor features in relation to the total number of features represented in each participant's word production. ZZ produced
words whose meaning can be decomposed into a greater proportion of sound-related features (78.6%) than vision-related features (35.7%). This
pattern differed from the aphasic as well as healthy controls, who all produced words associated with more vision-related than sound-related
semantic features. Two-tailed Fisher's exact tests showed significant differences between ZZ and eight of the nine controls (p < .005) as
regards the distribution of visual- and auditory-related features. In control 2b, although his production was associated with a larger
number of visual than auditory features, as was the case with the other controls, this difference did not reach significance compared to the
feature distribution of ZZ (p > .05)2. Furthermore, ZZ produced a greater number of movement-related words (42.9%) than any other
participant, relatively few words whose meaning contains features related to tactile experience (21.4%), and no words related to taste or
smell. For the controls, the second most frequent semantic modality characterizing their analyzed words was touch, whereas words involving
sound-related meaning components were relatively few and words related to taste or smell were rare. Distribution of sensory and motor
meaning components associated with the most specific words produced by individual subjects (ZZ = occipital; 1a–4a = aphasic controls; 1b–5b
= healthy controls) expressed as percent of a particular sensory or motor feature in relation to each subjects’ total number of features
associated with level-1 words. When the cases where ZZ's words with sensory or motor related features are put in context, it can be seen
that the descriptions are rather vague, although ZZ does provide some sensory and motor based information. For example, he describes a
“parrot” as an animal which “squeaks,” “says something,” “has a certain sound or euphony,” and that a “volcano” is something that “explodes”
or “sounds.” Further examples are listed in Appendix E together with responses provided by control participants. Despite the instructions to
provide as much information as possible about the test words, ZZ produced very few words associated with sensory and motor features,
indicating severe difficulties with this level of specificity. Looking at the distribution of feature modalities, he produced mostly sound-
related words, with the next largest category being movement-related words, and only rarely words with vision-related meaning components.
This differed from the healthy as well as aphasic control participants, who produced predominantly words with vision-related features, with
the exception of one healthy control (2b), who produced mostly words with touch-related features. Further differing from the control
participants, whose second most commonly produced meaning feature was touch, ZZ produced relatively few words with touch-related features. A
possible explanation for the controls’ production of relatively many words with touch-related features as well as ZZ's relatively sparse
production of them is that words which are strongly vision-related are also often strongly related to touch (Lynott & Connell, 2009). The
auditory features associated with ZZ's production provided fragmentary information about the meanings of the test words, but this was in
most cases not enough to result in accurate descriptions (see e.g., responses for “volcano” and “parrot” in Appendix E). Somewhat similarly,
the phrase kan flyga “can fly” was produced as response to the test word fjäril “butterfly,” although “butterfly” was referred to as a
“plant,” suggesting that he had only partial access to the word's meaning. The ability to fly was the only specific information about
butterflies he could provide, possibly because the flight of a butterfly has movement-related semantic features in addition to visual
features. The most accurate descriptions produced by ZZ were those which included more abstract information or knowledge about what objects
are used for, e.g., that a thermometer is used to measure temperature (see Appendix F for full descriptions). It could thus be expected that
even though ZZ's performance on concrete word descriptions was hampered due to occipital lobe damage, he could nevertheless be able to
produce more detailed, normal descriptions for less concrete words, e.g., emotional and abstract words. In order to obtain some indication
as to whether ZZ's descriptions of emotional and abstract test words could be judged to be relatively normal in comparison with his
descriptions of concrete words, we carried out a follow-up test in which we asked 12 participants to guess which words the descriptions were
about. This was done for descriptions produced by ZZ and control 5b who matches ZZ most closely in age and education level. All occurrences
of target (test) words in the descriptions were hidden. Results showed that ZZ's concrete word descriptions led to correct responses in
significantly fewer cases (35/120) in comparison to control 5b's descriptions (86/120) (c2 = 43.353, p < 0.001, df = 1). In contrast, the
accuracy of guessing correct target words for ZZ's descriptions of emotional and abstract words did not differ significantly from the target
word guesses for 5b's descriptions (emotional words: ZZ: 87/120, 5b: 86/120; abstract words: ZZ: 60/120, 5b: 72/120, (c2 = 2.424, p = 0.153,
df = 1)). These results can be related to the case study of Crutch and Warrington (2003), where, using a picture-description task, an
individual with occipitotemporal lesions showed well-preserved propositional speech and abstract vocabulary, although suffering from severe
anomic aphasia. Taste and smell-related words were not used by ZZ and only to a minor degree by some of the controls. The sparse use of the
olfactory and gustatory modalities may be due to the fact that the smells and tastes associated with the test nouns (vegetables, food,
flowers, see Appendix A) are difficult to describe in terms of taste or smell; for example, it may be difficult to say what a hazelnut
tastes like, other than that it tastes like hazelnut. Since the material investigated in the present study was originally recorded for other
purposes (comparing descriptions of abstract, emotional and concrete test words), the concrete part of the test was not designed to include
words with a systematic variation in their associated sensory modalities. Nevertheless, there was a variation in the stimuli with some test
words denoting entities which can be experienced through more than the visual modality (e.g., dragspel “accordion,” parrot “papegoja,”
blomkål “cauliflower”). Although the test words’ sensory related modalities should ideally have been systematically varied, a clearly
different semantic feature pattern could still be found in ZZ's word descriptions as compared to all other participants. Considering that
the test words were concrete nouns with high imageability ratings, a strong association with visual information was expected to be reflected
in the word descriptions as seen in the controls. ZZ's lack of vision-related words and relative focus on sound and movement is consistent
with the hypothesis that his occipital lesions would make visual semantic information difficult to access, whereas information from other
modalities would be expected to remain more accessible. ZZ produced almost exclusively words coded for the highest, most general levels of
semantic categorization (4–5). This pattern differed clearly from healthy as well as aphasic controls, whose word descriptions contained
words at all levels of semantic specificity, including a large number of subordinate and basic level words. ZZ only produced subordinate
level (2) words in song lines or lexicalized phrases (see Appendix D) which suggests that he is able to access their lexical forms in these
specific contexts. There is no evidence, however, that he is able to explain their semantic content or that he would use these subordinate
level words spontaneously. Results further showed that the largest proportion of words produced by all controls involved meanings at the
most specific level (1 = sensory or motor properties), a pattern which can probably be explained by the nature of the task, i.e., to provide
as much information about the meaning of each test word as possible. The fact that the task encourages production of specific descriptions
makes the absence of detailed low-level information in ZZ's responses even more striking. It could be argued, however, that speakers might
tend to start their descriptions with general information and then move on to more specific information, and that the reason for ZZ's high
levels of generality is that he simply produces word descriptions with less information, thus staying at the general level. However, when
measuring the average level of the first word related to the test word produced for each test item, controls were found to start out at mean
levels close to subordinate (level 2) and basic (level 3) (M = 1.88–3.05), whereas ZZ was found to start out by producing words at the
highest mean level (M = 3.73), closer to a superordinate level. When comparing ZZ to the control participants, it could perhaps be thought
that his high level of education contributes to his more abstract way of describing things. The control participants were of varying ages
and levels of education with the majority of them being younger and with a lower level of education than ZZ. However, the statistical
comparison between ZZ and control 5b (see Figure 1), who matches ZZ in age and level of education, showed that 5b responded in a manner
similar to the other controls and differed significantly from ZZ. Furthermore, the concrete words used in the study are unlikely to be
unfamiliar to any adult speaker of Swedish (mean rated familiarity = 568, sd = 49). Considering this, we tend not to think that ZZ's results
are influenced to any considerable degree by his relatively high age and education level. Previous studies have shown that individuals with
occipital lesions have difficulties accessing words related to the visual modality (Gainotti, 2004; Manning, 2000). In these studies, the
effect of different modes of presentation (e.g., visual/tactile/verbal) was investigated. In the present study, a man (ZZ) with occipital
lesions was shown to have selective difficulties with words with visual-related meanings, even though the stimuli were only presented
verbally. In descriptions of concrete word meanings, ZZ exhibited a unique pattern producing mostly words with a low degree of lexical
semantic specificity. At the level of sensory and motor related properties, ZZ produced very few vision-related words and a larger
proportion of sound- and movement-related words. These results support the idea that not only the mode of presentation can affect task
performance, but also the degree of visual semantic content in verbally presented stimuli (Forde et al., 1997; Manning, 2000). To the
authors’ knowledge, this question has not been systematically investigated in previous studies of persons with occipital lesions. Carried
out using http://faculty.vassar.edu/lowry/tab2x2.html Looking outside the visual/auditory comparison, it can be seen that control 2b
actually produces mainly touch-related words. This differs from the rest of the controls, who all produce mainly vision-related words. List
of concrete test words and possible associated sensory and motor parameters List of words with different levels of specificity (1 = most
specific, 5 = most general) in test subjects’ descriptions of the test word papegoja “parrot” ZZ's total production of words with sensory or
motor related features. Presence/absence of sensory and motor meaning components are specified with 1/0, respectively Examples of content
words belonging to the same lexical semantic hierarchy as the test word which were not included in the analysis. Pauses are marked with “#”
The original song line is dragspel, fiol och mandolin–“accordion, violin and mandolin,” from the song “Fritjof och Carmencita” by Swedish
composer Evert Taube. The line is from the song “Sjösala vals,” also by Swedish composer Evert Taube; Swedish lyrics “gullviva, mandelblom,
kattfot och blå viol.” Descriptions containing sensory and motor related words produced by occipital aphasic ZZ as well as aphasic and
healthy controls. Pauses are marked with “#” Responses containing abstract/functional information produced by ZZ and healthy and aphasic
controls. Pauses marked with “#”
