Human babesiosis is a rare tick-borne infectious disease. The clinical presentation ranges from an asymptomatic form to a life threatening
infection with severe hemolysis. Human babesiosis due to Babesia microti is the most common and is endemic in North America. We report a
European patient with severe pancytopenia and reactive hemophagocytosis related to a Babesia microti infection. Babesia infection was
acquired during a travel in the USA. Babesiosis should be considered in patients who traveled in endemic areas, especially North America for
the most common agent Babesia microti. Human babesiosis is a tick-borne infectious disease caused by intraerythrocytic protozoan species of
the genus Babesia transmitted by Ixodes. Babesia microti is the most common cause of human babesiosis endemic in USA on the northeastern
seabord and the upper midwest. The first confirmed case was a normosplenic individual on Nantucket Island published in 1970 . After
additional cases the disease became known as Nantucket fever. The incubation period may last from 1 to 9 weeks and clinical features are
similar to those of malaria. The severity is variable depending on the immune status of the host, ranging from an asymptomatic infection to
a severe life threatening disease . Severe disease generally occurs in patients over the age of 50 years or with splenectomy, malignancy,
HIV, or immunosuppressive medication. B. microti infections can also rarely be acquired by transfusion of blood products from asymptomatic
donors . In Europe few isolated cases have been reported related to other Babesia species: B. divergens and B. venatorum. Most of European
cases are observed in splenectomized patients . A 82-year-old man living on the French Riviera presented at the emergency department for
fever and chills lasting for 5 days. He complained of severe asthenia. He came back two weeks ago from a travel in New York city, USA with a
two days stay on the Long Island countryside. He did not note any insect bite during his travel. Jaundice was noticed on examination as well
as slightly enlarged spleen and liver. Blood test showed an abnormal blood cell count with neutropenia (0·5 G/L), lymphopenia (0·3 G/L),
thrombocytopenia (30×109/L) and anemia (haemoglobin of 91 g/L) with a low reticulocyte count (45 G/L). Blood test also showed increased C
reactive protein (154 mg/L), raised ferritin (5953 ng/ml) and liver enzymes were elevated (ALT 56 UI/L (N<40), AST 68 UI/L (N<53), Alkaline
phosphatase 213 UI/L (N<129), total bilirubin 48·9 μmol/L). Haptoglobin was undetectable, LDH levels increased 620 UI/L (N<225) and
coagulation tests were in normal range. Routine blood cultures were negative. Bone marrow aspiration was performed because of the severe
cytopenias associated with a low reticulocyte count and showed typical hemophagocytosis (Figure 1A). Microscopic examination of the blood
smear and the bone marrow stained with Giemsa showed intra-eryhtrocytic parasites (Figure 1B). The parasitemia was evaluated about 3% of red
blood cells. Rapid testing for Plasmodium falciparum by PCR revealed negative. Intravenous treatment for babesiosis with clindamycin and
quinine was started. Patient’s clinical status improved with the resolution of the fever after 3 days of treatment. Blood analysis improved
after the 10 days treatment course (haemoglobin 104 g/L, platelets 220×109/L, neutrophils 3 G/L, C reactive protein 16 mg/L). PCR testing on
blood for babesia was positive (Figure 2A). Babesia microti was confirmed by PCR with specific primers (LDH gene amplification) as shown on
Figure 2B. Serology for Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent of Lyme disease, was negative. A; Bone marrow smear stained with Giemsa
(magnification x 100). The picture shows a macrophage with phagocytosis of a neutrophil. On the right side an intra-erythrocytic ring of
Babesia microti can be observed in a red blood cell (arrow). B; Blood smear stained with Giemsa (magnification x 100) showing intra-
erythrocytic forms of Babesia microti. Polymerase chain reaction results for Babesia microti in patients blood (C=H20, negative control;
B.d= Babesia divergens strain R87, positive control; B.m= Babesia microti strain T, positive control; P=Patient). PCR was done with specific
primers for Babesia in 2A and specific amplification of the LDH gene of Babesia microti in 2B. The clinical symptoms and the biological
abnormalities observed during babesiosis are very similar to Plasmodium infection. Thus malaria is often evoked even in travelers who have
never visited a malarious area because of the rare “airport malaria” . This case underline that the diagnosis of babesiosis should be
considered in patients who traveled in endemic areas, especially North America, for the most common agent Babesia microti. Babesia microti
infection cannot be ruled out in patients with intact spleen in contrary to the European Babesia species (Babesia divergens and Babesia
venatorum). Moreover in some rare cases spontaneous splenic rupture secondary to babesia microti infection have been reported . Babesiosis
has been reported to be associated to reactive hemophagocytosis in few cases however regenerative hemolytic anemia is the most usual
presentation . In the present case the unusual severe neutropenia and non-regenerative anemia led to the bone marrow aspiration analysis.
Typical hemophagocytosis was seen however without evidence of phagocytosis of babesia infected red blood cells. Diagnosis of babesia is
usually strongly evoked by the blood smear analysis and can be confirmed by specific PCR, allowing to identify Babesia species and to
exclude plasmodium infection. Despite some similarities with plasmodium, babesiosis does not respond to chloroquine. The use of clindamycin
with quinine have been shown to be effective as the combination of atovaquone and azithromycin . Because Borrelia burgdorferi, the agent of
Lyme disease, is transmitted by the same tick and is endemic in North America it should systematically be screened by serology in these
patients. The diagnosis of babesiosis should be considered in patients who traveled in endemic areas especially North America for the most
common agent Babesia microti. Blood analyses usually show regenerative hemolytic anemia, thrombocytopenia, and elevated liver enzymes. In
case of pancytopenia associated with non-regenerative anemia reactive hemophagocytosis should be evoked. Diagnosis of babesiosis can be made
on blood smear analysis but needs usually more specific tests, as PCR, to be confirmed. The patient has given his consent for the
publication of this case report. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors have participated substantially in
order to be considered as authors in this case report. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for
this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/13/99/prepub
