Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: CUH SFP JK JV MS
UD EJMS JPK UW SS. Performed the experiments: CUH JK EJMS UW SS. Analyzed the data: CUH SFP JK JV MS UD EJMS JPK UW SS. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: CUH SFP JK JV MS UD EJMS JPK SS. Wrote the paper: CUH SFP JK JV MS UD EJMS JPK. ¶ These authors also
contributed equally to this work. Juvenile-onset recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is associated with low risk human papillomavirus
(HPV) types 6 and 11. Malignant transformation has been reported solely for HPV11-associated RRP in 2–4% of all RRP-cases, but not for HPV6.
The molecular mechanisms in the carcinogenesis of low risk HPV-associated cancers are to date unknown. We report of a female patient, who
presented with a laryngeal carcinoma at the age of 24 years. She had a history of juvenile-onset RRP with an onset at the age of three and
subsequently several hundred surgical interventions due to multiple recurrences of RRP. Polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or bead-based
hybridization followed by direct sequencing identified HPV6 in tissue sections of previous papilloma and the carcinoma. P16INK4A, p53 and
pRb immunostainings were negative in all lesions. HPV6 specific fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) revealed nuclear staining
suggesting episomal virus in the papilloma and a single integration site in the carcinoma. Integration-specific amplification of
papillomavirus oncogene transcripts PCR (APOT-PCR) showed integration in the aldo-keto reductase 1C3 gene (AKR1C3) on chromosome 10p15.1.
ArrayCGH detected loss of the other gene copy as part of a deletion at 10p14-p15.2. Western blot analysis and immunohistochemistry of the
protein AKR1C3 showed a marked reduction of its expression in the carcinoma. In conclusion, we identified a novel molecular mechanism
underlying a first case of HPV6-associated laryngeal carcinoma in juvenile-onset RRP, i.e. that HPV6 integration in the AKR1C3 gene resulted
in loss of its expression. Alterations of AKR1C gene expression have previously been implicated in the tumorigenesis of other (HPV-related)
malignancies. Recurrent respiratory papillomatosis (RRP) is a benign neoplasm of the larynx, predominantly induced by low risk HPV types 6
and 11 , . RRP may occur at any site in the airway tract, although the larynx is the preferred location . The viral etiology of RRP was
first suggested by Ullmann in 1923 and has been confirmed by HPV6/11-specific in situ hybridization and polymerase chain reaction (PCR) . In
adult-onset RRP, both HPV types 6 and 11 can be found, whereas in juvenile-onset RRP, mainly HPV11 is detected . It is known that RRP has
the potential to undergo malignant transformation. The reported incidence of carcinoma developing in RRP patients varies from 0% to 22% , .
In our own series of patients treated at the University of Cologne, the incidence of airway carcinoma was 4.6% . To date, it is unclear how
a low risk HPV infection may lead to malignancy. Several extrinsic factors could primarily be responsible for some of the malignant
transformations. Particularly, smoking and previous radiation therapy may independently induce malignant transformation, or facilitate viral
integration in DNA damaged areas of the genome. Alternatively in cases without such risk factors, the virus may incidentally integrate into
genes that are actively transcribed , as has been suggested to occur in high risk HPV-related anogenital and oropharyngeal cancers . Here we
studied for the first time consequences of a rare case of low risk HPV6-integration in juvenile onset RRP in relation to malignant
transformation. A 24-year old female patient that never smoked presented with an advanced laryngeal carcinoma. The patient showed a long
history of RRP. At the age of three, she had undergone a first microlaryngoscopy with removal of laryngeal masses, which were diagnosed as
papillomatosis in the histopathologic investigation. Several hundred revision surgeries had been necessary to control recurrences of the
disease. In 2008, a further microlaryngoscopy and histopathologic examination revealed a malignant laryngeal squamous cell carcinoma of
stage IV. Total laryngectomy with bilateral neck dissection was performed. Adjuvant chemoradiation with 5-FU and carboplatin to a total dose
of 70 Gy was administered postoperatively. However, the patient developed inoperable paratracheal recurrence of the primary tumor and
eventually died 21 months after the diagnosis of recurrence. The patient had never been treated with Cidofovir. We analyzed formalin-fixed,
paraffin-embedded tissue that had been archived at the Institute of Pathology at the University of Cologne Medical Center from previous
resections (1985 and 1989) of the laryngeal papilloma, as well as fresh frozen tumor tissue from the laryngeal carcinoma and lymph node
metastasis (2008). Furthermore, we analyzed 9 additional, randomly chosen fresh frozen tissue samples from our tumor tissue archive, i. e.
three cases of laryngeal papilloma (two HPV6- and one HPV11-positive), three HPV16-associated oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas (OSCC)
and three HPV-negative oropharyngeal squamous cell carcinomas. These samples served as controls for immunohistochemical stainings and
Western blotting. The ethics committee of the University of Cologne medical faculty approved this study. Written, informed consent had been
obtained from the hereby reported patient and all other patients whose material was used for control. All control samples were anonymized
prior to analysis. Genomic DNA was extracted from five 10 µm-thick formaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections and of snap frozen
tissue sections, respectively, using the Gentra puregene tissue kit with proteinase K treatment (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the
manufacturer's protocol. Paraffin was removed by graded xylol and ethanol baths before extraction of the DNA. Both a general primer GP5+/6+
PCR (150 base pairs product) and a nested PCR with degenerate primers A5/A10 (527 bp product) and A6/A8 (268 bp product) for HPV detection
were applied . Five µl of these PCR products were separated on a 1.5% agarose gel and visualized by ethidium bromide staining. Direct
sequence analysis of purified PCR products (QIAquick PCR purification kit, Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) was carried out with an ABI Prism 377
DNA sequencer using the Taq FS Big-Dye-Terminator cycle sequencing method (PE Applied Biosystems, Weiterstadt, Germany). Human
papillomavirus typing was performed by comparison of the obtained sequences with database entries using NCBI Blast search. Additionally,
HPV-typing was performed by bead-based multiplex hybridization of A6/A8 PCR products with 38 type-specific probes as previously described .
HPV-types covered by the assay were HPV6, 11, 16, 18, 26, 30, 31, 33–35, 39, 40, 42–45, 51–59, 61, 66–68, 70–73, 81–84, 89 , . β-globin gene
PCR served as a positive control for sufficient DNA of adequate quality, and to show that samples were free of PCR inhibitory substances
(268 bp PCO4/GH20 PCR product) . The following primary antibodies were used: monoclonal mouse anti-human p16INK4A antibody, clone G175-405
(BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany); monoclonal mouse anti-human AKR1C3 antibody, clone NP6-G6.A6 (does not cross react with AKR1C1,
AKR1C2, and AKR1C4) (Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany), monoclonal mouse anti-human p53 antibody, clone DO-7 (BioLogo, Kronshagen, Germany),
and monoclonal mouse anti-human pRb antibody, clone J146-35 (BD Biosciences, Heidelberg, Germany). Immunohistochemical staining on 5 µm-
thick formaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections and cryostat sections, and slide evaluation was performed as previously
described , . Primary antibodies were detected using the avidin-biotinylated peroxidase complex (ABC) procedure (Vectastain-Elite-ABC kit;
Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, USA) and peroxidase activity was visualized using diaminobenzidine/H2O2 (BD Biosciences, Heidelberg,
Germany). Sections were counterstained with hematoxylin and mounted in Histofluid (Marienfeld, Lauda-Koenigshofen, Germany). Each analysis
included negative and positive controls. Analysis was performed by two independent researchers (CUH and SFP) and consensus was achieved.
Strong nuclear and cytoplasmic staining was considered positive for AKR1C3 expression. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) for the
detection of HPV6 on 5 µm thick formaldehyde-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections, and evaluation of nuclear FISH signals was performed
as previously described . In brief, sections were deparaffinized, treated with 85% Formic acid/0.3% H202 and dehydrated in an ethanol series
containing 0.01 M HCl (acidic dehydration). The digoxigenin-labeled HPV6 probe (Panpath, Budel, The Netherlands) was applied under a
coverslip at a concentration of 1 ng/µl in 50% formamide, 2× SSC pH 7.0, 10% dextran sulphate, and a 50× excess of carrier DNA (salmon sperm
DNA) followed by hybridization over night. Detection was carried out with peroxidase-conjugated sheep anti-digoxigenin Fab fragments (Roche,
Basel, Switzerland; 1∶100 diluted in 4×SSC containing 5% nonfat dry milk), followed by a tyramide signal amplification (TSA) reaction using
rhodamine-labeled tyramide 25–27. After dehydration in an ascending ethanol series, slides were mounted in Vectashield (Vector Laboratories,
Burlingame, USA) containing 0.2 µg/ml 4,6-diamidino-2-phenyl indole (DAPI; Sigma, Germany). Slides were evaluated under a Leica DM-RE
fluorescence microscope equipped with DAPI and rhodamine filters and images were recorded with the Metasystems Image Pro System (black and
white CCD camera; Sandhausen, Germany). Total RNA was extracted from five 10 µm-thick snap frozen tissue sections using the RNeasy mini kit
(Qiagen) according to the manufacturer's instructions, which included DNase treatment. RNA concentration and quality were determined by RNA
standard sense chips on a BioRad Experion system (BioRad, Munich, Germany). 500 ng RNA was reverse transcribed in 20 µl using oligo-dT
primer (25 µM), dNTPs (10 mM each), DTT (0.1 M), 5× RT-buffer and 40 U SuperScript reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Karlsruhe, Germany).
Quality of generated cDNA was determined by a standard GAPDH gene PCR (forward primer 5′–AATGGAAATCCCATCACC–3′, reverse primer
5′–CAGCCTTGGCAGCGCCAG–3′; 441 bp product). For detection of the physical status of HPV6 (episomal and/or integrated virus), a 3′-RACE APOT
assay (amplification of papillomavirus oncogene transcripts) was used which was based on Klaes et al. and modified for HPV6 detection. After
reverse transcription of RNA, a nested PCR with a set of newly designed 5′-Primers (1st 5′-primer: 5′-GGACGGACAAGATTCACAACC-3′; 2nd
5′-primer: 5′-CCTGTTGCTGTGGATGTGACAGC-3′) both located in the E7 open reading frame of HPV6 and a 3′-Frohman primer (for both nested PCR-
setups) was used . PCR products were separated on a 1.2% agarose gel. Candidate bands for viral integration different from episomal ones
were cut out of the gel, purified (Gel extraction kit, QIAGEN) and sequenced. Sequences were compared with NCBI and UCSC database entries to
determine virus-human fusion points indicating viral integration. Sequence analysis of TP53 was performed by PCR amplification followed by
direct sequencing based on the IACR protocol . Exons 4–8 were amplified from cDNA, Exons 2, 3 and 9–11 were amplified from DNA. Sequences
were compared with reference sequence NC_000017.9. High-resolution oligo-nucleotide aCGH was performed using a 105 K microarray (99,000
human sequence probes) (Agilent Technologies, Boeblingen, Germany) according to the manufacturer's protocol. In brief, 1.5 µg genomic tumor
and reference DNA (G1521 female DNA, Promega, Mannheim, Germany) were digested with AluI and RsaI, labeled and processed according to the
manufacturer's protocol and scanned using an Agilent G2567AA Scanner. Images were extracted using Feature Extraction 9.5 software and
visualized using Genomic Workbench 6.5 software (both Agilent Technologies). Aberrations were calculated by the z-score algorithm with a
threshold of 2.5. Primary array CGH data have been made publicly available at EMBL-EBI (Accession No. E-MEXP-3330) for use in subsequent
analysis. Total protein extracts were derived from five 10 µm-thick snap frozen tissue sections. Extracts were normalized after protein
concentrations were determined by bradford assay according to the manufacturer's protocol (Roti-Nanoquant, Carl Roth, Karlsruhe, Germany)
and equal amounts were resolved via SDS-PAGE (sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis). Blotting of proteins on
nitrocellulose membranes was carried out according to standard protocols in a semi-dry blotter using Towbin buffer (0.025 M Tris-HCl pH 8.0;
0.192 M Glycin; 20% Methanol). After blocking with 4% non-fat milk powder in TBS-T buffer (0.1% Tween 20 in Tris-buffered saline),
monoclonal anti-AKR1C3 antibody (clone NP6-G6.A6, Sigma-Aldrich, Munich, Germany) followed by secondary anti-mouse IgG peroxidase conjugated
antibody (Sigma-Aldrich A 9044) was applied to the membrane. Dilution of antibodies and subsequent washing was done in TBS-T buffer. For
visualization, Pierce solution (Biozym, Hessisch Oldendorf, Germany) was applied to the nitrocellulose membrane. Chemiluminescence signals
were documented with an Alpha Innotech Fluorchem FC2 system (Biozym). Blots were stripped and re-probed with monoclonal beta-actin antibody
(Clone AC-74, Sigma-Aldrich) as control. Genomic DNA was extracted from paraffin-embedded laryngeal lesions of the patient from the years
1985 (papillomatosis), 1989 (papillomatosis) and 2008 (primary carcinoma and lymph node metastasis), as well as from snap frozen carcinoma
and lymph node metastasis. DNAs were screened for HPV by PCR and subsequent sequencing analysis and were all positive for HPV6. Co-infection
with 37 other low- and high-risk HPVs was excluded by multiplex hybridization of group-specific PCR products with HPV-type-specific probes.
FISH analysis on paraffin embedded tissue sections confirmed the presence of HPV6 in the papillomatosis (1989) and carcinoma, and
furthermore showed diffuse nuclear staining indicating episomal HPV6 in the papilloma (fig. 1A) and nuclei harboring a single punctate
signal indicating HPV integration in the carcinoma (fig. 1B). In contrast to HPV16-positive OSCC, however, the laryngeal lesions were
immunonegative for p16INK4A expression, whereas p53 showed no detectable expression and pRb was highly expressed (fig. S1 A, D, G). Probes
were directed against HPV6. Magnification ×750. (A) Papilloma. (B) Carcinoma. To unmask the location and breakpoint of the HPV6 integration
site, we performed a 3′-RACE PCR APOT assay adapted for HPV6 detection using extracted RNA from the frozen carcinoma tissue. Separation of
PCR products by agarose gel electrophoresis showed bands indicating viral integration. Subsequent sequence analysis identified integration
of HPV6 in the AKR1C3 gene on chromosome 10p15.1 (see fig. 2A). Analysis of the chimeric HPV/AKR1C3 mRNA showed that it is spliced from HPV6
at nucleotide 745 in the viral E1 gene to intron one of the AKR1C3 gene. ArrayCGH analysis using genomic DNA from snap frozen tissue
revealed that a 0.57 MB region (10p14–10p15.2) including the AKR1C3 gene was lost in the carcinoma (fig. 2B), thus suggesting deletion of
the other AKR1C3 gene copy. ArrayCGH detected additional DNA copy number changes, including a large deletion on chromosome 3 in a region
which is normally gained in OSCC (see for the entire CGH profile fig. 2C). (A) Sequence analysis of APOT PCR product. Analysis of the
chimeric HPV/AKR1C3 mRNA showed that it is spliced from the HPV6 splice donor site at nucleotide 745 to intron one of the AKR1C3 gene. (B,
C) ArrayCGH analysis. (B) Large scale ideogram of chromosome 10. AKR1C3 is marked by an arrow. (C) Overwiev of all chromosomes. Arrows
indicate 3q loss and AKR1C3 integration site on chromosome 10 and a large deletion on chromosome 3. Green colored regions indicate DNA loss.
Algorism z-score, Threshold 2.5. Western blotting showed a distinct AKR1C3 protein expression in all control samples except for one
HPV16-positive OSCC and the laryngeal carcinoma of the here reported patient (fig. 3A). Immunohistochemical staining for AKR1C3 protein
expression confirmed the observed expression by western blotting of the controls and the carcinoma. In contrast to the carcinoma, the
papilloma showed strong AKR1C3-expression (fig. 3D and 3E). (A) Western blot analysis of total protein extracts from dissected tissue
samples as indicated. β-Actin was used as an internal loading control (lower panel). Note the faint band of the HPV6 positive SSC while all
other protein samples except for one HPV16-positive OSCC showed moderate-strong AKR1C3 expression. (B–E) Immunohistochemistry for AKR1C3
expression showing (B) strong immunostaining in a control HPV11-positive papilloma, (C) strong immunostaining in a control HPV16-positive
OSCC, (D) strong immunostaining in the papilloma from 1989, (E) and no staining in the primary carcinoma from 2008. Magnification ×400. HPV6
and/or HPV11 have been reported to be present in 50–100% of RRP cases, depending on the methods used for viral detection (7). While the
incidence for malignant transformation into squamous cell carcinoma (SSC) in adult-onset RRP varies from 3 to 6% in the literature , , this
is a very rare event in juvenile-onset RRP with a reported transformation rate of less then 1% . Although both low risk HPV types 6 and 11
are capable to cause malignant transformation in adult-onset RRP, HPV11 appears to have the highest potential . HPV11 has also been detected
in the 20 reported cases of juvenile-onset RRP that show malignant transformation . In this study we present the first case showing
integration of HPV6 in the AKR1C3 gene on chromosome 10p15.1 in association with loss of its gene expression and carcinoma formation.
Several studies have provided evidence, that integration of high risk HPV types, such as HPV16 and HPV18, is a pivotal step in the
transition of cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN) to invasive carcinoma , . Also in OSCC, HPV16 is often found integrated , , , . In
contrast, the low risk HPV types 6 and 11 are mostly present in the episomal form, both in uterine benign and CIN-lesions as well as in
laryngeal papilloma , . For tonsillar carcinoma, integration of HPV6 DNA into chromosome 10q24 has been described by cloning of the virus-
cellular integration site . In the here presented RRP case, we provide evidence that similar to high risk HPV, also low risk HPV type 6 can
integrate into the cellular genome, leading to the production of a virus-cellular fusion transcript by PCR with the cellular sequence
derived from 10p15.1. In addition, arrayCGH identified a loss of this sequence as part of a longer deletion of 10p14-p15.2. This is in
agreement with other studies showing that HPV-integration can lead in up to 77% of cases to alterations of genomic structures through the
amplification, deletion and complex rearrangement of flanking cellular DNA . However, the mechanism leading to these alterations upon
integration is still unclear and remains to be studied. Because Wentzensen et al. reported that high risk HPV DNA can be integrated at sites
located all over the host genome with a general predilection for fragile sites, we performed a database query for fragile sites at 10p. No
listed fragile sites were identified near the HPV6 integration site . The cellular part of the identified fusion transcript consisted of
intron one DNA of the AKR1C3 gene, which codes for a hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase involved in the regulation of local concentrations of
androgens and estrogens particularly in hormone dependent tissues like prostate, breast and endometrium. Cancers originating from these
tissues are associated with an upregulated protein expression . In a most recent article Wanichwatanadecha et al. show that AKR1C1 and
AKR1C3 protein levels are upregulated under the influence of HPV16 E6-protein and are modulated by truncated 16E6*I protein in cervical
cancer cell lines, implicating a distinct role of the AKR1Cs in HPV-related carcinogenesis . Our western blot and immunohistochemical
results show that the AKR1C3 protein is also highly expressed in the laryngeal papilloma, but is downregulated in the carcinoma. Because we
found a deletion of the 10p14-p15.2 region by aCGH, it is tempting to speculate that one copy of the AKR1C3 gene is truncated by the virus
and the other copy is lost during transition to carcinoma. In this deleted chromosomal region, however, also close homologues of AKR1C3 are
located, including AKR1C1, AKR1C2 and AKR1C4. These AKR1C family members are also involved in steroid metabolism , and selective loss of
AKR1C2 in prostate cancer, for example, have been found to promote clonal expansion of tumor cells by enhancement of androgen-dependent
cellular proliferation . More studies are thus required to further elucidate the exact roles of the AKR1C members in HPV-related cancer. We
noticed that p16INK4A immunohistochemical staining was negative in the here presented RRP case. This is in line with findings of Sano et al.
, who showed only focal and weak p16INK4A staining in HPV6-positive cervical and genital lesions. Also a pilot study on premalignant head
and neck lesions was in agreement with this finding . An explanation for this observation might be differences in the interaction of E6 and
E7 oncoproteins with cellular proteins between low- and high-risk HPVs, leading only to p16INK4A upregulation in the case of high risk HPV-
related carcinomas . P16INK4A expression thus appears to be an unreliable surrogate marker for low risk HPV-positive head and neck cancers.
Immunohistochemical staining showed no detectable expression of p53 and high pRb expression in the carcinoma. These findings are in line
with a report by Arany et al. (1993), also showing low p53 expression and strong pRb expression in skin lesions infected by HPV6. The latter
finding might be explained by the inefficiency of HPV6 E7 protein to inactivate pRb , which is in contrast to HPV16 positive OSCC in which
E7 effectively can downregulate this target . The situation for p53 is more complicated, because p53 showed to be wild type in the carcinoma
and no p53 deletion was detectable by arrayCGH. Nevertheless, p53 expression could not be detected by immunohistochemistry. An explanation
for this finding could be transcriptional deregulation or deregulation by high MDM2 levels. In conclusion, this is the first study reporting
malignant transformation of juvenile-onset RRP associated with HPV6 infection. Our analysis showed viral integration in the AKR1C3 gene on
chromosome 10p15.1 in association with deletion of the chromosomal region 10p14-p15.2, transcription of a virus-human fusion product as well
as loss of AKR1C3 protein expression. A more general role for deregulated expression of AKR1C3 and its family members in HPV-associated
tumors remains to be studied. Routine immunohistochemical analysis of known HPV-related proteins. (A–C) Immunohistochemistry for p16INK4A
expression showing (A) no expression in the primary carcinoma from 2008, (B) strong immunostaining in a control HPV16-positive OSCC and (D)
no immunostaining in a control HPV16-negative OSCC. (D–F) Immunohistochemistry for p53 expression showing (D) no expression in the primary
carcinoma from 2008 in comparison to positive normal epithelium in the same sample (shown in box), (E) no immunostaining in a control
HPV16-positive OSCC and (F) strong nuclear immunostaining in a control HPV16-negative OSCC. (G–I) Immunohistochemistry for pRb expression
showing (G) cytoplasmic and nuclear expression in the primary carcinoma from 2008 in comparison to positive normal epithelium in the same
sample (shown in box), (H) no immunostaining in a control HPV16-positive OSCC and (I) cytoplasmatic and nuclear immunostaining in a control
HPV16-negative OSCC. Magnification ×400. (TIF) Click here for additional data file. The authors would like to thank A. Haesevoets
(Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Maastricht University Medical Center) and O. Siefer (Jean-Uhrmacher-Institute for
otorhinolaryngological research at the University of Cologne) for excellent technical assistance.
