This report suggests that laparoscopic technology and instrumentation can be used to improve open procedures, especially when exposure and
visibility are limited. Air embolism is a relatively rare complication of thoracoscopic surgery. Open supraclavicular sympathectomy was
indicated to overcome the risk of re-embolization. A novel video-assisted technique was performed. The previously prevalent open
supraclavicular sympathectomy is a good choice for avoiding air embolism. Laparoscopic instrumentation and technology can be used to improve
open procedures, especially when exposure and visibility are limited. Sometimes we should remember to use the experience of our teachers.
Air embolism is a relatively rare complication of thoracoscopic video-assisted surgery.1 Nevertheless, intraoperative care and monitoring
are of utmost importance and may saves lives.2 The evaluation of end-tidal CO2 is known to serve as a possible indicator of increased dead
space due to CO2 embolism.3,4 The transition from an open to a thoracoscopic approach to upper dorsal sympathectomy, more than 20 years ago,
brought this rare complication to awareness. Insufflation of hemithorax with CO2 is required to obtain visualization and working space and
can cause gas embolism. An 18-year-old male with idiopathic primary palmar hyperhidrosis (PPH), suffering from severe social and
occupational handicaps, was admitted for an elective re-sympathectomy. Two years previously, an attempted bilateral thoracoscopic
sympathectomy had failed. At the very beginning of the procedure with the patient under general anesthesia, after a left pneumothorax was
obtained with 1 liter of CO2 and before any dissection was commenced, a sudden drop in end-tidal CO2 accompanied by bradycardia (55
beats/minute) was noted. An air embolism was suspected. Immediate deflation of the left hemithorax was done followed by intravenous infusion
of 500cc of clear fluids with a 10-mg intravenous push of Ephedrine. The patient became hypotensive (blood pressure, 80/40) with severe
bradycardia of 45 beats/minute. After 2 intravenous injections of 0.3-mg Adrenaline, the patient stabilized and the operative procedure was
postponed. The patient insisted on undergoing the surgical procedure. We decided that it would be safer to perform the long neglected open
approach of supraclavicular upper dorsal sympathectomy. A surgeon, very experienced in this surgical approach, was invited to participate.
We upgraded the old procedure to a video-assisted procedure, with the use of a 5-mm scope through the supraclavicular incision. The
identification of the sympathetic trunk was easier instead of counting on palpation alone, and we had excellent visual control of the entire
procedure. The patient had an immediate excellent result, and there were no complications. Follow-up of 36 months revealed no morbidity and
dry hands. (1) Localization of skin incisions: A. 6-cm to 7-cm skin incision, 1cm above and parallel to the clavicle; B. A 5-mm trocar is
introduced 1cm lateral to the primary incision. (2) Visual control enables identification of the sympathetic trunk and ganglia and safe
resection of the T2–T3 segment. A skin incision, about 7cm in length, is made 1cm above the middle part of the clavicle. The platysma muscle
and the clavicular head of the sternocleidomastoid muscle are incised. The prescaleneal pad of fat and lymph nodes, lateral to the internal
jugular vein, is excised. If the omohyoid muscle is in the operating field, it should be transected. The phrenic nerve, positioned over the
anterior scalenus muscle must be preserved and, if necessary, gently moved aside. The thyrocervical arterial trunk should often be
transected. The anterior scalenus muscle is transected. The plan of dissection, above and behind the subclavian artery and medial to the
brachial plexus, reaches the dome of the pleura, which is dissected from the posterior part of the thorax. The first costo-vertebral
junction is palpated, and the stellate ganglion is exposed. At this stage of the procedure, an additional 5-mm skin incision is made 1cm
lateral to the primary incision. A 5-mm trocar is inserted toward the index finger that lies deep in the cavity. A 30° 5-mm scope is
introduced. All the previously mentioned structures that could only be palpated are now visible on the screen, and the Stelate ganglion (T1)
and the sympathetic trunk can be easily identified. No gas insufflation is required. The pleura are dissected under vision from the
posterior part of the thorax along the second, third, and fourth costovertebral junctions, anterior to which are the second and third
sympathetic ganglia. These 2 ganglia are resected using metal clips on the remaining chain. Care is taken not to injure the subcostal
vessels. If the pleura are injured, a small tube is inserted into the pleural cavity. The sternocleidomastoid and subcutaneous tissue are
sutured. The skin is closed. If a tube was inserted into the pleural cavity, air is aspirated from it while the lungs are inflated, and the
tube is removed. The determination of our patient to undergo 3 anesthesias and 2 surgical procedures emphasizes the scope of the problem PPH
presents, and underlines the perseverance of these patients in their search for a solution to their problem. Air embolism during
thoracoscopy should always be born in mind. When suspected, prompt diagnosis and immediate therapeutic measures are mandatory to prevent
severe morbidity or mortality. The classical open approach was never indicated in our practice after the introduction of the thoracoscopic
technique in the early 1990s. This case was an exception, because we were not prepared to attempt re-thoracoscopy due to the risk of air
embolism. We chose, therefore, to offer to the patient the classical open supraclavicular sympathectomy approach. This procedure used to be
our standard surgical approach for PPH more than 2 decades ago.5 The results were satisfying, yet the procedure required exceptional
expertise. The vast experience in this technique of one of the authors (HM) facilitated surgery. We managed to improve the approach by the
assistance of videoscopy instead of manual palpation, which facilitated detection of the sympathetic chain and determining the level of
ganglia. Laparoscopic instrumentation and technology can be used to improve open procedures, especially when exposure and visibility are
limited. Indeed, in the present case it proved to be very helpful and made the identification of the sympathetic structures very easy.
