A laparoscopic approach may be feasible in the management of very large pseudocysts of the pancreas. Laparoscopic cystogastrostomy is an
established procedure for the drainage of pancreatic pseudocysts. Cysts are mainly present in the lesser sac (retro-gastric), which is
completely amenable to cystogastrostomy. We discuss the problems faced and simple solutions to the problems in managing a huge pancreatic
pseudocyst of 22 cm×18 cm in a young boy 18 y of age. Pancreatic pseudocysts (PP) have been managed laparoscopically since 1994.1 The most
commonly performed procedure is the laparoscopic anterior cystogastrostomy for retro gastric cysts.2 There are many reports of huge cysts
managed laparoscopically; however, in the English literature no one has currently reported a PP of more than 20 cm managed laparoscopically
in a young boy 18 y of age. We approached this case with the intent of managing it with a minimally invasive technique, but we faced
problems associated with the size of the cyst and the failure of endoscopic drainage. Hence, we discuss the problems faced while managing
such a huge cyst laparoscopically and how they were dealt with in our setup. An 18-y-old boy reported an enlarged mass over the upper
abdomen. He gave a history of abdominal trauma for which he was admitted in his local hospital and managed conservatively. On examination,
he had a huge mass of about 20 cm×15 cm that was firm in consistency in his upper abdomen and that moved very slightly with respiration.
Ultrasound showed a walled off cystic collection of about 20 cm×17 cm. Computed tomography revealed a 22 cm×18 cm pancreatic pseudocyst that
pushed the stomach superiorly and the colon inferiorly (Figure 1) while compressing the retroperitoneal structures. The underlying pancreas
could not be properly delineated; however, the rest of his gut and solid organs were within normal limits. Reconstructed computed tomography
image showing the huge cyst compressing the nearby structures. We planned a laparoscopic internal drainage of the cyst. In the process, we
faced 2 major problems: Due to the huge size of the cyst, the patient's venous return was not normal, a situation that could be further
aggravated after pneumoperitoneum.The cyst almost completely occupied the upper abdomen and extended below the umbilicus; hence, the site of
entry for pneumoperitoneum was uncertain. Due to the huge size of the cyst, the patient's venous return was not normal, a situation that
could be further aggravated after pneumoperitoneum. The cyst almost completely occupied the upper abdomen and extended below the umbilicus;
hence, the site of entry for pneumoperitoneum was uncertain. An endoscopic transmural drainage was an ideal procedure to preoperatively
decompress the cyst. It was tried, but it failed, because the cyst wall was thick and the cyst had completely compressed the stomach, making
endoscopic manipulation difficult inside the stomach. Preoperative percutaneous external drainage was the next choice, but it had its own
risks of infection, including potential hemorrhage into the cyst or into the peritoneal cavity, a punctured bowel, and other such things. We
decided to perform the same in the operation theater with the patient under anesthesia and already prepared for laparotomy if required. The
patient was put in the usual reverse Trendelenburg with a modified lithotomy position. An area was marked, using ultrasound guidance, along
the left mid clavicular line approximately 4 cm below the costal margin. This site was marked as such to avoid the colon and other major
vessels while reaching the cyst percutaneously via the stomach. A 24-gauge lumbar puncture needle was introduced into the cyst
percutaneously from the marked site, and 1000 mL of pancreatic fluid was very slowly aspirated (Figure 2). This decompressed the cyst a bit,
and we could enter the peritoneal cavity by an open technique from the umbilicus. There were flimsy adhesions between the gastric wall and
the anterior abdominal wall, which were separated by the 30° scope. We could see the needle passing through the stomach wall into the cyst
(Figure 3), which confirmed its safe passage. Further, under direct vision of the scope, we slowly aspirated another 500 mL of fluid. This
collapsed the cyst to more manageable proportions, and we could insert the other ports. The needle was removed under vision. At the site of
needle puncture of the stomach an anterior gastrotomy was performed, and we proceeded with an uneventful anterior laparoscopic
cystogastrostomy using the routine 4-port technique. The patient had an uneventful postoperative recovery. He is doing well 12 mo after
surgery. Intraoperative photograph showing the patient with distended abdomen due to the cyst and aspiration being done using a 24-gauge
needle. Needle (N) seen going through the stomach wall (S) into the cyst after adhesions (A) have been separated. Surgery, a near-perfect
procedure, is the mainstay in the management of the pancreatic pseudocyst. At times, surgery, endoscopic drainage, and percutaneous external
drainage are complementary to each other rather than being conflicting alternatives.3 Since its introduction in 1994, laparoscopy has
contributed enormously in the management of pseudocysts. Many series have reported excellent outcomes with the laparoscopic procedure.4 It
offers all of the benefits of minimally invasive surgery to the patient while maintaining all of the principles of PP surgery. Laparoscopy
achieves adequate internal drainage, facilitates concomitant debridement of necrotic tissue within the pseudocysts, and achieves good
results with minimal morbidity.4 Laparoscopic internal drainage can be performed using anterior and posterior approaches.5 The anterior
technique is easy to master, while the posterior laparoscopic approach requires more sophisticated laparoscopic skill.6 Most laparoscopy
case series, however, report cyst sizes below 12 cm. The most common cause of pancreatic pseudocysts in children is trauma followed by
cholelithiasis.7 Endoscopic management in children is regarded as the gold standard by some7; however, it is reported to have a very high
recurrence rate.5 In our case, endoscopic drainage was not possible due to the huge size of the cyst. External drainage alone can have very
high recurrence and complication rates. In our case, it was the perfect adjunct to a laparoscopic internal drainage procedure. Until now in
the English literature, no one has addressed the feasibility of preoperative, on-table percutaneous drainage of a cyst with ultrasound
localization to facilitate entry into the peritoneal cavity in the treatment of large pancreatic pseudocysts. This procedure has been
described in this case. Laparoscopy has played a significant role in the surgical management of pseudocysts with excellent outcomes. Huge
pancreatic pseudocysts are also amenable to laparoscopic repair with slight preoperative or on-table modification.
