We report on a 55-year-old man with alcoholic liver cirrhosis who presented with status epilepticus. Laboratory analysis showed markedly
elevated blood ammonia. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed widespread cortical signal changes with restricted diffusion,
involving both temporo-fronto-parietal cortex, while the perirolandic regions and occipital cortex were uniquely spared. A follow-up brain
MRI demonstrated diffuse cortical atrophy with increased signals on T1-weighted images in both the basal ganglia and temporal lobe cortex,
representing cortical laminar necrosis. We suggest that the brain lesions, in our case, represent a consequence of toxic effect of ammonia.
Hepatic encephalopathy, also known as portosystemic encephalopathy, indicates a spectrum of neuropsychiatric changes in patients with
impaired liver function, after an exclusion of other known brain disease. In a patient with chronic liver disease, acute attacks are
frequently precipitated by an intercurrent problem, such as gastrointestinal bleeding, acute superimposed hepatitis, concomitant infection,
drugs, or constipation, which leads to an elevation of blood ammonia level. Prolonged hyperammonemia results significant brain injury and
long-term sequelae, such as intellectual impairment by the primary toxic effects of ammonia on the brain parenchyma. Hepatic encephalopathy
is reversible with treatment. Therefore, recognition and correction of hyperammonemia is essential to avoid the complications, as mentioned
before (1, 2). The most common cause of hyperammonemic encephalopathy is acute hepatic dysfunction, and other etiologies include
portosystemic shunt surgery, drugs (e.g., sodium valproate, asparaginase therapy, or chemotherapy), infection, hypothyroidism, multiple
myeloma, and post-lung or bone marrow transplantation (3). Although the imaging findings of acute hyperammonemic encephalopathy are well
described in children with inborn errors of metabolism (4), the radiologic findings of acute hyperammonemic encephalopathy in adults are
less well described. We report a serial MRI of a patient with acute hepatic encephalopathy, who showed cortical laminar necrosis, not
reported previously as a consequence of acute hepatic encephalopathy. A 55-year-old man was admitted to the emergency room with generalized
tonic-clonic seizures and stuporous mentality, without regaining consciousness for two hours. He was a chronic alcoholic with alcoholic
liver cirrhosis. The initial blood ammonia level was 1002 µmol/L (normal range 12-47 µmol/L), and the liver function test results were
mildly deranged (bilirubin, 0.91 mg/dL; aspartate aminotransferase, 63 IU/L; alanine aminotransferase, 30 IU/L; pulmonary trunks 1.30
international normalized ratio). Other serum electrolytes and blood glucose levels were within normal ranges (glucose, 113 mg/dL).
Anticonvulsant was initially administered intravenously, and the seizures immediately disappeared. Lactulose enema was administered to
decrease the patient's blood ammonia level. Electroencephalography performed 3 days after the onset of symptoms showed continuous
generalized slowing without epileptiform discharges, suggesting a moderate diffuse of cerebral dysfunction. No hypotensive or hypoxemic
episode was observed during the admission days. Diffusion-weighted imaging (DWI) (b = 1000), 5 hours after the onset of seizures, showed
relatively symmetric bilateral high signals in both temporo-fronto-parietal cortex, including insular and cingulate cortex, with restricted
diffusion on the apparent diffusion coefficient (ADC) map (Fig. 1A). The initial differential diagnosis was acute hepatic encephalopathy,
hypoxic ischemic change, and other metabolic encephalopathy. On the fourth day, MRI was performed at 3.0 tesla (Achieva; Philips Medical
Systems, Best, the Netherlands), with T2-weighted (TR, 3000 ms; TE, 80 ms), fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images (FLAIR) (TR, 11000
ms; TE, 125 ms; TI, 2800 ms), and T1-weighted inversion recovery (TR, 2000 ms; TE, 10 ms) and intravenous contrast-enhanced images. An
interval increase in the extent of brain cortical edema was noted in both cerebral hemispheres, while the occipital cortex and perirolandic
regions were uniquely spared. Symmetric high signals were observed in both the medial thalami, basal ganglia, periventricular and cerebellar
white matter on the T2-weighted and FLAIR images. Basal ganglia showed subtle high signal on the T1-weighted image in both globus pallidus
(Fig. 1B). No pathologic contrast enhancement was seen. After one month of medical treatment and supportive care, the patient's blood
ammonia level decreased to 49 µmol/L, and his seizure attack did not recur. But the patient's intellectual function was impaired. Follow up
brain MRI revealed a diffused cortical atrophy in both temporo-fronto-parietal lobe and curvilinear, gyriform high signals on the
T1-weighted image in both temporal cortex. In addition, bilateral basal ganglia showed obvious high signals on the T1-weighted image (Fig.
1C). These findings were considered as a cortical laminar necrosis, presumably, the consequence of extreme toxic effect of ammonia. The
basic physiology of acute hepatic encephalopathy involves the increased levels of CNS glutamine, as a result of elevated CNS ammonia levels.
As CNS ammonia levels increase, glutamine, which is a potent osmolyte, accumulates and leads to numerous consequences, such as astrocyte
swelling, oxidative/nitrosative damage, disruption of glucose metabolism, defective neurotransmitter synthesis (such as gamma-aminobutyric
acid), and increased blood-brain barrier permeability. As CNS ammonia levels rise with systemic hyperammonemia, the direct toxic effects of
ammonia may take hold; thus, increasing CNS ammonia concentrations have been shown to disrupt neuronal function, and glutamine levels have
been shown to correlate with the severity of hepatic encephalopathy. These changes collectively contribute to the astrocyte swelling,
cytotoxic brain edema, intracranial hypertension and cerebral hypoperfusion, as well as decreased consciousness, which may be seen in an
acute hepatic encephalopathy (4, 5). MRI can show cytotoxic brain edema as extensive cortical signal changes, with associated restricted
diffusion (3). Similarly, our patient also showed relatively symmetrical, bilateral high signals, in both temporo-fronto-parietal cortex,
including the insular and cingulate cortex on the DWI, with restricted diffusion on the ADC map. Some researches reported the vulnerable or
resistant area of the brain in hyperammonemic encephalopathy patients. U-King-Im et al. (3) reported that symmetric involvement of the
cingulate gyrus and insular cortex is the striking common imaging finding in adult acute hyperammonemic encephalopathy, while additional
cortical involvement is more asymmetric and variable. They suggest that these cortical changes appear to be early imaging finding, and
potentially, reversible if aggressive treatment is instituted. They postulate that subcortical white matter, basal ganglia, thalami, and
brain stem involvement can also be seen in cases with more severe injury. Several case reports have revealed sparing of the perirolandic and
occipital cortex, with early involvement of the cingulate gyrus and the insular cortex in both adults and children patients (4, 6). Thus,
the cingulate gyrus and insular cortex appear to be particularly vulnerable to hyperammonemic-hyperglutaminergic encephalopathy, while the
perirolandic and occipital cortex seem relatively resistant. However, the pathophysiologic mechanism of regional vulnerability in
hyperammonemic encephalopathy is not clearly proved. McKinney et al. (5) reported abnormalities in the thalami, posterior limb of internal
capsule, periventricular white matter, and dorsal brain stem, as well as the diffused cortical involvement on FLAIR and DWI in acute hepatic
encephalopathy patients, which can be reversible. The MRI extent on FLAIR and DWI strongly correlates with the maximal plasma ammonia level,
and plasma ammonia level correlates well with the clinical outcome. However MRI severity correlates only moderately with the clinical
outcome. Our patient showed a periventricular and cerebellar white matter abnormalities, in addition to the diffusede extensive involvement
of the cerebral cortex, both basal ganglia, and medial thalami. After 1 month treatment, he showed intellectual impairment, these seem to be
caused by extremely high ammonia level on admission. The direct correlation between MRI and clinical outcome has not yet been entirely
determined, and it should be explored further in a prospective study. A follow up brain MRI, in our patient, showed a diffused cortical
atrophy in both temporo-fronto-parietal cortex and cortical laminar necrosis in both of the temporal cortex. Cortical laminar necrosis has
been described as a consequence of hypoxic encephalopathy, but also in some cases of electrolyte imbalance and diffuse encephalitis.
Distinguishing a feature between hypoxic encephalopathy and metabolic encephalopathy is the distribution of the cortical signal changes.
Cortical laminar necrosis of hypoxic brain damage is predominant in the watershed zones or the parieto-occipital regions, which possibly
reflects the haemodynamic factors (6-8). In our patient, there was no hypotensive or hypoxemic episode during the admission days.
Furthermore, the cortical signal change and cortical atrophy were more diffused and generalized in both temporo-fronto-parietal lobes and
cortical laminar necrosis were predominant in both temporal cortex. We, therefore, suggest that the cortical laminar necrosis in our case
represent an extreme toxic effect of ammonia. The bilateral basal ganglia of T1 high signal intensity changes have been described in
patients with chronic liver disease (1, 9). In our patient, the basal ganglia showed subtle T1 high signal in both globus pallidus on the
fourth day after the onset of seizures. This finding can be interpreted as chronic lesions, due to longstanding cirrhosis. On the 37th days
after the onset of seizures, a follow up brain MRI showed obvious T1 high signals in the lower portion of both basal ganglia, rather than
globus pallidus. It is known that the T1 high signals in the basal ganglia or caudate nucleus can be seen with cortical laminar necrosis in
patients of hypoxic-ischemic encephalopathy (10). We suspect the obvious T1 high signals in the lower portion of both basal ganglia by
extreme toxic effect of ammonia, as in the cortical laminar necrosis. In conclusion, extensive cortical edema, including deep gray matter,
with sparing of the perirolandic and occipital cortex, appears to be a unique imaging feature, particularly in patients with an extremely
high blood ammonia level. In addition, the diffused cortical atrophy with T1 high signals in both basal ganglia and temporal lobe cortex
representing cortical laminar necrosis can appear on a follow up brain MRI in such cases. Therefore, we suggest that the brain lesions in
our case represent a consequence of toxic effect of ammonia. Acute hepatic or hyperammonemic encephalopathy can be considered as one of the
causes in the differential diagnosis of cortical laminar necrosis. Serial MRI on 5 hours, 4th and 37th days. A. Diffusion-weighted imaging
(DWI) 5 hours after onset of seizures in 55-year-old man. DWI (b = 1000) obtained 5 hours after onset of seizures showed bilateral
relatively symmetric high signals in both temporo-fronto-parietal cortex, including insular and cingulate cortex, with restricted diffusion
on apparent diffusion coefficient map. B. MRI on fourth day after onset of seizures. fluid-attenuated inversion recovery images shows
interval increase in extent of brain cortical edema in both cerebral hemispheres, while showing unique sparing of occipital cortex and
perirolandic regions. It also shows symmetric high signals in both medial thalami, basal ganglia, periventricular and cerebellar white
matter. Basal ganglia shows subtle high signal on T1-weighted image in both globus pallidus. C. Follow-up MRI 37 days after onset of
seizures. T1-weighted images show diffuse cortical atrophy in both temporo-fronto-parietal lobe and curvilinear form high signals on
T1-weighted image, particularly temporal lobes (obvious on sagittal T1-weighted image). In addition, obvious T1 high signals appear in lower
portion of both basal ganglia. These findings were considered cortical laminar necrosis, presumably consequence of extreme toxic effect of
ammonia.
