Primary retroperitoneal transitional cell carcinomas (TCCs) are extremely rare neoplasms for which prognosis is very poor. We present a case
that underwent complete remission after radiotherapy and concurrent oral chemotherapy. A 68-year-old woman presented with acute onset of
bloody stool. Urgent colonoscopy only detected haemorrhoids. Subsequent abdominal ultrasonography revealed a mass of 7cm in maximal diameter
in the left iliac fossa. Laparotomy disclosed a retroperitoneal mass that could not be dissected and therefore only incision biopsy was
performed. After a final diagnosis of primary retroperitoneal TCC, chemotherapy with tegafur-uracil (UFT) was initiated but was not
effective. Subsequently, radiotherapy was initiated concurrently with UFT at a total dose of 50Gy in 25 fractions. At 20 months after
radiotherapy, the tumour seemed to have completely remitted. At the last follow-up, ten years from radiotherapy, computed tomography
revealed no recurrence. We identified only three single case reports regarding primary retroperitoneal TCC over the last five decades. All
patients died from the tumour 8−24 months after diagnosis or treatment. Based on the success of our case, radiotherapy with concurrent oral
chemotherapy should be considered as an option for unresected cases. A 68-year-old woman presented at a neighbouring hospital with acute
onset of bloody stool in August 2001. She had received a subtotal gastrectomy for a gastric ulcer 20 years previously but was taking no
medication at presentation. Physical examination revealed mild tenderness in the left lower abdomen. Urgent colonoscopy disclosed only
haemorrhoids. Subsequent abdominal ultrasonography revealed a mass of 7cm in maximal diameter in the left iliac fossa. On pelvic
examination, a hard mass was palpated on the left side of the normal-sized uterus and was unmovable. Serum CA125 was increased to 484.2u/ml
(normal <35.0u/ml) but CA19-9 and routine blood tests were normal. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) and pelvic magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) revealed a mass approximately 5cm × 7cm × 7cm in size in the left pelvic wall (Figs 1 and 2). No nodal or distant metastases were
detected using CT or MRI. Chest radiography was normal. Figure 1Post-contrast computed tomography of the abdomen at presentation showing a
lobulated mass (arrowheads) with cystic components in the left pelvic wall. The mass encases the left iliac vein (arrow). Figure 2Coronal
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis at presentation: T1 weighted MRI showing an inhomogeneous low intensity mass (A) and T2
weighted MRI showing internal multicystic components with homogeneously high intensities (B) Post-contrast computed tomography of the
abdomen at presentation showing a lobulated mass (arrowheads) with cystic components in the left pelvic wall. The mass encases the left
iliac vein (arrow). Coronal magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis at presentation: T1 weighted MRI showing an inhomogeneous low
intensity mass (A) and T2 weighted MRI showing internal multicystic components with homogeneously high intensities (B) Laparotomy disclosed
a retroperitoneal mass extending caudally to the lesser pelvis. A normal-appearing left ovary and left uterine tube were located inside the
mass. The other intrapelvic organs were normal. A small amount of ascites was observed without intraperitoneal implants. The mass could not
be dissected and therefore only incision biopsy was performed. Histology revealed a transitional cell carcinoma (TCC) without any ovarian
tissues (Fig 3). Cytology of the ascites was negative. Postoperatively, cystoscopy and intravenous pyelography were performed with negative
results. On the basis of these findings, a diagnosis was made of primary retroperitoneal TCC. In November 2001 oral chemotherapy with
tegafur-uracil (UFT) at a dose of 300mg/m2/day was initiated in an outpatient setting because the patient and her family hoped to avoid any
invasive treatment. At two months from the initiation of chemotherapy, the patient complained of swelling in the left leg in spite of a
slight decrease in serum CA125 level (304.5u/ml). One month later, abdominal CT revealed a growing mass 8cm × 8cm × 8cm in size but no nodal
or distant metastases. Serum CA125 was again increasing (351.0u/ml). Radiotherapy using a three-dimensional conformal technique was
initiated in March 2002. Figure 3Photomicrograph (haematoxylin and eosin stain; 20× magnification) of the biopsied specimen from the tumour
showing the characteristic cell pattern of transitional cell carcinoma Photomicrograph (haematoxylin and eosin stain; 20× magnification) of
the biopsied specimen from the tumour showing the characteristic cell pattern of transitional cell carcinoma At the end of radiation of 50Gy
in 25 fractions, oedema in the left leg had almost disappeared and there was a prominent decrease in serum CA125 (25.5u/ml) but the tumour
showed almost no change in size on CT. The chemotherapy was continued during and after the radiotherapy. From February 2003 the drug was
administered at a smaller dose of 100mg/m2/day because of leucopoenia. In November 2003, at 20 months from initiation of radiotherapy, the
tumour had almost disappeared except for a tiny nodule detected on follow-up CT (Fig 4). Until that time, serum CA125 had been within the
normal range for 19 months. Considering the possibility of a residual tumour, the chemotherapy was continued. Figure 4Post-contrast computed
tomography performed 20 months after the initiation of radiotherapy showing a small area of low density with spotty calcifications
(arrowhead) I = intestinal loops Post-contrast computed tomography performed 20 months after the initiation of radiotherapy showing a small
area of low density with spotty calcifications (arrowhead) I = intestinal loops In November 2006 the patient received a left mastectomy for
breast cancer followed by a single course of adjuvant chemotherapy. In January 2007 she underwent adjuvant hormonal therapy. In December
2008 pelvic CT revealed the tiny nodule still present without any change in appearance and size. Although tumour markers were not examined
at that time, the tumour seemed to have already attained complete remission. Consequently, chemotherapy was ended. From the initiation of
chemotherapy, interruptions had occurred four times owing to leucopoenia or adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer. The last follow-up CT
in May 2012, ten years from initiation of radiotherapy, revealed no recurrence. The patient had been well and was receiving adjuvant
hormonal therapy. Primary retroperitoneal TCCs are extremely rare entities. We could identify only three single case reports published in
the last five decades. 1−3 Two of these cases involved radiotherapy alone at a total dose of 50Gy in 25 fractions and radiotherapy at an
unspecified dose, and the remaining case involved surgery and adjuvant chemotherapy. Despite this, all patients died of the tumour 8−24
months after diagnosis or treatment. In our case, however, the patient has remained well with no recurrence over the ten years since
radiotherapy. An explanation for the difference in the effectiveness of radiotherapy between the previous case and ours is that in our case,
the concurrently administered chemotherapeutic agent acted as a radiosensitiser. Serum CA125 is a clinically useful marker of tumour
response or recurrence but not very helpful in differentiating the exact origin of the tumour. In our case, serum CA125 was increased before
radiotherapy but had decreased steeply at the end of radiotherapy. At that time, the tumour had not changed in size but was finally
completely remitted. Therefore, in our case, the decline in CA125 seemed to be a predictor for tumour response. The tumour had almost
disappeared in November 2003. Furthermore, during the subsequent 8.5 years until the last follow-up appointment in May 2012, there was no
recurrence detected on CT or by serum CA125 levels. Accordingly, complete remission of the tumour seemed to have been attained as late as
November 2003. Concerning the origins of this retroperitoneal tumour with cystic components, the following five major hypotheses were
proposed by Pearl et al: (i) heterotopic ovarian tissue; (ii) monodermal variant of teratomas; (iii) embryonal urogenital remnants; (iv)
intestinal duplication; and (v) coelomic metaplasia. 4 According to Hansmann and Budd, 5 the most provable origin for our case seems to be
embryonal urogenital remnants. However, owing to the possibility of a sampling error in biopsy and the pathological findings in our case,
the hypothesis of the tumour originating from heterotopic ovarian tissue or a monodermal variant of a teratoma could not be totally
excluded. Because of the paucity of experience in the treatment of primary retroperitoneal TCCs, each patient should be individualised. Our
patient was cured with radiotherapy and oral chemotherapy but the role played by continued administration of the oral drug following
radiotherapy remains unknown. Nevertheless, based on the success of our case, radiotherapy with concurrent oral chemotherapy should be
considered as an option for unresected cases. We wish to thank all participating members of Seibu Gazou Kenkyuukai for interpreting the
radiological examinations of this case.
