We report an unusual case of 9.5-cm-sized embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma arose from a mediastinal mature teratoma in a 46-yr-old man. A man
presented with chest trauma as a result of an accident at 10 September 2011. On chest X-ray, an anterior mediastinal mass was detected. To
obtain further information, chest computed tomography (CT) with contrast enhancement was performed, revealing an anterior mediastinal mass.
Complete surgical excision was performed and entire specimen was evaluated. Pathologic diagnosis was embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma arising in
mature cystic teratoma. After surgical excision, two cycles of dactinomycin-based chemotherapy were performed. Lung metastasis was detected
on follow up CT in September 2012, and wedge resection was performed. Pathological finding of the lung lesion showed same feature with that
of primary rhabdomyosarcoma. Teratoma is common neoplasm that is typically encountered in infants and children. The majority of cases is
benign, and arises from the sacro-coccygeal region, ovary, mediastinum, or retroperitoneum. A small percentage of cases exhibit malignant
components, present at unusual site, or present during adult middle age (1). Primary germ cell tumors of the mediastinum represent
approximately 10% of all neoplasm in the mediastinal area. The histopathologic features are similar to those of germ cell tumors in the
gonads (2, 3). Malignant transformation in mediastinal germ cell tumor, especially to embryonic rhabdomyosarcoma is very rare (4-7).
Furthermore, mediastinal embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma that arose from benign mature teratoma without other germ cell tumor components has not
been reported in English literature, to our knowledge. In this report, we present such a case of a primary embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma of the
anterior mediastinum that arose from a tumor that was only associated with a mature teratoma in middle-aged adult. A 46-yr-old man presented
with chest trauma as a result of an accident on 10 September 2011. On chest X-ray, an anterior mediastinal mass was detected (Fig. 1A). To
obtain further information, chest computed tomography (CT) with contrast enhancement was performed, revealing a 9.5-cm-sized anterior
mediastinal mass (Fig. 1B). The initial radiological diagnosis was thymoma. The radiological differential diagnoses were germ cell tumor and
mediastinal sarcoma. Clinical and ultrasonography examination of the testicles were normal. Complete surgical excision was performed and
entire specimen was evaluated. Grossly, the specimen showed a well-circumscribed 9.5 × 8 × 6-cm-sized round firm mass that was covered with
normal thymic and perithymic soft tissue (Fig. 1C). The cut surface was flesh-colored and pale tan appearances (Fig. 1D). Microscopically,
tumor demonstrated two different areas, including mature teratoma and sarcomatous area. In the teratoma area, the tumor demonstrated mature
squamous epithelium, hair, skin appendage, adipose tissue, and other mesenchymal tissue (Fig. 2A). Immature components were not identified.
There is also intermingled areas compact cellular and loose and myxoid area (Fig. 2B). In the sarcomatous area, there is some histological
architecture resembled embryonic muscle, which forms aggregates of myoblasts amid loose, myxoid mesodermal tissue. The myoblastic tumor
showed sheets of rhabdoid cells, which were small and spindled in appearance, and demonstrated moderate to poor differentiation. The cell
also demonstrated deeply eosinophilic cytoplasm, and small eccentric oval-shaped nuclei (Fig. 2C). Immunohistochemical (IHC) analysis
revealed a strong positivity to anti-myogenin and anti-desmin antibodies in the rhabdomyosarcoma component (Fig. 2D). The surgical resection
margin was clear. After surgical excision, two cycles of dactinomycin-based chemotherapy were performed. Lung metastasis was detected on
follow up CT on September 2012, and wedge resection was performed. Pathological finding of lung lesion showed same feature with that of
primary rhabdomyosarcoma. In our pathologic examination, sarcomatous area of tumor showed typical histological characteristics of embryonic
rhabdomyosarcoma. It showed same typical cellular features with usual embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma. These tumor cells were confirmed by
immunohistochemical marker, such as anti-myogenin and anti-desmin antibodies. A review of literature revealed 32 previous reported patients
with mediastinal rhabdomyosarcoma (including all subtypes) that arose from germ cell tumor in 12 separate studies (1-15). The average age of
these patients (excluding 2 cases that lacked data) was 26.4 yr. The majority of patients were men (M:F ratio = 28:2). Among these 32 cases,
embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma was only observed in 8 cases. Of particular note, there were no reported cases of embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma with
only a mature teratoma, thus making our present case unique. A non-germinal malignant tumor developing within a germ cell tumor is an
extremely rare event in both gonadal and extragonadal loci. Moreover, embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma in adult patient's mediastinum is also very
rare (4). In our review of the pathological findings reported in the literature, only three studies describe and undetermined type
rhabdomyosarcoma with teratoma (1, 14, 15). In all reports, rhabdomyosarcoma was usually observed in combination with seminoma (6), myxoid
liposarcoma (4), immature teratoma (4, 9, 13), embryonal carcinoma (4-6, 10), chondrosarcoma (4), choriocarcinoma (5), endodermal sinus
tumor (6), angiosarcoma (6), and yolk sac tumor (7, 10, 13) (Table 1). This may represent important histological evidence that
rhabdomyosarcoma arises from skeletal component of a mature teratoma. Consistently, previous immunohistochemical studies support this
possibility. In general, the prognosis for patients with mediastinal rhabdomyosarcoma is poor. Possible causes of this are the difficulty in
obtaining early detection and the chemo-resistance of these tumors, and proper metastatic potential. The detection diagnosis of mediastinal
rhabdomyosarcoma is usually fortuitous. Furthermore, because the common initial radiological diagnosis is benign thymoma, clinicians often
pay little attention to these lesions (3). Unfortunately, these tumors exhibit chemo-resistance and metastatic potential (2, 14, 16), and
presently, there is no standard schedule for performing chemotherapy to treat adult cases of embryonal rhabdomyosarcomas. Even existed
pediatric protocols are often not effective in either the germinal and non-germinal components. Patients die mostly as a result of regional
involvement and multiple metastases (4, 10). However, if complete excision is performed, the recurrence rate will decrease (10, 17). In
summary, primary rhabdomyosarcomas arising from mature teratoma in the mediastinum are very rare in adults. Because of the risk of
recurrence in these cases, complete surgical resection should be considered both before and after chemotherapy. Radiologic and gross
findings of mediastinal rhabdomyosarcoma arising in mature teratoma. (A) An anterior mediastinal mass in chest X-ray. (B) A 9.5-cm-sized
anterior mediastinal mass in Chest Computed tomography. (C) 9.5-cm-sized a well-circumscribed round and firm mass, which is covered as
normal thymus and peri-thymic soft tissue. (D) The cut surface of mass show flesh meat like pale tan appearance. Findings of microscopy and
immunohistochemistry. (A) In teratoma area, mature squamous epithelium is seen. It is very close to embryonal rhabdomyosarcoma component
(H&E, × 40). (B) Low power view of sarcoma area. Intermingled dense compact cellular area and loose myxoid area (H&E, × 12.5). (C) Numerous
rhabdoid myoblasts. Epithelioid rhabdomyosarcoma cell showed deeply eosinophilic cytoplasm and small eccentric oval shaped nuclei (H&E, ×
400). (D) Tumor cells show immunopositivity for Desmin (× 400). Clinical and pathologic details of primary mediastinal rhabdomyosarcoma
