We report computed tomography (CT) findings for a rare case of follicular dendritic cell sarcoma of the greater omentum from a 47-year-old
female patient. The tumor presented ash a palpable mass lesion in the umbilical region for the last two months. Multidetector CT scan of the
abdomen showed a 14-cm soft-tissue mass with calcification and necrosis within the greater omentum. As a result, a follicular dendritic cell
sarcoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a solitary omentum mass, especially one with coarse and chunk-like
calcifications. Follicular dendritic cell sarcomas were first described by Monda et al. (1) and are known to occur predominantly in adults,
though they can occur at any age. This tumor arises from germinal centers and mainly affects lymph nodes. Extranodal sites include the
palate, tonsils, tongue, intra-abdominal soft tissue, liver and spleen (2). Only a few reports have discussed the pathology and none have
discussed the CT findings of this tumor when occurring in the greater omentum (3). We present the CT findings from a 47-year-old female
patient with a follicular dendritic cell sarcoma of the greater omentum. A 47-year-old woman had had epigastralgia, acid regurgitation, and
fatigue over the two prior months. Her body weight had increased 10 kg over one month and a physical examination revealed a large, bulging,
movable hard mass in the umbilical area. No bowel obstruction, anorexia, fever, or tarry stool was noted. A colonoscopy showed hyperplastic
polyps, while a gastroduodenoscopy revealed a gastric polyp and erosive gastritis. CT of the abdomen showed a 14 × 8 × 7-cm mass with
calcification in the abdomen and pelvis at the umbilical level (Fig. 1A, B). The mass was inferior to the stomach, anterior to the
transverse colon, and extended downward to pelvic level (Fig. 1C, D). We could trace the engorged right gastroepiploic artery and vein at
the uppermost part of the tumor (Fig. 1E). All of these landmarks revealed that the exact anatomical location was the greater omentum. The
tumor showed complex internal architecture, such as heterogeneous enhancement, central necrosis, hemorrhage, and focal calcification. The
possibility of sarcoma and primary gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) were considered. Under the impression of sarcoma of the greater
omentum or primary GIST of the greater omentum, an operation was performed. The surgery revealed a huge solid encapsulated mass in the
omentum, with central necrosis and hemorrhage within the tumor (Fig. 1F). No invasion to adjacent organs was observed and a histological
diagnosis revealed a follicular dendritic cell sarcoma of the greater omentum (Fig. 1G, H). A follicular dendritic cell sarcoma is a rare
tumor arising from germinal centers and affecting mainly lymph nodes. It affects patients of any age, but mainly adults of either sex (4,
5). Extranodal sites that have been reported to include the palate, tonsils, tongue, intra-abdominal soft tissue (mesentery, mesocolon and
greater omentum), stomach, small intestine, colon, pancreas, liver, spleen, mediastinum, retroperitoneum, intracranium, breast, abdominal
wall, thyroid gland, lung and the dura mater of the spine (3, 5-7). The clinical symptoms and laboratory findings include low-grade fever,
weight loss, mild anemia, and hypergammaglobulinemia. Intra-abdominal tumors have an aggressive course (4); follicular dendritic cells
participate in the immune system by presenting antigens for B cells and by stimulating B-cell proliferation and differentiation (7). These
tumors have distinct immunohistochemical features, with the diagnosis relying on the reactivity to CD21 and CD35 markers (8). There are a
few reports of the imaging features of follicular dendritic cell sarcoma arising in the abdomen (9, 10). The radiologic findings of
follicular dendritic cell sarcoma in the greater omentum have not been described before, to our knowledge. Leipsic et al. (11) reported a
case of mediastinal follicular dendritic cell sarcoma, described as coarse and chunk-like on CT images. Calcification also was demonstrated
in our case. On the post-contrast images of our study, heterogeneous densities within the tumor were much more apparent; on histology, the
enhancing portion corresponded to tumor and the non-enhancing area was focal necrosis and hemorrhage. The large tumor size of our case can
be related to the presence of gross necrosis and hemorrhage; similar findings were noted by Long-Hua et al. (10). The first issue in our
case was to identify the exact anatomical location of the tumor. To understand the embryology and anatomy of the greater omentum is
important for a radiologist. The greater omentum is composed of a double layer of peritoneum that extends from the greater curvature of the
stomach inferiorly. After a distance that usually ranges from 14 to 36 cm, the greater omentum turns superiorly on itself to drape below the
transverse colon. The normal greater omentum appears on CT scans as a band of fatty tissue of varied width (12). A multi-detector CT scan
with multiplanar reformation allows for the determination of anatomical details of the omental mass, which is embedded in fatty tissue
between the stomach and the colon. In our case, we could identify the mass by coronal plane imaging as below the stomach with no connection
to it. The tumor was located anterior to the transverse colon, and draped to the pelvis. This was seen in coronal, axial, and sagittal
planes. The other crucial point is to recognize the relationship between the gastroepiploic vessels and the mass, because the blood supply
of the greater omentum is largely originates from the anastomosis of the right and left gastroepiploic arteries. The right gastroepiploic
artery and vein were seen at the highest part of the tumor, with branches to the mass. Accurately locating the greater omentum leads to a
correct differential diagnosis. Metastatic disease involving the greater omentum is far more common than primary tumors. However, the tumors
are usually multiple small foci. A solitary soft tissue mass could be a primary neoplasm of the omentum. These most often arise from
mesodermal elements and are malignant. Primary tumors include leiomyosarcoma, hemangiopericytoma, fibrosarcoma, reticulosarcoma, spindle
cell sarcoma, liposarcoma, and primary GIST. The omentum is composed of four layers of peritoneum and calcification may occur in several
types of peritoneal tumors, such as the primary peritoneal serous carcinoma, desmoplastic small round cell tumor, mesothelioma, and
follicular dendritic cell sarcoma. Calcification has been reported to occur in 30% of primary peritoneal serous carcinoma cases (13);
however, most of these cases are diffuse neoplastic processes. Calcification within diffuse peritoneal malignant mesothelioma is considered
rare. Desmoplastic small round cell tumor occurs predominantly in adolescents and young adult males. Primary GIST in the omentum and
follicular dendritic cell sarcoma has overlapping appearances on imaging. Both of these two tumors are well-circumscribed large masses
containing areas of low attenuation due to necrosis and hemorrhage. However, Kim et al. (14) reported no calcification in their cases of
primary GIST in the omentum. The depiction of coarse and chunk-like calcification of an omentum tumor on CT images can raise the suspicion
of a follicular dendritic cell sarcoma. In summary, multi-detector CT is the best imaging modality to depict greater omentum lesions. The
anatomic relationships of the soft tissue mass, stomach, colon, and the gastroepiploic vessels in multiple planes are very useful for
diagnosis of omentum tumors. A follicular dendritic cell sarcoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis of a solitary omentum
mass, especially one with coarse and chun-klike calcification. Follicular dendritic cell sarcoma in 47-year-old woman. A. Precontrast CT
scan in axial plane displays coarse chunk-like calcification within tumor. B. Post-contrast CT scan of whole abdomen in coronal plane
reveals heterogeneously enhanced soft-tissue mass below stomach (arrow). C. Coronal postcontrast CT scan shows relationship between soft-
tissue mass and transverse colon (arrow). D. Sagittal postcontrast CT scan shows tumor mass draped below transverse colon (arrow). E.
Coronal maximum intensity projection image shows engorged right gastroepiploic vessels (arrow) with branches to tumor. F. Gross specimen of
tumor shows well encapsulated, fleshy mass from greater omentum. G. Tumor is mainly composed of spindle cells in storiform and whorl
arrangement. Varying numbers of lymphocytes admixed in tumor tissue are shown (H&E, original × 200). H. Tumor cells are diffusely positive
for CD21 by immunohistochemical study, indicating that the follicular dendritic cell origin of tumor cells (immunohistochemical study,
counterstained with hematoxylin, original × 200).
