Two cases of asymptomatic double aortic arch with tetralogy of Fallot are reported. One presented with a non-dominant left arch and left-
sided descending thoracic aorta and the other with a non-dominant left arch, a right-sided descending thoracic aorta and a patent ductus
arteriosus. One-stage operation was performed and both patients were discharged free of symptoms and signs related to the double aortic arch
and tetralogy of Fallot after the operation. A preoperative recognition of DAA is important, especially in echocardiographic investigation.
Double aortic arch (DAA) associated with tetralogy of Fallot (TOF) is a rare congenital disorder. We reported two cases of asymptomatic
double aortic arch associated with TOF. One-stage operation was performed successfully in both patients, and they were discharged free of
symptoms and signs related to the DAA and TOF after the operation. An 8-year-old boy presented with exertional dyspnoea and mild cyanosis,
but no history of stridor or dysphagia, was referred to us. Clinical features were as followings: 21 kilograms, 95 beats/min, and pulse
oximeter oxygen saturation 87% on air. A harsh 3/6 ejection systolic murmur was heard in the third and fourth left intercostal space. The
electrocardiogram revealed sinus rhythm with right-axis deviation and right ventricular hypertrophy. The X-ray displayed a typical coeur en
sabot heart and normal lung fields. The echocardiography confirmed the diagnosis of TOF consisting of a 19 mm bidirectional subcrista
ventricular septal defect (VSD), infundibular pulmonary artery stenosis with a gradient of 82 mmHg. Besides confirming TOF, a suspected DAA
was diagnosed and the cardiac catheterization was requested for further analysis. After confirming TOF with mildly hypoplastic pulmonary
annulus and pulmonary artery branches (McGoon ratio 1.7), a DAA with a non-dominant left arch and left-sided descending thoracic aorta was
also detected: the left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery arose individually from the smaller left component of the
aortic arch, whereas the right common carotid artery and subclavian artery arose individually from the larger right aortic arch (Figure 1).
Aortic root angiograms (a) and RV angiography (b) in anteroposterior. AO = aorta, PA = pulmonary artery, DA = descending aorta, LCCA = left
common carotid artery, LSCA = left subclavian artery, RV = right ventricle, VSD = ventricular septal defect. Surgical treatment, consisting
of VSD closure, right ventricular out flow tract enlargement and resection of the distal end of the left aortic arch beyond left subclavian
artery, was performed successfully. Postoperatively, the child was haemodynamically stable, and recovery was unremarkable. After a 46 months
follow-up, the child was in New York Heart Association Class I and free of symptoms and signs related to the DAA and TOF. The pulse oximeter
oxygen saturation on air was 96%. Follow-up cardiac catheterization or CT has not been performed so far to study the balance of circulation
to either lung. However, follow-up echocardiograms have revealed satisfactory flow into the reconstructed pulmonary artery and without any
gradients to descending aorta. The pressure gradient across pulmonary artery decreased to 20 mmHg after operation. A 16-month-old girl
presented with exertional dyspnoea and mild cyanosis, but no history of stridor or dysphagia, was referred to us. Clinical features were as
followings: 10.5 kilograms, 108 beats/min, and pulse oximeter oxygen saturation 83% on air. A harsh 3/6 ejection systolic murmur was heard
in the third and fourth left intercostal space, and a grade 3/6 systolic and diastolic murmurs was heard in the second left intercostal
space. The electrocardiogram and X-ray display was same as patient 1. The echocardiography confirmed the diagnosis of TOF consisting of a
15 mm bidirectional subcrista VSD, infundibular pulmonary artery stenosis with a gradient of 103 mmHg and a suspected DAA. The computed
tomography (CT) was requested further analysis. Besides confirming TOF with mildly hypoplastic pulmonary annulus and pulmonary artery
branches (McGoon ratio 1.8), a DAA with a non-dominant left arch and right-sided descending thoracic aorta was also detected (Figure 2): the
left common carotid artery and the left subclavian artery arose individually from the smaller left component of the aortic arch, whereas the
right common carotid artery and subclavian artery arose individually from the larger right aortic arch. A patent ductus arteriosus connected
left aortic arch with left pulmonary artery were also detected. The vascular ring surrounded the trachea and oesophagus, and the trachea was
slightly compressed. 3D-volume rendered image of the contrast enhanced multi-slice CT (a) in posteroanterior and (b) in anteroposterior.
AO = aorta, DA = descending aorta, PDA = patent ductus arteriosus, LPA = left pulmonary artery, RPA = right pulmonary artery, LCCA = left
common carotid artery, LSCA = left subclavian artery, RCCA = right common carotid artery, RSCA = right subclavian artery, RV = right
ventricle, LV = left ventricle, VSD = ventricular septal defect, LA = left atrium. Surgical treatment, consisting of VSD closure, right
ventricular out flow tract enlargement, resection of patent ductus arteriosus and resection of the distal end of the left aortic arch beyond
left subclavian artery, was performed and the mild upper-airway obstruction was successfully relieved (Figure 3). Postoperatively, the child
was haemodynamically stable, and recovery was unremarkable. After a 14 months follow-up, the child was in New York Heart Association Class I
and free of symptoms and signs related to the DAA and TOF. The pulse oximeter oxygen saturation on air was 96%. And follow-up
echocardiograms have revealed satisfactory flow into the reconstructed pulmonary artery and without any gradients to descending aorta. The
pressure gradient across pulmonary artery decreased to 16 mmHg after operation. Intraoperative (a) and postoperative (b) picture.
AO = aorta, PDA = patent ductus arteriosus, PA = pulmonary artery, RV = right ventricle, INV = innominate vein. DAA is a form of vascular
rings, completely encircling trachea and esophagus by its connecting segments, which may cause stridor, respiratory distress or dysphagia in
the first months of life . During embryogenesis a failure of the normal regression of one or more segments of the six pairs of the aortic
arches that arise from the truncus arteriosus leads to the formation of multiple anomalies of the aortic arch, to form DAA . The vascular
ring anomaly of the aortic arch comprises 1% of operable congenital cardiac disease . In DAA patients, right or left arch may be larger or
similar in size, or one arch can be atretic. But in clinic practices, right arch is dominant in more than 75% of these cases. In the present
case, the patients had a DAA with a non-dominant left arch. DAA has been abundantly described in previous studies and its management is well
established . TOF is one of common cyanotic congenital heart disease that occurs in approximately 1 in 3600 live births and accounts for
3.5% of infants born with congenital heart disease. Surgical repair was first introduced in the 1950s, and nowadays most patients with TOF
can undergo compete repair with a low operative mortality and a excellent long-term survival rate . For patients with TOF, exertional
dyspnoea is a common symptom. And DAA with mild stridor or dysphagia or without might be undetected preoperatively. So it is important for
echocardiographic investigation to recognize before operation. A suprasternal fossa short-axis and long-axis view of aorta is necessary for
echocardiographic investigation to find DAA anomalies. Once a suspected DAA is detected by echocardiography, a CT or cardiac catheterization
check is vital for confirming anomalies and surgery treatment. Both patients have given their consents for the case report to be published,
and written informed consents were obtained from the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. CT: Computed
tomography; DAA: Double aortic arch; TOF: Tetralogy of Fallot; VSD: Ventricular septal defect The manuscript has not been submitted to nor
is it under consideration for publication by another journal. None of the authors has any conflict of interest in the matter. AL, GL, YL,and
YbZ have participated in executing the work, collecting the data, writing of the manuscript. ZqL and YlL conceived of the study, and
participated in its design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. This
study was supported by Capital Citizens’ Health Project Cultivation of Beijing Municipal Science and Technology Commissions (Project No.
Z11110007491100) and Beijing Health System High Level Health Technical Professionals Training Plan (Project No. Leading Talent 2011-1-4).
