Conflict of interest: MP declares competing financial interests under patent number: 07 820134.0-12222 and as a member of Thankstem s.r.l.
The other authors have no competing interests to declare. Stem-cell therapy represents a promising strategy for the treatment of challenging
pathologies, such as large, infected wounds that are unresponsive to conventional therapies. The present study describes the clinical
application of peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) for the treatment of four adult Warmblood horses with naturally occurring wounds, which
were unresponsive to conventional therapies for at least 3 months. A visual assessment was performed, and a number of wound-healing
parameters (granulation tissue, crust formation and scar formation) were evaluated. In all cases, tissue overgrowth was visible within 4
weeks after PBSC injection, followed by the formation of crusts and small scars in the centre of the wound, with hair regeneration at the
edges. In conclusion, this is the first report of PBSC therapy of skin wounds in horses, and it produced a positive visual and clinical
outcome. Extended wounds of the distal limbs are one of the most common dermatological pathologies in horses, and tend to have a long
recovery period and poor response to conventional therapies.1–4 In horses, secondary-intention wound healing occurs significantly more
slowly in metatarsal wounds than in other wounds such as muscle wounds.1–4 This difference reflects the contribution of contraction to wound
healing. Demarcation is also seen later and a healthy granulation bed develops more slowly, because wounds remain irregular and more
purulent for a longer time in horses than in most animal species.1–4 Another reason for the extended healing period is the slow
epithelialization process.4,5 Because horses have a weak initial inflammatory response, the natural wound debridement process is slow, and
there is a high risk of infection.6–8 However, after the initial phase, horses have the tendency to develop chronic inflammation at the site
of the wound, which causes excessive granulation tissue.6,8,9 Therefore, wound infection or exuberant granulation are the origin of the
delayed healing time in most cases. Currently, skin grafting, using grafts from other parts of the body, is the treatment of choice,10
although accessory skin loss, infection, and difficult attachment to the underlying and surrounding tissues are major complications,
reducing the chance of success of skin transplantation in this animal species.1,2,11,12 Because allogeneic skin graft rejection is a well-
known risk in humans,13 skin tissue taken from other horses has, to our knowledge, been used to date only as a biological dressing.14 Hence,
because of the aforementioned difficulties in wound healing in horses, the use of regenerative therapies has recently been suggested as a
promising new treatment for equine dermatological pathologies.15 It is known that during the inflammatory phase of the wound-healing
process, macrophages release biologically active substances (cytokines), which are essential for the recruitment of various types of blood
cells, such as inflammatory cells, mesenchymal cells16 and peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs).17 All these cells take part in the formation
of granulation tissue by producing extracellular-matrix components and by simulating wound contraction. Therefore, we hypothesized that
injecting PBSCs directly into the wound might be of use for the treatment of skin wounds that are unresponsive to conventional therapies.
Interestingly, bone marrow-derived mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) have been described to increase the healing capacity of persistent leg
wounds in human patients with diabetes.18 However, no dermatological pathologies in horses have been treated with stem cells to date,
although peripheral blood has recently been described as an attractive source of stem cells in horses (minimally invasive, non-painful and
easily harvested).19,20 In the present study, we evaluated the clinical effects of equine PBSCs on different types of naturally occurring
wounds on the limbs of four horses, which were unresponsive to conventional therapies. The study was approved by the local ethics committee
(approval EC2010-147), and all procedures were carried out with due care for animal welfare. Four horses were enrolled in the study. All had
sustained injuries to the legs. An 11-year-old mare sustained a skin wound to the dorsal surface of the metatarsal bone, which subsequently
became infected with Clostridium species (Fig. 1a). After wound debridement, removal of the digital extensor tendon, and conventional
medical treatment consisting of broad-spectrum antibiotics in combination with non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, there was no
improvement in the wound. Therefore, the same surgical and medical treatment were repeated; however, the extended wound persisted for 3
months, and at one point the underlying bone was visible through the necrotic tissue. Representative photos of the wounds of (a) an 11-year-
old mare (a) and (b) a 16-year-old gelding on the day of therapy (day 0) with peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) and at three different
time points after PBSC therapy, showing granulation tissue, crust formation and scar formation, respectively. A 16-year-old gelding had a
skin wound at the plantar surface of the metatarsal bone (Fig. 1b), which did not heal after 3 months of conventional therapy, including
wound debridement, local wound-healing creams and general antibacterial therapy. Moreover, the wound surface was covered with pus, which is
commonly associated with a bacterial infection. A 26-year-old gelding sustained a deep wound with bone exposition at the medial surface of
the tibia (Fig. 2a). Because the wound was not responsive to wound debridement and medical treatment for 3 months, stem-cell therapy was
recommended as a last resort. Representative photos of the wounds of two 26-year-old geldings, case reports (a) 3 and (b) 4, on the day of
therapy (day 0) with peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) and at three different time points after PBSC therapy, showing granulation tissue,
crust formation and scar formation, respectively. Another 26-year-old gelding had a wound on the leg for 3 months. Non-neoplastic exuberant
granulation was seen on the plantar surface of the metatarsal bone (Fig. 2b). Nodular proliferative lesions were present, which tended to
recur after surgery (resection of the granulation tissue and wound debridement) and to form ulcers. Treatment with broad-spectrum
antibiotics for 30 days did not improve the symptoms. Samples (5–7 mL) of autologous blood were collected from the jugular vein of the
injured horses into sterile tubes containing EDTA. The nucleated blood-cell fraction was separated by incubation with ammonium chloride
(dilution 1 : 3 in 1 mol/L ammonium chloride), followed by centrifugation at 400 g. The separated fraction was washed several times with
phosphate-buffered saline (Sigma–Aldrich, St Louis, MO, USA) to remove most of the erythrocyte fraction, as previously described.16 Cells
were then incubated for 72 h at 37 °C in the presence of 50 nmol/L macrophage colony-stimulating factor and 5 μmol/L gentamicin (both
Sigma–Aldrich). Subsequently, the cells were incubated for 30 min at room temperature with saturating amounts of fluorescently labelled
human antibodies (either alone or in combination) against various markers that crossreact with horse antigens. Cells were then sorted by
fluorescence-activated cell sorting (FACSAria II; BD Biosciences Inc., San Jose, CA, USA) confirming the presence of PBSCs, which were
positive for peridinin chlorophyll-conjugated CD34 and allophycocyanin-conjugated CD117 (haematopoietic stem-cell markers) and for
phycoerythrin-conjugated CD90 and fluorescein isothiocyanate-conjugated CD105 (mesenchymal stem-cell markers) (all from BD Biosciences).
After approximately 3 days, 5 × 105 and 1.25 × 105 PBSCs were each resuspended in 2 mL of PBS for local and intravenous injection,
respectively. The autologous PBSCs, kept at 4–7 °C, were transported to the animals within 24 h. Local (intradermal) injections were made
into 5–6 different locations at the wound edges, and an intravenous injection was made into the jugular vein. Afterwards, the peripheral
wound edges were surgically prepared with an iodine solution and alcohol. Detomidine (0.04 mg/kg; Domosedan®; Janssen Animal Health, High
Wycombe, Buckinghamshire, UK) and butorphanol (0.1 mg/kg; Torbugesic®; Fort Dodge Animal Health, Fort Dodge, IA, USA) were intravenously
administered (using a 21 G needle measuring 40 mm) as sedative and analgesia. The in vivo efficacy was assessed by evaluating
hypersensitivity reactions and weal formation (physical reaction) after injection with PBSCs. Various wound-healing parameters (granulation
tissue, crust formation and scar formation) were visually evaluated daily, and the time points of their appearance were documented until no
more progress could be noticed for at least 3 weeks (Table 1). A monthly follow-up was performed until 1 year after injection. Time points
of appearance of different wound healing parameters in days after treatment with autologous peripheral blood stem cells (PBSCs) Data were
analysed using the Student t-test for group comparisons of normally distributed variables. Values are given as means ± SD. P-values were
calculated using an Excel spreadsheet (2007; Microsoft Corp., Redmond, WA, USA), and P < 0.05 was considered significant. We report the use
of PBSCs to treat long-lasting skin wounds in horses, which were unresponsive to conventional medical and surgical treatments. In cases of
ongoing bacterial infection, antibiotic treatment was continued. No hypersensitivity reactions or weal formation (physical reaction) were
seen in any of the four animals after injection of PBSCs, which is in contrast to a previous report describing weal formation after
injection of umbilical cord-derived MSCs in Quarterhorse yearlings.21 Because epithelialization is a slow process in horses, it usually
takes months before a large wound is fully healed.22 In particular, metatarsal wounds in horses differ markedly from that of all other
wounds: these wounds increase to almost twice their original size in the first 2 weeks, exuberant granulation tissue is persistent, and
epithelialization starts later than in wounds on other parts of the body.3 In the present study, granulation tissue began forming within 4
weeks of the PBSC therapy in all four cases, which was a significant (P < 0.001; Student t-test) improvement compared with the previously
failed conventional therapies, which had been used for at least 3 months (Table 1). Furthermore, crust formation was achieved within 2
months, which was also significantly (P < 0.05) faster than had been achieved with the failing conventional therapies (Table 1). Because it
took longer than 3 months after PBSC therapy for scars to form in three of the four cases, this wound-healing parameter showed no
significant difference between conventional and PBSC therapy (Table 1). However, none of the animals had any residual swelling or lameness
after full recovery, and eventually only small scars were formed in all four cases (Figs 1 and 2). This is in contrast to a previous
study,23 in which similar wounds resulted in permanently swollen legs in combination with large scar formation and long-lasting lameness
after treatment with various conventional therapies. In the present study, none of the animals had swollen leg after PBSC therapy, and there
were no signs of lameness once crust formation had taken place. In addition, we found that for animal four, the granulation tissue could be
easily removed without recurrence of the wound (Fig. 2b), which is also in contrast to the results with the previous conventional treatment
this horse received. At follow-up 1 year after PBSC therapy, none of the cases showed wound recurrence or other adverse effects. In
conclusion, we report the use of PBSC therapy for large wounds on the legs of four horses. Despite previous failure of conventional
therapies, all four animals responded well to the PBSC therapy, indicating that this might be a useful treatment for large wounds in horses.
Further studies using a larger numbers of animals, a double-blind standardized model and appropriate controls are warranted to confirm the
results of this small-scale study. PBSC s can be locally applied by using multiple intradermal injections into the edges of naturally
occurring chronic wounds in horses. An intravenous injection of PBSCs can also be performed in horses without any noticeable adverse
effects. When wounds are infected, PBSC therapy is still an option, in combination with antibacterial medication. We found that in one
animal, granulation tissue could be easily removed after PBSC therapy without any recurrence, which was in contrast to the previous
conventional treatment this horse received, when removal of the granulation tissue led to a chronic recurrence of the exuberant granulation.
At follow-up 1 year after PBSC therapy, there was no wound recurrence or other adverse effects. Based on the lack of any clinical
improvement with conventional treatment for 3 months in these horses, the results of this case study show the promising application of PBSCs
for accelerating the healing of damaged skin. PBSC s can be locally applied by using multiple intradermal injections into the edges of
naturally occurring chronic wounds in horses. An intravenous injection of PBSCs can also be performed in horses without any noticeable
adverse effects. When wounds are infected, PBSC therapy is still an option, in combination with antibacterial medication. We found that in
one animal, granulation tissue could be easily removed after PBSC therapy without any recurrence, which was in contrast to the previous
conventional treatment this horse received, when removal of the granulation tissue led to a chronic recurrence of the exuberant granulation.
At follow-up 1 year after PBSC therapy, there was no wound recurrence or other adverse effects. Based on the lack of any clinical
improvement with conventional treatment for 3 months in these horses, the results of this case study show the promising application of PBSCs
for accelerating the healing of damaged skin. This study was supported by Thankstem s.r.l. We are also grateful to a number of private
funding sources that provided the basis for this study.
