Primary iridociliary cysts can induce plateau iris configuration and angle closure glaucoma. We report a patient with bilateral, primary,
ring-shaped, solitary iridociliary cysts. The right eye displayed normal intraocular pressure, oppositional iridocorneal angle closure, and
healthy optic nerve head. The left eye had advanced chronic angle closure glaucoma. The management strategy varied between eyes and is
discussed. This, to the best of our knowledge, is the first report of transscleral Diode laser application in an eye with a large
iridociliary cyst. Primary iridociliary cysts can push the iris root anteriorly, causing a (pseudo) plateau iris configuration with or
without angle closure glaucoma. Only a single case of unilateral, solitary, ring-shaped iridociliary cyst presenting with acute angle
closure has been reported. Here, we present a patient with bilateral, primary, ring-shaped, solitary iridociliary cysts. There was a marked
inter-eye asymmetry as regarding intraocular pressure (IOP), iridocorneal angle, and optic nerve head. These differences were found despite
similar appearance of the iridociliary cysts on ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM). A 56-year-old male presented with chronic on and off pain in
the left eye. Other components of medical history were unremarkable. His systemic examination revealed multiple subcutaneous tumors in
distal upper limbs and more than 6 café-au-lait macules; but all were <15 mm in diameter. His vision was 20/30 in right eye and counting
fingers at 3 feet in left eye. The peripheral anterior chamber was shallow in both eyes. Irises had no nodule. Applanation tonometry
readings were 13 mm Hg and 50 mm Hg in right and left eye, respectively. Dark-room gonioscopy showed appositional closure of the drainage
angle with multiple peripheral iris convexities in the right eye and 360° synechial angle closure in the left eye. UBM presented a ring-
shaped solitary iridociliary cyst spanning 360° in the right and 270°, sparing nasal quadrant, in the left eye. The cysts had hyper-
reflectile walls and sonolucent interiors, suggestive of primary neuroepithelial cysts [Fig. 1]. Ultrasound Biomicroscopy showing
iridociliary cyst in right (a) and left (b) eye We did Nd:YAG laser iridotomy, peripheral to the collarette of the right iris at 8 o′clock
hour where the diameter of the cyst was narrowest on UBM to avoid cyst rupture [Fig. 2]. Post iridotomy, the angle recess was narrow, but
the scleral spur was visible all around on dark-room gonioscopy in the right eye. The right optic disc was healthy, and the left had
advanced glaucomatous cupping [Fig. 3]. An UBM confirmed patency of the angle recess in the right eye [Fig. 4a]. Magnetic resonance imaging
of brain and orbits was unremarkable, except for a diffuse T2 hyperintense signal in the left optic nerve. Antiglaucoma medications were
started in the left eye. Laser iridotomy in right eye. Note its atypical location at 8 o′clock hour Optic Disc photographs of right (a) and
left (b) eye Ultrasound Biomicroscopy of Right (a) and Left (b) eye. The biomicroscopic section is partially passing through the iridotomy
in Right eye. Note narrow but open angle recess in A and absence of iridociliary cyst in B The left eye was painful despite maximum
antiglaucoma medications. This eye underwent G-probe assisted inferior 180° contact transscleral Diode cyclophotocoagulation (810 nm laser;
Iridex Corporation, CA, USA). Post procedure, severe inflammation of the anterior chamber and neovascularization of the iris occurred, which
resolved gradually with steroid and cycloplegic eye drops. The cataract in the left eye progressed to maturity. The IOP in the left eye
remained between 40 and 48 mm Hg though the patient was pain-free. On repeat UBM, the inferior ciliary processes were shrunken, but the cyst
was no longer imaged [Fig. 4b]. Other UBM, 3 months later, did not show recurrence of the cyst. Primary iridociliary cysts, in the majority,
are stationary lesions located focally and rarely cause visual complications. Angle closure, secondary to iris and ciliary body cysts, is
related to the forward bulk of the iris cyst and occlusion of the posterior chamber and is scarcely reported. A postulated mobility of the
ring-shaped iridociliary cyst during movements of the pupil might make an additional contribution to the angle closure. Absolute glaucoma,
as in the left eye of our patient, is not attributed to iris or ciliary body pigment epithelial cyst(s) in the past. Except for a single
report of 7 members of a family with familial aortic dissection and having pupillary margin iris pigment epithelial cysts, no relation of
primary cysts of iris or ciliary body epithelium to any systemic disease has been reported. The clinical features of our patient were
insufficient to meet the diagnostic criteria of Neurofibromatosis (NF)- 1. The differential diagnoses were forme fruste of NF or
Schwannomatosis. Nevertheless, iris pigment epithelium cyst is formed by separation of the 2 layers of epithelium and cannot be explained by
the pathogenesis of NF. Iridociliary laser cystotomy with sequential argon and Nd:YAG laser has been reported. Laser iridocystotomy when the
cyst could not be visualized in mydriasis by gonioscopy is also reported. This treatment results in pigment dispersion, and carries the
potential risk of inflammation and cyst recurrence. Argon laser iridoplasty has recently been described as a safe and effective alternative.
However, laser iridotomy did suffice to relieve oppositional angle closure in the right eye of our patient [Fig. 4a]. The continued growth
of right lens in time may push forward the iridociliary cyst. He is under periodic follow-up. We addressed intractable raised IOP in the
left eye with Diode cyclophotocoagulation. The treatment resulted in inadvertent iridociliary cyst rupture with no troublesome sequel over
the follow-up. Thus, cyst rupture is a potential complication of Diode cyclophotocoagulation in eyes with large iridociliary cyst(s). One
should anticipate and warn the patient of the resultant severe inflammation. Source of Support: Nil, Conflict of Interest: None declared.
