Dear Editor, A 32-year-old, 6.2-foot man presented with complaints of defective vision since early childhood and a history of defective
night vision. His father died of an unknown cause when he was 5 years old. The patient had visible arachnodactyly and hyperextensible joints
[Fig. 1], but this did not affect his life. Ocular examination revealed that both lenses were dislocated superiorly. Punctate anterior and
posterior “snowflake” lens opacities resembled a complicated cataract [Fig. 2]. Best-corrected visual acuities (BCVA) were 20/400 (-2.25),
right, and 20/250 (-4.00), left, respectively. The anterior chamber was normal for both eyes. Intraocular pressures were 20 and 18 mmHg,
respectively. We could not see the fundus clearly before the cataract surgery. Electroretinography (ERG) findings showed a barely detectable
rod b-wave [Fig. 3]. The amplitudes of a- and b-waves in the mixed cone–rod signal were reduced, and the cone response was delayed,
suggesting a diagnosis of retinitis pigmentosa (RP). Marfan syndrome was confirmed through his tall height, arachnodactyly, hyperextensible
joints and echocardiography [Fig. 4]. Phacoemusification and anterior vitrectomy were performed on both eyes. Intraocular lens (IOL) was not
implanted the first time. After the surgery, fundus photograph showed “bone-spicule formation” in both eyes [Fig. 5]. BCVA were 20/50
(+10.00), right, and 20/25 (+12.50), left, respectively. Scleral fixated IOL were implanted 3 months later in order to improve the patient's
quality of life. BCVA was 20/60 right and 20/50 left after the surgery. The patient was visible arachnodactyly and hyperextensible joints
Slit lamp photograph. Ectopia lentis is present in the right (a) and left (b) eyes ERG findings showed a barely detectable rod b-wave. The
amplitudes of a- and b-waves in the mixed cone–rod signal were reduced, and the cone response was delayed Echocardiography findings. (a) The
aortic sinus was widened; (b) the aortic root was seen as a fusiform expansion and (c and d) a small quantity of aortic regurgitation (a)
Fundus photograph of the right (a) and left (b) eyes. Bone-spicule pigmentation is present in the entire retina; (b) Fundus photograph of
the right (a) and left (b) eyes. Bone-spicule pigmentation is present in the entire retina About 50% of the patients with Marfan syndrome
are diagnosed by ophthalmologists. The presence of ectopia lentis (EL) is considered a major criterion for the diagnosis of Marfan syndrome
in nosology, which unequivocally diagnoses or excludes Marfan syndrome in 86% of the cases. Although the link between RP and EL has been
reported before, systemic symptoms have not been reported. The only complaint of the current case was defective vision, and EL was found
during the eye examination. Considering his 6.2-foot height (taller than average Chinese man), arachnodactyly, hyperextensible joints and
echocardiography, a systemic examination was performed and Marfan syndrome was then confirmed. These results suggest that a systemic
examination may be necessary in tall subjects with poor vision. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first report of bilateral
spontaneous EL associated with RP in a patient with Marfan syndrome.
