We present here a long survival case of a patient with the mosaic form of trisomy 13 who died of aspiration pneumonia at the age of 7 years
and 4 months. The autopsy revealed olfactory aplasia and fenestration of the septum pellucidum, and dilated lateral ventricles and atrophic
hippocampus. Furthermore, there were numerous “torpedos” (i.e., swollen fusiform Purkinje cell axons), mostly in the granular layer
underneath the Purkinje cell layer, and, occasionally, in the granular layer. Similar neuropathological findings have been reported in
elderly cases of essential tremor, Parkinson’s disease, or Alzheimer’s disease. Precise mechanism for this axonal change is still unclear.
These pathological changes have never previously been reported in the literature on trisomy 13, and the present patient is one of the oldest
autopsied individuals with the mosaic trisomy 13. The trisomy 13 syndrome, also called Patau syndrome, was first reported in 1960 . It is a
congenital anomaly syndrome caused by accessory chromosome 13 of the D1 group. Clinically, this syndrome is manifested by variable
deformities and their complications. Most patients with this syndrome die soon after birth because of the severe congenital heart disease
and brain deformity. The mortality rate is approx. 50 % in the first month of life and 90 % during the first year of life . Although a few
cases of longer survival have been reported [3, 4], there have been no published reports to date on neuropathological findings in long
survival cases with trisomy 13. Here, we report an autopsy case of a 7-year-old boy with mosaic type of the trisomy 13 syndrome. This
autopsy in one of the longest survival cases in the literature. This patient was born vaginally after 39 weeks of gestation weighting
3,366 g. He was immediately transported to our Hospital because of neonatal aspiration and meconium aspiration syndrome. The boy had
systolic heart murmurs and was further diagnosed with ventricular septal defect type IV. He also had several minor anomalies, including
capillary hemangioma on forehead, frontal alopecia, narrow V-shaped palate, narrow fingernails, cryptorchidism, inguinal hernia, and penis
palmatus. Cytogenetic analysis was carried out using a peripheral blood specimen, and the G-banding karyotype analysis revealed the presence
of trisomy 13. We did not conduct the chromosome analysis of buccal mucosa or skin fibroblasts. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH)
assay showed mosaic trisomy 13: 73.2 % of cultured cells had the karyotype 13 (47, XY + 13), while the remainder of the cells had normal
karyotype (Fig. 1). Convulsions developed in the infancy. Electroencephalogram showed multifocal spikes; the convulsions were well
controlled by 0.05 mg/kg/day of clonazepam. At the age of 3 years, repeated respiratory infections were seen, so that the boy frequently
needed mechanical respiratory support. Respiratory problems were eventually controlled by tracheotomy, following which the patient was able
to stay at home. At the age of 5 years, there were frequent urinary infections due to penis palmatus. These infections ceased after
urethroplasty. At the age of 7 years, the patient could roll over his body and enjoyed touching the toys. Physical examination revealed
poorly developed and underweight child with respiratory failure. Severe aspiration pneumonia developed at the age of 7 years and 4 months,
leading to the patient’s demise.Fig. 1Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) reveals mosaic trisomy 13, with 73.2 % of cells carrying
normal karyotype and 26.8 % trisomy 13 Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) reveals mosaic trisomy 13, with 73.2 % of cells carrying
normal karyotype and 26.8 % trisomy 13 From the age of 6 years, the patient developed aggravated epileptic seizures accompanied by partial
convulsions of the left arm. Repeated electroencephalogram (EEG) spikes in the centroparietal area of the right hemisphere were observed.
Followed the diagnosis of focal epilepsy, the dose of clonazepam was increased up to 0.1 mg/kg/day which led to cessation of seizures. At
the age of 7 years, the drug-induced sleep EEG showed no spikes. On the extremities’ examination, spastic paralysis of lower extremities and
increased deep-tendon reflex were observed. Furthermore, neurological examination showed brisk deep-tendon reflexes and a rigid and spastic
muscle tone. The examination of the cranial nervous system revealed declined activities of the facial expression muscles, diminished eyelash
reflex, and attenuated vomiting reflex. The pupil dilation response was slow bilaterally. The ophthalmoscopy revealed atrophic changes in
bilateral optic nerves. The brain MRI showed no brain malformation (Fig. 2a, b), and the brain showed relatively good myelination. Both left
and right lateral ventricles were enlarged, and there were hypoplasia of transparent septum and thinning of the splenium of the corpus
callosum. The auditory brainstem response to 100 dB revealed prolongation of bilateral I wave latency at 2.9 and 3.0 ms for the left and
right side, respectively (Fig. 3a). However, the central conduction time and the I–V wave latencies were normal, with no difference between
the left and right side of the boy’s brain (3.8 and 3.7 ms, respectively). The amplitudes of the II, III, and IV waves were low. Components
of the normal reaction wave were seen on the visual evoked potential (Fig. 3b) and electroretinogram. Prolongation was observed in the
central conduction time at 7.04 ms (+2.8 SD) upon short-latency somatosensory evoked potential (Fig. 3c).Fig. 2 a Magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI), T1-weighted, 1.5T axial view (SE spin echo; TR = 15 ms; TE = 450 ms). MRI reveals dilatations of lateral ventricles and bifurcated
septum pellucid. b The splenium of the corpus callosum is thinFig. 3 a The auditory brainstem response to 100 dB reveals prolonged wave I
latency (2.9 and 3.0 ms in the left and right sides, respectively). b The visual-evoked potential shows intact wave components with delayed
latency. c The short-latency somatosensory evoked potential demonstrates prolonged central conduction time (7.04 ms) a Magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI), T1-weighted, 1.5T axial view (SE spin echo; TR = 15 ms; TE = 450 ms). MRI reveals dilatations of lateral ventricles and
bifurcated septum pellucid. b The splenium of the corpus callosum is thin a The auditory brainstem response to 100 dB reveals prolonged wave
I latency (2.9 and 3.0 ms in the left and right sides, respectively). b The visual-evoked potential shows intact wave components with
delayed latency. c The short-latency somatosensory evoked potential demonstrates prolonged central conduction time (7.04 ms) Nuclear
hypersegmentation and drumstick deformation with club-shaped protrusions were frequently observed in peripheral blood neutrophils (Fig. 4a).
Blood cells were fixed in 1 % osmium tetroxide, dehydrated with ethanol, and embedded in epoxy resin. Then, ultrathin (100 nm) sections were
prepared and double-stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate. These specimens were observed using electron microscopy, which revealed
small protrusions of neutrophil nuclei, nuclear pockets, and dendritic deformation of the mitochondria (Fig. 4b).Fig. 4 a Hematoxylin–eosin
staining of peripheral blood neutrophils reveals hypersegmentation and drumsticks of neutrophil nuclei (magnification ×100). b Electron
microscopy (JOEL, Tokyo, Japan; magnification ×100) reveals nuclear pockets and dendritic deformation of mitochondria a Hematoxylin–eosin
staining of peripheral blood neutrophils reveals hypersegmentation and drumsticks of neutrophil nuclei (magnification ×100). b Electron
microscopy (JOEL, Tokyo, Japan; magnification ×100) reveals nuclear pockets and dendritic deformation of mitochondria Autopsy was performed
soon after death. The boy was 93 cm tall and weighed 6 kg. The brain weight was not measured. Cerebral hemisphere showed symmetric atrophy
with widened sulci and narrow gyri. The olfactory bulb, tract, and trigone, and anterior perforated substance were absent, and gyrus rectus
showed shape deformation (Fig. 5a). The septum pellucidum was fenestrated, and corpus callosum was thin (Fig. 5b).Fig. 5 a The olfactory
bulb, tract, trigone, and anterior perforated substance are absent, and gyrus rectus is abnormally shaped. b Coronal section of the
autopsied brain demonstrates fenestration of the septum pellucidum a The olfactory bulb, tract, trigone, and anterior perforated substance
are absent, and gyrus rectus is abnormally shaped. b Coronal section of the autopsied brain demonstrates fenestration of the septum
pellucidum Histopathologically, each layer of the cerebral cortex was preserved, and polarity of pyramidal cells was intact. The melanin
granule was absent in pars compacta of the substantia nigra (Fig. 6a). A large number of torpedoes (swollen axons of Purkinje cells) were
seen in the granular layer below the Purkinje cell layer (Fig. 6b). Similar axonal swelling was seen even in the molecular layer, albeit not
as extensive (Fig. 6c). There were numerous spheroids in the gray matter of the spinal cord and medulla.Fig. 6 a Decreased melanin granule
is observed in pars compacta of the substantia nigra (hematoxylin–eosin staining; ×100). b The presence of characteristic axonal swelling of
Purkinje cells (torpedoes) (neurofilament; ×100). c Similar axonal swelling of Purkinje cells is seen in the molecular layer (Bodian; ×200)
a Decreased melanin granule is observed in pars compacta of the substantia nigra (hematoxylin–eosin staining; ×100). b The presence of
characteristic axonal swelling of Purkinje cells (torpedoes) (neurofilament; ×100). c Similar axonal swelling of Purkinje cells is seen in
the molecular layer (Bodian; ×200) A commonly encountered brain anomaly in trisomy 13 is holoprosencephaly, which is a brain disorder
characterized by a failure of differentiation and a various degree of cleavage of the prosencephalon . This patient exhibited olfactory
aplasia and partial dysgenesis of the septum pellucidum. However, there was no fusion of cerebral hemispheres nor a partial or complete
absence of the corpus callosum. Olfactory aplasia is sometimes associated with septo-optic dysplasia . However, this diagnosis was not
applicable to our patient because of incomplete absence of septum pellucidum. Furthermore, the autopsy revealed a relatively well-preserved
optic tract. Isolated olfactory aplasia has never previously been reported in trisomy 13. The mortality is generally associated with the
severity of deformities in the central nervous system, heart, and respiratory system. To the best of our knowledge, our patient is one of
the longest survivors with trisomy 13 subjected to autopsy. The patient’s long survival was due to the absence of complications associated
with deformities of major organs, such as the brain, the heart, or the lungs. Another unique feature in our case was the presence of
numerous torpedoes, i.e., swollen axons of Purkinje cells, within the granular layer. The precise mechanism for this axonal change remains
unknown. It has been reported in several neuropathologic conditions with diffuse or focal cerebellar changes, such as necrotic lesions,
degenerative disease involving the cerebellum, elderly cases of essential tremor, Parkinson’s disease, Alzheimer’s disease, cerebellar
injury, and aging . However, this characteristic change in the cerebellum has never previously been reported in autopsy reports on trisomy
13.
