Conflict of interest: J.C.Becker: adboard and speakers bureau for Roche and Glaxo Smith Kline Acquired reactive perforating collagenosis is
a perforating dermatosis usually associated with different systemic diseases, mainly diabetes mellitus and/or chronic renal insufficiency.
Different therapies have been tried but treatment is not standardized yet and remains a challenge. In the last few years, allopurinol has
been reported as a good therapeutic option for acquired reactive perforating collagenosis. We describe the case of a 73-year-old man
affected by acquired reactive perforating collagenosis associated with diabetes type 1 and chronic renal failure with secondary
hyperparathyroidism. The patient was successfully treated with allopurinol 100mg once/day p.o.. A colagenose reativa perfurante adquirida
pertence ao grupo das dermatoses perfurantes e frequentemente está associada com diferentes doenças sistêmicas, principalmente diabetes
mellitus e/ou insuficiência renal crônica. Diferentes terapêuticas têm sido utilizadas, mas o tratamento ainda é um desafio, pois não existe
tratamento padronizado. Nos últimos anos, alopurinol tem sido relatado como uma boa opção terapêutica para colagenose reativa perfurante
adquirida. Relatamos o caso de um paciente masculino, com 73 anos de idade, portador de colagenose reativa perfurante adquirida em
associação com diabetes tipo 1 e falência renal crônica com hiperparatireoidismo secundário. O paciente foi eficazmente tratado com
alopurinol na dose 100mg/dia, via oral. Reactive perforating collagenosis (RPC) was described by Mehregan et al. in 1967 and belongs to the
spectrum of perforating dermatoses; an inherited form and an acquired variant are known.1 The former appears early in childhood and recurs
once or twice per year. On the contrary, acquired RPC (ARPC) appears late in life and is associated with different systemic diseases.
Diagnostic criteria of ARPC (Faver's criteria) are: onset of lesions after the age of 18 years; umbilicated papules or nodules with a
central adherent keratotic plug; on histopathology, elimination of altered collagen through an epithelium-lined crater filled with keratin.1
Skin lesions may be disseminated all over the body and itching very severe; treatment is not standardized yet and remains a challenge.1 In
the last few years, allopurinol has been reported as a good therapeutic option for ARPC.1-6 We describe the case of a male patient
successfully treated with allopurinol. A 73-year-old man was admitted with intensively pruritic multiple erythematous excoriated papules and
nodules with a central adherent keratotic plug up to 20mm in diameter involving the whole integument. Pruritus had started 10 months before
and subsequently there was onset of keratotic papules and nodules (Figure 1). The patient had suffered from diabetes type 1 for 50 years,
complicated with retinopathy, cardiopathy, chronic renal failure and, in the last 5 years, also with secondary hyperparathyroidism.
Medication consisted of insulin, bisoprolol, clopidogrel, telmisartan, nicorandil, furosemide, calcium dobesilate and ranitidine. Laboratory
tests showed elevated creatinine 1.72mg/dl (0.7-1.20), urea 106mg/dl (10-45), potassium 5.5 mmol/l (3.5-5.0), HbA1c 8.0% (4.3-5.9),
parathormon 89.8pg/ml (15.0-65.0), lymphocytes with 12% (20-40.0); uric acid 6.1mg/dl (3.4-7.0) was within normal range. A, B, C, D.
Multiple excoriated hyperkeratotic papules and nodules with central crust involving the whole integument Histopathology showed irregular
epidermal hyperplasia with hypergranulosis, orthokeratosis and a cup-shaped depression of the epidermis with parakeratotic material, debris
and extruded basophilic collagen fibres at the bottom (Figure 2). Fibrosis and a perivascular lymphoplasmacellular infiltrate were present
in the dermis. A. Acanthosis of the epidermis with hypergranulosis and ortho-parakeratosis. On the left side, cup-shaped depression of the
epidermis with parakeratotic material and debris. In the dermis fibrosis, teleangiectatis vessels and aspecific lymphohistiocytic
infiltrate. B. Cup-shaped depression of the epidermis which is filled by parakeratotic keratin and neutrophils. At the bottom basophilic
collagen fibres in vertical orientation that are extruded The diagnosis of ARPC was made. The patient was initially given a 2-week course of
antihistamines p.o.. Topically applied corticosteroids and 6-week narrow-band ultraviolet-B phototherapy were also tried. As pruritus and
skin lesions persisted, allopurinol 100mg once/day p.o. was started. Skin lesions and pruritus improved within 4 weeks, in fact the lesions
resolved to postinflammatory hyperpigmentations. Clinical response was maintained at 14-month follow-up visit with uninterrupted well-
tolerated allopurinol therapy (Figure 3). A, B, C, D. Multiple postinflammatory hyperpigmentations involving the whole integument after 8
months of treatment About one hundred ARPC cases have been reported in the English literature and ARPC has been observed mainly in patients
with diabetes mellitus and/or chronic renal insufficiency, but it has been associated also with other endocrine disorders like
hypothyroidism and hyperparathyroidism, liver dysfunction, sclerosing cholangitis, lung fibrosis, AIDS, pulmonary aspergillosis, scabies
infection, leukemia, lymphoma and different malignancies.1 The pathogenesis is unknown. It has been hypothesized that mild superficial
trauma (i.e. due to scratching) in patients with inherited susceptibility may lead to necrosis of papillary dermal collagen.1 Diabetic
vasculopathy and hypoxic conditions as insufficient small blood vessels supply may be aggravating factors.1 Immunohisochemical and
ultrastructural studies have shown that the extruded collagen is normal.7 Using immunofluorescence techniques, Herzinger et al. demonstrated
the presence of collagens type IV and type VII within the keratin plug, and suggested that collagen IV may elicit an immune response that
triggers its penetration through the epidermis.8 The typical umbilicated (secondarily crateriform) papules or nodules can be localized only
on the trunk or extremities or can be diffuse involving the all integument. Lesions are usually very itchy and new lesions can appear as a
Koebner's phenomenon due to continuous scratching. However, pruritus is a common symptom in most systemic diseases associated which ARPC,
thus it is not clear whether ARPC is a primary condition or a reaction to scratching. Histopathologic features depends on the evolution of
the lesion. Early lesions shows epidermal acanthosis and accumulation of basophilic collagen in papillary dermis. Fully developed lesions
show a dome-shaped epidermal depression (crater) filled with a parakeratotic plug, collagen and debris. Vertically oriented basophilic
collagen fibres are extruded. Follicular involvement is present in 40% of cases.1,7-10 Differential diagnosis includes mainly other
perforating dermatoses like perforating folliculitis, elastosis perforans serpigininosa, Kyrle's disease, perforating calcifying elastosis
and perforating granuloma annulare. More than 100 cases of APRC have been reported, 18 (18%) in the 70-79 year group like our patient.1
Treatment is difficult. ARPC usually improves when the coexisting systemic disease is treated. Numerous therapies have been tried in ARPC,
including topical therapies like topical steroids, topical retinoic acid, phototherapy and systemic therapies like doxycycline, rifampicin
and systemic retinoids. Still, no standard therapy is available.1 In some patients, allopurinol confirmed to be a valid and effective
treatment.2-6 The exact mechanism of action is unknown; it has been speculated that allopurinol inhibits xanthine oxidase which decreases
oxygen free radicals that cause collagen damage and might inhibit collagen cross-linking by advanced glycation endproducts due to an
antioxidative effect.2-4 To our knowledge, only twelve patients (M:F=6:6; median age: 66,5; mean age: 67,6; range: 37-96) have been reported
as effectively treated with allopurinol.1-6 ARPC was associated with diabetes and renal insufficiency in 4 patients, with only diabetes in 4
and renal insufficiency in 2. Uric acid was within normal range in 8 patients. Allopurinol, 100mg/day p.o., was started in all patients; in
one of them, however, the daily dose had to be increased up to 300mg and in another was reduced to 50mg/day. Improvement was noticed already
within one and 4 weeks in 7 patients and within 24 months in 5 patients.1-6 Our experience supported by the literature suggests that
allopurinol is a valid and effective treatment in patients with ARPC. Due to the rarity of ARPC, case series are difficult to collect but
case reports should be encouraged including those in which allopurinol proved to be ineffective. Financial funding: None * Study carried out
at the Medical University of Graz - Graz, Austria.
