Metastatic tuberculous abscesses or cutaneous tuberculous gummas occur mostly by reactivation of ancient cutaneous foci and is triggered
mainly by pharmacological immunosuppression, diabetes mellitus, alcoholism or acquired immunodeficiency syndrome. The present case report
refers to a 33-year-old male patient with polymyositis and a previous diagnosis of treated pulmonary tuberculosis. He presented cutaneous
abscesses and fever months after the tuberculosis regimen. The patient was diagnosed as metastatic tuberculous abscesses associated with
immunosuppression as result of polymyositis treatment. Abscesso tuberculoso metastático ou goma tuberculosa cutânea, ocorre principalmente
pela reativação de surtos cutâneos precoces desencadeados principalmente por imunodepressão farmacológica, diabetes mellitus, alcoolismo ou
síndrome da imunodeficiência adquirida. O presente caso relatado refere-se a um paciente do sexo masculino de 33 anos portador de
polimiosite e com diagnóstico prévio de tuberculose pulmonar tratada. Apresentou, meses depois do tratamento para tuberculose, abscessos
cutâneos e febre. Após a investigação clínica foi diagnosticado como portador de tuberculose gomosa cutânea associada à imunodepressão
consequente ao tratamento de polimiosite. Tuberculosis is an infectious disease caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and may also be caused
by other species of the same genus such as M. bovis, M. africanum, M. microti or M. canetti.1 These infectious agents are aerobic bacilli
with a thick waxy cell wall composed of mycolic acid, which renders them acid-fast.2 Pulmonary involvement is the most common form of the
disease. Nevertheless, several organ systems may also be affected by hematogenous dissemination, causing extrapulmonary tuberculosis. The
extrapulmonary tuberculosis presentations have probably been increasing as a result of AIDS and the increased use of immunosuppressive
drugs.1 Cutaneous tuberculosis is responsible for about 2.1% of all cases of tuberculosis. The greatest incidence occurs in people on a low
income. With the advent of AIDS there was a rise in incidence probably due to a process of reactivation of latent tuberculosis in
immunocompromised people by an increase in the number of bacilli that are resistant to treatment or because immunosuppression facilitates
infection by less virulent strains.1 A 33-year-old male patient resident of Manguinhos - Rio de Janeiro - Brazil was diagnosed 18 months ago
with polymyositis and was irregularly taking methotrexate (15mg/weak) with prednisone (40 mg/day); however, he failed to attend medical
follow-up visits regularly. One year ago, he was hospitalized with pulmonary tuberculosis. He was prescribed rifampicin, isoniazid and
pyrazinamide and completed a six-month treatment period. Six months later, he was admitted at the Hospital with painful warm nodules of
various sizes on his body in addition to gummatous lesions developed two months earlier (Figures 1,2 and 3). He presented intermittent fever
which responded to metamizole. There was throbbing pain in his limbs, aggravated by movement and alleviated by resting. He also complained
of muscle weakness in pectoral and pelvic girdle. Gummatous lesion on the posterior region of the upper third of the right leg Ulcerated
lesion on the internal surface of the left forearm Gummatous lesions on the internal surface of the left thigh At admission, he had
tachypnea, tachycardia and fever. Lymphadenopathy was absent and the blood pressure was normal. The laboratory tests showed leukocytosis
(21,100 leukocytes), thrombocytosis (573,000 platelets) and normocytic normochromic anemia. Lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels were 515 U/I
and creatine phosphokinase (CPK) 282 IU/l. Chest x-ray revealed no abnormalities. During hospitalization, leukocytosis, thrombocytosis and
normocytic normochromic anemia persisted, as well as increased LDH levels. Creatine phosphokinase returned to normal levels. The
differential diagnosis of the nodular disease mainly considered myositis and vasculitis, methotrexate-related panniculitis, Weber-Christian
disease, subcutaneous panniculitis-like T-cell lymphoma, erythema nodosum, bacterial, fungal and mycobacterial infections. At admission
antibiotic therapy with oxacillin was initiated against infection by Staphylococcus. However, no specimen has confirmed the suspicion of
diagnosis. These results hampered the investigation for presence of staphylococci bacteria and made the decision to maintain or not the
antibiotics difficult. The patient's fever and skin rash persisted despite the therapy. On the seventh day of treatment, the antibiotic was
changed to vancomycin at 500 mg qid intravenously for 14 days; no improvement occurred in the patient's clinical condition. The material
collected from the lesions was studied for histopathology patterns, bacterioscopy and culture studies. Ultrasound confirmed a subcutaneous
structural alteration on the posterior region of the upper third of the right leg, with 8 cm in size and without liquid. The possibility of
purulent material being accumulated inside the lesion could not be discarded. Skin histopathology studies revealed acanthosis, edema of the
reticular dermis, and mild infiltrate of lymphocytes with some neutrophils around vessels and skin adnexa. Panniculitis was suggested by the
presence of subcutaneous necrosis of adipocytes, deposits of fibrinoid material and hyaline eosinophilic strands. Initially, aspirated
secretion from the lesions was negative for acid-fast bacilli. One week later, a new sample showed acid-fast bacilli (+ + +). Rifampicin 600
mg qd, isoniazide 400 mg qd, pyrazinamide 2 g qd and ethambutol 1.2 g qd were initiated. Within a five-day treatment period the patient
improved considerably, the fever disappeared and he was discharged. Culture studies revealed growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis. Lesions
were totally cured after 6 months. Cutaneous tuberculosis is a rare disease with specific clinical features and natural history. Clinical
manifestation and following events, may depend on multiple factors such as how bacilli accessed the skin; the strain's virulence; number of
inoculated bacilli; immune state of the patient and the relation of Mycobacterium with the anatomical region affected.3 Skin lesions can be
divided according to exposure in primary and secondary lesions, by local inoculation or by distant dispersion, respectively. Tuberculids are
a hypersensitivity reaction to a distant focus of infection.4 Diagnosis of cutaneous tuberculosis may be achieved by direct microscopy, PCR,
culture and histopathology study of a biopsy specimen. Chest xray with pulmonary involvement, active or not, as well as positive PPD may
help the diagnosis.5 The patient had a previous diagnosis of polymyositis. It causes an autoimmune chronic inflammation of the muscles with
marked pain, weakness and/or loss of muscle mass in the proximal musculature, particularly in the shoulder and pelvic girdle. The standard
treatment is pharmacologic immunosuppression. The simultaneously presentation of polymyositis and cutaneous mycobacteriosis is rare. After a
literature review we have found 3 similar cases of patients with cutaneous tuberculosis plus dermatomyositis and one case of neutrophilic
tuberculous panniculitis in a patient with polymyositis. The immunosuppressive treatment seems to be responsible for the presentation of
cutaneous tuberculosis. Besides, because of the number of case reports, a study is necessary to evaluate the direct relationship between
polymyositis and cutaneous tuberculosis.6-9 In the present case, the treatment of polymyositis may have induced the development of pulmonary
tuberculosis; and one year later the onset of cutaneous disease was observed. During hospitalization, chest x-ray and CT scanning showed no
evidence of tuberculosis activity. The lack of response of the tuberculin test and the absence of granuloma histopathology findings were
probably due to immunosuppression of the cell-mediated immunity. An additional investigation of secretion showed acid-fast bacilli (+ + +)
and growth of Mycobacterium tuberculosis in culture. The diagnosis of cutaneous metastatic tuberculous abscess, a form of tuberculosis that
results from reactivation of primary foci, was established from the presence of subcutaneous, multibacillary abscesses that formed fistulae
and drained spontaneously.10 The standard RIPE regimen for six months has been shown to be effective in these forms of the disease. Conflito
de interesse: Nenhum / Conflict of interest: None Suporte financeiro: Nenhum / Financial funding: None * Study carried out at the Teaching
Hospital, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro (Hospital Universitário Gaffrée e Guinle. Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro -
HUGG-UNIRIO) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
