Progressive symmetrical erythrokeratodermia is a rare autosomal dominant genodermatosis with variable penetrance described by Darier in
1911. It is characterized by erythematous and keratotic plaques, sharply defined and symmetrically distributed along the extremities,
buttocks and, more rarely, on the face. We report a case of a 55-year-old patient with lesions on the dorsum of the hands, interphalangeal
pads, wrists, groin and back feet. This case demonstrates a rare and late diagnosis, clinical profusion and presence of familiar
involvement. Eritroqueratodermia simétrica progressiva é uma genodermatose rara de herança autossômica dominante, com penetrância variável,
descrita por Darier em 1911. E caracterizada por placas eritematosas e queratósicas, bem delimitadas, simetricamente distribuídas ao longo
das extremidades, nádegas e mais raramente face. Os autores relatam o caso de uma paciente de 55 anos apresentando lesões no dorso das mãos,
coxins interfalangeanos, punhos, região inguinal e dorso dos pés. O caso demonstra raridade, diagnóstico tardio, exuberância clínica e
acometimento familial. Erythrokeratodermias are classified as genodermatoses that share keratinization disorders. They are represented by
erythrokeratodermia variabilis (EKV) and progressive symmetric erythrokeratodermia (PSEK).1,2 An autosomal dominant inheritance is usually
seen in both, although there are reports of sporadic cases as well as autosomal recessive inheritance in PSEK. They are generally
distinguished by their clinical aspect, since the histopathology findings are almost the same, showing orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis,
moderate acanthosis with a prominent granular layer. Transitory well outlined erythematous plaques with a geographical appearance, are
present in EKV and may affect any cutaneous surface.1,2,3 It is usually seen in childhood, and the erythema tends to fade with time.
Hyperkeratosis is clinically observed through the presence of thickened plaques and it is usually more stable than the erythema. The
variability in number, size, shape and duration of the erythematous plaques are defined by the given name of the illness.1,3 Lesions may be
modified depending on temperature, emotional stress and mechanical pressure. They tend to worsen during pregnancy and around 30% of patients
may suffer the onset of their symptoms at birth, which does not occur in PSEK cases. In PSEK, keratotic plaques are on an erythematous base
and remain in a fixed area since the early stages of the disease. Usually there is symmetric distribution around joints and it attacks more
specific skin surfaces, such as extremities, buttocks and occasionally face and torso. The lesions slowly become progressive in number and
size, which increases throughout the years. Both diseases share the fact that they stabilize after puberty. The chosen treatment for
erythrokeratodermias is oral retinoids. The limiting factor for their use is the side effects, especially in children. There are reports of
clinical improvement, however, recurrence is expected when the treatment is interrupted. Formulas containing coaltar, salicylic acid,
corticosteroids and topic retinoids can be used, but variation in results may occur. An asymptomatic clinical case of classic PSEK is
described below with family involvement. Female patient, 55 years old, phototype III, referred the onset of skin lesions from the age of 5,
with progressive growth until the age of 18. She reports that similar lesions in the same locations also occurred on three of her siblings
during their childhood. Their parents were not consanguineous. Dermatological exams evidenced fixed, finely scaly, symmetric erythematous
keratotic plaques on the dorsum of the hands, interphalangeal pads, wrists, elbows, groin and feet (Figures 1,2,3,4). The plaques were
thicker on the elbows and there was a welldefined, brownish-colored hyperpigmentation halo on the inguinal region. A biopsy of the dorsum of
the right foot revealed discrete papillomatosis and acanthosis, orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a basket-weave pattern and maintenance of
the granular layer, thus eliminating the main hypothesis of psoriasis (Figure 5). For treatment, topical 0.025% tretinoin associated with
20% urea and 3% salicylic acid was applied, as well as moisturizing lotion in the morning. After 4 months' treatment only mild clinical
improvement was noticed and 20mg/day acitretin was introduced, with excellent response. Clinical aspect on the dorsum of the hands. Fixed
and well-defined symmetrically distributed erythematous-scaly plaques Clinical aspect of the elbows. Fixed and well-defined symmetrically
distributed erythematous-scaly plaques Clinical aspect on dorsum of the feet. Fixed and well-defined symmetrically distributed
erythematousscaly plaques Clinical aspect of the inguinal area. Erythematous plaques, with a brownish-colored halo delimiting the affected
region Histopathology stained by Hematoxilin Eosin. HE, 100x. An orthokeratotic hyperkeratosis in a basket-weave pattern. Presence of
moderate acanthosis and focus of thickened granular layer Progressive symmetrical erythrokeratodermia, also known as Gottron syndrome or
Darier-Grotton erythrokeratodermia, was described by Darier in 1911. In 1923, Grotton was the one who defined the name for this particular
illness as it is known today.1,2 Darier described it as a rare keratinization disorder, characterized by non-migratory keratotic plaques on
an erythematous base, appearing insidiously and slowly on circinate areas, surrounded by a delicate hyperpigmented projection, with
symmetric distribution on knees, elbows, hands and feet. There may occur palmoplantar hyperkeratosis in approximately 50% of patients. The
pathogenesis of erythrokeratodermia requires further studies.4 Analysis has shown that mitotic activity increased on the affected skin of
patients with PSEK and was normal in EKV patients. Physiopathology of both conditions reveal different aspects; molecular genetic alteration
in PSEK still remains unknown. Reports show that a mutation occurs in the loricrin protein, which is the major constituent of the cornified
cell, with gene-coding region located on 1q21.3.5,6,7 It is believed that the mutant loricrin accumulates in the nucleus, interfering in the
keratinocyte apoptosis process, leading to a pathologically thickened stratum corneum; differently from the EKV, which shows a genetic
mutation recently located in the lower arm of chromosome 1, responsible for the expression of connexin 31, generating anomalies in the
cohesion of the stratum corneum cells.6,8 Transmission in PSEK is hereditary and it results in an autosomal dominant pattern, with sporadic
cases occurring in up to 50% of the total diagnosed. It affects both sexes equally during the first months or years of their lives.9 Genetic
penetration, however, can be incomplete which generates a variable clinical expressivity. Spontaneous remission does not usually occur,
although cases have been described in the literature. Diagnosis is established on clinical bases and histopathology is most important to
exclude the main differential diagnosis, psoriasis. The therapy will be directed according to clinical manifestations. In clinically
moderated non-malignant cases, the use of retinoids, keratolytics and even steroids would be an option. In more extensive cutaneous
involvement, systemic therapy is indicated, with retinoids being the main choice. The most commonly used drugs are acitretin and etretinate
in doses varying between 0.5 to 1.0mg/kg. Phototherapy has shown good results. In the case reported there was favorable clinical response to
systemic therapy with acitretin, but without total remission of the lesions. Financial Support: none Conflict of Interests: none * Study
carried out at the Naval Hospital Marcílio Dias (HNMD) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil.
