Corresponding author: Takaaki Shinohara Department of Hand Surgery, Nagoya University Graduate School of Medicine, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-
ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan Tel:+81-52-744-2957, Fax: +81-52-744-2964, E-mail: hand_surgery1966@yahoo.co.jp Radial head dislocation
associated with plastic bowing of the ulna is classified as a Monteggia equivalent lesion. This injury in children can be treated by closed
reduction, but manipulative reduction may not completely correct plastic bowing of the ulna. We encountered two cases of incomplete
reduction in which the radial head was reduced in a supination position, but redislocated during rotation from neutral to a pronation
position. The patients were treated conservatively using an adjustable hinged elbow splint. Plain radiography at 6 weeks after incomplete
closed reduction showed that the radial head was reduced in all positions from supination to pronation; thus, both patients had good
outcomes. Our method is non-invasive and may be an option for treatment of incomplete reduction of radial head dislocation with acute
plastic bowing of the ulna. A Monteggia lesion is an uncommon injury in a pediatric elbow joint1) and radial head dislocation associated
with traumatic plastic bowing of the ulna, which is classified as a Monteggia equivalent lesion, is easily overlooked2). However, a
dislocated radial head should be reduced as soon as possible because delayed treatment might produce a requirement for open reduction of the
radial head and corrective osteotomy of the ulna3). Failure of reduction might occur due to interposition of soft tissue in the
radiocapitellar joint or incomplete correction of the ulnar deformity. We encountered two cases of incomplete reduction, in which the radial
head showed eccentric motion during pronation to supination motion after reduction. Instead of open reduction, these cases were treated
using a hinged splint. A 6-year-old boy was referred to our hospital due to incomplete reduction of the radial head. He had fallen down over
an outstretched arm 8 days earlier. He had been diagnosed with radial head dislocation with plastic bowing of the ulna at a local hospital
and reduction had been performed under general anesthesia on the same day. Plain radiography at the time of injury showed the radial head
dislocated anteriorly and the ulna had a bowing deformity (Fig. 1). The ulnar bow rates4) (the ratio of the maximum ulnar bow5) divided by
the ulnar length; Fig. 2) were 3.6% on the affected side and 0% on the contralateral side. The ulnar bow rates were evaluated in neutral
position. After reduction, the rate on the affected side decreased to 1.8%. Further examination revealed that the radial head was reduced in
a supinated position, but anteriorly dislocated from neutral to a pronation position (Fig. 3). Instead of performing open reduction, we
decided to continue conservative treatment using an adjustable hinged elbow splint. The splint has a hinge at the elbow joint that controls
the flexion-extension arc but permits free pronation-supination motion. The aim of the splint was to reduce the traction force of the biceps
muscle on the radial head while allowing the soft tissue surrounding the radial head to heal and stabilize the proximal radio-ulnar joint.
The arm was immobilized in a long arm cast with the elbow at 100 degrees of flexion and the forearm and wrist in neutral positions for an
additional 2 weeks. At 3 weeks after injury, active motion exercise was commenced with the splint. The flexion-extension arc was limited by
the splint to 90 to 140 degrees and prosupination motion was encouraged (Fig. 4). Restriction of elbow extension was gradually decreased, 10
degrees for every 3 days, under the control of the hinged splint. The patient was controlled to wear the splint all day for the first 4
weeks except bathing, and to hold the arm in 90 degree of flexion while bathing. Elbow extension reached full extension by 4 weeks after the
commencement of exercise, then splinting was continued additional 2 weeks for prevention of elbow hyperextension. The splint was removed at
6 weeks. Plain radiography at 7 weeks after injury showed that the radial head was reduced in the full arc of pronation-supination motion.
At 2 years and 3 months after injury, the patient had no pain and a full range of motion, and the radial head was reduced in all positions
on plain radiography (Fig. 5). The clinical outcome was excellent, as rated by Kim’s elbow performance score6). Case 1, a 6-year-old boy.
Lateral radiograph of the left forearm showing anterior dislocation of the radial head with plastic bowing of the ulna. Method of
calculation of the ulnar bow rate as the percentage ratio A/B. A: The maximum ulnar bow, determined as the maximum perpendicular distance
from a straight line drawn along the dorsal border of the ulna. B: Length of the ulna. Case 1, a 6-year-old boy. Lateral radiographs of the
left forearm after closed reduction. A) The radial head was reduced in a supination position. B) The radial head was redislocated during
rotation from neutral to a pronation position. Case 1, a 6-year-old boy. A) Photograph showing active range of motion exercises performed
while wearing an adjustable hinged elbow splint that limits elbow extension. B) Photograph showing a hinge that can selectively control the
range of elbow motion. Case 1, a 6-year-old boy. Lateral radiographs of the left forearm at 2 years and 3 months after injury, showing that
the radial head was reduced in a pronation position. A 9-year-old girl was referred to our hospital 12 days after injury complaining of pain
and limited motion of her right elbow joint. She had radial head dislocation, but this had not been recognized by a local doctor. Physical
examination revealed tenderness at the lateral side of the right elbow and the flexion-extension arc was 10 to 100 degrees, with 50 degrees
of pronation and 50 degrees of supination. Plain radiography revealed anterior dislocation of the radial head with plastic bowing of the
ulna. The ulnar bow rate of the affected side was 1.7% and that of the contralateral side was 0%. Closed reduction was performed under
general anesthesia at our hospital, but was only partly successful. Plain radiography showed that the ulnar bow rate improved to 1.1% and
the radial head had been reduced in supination, but anteriorly dislocated in pronation, as also found in case 1. The arm was immobilized in
a long arm cast with the elbow at 100 degrees of flexion, forearm and wrist in neutral position for 2 weeks after closed reduction.
Subsequently, conservative treatment using a hinged splint was performed in the same manner as that in case 1. Plain radiography at 6 weeks
after closed reduction showed that the radial head was reduced regardless of the forearm position. At 3 years and 4 months after injury, the
patient had no pain and full range of motion, and the radial head was reduced in all positions on plain radiography. The clinical outcome
was excellent based on Kim’s elbow performance score. Clinical and radiographic findings in traumatic bowing of the forearm were first
reported by Borden7). This incomplete fracture is commonly seen in forearms of children8) and occurs by formation of slip lines or
microfractures, which disrupt the collagen bundles and canaliculi of the Haversian system9). Chamay10) demonstrated ulnar bowing deformity
in dogs using longitudinal compression force and showed that plastic deformation resulted when the force exceeded the elastic limit but was
below the fracture threshold. Plastic bowing is easily overlooked because of the lack of a visible cortical defect. A Monteggia equivalent
lesion, which involves radial head dislocation with traumatic bowing of the ulna, is also easily overlooked. Delays in correct diagnosis
lead to increased morbidity and increase the risk of the need for open surgery to achieve reduction of the dislocated radial head3). Radial
head dislocation with acute plastic bowing of the ulna in children can be treated by closed reduction, but manipulative reduction may not
completely correct plastic bowing of the ulna7). It is important to confirm whether the radial head is reduced completely in full forearm
rotation on radiographic examination, and careful attention is required when the ulnar bow rate after reduction does not reach that of the
contralateral side. In the cases reported here, the radial head was reduced in supination, but redislocated in a neutral to pronation
position. In the second case, the 12-day interval from injury made it difficult to achieve complete reduction without open surgery.
Incomplete reduction of the radial head is a candidate for open reduction surgery, but we chose conservative treatment using an adjustable
hinged elbow splint. Open reduction can still be performed if this treatment fails. Tompkins11) suggested over traction of biceps muscle as
one of the mechanisms of the Monteggia lesion with an anterior radial head dislocation. By limiting elbow extension with a splint, we aimed
to reduce the traction force of the biceps muscle on the radial head until soft tissue healing stabilized the radial head in a good
position. We also think that stability of the radial head is provided due to the applied muscle contraction force in the axial direction of
the forearm in the elbow flexion position. Prosupination motion was encouraged while limiting elbow extension, both to avoid contracture and
to re-establish a good forearm prosupination axis. Our splinting method is non-invasive and the two patients had good outcomes. Therefore,
this method may be an option for treatment of incomplete reduction of radial head dislocation with acute plastic bowing of the ulna.
However, if the annular ligament is interposed, the radial head would not reach stability in its normal position. Thus, evaluation of the
condition of the injured annular ligament or capsule is required prior to commencing this conservative treatment. Ultrasonography provides a
rapid, cost-effective, non-invasive, and dynamic method for examination of soft-tissue structures12) and is useful to evaluate the
unossified epiphysis or to identify interposition of soft tissue between fracture fragments in the region of the elbow in infants and young
children13). We have recently used ultrasonography to evaluate soft-tissue injuries around the elbow area and such diagnostic imaging is
likely to enhance the reliability of our splinting treatment.
