We report a case of CMV corneal endotheliitis that was treated with intravitreal ganciclovir injection. A 56-year-old man who has suffered
from uveitis was referred to our clinic due to corneal endothelial abnormality. Slit lamp examination showed a localized sectoral corneal
edema and linear keratic precipitates along the boundary of edema. In spite of treatment with oral steroid and acyclovir, the disease
progressed and two new coin-like lesions were developed. After topical ganciclovir and intavitreal injection of ganciclovir, the corneal
lesions disappeared. Linear endotheliitis is an endothelial disease which is characterized by sectorial corneal edema and keratic
precipitates (KPs) lines along the boundary of the edema . It has been described as being more difficult to treat than disciform
endotheliitis, which is associated with the immune system response to infection . Linear endotheliitis may be caused by viral infection,
including infection by the herpes virus . Recently, cytomegalovirus has been reported as another causative agent of linear endotheliitis .
Topical and systemic ganciclovir is commonly used to treat CMV endotheliitis . However, systemic ganciclovir has various side effects
including pancytopenia or myelosuppression . In this report, we present a case of linear corneal endotheliitis caused by CMV (confirmed by
polymerase chain reaction ). The patient was later treated with topical ganciclovir and intravitreal ganciclovir injection. A 56-year-old
man who had recurrent anterior uveitis for the last 30 years was referred to our clinic due to a corneal endothelial abnormality. He had no
history of immunologic and infectious disease that may cause an anterior chamber reaction or endothelial abnormality. At his first visit,
slit lamp examination showed sectorial corneal edema and KPs along the boundary of the edema (Fig. 1) and mild anterior chamber reaction.
The intraocular pressure (IOP) was 29 mmHg measured by non-contact tonometry. We prescribed oral acyclovir 400 mg twice a day, topical
acyclovir 3% (Herpecid; Samil, Seoul, Korea) 5 times a day, topical prednisolone 1% (Pred forte; Allergan, Irvine, CA, USA) every 2 hours,
and dorzolamide plus timolol maleate 6.83 mg/mL (Cosopt; Merk & Co, Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA) twice a day. At his second visit, the
corneal lesions were stationary while the anterior chamber reaction was reduced. We prescribed topical 5% NaCl (Muro 128; Bausch & Lomb,
Rochester, NY, USA) every 6 hours for corneal edema and oral prednisolone 20 mg per day. New coin-like corneal lesions developed a week
after adding the oral steroid (Fig. 2). CMV endotheliitis was suspected because the new lesions had a coin-like appearance, which is
specific for CMV endotheliitis (Fig. 3). Oral steroids were tapered off. The patient rejected treatment with systemic gancyclovir because of
his private situation and possible complications. He agreed to topical and intravitreal ganciclovir instead of systemic gancyclovir. Topical
acyclovir was changed to topical gancyclovir ophthalmic gel (0.15%; Virgan, Farmila-Thea Farmaceutici SpA, Milan, Italy) and gancyclovir (2
mg/0.05 mL) intra-vitreous injection. During the injection, we removed 0.1 mL of aqueous humor from anterior chamber to prevent IOP
elevation. We performed qualitative PCR analysis for CMV only. We did not perform PCR analysis for other pathogens because CMV infection was
strongly suspected. DNA extraction was performed using a QIAamp DNA blood mini QIAcube kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany) according to the
manufacturer's protocol. CMV DNA was amplified using a nested PCR technique using two primer sets derived from the CMV glycoprotein B gene
region (1st PCR, 5-GGCCGATCCTCTGAGAG TCTGC & 5-GTGGGTGCTCTTGCCTCCAGAG-3; 2nd PCR, 5-CCTAGTGTGGATGACCTACGGGCCA-3 &
5-CAGACACAGTGTCCTCCCGCTCCTC-3). The nested amplification product was visualized on 2% agarose gel electrophoresis and confirmed the expected
249 base pair products. After this point, the corneal lesion seemed to be have improved minimally. The frequency of applying topical
steroids (Pred forte) was reduced from 12 to 6 times a day. Qualitative PCR analysis showed the presence of CMV-DNA in the aqueous humour.
Ganciclovir (2 mg/0.05 mL) was injected into the vitreous one more time. Ten days later, the patient's corneal edema had almost subsided and
the linear KPs had disappeared (Fig. 3). After symptoms and signs associated with endotheliitis abated, the lesions did not recur for more
than 6 months, and we did not perform follow-up PCR analysis. Specular microscopy showed a reduced number of endothelial cells (Fig. 4). The
patient underwent a cataract operation about a month later. CMV has been reported as a causative agent of linear endotheliitis . We
confirmed the presence of CMV-DNA in the aqueous humour with qualitative PCR analysis. Topical and systemic ganciclovir is commonly used for
treating CMV endotheliitis . However, systemic ganciclovir has the serious side effects of myelosuppression and carcinogenesis . In this
case, intravitreal ganciclovir injection was performed twice for CMV endotheliitis, which is effective against CMV endotheliitis and does
not have systemic side effects. Intraocular injections of anti-viral agents instead of systemic agents can be an effective treatment that
reduces systemic side effects . While there has been no report of intracameral ganciclovir injection and corneal endothelial toxicity due to
ganciclovir, intravitreal ganciclovir injection has been commonly used for the treatment of CMV retinitis . Intravitreal injection of
ganciclovir may have side effects such as endophthlamitis , intraocular hemorrhage , crystallization of the vitreous humor , and retinal
toxicity . In our case, the concentration of intravitreal ganciclovir was set to 2 mg/0.05 mL, which has been used in other previous studies
. As described in a previous publication, intravitreal injection of ganciclovir should be done every ten days in order to maintain an
adequate concentration in the aqueous humor . In this case, there were no side effects associated with intravitreal ganciclovir injection.
The cataract operation was carried out a month later. This patient's cataracts may be due to long-term use of steroids to treat anterior
uveitis. His cataracts had already advanced when he first visited our clinic; he had used topical steroid for the last 30 years. In
addition, cataracts have been reported as a complication of intravitreal ganciclovir injection . In this case study, we treated CMV
endotheliitis with topical ganciclovir and intravitreal ganciclovir injection, which was effective in treating CMV endotheliitis without
systemic side effects. Topical ganciclovir and intravitreal ganciclovir injection can be considered as an effective treatment option for CMV
endotheliitis that avoids systemic side effects. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Slit lamp
examination showed sectorial corneal edema, keratic precipitates along the boundary of edema. Two new coin-like lesions pointed by arrows
developed 1 week after adding oral steroids to the treatment course. After ganciclovir 2 mg/0.05 mL was injected into the intra-vitreous
space, corneal edema almost subsided and linear keratic precipitates disappeared. The cornea returned to a normal state. Specular microscopy
shows the reduced number of endothelial cells after treatment of linear endotheliitis.
