Although the adverse effects of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) on the upper gastrointestinal tract have been well
characterized, those specific to the lower gastrointestinal tract are less clear, as only a limited number of articles and case reports
exist in the literature. We describe a case of a 69-year-old woman who presented to the emergency department due to sudden onset abdominal
distension and pain. Notably, she reported using intramuscular diclofenac sodium twice daily for 14 days after knee joint replacement
surgery. The patient denied any other coexisting diseases. As a subsequent X-ray and computed tomography (CT) scan showed free air in the
abdomen, an exploratory laparotomy was performed, revealing four free perforations in the terminal ileum. Findings on microscopic analysis
were non-specific. We report a unique case of multiple ileal perforations due to regular diclofenac sodium injections and contend that ileal
perforation can be considered as a source for pneumoperitoneum with concomitant peritonitis in patients with a history of NSAID use if other
possibilities are excluded. Non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) – including aspirin – have a long history of clinical use given
their potent antipyretic, analgesic, and anti-inflammatory effects. However, NSAIDs also have a well-described serious side effect profile,
most notably including gastrointestinal injury. With 7.9% of the Korean population considered elderly , NSAID use continues to increase,
with NSAID-related gastrointestinal injury now a common clinical problem . As capsule endoscopy and balloon enteroscopy are now able to
detect even the smallest of small intestinal lesions, NSAID-induced enteropathy has become a topic of great interest in the gastroenterology
literature. Moreover, new data now suggest that the prevalence of NSAID-induced enteropathy is higher than previously expected, and is
likely continuing to increase . Although the gross appearance of NSAID-induced enteropathy can vary significantly – including diaphragm-like
strictures, ulcers, erosions, and mucosal redness – few case reports of NSAID-induced ileal perforation exist. Herein, we report a case of
multiple ileal perforations secondary to diclofenac use. A 69-year-old woman presented to the emergency department with sudden onset
abdominal distension and mild abdominal pain though denied diarrhea or fever. Notably, she reported that she had been using intramuscular
diclofenac sodium twice a day for the past 14 days due to pain stemming from a recent knee joint replacement surgery. The patient denied any
other coexisting diseases. Physical examination revealed a distended abdomen with slight tenderness in the right lower quadrant. Although
all laboratory tests – including the Widal test – were normal, a simple chest X-ray showed free air in the abdomen. A computed tomography
scan of the abdomen was then performed, showing a large fluid collection and pneumoperitoneum, though no definite mass or site of
perforation could be identified. Consequently, the patient underwent an emergent laparotomy, revealing multiple mucosal defects in the
terminal ileum, including a total of four discrete perforations, each approximately 5 mm in size. However, a subsequent microscopic analysis
did not reveal any specific findings around the sites of perforation, such as inflammatory cell infiltrates with thrombi, malignancies, or
findings suggestive of inflammatory bowel disease (Figure 1). Accordingly, a diagnosis of multiple ileal perforations secondary to
diclofenac use was reached, as the patient had no specific past medical history and the relevant laboratory testing and histopathology did
not suggest any other underlying etiology. After surgery, the patient had an unremarkable course of recovery, and was followed as an
outpatient without any additional complications. Histopathology showing nonspecific inflammation and excluding IBD, vasculitis, and vascular
thrombi. The low power view (A) reveals an ulcer with perforation (H&E, x20). The high power view (B) reveals necrotic debris intermixed
with inflammatory cells (predominantly neutrophils) and granulation tissue formation at the perforated ileal wall (H&E, x200). NSAIDs have a
well-characterized adverse event profile, including many upper gastrointestinal tract-related complications. These side effects clearly
contribute significantly to the morbidity and mortality of individuals treated with this class of medications. However, NSAIDs are also
capable of producing similar complications in the lower gastrointestinal tract, including the jejunum and ileum, and it is generally well
accepted that NSAID-induced gastrointestinal injury occurs more frequently in the small bowel than in the stomach . Though the incidence of
NSAID-induced enteropathy is believed to be higher than previously expected, the exact rate has never been determined. According to one
study including the post-mortem results of 713 patients both with and without a history of NSAID use, nonspecific small-intestinal
ulcerations were found in 21 (8.4%) of NSAID users and 3 (0.6%) nonusers. Additionally, three long-term NSAID users were found to have died
from complications arising from perforated nonspecific small-intestinal ulcers . Another similar study also reported that after enteroscopy,
jejunal or ileal ulcerations were detected in 47% of patients treated with NSAIDs for rheumatoid arthritis . Prostaglandin is critically
involved in regulating the gastrointestinal blood flow as well as other various mucosal functions. As such, the NSAID-induced decrease in
prostaglandin production is believed to represent the primary cause of small bowel injuries due to NSAID use. Specifically, NSAIDs decrease
endogenous mucosal prostaglandins, which results in decreased amounts of intestinal mucus, other microcirculatory disturbances secondary to
pharmacologically increased intestinal motility, intercellular junction disruption, and increased mucosal permeability. The subsequent
mucosal injuries can occur secondary to damage caused by bile acid, proteolytic enzymes, intestinal bacteria, or other toxins. Moreover, all
of these processes induce inflammatory cytokine production as well as neutrophil infiltration, with the lipopolysaccharide/toll-like
receptor 4 pathway also playing an important role in the etiology of such mucosal injuries . The most basic principle in the treatment of
NSAID-induced injuries is to discontinue all NSAID use. However, often only a temporary cessation of NSAID use is possible, as many patients
require NSAIDs daily for chronic pain or as an anti-platelet agent. Although some preliminary evidence suggests that misoprostol,
metronidazole, and/or sulfasalazine have some effect in treating NSAID-induced enteropathy, no confirmatory data exist. In fact, one recent
double-blind, randomized controlled trial showed that neither metronidazole nor misoprostol was able to significantly reduce the increased
mucosal permeability secondary to indomethacin after one week . Another similar study of rheumatoid arthritis patients treated with NSAIDs
found that sulfasalazine reduced both intestinal inflammation and blood loss, while all other disease-modifying antirheumatic drugs (DMARDs)
did not . Furthermore, while selective COX-2 inhibitors have been shown to decrease the rate of complications in the upper gastrointestinal
tract, it remains unclear if these agents are similarly effective in preventing NSAID-related complications in the small bowel . In the case
described here, the patient received regular twice-daily injections of diclofenac sodium for two weeks. Similarly, the subsequent laboratory
and histopathologic findings were unable to identify any etiology for her ileal perforations other than NSAID-induced gastropathy, including
inflammatory bowel disease, trauma, typhoid, tuberculosis and amoebiasis. Accordingly, a diagnosis of diclofenac sodium-induced multiple
ileal perforation was reached. We report a unique case of multiple ileal perforations due to regular diclofenac sodium injections and
contend that ileal perforation can be considered as a source for pneumoperitoneum with concomitant peritonitis in patients with a history of
NSAID use if other possibilities are excluded. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s father for publication of this case
report. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PWS and KSW took part in the design of the study, was involved in patient
treatment and participated in writing the manuscript. LS was a major contributor in writing the manuscript. LST involved the treatment
procedures. PHS performed the pathologic review. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
