Corresponding author: Takaaki Shinohara Department of Hand Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, Nagoya University, 65 Tsurumai-cho, Showa-
ku, Nagoya 466-8550, Japan Tel:+81-52-744-2957, Fax: +81-52-744-2964, E-mail: hand_surgery1966@yahoo.co.jp Surface-based bone hemangiomas
are uncommon, mostly occurring in long bones of the lower extremities. Radiographic surface-based bone hemangioma images may present various
features that provide a diagnostic challenge. We report a case of surface-based hemangioma of the radius that posed radiological diagnostic
difficulties. The tumor size was small and the cortical reaction was subtle. MRI findings were nonspecific and angiography was useful in the
assessment of painful but less obvious surface-based bone hemangioma. The patient’s pain improved following surgery and no tumor recurrence
was observed at 3 years after surgery. Surface-based bone hemangiomas are relatively rare benign soft tissue tumors, mostly occurring in
lower extremity long bones1,2). There have been a few case reports of upper extremity surface-based hemangioma of the ulna or humerus, but a
radius lesion has not been reported. Many of the lesions show localized cortical thickening and some cases show cortical erosion on plain
radiographs1). These hemangiomas can provide a diagnostic challenge radiographically, as the cortical reaction may mimic many different
lesions3). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) findings are nonspecific with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal
intensity on T2-weighted images. We report a case of recurrent surface-based hemangioma of the radius that posed radiological diagnostic
difficulties. A 22-year-old woman presented with left radial wrist pain that began 1 month earlier. She had a history of a resected
hemangioma of the wrist twice at the age of 9 years and 13 years at another hospital. There was a surgical scar on the radial part of the
flexor carpi radialis tendon, but there were no other abnormal physical findings. Radiographic examination of the distal radius metaphysis
demonstrated slight cortical bone thinning on the radial side (Fig. 1). MRI showed ambiguous lesions with low signal intensity on
T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images (Fig. 2). Angiography revealed a pooling of contrast medium along the
area of cortical thinning (Fig. 3). Pain increased and interfered with daily life 2 years after the first visit. Therefore, surgical
treatment was performed at the patient’s request 2 years and 4 months after the first visit. A second MRI examination was performed 1 month
before surgery; however, the findings were same as for the first MRI. A 15 × 7 × 3 mm blood-tinged multilocular cystic mass was identified
at the radial side of the distal radius metaphysis upon surgical exploration. The tumor was contained in the periosteum and was removed en-
block with the thickened periosteum (Fig. 4). Histologic examination confirmed a diagnosis of surface-based bone hemangioma (Fig. 5). The
patient had no pain and no signs of tumor recurrence on MRI and magnetic resonance angiography at 3 years and 3 months after surgery.
Anteroposterior radiographs of the left wrist, showing slight cortical bone thinning (arrows) of the radial side of the distal radius
metaphysis. Coronal T2-weighted magnetic resonance image of the left wrist, showing ambiguous lesions (arrows) with high signal intensity in
the area of cortical thinning. Angiography of the left wrist, showing the pooling of contrast media (arrows) along the area of cortical
thinning. 15 × 7 × 3 mm blood-tinged multilocular cystic tumor contained in the periosteum. Photomicrograph of the lesion, showing a
cavernous hemangioma with dilated, thin-walled vascular spaces that contain blood cells in the vicinity of the periosteum (hematoxylin-eosin
stain; magnification × 40). Surface-based bone hemangiomas are uncommon; there are approximately 30 previously reported cases, mostly
occurring in long bones of the lower extremities1,2). Bone hemangiomas are benign, malformed vascular lesions that account for less than 10%
of all hemangiomas. Bone hemangiomas usually occur in the medullary cavity of the vertebral body and skull, accounting for 75%, and in the
scapula, ribs, clavicle, and pelvic bones, accounting for an additional 15–20% of all cases4). Since most of these lesions are asymptomatic,
they are usually discovered incidentally on imaging examination. In contrast, bone hemangiomas of the extremities, though much less frequent
than the axial bones, are symptomatic in over 90% of cases2,5,6). Kaleem conducted a meticulous review of English-language medical
literature and found 39 cases of extremity bone hemangioma with detailed clinical data. Forty percent of the patients had pain alone, 37%
had pain associated with local swelling and or a mass, 7% had swelling alone, and 7% presented because of pathologic fractures2). Although
previous papers emphasized the extreme rarity of surface-based bone hemangiomas, these tumors may be more common than previously
reported3,7,8). Kaleem reported that the ratio of medullary lesions to surface-based lesions is three to one2). The largest single series of
surface-based lesions was reported by Devaney (11 cases). Among 22 cases (11 previously reported cases listed by Kaleem plus 11 cases
reported by Devaney), the tibia (8 cases) was the most frequent site of involvement, followed by the fibula (7 cases), ulna (3 cases), femur
(2 cases) and humerus (2 cases)1,2). To the best of our knowledge, there is no previously published case report of surface-based hemangioma
of the radius. Medullary lesions usually show circumscribed, lucent lesions with a soap bubble appearance. However the diagnosis of surface-
based lesions is often difficult, especially when the tumor size is small. On plain x-rays, surface-based lesions usually show localized
cortical thickening, while some cases show cortical erosion1). The periosteal reaction around the surface-based lesion, if present, offers
an excellent diagnostic clue. In the absence of the periosteal reaction, the cortical reaction can easily be missed, especially when the
finding is subtle, as seen in the presented case. Additionally, cortical thinning is not typically observed on radiography of surface-based
bone hemangioma. MRI findings are nonspecific, with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted
images, and the surface-based lesion always lacks bone marrow changes. Therefore, it can be overlooked when the lesion is extremely small.
In the presented case, the patient had a history of a resected hemangioma twice at the age of 9 years and 13 years. MRI images taken on two
independent occasions did not clearly depict a tumorous lesion in the area of cortical thinning. Therefore, we could not confirm tumor
recurrence until we carried out angiography. A blood-tinged multilocular cystic mass was confirmed at the contrast medium pooling area and
the histological diagnosis was surface-based bone hemangioma. Although contrast medium pooling along the thinned cortex was not obvious,
angiography findings were consistent with both macroscopic and microscopic findings. Reports in the literature indicate that there is a high
rate of recurrence after incomplete resection and emphasize the importance of en-block excision to prevent recurrence1,3). The patient
underwent twice surgical resection of the hemangioma at the radial side of the wrist and surface-based bone hemangioma was located in the
deep layer of a previous surgical wound this time. Therefore, this case was considered recurrence after incomplete resection. We strongly
believe that meticulous localization of the lesion with angiography is essential in the assessment of painful but less obvious surface-based
hemangioma of bones.
