We report a case of a chronic hemodialysis patient who developed hypermagnesemia due to an overdose of magnesium-containing laxative and
paralytic ileus resulting in colonic perforation. Despite intravenous calcium infusion and daily hemodialysis, the patient developed
ischemic colitis and intestinal perforation. Colonic perforation accompanied with hypermagnesemia in hemodialysis patients has rarely been
reported. This case suggests that hypermagnesemia should be considered in renal failure patients as this can result in life-threatening
events despite prompt treatment. Hypermagnesemia rarely accompanies acute symptoms.1 Severe symptomatic hypermagnesemia predominantly
results from excess exogenous magnesium intake in patients with renal failure1 or in patients with bowel disorders.2 Although severe
hypermagnesemia can be fatal, it is frequently overlooked. Here, we report a case of hypermagnesemia in a hemodialysis patient that
aggravated constipation and resulted in colonic perforation. A 62-year-old diabetic woman on chronic hemodialysis for 7 months was admitted
to our hospital because of general weakness and constipation for 1 week. She was bed-ridden for 1 month because of a fracture of L3-L4 spine
due to a pedestrian traffic accident. Her vital signs were within normal ranges, and she had no fever. Physical examination revealed soft
but distended abdomen and hypoactive bowel sounds. Plain abdominal radiographs showed large bowel distension with stool impaction (Fig. 1).
Laboratory data showed hemoglobin of 8.6 g/dL, hematocrit 25.8%, random glucose 258 mg/dL, blood urea nitrogen 24.8 mg/dL, serum creatinine
4.1 mg/dL, sodium 129 mEq/L, potassium 4.5 mEq/L, calcium 8.0 mg/dL, phosphorus 1.7 mg/dL, and C-reactive protein 48.1 mg/L. The serum
magnesium level was 3.0 mg/dL, and was 2.2 mg/dL 1 week ago (normal range, 1.8-2.6 mg/dL). She had taken magnesium-containing laxative
(magnesium hydroxide 1500 mg per day) for a month, which was prescribed by another clinic. Therefore, magnesium hydroxide was discontinued
and other laxatives were given. On the 3rd hospital day, the patient became lethargic and showed somnolence. Physical examination showed
generally hypoactive deep tendon reflex, abdominal distension with no bowel sounds, and severe tenderness on the lower abdomen. Her vital
signs were; blood pressure: 90/60 mm Hg, pulse rate: 90 beats/minute, and body temperature: 37.0℃. Electrocardiogram revealed normal sinus
rhythm. The serum magnesium level was rapidly increased to 6.0 mg/dL. Plain abdominal radiographs showed more distended large bowel loops
compared with those on admission. Computed tomography (CT) showed diffuse and marked dilatation of large bowel loops with fecal impaction,
compatible with megacolon. The clinical course and the serum magnesium level are shown in Fig. 2. Calcium gluconate was infused for a
temporary antagonizing effect of hypermagnesemia. Nasogastric tube and rectal tube were inserted for gastrointestinal decompression.
Hemodialysis was performed daily for hypermagnesemia correction. After three consecutive hemodialyses, the serum magnesium decreased to 3.3
mg/dL and vital signs became normal. The patient started to have bowel movements, and abdominal distension subsided slightly with
defecation. On the 11th hospital day, she complained of severe abdominal pain again. Diffuse abdominal tenderness and rebound tenderness
were noticed. She was hypotensive (blood pressure 90/50 mm Hg) with a rapid pulse of 100/minute and febrile (37.5℃). The serum magnesium
level was 3.1 mg/dL. Follow-up abdominal CT showed large air fluid levels in the upper pelvic cavity, representing gastrointestinal
perforation (Fig. 3). Emergent Hartmann's operation was performed. Operative finding was necrosis of the transverse colon and rectum, and
histologic findings were gangrenous colitis with microperforation and serosal abscess of the colon and rectum. After the operation, her
abdominal pain was resolved and vital signs became normal. Symptomatic hypermagnesemia is relatively rare because the proximal tubule and
the ascending limb of the Henle's loop are highly effective in regulating magnesium levels. Even in the presence of decreased renal
function, the serum magnesium level is regulated by a reduction in the gastrointestinal absorption of magnesium, which is in turn regulated
by high serum magnesium levels.3 Therefore, hypermagnesemia is most frequently seen in conjunction with renal insufficiency and ingestion of
magnesium-containing drugs or in patients with small bowel hypomotility disorder.3,4 Our case shows that hypermagnesemia is rapidly induced
by magnesium-containing drugs and bowel hypomotility in a hemodialysis patient, and that it can result in colonic perforation despite the
correction of hypermagnesemia. Our patient had taken magnesium hydroxide for several months, but the serum magnesium level was within normal
range prior to admission. On admission, she complained of aggravated constipation, and the serum magnesium level was 3.0 mg/dL. Despite the
discontinuation of magnesium hydroxide, the plasma magnesium concentration was rapidly increased. We postulate that the immobility due to
the late-onset lumbar fracture decreased the bowel motility and aggravated the constipation. Since the major gastrointestinal site for
magnesium absorption is the upper small bowel5,6 and it occurs mainly through passive diffusion,2 bowel hypomotility may have resulted in a
longer stay of magnesium-containing laxative in the intestine and the intestinal absorption of magnesium was enhanced. Hypermagnesemia can
decrease bowel motility by blocking myenteric neurons and interfering with excitation-contraction coupling of smooth muscle cells.5 In
addition, hypermagnesemia can block the peripheral and autonomic nervous system via antagonization of calcium effects, suppression of
acetylcholine release, and reduction of postsynaptic membrane responsiveness, and depress the conduction system of the heart and sympathetic
ganglia.7 Therefore, in this case, hypermagnesemia aggravated constipation and abruptly induced megacolon, hyporeflexia, somnolence, and
hypotension. Our patient developed somnolence and hypotension at a peak magnesium concentration of 6.0 mg/dL, which are usually seen when
the magnesium concentration is above 7.2 mg/dL.8 Moreover, the paralytic effect of hypermagnesemia on the intestinal smooth muscle is rarely
seen in clinical practice. A literature search of English-language journals was carried out using the National Library of Medicine PubMed on
the internet, by employing the terms "hypermagnesemia", "ileus" or "perforation", and "case report". Four reports regarding hypermagnesemia-
induced ileus or perforation were identified (Table 1).9-12 A comparison between our case and these cases showed that the peak serum
magnesium concentration does not correlate with mortality or the severity of intestinal complication. Prolonged hypotension and a pressure
effect of fecal impaction on intestinal circulation can induce intestinal ischemia. Since our patient had suffered from constipation with
severe fecal impaction, she might have had impaired intestinal circulation, and the hypotension on the 3rd hospital day could have
accelerated the ischemic colitis. Although bowel motility and cardiac compromise were gradually improved, colonic perforation developed due
to prolonged ischemic colitis. This case shows that hypermagnesemia manifests severe neurologic, cardiovascular, and intestinal
complications in a hemodialysis patient. It is important to promptly correct hypermagnesemia, hypermagnesemia, since it can result in life-
threatening events. This report was approved by the Institutional Review Board of the Catholic University of Korea (OC12ZISE0018). This
research was supported by Basic Science Research Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of
Education, Science and Technology (20110013312). The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Abdominal plain radiograph shows
diffuse and marked dilatation of large bowel loops with fecal impaction. Clinical course of the patient. DTR, deep tendon reflex. Abdominal
CT scan reveals large air fluid levels (arrows) in abdominal cavity. Cases of Hypermagnesemia-Induced Paralytic Ileus and Perforation
(Literature Search from English-Language Journals) Mg, magnesium; Cr, creatinine; M, male; F, female; DTR, deep tendon reflex.
