Corresponding author: Hirofumi Oyama, MD. Department of Neurosurgery, Ogaki Municipal Hospital, Minaminokawa-cho4-86, Ogaki, Gifu 503-8502,
Japan Phone:0584-81-3341; Fax: 0584-75-5715; E-mail: oya3776@arrow.ocn.ne.jp To clarify the effect of surgery on the prevention cerebral
hemorrhage in adult moyamoya disease, we compared postoperative courses between superficial temporal artery-middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA)
anastomosis and conservative therapy. The study subjects were 30 adults with moyamoya disease. Unilateral STA-MCA anastomosis was conducted
in 7 of these 30 cases, and bilateral STA-MCA anastomosis was conducted in 8 of these 30 cases. Therefore, anastomosis was performed in a
total of 23 sides. The postoperative clinical course was observed for more than 5 years after the STA-MCA anastomosis. Cerebral hemorrhage
occurred after operation in 2 sides (8.7%) among the 23 sides that received STA-MCA anastomosis. On the contrary, hemorrhage occurred during
conservative therapy in 5 sides (13.5%) among 37 non-operation sides (no significance in χ2 test). Cerebral infarction occurred in 3 sides
(13%) among 23 sides treated with STA-MCA anastomosis. However, the infarction occurred in 2 sides (5.4%) among the 37 non-operation sides
(no significance in χ2 test). Cerebral hemorrhage tended to occur less frequently after STA-MCA anastomosis, and bypass surgery was
suggested to have some beneficial effect in preventing cerebral hemorrhage in adult moyamoya disease. However, it was revealed that STA-MCA
anastomosis exacerbated the brain ischemia. Therefore, strict management is mandatory in the perioperative period. Cerebral hemorrhage is a
major problem in adult moyamoya disease along with cerebral infarction. Superficial temporal artery-middle cerebral artery (STA-MCA)
anastomosis has been attempted for the prevention of cerebral hemorrhage; however, its effectiveness is unclear. To clarify the effect of
operation on the prevention of cerebral hemorrhage in adult moyamoya disease, we compared postoperative courses between STA-MCA anastomosis
and conservative therapy. The study subjects were 30 adults with moyamoya disease. The onset was TIA in 6 cases, cerebral infarction in 5
cases, cerebral hemorrhage in 8 cases, intraventricular hemorrhage in 4 cases, convulsion in 3 cases, depression in 1 case, and other
symptoms in 3 cases. Unilateral STA-MCA anastomosis was performed for 7 of these 30 cases. Bilateral STA-MCA anastomosis was conducted for 8
cases, and therefore, anastomosis was performed on a total of 23 sides. The postoperative clinical course was observed for more than 5 years
after STA-MCA anastomosis. Cerebral hemorrhage occurred after the operation in 2 sides (8.7%) among 23 sides treated with STA-MCA
anastomosis. (Table 1) These 2 patients had shown cerebral hemorrhage (1 case) and intraventricular hemorrhage (1 case) at the onset. On the
contrary, hemorrhage occurred during conservative therapy in 5 sides (13.5%) among 37 non-operation sides (no significance in χ2 test).
These 5 patients had shown cerebral hemorrhage (2 cases), intraventricular hemorrhage (2 cases) and transient ischemic attack (TIA) (1 case)
at the onset. Cerebral infarction occurred in 3 sides (13%) among 23 sides treated with STA-MCA anastomosis. (Table 2) These 3 patients had
shown cerebral infarction (1 case), cerebral hemorrhage (1 case) and convulsion (1 case) at the onset. On the contrary, infarction occurred
in 2 sides (5.4%) among 37 non-operation sides (no statistical significance in χ2 test). These 2 patients had shown TIA (1 case) and
convulsion (1 case) at the onset. The STA-MCA anastomosis operation was performed for 3 out of 6 patients with TIA. For one among the 3
patients operated on, TIA disappeared. Another patient suffered from chronic subdural hematoma in the operated side. Cerebral hemorrhage in
the side of STA-MCA anastomosis and the non-operation side. Cerebral hemorrhage happened after operation in 2 sides (8.7%) among 23 sides of
STA-MCA anastomosis. On the contrary, hemorrhage occurred during conservative therapy in 5 sides (13.5%) among 37 non-operation sides (no
significance in χ2 test). Cerebral infarction in the side of STA-MCA anastomosis and the non-operation side. Cerebral infarction occurred in
3 sides (13%) among 23 sides of STA-MCA anastomosis. On the contrary, infarction developed in 2 sides (5.4%) among 37 non-operation sides
(no significance in χ2 test). The patient was a 42-year-old female, who suffered from left hemiparesis and became comatose when she was 17
years old. Brain CT scan revealed ventricular hemorrhage, and cerebral angiography showed moyamoya disease. She was later treated with
ventricular drainage and a ventriculo-peritoneal shunt. An STA-MCA anastomosis operation was performed on both sides 6 months after the
first attack, and she had been in an independent condition thereafter. The second attack happened 25 years after the first one. She
presented with nausea, dizziness and right hemiparesis, and suffered from incomplete right hemiparesis and conjugate deviation to the left
side upon admission. Brain CT scan showed left putaminal hemorrhage. (Fig. 1) Cerebral angiography revealed that the collateral flow via
STA-MCA anastomosis and middle meningial artery was poor on the left side, compared with the right side. (Fig. 2) The moyamoya vessels
developed more prominently on the left side than the right side. She was treated conservatively and eventually walked independently, but
marked aphasia remained. This case seems to show that poor revascularization and remaining moyamoya vessel are related with cerebral
hemorrhage. It is suggested that decreasing the moyamoya vessels by adequate revascularization will be effective for preventing cerebral
hemorrhage in the future. Brain CT scan 2 days after second admission. It showed left putaminal hemorrhage. Cerebral angiography 5 days
after second attack. Left cerebral angiography (A, lateral view) and right cerebral angiography (B, lateral view). They revealed that
collateral flow via STA-MCA anastomosis (arrow) and middle meningial artery (double arrow) was poor on the left side, compared with the
right side. The moyamoya vessels (arrowhead) developed more prominently on left side than right side. In bypass surgery for moyamoya
disease, rebleeding was less likely to occur in patients who had undergone bypass or some other revascularization surgery.1) The rebleeding
rate was 19.1% in the bypass surgery group in contrast to 28.3% in the conservative treatment group (no significance).2) Rebleeding was
observed in 12.5% of patients who underwent bypass surgery and in 38.5% of patients who did not (no significance).3) In the current series,
cerebral hemorrhage occurred in 8.7% of STA-MCA anastomosis sides in contrast to 13.5% of non-operation sides. Cerebral hemorrhage tended to
occur less frequently after STA-MCA anastomosis and bypass surgery was suggested to have some beneficial effect in preventing cerebral
hemorrhage in adult moyamoya disease. However, it was revealed that STA-MCA anastomosis caused poor results for those with brain ischemia.
Cerebral infarction occurred in 3 sides (13%) among 23 sides treated with STA-MCA anastomosis. On the contrary, infarction occurred in 2
sides (5.4%) among 37 non-operation sides. It was reported that the risk of infarction after revascularization was 1.8%.1) Another report
mentioned that 20% of patients presented with an ischemic event during the follow-up period after encephalo-duro-arterio-synangiosis.4)
Strict management is mandatory to prevent ischemic events in the perioperative period.
