We present a 62-year-old man with mitral regurgitation whose posterior annulus had severe calcification. Mitral valve replacement was
performed by anchoring the cuff on a double-plicated posterior leaflet, and reinforcing with an equine pericardium. The patient is doing
well 13 years after surgery with echocardiography showing no problems. Mitral regurgitation (MR) with severe mitral annular calcification
(MAC) forces surgeons into a difficult situation when deciding on a surgical method. Many authors have described specific mitral valve
replacement (MVR) methods for MAC. Although managing a patient to prevent complications in the early postoperative phase is important, long-
term stability without recurrence of MR is the bottom line for a patient’s quality of life, even with MAC. We were able to obtain good
results 13 years after an atypical valve operation. This report evaluates the operation and the results. A 62-year-old man (height 156.7 cm,
weight 43.8 kg, body surface area 1.40 m2) presented at our affiliated National Hospital Organization Saitama Hospital in September 1999
with orthopnea after 2 months of dyspnea on exertion and palpitation. He had histories of hypertension and brain infarction. He was
hospitalized with a diagnosis of MR and atrial fibrillation. After treating acute heart failure, he was scheduled for surgery in November
1999. Preoperative transesophageal echocardiography revealed severe MR due to chordae rupture of the posterior medial scallop with serious
MAC (Figure 1A,B). (A) Preoperative transesophageal echocardiogram revealed serious mitral annular calcification. (B) Doppler echocardiogram
revealed severe mitral regurgitation due to chordae rupture of the posterior medial scallop. MAC: mitral annular calcification; LA: left
atrium; LV: left ventricle. Operative findings for the mitral valve were degeneration of the posterior medial scallop in the prolapsed area,
and severe annular calcification of the posterior leaflet (Figure 2A). MVR was decided due to degeneration and existence of MAC. Anterior
leaflet was resected, leaving the posterior leaflet preserved. 2–0 polyester pledgeted mattress sutures were placed on the posterior leaflet
itself to plicate it twice. Most of the sutures did not penetrate the MAC, leaving it intact (Figure 2B). The sutures were passed through an
equine pericardium, and then through the cuff of a standard 25-mm Carbomedics Mitral Valve (Sulzer Carbomedics Inc., Austin, TX, USA). The
equine pericardium was sutured to the left atrial wall (LA) with 4–0 polypropylene running stitches to cover the MAC (Figure 2C). The
anterior side of the artificial valve was sutured to the annulus with conventional everting mattress stitches. (A) Degeneration of posterior
medial scallop and annular calcification of posterior leaflet were noticed. Anterior leaflet was resected. (B) Posterior leaflet was
plicated twice, and the sutures were passed through an equine pericardium. (C) The prosthetic valve was fixed with the above-mentioned
sutures in the posterior area, and in the conventional everting manner in the anterior area. The equine pericardium was sutured to the left
atrial wall to cover the annular calcification. AL: anterior leaflet; PL: posterior leaflet; MAC: mitral annular calcification; EP: equine
pericardium; P: pledgets; PV: prosthetic valve. Figure 3A shows a cross-sectional view of the sutured posterior leaflet area. The plicated
posterior leaflet and the equine pericardium are placed under and outside the cuff in order not to obstruct closure of the disc. (A) Cross-
sectional view of our operation using a standard prosthetic mitral valve. The area around the posterior leaflet and the annular
calcification is shown. (B) The systolic phase in the parasternal long-axis view of the two-dimensional echocardiogram, taken more than
12 years after surgery, shows no perivalvular leakage. AV: aortic valve; C: cuff; D: disc; P: pledget; EP: equine pericardium; PL: posterior
leaflet; MAC: mitral annular calcification; LA: left atrial wall; LV: left ventricular wall. Post-operative course was without significant
problems. Since discharge, he has been followed-up for 13 years. He is enjoying a normal life without major symptoms. A recent transthoracic
echocardiogram showed no perivalvular leakage (Figure 3B) and no problems around the pericardial patch. This is a report on an operative
technique for managing MAC, which emphasizes durability, and on long-term follow-up over a period of 13 years. The results of recent
echocardiography around the prosthetic valve were excellent, and the patient is doing very well. Few reports of such a long-term follow-up
after this type of surgery have been published. MVR methods for MR with MAC can be divided into 2 types. One is a technique that attempts to
resect MAC as much as possible, and the other leaves MAC intact by devising a method for suturing the prosthesis. Surgery to resect MAC is
often challenging because calcification is often deep, and there is a probable risk when excavating the area around the posterior atrio-
ventricular groove of rupture, injury to circumflex artery, and thrombo-embolic events . To prevent these events, ultrasonic debridement is
often used, and methods such as using autologous or equine pericardium , and transferring the anterior leaflet to the posterior area are
adopted. The best way to prevent these disadvantages when resecting MAC is to leave it intact, and to develop new methods of suturing the
prosthetic valve. Many reports have been published on possible solutions such as: suturing the prosthesis to the LA itself , developing a
collar for the prosthesis , using the leaflets to secure the prosthesis , plicating both mitral leaflets and the LA to create a new annulus
, and using a Dacron graft between the LA and the prosthesis. The advantages of our method are that folding the posterior leaflet twice
creates a new annulus above the MAC, and using the equine pericardium reinforces the suture and acts as a preventive sheet to avoid
perivalvular leakage. By preserving the posterior leaflet, the subvalvular apparatus is also maintained. Our method of suturing the
prosthesis to the posterior leaflet is similar to that of Di Stefano et al. , who plicated the mitral leaflets and the atrial wall to create
a new annulus. Although we used only the equine pericardium-covered posterior leaflet as a new annulus, we plicated the leaflet twice. This
made the leaflet more solid and suitable as an anchor for suturing the prosthesis. Equine pericardium was used to reinforce this anchor
because the leaflet alone might not be structurally sufficient even if plicated twice. Feindel et al. used pericardium to reconstruct the
MAC resected area and to create a new annulus for MVR. Our usage of pericardium is similar to them in the aspect of being a part of the new
annulus for MVR, but different from them in the aspect of constituting the new annulus together with the posterior leaflet. We must mention
that this operation was performed in only 1 patient. Although long-term durability of the procedure was proven in the presented case,
multiple experiences using the procedure are needed for further evaluation. In summary of the presented case, using the double-plicated
posterior leaflet as an anchor in MVR and equine pericardium as a reinforcement resulted in an excellent long-term outcome for MR with MAC.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images. The authors declare that
they have no conflicts of interests. ST and TN contributed to the pre-operative planning and operation of the case. All authors contributed
to following up the case. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
