This report describes the histopathological findings in a patient with Acanthamoeba sclerokeratitis (ASK). A 58-year-old patient with ASK
underwent enucleation and sections of the cornea and sclera were subjected to histopathology and immunohistochemistry with monoclonal mouse
antihuman antibodies against T cell CD3 and B cell CD20 antigens. Hematoxylin and Eosin stained sections of the cornea revealed epithelial
ulceration, Bowman's membrane destruction, stromal vascularization, infiltration with lymphocytes, plasma cells, and granulomatous
inflammation with multinucleated giant cells (MNGC). The areas of scleritis showed complete disruption of sclera collagen, necrosis and
infiltration with neutrophils, macrophages, lymphocytes, and granulomatous inflammation with MNGC. No cyst or trophozoites of Acanthamoeba
were seen in the cornea or sclera. Immunophenotyping revealed that the population of lymphocytes was predominantly of T cells. Granulomatous
inflammation in ASK is probably responsible for the continuance and progression of the scleritis and management protocols should include
immunosuppressive agents alongside amoebicidal drugs. Acanthamoeba sclerokeratitis (ASK) is uncommon but sight threatening complication of
Acanthamoeba keratitis. It is presumed to be either an immune-mediated, or infective process or both. This uncertainty has hindered
formulation of effective management guidelines and the outcome of this condition often remains poor. We report the histopathological
findings in the cornea and sclera in a case of ASK, who had undergone enucleation for recalcitrant disease. A healthy, 58-year-old farmer,
who presented a month after onset of symptoms following trauma during agriculture-work, had been diagnosed with Acanthamoeba keratitis on
the basis of typical ring-shaped corneal ulcer [Fig. 1a] and detection of the characteristic double walled cysts of Acanthamoeba on direct
microscopy [Fig. 1b]. Treatment was with topical polyhexamethylene biguanide 0.02% 1 hourly, chlorhexidine 0.02% 1 hourly, atropine sulfate
1% TID, and oral ibuprofen 400 mg TID after food. Six weeks after presentation, he complained of increasing pain. On examination in addition
to earlier findings there were engorged episcleral vessels nasally and globe was tender. He was advised to continue the topical amoebicidal
drugs. Two weeks later he returned with severe pain. His vision was perception of light with accurate projection of rays. Slit-lamp
examination revealed central ring-shaped infiltrate, peripheral guttering, vascularization, blood-stained hypopyon, and diffuse anterior
scleritis in the supero-nasal quadrant [Fig. 1c]. Intraocular pressure was digitally normal. B-scan ultrasonography was normal. A diagnosis
of ASK was made and oral Prednisolone 60 mg daily (1 mg/kg body weight) was added. Random blood sugar was normal. Over the next few weeks
scleral inflammation increased whenever the steroids were tapered and therefore the initial dose was continued. Eight weeks after diagnosis
of ASK he was suddenly lost to follow-up. He returned 2 months later with severe pain. The reason he gave for his absence was development of
diabetes mellitus, sudden worsening of his general health, and hospitalization elsewhere. The oral steroids were stopped and in course of
time the topical drugs had exhausted. On examination vision was perception of light with inaccurate projection of rays. There was diffuse
anterior scleritis and staphyloma in the superior quadrants [Fig. 2d]. B-scan ultrasonography revealed only multiple low echoreflective
point-like opacities in the vitreous cavity. Because of the poor visual prognosis, debilitated systemic condition, and intractable pain the
eye was enucleated and sent for histopathology. (a) Slit-lamp photograph showing ring ulcer and hypopyon with no scleral involvement. (b)
Gram-stained light microscopy picture of corneal scraping showing typical double walled structures of Acanthamoeba cysts (arrows). (c) Slit-
lamp photograph showing ring infiltrate in the cornea with peripheral guttering, vascularization, and hemorrhagic hypopyon and deeply
congested and boggy sclera superiorly indicating scleritis. (d) Slit-lamp photograph prior to enucleation showing persistent corneal
infiltrate, scarring, staphylomatous changes in the superior nasal quadrant, and active scleritis (a) Histopathological section of the
cornea-scleral rim showing disrupted collagen lamellae, necrosis, infiltration with lymphocytes, neutrophils, giant cells, and
neovascularization (H and E stain, ×100) (b) Section of the sclera in high magnification showing granulomatous inflammation with
multinucleated giant cells (arrow). (H and E stain, ×400) (c) Section showing immunopositive staining (brown) that is positive for T cell
marker CD 3 while (d) negative for B cell marker CD 20 (no brown staining) (DAB chromogen counterstained with H and E stain, ×400) Gross
examination of the eye-ball revealed an ulcerated area in the cornea and an area of thinning with staphylomatous projection measuring 15 ×
11 mm in the superior limbus between 11 and 2 o’clock positions. The eye-ball was grossed vertically to include the affected sclera and
cornea, and the calotte was submitted for processing. Histopathology sections of the cornea stained with Hematoxylin and Eosin revealed
epithelial ulceration with destruction of Bowman's layer. The stroma showed chronic infiltration with lymphocytes, plasma cells, and
vascularization in anterior two-thirds. There was granulomatous reaction in the mid and deep stroma with prominent multinucleated giant
cells (MNGC). The Descemet membrane was fragmented. The area of scleritis showed complete disruption of collagen, necrosis, neutrophils,
lymphoplasmocytic cells, and florid granulomatous reaction with prominent MNGCs [Figs. 2a and b]. No trophozoites or cysts of Acanthamoeba
in the sclera were seen even with periodic acid-Schiff stain. Immunohistochemistry was performed using monoclonal mouse antihuman antibodies
(Dako, Denmark) against T cell CD3 and B cell CD 20 antigen. The inflammatory cells in the areas of granulomatous reaction were positive for
T-cell marker CD3 [Fig. 2c] and negative for B-cell marker [Fig. 2d]. Granulomatous inflammation is seen commonly in chronic infections with
persistent infectious agents, noninfectious conditions like foreign bodies (silica, suture materials), autoimmune diseases, and uncommonly
in some acute infections. It is characterized by the granuloma, the function of which is to contain the pathogen, thereby preventing its
dissemination and restricting the inflammation to protect surrounding healthy tissue. However chronic granulomatous inflammation can cause
significant and severe damage to surrounding tissues in the form of tissue necrosis and fibrosis. Granulomatous inflammation has previously
been reported in Acanthamoeba keratitis. Its mechanism in corneal infections is presumed to be either an immunological response to host
antigens that becomes altered and or exposed by the infective and inflammatory processes, or a response to antigens from the infectious
agent itself. Lee et al., proposed that ASK is purely an immune-mediated process on the basis of few available case reports that did not
detect the organism from the sclera, and on the belief that the organism rarely invades extra-corneal tissue. For many years there was only
one published report documenting scleral invasion of Acanthamoeba, and only recently was another case report published. It is interesting
that in both cases the organism was isolated from biopsy taken during the acute stages and the organism was not detected later when the eye
was enucleated. The failure to detect the organism in other reports and in our case could be due to the timing of the biopsy. It is possible
that in the late stages of ASK, no viable organisms remain and the clinical picture then is only due to persisting inflammation. In our
patient T cells were detected predominantly in areas of granulomatous inflammation. This is in contrast to previous reports where
lymphocytes were not observed in corneal tissue sections in cases of Acanthamoeba keratitis. Granulomatous inflammation is known to be
initiated by antigen-specific and non-specific T cells which are not only responsible for the recruitment of macrophages to the site of
invasion but also the release of various chemokines and cytokines like osteopontin and tumor necrosis factor. The role of cell-mediated
immunity and delayed hypersensitivity responses in ASK needs further investigation. The onset of scleritis may be masked by the keratitis
leading to delay in diagnosis and treatment. Severe pain, globe tenderness, engorged episcleral vessels, anterior uveitis, and scleral
thickening on ultrasonography in any patient of Acanthamoeba keratitis should raise suspicion for scleritis. In case laboratory diagnosis
with routine microscopy, culture or biopsy is inconclusive, polymerase chain reaction may be helpful although this is often not widely
available. It is difficult to identify risk factors because ASK is not common and few reports exists in the literature. Possible risk
factors proposed have been overwhelming corneal infection and the use of topical steroids. Our patient did not give history of topical
steroid use prior to presentation. Favorable outcome is reported with the concurrent use of amoebicidal and immunosuppressive drugs. It
appears from previously published reports and findings in our study that in the initial stages an infective process dominates while in the
later stages the inflammatory responses dominate. Granulomatous inflammation probably plays an important role in initiation and continuation
of the inflammatory component of the disease process. The outcome in our patient could have been different if ASK was detected initially,
had he not been lost to follow-up or diabetes had not developed or if detected early, steroid sparing immunosuppressive agents had been
used. In conclusion the findings of an underlying immune-mediated mechanism in our study provides support to the proposition of including
the use of immunosuppressive agents alongside amoebicidal drugs in the treatment of ASK. Source of Support: Nil, Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
