One-step apexification using mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) has been reported as an alternative treatment modality with more benefits than
the use of long-term calcium hydroxide for teeth with open apex. However, orthograde placement of MTA is a challenging procedure in terms of
length control. This case series describes the sequence of events following apical extrusion of MTA into the periapical area during a one-
step apexification procedure for maxillary central incisor with an infected immature apex. Detailed long-term observation revealed complete
resolution of the periapical radiolucent lesion around the extruded MTA. These cases revealed that direct contact with MTA had no negative
effects on healing of the periapical tissues. However, intentional MTA overfilling into the periapical lesion is not to be recommended. When
an infected or traumatized immature tooth has vital pulps, the general consensus for clinical treatment is to preserve normal pulp tissue by
using traditional apexogenesis or recent alternative revascularization to allow complete formation of the root.1,2,3 The success rate for
the apexogenesis was reported as high as 92%.4 On the other hand, a completion of the root filling may be facilitated by inducing a hard
tissue apical barrier for those teeth with non-vital pulps. There have been many attempts to achieve an apical barrier for the incompletely
formed apex, a process also known as apexification. The longest advocated medicament for apexification has been Ca(OH)2 (calcium
hydroxide).5,6,7 Although the clinical success rates for Ca(OH)2 apexification is high, complications like risk of re-infection and root
fracture has gradually steered clinician toward the use of alternative material such as mineral trioxide aggregate (MTA) as an apical
barrier.8,9,10 Successful outcome of MTA apexification has been reported.11 The essence of this treatment approach lies in the expedient
cleaning and shaping of the root canal system, followed by replacement of an apical seal with a material that is amenable to tissue healing
and regeneration.12,13 Patients benefitted from this treatment approach.14,15 MTA apexification may be performed as a one- or two-visit
procedure and alleviate the need for extended period of dressing with Ca(OH)2. This technique also allows for immediate restoration and
reduces the potential of catastrophic, vertical or oblique root fracture that often affects such teeth.16 Obtaining an optimal apical seal
in teeth with immature apices is a challenge because the wide apical foramen requires a large volume of filling material that may extrude
into the periradicular tissue initiating the foreign-body reactions.5 The lack of an apical step or seat also contributes to the apical
extrusion of the material. Special placement techniques, using manual,17 ultrasonic18 or ultrasonic-assisted hand delivery for MTA19 have
been suggested to minimize extrusion of the material. Despite this, difficulties in delivering and filling the canal with MTA material from
an orthograde direction have been reported.17,20 Apical extrusion of the material sometimes occurs. While favorable clinical outcomes from
one-visit MTA apexification have been reported,21,22,23 in complete closure of the immature apex was observed in the case of overfilling.24
On the other hand, there is no long-term report of cases with MTA extruded into the periapical lesion. This report presented a series of
cases with apical extrusion of MTA into the periradicular lesion during the one-step apexification procedure of maxillary central incisors
with an immature or resorbed apex and their long-term clinical outcome. A 15-year-old male was referred to a dental teaching hospital for
the management of a large periapical lesion on the right maxillary incisor (tooth #11) in 2006. Clinical examination revealed a labial
swelling and tenderness to percussion associated with tooth #11. Periapical radiograph showed a wide open, incompletely formed apex
surrounded by a radiolucent lesion of approximately 20 mm in diameter. The patient reported a history of trauma involving the central
incisor 5 years before. The tooth was diagnosed as pulp necrosis with acute exacerbation of a chronic apical abscess. Non-surgical root
canal therapy of tooth #11 was initiated. After rubber dam isolation, the central incisor cavity was accessed; hemorrhagic, purulent exudate
was seen discharging from the root canal. Working length was determined using both electronic apical locator (e-Magic Finder; S-Denti,
Cheonan, Korea) and intraoral digital radiograph (Figure 1a). The canal was prepared using hand and rotary instruments, with 5.25% sodium
hypochlorite (NaClO) and ethylene diaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA). as irrigants. The dimension of master apical file could not be confirmed
because the apical foramen measured greater than size 140. A water-based Ca(OH)2 paste (Calcipex II; J. Morita, Osaka, Japan) was placed as
medicament for 2 weeks. In the next visit, the canal was thoroughly irrigated with 5.25% NaClO, dried and filled with MTA (ProRoot MTA;
Dentsply Tulsa Dental Specialties, Johnson City, TN, USA) for an apical step. The material was mixed according to the manufacturer's
directions and carried to root canal with an amalgam carrier. Small increments of MTA were delivered apically using a size 120 gutta-percha
cone and plugged to 4 mm short of working length, followed by paper points to remove excess moisture. This procedure was repeated until a
3–4 mm thickness of the apical MTA plug was obtained, guided by tactile sensation and measurement on paper points. Digital radiographs
(PDX1000; PointNix, Seoul, Korea) were taken to monitor the progress. In spite of these efforts to control the length of MTA placement, an
extrusion of the MTA beyond the apex was detected (Figure 1b and 1c). The remaining canal space was obturated with MTA, patient and his
parents were informed of the extrusion, and the patient scheduled for follow-up. The patient was reviewed every week for 1 month, and then
every 6 month. After about 1 year, the extruded MTA appeared to have shifted in its location (Figure 1d). At the final recall after 36
months, a significant reduction of periapical radiolucent lesion was noted and the overfilled MTA was completely surrounded by bony (or
bone-like) tissues (Figure 1e). A 36-year-old male was referred to the same teaching hospital for endodontic re-treatment of the right
maxillary incisor (tooth #11) in 2006. The chief complaint was discomfort of tooth #11 with a history of intermittent swelling on the labial
aspect. He presented a root canal treatment on that tooth 9 years ago. Medical history was not contributory. Clinical examination showed
that the tooth was tender to percussion, and a sinus tract was present on the labial vestibule that was traced to the apical area of 21.
Radiographically, tooth #11 had a periapical rarefaction, measured approximately 11 mm (width)×15 mm (height), with a resorbed apex (Figure
2a). A diagnosis of chronic apical abscess was made and nonsurgical re-treatment of tooth #11 planned. After access cavity preparation, the
gutta-percha was removed using gates-glidden drill and ProFile rotary instruments. Canal was instrumented with K-files to size #55,
irrigated with 5.25% NaClO and dressed with Ca(OH)2. At the second visit, the sinus tract had resolved and the tooth asymptomatic. However,
tissue fluid exudate was still present in the root canal. Thus, irrigation and dressing was repeated at this visit. Ten days later, only a
trace amount of exudates could be blotted by paper point, and a one-step apexification with MTA as apical barrier was performed. MTA
(ProRoot MTA; Dentsply Tulsa Dental Specialties, Johnson City, TN, USA) was delivered to the apical 3 mm of the canal using an amalgam
carrier and then downpacked with measured endodontic pluggers under an operating dental microscope (Pico; Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany). A
large paper points were used to remove excess moisture. A couple of radiographs were taken to determine the positioning of the MTA, which
revealed a mass of MTA present in the periapical radiolucency (Figure 2b and 2c). The tooth was restored with dentine-bonded composite and
the patient was informed about the possibility of surgical intervention. Patient came back for 1-month recall, but reported no episodes of
discomfort and/or swelling. Further periapical radiographs were taken at 3 (Figure 2d), 14 (not shown) and 36 months (not shown) to evaluate
the periapical condition. Gradual healing of the periapical rarefaction was noted. At the 54-month follow-up, osseous repair and a
continuous lamina dura-like structure could be observed along with the extruded MTA (Figure 2e). Clinical examination revealed the absence
of clinical signs and symptoms with adequate function. A 16-year-old female student was referred to the Samsung Medical Center for treatment
of a large periapical pathosis associated with the left maxillary central incisor (tooth #21) in December 2006. She presented a history of
trauma to this #21 tooth about 10 years ago. She complained of tenderness on palpation at the vestibular area. On examination, a sinus tract
was noted between teeth #21 and #22 near the mucogingival junction. Periapical radiograph revealed an incompletely formed, open apex of
tooth #21 with a large periapical lesion of 15 mm in diameter. The sinus tract was traced but could not differentiate the origin (Figure
3a). Electric pulp testing revealed that the #22 tooth was vital. A diagnosis of chronic apical abscess of tooth #21 was made and non-
surgical re-treatment with MTA apexification was planned. After isolating the tooth #21, access to its root canal was gained, and then the
working length determined with the use of digital radiograph and electronic apex locator (Root-ZX; Morita, Tokyo, Japan). The canal was
cleaned chemomechanically using hand and rotary instruments, irrigated with 5.25% NaClO and EDTA. The dimension of the apical foramen was
larger than size 140. A water-based calcium hydroxide paste (Calcipex II; J. Morita, Osaka, Japan) was placed using lentulospirals to the
working length as medicament. One week later, the canal of this #21 tooth was copiously irrigated with 5% NaClO, dried with sterilized paper
points and obturated with MTA (ProRoot MTA; Dentsply Tulsa Dental Specialities, Johnson City, TN, USA) as a one-step apexification, with a
procedure described for in Case 1. Despite considerable care during MTA plugging, there was some extrusion of MTA into the periapical lesion
(Figure 3b). The rest of the root canal was obturated with thermoplasticized injectable gutta-percha (Obtura II; Obtura-Spartan, Fenton, MO,
USA) and the access cavity was restored with a composite resin. The patient was scheduled for follow-up. After 8 months (August 2007), the
patient presented with no symptoms. Periapical radiograph showed decrease in size of the periapical radiolucency (Figure 3c). Thereafter, at
12-, 24- and 36-month recall, the patient was free from any signs and symptoms. There was a radiolucent halo with irregular margin around
the extruded MTA on the 24-month recall radiograph (Figure 3d). The 48-month radiograph showed complete healing of the periapical lesion
with the extruded MTA intermingled with regenerated bone with a periodontal ligament-like space between them (Figure 3e). Conservative
approaches of apexogenesis or revascularization have been advocate for the treatment of vital immature teeth with apical periodontitis.
Meanwhile, in the case of non-vital teeth with incompletely formed apex, one- or two-step MTA apical barrier technique can be introduced as
an alternative to calcium hydroxide apexification. From a clinical perspective, MTA has a unique advantage for the treatment of immature
teeth because one of the problems often found in those cases is the presence of tissue fluid or exudation into the canals.25 MTA is able to
set in the presence of moisture. When it was used as an apical barrier, it can stimulate the cells to differentiate into hard tissue-forming
cells to produce a hard tissue matrix. Masuda et al.26 reported that MTA does not produce any adverse effect on microcirculation of the
connective tissues. Torabinejad et al.27 also demonstrated that MTA implanted into the animal bone resulted in minimal inflammatory
reactions with favorable bone healing with direct bone apposition. However, these results from these animal studies, although favorable,
cannot justify the any deliberate placement of MTA into the periapical tissue obturation material preferably should be confines within the
root canal system, because extrusion can reduce decreased the chance of success of endodontic treatment.28 In an effort to prevent
extrusion, practicing the placement of this material in artificial canals would be very helpful in developing clinical skills. For the
present case series, unfortunately, a considerable amount of MTA was extruded into the apical lesion during placement. It may be speculated
that the MTA might be dislodged through the wide apical foramen or be pushed actively beyond apical foramen. The healing outcomes of these
three cases are very similar. The extruded MTA seems to have been compressed and/or resorbed slightly and moved down (to gravitational
direction) from original location. Regardless of the final location of the detached MTA, favorable healing around this material was
observed. These healing responses were remarkably favorable when considering that the prognosis of overfilling with common root canal
filling materials is generally poor.24,28 According to Holland et al.,28 there would be cell adhesion and differentiation with consequent
deposition of hard tissue by the periapical tissue opposing the MTA, with biological closure of the apical foramen as well as absence of
inflammation in the periapical tissues. The outcomes of these present cases mirrored the results from animal studies well. A resorbable
matix has been suggested for the easy length control and for prevention of overfilling.29 The use of calcium sulfate has been used as such
an internal matrix.30 Collaplug (Zimmer Dental, Warsaw, IN, USA) was also used as an apical matrix; however, it did not appear to prevent
extrusion or improve the sealing ability of MTA.31 The short-term application of Ca(OH)2 might bring about an additional benefit;9,11,21
however, its use prior to MTA apexification has been associated with extrusion of the MTA material.32 In this case series, we had used
Ca(OH)2 as an intracanal medicament because the debridement of infected immature root can be difficult to achieve as a one-visit procedure
and dressing with Ca(OH)2 would allow sufficient time to disinfect the root canal without significantly weakening of the root strength.33
Therefore, the apical extrusion of the MTA material might be related to the use of Ca(OH)2. Others have reported that the use of MTA in a
one-visit apexification procedure (without Ca(OH)2 medication) was clinically effective.18 Nonetheless, the follow-up results of these
patients indicated the clinical effectiveness of MTA as an apical plug via an orthograde approach, regardless of any internal matrix or
medicament used. For the present clinical observations, MTA favors the apexification and periapical healing even when a considerable amount
of this material had inadvertently been extruded. While it is recognized that extrusion of MTA via an open apex is not a common mishap
during the apexification procedure, the extruded material does not negatively affect the healing of the periapical tissues, as supported by
follow-up observations of 36–54 months. If a complete closure of the root apex is considered the ideal goal to be achieved for the
apexification procedure, this goal has been achieved in the present case series. However, deliberate overfilling of MTA into the periapical
lesion is not advocated in any clinical circumstance. Revascularization procedure, as a further advanced procedure, is highly suggested for
this kind of cases to get a biological healing including continuing of root formation without the risk of material extrusion. This study was
supported by the National Research Foundation (NRF) of Korea, funded by the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology (MEST) (No.
2011-0014231, Dr. Seok-Wood Chang), Korea. Radiographs of case 1. (a) The first visit during working length measurement. (b) The MTA
extrusion into the periapical lesion during the one-step apexification. (c) Completion of MTA placement. (d) 11-month follow-up presenting
the displacement of MTA. (e) 36-month follow-up showing complete resolution of periapical radiolucency around the extruded MTA. MTA, mineral
trioxide aggregate. Radiographs of case 2. (a) The first visit for diagnosis. (b) The MTA extrusion into the periapical lesion during the
one-step apexification. (c) Completion of MTA placement. (d) 3-month recall showing the gradual healing of the apical lesion with
radiolucent halo around the extruded MTA. (e) 54-month follow-up showing complete osseous repair with continuum of lamina dura-like
structure along the extruded MTA. MTA, mineral trioxide aggregate. Radiographs of case 3. (a) The preoperative diagnostic procedure with
tracing of sinus tract. (b) The MTA extrusion into the periapical lesion during the one-step apexification. (c) 8-month recall check with
gradual healing of periapical lesion. (d) 24-month recall check presenting irregular margin with radiolucent halo around extruded MTA during
the osseous healing. (e) 48-month follow-up showing complete healing of periapical lesion and intermingled MTA with regenerated bone. MTA,
mineral trioxide aggregate.
