A 20 year old unmarried girl presented to Surgery OPD, Saraswathi Institute of Medical Sciences, Hapur, north India, in June 2012, with
complaints of multiple black patches all over the body since birth. As she grew older multiple swellings appeared on the patches. The
patches and swellings had increased in size gradually with age in proportion to body growth. There was a family history of similar lesions
in a paternal uncle and her grandfather. She was worried about the large swelling in the left flank. Examination revealed a large bluish
black, well defined patch, covering most of the back with lesional hypertrichosis. Multiple satellite lesions of similar morphology were
noted. There were multiple swellings of different sizes and shapes on this giant nevus (Fig. 1). All were mobile, soft in consistency with
well defined margins. The largest swelling on the left flank measured 10 × 6 cm. A clinical diagnosis of congenital ‘Bathing trunk’ nevus
with multiple satellite nevi and lipomatosis was made. ‘Bathing trunk’ nevus is a special type of congenital giant nevus, in the shape of
the named garment. A congenital melanocytic nevus is labelled as giant if it involves more than 144 cm2 area of body or measures more than
20 cm in diameter in an adult. Bathing trunk nevus is a rare clinical entity and one, in combination with multiple nevi and lipomas, is
rarer. Fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) of swellings confirmed the clinical suspicion of lipoma. The swelling of the flank was
surgically excised. On histopathological examination, the nevus was found to be of the intradermal category with no junctional activity or
sign of malignancy. In consultation with a plastic surgeon, adequate expansion of normal skin with tissue expander followed by removal of
nevus and resurfacing with expanded skin has been planned for the patchy, hairy and deep black colour moles on the face (Fig. 2). No further
treatment was offered, but keeping in mind the potential risk of melanoma developing in this type of lesion, the patient is being followed
regularly after the surgery at the interval of one month at present. ‘Bathing trunk nevus’ with multiple swellings of different sizes and
shapes. Two big patchy deep black moles on the face with lesional hypertrichosis.
