Recurrences of cervical cancer after definitive radiotherapy often occur at common iliac or para-aortic lymph nodes as marginal lymph node
recurrences. Patients with these recurrences have a chance of long-term survival by optimal re-treatment with radiotherapy. However, the re-
irradiation often overlaps the initial and the secondary radiotherapy fields and can result in increased normal tissue toxicities in the
bowels or the stomach. Carbon-ion radiotherapy, a form of particle beam radiotherapy using accelerated carbon ions, offers more conformal
and sharp dose distribution than X-ray radiotherapy. Therefore, this approach enables the delivery of high radiation doses to the target
while sparing its surrounding normal tissues. Marginal lymph node recurrences in common iliac lymph nodes after radiotherapy were treated
successfully by carbon-ion radiotherapy in two patients. These two patients were initially treated with a combination of external beam
radiotherapy and intracavitary and interstitial brachytherapy. However, the diseases recurred in the lymph nodes near the border of the
initial radiotherapy fields after 22 months and 23 months. Because re-irradiation with X-ray radiotherapy may deliver high doses to a
section of the bowels, carbon-ion radiotherapy was selected to treat the lymph node recurrences. A total dose of 48 Gy (RBE) in 12 fractions
over 3 weeks was given to the lymph node recurrences, and the tumors disappeared completely with no severe acute toxicities. The two
patients showed no evidence of disease for 75 months and 63 months after the initial radiotherapy and for 50 months and 37 months after the
carbon-ion radiotherapy, respectively. No severe late adverse effects are observed in these patients. The two presented cases suggest that
the highly conformal dose distribution of carbon-ion radiotherapy may be beneficial in the treatment of marginal lymph node recurrences
after radiotherapy. In addition, the higher biological effect of carbon-ion radiotherapy and its superior dose distribution may provide more
effective tumor control in treatment for re-irradiation of the marginal recurrences in radiation resistant tumors other than cervical
cancer. Metastases in common iliac or para-aortic lymph nodes (LN) often occur after definitive radiotherapy (RT) for cervical cancer . RT
for these lymph node metastases provides a chance of long-term survival in these patients . However, if the recurrences occur very close to
the edge of the initially treated field after RT, there is a concern that an overlap of the initial and the second radiation fields could
yield a high cumulative dose and possibly result in severe toxicities in normal tissues such as the bowel. Carbon-ion RT, a form of particle
beam RT using accelerated carbon ions, offers more conformal radiation dose distribution than X-ray RT and thus enables the delivery of high
radiation doses to the tumor while sparing the surrounding normal tissues . Carbon-ion RT has shown excellent local control for X-ray
resistant diseases such as recurrent rectal carcinoma, skull-base tumors, uveal melanoma, non-squamous cell carcinomas of the head and neck,
and sarcomas. In these tumors, high radiation doses could be delivered to the clinical targets by carbon-ion RT without causing severe
complications in the surrounding normal organs . In this article, we report two cases of recurrent cervical cancer in the LN marginal to the
RT fields utilized in the initial treatment. Definitive carbon-ion RT was applied successfully to the marginal LN recurrences of these
patients without further recurrences or severe complications. A 55-year-old female presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding and was
diagnosed with FIGO Stage IIA (T2aN0M0, UICC 6th edition) squamous cell carcinoma of the uterine cervix. The patient had an elevated value
of serum squamous cell carcinoma antigen (SCC), 5.3 ng/ml (normal value: 0–1.5 ng/ml). The patient was treated with external beam RT (EBRT)
of 50 Gy in 25 fractions to the pelvis using conventional X-rays (consisting of 26 Gy of whole pelvis fields and the last 24 Gy of center
shielding pelvis fields) and 4 fractions of high-dose-rate (HDR) intracavitary brachytherapy (BT) with the total dose of 24 Gy given to
point A. There were no acute adverse effects greater than Grade 3. However, there were Grade 2 upper gastrointestinal symptoms and Grade 1
neutropenia. The tumor completely disappeared, and the serum SCC levels returned to normal after therapy. Therefore, the patient received no
further treatment. Twenty-three months later, the patient developed bilateral edema in the legs. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography
(CT) study showed an enlarged left common iliac LN with a diameter of 2 cm situated at the edge of the previous whole pelvis irradiation
field (Figure 1(a)). Based on an elevated uptake of 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose (FDG) in the positron-emission tomography (PET)/CT study
(maximum SUV 6.1) and an elevated value of serum SCC (4.0 ng/ml), the enlarged LN was clinically diagnosed as a metastasis of cervical
cancer. To avoid normal tissue complications from re-irradiation, carbon-ion RT was selected as the treatment modality. Carbon-ion RT (48 Gy
(RBE) in 12 fractions over 3 weeks) was administered to the left common iliac LN and the lower para-aortic LN (PALN) region (Figure 2a). The
patient experienced no serious adverse effects during the therapy, and no further therapy was administered. The serum SCC level returned to
normal levels (<1.0 ng/ml) after the carbon-ion RT treatment. The patient showed no evidence of disease for 75 months after the initial RT
and for 50 months after the carbon-ion RT of the LN recurrence (Figure 3). There were no serious adverse effects beside the leg edema that
was present prior to treatment. Location of the lymph node recurrences in relation to the radiation field of the initial radiotherapy. The
initial radiation fields were reconstructed with red lines, while the recurred lymph nodes were contoured as red solids. Lymph nodes
recurred at the edge of the initial radiation field both in (a) Patient 1 and (b) Patient 2. Comparison of carbon-ion radiotherapy (RT) and
X-ray RT dose distributions in Patient 1. (a) Dose distribution of the carbon-ion RT applied in Patient 1 for the lymph node (LN)
recurrence. Carbon-ion RT of 48 Gy (RBE)/12 fractions/3 weeks was given to the left common iliac LN and the lower para-aortic LN region at
the National Institute of Radiological Sciences, Chiba, Japan. The isodose lines are shown by percentage with respect to the total dose of
48 Gy (RBE). (b) Simulated dose distribution of X-ray (RT) using orthogonal 4 fields. The anterior-posterior field of the initial RT is
shown with thick red lines. The 50% isodose lines are highlighted in green. CT images of the recurred lymph nodes (LNs) at the time of
recurrence ((a) Patient 1, (c) Patient 2)) and 3 years after carbon-ion radiotherapy ((b) Patient 1, (d) Patient 2). The recurrent LNs have
disappeared after the therapy in both patients. A 52-year-old female patient presented with abnormal vaginal bleeding and was diagnosed with
squamous cell carcinoma of uterine cervix. She was referred to our department for concurrent chemoradiotherapy. A colonoscopy confirmed the
invasion of the tumor into the rectal mucosa, and the patient was staged to be FIGO Stage IVA (T4N0M0, UICC 6th edition). The patient was
treated with EBRT of 50 Gy in 25 fractions to the pelvis using conventional X-rays (consisting of 30 Gy of whole pelvis fields and 20 Gy of
center shielding pelvis fields) and 5 fractions of HDR BT (2 fractions of intracavitary BT with 6 Gy prescribed to the point A and 3
fractions of image-guided interstitial BT with 6 Gy prescribed to the gross tumor). The patient also received 4 courses of weekly cisplatin
at a dose of 40 mg/m2. Although Grade 2 upper gastrointestinal symptoms and leukopenia were observed during the treatment, the tumor
disappeared completely. Twenty-two months later, a follow-up contrast-enhanced CT and FDG-PET/CT showed an enlarged PALN (10 mm in diameter,
max SUV 3.10) and an enlarged right common iliac LN (10 mm in diameter, max SUV 2.81) at the edge of the whole pelvis irradiation field
utilized in the initial treatment (Figure 1(b)). These lymph nodes were clinically diagnosed as metastases of cervical cancer. Similar to
the previous patient, carbon-ion RT with the dose of 48 Gy (RBE) in 12 fractions over 3 weeks was administered to the common iliac LN and
lower PALN regions. The patient was discharged with no apparent acute adverse effects. No further therapy was administered, and the patient
showed no evidence of further recurrences for 63 months after the initial RT and for 37 months after the carbon-ion RT for the recurred LN
(Figure 3). The patient experienced no late toxicities from the treatment. Metastases in the common iliac LN and PALN are often observed
after definitive RT for cervical cancers . A retrospective study of 1894 patients who received definitive RT for cervical cancer at the M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center has shown that the most common site of regional recurrence in patients with centrally controlled disease was the
cranial margin of the initial RT fields. In the study, 198 patients (10.5%) had regional recurrences with no central recurrence. Of these
patients, 75 patients (4.0%) were confirmed with diagnostic images to have only marginal recurrences. Most of the recurrences were located
in the superior margin of the initial RT fields (73 patients) . In other prospective clinical studies, the PALN recurrences were observed in
7% of patients treated with chemoradiotherapy in the Radiation Therapy Oncology Group 90–01 trial . Additionally, PALN recurrences were
found in 15% of patients in the Japanese Gynecologic Oncology Group 1066 trial that studied patients with more advanced diseases of FIGO
Stage III-IV . The 5-year overall survival of patients with solitary LN metastases that are marginal to the initial radiation fields was 13%
in the M.D. Anderson Cancer Center study . In contrast, it is reported that the 3-year and 5-year overall survival of patients who received
X-ray RT for solitary PALN recurrence of cervical cancer were 50% and 31%, respectively . It was also found that the delivery of radiation
doses above 50 Gy was a significantly favorable factor for the survival of these patients . These results indicate that patients with
solitary recurrence in PALN or in the common iliac LN would be candidates for definitive RT and could achieve long-term survival if an
adequate amount of radiation dose can be safely delivered to the LN recurrence. RT to the abdomen requires careful attention to prevent
adverse effects in the gastrointestinal tract, especially in the stomach and small bowels. The radiation dose-volume analyses of normal
tissue toxicities recommend the volume of small bowels receiving doses above 45 Gy should be minimized . To prevent the incidence of severe
normal tissue toxicities in cases of re-irradiation, physicians should avoid or minimize the volume receiving a high cumulative dose due to
the overlap of the initial and re-treatment irradiation fields. In our simulation study of re-irradiation using conventional X-ray treatment
by 3D conformal RT, a strip of small bowel is exposed to a cumulative irradiation dose above 70 Gy (Figure 4) due to the overlap of
radiation fields. Thus, re-irradiation with X-ray RT could result in a significant risk of complications in small bowels. Simulated diagram
of cumulative dose distribution in Patient 1. The dose distribution was simulated in a case if the re-irradiation of 50 Gy were to be
administered by 3D conformal X-ray radiotherapy using an orthogonal 4-field technique. The cumulative radiation dose to the bowels is
greater than 70 Gy because of the overlap of the initial and re-treatment radiation fields. The red lines indicate the anterior-posterior
field of the initial radiotherapy. Alternatively, carbon-ion RT has been shown to have higher anti-tumor effects and superior dose
distributions compared to conventional X-ray RT . The superior dose distribution of carbon ion beams results from the ability of accelerated
carbon ions to release a maximal amount of energy at the end of the track as a so-called Bragg peak. This energy release allows a smaller
amount of lateral scattering (penumbra) due to the greater mass of carbon nuclei . Due to the differences of treatment planning systems
between the carbon-ion RT and X-ray RT, there is a limitation in the graphical presentation of cumulative dose distributions of these
patients. However, while the overlap of the treatment fields could not be completely avoided, the application of carbon-ion RT could
significantly reduce the volume of small bowel receiving high doses (Figure 2). As a result, the patients did not have severe late
toxicities. A possible uncertainty in carbon-ion RT applied to abdomen is that its dose distribution can be affected by the excessive
fluctuation of bowel gas in the beam track. In order to minimize such uncertainty, the presence of bowel gas is checked with daily
fluoroscopic images used for patient set-up. The two patients will continue to be followed carefully and the incidence of late toxicities
will be monitored. These cases support previous reports that suggested patients with marginal LN recurrences after definitive RT of cervical
cancers can possibly achieve long-term survival if enough radiation is delivered to the target. Carbon-ion RT is one of the modalities that
may enable re-irradiation for these patients in a safer manner. In summary, in two patients with solitary marginal LN recurrences after
definitive RT, carbon-ion RT was successfully applied to the lesions while minimizing high doses to the bowels. The patients are disease
free and do not have late toxicities. Carbon-ion RT may be an effective treatment option for re-irradiation in the marginal recurrences of
cervical cancer and other malignant tumors. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication in this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. RT: Radiotherapy; LN:
Lymph nodes; FIGO: International federation of gynecology and obstetrics; UICC: Union for international cancer control; EBRT: External beam
radiotherapy; HDR: High-dose-rate; BT: Brachytherapy; CT: Computed tomography; FDG: 18F-fluorodeoxy glucose; PET: Positron emission
tomography; RBE: Relative biological effectiveness; Gy: Gray; PALN: Para-aortic lymph nodes. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. TT analyzed the treatments and drafted the manuscript. TO analyzed the treatment and contributed to the final draft of the
manuscript. HK, YO, KA, MW, SK, and TK planned the treatment and contributed to the final draft of the manuscript. SN analyzed the treatment
and contributed to the manuscript. TN analyzed the treatment and contributed to the final draft of the manuscript. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript.
