Originally described by Monteggia and later classified by Bado, elbow dislocations with concurrent radial and ulnar shaft fractures with
distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) disruption are considered operative cases with high-energy injurious etiologies. Here, we present an
unclassifiable Monteggia variant fracture suffered through a high axial load mechanism in a 47-year-old female. The fracture pattern
initially exhibited included a divergent elbow dislocation, a radial shaft fracture, plastic deformation of the distal ulna, and DRUJ
instability. Here we describe the pattern in detail, along with definitive treatment and clinical outcome at 1 year follow-up. Originally
described by Giovanni Monteggia in 1814, the Monteggia fracture pattern has gone through a few revisions . Further subclassified by Bado and
later by Jupiter, this fracture pattern warrants immediate attention and (usually) a trip to the operating room for definitive
reconstruction . In general, fracture involvement of both the radius and ulna with a concomitant radial head dislocation describes the
fracture pattern . In attempts to further understand the injury, other Monteggia fracture variants and equivalents have also been described
[2, 7]. However, to our knowledge, no report has described the injury sustained in our patient: divergent elbow dislocation with concomitant
radial shaft fracture, plastic deformation of the distal ulna shaft, and distal radioulnar joint (DRUJ) instability—a unique fracture
pattern that has similar characteristics to the Monteggia lesion, but with obvious differences. Herein, we report the reconstruction and
outcome of a novel Monteggia fracture variant in which the radial head and ulna dislocate in opposite directions—a contradistinction to the
original observations that served as the basis for Bado’s classification scheme. Informed consent was obtained from the patient prior to
starting this manuscript. A 47-year-old female presented to the outpatient office complaining of right elbow pain after falling down two
flights of stairs onto an outstretched hand while intoxicated, 10 days prior to presentation. Initial treatment at an outside institution
included attempted closed reduction and posterior splint placement. Upon examination, she was found to have limited range of motion (ROM),
intact skin, motor, and neurologic function, and palpable distal pulses in the right upper extremity. Furthermore, she also had limited ROM
of the right wrist with laxity to DRUJ shuck as compared to the contralateral limb. Radiographs demonstrated a comminuted and displaced
proximal third radial shaft fracture with associated proximal radioulnar, radiocapitellar, and ulnohumeral joint dislocations (Fig. 1a, b).
Distally, DRUJ disruption was obvious both radiographically and clinically (Fig. 2). Advanced CT imaging revealed radial head and coronoid
process fractures along with posterior dislocation of the ulna and anterior dislocation of the radius in relation to the humerus
(Fig. 3).Fig. 1AP (a) and lateral (b) radiographs of the right elbow reveal a fracture of the radial shaft with the apex dorsal. The
proximal radius is dislocated anteriorly and the ulna posteriorly with respect to the humerusFig. 2Lateral radiographs of the right wrist
demonstrating distal radioulnar joint disruption and dorsal ulnar dislocation (green arrow)Fig. 3Lateral 3D reconstruction of CT scans of
the right elbow confirm the divergent dislocation. Note the small radial head fracture. The coronoid process is abutting the posterior
cortex of the medial humeral condyle. A tiny bone fragment off the coronoid process is seen between the olecranon fossa and humerus
(arrowhead) AP (a) and lateral (b) radiographs of the right elbow reveal a fracture of the radial shaft with the apex dorsal. The proximal
radius is dislocated anteriorly and the ulna posteriorly with respect to the humerus Lateral radiographs of the right wrist demonstrating
distal radioulnar joint disruption and dorsal ulnar dislocation (green arrow) Lateral 3D reconstruction of CT scans of the right elbow
confirm the divergent dislocation. Note the small radial head fracture. The coronoid process is abutting the posterior cortex of the medial
humeral condyle. A tiny bone fragment off the coronoid process is seen between the olecranon fossa and humerus (arrowhead) The patient was
taken to the operating room for definitive reconstruction. First, the proximal third radial shaft fracture was addressed via a volar Henry
approach and a small fragment plate employing both non-locked and locked fixation. Next, dissection proceeded through the Kaplan interval.
The comminuted fragments of the radial head and coronoid process were debrided. In an attempt to stimulate fibrocartilaginous synthesis, a
1.6 mm Kirschner wire was then used to drill approximately 1 cm2 of osteochondral loss on the radial head, the coronoid process, and the
medial epicondyle of the distal humerus. A completely avulsed MCL was noted during ulnar nerve transposition and was repaired using a 3.5 mm
suture anchor inserted into the distal-most aspect of the midsagittal plane of the medial epicondyle. The stability of the elbow joint was
assessed while maintaining manual tension of the LCL, with sutures ultimately incorporated into its definitive repair. The elbow was stable
in flexion, varus and valgus, but unstable anteriorly when extended to less than 40°. To supplement the repair for 6 weeks, a unilateral
hinged external fixator was placed. Next, the LCL was repaired utilizing the ex-fix guide pinhole as the isometric point for insertion of a
5.5 mm suture anchor. Following repair of the annular ligament, the elbow could be passively ranged in a stable fashion. Next, attention was
turned to the DRUJ. Shuck testing under fluoroscopy confirmed clinical findings. The joint was reduced in supination and stabilized with two
parallel 2.0 K-wires to engage four cortices from the distal ulna to the distal radius. Finally, the external fixation device was then
locked in 70° of flexion, and all wounds were closed primarily. The patient tolerated the procedure well and was discharged on her second
postoperative day. Her external fixator was locked at 70° of flexion for the first 2 weeks of follow-up. At the 2-week follow-up, her
external fixation device was unlocked, allowing full range of motion, and occupational therapy was started. At the 3-week follow-up, her
active ROM was 0–70°. At the 5-week follow-up, the patient reported hyperextending her elbow a few days prior when inebriated and falling
against a wall. Her elbow AROM was painless and improved to 0–90° with mild but improving wrist stiffness. Radiographs revealed a stable
reduced DRUJ and proximal radioulnar joint (PRUJ), although there was some concern regarding the ulnohumeral articulation. CT scan confirmed
a small posterior subluxation of the ulna on the humerus. She was then placed in a posterior splint at 90° of flexion, and she was taken to
the operating room for ex-fix adjustment, manipulation under anesthesia, and removal of the DRUJ K-wires at 6 weeks postoperatively. In the
operating room, the elbow exhibited stable ROM from 0 to 130° and a concentrically reduced elbow was obtained via ex-fix adjustment. Owing
to the patient’s previous slight posterior subluxation and concerns with compliance, the hinge was re-locked for one more week to allow
further soft tissue healing. Hardware was removed from the DRUJ and shuck testing demonstrated a stable, well-reduced DRUJ. The patient
tolerated the procedure well and was discharged the same day. At the 9-week follow-up, the patient noted increased ROM in the wrist as well
as pain-free ROM of the elbow and shoulder. She remained neurovascularly intact. X-ray examination revealed a well-reduced DRUJ, PRUJ, and
elbow joint with radial shaft union. At this time, the calculated DASH score was 38.8 (Fig. 4a, b). She remained in outpatient physical and
occupational therapy for 15 weeks, and continued the exercises at home. At the 1-year follow-up, she had symmetric AROM flexion/extension of
the elbow. She was able to supinate her forearm to approximately 45° and pronate it to approximately 80° (Fig. 5a–d). At the 1-year follow-
up, the calculated DASH score had improved to 5.8.Fig. 4AP (a) and lateral (b) radiographs of the elbow exhibiting a well-healed and
concentrically maintained elbow with a stable distal DRUJ (c–d)Fig. 5Photographs at the 1-year follow-up clinical examination demonstrating
supination of 45° (a), pronation of 80° (b) extension of 5° (c), and flexion of 95 ° (d) in the affected extremity AP (a) and lateral (b)
radiographs of the elbow exhibiting a well-healed and concentrically maintained elbow with a stable distal DRUJ (c–d) Photographs at the
1-year follow-up clinical examination demonstrating supination of 45° (a), pronation of 80° (b) extension of 5° (c), and flexion of 95 ° (d)
in the affected extremity Monteggia fractures are typically associated with high-energy impact—they are most commonly due to a fall on an
outstretched hand in forced pronation, as was evidenced in our case. As ulnar displacement increases, the radial head is levered out of the
joint, resulting in the classic deformity [8, 9]. Despite this, Monteggia fractures and their variants are rare and are often missed
injuries. Although rare, the Monteggia fracture has gained notoriety among the orthopedic community in light of its notoriously poor
outcomes. The displacement by muscle forces across the fracture site and associated ligamentous injury has been shown to be a source of
significant morbidity in the past, especially before the routine use of contoured compression plates for treatment [10, 11]. Bado type II
and injuries with associated radial head and coronoid fractures have historically portended poor clinical outcomes . Potential complications
of Monteggia fractures include persistent dislocation of the radial head, elbow stiffness, forearm synostosis, nerve palsy, and residual
forearm deformity . There have been reports of persistent dislocation of the radial head caused by median and radial nerve entrapment,
resulting in subsequent nerve palsy [13, 14]. Treatment of complicated Monteggia fractures and their variants remains a challenge. Much of
the literature reporting on treatment and outcomes combines pediatric and adult injuries. Although closed treatment remains standard for
most pediatric Monteggia fractures, internal fixation is mandatory in adults . Despite the potentially disabling and often unpredictable
complications inherent to open fixation, recent studies have shown satisfactory results in 55–83 % of Monteggia fractures when treated with
anatomic reduction and stable plate fixation that permits early mobilization [4, 16]. Anatomic alignment of the ulnar fracture with
restoration of the trochlear notch typically allows for a manageable reduction of the proximal radiocapitellar joint and, consequently, a
satisfactory result. Achieving a satisfactory result for our patient coincided with the aforementioned goals for reconstruction—anatomic and
stable reconstruction of the PRUJ with definitive restoration of the forearm ring. Representing an unclassifiable Monteggia variant-type
injury, our patient’s initial forecast did not bode well on first presentation. However, paying particular attention to maintaining
concentric stability at the elbow along with early, protected ROM via plate fixation and combined hinged ex-fix utilization resulted in a
good clinical outcome, despite the nonadherent efforts put forth by our patient . While the overall use of microfracture remains
controversial, it was utilized in our case to provide our patient with every chance of maintaining long-term painless, full elbow ROM and
function. Long-term follow-up with possible re-exploration will be necessary to truly assess the role of microfracture in this setting. In
summary, combined plate fixation, ligamentous repair, DRUJ stabilization, and placement of a hinged external fixator proved to be an
effective strategy to achieve union and restore functional status in our patient with a high-energy, unclassifiable Monteggia fracture
variant. Paying particular attention to anatomic restoration of the forearm ring with concentric elbow stability is of paramount importance.
However, this represents just one case in an already rarely occurring fracture pattern, and additional studies will be necessary to prove
the true efficacy and reproducibility of this treatment strategy. Furthermore, the role of microfracture in this injury setting also needs
to be further explored, as it may prove as a useful adjunct in maintaining fluid elbow function. None.
