Lipoblastoma and lipoblastomatosis are rare benign soft-tissue tumoral lesions resembling fetal adipose tissue. A total of 16 cases of
lipoblastoma of the neck were reported in the literature, and only 3 were described in the posterior side of the neck. Hibernoma is a rare
benign adipose tumor composed of brown fat cells and only about ten cases occurring in the cervical area have been reported. We reported two
rare cases of adipose tissue tumors. The first case was a male infant aged 12 months who had a cervical mass on the posterior side of the
neck. He underwent a complete resection of the lesion and the pathologic study revealed lipoblastomatosis. The second case was a 36-year-old
man with an anterior cervical mass, which moved with swallowing. A resection was made and the histological analysis showed hibernoma.
Lipoblastoma e lipoblastomatose são lesões tumorais benignas dos tecidos moles similares ao tecido adiposo fetal. Na literatura, apenas 16
casos de lipoblastoma na região do pescoço foram relatados e, destes, somente 3 foram descritos na região posterior do pescoço. Hibernomas
são tumores benignos raros do tecido adiposo composto por células gordurosas marrons. Foram descritos cerca de dez casos desses tumores na
região cervical. Este artigo relatou dois casos raros de tumores do tecido adiposo. No primeiro caso, tratouse de criança do gênero
masculino, com 12 meses de idade, com aparecimento de massa cervical na região posterior do pescoço. A ressecção completa da lesão foi
realizada, e o estudo patológico revelou lipoblastomatose. O segundo caso ocorreu em um homem de 36 anos com massa cervical anterior, que se
movia com a deglutição. Após ressecção à análise histopatológica mostrou hibernoma. Lipoblastomas and their diffuse, multicentric and
infiltrative forms, the lipoblastomatosis, are rare benign soft tissue tumors that resemble the fetal adipose tissue. Adipose tumors
comprise about 6% of soft tissue neoplasms and are developed in the first two decades of life. In general, 94% are lipomas, 4.7%
lipoblastomas and 1.3% liposarcomas(1). Lipoblastoma is a benign tumor of embryonic fat cells(2) that occurs mainly before the age of 3
years, are more prevalent in men(1), and arise primarily in the trunk and extremities. Only 16 cases of lipoblastoma in the neck have been
reported in the literature(2), and only 3 cases were described on the posterior side of the neck(1). Cervical hibernoma is a benign tumor
that could be considered a differential diagnosis and is opposed to lipoblastoma(2), and occurs mainly in adults(3). Only ten cases have
been described in the neck(4). The symptoms are: compression of cervical structures, respiratory compromise, Horner's syndrome and
hemiparesis(2). We reported two cases of these rare lesions. The first one was a cervical hibernoma and the other a cervical
lipoblastomatosis; both were found on the posterior neck. Male infant aged 12 months who had a cervical mass on the posterior side of the
neck measuring 60×40mm. He underwent diagnostic imaging studies that showed a density fat tumor. After, a complete resection of the lesion
was performed. The histological analysis showed an admixture of mature and immature adipocytes with muscle fibers entrapped and foci with a
mixoyd stroma, which confirmed the presence of lipoblastomatosis (Figure 1). A 36-year-old man with anterior cervical mass for 40 days that
measured 50mm, had fibroelastic consistency and mobile with swallowing. Ultrasonography examination showed a thyroid nodule. The patient
underwent a fine-needle aspiration. The cytological diagnosis was adipocytic tumor which confirmed the presence of hibernoma. After the
complete resection, the histological exam confirmed the diagnosis of hibernoma. Adipose tumors comprise about 6% of soft tissue neoplasms
and are developed in the first two decades of life. In general, 94% are lipomas, 4.7% lipoblastomas, and 1.3% liposarcomas. Cervical
lipoblastomas are rare and constitute 10 to 15% of all lipoblastoma cases(1). Hibernoma is a rare benign tumor of embryonal brown fat(2),
and only about ten cases of it are reported in the neck(4). Lipoblastoma are characterized as single subcutaneous nodule or by multiple
lesions(3). It grows rapidly and often is asymptomatic, except when causing mass effect(1). On the other hand, hibernoma presents firm and
mobile tumor, grows slowly and occurs chiefly in adults(3); both hibernoma and lipoblastoma can cause mass effect(5). Diagnostic imaging
studies are invaluable in the preliminary diagnosis of fatty tumors(2). Plain X-rays and computed tomography scan can suggest the fat
density of the tumor. Results of ultrasonography examinations can be confusing. The MRI is the most reliable method showing location, size,
extent and mass characteristics of the tumor(1), suggesting the histological components(2). The differential diagnosis of lipomatous tumors
should include lipoma, lipoblastoma, hibernoma, and liposarcoma(2). The lipoma is the most common soft tissue tumor and may show cytologic
similarities to lipoblastoma. Although vacuoles may be seen in the adipocytes of conventional lipomas, the extent of vacuolated adipocytes
is greater in number and smaller in lipoblastoma(3). Hibernoma has been well cytologically described. Hibernoma cells differ from those of
lipoblastoma, and they usually show a central nucleus and abundant finely-granular or microvacuolated cytoplasm. In addition, smears show no
myxoid matrix and less capillaries(3). Furthermore, hibernoma shows a lobular pattern, but it is entirely composed of brown fat with
eosinophilic granular cytoplasm characteristic, that is not found in white fat of lipoblastoma(2). Liposarcoma is histologically different
from lipoblastoma. It is important to recognize that both tumors may contain mitotic figures, and also that lipoblastoma is a mass of fetal
fat cells varying in different degrees. Despite both tumors could contain a plexiform capillary network, this feature tends to be more
prominent in myxoid liposarcoma. It is particularly important to differentiate myxoid liposarcoma from lipoblastoma because both tumors have
a myxoid background. The characteristic lobulation of lipoblastoma is a feature that is often absent in liposarcoma, but can be seen in the
myxoid variant. Hyperchromasia and nuclear atypia are seen in liposarcoma, but absent in lipoblastoma, and may be the most distinguishing
feature(2). Different lipomatous tumors tend to have characteristics of chromosomal abnormalities. Lipomas have abnormalities of chromosomes
12, 6, or 13, whereas myxoid liposarcoma tends to have the translocations t(12;16)(q13;p11) or t(12;22)(q13;q12). Hibernoma shows
rearrangement in chromosome 11q132 and lipoblastomas show rearrangement in chromosome 8q11-13. Despite well-localized and nonmalignant
nature of lipoblastomas, their rapidly growing might cause compressive symptoms. The standard therapy for cervical lipoblastoma is the
complete surgical excision(2). Its prognosis is good. By far the a recurrence rate of 15% has been reported for cervical lipoblastoma(1).
Lipoblastomatosis has a high propensity for recurrence(2). Curative treatment to hibernomas is the complete excision with preservation of
vital structures(4). This procedure must be made without technical difficulties since hibernoma usually presented as a well-circumscribed
mass(5). Unlike lipomas, the hibernomas has an extensive vascularity that should be carefully treated to avoid postoperative bleeding or
hematoma. No case of recurrence or metastasis has been reported(4,5). Additional treatment is not necessary, except when liposarcoma is
suspected(5). When dealing with a cervical mass, lipoblatomatosis and hibernoma should be considered in the differential diagnosis. The
surgical treatment must be considered.
