To report a patient with Danon retinopathy with cystoid macular edema treated with topical dorzolamide 2% eye drops and oral acetazolamide.
A 37-year-old Caucasian man with Danon disease treated with topical and oral carbonic anhydrase inhibitors participated in the study.
Examinations performed before and during treatment included visual acuity (VA), spectral-domain optical coherence tomography, and
electroretinography. Following total 48 weeks of treatment, VA decreased from 20/30 OD, 20/200 OS, to 20/40 OD, CF OS. The mean central
retinal thickness was unchanged from baseline 263 μm OD, 226 μm OS, after treatment 283 μm OD and 202 μm OS. In our case, carbonic anydrase
inhibitors were not effective. However, a general recommendation cannot be given based on a single case. Danon disease (DD) (Online
Mendelian Inheritance in Man 300257) is a rare, X-linked dominant disease characterized by cardiomyopathy, myopathy, and various degrees of
mental retardation in males, first reported in 1981. The genetic locus for DD localizes to the lysosome-associated membrane protein-2
(LAMP2) gene. LAMP-2 protein is found in the lysosomal membrane where it is thought to protect the membrane from proteolytic enzymes and to
act as a receptor for proteins imported into lysosomes. In its absence, autophagic vacuoles are seen in the heart and muscles. Cardiac
disease in males is usually severe. In one study of 20 male patients, all patients except one died before 30 years. Implanted pacemakers and
defibrillators and heart transplantation have improved life expectancy. Myopathy is typically mild and often asymptomatic. Symptomatic
patients present with proximal limb muscle weakness that is slowly progressive. Mild mental retardation affects an estimated 70% of males.
Female mutation carriers show a milder phenotype. Ophthalmic manifestations of DD include in males salt-and-pepper appearance of the
midperipheral retina and loss of pigment in the retinal pigment epithelium (RPE) and in females a midperipheral pigmentary retinopathy.
Myopia, lens changes, abnormal visual fields, and abnormal electroretinogram have also been described. A 37-year-old man of English descent
presented with long-standing photophobia, reduced vision, and retinal pigmentary changes. He had infantile onset dilated cardiomyopathy
requiring a cardiac transplant at age 20. He subsequently developed lymphoma in the left kidney, treated by nephrectomy and rituximab, and
two bowel lymphomas treated with chemotherapy and rituximab. At age 29, he developed peripheral myopathy when DD was diagnosed on muscle
biopsy. He took cyclosporin 100 mg bd, mycophenolate 500 mg bd, ramipril 10 mg daily, amlodipine 10 mg daily, pravastatin 20 mg daily,
ezetimibe 10 mg daily, prednisolone 5 mg daily, and aspirin 100 mg daily. On examination, he was highly myopic; best-corrected Snellen
visual acuity (VA) was 20/30 in the right eye and 20/200 in the left eye. Slit-lamp biomicroscopy of the anterior segments was unremarkable.
Fundoscopy revealed midperipheral pigmentary changes, with near-complete loss of RPE in the remaining retina. There was no posterior
staphyloma in either eye. Cirrus spectral-domain optical coherence tomography (SD-OCT) (Zeiss, Germany) scanning demonstrated asymmetric
macular cysts in the inner retinal layers and patchy photoreceptor loss in both maculae [Fig. 1, Table 1]. Humphrey visual field testing
(Zeiss, Germany) showed bilateral central scotoma. Ishihara testing demonstrated congenital color deficiency. Full-field ERG testing was
performed using a gold foil electrode according to the International Society for Clinical Electrophysiology of Vision standards (LKC
Technologies, Inc.). This showed non-specific abnormalities: scotopic responses were of reduced amplitude and normal implicit time; photopic
responses were of normal amplitude but increased implicit time. He refused fluorescein angiography. Fundus photographs right eye (a), left
eye (b), infrared images right eye (c), left eye (d), and horizontal spectral-domain macular OCT scans at baseline right eye (e), left eye
(f), and after treatment right eye (g), left eye (h) with oral acetazolamide of a patient with histologically confirmed Danon disease. These
demonstrate the peppered pigmentary mottling and cystic-appearing lesions within the macula with photoreceptor loss and minimal response to
treatment Retinal thickness and visual function in response to treatment Treatment with the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor (CAI) dorzolamide
2% topically bd to both eyes was initiated. Following 30 weeks of treatment, the patient reported no change in central vision or glare
symptoms. The fundus exams of each eye were similar to that of the baseline visit. There was no significant change in vision, central
subfield thickness, or macular cube volume. He was then treated with acetazolamide 500 mg daily while cyclosporine levels and renal function
were monitored. Following 18 weeks of treatment, he reported no change in central vision or glare symptoms. Best-corrected VA was 20/40 in
the right eye and CF in the left eye. Fundus exams of each eye were unchanged. Central subfield thickness, macular cube volume, and repeat
ERG testing (Roland, Germany) showed no significant changes. He refused further treatments. Danon retinopathy is a rare X-linked disorder
related to mutations in the LAMP2 gene. The patient showed characteristic signs of Danon retinopathy and his ERG results were typical of the
disease. The patient was myopic, but the macular changes are not typical of pathologic myopic foveoschisis, typically a thickened retina at
the posterior pole, with hyporeflective splitting between the outer and inner retina, or of progressive myopic maculopathy, both of which
are usually detected in patients with a posterior staphyloma. Patients with retinal dystrophies have been reported to have both cystoid
macular edema (CME) and non-CME macular cysts. The patient refused fluorescein angiography, which is the diagnostic test to differentiate
between CME and non-CME cysts, but the asymmetry of cystic changes seen on OCT is typical of CME associated with late hyperfluorescence on
intravenous fluoresce in angiography and strongly suggests that the cysts are CME rather than non-CME cysts. The CME is probably due to
leakage of fluid through the RPE consequent to failure of the RPE pump. LAMP2 gene is expressed in RPE cells. The reason for abnormal LAMP2
protein resulting in presumed RPE pump failure is not known. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of CME in histologically
confirmed DD. In our case, topical dorzolamide 2% eye drops and oral acetazomide were not effective in the treatment of CME associated with
DD. The reasons for lack of effect may have included low dose of acetazolamide, limited by renal disease; pre-existing photoreceptor atrophy
and long-standing visual loss, particularly in the left eye; and pre-existing RPE atrophy, given the mechanism of action of CAI via RPE
acidification which helps to enhance chloride transport, and consequently water transport. Also, any non-CME macular cysts may not respond
to CAIs. Lack of effect of CAI is in contrast to previous studies which have demonstrated a beneficial effect of CAIs in patients with
retinal dystrophy and CME such as retinitis pigmentosa, and patients with macular cysts, including X-linked retinoschisis and enhanced
S-cone syndrome, although some patients fail this treatment. Despite lack of response in our patient, we recommend consideration be given to
carbonic anhydrase inhibition for patients with CME associated with Danon retinopathy, given the response seen in other retinal conditions
with associated CME and macular cysts with this treatment. A further treatment option to consider for similar patients is intravitreal
bevacizumab, which this patient refused. In conclusion, to our knowledge our patient is the first reported case of Danon retinopathy with
CME. Treatment with topical or oral CAI was not effective in this patient. Danon retinopathy is a rare but important retinal dystrophy
causing CME. It is suspected in males who have had a cardiac transplant and reduced vision. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest:
None declared.
