A 27-year-old woman developed bilateral acute angle closure glaucoma (AACG) and transient myopia after taking oseltamivir for four days. On
the fourth day, she received systemic and topical intraocular pressure (IOP)-lowering agents, and IOP decreased in both eyes. However, her
visual acuity was unchanged. A myopic shift of -5.25 D OD and -5.0 D OS was estimated to have occurred in the acute phase. A-scan
ultrasonography and Pentacam showed markedly shallow anterior chambers and increased lens thickness. Ultrasound biomicroscopy revealed an
annular ciliochoroidal effusion with forward displacement of the lens-iris diaphragm. Ciliochoroidal effusion and transient myopia were
resolved after discontinuation of oseltamivir. Attention has focused on oseltamivir (Tamiflu; Roche, Nutley, NJ, USA) due to the era of the
influenza A (H1N1) pandemic. Oseltamivir is an ester prodrug of oseltamivir carboxylate, a selective inhibitor of influenza viruses A and B
neuraminidase. The most frequent adverse events are nausea and vomiting, but neuropsychiatric events and skin and hypersensitivity reactions
are often also observed. However, acute angle-closure glaucoma (AACG) and transient myopia attributed to oseltamivir have not been reported
previously. Here, we report on a patient with oseltamivir-induced AACG and transient myopia with an ultrasound biomicroscopic description of
the pathogenic mechanism. A 27 year old woman experienced acute-onset blurry vision and ocular pain in both eyes four days after beginning
oseltamivir therapy (75 mg twice daily) for suspected influenza. Her medical and ocular history was unremarkable and she had never worn
glasses. Before arriving at our hospital, her intraocular pressure (IOP) measured 60 mmHg OU. A diagnosis of bilateral AACG was made by her
local ophthalmologist because of increased IOP and severely shallow anterior chambers with cornea edema. She was treated with oral
acetazolamide, topical timolol/dorzolamide combination, and brimonidine and was transferred to our hospital the next day. On examination at
our hospital, her uncorrected visual acuity (UCVA) was 20/400 OU. The manifest refraction was −5.0D-1.0D × 170° OD and −4.5D-1.0D × 20° OS,
yielding a best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of 20/32 OD and 20/40 OS. IOPs were 9 mm Hg OD and 11 mm Hg in OS. Slit-lamp examination
revealed mild cornea edema and markedly shallow anterior chambers without inflammation in both eyes. Gonioscopy revealed grade 0 angles on
Shaffer classification OU. Undilated fundus examination revealed that maculas and optic discs were unremarkable. Fluorescein angiography and
indocyanine green angiography were normal. Sclera and choroidal thickening and edema in Tenon's space were not detected on B-scan
ultrasonography. However, ultrasound biomicroscopy (UBM) confirmed a 360° ciliochoroidal effusion and anterior rotation of the ciliary
processes with forward displacement of the lens-iris diaphragm in both eyes [Figs. 1a and b]. A-scan ultrasonography and Pentacam were used
to measure the axial length, anterior chamber depth (ACD), lens thickness (LT), chamber volume (CV), iridocorneal angle, and central corneal
thickness (CCT). A-scan ultrasonography and Pentacam revealed markedly shallow anterior chambers and lens thickening in both eyes [Table 1]
[Figs. 2a and b]. Ultrasound biomicroscopy on day 1 showed ciliochoroidal effusion (star) from the scleral spur, detachment of the ciliary
body and an anterior rotation of the ciliary processes in the right (a) and left eyes (b), Ultrasound biomicroscopy on day 15 showed
resolution of ciliochoroidal effusion and deepening of the anterior chamber in the right (c) and left eyes (d) Changes in refraction,
biometric measurements, and intraocular pressure after discontinuation of oseltamivir in the patient in the study Pentacam images of the
right (a) and the left eyes (b) on day 1 showed markedly shallow anterior chambers. Compared with day 1, Pentacam images of the right eye
(c) and the left eye (d) on day 15 revealed that chamber volume, anterior chamber depth, and angle had increased At that time, real-time
reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) using an AB H1N1 PCR Kit (Applied Biosystems, CA, USA) for the specimen obtained
from the nasopharyngeal swab was negative for influenza A virus antigen. The swine origin influenza A/H1N1 was not detected in influenza A
virus PCR. The diagnosis of probable oseltamivir-induced AACG was suspected because there was no other detectable origin of the AACG, and
the clinical features of our patient appeared similar to those of other drug-induced cases of AACG. Oseltamivir was the only medication
being used by the patient when she developed acute-onset blurry vision. Oseltamivir was discontinued, and she was treated with topical
prednisolone acetate and cycloplegic agents. Three days later, the UCVA was 20/20 OU with deep anterior chambers and IOP was measured to be
9 mm Hg OU. The spherical equivalent improved from −5.5 to −0.25D OD and from −5.0 to −0.5D OS. A-scan ultrasonography revealed that the ACD
increased from 2.07 to 3.45 mm OU and that the LT decreased from 4.43 to 4.18 mm OD and from 4.55 to 4.18 mm OS. Pentacam showed that CV
increased from 58 to 185 mm3 OD and from 56 to 184 mm3 OS, angle increased from 20.3 to 30.7OD and from 19.1 to 33.0°OS, and CCT decreased
from 573 to 542 μm OD and from 578 to 551 m OS [Table 1]. Gonioscopy revealed grade 4 angles on Shaffer classification OU. UBM revealed that
the annular ciliochoroidal effusion had resolved in both eyes. Anti-glaucoma medications, a corticosteroid, and cycloplegic eye drops were
subsequently discontinued. Two weeks after discontinuation of oseltamivir, UCVA was 20/20 OU and IOP was 16 mm Hg OU. Pentacam revealed that
ACD increased by 1.23 mm OD and 1.27 mm OS, CV increased by 116 mm3 OD and 115 mm3 OS, and angle increased by 13.4° OD and 19.5° OS compared
with the measures at the initial visit [Table 1] [Figs. 2c and d]. UBM showed no annular ciliochoroidal effusion in either eye [Figs. 1c and
d]. Bilateral AACG and transient myopia may be induced by drugs, such as topiramate, 3,4-methylenedioxymethamphetamine, and cabergoline. On
the basis of the previous reports, different possible mechanisms of drug-induced AACG have been proposed, including ciliary body swelling
and ciliochoroidal effusion. In the presented patient, UBM findings of ciliochoroidal effusion during the acute stage with resolution of
these findings during the convalescent stage indicated that the mechanism of bilateral AACG and transient myopia was related to the
ciliochoroidal effusion. Ciliochoroidal effusion causes an anterior rotation of the ciliary body, which results in the anterior displacement
of the lens-iris diaphragm. The annular ciliochoroidal effusion reduces the distance between the opposing ciliary processes and slackens the
lens zonules, which results in an increase in the lens thickness. These changes may lead to AACG associated with shallow anterior chambers
and myopia, as seen in our patient. Ciliochoroidal effusion has been reported in association with dopaminergic drugs. The systemic
administration of oseltamivir increased dopamine release in the rat medial prefrontal cortex in the previous study. The authors postulated
that the increase in the dopamine during oseltamivir treatment may have caused an abnormal behavior in young patients. Dopaminergic neuron
in the eye and the presence of aqueous humor dopamine and adenylate cyclase linked dopamine receptors in the ciliary body have been reported
in the experimental study. Therefore, fluid movement in ciliochoroidal effusion in the presented patient may be related to the membrane
potential alteration induced by the effects of dopamine on adenylate cyclase. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of
ciliochoroidal effusion associated with oseltamivir. The results obtained from this patient suggest that a history of oseltamivir must be
determined in a patient with bilateral AACG and transient myopia due to ciliochoroidal effusion. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of
Interest: None declared.
