A 60-year-old Indian woman who was suffering from recurrent pneumonia presented with major haemoptysis and a right-sided pleuritic chest
pain. Initially the patient required resuscitation to optimise her haemodynamic parameters while oxygenation remained satisfactory. An
urgent computed tomography pulmonary angiogram revealed right middle lobe syndrome which constitutes chronic collapse of the middle lobe
accompanied by bronchiectatic changes. Angiography identified an abnormal bronchial artery and venous shunting which was embolised
satisfactorily. Subsequently she underwent bronchoscopy which was unremarkable. Her post-operative course was uneventful and patient was
discharged home. During the post-operative follow-up patient remained stable and was discharged from out-patient clinic after two years.
Middle lobe syndrome (MLS) is an uncommon disease involving the right middle lobe and/or left lingula. This syndrome which is characterised
by the chronic collapse of the middle lobe and bronchiectasis has been previously described in both adults and children . The collapse is
not usually associated with airway obstruction. Clinical manifestations are in consistence with that of pulmonary infection symptoms; that
is cough as well as fever and less commonly dyspnoea, haemoptysis and pleuritic chest pain. Other reported histopathological features are
chronic bronchitis with lymphoid hyperplasia, organising pneumonitis and granulomatous inflammation . Although patients may remain
asymptomatic, a wide spectrum of signs and symptoms has been reported . A 60-year-old Indian woman presented to the accident and emergency
department with increasing haemoptysis. The onset of haemoptysis was acute with no associated cough. Although her oxygenation was
satisfactory, she was tachycardic with heart rate of 109 beat-per-minute and blood pressure of 100/65 mmHg, categorising the haemorrhage as
class 2 . The bleeding was associated with a mild right sided pleuritic chest pain which was previously experienced particularly during the
pneumonia episodes. Her past medical history included recurrent pneumonia for which she received various courses of antibiotics with no
identified micro-organism. She also was screened for tuberculosis with negative results. The latest pneumonia pattern was radiologically in
consistence with that of atypical pneumonia involving the middle zone of the right lung. Initially she was resuscitated with the fluids to
stabilise the vital signs. The blood results including the coagulation profile and haemoglobin were unremarkable and within the normal
limits. Immediately she underwent a computed tomography pulmonary angiogram (CTPA) which revealed right middle lobe collapse with
bronchiectatic changes (Figure 1). Angiography identified an abnormal bronchial artery and venous shunting. The scheduled bronchoscopy was
postponed proceeding with the radiological embolisation. The bronchial artery embolisation performed satisfactorily and the bleeding stopped
completely (Figure 2). Thereafter she underwent bronchoscopy which was unremarkable with removal of some clots form the bronchial tree. Her
post-operative course was satisfactory and patient was discharged home on her post-operative day two. Initially the patient was reviewed
after 6 weeks, then one and two years in the out-patient clinic with the view to resecting the right middle lobe. As the patient remained
stable with no complications throughout the follow-up and preferred not to undergo the surgery, at the end of follow-up she was discharged
from the out-patient clinic. CTPA (A:axial, B:sagittal): Right middle lobe collapse and bronchiectasis (arrows) . (A) Angiography (pre-
embolisation): Enlarged abnormal right bronchial artery with abnormal venous shunting (arrows). (B) Post-embolisation. Haemoptysis is one of
the manifestations of a patient with MLS . It is estimated that 90% of haemoptysis originates from the bronchial tree circulation which may
commonly be associated with anomalous bronchial artery . Although in this case the malformation of the bronchial artery was ruled out, the
chronic infection, bronchiectasis and atelectasis imposed an abnormal vasculature to the regional anatomy of the bronchial artery and its
branches which can be labelled as a culprit for acute haemoptysis. There is a consensus amongst clinicians that an urgent chest CT-scan
should precede the bronchoscopy for haemoptysis investigation . There is a paucity of evidence in the literature regarding the surgical
management of MLS. A recent study on a limited number of children demonstrated that the surgical resection of the right middle lobe is an
option when the medical therapy fails . While more evidence is required for surgical resection of complicated or uncomplicated MLS, early
diagnosis and embolisation remains the mainstay of haemoptysis management in these patients. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-
Chief of this journal. CT –scan: Computed tomography scan; CTPA: Computed tomography pulmonary angiogram; MLS: Middle lobe syndrome. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. KS reviewed and resuscitated the patient and wrote the manuscript; MK conducted the
investigations and literature search; VZ admitted the patient under his care, instructed and supervised the management. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. Except for the authors there was no person who substantially contributed towards the study or the manuscript.
There is no source of funding.
