We report a rare case of a deep stromal keratitis with a chronic indolent course, diagnosed as microsporidial keratitis from corneal
scrapings. The patient’s condition worsened despite medical therapy and penetrating keratoplasty was performed. The histopathology of the
corneal tissue revealed multiple microsporidial spores in the posterior stroma and the endothelial exudates, whereas there was no clinical
or histopathological breach in Descemet’s membrane. This is the second report in the literature to report that micropsoridial spores can
cross the intact Descemet’s membrane. Microspordia are emerging pathogens in recalcitrant stromal keratitis.1 The disease is difficult to
diagnose both clinically and by laboratory diagnosis. Existing reports have shown clinical and histological evidence that the disease is
restricted to the stroma, with no recurrence after penetrating keratoplasty.12 Currently, there is little evidence demonstrating penetration
into the anterior chamber (AC). We report a case of stromal microsporidial keratitis with presence of an intact Descemet membrane (DM) and
demonstrable microsporidial spores in the AC exudates. This finding suggests the possiblity of recurrence of disease even after penetrating
keratoplasty. This is only the second case to demostrate this rare finding. A 26 year old healthy male presented on November 1, 2008 with a
one-year history of recurrent redness, pain and watering in the right eye. The patient was a non-diabetic, with good general health and
nutritional status. The condition waxed and waned despite multiple ophthalmology consults, and therapy that included topical antibiotics,
corticosteroids and oral antiviral medication. Best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was counting fingers at one meter. Slit lamp examination
showed intact, edematous epithelium, while the underlying stroma showed multiple, gray-white irregular to oval shaped flocculent infiltrates
with indistinct borders; diffusely distributed over the entire cornea (except the limbus), involving the deep stroma [Figures 1a and b].
Endothelial exudates were also noted. The left eye was essentially normal. (a and b) Slit lamp photographs showing the dense corneal
infiltrates at presentation. (c) Persistence of stromal infiltrates three weeks after therapy. (d) Clear graft two months following
penetrating keratoplasty Corneal scrapings were obtained. The smear revealed multiple oval, spore-like structures, with a waist-band which
was Gram positive, 1% acid fast positive and showed blue fluorescence on potassium hydroxide with calcofluor white stain, confirming a
diagnosis of microsporidial stromal keratitis. Medical therapy was instituted with topical 0.02% chlorhexidine gluconate ever half-hour and
oral albendazole 400mg twice daily; however here was no response even after three weeks [Figure 1c]. The patient underwent penetrating
keratoplasty. Surgery was performed under local anesthesia. A 9.5mm corneal graft was sutured with 16 interrupted sutures into a 10 mm
recipient bed. The entire area of inflitrated corneal tissue was excised. Postoperatively, the patient was prescribed topical chlorhexidine
2% eight times a day (formulated in the hospital pharmacy) which was discontinued after three weeks, topical prednisolone acetate 1% eight
times a day tapered over the next several months, and topical atropine sulphate 1% three times a day for two weeks. There was with no
recurrence postoperatively. The visual acuity improved to 20/20 within two months [Figure 1d]. However, a year later, the patient presented
with severe allograft rejection (he had stopped topical steroids) and subsequently the graft failed. An endothelial keratoplasty was
performed and the patient was doing well at the last follow-up, two years postoperatively. The histopathology of the corneal button revealed
an ulcerated cornea with dense inflammatory infiltrates in the stroma composed of neutrophils, lymphocytes and plasma cells with stromal
necrosis. Numerous microsporidial spores were present in the deeper stroma upto the DM [Figures 2a–c] on Gram stain and 1% acid-fast stain.
The DM itself was intact throughout the specimen. The AC exudates noted in some sections showed the presence of microsporidial spores
[Figure 2d arrow]. (a) Section of the cornea shows epithelial ulceration, dense stromal infiltrates and AC exudates posterior to and
separate from the DM (H and E, ×10). The DM is intact through the specimen. (b) 1% acid fast stain shows brightly stained microsporidial
spores within the posterior stroma. (c) Under higher magnification (×100), the spores show the characteristic waist-band. (d) ×100
magnification with 1% acid fast stain showing presence of microsporidial spore (arrow) in the AC exudate Microsporidial keratitis is an
emerging, opportunistic clinical entity caused by parasites belonging to the genus microspora.1 Clinically the stromal form presents with
mid to deep stromal infiltrate mimicking stromal HSV keratitis. Vemuganti et al, reported the largest series (five cases) of stromal
microsporidial keratitis from this center that underwent penetrating keratoplasty, where the presentation ranged from stromal infiltrate to
thinning with descemetocele formation.1 Interestingly, Font et al, reported a case of stromal microsporidial keratitis which had recurrence
of infection following therapeutic DALK; requiring a penetrating keratoplasty.2 Das et al, recently reported a case of microsporidial
keratits with the spores noted in the AC exudates.3 There have been reports on intraocular microsporidiosis causing endophthalmitis45 or
sclero-uvetis with retinal detachment,6 however the mechanism of spread was presumed to be a systemic in these reports and none-of these
patients had corneal involvement. With the current cases being reported, it is possible that the spread could have been through the intact
ocular tissues rather than a hematologic route. Our case clearly demonstrates the presence of microsporidia in the AC exudates; which to our
knowledge is the second case reported in literature. This finding may suggest a hitherto unknown, additional pathogenic mechanism of
microsporidia with an ability to penetrate the intact DM (similar to fungi, under which these organisms have been reclassified7). With an
increasing trend towards DALK, it would be important to note that in the presence of endothelial exudates or AC exudates, a penetrating
keratoplasty is preferred over lamellar keratoplasty, as the latter may be associated with recurrence of infection. Hyderabad Eye Research
Foundation and Hyderabad Eye Institute. Source of Support: Hyderabad Eye Institute Conflicting Interest: No declared.
