In vivo confocal microscopy is becoming a mandatory examination to study corneal abnormalities such as drug deposits in systemic disease. A
female diagnosed with fibromyalgia on systemic chloroquine for 9 months presented for an ophthalmic examination. Confocal microscopy was
performed using the Confoscan 4 (Nidek Co. Ltd., Gamagori, Japan) and multiple highly reflective deposits in the epithelial basal cells were
found, that were consistent with choloquine. Deposits were also present in the wing cell layer. In the anterior stroma these deposits were
rare. Atypically shaped and branched nerves were also present in the anterior stroma. Corneal deposits of chloroquine can be evaluated by
confocal microscopy. Confocal microscopy provides information on corneal metabolism and physiology. Chloroquine keratopathy can affect the
anterior stroma in addition to the epithelium. Fibromyalgia is a syndrome characterized by chronic widespread musculoskeletal pain and
stiffness in association with fatigue and poor sleep. The classification of the American College of Rheumatology Criteria for fibromyalgia
includes the presence of pain in all four body quadrants in combination with excess tenderness to manual palpation in at least 11 of 18
muscle-tendon sites, in the absence of clinically demonstrable peripheral nociceptive causes.1 Although some biological mechanisms have been
identified, the etiology and pathogenesis of fibromyalgia remain unclear.23 The prevalence of FMS in the general population is estimated to
be between 1.3% and 4.8%.4 Chloroquine can be prescribed for management of this syndrome. However the potential for ocular toxicity due to
chloroquine therapy is well documented.5 Confocal microscopy is one method to evaluate the corneal toxicity of chloroquine. The clinical
application of confocal microscopy in ophthalmology dates back to the 1960s. Over the time confocal microscopy has been used to study the
structural morphology of ocular tissues such as the cornea and to monitor changes that occur with time. This case report presents a
relatively uncommon application of confocal microscopy for evaluating corneal toxicity in a patient taking systemic chloroquine for
fibromyalgia. A 64-year-old Caucasian female was referred by her rheumatologist. She had a medical history of fybromyalgia that had been
diagnosed in December 2008. In November 2009 the patient began treatment with a daily dose of 250 mg of chloroquine bisphosphonate
(Clorochina, Bayer Italia, Milano, Italy) for 9 months. The only ocular symptom was modest dry eye that was controlled with artificial
tears. At presentation, the fybromialgia was well controlled. The only significant findings on slit-lamp biomicroscopy were corneal deposits
and vortex keratopathy (cornea verticillata) [Figure 1]. Uncorrected visual acuity was 0.0 LogMAR in the right eye and 0.0 LogMAR in the
left eye. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was 13 mm Hg bilaterally and the fundus examination was unremarkable. The patient was examined using a
scanning slit corneal confocal white-light microscopy Confoscan 4 (Nidek Co. Ltd., Gamagori, Japan), with a ×40 lens. Confoscan 4 was used
to study the corneal morphology and assess layer reflectivity and cellular density. Slit lamp biomicroscopy: fine corneal deposits The main
parameters for the acquisition sequence were set with a z-axis range of movement of 1000 μm, thus giving a theoretical z-axis distance
between images in the scans of 10 μm. Each frame is approximately 400×300 μm (area, 0.12 mm2). The position on the z-axis of the corneal
thickness of each image was obtained using the Z-Scan function of the instrument. The Z-Scan is a graph that plots the depth (expressed in
microns) on the x-axis and the level of reflectivity (expressed in arbitrary numerical units called light reflectance units, LRU) on the
y-axis, of each corneal image included in the scan. Oxibuprocaine cloridrate 0.4% was instilled in each eye (Novesina 0, 4%, Novartis Farma,
Origgio, Italy), than a drop of polyacrylic acid 0.2% (Viscotirs gel, Medivis, Catania, Italy) was placed on the microscope probe as a
coupling agent to avoid epithelial damage. No chloroquine deposits were observed on the endothelium of both eyes. Polymegathism and
pleomorphism were detected that were likely age related [Figure 2a]. (a) Endothelium: no chloroquine deposits were observed, (b) Deep
stroma: no chloroquine deposits were observed, (c) Anterior stroma: chloroquine deposits were rarely represented No chloroquine deposits
were observed in the deep stroma bilaterally [Figure 2b]. Chloroquine deposits were rare in the anterior stroma [Figure 2c]. Some anterior
stromal nerves with an atypical shape, branches, and a thinner diameter were present [Figure 3a]. (a) Nerves: few anterior stromal nerves
with atypical shape and branches and thinner diameter, (b) Epithelium: chloroquine deposits were detectable in epithelium. The cells lost
their well-marked borders because of the reflectivity of the drug deposits Chloroquine deposits were detectable in the basal and
intermediate layers. The cells lost their well-marked borders due to the reflectivity of drug deposits [Figure 3b]. Systemic medication use
may lead to deposition of some components in different tissues. Although chloroquine is not the gold standard for treatment of fibromyalgia
and similar inflammatory diseases, it is a reasonable alternative for many cases. Drugs from the chloroquine family (chloroquine,
hydroxychloroquine, amodiaquine) may produce ocular toxicity involving the cornea (vortex keratopathy), ciliary body, lens (posterior
subcapsular cataracts), and retina (bull’s eye maculopathy).5 Corneal deposits are usually located in the epithelium and the anterior
stroma, intracellularly within lysosomes.67 Confocal microscopy provides histologic sections of corneal tissue. Hence, confocal microscopy
is an important method to evaluate the distribution of chloroquine (or other medications for inflammatory disease) in the cornea.89 In vivo
confocal microscopy of patients treated with hydroxychloroquine has shown formation of corneal inclusion bodies in the anterior stroma that
are likely to be phagocytosed by activated keratocytes, causing these cells to be highly reflective.9 In this case report, we found the
presence of hyperflective deposits in the basal and intermediate epithelium corneal cells. These inclusions measured between 2 and 12 μm.
Some bright microdots were detected in the anterior stroma indicating keratocyte activation. Some anterior stromal nerves appeared thinner
than normal and convoluted suggesting that chloroquine could affect neural structures also. The histologic sections of corneal tissue in
vivo using confocal microscopy are a very useful method to study corneal architecture. Future applications of confocal microscopy will
include the study of corneal metabolism. This case report is one of a handful of imaging studies of corneal deposits due to cholorquine
evaluated by confocal microscopy. Comparison of future studies to this case report may be helpful in evaluation of similar keratopathies.
Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No.
