Paraganglioma of the urinary bladder is a rare tumor. Herein we sought to describe a case of locally advanced paraganglioma of the urinary
bladder managed by partial cystectomy and extended pelvic lymph node dissection. The case of a 43-year old Haitian male with locally
advanced paraganglioma of the urinary bladder is presented in detail. Through surgical extirpation, our patient was rendered disease-free.
Eighteen months later the patient is doing well without symptoms but is noted to have subcentimeter bilateral pulmonary nodules and
retroperitoneal lymph nodes. No further therapy has been initiated at this time. Patients with localized tumors have an extremely favorable
prognosis and may be managed by less aggressive modalities, whereas patients with metastatic disease have a significant reduced survival
rate despite aggressive treatment. Paraganglioma of the urinary bladder is a rare tumor that originates from chromaffin tissue of the
sympathetic nervous system associated with the urinary bladder wall. These tumors of the sympathetic nervous tissue may be non-functional or
functional, i.e., secrete catecholamine causing paroxysmal hypertension, palpitation, and micturition syncope . Typically these tumors
possess the capacity to invade and thus are deemed malignant, yet lack mitoses and cellular dissociation that are usually associated with
malignant tumors . Numerous, small series case reports have been published in the English literature since it was first reported in 1953 by
Zimmerman et al.. Herein we sought to describe a case of locally advanced paraganglioma of the urinary bladder treated by partial cystectomy
and extended lymph node dissection. Paraganglioma (aka pheochromocytomas) of the urinary bladder are exceedingly rare tumors accounting for
less than 0.05% of all bladder tumors and less than 1% of all pheochromocytomas. In the genitourinary tract, the urinary bladder is the most
common site for paragangliomas (79.2%), followed by the urethra (12.7%), pelvis (4.9%), and ureter (3.2%) . Furthermore, approximately 10%
of all extra adrenal pheochromocytomas are malignant . Several reviews have been written on paragangliomas of the urinary bladder . Symptoms
reported in the current literature range from the typical micturition attacks of headache and palpitations to more abstract signs such as
paraesthesias and dyspnea. While our patient lacked some of the more common presenting symptoms of bladder paraganglioma, e.g.,
hypertension, he did have hematuria and lower urinary tract symptoms, testifying to the variability in which this disease can present
itself. Furthermore, the consequences of hypertension itself may muddle the initial diagnostic picture of these patients. Patients often
seek medical attention only when their hypertension has become so advanced as to cause syncope, retinopathy, or intracranial hemorrhage .
Physicians must constantly be wary of an undiagnosed paraganglioma in the setting of unexplained hypertension or associated symptoms.
Reported treatment options for localized or locally advanced paraganglioma of the urinary bladder include radical cystectomy, partial
cystectomy and transurethral resection. Approximately 3% of patients with reported follow-up died due to their cancer, illustrating that
good survival rates can be achieved with the above therapies. It is important to note, however, that over 20% of patients did have
recurrence or metastases at the last known follow-up . In the face of metastatic paraganglioma, surgical treatment is rarely curative. It
may adequately prolong survival by reducing comorbid conditions (i.e. hypertension) and reducing tumor burden, but adjunct therapies are
usually indicated . Thus patients should be counseled according to their individual presentation and disease status. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. After MD Anderson Cancer Center
Orlando institutional review board approval, the clinical and hospital records of our patient, a 43-year old Haitian male who presented to
our outpatient clinic in February 2011 were reviewed for demographics, clinical and pathologic information as well as outcome. A 43-year old
Haitian male presented to an outside urologist for intermittent painless gross hematuria for the past six months. The patient reported some
mild urinary symptoms (frequency, intermittency, and nocturia times three, AUA symptom score of 8). He denied a history of headaches, blurry
vision, or other symptoms associated with micturition such as palpitations or dizziness. No abnormalities were noted on physical
examination. The patient underwent a computed tomography of the chest, abdomen and pelvis without and with intravenous contrast that
demonstrated a 3.7 cm by 1.8 cm mass on the anterior/superior aspect of the bladder associated with bulky bilateral pelvic adenopathy
(Figure 1). Urinary normetanephrine was elevated at 5412 μg/24 hr. The patient was taken to the operating room in February of 2011 where the
bladder tumor was biopsied and found to be a paraganglioma. He was then referred to MD Anderson Cancer Center Orlando for further
management. The patient was evaluated by both Urologic Oncology and Medical Oncology, who confirmed the above information. The patient was
not hypertensive; his physical exam remained normal. In addition, serum creatinine, alkaline phosphatase and hemoglobin were noted to be
0.9 mg/dL, 96 IU/L and 12.4 g/dL, respectively. Urinary dipstick was negative. The patient was placed on Diltiazem extended release 180 mg
orally once a day. At the end of February, the patient was taken back to the operating room for a transurethral resection of the bladder
tumor and random bladder biopsies. The entire tumor was visible was resected. Exam under anesthetic did not demonstrate a palpable mass or
bladder pedicle thickening. Pathology demonstrated paraganglioma confirmed with positive immunohistochemical stains for both synaptophysin
and chromagranin. Random bladder biopsies and prostatic urethral biopsy were negative for malignancy. Contrasted enhanced CT axial images of
the pelvis. (A) Initial bladder tumor measuring 3.7 cm by 1.8 cm, (B) enlarged right pelvic lymph node (other cuts demonstrated bulky
bilateral pelvic adenopathy), (C) post-operative imaging (12 months) no bladder tumor evident and (D) post-operative imaging (12 months) no
pathologic pelvic adenopathy. Approximately one month later, the patient underwent a partial cystectomy and extended bilateral pelvic lymph
node dissection. Intraoperative frozen sections of the urinary bladder demonstrated negative surgical margins. The patient had an
unremarkable immediate post-operative course and was discharge to home on post-operative day 6 with a urinary catheter in place. One week
later the urinary catheter was removed. Final pathology demonstrated invasive paraganglioma 2.7 cm in maximum dimension. Final surgical
margins are negative. The tumor cells are diffusely and strongly positive for CD56, Chromagranin A, and synaptophysin, but are negative for
cytokeratin 7, cytokeratin 20, cytokeratin AE1/3, and S-100. Twenty-three lymph nodes removed with 13 of the nodes involved with metastatic
disease. Pathologic imaging is illustrated in Figure 2. H&E staining of primary tumor notes typical zellballen growth pattern of tumor.
Eighteen months later the patient is doing well without symptoms but is noted to have subcentimeter bilateral pulmonary nodules and
retroperitoneal lymph nodes. No further therapy has been initiated at this time. Paraganglioma of the urinary bladder is shown. (A) H&E of
tumor from partial cystectomy specimen (40× magnification), (B) H&E of tumor from partial cystectomy specimen (200× magnification), (C) H&E
of metastatic tumor from one of 13 positive lymph nodes (40× magnification), (D) Chromogranin IHC (40× magnification), (E) synaptophysin IHC
(40× magnification) and (F) CD56 IHC (40× magnification). In summary, paragangliomas of the urinary bladder tend to be functional. Initial
presentation is extremely varied in these cancers, necessitating a low threshold of suspicion in the face of hypertension or hematuria.
Patients with localized tumors have a favorable prognosis and may be managed by less radical modalities, whereas patients with metastatic
disease have a significantly reduced survival rate. Moving forward, it would be helpful to standardize the reporting guidelines of
paragangliomas cases to better understand the natural process and outcomes. AUA: American Urological Association; VMA: Vanillylmandelic
acid; H&E: Hematoxylin and eosin; IHC: Immunohistochemical. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors have read
and approved the final manuscript. JB, BS Acquisition of data, statistical analysis and drafting manuscript. AL MD Pathologic interpretation
of case report and acquisition pathologic images. JH, MD Analysis of data and drafting of manuscript. CJR, MD, MBA Study concept and design,
drafting of manuscript.
