Granulicatella spp. is a fastidious bacteria responsible for bacteremia and endocarditis which are fatal in about 20% of the cases. These
severe infections are uncommon in children under 17 years of age and have proven extremely difficult to treat. We report a brief review of
the literature and two cases of NVS bacteremia by Granulicatella complicated by infective endocarditis (IE). The first one is that of a
7-year-old Caucasian female with Shone syndrome and IE involving the pulmonary valve homograft, confirmed by echocardiography. The second
case is that of a 5-year-old Caucasian male. In this patient echocardiogram was negative for signs of IE; however, a “possible” IE was
suspected on the basis of a cardiac catheterization 3 weeks before the onset of fever. Since in both our patients clinical failure of first
line antibiotic treatment was observed, we used a combination of meropenem with another anti-streptococcal drug with excellent results. In
Granulicatella bacteremia in the pediatric population, combination antimicrobial therapy including meropenem should be considered as a
second line treatment in non-responding patients. Granulicatella is a fastidious Gram-positive nutritionally variant streptococcus (NVS)
that is classified in two different genera: Abiotrophia which includes only A. defectiva and the genus Granulicatella which comprises three
species (G. adiacens, G. elegans and G. balaenopterae). Since these organisms require pyridoxal or thiol group supplementation for growth,
their isolation may be difficult. Granulicatella spp is part of the normal flora of the oral cavity, the genitourinary tract, and the
intestinal tract. Although NVS are found as part of normal flora of the upper respiratory, urogenital, and gastrointestinal tracts, their
ability to cause clinically significant disease has been increasingly recognized. The most frequent clinical syndromes caused by NVS are
endocarditis and bacteraemia but these microorganisms have been implicated also in several others infections such as central nervous system
infections , sinusitis, otitis media, prostatitis, cholangitis, arthritis . In vivo and in vitro antimicrobial susceptibility tests suggest
that peniclillin plus aminoglycoside or vancomycin alone should be considered as therapeutically equivalent , although antibiotic resistance
has been described for both these drugs . IE is uncommon in children under 17 years of age, but it is a cause of significant morbidity.
Notably, 90% of IE cases occur in individuals who have structural heart disease, usually congenital. However, even children with normal
hearts, could be at risk of IE due to invasive procedures such as bronchoscopy, tonsillectomy etc. . The clinical presentation of IE is
usually indolent with prolonged low grade fever associated with non-specific symptoms such as myalgia, arthralgia, headache and generalize
malaise whilst classical signs of IE (e.g. Roth spots, Osler nodes) are very rare in children . Mortality rate ranges from 4% to 18% and
complications include valvular insufficiency, congestive heart failure, embolization, mycotic aneurism, etc. Cardiovascular surgery may be
life-saving in these patients, but decision for surgical intervention must be individualized . NVS have been implicated in approximately 5%
of cases of bacterial endocarditis in the adult population and carry a worse prognosis compared to infection with other streptococci . In
patients with endocarditis caused by Granulicatella, classic endocarditis signs such as digital clubbing, Osler nodes and petechiae are
rare. Pre-existing valvular pathology is a frequent predisposing factor. Because of the difficulties in isolating this organism its role as
a pathogen in endocarditis could be underestimated. Consequently, some cases of culture-negative endocarditis could be attributed to this
microorganism . Here, we report two cases of paediatric NVS bacteraemia, one of which with confirmed heart localization and review of the
literature. The first case concerns a 7-year-old Caucasian female with Shone syndrome (characterized by coartation of aorta, mitral stenosis
and subvalvular aortic stenosis). At the age of 1 month she underwent a coartectomy and 6 years later she underwent a Ross-Konno procedure
(aortic valve replacement with a pulmonary autograft and pulmonary valve replacement with a homograft conduit) plus mitral valvuloplasty.
The last echocardiogram, performed 1 month before admission to our hospital, showed a subtotal obstruction of the conduit. She was admitted
to our hospital with a history of 2-weeks of nocturnal fever, treated at home with ceftriaxone without success. The patient appeared acutely
ill; clinical examination revealed a 2-3/6 systolic murmur and hepatosplenomegaly. A complete blood count revealed anemia (Hb 10.3 g/dl),
white blood cells count 15,760/ml with 84.2% neutrophils and 11.7% lymphocytes, CRP 4.86 mg/dl. Transthoracic echocardiogram was negative
for signs of IE. The child had fever to 39°C. Vancomycin and gentamicin were started, with subsequent defervescence. Blood samples were
taken for cultures. After 4 days of therapy, fever recurred and was associated with shaking chills. Gram-positive cocci in short chains were
isolated from blood cultures, but there was very scant growth on routine bacterial culture media. Applied Biosystems 3130 and 3130xl Genetic
Analyzers identified the organism as G. adiacens. Antibiotic susceptibility tests (AST) were not available. A repeat echocardiogram
demostrated a filamentous (10 × 2 mm) on the homograft. Antibiotic therapy was changed to vancomycin plus meropenem. After four weeks,
therapy was switched to oral amoxicillin and clavulanic acid. The patient began to complain of right-side abdominal and chest pain.
Suspecting pulmonary embolism, a lung computer tomography scan was performed. This revealed a pyramid-shaped area of pleural-based
consolidation in the posterior segment of the right lower lobe. No significant filling defects of the pulmonary arteries and their major
branches were evident. Intravenous treatment with vancomycin plus meropenem was restarted and continued for additional two weeks; low
molecular weight heparin was prescribed. However, due to a persistent dysfunction of the conduct, it was replaced with a pulmonary valved
homograft. Cultures of prosthetic material were negative. Six months later the patient was doing well and had negative blood cultures. A
5-year-old Caucasian male was brought to our hospital with a 2-month history of fever and associated diarrhoea and leg pain. His past
medical history was significant for infundibular pulmonary stenosis. Cardiac catheterization had been performed 3 weeks before the onset of
fever. At admission, he presented general malaise, asthenia, anorexia, pale skin and a systolic murmur. Laboratory tests revealed a white
blood count of 8,370/ml with 70% neutrophils and CRP 2.99 mg/dl. Blood cultures were obtained and empiric antibiotic treatment with
cefotaxime and gentamicin was started. Transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms revealed no vegetations and chest x-ray and
abdominal ultrasound were negative. Two blood cultures taken 24 hours apart isolated G. Adiacens, susceptible to cephalosporins, vancomycin,
tetracycline, cloramphenicol, linezolid and resistant to penicillin. Despite antimicrobial therapy, the patient’s fever persisted and five
days after admission two blood cultures were again positive for G. adiacens that was now resistant to beta-lactams, tetracycline,
cloramphenicol, linezolid, susceptible to vancomycin, clindamycin and levofloxacin (MIC 1.5 mcg/ml, 0.125 mcg/ml and 0.38 mcg/ml
respectively). Meropenem was not tested. Therapy was changed to ciprofloxacin (10 mg/kg q12) and meropenem (30 mg/kg q8). Repeated
transthoracic and transesophageal echocardiograms were again unchanged from the patient’s baseline; nonetheless, these findings led us to
consider the patient to have “possible” infective endocarditis according to modified Duke criteria (the patient fulfilled three minor
criteria: fever, predisposing heart condition, microbiological evidence) . Defervescence was observed after one week of treatment and
inflammatory markers normalized. Three blood cultures were sterile. Therapy was continued for a total of four weeks. At a follow-up visit 6
months after discontinuation of therapy, the patient was doing well and had sterile blood cultures. A review of the literature on
endocarditis due to Granulicatella spp was performed by a PubMed search for the period between 1997 and 2011 using the following keywords:
endocarditis, Granulicatella adiacens, Abiotrophia defectiva, nutritionally variant Streptococci. A study was considered eligible for
inclusion in the review if it reported data on the localization of the disease, isolation of the bacterium, antibiotic treatment (type and,
in some cases, duration), and outcome of patients. Our search identified 16 relevant articles, describing a total of 20 patients (fourteen
men, five women, one unspecified), with mean age of 47 years (Table 1). The analysis of clinical aspects of these patients revealed that
nine had risk factors for IE (such as structural heart disease, recent cardiac surgical procedures), echocardiography was negative for signs
of endocarditis in two patient, peripheral stigmata of endocarditis were absent in six and unknown in five. Regarding the treatment, beta-
lactam plus gentamicin was the empiric therapeutic regimen in 18/20 patients; in two cases even rifampin was used in the treatment of
attack. The treatment duration varied (from 2 to 6 weeks) (in seven cases treatment data were not available). Combined surgical and medical
treatment was undertaken in eight patients and in two cases there were relapse after discontinuation of therapy. Christensen et al. reported
3 pediatric cases with IE due to Granulicatella spp. Case reports of Granulicatella spp. Endocarditis described in the literature M: male;
F: female;/: unknown; Pi: piperacillin; T: tazobactam; G: gentamicin; V: vancomicin; P: penicillin; Cl: clindamycin; R: rifampin; Ax:
amoxicillin; Ap: ampicillin; Cx: cefotaxime; Ce: ceftriaxone; B: beta-lactam; Ox: oxacillin; Te: teicoplanin. We reported two cases of
Granulicatella bacteremia and IE. Endocarditis involving the valve homograft was demonstrated in one by echocardiography and was strongly
suspected in the second case. Both patients failed first line antibiotics, but subsequently responded to a second line regimen including
meropenem. In the adult population, NVS endocarditis has a higher mortality rate (17%), then IE caused by enterococci (9%) or viridans
streptococci (0-12%) . It is not clear if mortality is similarly increased in the pediatric population. NVS endocarditis may be extremely
difficult to treat. In particular, treatment of Abiotrophia/Granulicatella infection is complicated by variable susceptibility to commonly
used antistreptococcal antibiotics, such as penicillin and ceftriaxone, as well as significant resistance to macrolides . Vancomycin
demonstrates susceptibility in vitro, while gentamicin and rifampicin may be useful for synergy . Nevertheless, treatment failure was
observed in about 41% of the cases, despite sensitivity of the organisms to the antibiotics used in two-thirds of these cases , and almost
27% of reported cases required prosthetic valve replacement . Moreover, the optimal duration of treatment has not been elucidated. Since in
both our patients failed first line antibiotic treatment was observed, we used a combination of meropenem with another anti-streptococcal
drug, based on previous reports suggesting up to 96% of strains may be susceptible to meropenem . To our knowledge this is the first
description of Granulicatella spp bacteraemia successfully treated with a combination therapy including meropenem. Blood cultures quickly
became sterile and surgical therapy was not required (conduit obstruction observed in the first case was not clearly a direct consequence of
IE, since previous dysfunction had been documented and cultures of the excised graft were sterile). AST of serial isolates from the first
patient was obtained and it showed unexpected results. The initial blood culture isolate had the expected patterns of antibiotic
sensibility. However, a second isolate, obtained after 5 days of treatment was resistant to cephalosporins, tetracycline, chloramphenicol
and linezolid and the MIC for vancomycin had increased to 1.5 mcg/ml, a concentration that may predict a poor in vivo response. Of note, to
our knowledge this is the first report of a strain of Granulicatella adiacens that is resistant to linezolid. In conclusion, in
Granulicatella IE in the pediatric population, a combination antibiotic regimen including meropenem should be considered as second line
treatment in patients who fail to respond to conventional recommendations. Finally, pediatricians should be aware of the possibility of
Granulicatella bacteremia and IE in little patients with structural heart disease or prosthetic cardiac valves and those undergoing cardiac
procedures. Written informed consents were obtained from both patient’s parents for publication of these case reports. A copy of the written
consents is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. NVS: Nutritionally variant Streptococcus; AST: Antibiotic
susceptibility tests; MIC: Minimum inhibitory concentration; IE: Infective endocarditis. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. Each author has contributed greatly to write this article. MDL and PB have been involved in the data collection and in drifting
the manuscript. DA, SC and MAC have made substantial contribute to the review of the literature.GR, FICC and PD’A have been involved in the
diagnostic and clinical management of two patients and have given final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and
approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2431/13/61/prepub We would like to thank Dr Nicola Petrosillo for his contribution to this article.
