Rhodotorula mucilaginosa rarely cause keratitis in immunocompromised individuals. A 30 year old male with history of minor trauma presented
with cotton wool like stromal infiltration and hypopyon in left eye. Microbiological examination of corneal scraping showed fungal hyphae
and yeast cells in direct smear. Molecular identification of the organism was performed which showed 100% homology with Rhodotorula
mucilaginosa. Management of these cases is difficult often necessitating surgical procedures. However further reports are necessary to
understand the disease and establish a treatment protocol. Rhodotorula sp. is a pigmented yeast belonging to the Sporidiobolaceae family of
Basidiomycota phylum. It is a common environmental inhabitant found in soil, water, and air. The genus Rhodotorula includes three active
species; Rhodotorula glutinis, Rhodotorula minuta, and Rhodotorula mucilaginosa. This yeast fulfills the criteria of an emerging pathogen
with few incidences of systemic and ocular infection being reported in literature over the last two decades. Rhodotorula mucilaginosa and
Rhodotorula glutinis were occasionally reported as causative agents for corneal ulcer. We hereby report a case of infective keratitis caused
by Rhodotorula mucilaginosa from a tertiary-level eye care centre in eastern India. A 30 years old male, painter by occupation, presented
with a history of pain, redness and watering in the left eye of 1-month duration following fall of paint 14 days prior to the onset of
symptoms. He was treated with fortified cefazolin and fortified tobramycin before referral. At presentation, the best-corrected visual
acuity in his left eye was perception of light with accurate projection of rays in all quadrants. Slit lamp examination revealed a central
corneal infiltrate measuring 9.8×8.2 mm in size. The infiltrate was whitish in colour with a cotton wool texture involving the entire
stromal thickness extending up to the temporal limbus [Fig. 1]. Hypopyon was present measuring 2.8 mm. An area of thinning was noted in the
central portion of the infiltrate. No pigmentation or vascularisation was noted. Right eye examination was within normal limit. Clinical
photo of Rhodotorula keratitis Standard microbiological workup was performed. 10% Potassium hydroxide (KOH) and Gram's staining showed mould
hyphae and yeast [Fig. 2]. Topical treatment with Amphotericin B and natamycin 5% was started hourly along with atropine 1% eye drops used
thrice a day. Systemic therapy consisted of oral itraconazole 100 mg twice daily. On medical therapy, there was progression of infiltrate
necessitating a therapeutic keratoplasty with a 10 mm donor corneal button at 7 days from initial presentation. The excised corneal button
was also subjected to microbiological and histopathological examination. Gram stain image from corneal scraping showing mould hyphae and
yeast After 12 days of incubation orange pigmented glistening yeast like colonies were grown on SDA and PDA [Fig. 3]. Unicellular
blastoconidia and elongated globose forms were seen in Grams staining from culture. Lactophenol cotton blue mount from the colonies showed
capsulated yeast cells without hyphae [Fig. 4]. The yeast was initially identified as Rhodotorula sp. Histopathological sections also showed
the presence of yeast like cells [Fig. 5]. Antifungal sensitivity testing by disc diffusion method (CLSI document M44-A2) showed maximum
sensitivity to Voriconazole; Amphotericin B and Natamycin showed intermediate activity while it was resistant to Itaconazole and
Fluconazole. Recurrence of infection in the graft was noted as reappearance of hypopyon (3mm) along with a temporal full thickness stromal
infiltration (3.2 mm × 2.8mm) involving the graft- host junction, after 18 days with isolation of same organism. Medical therapy with
topical voriconazole (2%) was initiated along with voriconazole lavage of the anterior chamber, which led to resolution of the infection and
subsequently to graft failure at the end of 3 months. Pink pigmented Rhodotorula culture on SDA Lactophenol cotton blue mount in 100X
Histopathological section of Corneal button showing yeast cells Species confirmation was carried out at the Xcelris Genomic Centre,
Ahmedabad, India by using D1/D2 region of LSU (Large SubUnit: 28SrDNA) based on PCR technique. PCR amplified a band with a sequence that was
100% homologous with Rhodotorula mucilaginosa (strain IMUFRJ 52028/ Gen Bank Accession Number: FN428899.1) [Fig. 6]. Chromatograme data with
both primer with Gel image of PCR amplicon Though the first case of Rhodotorula keratitis was reported by Romano et al. way back in 1973,
the pathogenicity of the organism was questionable. This case draws attention primarily because of the rarity of its occurrence and adds to
our understanding of the disease process in the eye. Eye infections constitute the second common group preceded by fungaemia (79% of the
Rhodotorula infections). Until date, keratitis (6 cases) is reportedly more frequent than endophthalmitis (3 cases). or dacryocystitis.
Immunosuppression and indwelling catheters have been the most common risk factor for systemic and ocular infections. The case in this report
involves a young immunocompetent individual with no identifiable risk factors other than the fall of paint into the eye prior to the
incidence. Identification of Rhodotorula sp was made in culture characterized by typical colony morphology and appearance of blastoconidium.
Though these organisms are not classically dimorphic, occasional budding yeast cells may become elongated and be mistaken as pseudohyphae.
The clinical appearance along with the confounding dimorphic appearance on direct smear can be mistaken for Candida infection initially.
Confirmation of Rhodotorula mucilagiosa was done by PCR based DNA sequencing. This species has been the most common organism identified in
keratitis (3 cases) in previous reports. Additionally, there is one report of isolation of Rhodotorula glutinis and two reports where the
specific organism was not identified. Evaluation of sensitivity pattern for this organism was performed which showed in vitro activity of
voriconazole only. This has an important bearing on the management of the case, which showed lack of response to topical therapy with
Amphotericin B and Natamycin. Reports show Amphotericin B to be the drug of choice for Rhodotorula infection with the lowest MICs (MIC90,
0.5 μg/ml) followed by itraconazole and voriconazole. Similarly, failure of medical therapy in Rhodotorula keratitis is reported by Lifshitz
et al. and Casolari et al. Though there ought to be differences in the severity of initial presentation amongst these cases, failure of
medical therapy as well as the sensitivity pattern of this isolate brings forward the inherent difficulties in treatment compared to
systemic infections. While the sensitivity data available in literature mostly centers on systemic infections, drug penetration and toxicity
are additional factors determining outcome in ocular infection. In addition, the sensitivity data obtained in this case may reflect a
pattern for the particular isolated strain only. Though recurrence of infection was controlled with topical voriconazole therapy, it is
difficult to comment upon the role of voriconazole in Rhodotorula mucilaginosa keratitis from a single case report. However, voriconazole
has reportedly shown good intraocular penetration and in vitro activity against Rhodotorula sp. This may become the mainstay therapy in
future with accumulation of further evidence and establishment of appropriate therapeutic principles. Rhodotorula mucilaginosa is a rare
cause of fungal keratitis. Management of these cases is difficult often necessitating surgical procedures probably because of our
unpreparedness in dealing with these organisms. Topical treatment with voriconazole may be considered in non responsive cases. Further
reports are necessary to understand the disease as well as the organism to establish a treatment protocol. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict
of Interest: None declared.
