A 41-year-old male presented to the accident and emergency department with a 3 -hour history of palpitations and mild chest discomfort that
had woken him from sleep. There was no history of previous episodes; indeed he had no past medical, surgical or family history of note. He
was an Iron Man marathon competitor. The admission ECG showed a broad complex tachycardia (figure 1). Atrio-ventricular dissociation was
evident with negative QRS concordance across the chest leads, fusion beats were also visible. The presence of a left bundle branch block,
superior axis morphology further supported a diagnosis of ventricular tachycardia originating from the apex of the right ventricle.
Synchronized DC cardioversion was performed and his resting ECG was abnormal with extensive anteroinferior T wave inversion and Epilson
waves in the leads III and aVF (figure 2). On transthoracic echo the right ventricle was severely dilated and hypokinetic (figure 4). A
coronary angiogram confirmed normal coronary arteries. On signal averaged ECG (SAECG), late low-amplitude ventricular potentials were
evident. 2010 ESC revised Task Force Criteria for the Diagnosis of ARVC Dilated and Hypokinetic Right Ventricle The combined findings of
sustained left bundle, superior axis ventricular tachycardia, repolarisation abnormalities on resting ECG, depolarisation abnormalities on
Signal averaged ECG and regional structural abnormalities on 2d Echo fulfilled the revised Task Force criteria for diagnosis of
Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy (ARVC)4 (Figure 3). A cardiac MRI was performed and demonstrated the classical imaging
findings of ARVC. The right ventricle was dilated, the apex and right ventricular (RV) outflow tract were dyskinetic and there was an
aneurysmal segment in the basal inferior wall of the right ventricle. Abnormal gadolinium contrast enhancement was seen at the RV apex and
also in the left ventricle reflecting disease severity and a higher risk of heart failure and arrhythmias8 (figure 5). Short Axis Cardiac
MRI images before and after Gadolinium contrast showing abnormal uptake at the RV apex and the anteroseptal region of the LV. The patient
was commenced on bisoprolol, and given the high future risk of sudden cardiac death, a dual chamber single coil defibrillator was implanted.
Electrophysiological testing was not undertaken, as it has not been shown to be useful in risk stratification of ARVC9. Definitive diagnosis
of ARVC is dependent on histological findings. However, transvenous endomyocardial biopsy has diagnostic limitations; the fibrofatty change
of ARVC is often patchy and, as biopsies are taken usually taken from the septum rather than the RV free wall (to reduce the risk
perforation), diagnostic yield can be low2. As the Taskforce diagnostic criteria had already been fulfilled in this case we elected not to
undertake a biopsy. He has been referred to medical genetics and is undergoing genetic testing and family screening. The diagnosis had major
implications for his life as he had been advised to cease all high intensity activity. ARVC is an inherited cardiomyopathy5 characterised RV
dilation, thinning & dysfunction. Histologically, the RV myocardium is replaced by fibrous fatty tissue4. It is a disease of the desmosomes;
the mechanical connections between myocytes are disrupted hence the predilection for thin RV and the observation that the disease is more
severe and presents earlier in athletes4. The prevalence of ARVC is estimated at 1:10001. It is an autosomal dominant condition with
variable penetrance. Most patients present between the ages of 10-50 years1. The main presenting symptoms of ARVC are dizziness,
palpitations, atypical chest pain and syncope1,3,8,. It is estimated that ARVC accounts for 20% of sudden cardiac deaths with an overall
mortality rate of 2.5% per year2 A definite diagnosis of ARVC requires the presence of a combination of major and minor clinical criteria as
set out by the 2010 ESC revised Task Force Criteria4. Many patients are asymptomatic and the diagnosis is often only considered due to non-
specific ECG or echocardiographic abnormalities of the right ventricle. Clinicians are encouraged to consider a diagnosis of ARVC in these
patients and to refer on to cardiology for further investigation. VT with a left bundle branch block morphology and an inferior axis
commonly originates from the RV outflow tract (RVOT). In contrast to Arrhythmogenic Right Ventricular Cardiomyopathy, RVOT VT occurs in
structurally normal hearts (occasionally the RVOT is dilated and RV regional wall motion abnormalities are seen on CMR10) and is readily
treatable with verapamil and betablockers or radiofrequency ablation. The ECG in sinus rhythm in RVOT VT is normal as is the SAECG. In
contrast to ARVC, there are no family screening implications with RVOT VT. Other differentials to consider include idiopathic dilated
cardiomyopathy (IDCM)8 and Uhl's anomaly. Patients with IDCM usually have a progressive decline in left ventricular function, in contrast to
ARVC where the right heart is primarily affected. In Uhl's anomaly the RV myocardium is paper thin and devoid of myocardium. There is no
replacement of muscle by fatty tissue. It usually presents in childhood' Epsilon waves are characteristic of ARVC but are only found in
around 30% of cases6,4. They are distinct waves seen between the end of the QRS and start of the T wave and represent low amplitude
potentials caused by delayed conduction through the abnormal right ventricle7. The treatment of ARVC is that of a cardiomyopathy. The goal
is prevention of sudden cardiac death. Right heart failure occurs late. Anything more than moderate-intensity activity is strongly
discouraged4,5. ARVC is a recognised cause of sudden cardiac death. Left bundle branch block morphology ventricular tachycardia or an
abnormal right ventricle on echo in an otherwise well patient should prompt onward referral to cardiology. With Thanks to Dr Nicola
Johnston, RVH who kindly provided the cardiac MRI images
