Nontuberculous mycobacteria are increasingly associated with cutaneous infections after cosmetic procedures. Fractionated CO2 resurfacing, a
widely used technique for photorejuvenation, has been associated with a more favorable side effect profile than alternative procedures. We
describe 2 cases of nontuberculous mycobacterial infection after treatment with a fractionated CO2 laser at a private clinic. Densely
distributed erythematous papules and pustules developed within the treated area within 2 weeks of the laser procedure. Diagnosis was
confirmed by histologic analysis and culture. Both infections responded to a 4-month course of a multidrug regimen. An environmental
investigation of the clinic was performed, but no source of infection was found. The case isolates differed from each other and from
isolates obtained from the clinic, suggesting that the infection was acquired by postprocedure exposure. Papules and pustules after
fractionated CO2 resurfacing should raise the suspicion of nontuberculous mycobacterial infection. Nontuberculous mycobacteria (NTM) are
increasingly associated with cutaneous and soft tissue infections after cosmetic and spa procedures, such as liposuction, mammoplasty,
blepharoplasty, mesotherapy, and whirlpool footbaths during pedicures (1–5). These infections are often difficult to diagnose, resulting in
major treatment delays (4,6). Fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing is a widely used cosmetic procedure that minimizes the appearance of
rhytides (skin wrinkles) and acne scars, and compared with older laser procedures, fractionated CO2 resurfacing is associated with less
downtime and a lower rate of infectious and noninfectious complications (7–9). Although fractionated CO2 laser therapy is associated with
decreased rates of postprocedure infection, infections such as herpes simplex virus, bacterial, and candidal infections have been reported
(8–10). Palm et al. recently reported the first case of NTM infection caused by Mycobacterium chelonae after treatment with a fractionated
CO2 laser for facial resurfacing (11). Given the length of time from the procedure to the diagnosis (≈2 months), a source of NTM infection
was not sought. We report 2 additional cases of NTM infection after treatment with fractionated CO2 resurfacing at the same private clinic
and an extensive environmental investigation to identify a source of infection. This study received formal exemptions from review by the
Institutional Review Boards of the University of North Carolina and Duke University Medical Center. A 53-year-old woman had multiple
erythematous papules and pustules densely distributed over her face, neck, and chest (Figure 1, panel A) 2 weeks after receiving
fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing (Solta Medical Inc., Hayward, CA, USA). Before laser resurfacing, the patient began a prophylactic 7-day
course of valacyclovir because of a history of recurrent herpes labialis. Immediately before the procedure, the patient’s skin was cleansed
with 70% isopropanol. Topical lidocaine/tetracaine ointment was applied to the skin for topical anesthesia, followed by intraoral nerve
block and tumescent anesthesia for the face only. The neck and chest were treated at 40 mJ (treatment level 7 mJ) and 25% coverage, the
forehead at 60 mJ (treatment level 9 mJ) and 35% coverage, and the nose and cheeks at 70 mJ (treatment level 9 mJ) and 35% coverage (total
10.46 kJ). Immediately after the procedure, the patient’s skin was cleansed with sterile saline, and emollient was applied. Postprocedure
home wound care consisted of vinegar solution (vinegar diluted with bottled water) applications once a day and avoidance of showering,
scrubbing, and cosmetics for 72 h. A) Neck and chest of a 53-year-old woman (case-patient 1) 14 days after fractionated CO2 laser
resurfacing. B) Neck of the patient after 5 months of multidrug therapy and pulsed dye laser treatment. Ten days post–laser treatment,
erythematous papules and pustules developed over the face, neck, and chest of the patient. Outpatient treatment was initiated with oral
fluconazole, doxycycline, and valacyclovir for presumed fungal, staphylococcal, or disseminated herpes simplex virus infection. Because of
extensive pruritus, the patient was given locoid lipocin (0.1% hydrocortisone butyrate) and a tapered dose of prednisone for possible
allergic contact dermatitis. She reported adherence to instructions to avoid showering and washing her face with tap water for 72 h after
the procedure. However, she was exposed to dust from sanding she did at home during the week after the procedure. She did not show
improvement over the next 2 days and, after a low-grade fever developed, was hospitalized and received intravenous acyclovir therapy for
presumed disseminated herpes simplex virus infection. When the patient was hospitalized, lesions were nearly confluent over her neck and
chest and scattered over her face but limited to areas treated with the CO2 laser. PCR results for herpes simplex virus, varicella zoster
virus, and fungal cultures were negative. Gram staining showed polymorphonuclear leukocytes and gram-variable rods. Two skin biopsy
specimens demonstrated multiple, tiny foci of suppurative granulomatous dermatitis with elastophagocytosis (Figure 2, panel A) and numerous
long acid-fast rods that were gram positive (Figure 2, panel B). Skin biopsy specimens of a 53-year-old woman (case-patient 1) after
fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing. A) Hematoxylin and eosin–stained and B) Ziehl-Neelsen acid-fast–stained sections show a tiny superficial
microabscess surrounded by sparse granulomatous inflammation. Several groups of acid-fast organisms can be seen at the lower left of panel
B. Original magnifications: 400× in A and 600× in B. The patient was given empiric treatment for nontuberculous mycobacterial infection with
intravenous tigecycline combined with oral moxifloxacin and azithromycin. Two weeks later, tissue culture of her lesions grew M. abscessus.
Drug susceptibility testing showed resistance to moxifloxacin, amoxicillin/clavulanate, tobramycin, trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole,
ciprofloxacin, doripenem, linezolid, and doxycycline, and susceptibility to azithromycin, amikacin, kanamycin, imipenem, cefoxitin, and
tigecycline. One month after initiation of the multidrug regimen, repeat culture of a persistent pustule on her face again grew M.
abscessus. Treatment with tigecycline and moxifloxacin was stopped after 2 months and treatment with azithromycin was stopped after 5 months
because the patient showed clinical improvement. Scarring and dyspigmentation were observed. Thus, for cosmesis, she subsequently underwent
a series of procedures with a pulsed dye laser (Figure 1, panel B). A 52-year-old woman underwent fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing of the
neck at the same private clinic as case-patient 1 (66 days after case-patient 1 was treated). After case-patient 1 was treated, major
changes were made in the treatment protocol to make the procedure sterile. Treatment was performed at 30 mJ (treatment level 7) with 25%
coverage (total 2.96 kJ) but otherwise as for case-patient 1. Nine days after the procedure, painful pustular lesions developed within the
treated area but primarily on the right neck (Figure 3, panel A). The patient reported adherence with instructions to avoid washing with tap
water for 72 hours after the procedure and denied any other exposures. Treatment was initiated with valacyclovir, cephalexin, and topical
antimicrobial drugs. A) Right lateral neck of a 52-year-old woman (case-patient 2) 9 days after fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing. B) Neck
of the patient after 4 months of multidrug therapy. After this patient did not show improvement, a biopsy specimen from a lesion showed
suppurative and granulomatous dermatitis, which suggested NTM infection. Empiric treatment for NTM infection was initiated with azithromycin
and moxifloxacin; some improvement in the lesions was subsequently observed. The organism was identified as M. chelonae. Drug susceptibility
testing showed resistance to cefoxitin and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole; intermediate susceptibility to ciprofloxacin; and susceptibility
to amikacin, clarithromycin, linezolid, and tobramycin. Treatment was continued with azithromycin and moxifloxacin for 4 months and clinical
improvement was observed (Figure 3, panel B). After case 1 was detected, an epidemiologic investigation was requested by the physician
(dermatologist) who had performed the laser resurfacing to investigate possible sources of the infection within the clinic. The
investigation was initiated 27 days after the procedure was performed. We interviewed the dermatologist and reviewed all steps of the
procedure. Several items were obtained and cultured for nontuberculous mycobacteria: a multiuse jar of lidocaine/tetracaine ointment, a
multiuse jar of emollient, a multiuse vial of 1% lidocaine used for nerve blockimg, a nonsterile package of gauze used to apply ointments to
patients’ skin, and a multiuse vial of sodium bicarbonate. Small amounts of samples were swabbed onto 7H10 Middlebrook medium supplemented
with an additional 5 µg/mL of malachite green by using a sterile swab. A gauze square was immersed in ≈250 mL sterile water and agitated
vigorously for ≈1 min. The water was then filtered through a 0.4-μ sterile filter, and the filter was plated directly onto the 7H10
Middlebrook medium. Approximately 0.1 mL of each of the other samples was placed directly onto a 7H10 Middlebrook medium plate and spread
over the plate by using a sterile loop. Plates were incubated at 30°C, and no growth was observed on any plates after 3 months of
incubation. Although no obvious source of infection was identified, several changes to the routine fractionated CO2 resurfacing procedure
were made after case 1 was detected. These changes included use of sterile gloves; sterile gauze; sterile tongue depressors for application
of topical lidocaine/tetracaine ointment; conversion to single-use vials of lidocaine, epinephrine, and sterile saline used for tumescent
anesthesia; and single-use postprocedure emollient. Chloroxylenol (3%) was also added in addition to 70% isopropanol for preprocedure
cleansing. Postprocedure wound care was not changed. After case 2 was detected, a second site visit was arranged 46 days after the procedure
was performed. The dermatologist was interviewed again, and a complete sham procedure was performed while the investigators observed.
Samples were collected from the 3% chloroxylenol, hand scrub, multiuse sodium bicarbonate vial, and single-use lidocaine/tetracaine ointment
vial. The suction canister, connection tubing, and smoke filter were removed from the machine and cultured. Copious amounts of skin debris
were identified in the long and short tubes of the connection tubing, along with an ≈2 to 3–cm layer of skin debris on top of the smoke
filter. Environmental swabs of the countertops and walls in the procedure room were also collected. Water specimens (≈250 mL) were collected
from the taps in the staff and patient bathrooms in the clinic (there was no water source in the procedure room or any other nearby
procedure rooms) and from a fountain in the hallway. Patients were routinely instructed to wash the area with soap and water before coming
to the office (i.e., they did not wash in the patient sink in the office). The ointments were plated directly onto Lowenstein-Jensen (LJ)
and modified 7H10 medium. The environmental swab was plated directly onto LJ medium only. Two 1 × 3–cm pieces of the paper filter from the
filter canister were plated directly onto LJ medium. In addition, the multiuse lidocaine/tetracaine ointment from the first site visit was
plated directly onto LJ medium by using a sterile swab. Approximately 100 mL of sterile water were passed through the canister/short tube
and the long tube from the apparatus and collected in sterile bottles. The resultant suspensions were brown and contained large quantities
of skin debris. Approximately 40 mL of each water sample and 10 mL of the sodium bicarbonate were passed through 0.4-μ filters; each
specimen was processed in duplicate. One filter from each specimen was then plated directly onto LJ medium, and the other filter was plated
onto malachite green–supplemented 7H10 medium. Medium plates were incubated at 30°C. After 1 week, mycobacterial colonies were identified on
the medium containing the filtrate from the connector tubing and several of the tap water specimens (staff bathroom and patient bathroom).
Species identification of all isolates was performed at the Microbiology Laboratory of the University of North Carolina by using 16S rRNA
and heat shock protein 65 gene sequencing. Results of sequence analysis showed that the 2 patient isolates did not match. They were
identical by sequencing of part of the 16S rRNA gene but differed by heat shock protein 65 sequencing; the organism isolated from case-
patient 1 was M. abscessus and that from case-patient 2 was M. chelonae. Analysis of clinic water isolates showed several different
mycobacterial organisms. Four colony morphologies were isolated from the tap water in the patient bathroom, 2 of which were identified as M.
mucogenicum, 1 as M. obuense/aurum, and 1 as M. chelonae. Three colonies isolated from the tap in the staff bathroom were identified as M.
mucogenicum. The isolate from the large tubing leading to the smoke filter was M. smegmatis, which was not a match with either patient
isolate. Pulsed-field gel electrophoresis was performed at the University of Texas at Tyler to compare the M. chelonae isolate from the
case-patient 2 with the isolate from the patient bathroom in the dermatology clinic. The 2 isolates did not match. Environmental
investigation of the homes of the 2 patients was not conducted because case-patient 1 refused and sampling of the home of case-patient 2 was
not attempted. The bottles of vinegar used for postprocedure cleansing were not available for either patient. Neither patient had undergone
fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing before the procedures described. NTM are environmental organisms that are increasingly associated with
systemic and cutaneous disease in humans. NTM-induced cutaneous disease typically occurs after injections, such as tattoos, botulinum toxin,
and mesotherapy, or after minor surgical procedures in which breaks in the skin barrier occur (1,3,5,12–15). These organisms also have been
associated with whirlpool footbaths before pedicures (2,4,16). In these cases, shaving before a whirlpool footbath was associated with
increased rates of infection, presumably caused by microbreaks in the skin, which enable easy inoculation (2,16,17). NTM are ubiquitous in
soil and water and have been detected in municipal water sources throughout the United States (16,18,19). They are also found in biofilms
and, in the whirlpool footbath associated cases, seem to thrive in nutrient-rich water contaminated by skin debris, which accumulates on
bath filters (2,4,16,17). Eradication can be difficult because these organisms are resistant to most disinfectants (4,20,21). Cutaneous
infection with NTM is most often caused by M. marinum and rapidly growing mycobacteria that belong to 1 of 3 species groups: M. abscessus,
M. chelonae, and M. fortuitum (22–24). Diagnosis is difficult and often requires histologic evaluation and tissue samples for culture.
Delays in diagnosis are common and can lead to delays in treatment (6). Species identification can be difficult and requires sequencing of
multiple genes because of homology between Mycobacterium spp. family members (25–27). More than 120 NTM species have been identified,
including ≈30 isolates in the past decade whose names might be unfamiliar to many clinicians (28). These organisms are also resistant to
many antimicrobial drugs, a factor that complicates treatment. In the past 5 years, fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing has become the
preferred procedure for rhytides, photodamage, and acne scars (9). This procedure combines the efficacy of ablative laser resurfacing with a
more favorable side effect profile than traditional ablative therapy. Studies have shown a high degree of safety and efficacy and lower
rates of hypopigmentation, scarring, and infectious complications (7–10,29). This technology is based on the principle of creating narrow
columns of tissue damage known as microthermal treatment zones, which are evenly distributed over the treated area. Localized epidermal
necrosis and collagen denaturation occur in each column but the stratum corneum remains intact. Decreased disruption of the epidermal
barrier and areas of viable tissue around each microthermal treatment zone enable more rapid healing and reduce the risk of infection.
Although infections with fractionated CO2 laser therapy are less common than with traditional ablative laser, they do occur (10). Infection
with herpes simplex virus was reported in 1.7% of all cases and in 4.6% of cases in which the patient had a history of oral herpes but no
antivirus prophylaxis was given (8). Bacterial complications, including Staphylococcus spp. and Pseudomonas spp. infections, and Candida
spp. infections have also been reported, although at low rates (10). Palm et al. reported the first case of NTM infection after fractionated
laser resurfacing (11). The causative agent was identified as M. chelonae 3 months after the onset of acneiform eruptions. The patient
received multidrug treatment and showed some clinical improvement. She eventually underwent therapy with a pulsed dye laser and showed a
decrease in erythema and scarring. A possible source of NTM infection was not sought in this case. We report 2 additional cases of NTM
infection with M. abscessus and M. chelonae after fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing. Both patients showed development of erythematous
papules and pustules ≈10–14 days after the procedure, but the extent of skin involvement varied between the 2 patients. For both patients, a
diagnosis was made within 1–2 weeks by histologic examination and tissue culture. Early treatment with multidrug therapy specific for the
most likely mycobacterial pathogens was initiated while susceptibility testing was performed. In both patients, treatment was continued for
>4 months. Results of a thorough epidemiologic investigation showed no evidence that transmission of the NTM infections occurred during the
fractionated resurfacing procedure. The 2 patient isolates belonged to 2 different species, and neither matched the isolate obtained from
the fractionated laser apparatus. Furthermore, none of the isolates from environmental water at the clinic matched either patient isolate.
Although the absence of evidence does not definitively rule out common source transmission during the procedure, it does make it more likely
that infection occurred elsewhere after the procedure. The source of these infections remains unclear. It is possible that the causative NTM
isolates were transiently present in the environment but were not detected because of lag times between procedures and environmental
investigations. Furthermore, limitations of environmental sampling and culture for mycobacteria did not enable us to rule out a common
source of infection at the time of the procedure. Detailed environmental sampling of the home was not permitted by the first patient and was
not sought for the second patient. Several alternative environmental sources for infection are possible (aerosols from sinks, toilets, water
fountains, and sanding dust for case-patient 1). Although there was no evidence to support exposure during the fractionated laser procedure,
an NTM species was isolated from the tubing of the machine. Therefore, the tubing leading to the smoke filter is a potential reservoir for
NTM because it is changed infrequently and can contain skin debris within the corrugated tubing. Patients should be explicitly advised of
the risk for NTM infection after fractionated laser resurfacing, and physicians should be highly suspicious of such infections during the
postprocedure period. Although incubation periods reported for postprocedure NTM have been reported as 9–10 days, other cutaneous NTM
infections may be found <3 months after the presumed exposure (16). Thus, late manifestations might be possible. Biopsy specimens for
histologic evaluation and tissue culture are critical for making an accurate diagnosis. Suppurative neutrophilic and granulomatous
dermatitis should raise suspicion for NTM infection, even if results of staining for acid-fast bacilli are negative. As shown by these cases
and the case described by Palm et al. (11), identification of gram-positive rods during routine histologic examination might suggest NTM
infection because these organisms can be weakly gram positive. Empiric therapy specific for NTM should be considered while awaiting biopsy
and culture results for patients with suspicious lesions. However, prophylactic therapy before or after the procedure with active agents
against NTM is not recommended. The efficacy of such treatment in preventing infection remains unknown, and the risk for antimicrobial
drug–associated side effects likely outweighs any theoretical benefit. Although there is no standard treatment for cutaneous NTM infections,
multidrug therapy is usually necessary to minimize the development of drug resistance. Antimicrobial drug susceptibility testing should be
conducted to tailor therapy, and treatment should be continued for 4–6 months. When these infections occur, systematic observation of the
procedure should be performed. Specifically, attention should be paid to any liquids or ointments that may contact the skin of a patient
during or just after the procedure (particularly multiuse vials or containers) and the proximity of the procedure room to potentially
aerosol-generating water sources. Environmental sampling with mycobacterial culture of such liquids seems to be a reasonable first step in
identifying a source (although it did not identify a source in this study). Furthermore, strict postprocedure wound care is critical to
minimize risk for NTM infection. It is prudent to advise patients to avoid any municipal water sources for the first 72 h after the
procedure (although this time interval is arbitrary). Bottled water, which may not be sterile, could harbor small amounts of NTM. Use of
sterile water or sterile saline for postprocedure cleansing is recommended. First and foremost, physicians must remain aware of this
potential complication of fractionated laser resurfacing and be highly suspicious even if initial histologic and culture results do not
identify microbial pathogens. Suggested citation for this article: Culton DA, Lachiewicz AM, Miller BM, Miller MB, MacKuen C, Groben P, et
al. Nontuberculous mycobacterial infection after fractionated CO2 laser resurfacing. Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Mar [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1903.120880 We thank Beth Goldstein and Craig Burkhart for critically reviewing the manuscript. Dr Culton is an
assistant professor in the Department of Dermatology at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill. Her primary research interests
include immunology and autoimmunity of the skin and unusual manifestations of atypical mycobacterial skin infections.
