A mammary nodular lesion was recognized one month before the surgery in the right upper breast of a 55-year-old female. The fine needle
aspiration cytology specimens contained many individual bizarre, multi-nucleated, and/or giant cells having hyperchromatic pleomorphic
nuclei, prominent nucleoli, and relatively abundant cytoplasm, admixed with numerous mitotic figures in a hemorrhagic or inflammatory
background. A small amount of sheet-like or three-dimensional clusters of malignant cells coexisted. We first interpreted it as high-grade
malignancy, such as invasive carcinoma, not otherwise specified. A right breast-conserving surgery was performed, and gross examination
revealed a cystic cavity-formed and solid tumor lesion, measuring 35 × 35 × 25 mm and looking gray-yellowish to -whitish. On microscopic
examination, the tumor was composed of a diffuse proliferation of highly atypical cells devoid of adhesive characteristics, including many
multi-nucleated giant bizarre cells, in a haphazard fashion with stromal invasion, alternating with sarcomatoid features of spindle tumor
cells. The cystic cavity was surrounded by hemorrhagic and inflammatory granulation tissue and lined by mostly denuded but atypical tumor
cells or bland-looking flattened epithelial cells. Immunohistochemically, these tumor cells are specifically positive for all epithelial
markers. Therefore, we made a conclusive diagnosis of pleomorphic carcinoma of the breast with cyst formation. We should be aware that,
owing to its characteristic findings, cytopathologists can diagnose correctly, based on careful cytological examination of adequate
samplings. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/9290689448998782 An entity
of mammary pleomorphic carcinoma (PC) was first established based on the following criteria, as previously described by Silver and Tavassoli
in 2000 : ≥50% of the tumor manifested a pleomorphic cell population, and tumors of lobular origin were excluded out. The World Health
Organization (WHO) classification of tumours of the breast adopts this terminology and now records PC as a very rare variant of high-grade
invasive carcinoma of no special type, characterized by proliferation of pleomorphic and bizarre giant cells comprising >50% of the tumor
cells in a background of adenocarcinoma or adenocarcinoma with spindle and squamous differentiation . PC is an extremely uncommon subtype of
invasive breast carcinoma, and actually, one original paper described that less than 0.1% breast tumors were classified as PCs among a large
series of surgically-resected cases . Silver and Tavassoli have reported that the average PC tumor size was 5.4 cm, 52% and 12% of patients
had axillary lymph node metastases and distant metastases, respectively, and 38% of them were dead of its disease (mean disease-specific
postoperative survival: 22 months) . Corresponding to most invasive ductal carcinomas of the breast, PC could be seen at any age, but tend
to occur in the perimenopausal period , as in the present case. The authors have confirmed that PC is a unique entity with a significantly
poor outcome , similar to PCs in the other organs, such as lung or small intestine . However, PC of the breast potentially poses a
diagnostic challenge to clinicians and cytopathologists, since its entity seems to be difficult to conclude a correct diagnose
preoperatively. In fact, we recently have seen no series of large detailed studies regarding with cytological findings in PCs of the breast,
except for few case reports previously published . Hence, it is critical to establish an accurate preoperative diagnosis by fine needle
aspiration cytology. Here, we report a unique surgical case of PC of the breast, associated with cyst formation. Based on the cytology
specimens, we preoperatively interpreted it merely as invasive carcinoma, not otherwise specified. The patient was a 55-year-old Japanese
woman. Fine needle aspiration cytology from the mammary nodule was performed, followed by a right breast-conserving surgery. The tumor
specimens after fixation in 10% neutral buffered formalin were embedded in paraffin for histological or immunohistochemical examinations.
All immunohistochemical stainings were carried out using Dako Envision kit (Dako Cytomation Co., Glostrup, Denmark) according to the
manufacturer’s instructions, and using commercially available prediluted monoclonal antibodies against the following antigens: cytokeratins
(Cam5.2; Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA, diluted 1:1, AE1/AE3; Chemicon International, Tamecula, CA, USA, diluted 1:200, CK5/6;
Boehringer Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co. KG, Ingelheim, Germany, diluted 1:50, 34βE12; Leica Microsystems, Wetzlar, Germany, diluted 1:200),
EMA (Dako, diluted 1:100), E-cadherin (Becton Dickinson, diluted 1:1,000), β-catenin (Becton Dickinson, diluted 1:100), estrogen receptor
(ER; BioMed Immunotech, Inc., Tampa, FL, USA, diluted 1:25), progesterone receptor (PgR; Dako, diluted 1:6), HER2 protein (Dako, diluted
1:2), epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; Dako, diluted 1:1), p63 (Dako, diluted 1:30), S-100 protein (Dako, diluted 1:900), CD10
(NOVOCASTRA laboratories Ltd., Newcastle, United Kingdom, diluted 1:20), α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA; Dako, diluted 1:150), calponin (Dako,
diluted 1:50), vimentin (Dako, diluted 1:100), CD31 (Dako, diluted 1:20), CD34 (BioMed Immunotech, Inc., diluted 1:1), D2-40 (Dako, diluted
1:50), desmin (Dako, diluted 1:150), myogenin (Dako, diluted 1:30), c-kit (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Inc., Santa Cruz, CA, USA, diluted
1:40), CD3 (Dako, diluted 1:1), CD4 (Dako, diluted 1:1), CD8 (Nichirei Biosciences Inc., Tokyo, Japan, diluted 1:1), CD20 (Dako, diluted
1:200), CD30 (Dako, diluted 1:40), CD45 (Dako, diluted 1:400), CD68 (KP-1; Dako, diluted 1:100), CD79a (Dako, diluted 1:50), bcl-2 (Dako,
diluted 1:30), p53 (Dako, diluted 1:30), and Ki-67 (MIB-1; Dako, diluted 1:50). Since all tumor specimens were fixed in formalin,
transmission electron microscopy could not be performed. The patient had no history of malignancy, immunosuppressive disorders, use of
immunosuppressive medications, or unusual infections. Family history showed that her aunt also suffered from breast cancer and her father
had colorectal cancer. She first noticed a nodule in the right breast one month before the resection. On initial examination, a reddish
swelling mass more than 3 cm in diameter was palpable mainly in the right upper medial breast. Laboratory data, including blood cell count,
chemistry and tumor markers, were within normal limits, except for slightly increased carbohydrate antigen (CA) 15–3 level (35.1 U/mL).
Ultrasound sonography showed an intracystic tumor lesion, measuring approximately 3.5 cm in diameter, consisted of a mixture of a
heterogeneously enhanced solid component and a cystic component on chest CT scans. CT scans of the head, neck, chest, and abdomen disclosed
no definite evidence of metastases in the lymph nodes or other organs. MRI revealed a heterogeneous hyperintense cystic mass on T2-weighted
images, associated focally with a contrast-enhanced irregular wall portion. About 1 month after surgery, the patient has been medicated on
adjuvant chemotherapy, consisting of four cycles of epirubicin (120 mg/body), cyclophosphamide (800 mg/body), and fluorouracil (800
mg/body), and will be followed up with irradiation. She had neither recurrence nor metastases of the breast cancer, respectively, and was
alive and well at 10 months after the operation. The first fine needle aspiration cytology specimens were consisted mainly of many
individual mono- or multi-nucleated bizarre giant cells (Figure 1A), coexisted with a small amount of clusters of cohesive and sheet-like or
three-dimensional malignant cells (Figure 1B), in a hemorrhagic or inflammatory background (Figure 1A–B). The malignant tumor cells showed
markedly large (up to approximately 100 μm in diameter), hyperchromatic pleomorphic, and round to oval or spindle nuclei and had relatively
abundant cytoplasm (Figure 1A–B). Additionally, the nuclei often had prominent nucleoli and numerous mitotic figures, including atypical
mitoses (Figure 1A–B). No malignant squamoid cells were seen. Based on that, we first interpreted it as high-grade malignancy, such as
invasive carcinoma, not otherwise specified, and an ordinary right breast-conserving surgery was performed. Cytomorphologic examination of
the fine needle aspiration cytology in PC specimens. (A) The cytology specimens were consisted predominantly of many individual, scattered
malignant giant bizarre cells having often multi-nucleated pleomorphic nuclei in a hemorrhagic or inflammatory background (Papanicolaou
stains). Bar = 100 μm. (B) A small number of clusters of cohesive and sheet-like or three-dimensional malignant tumor cells coexisted. Those
malignant cells showed very large (up to approximately 100 μm in diameter), pleomorphic, and bizarre or spindle nuclei and had relatively
abundant cytoplasm. Additionally, the nuclei contained conspicuous nucleoli and numerous mitotic figures including atypical mitoses (arrows)
(Papanicolaou stains). Bar = 100 μm. On gross examination, the cut surface revealed a peripherally cystic cavity-formed, relatively well-
demarcated, and solid firm mass, measuring 32 × 27 × 25 mm, which looked from gray-yellowish to -whitish in color (Figure 2A). This cystic
cavity measured approximately 15 × 10 mm, filled with hemorrhagic but not necrobiotic materials. The background of the breast had no
remarkable change, e.g., not mastopathic. A scanning magnification of it showed that the cancer lesions, more than 60% in volume, were
partly surrounded by the cystic cavity but irregularly involved its wall in part (Figure 2B). There were neither extensive components of
intraductal carcinoma nor lobular carcinoma areas within our thorough investigation. Gross and microscopic examination of the resected PC
specimen. (A) On gross examination, the cut surface revealed a peripherally cystic cavity-formed, relatively well-defined, and solid firm
mass, measuring 32 × 27 × 25 mm, which looked from gray-yellowish to -whitish in color. This cystic cavity measured approximately 15 × 10
mm, filled with hemorrhagic materials. Bar = 5 mm. (B) A scanning magnification (H&E stains) revealed that the cancer lesions were partly
surrounded by the cystic cavity (lt. side) but irregularly involved its wall in part (rt. side). There were neither extensive components of
intraductal carcinoma nor lobular carcinoma areas within our thorough investigation. Bar = 5 mm. Microscopic findings demonstrated a diffuse
proliferation of large and highly atypical cells devoid of adhesive characteristics, having hyperchromatic pleomorphic nuclei and relatively
abundant eosinophilic or clear cytoplasm, admixed with many multi-nucleated bizarre giant cells and numerous mitotic figures including
atypical mitoses, arranged predominantly in a haphazard fashion with a chronic and acute inflammatory infiltrate (Figure 3A). By contrast, a
small amount of sarcomatoid components, consisted mainly of atypical spindle cells, were coexistent with it (Figure 3B). Apparent
keratinization, intercellular bridge, or intracytoplasmic mucin was not evident. Our careful histological examination revealed neither
evidences of squamous nor chondro-osseous metaplasia. On high-power view, emperipolesis of inflammatory cells was uniquely, sometimes seen
(Figure 3C). Moreover, the cystic cavity was surrounded by hemorrhagic and inflammatory granulation tissue and lined by mostly denuded but
atypical giant tumor cells or bland-looking flattened epithelial cells (Figure 3D). The tumor cells partly involved the adjacent cyst wall
but without evidence of apparent vessel permeation. Neither involvements of fat nor skin were recognized. Microscopic examination of the PC
of the breast. (A) Low power view showed a diffuse proliferation of large and highly atypical cells devoid of adhesive characteristics,
including many multi-nucleated bizarre giant cells (inset), arranged predominantly in a haphazard fashion with a chronic and acute
inflammatory infiltrate (H&E stains). Bar = 400 μm. (B) While, a small amount of sarcomatoid components, consisted mainly of atypical
spindle cells (inset), coexisted. Our careful histological examination revealed neither evidences of squamous nor chondro-osseous metaplasia
(H&E stains). Bar = 1,000 μm. (C) On high-power view, emperipolesis of inflammatory cells was sometimes recognized (H&E stains). Bar = 100
μm. (D) The cystic cavity was surrounded by hemorrhagic and inflammatory granulation tissue and lined by mostly denuded but single atypical
giant bizarre tumor cells or bland-looking flattened epithelial cells (inset) (H&E stains). Bar = 200 μm. Immunohistochemically, these
highly atypical giant cells were specifically positive for all epithelial markers, i.e., Cam5.2 (Figure 4A), AE1/AE3, CK5/6, 34βE12 (Figure
4B), and EMA, and focally positive for CD10 (Figure 4C), CD4, and EGFR, whereas negative for E-cadherin, β-catenin, p63, S-100 protein,
α-SMA, calponin, CD31, CD34, D2-40, desmin, myogenin, c-kit, CD3, CD8, CD20, CD30, CD45, CD68, CD79a, bcl-2, and p53. Additionally,
sarcomatoid spindle cells were focally positive for vimentin (Figure 4D). On the other hand, these tumor cells were completely negative for
hormone receptors (ER and PgR) and HER2, manifesting as triple-negative breast cancer. MIB-1 labeling index was approximately 30% in the
proliferating malignant cells. The above tumor-surrounding inflammatory cells were CD3-positive and CD4-predominant T-lymphocytes, admixed
with CD68-positive histiocytes. All immunohistochemical profile of the tumor cells is summarized in Table 1. Immunohistochemical examination
of the PC of the breast. (A, B, C, D) The giant bizarre tumor cells of PC were specifically positive for Cam5.2 (A) and 34βE12 (B), and
focally positive for CD10 (C). Additionally, one part of sarcomatoid spindle tumor cells were positive for vimentin (D). Bars = 50 μm.
Immunohistochemical profile of the carcinoma components in our case of PC of the breast Based on all these features, we indicated that these
tumor cells were characteristic of epithelial differentiation, and finally made a diagnosis of PC of the breast associated with cyst
formation. Final pathological stage was determined as pT2N0M0, stage IIA, according to the tumour node metastasis (TNM) system of the Union
for International Cancer Control (UICC) 7th Edition . The prognosis of the current PC patient might unusually appear better than that
reported by Silver and Tavassoli , since it is likely that the final diagnosis was made at a relatively earlier stage of the tumors; even
though follow-up period was not too long in this limited case report. Actually, our case has shown neither local recurrence nor metastases
for 10 months after the operation. In contrast, Nguyen et al. recently have described that, although not all of these PCs behave badly, the
presence of spindle cell sarcomatoid (metaplastic) components or the tumor size larger than 5 cm significantly leads to confer a
significantly poor prognosis even in the early stage for PC of the breast . In addition, as shown in this PC case, no immunohistochemical
expression of E-cadherin and β-catenin, involved in cell adhesion and cell-cell interaction, very likely results in severe vessel
permeation, advanced clinical stage, and worse outcome . Hence, it would be critical for very early treatment against PC to establish an
accurate preoperative diagnosis by fine needle aspiration cytology, the clinical utility of which in diagnosing breast tumors has been
already generalized. The cytological characteristic features of PC of the breast seem to reflect the histopathological ones, exhibiting
numerous individual bizarre and giant malignant cells with pleomorphic irregular nuclei, coarse chromatin, conspicuous nucleoli, very high
mitotic rate, and relatively abundant cytoplasm in the background of possible inflammation and/or necrosis . Indeed, when extensive necrosis
is present without evidence of viable PC cells on cytology specimens, cytopathologists should exclude out the possibility of benign breast
tumors, e.g., infarcted fibroadenoma . On the other hand, we for the first time indicate that cohesive, three-dimensional and/or sheet-like
clusters of highly malignant cells coexist on PC cytology. In fact, the cytological findings of this relatively new and extremely rare
entity have never been well described or reviewed more recently. The cytodiagnostics might not need to come out with such a distinctive one,
but should confirm malignancy in any case of PC of the breast. Despite that, a confident and accurate diagnosis of PC might be possible only
on cytology specimens, owing to its cytomorphologically peculiar characteristics, adequate samplings, and/or accumulated experience.
Furthermore, few previous papers proposed that, when the cytologic features of invasive ductal carcinoma with bizarre pleomorphic malignant
giant cells were difficult to make an accurate and conclusive diagnosis, immunostaining for cytokeratins and EMA on cell blocks of aspirates
would be very useful for the diagnosis of mammary PC . Nevertheless, in cases with evidence of single bizarre giant cells and clusters of
them, as shown here, cytopathologists should raise high possibility of PC as one of differential diagnoses, at the very least. Future
studies are further needed. It is possible that the present case report might be pathologically remarkable for three reasons at least:
first, cystic cavity formation was uniquely recognized within the tissue of PC. Amongst the ‘true’ cases reported or retrospectively
considered as PC of the breast in the English literatures , several PC tumors have displayed nodular or mass lesions with cystic change or
cystic cavity formation , similar to the present case. We can hypothesize that the cystic cavity of mammary carcinoma would be formed via
multiple processes: carcinoma cells initially develop in ductal wall and locally (i.e., intraductally) grow up in volume, and next block the
ductal lumen possibly via their stromal involvements; and finally, the cystic cavity might gradually get larger with increased inner
pressure and/or possible necrotic change. However, this hypothesis seems to be too speculative and not to be based on the histopathological
features of our case. Nevertheless, since it remains to be elucidated whether PCs of the breast are prone to having cyst formation, it would
be intriguing to study this topic. Second, we have found the presence of ‘emperipolesis’ wherein surrounding inflammatory cells are engulfed
by tumor giant cells of PC, very similar to pleomorphic giant cell carcinomas of the lung . According to the recent, relatively large study
of PCs of the breast by Nguyen et al., many cases of them showed neoplastic ‘cannibalism’ of their tumor cells, but not of inflammatory
cells. However, future thorough studies also will be further required to determine whether these features are genuinely characteristic in
mammary PCs after histologically examining a larger number of PC cases. Third, immunohistochemical analyses of not merely epithelial
markers, including CK5/6 and 34βE12, but CD10 and vimentin were positively expressed in the tumor nests. Additionally, ER/PgR/HER2 were all
triple-negative, possibly corresponding to basal-like type breast cancer . Although there have been no large, detailed immunohistochemical
studies of PC of the breast, to date, our data imply that those carcinoma cells might have potential squamous, myoepithelial, and/or basal-
like phenotypes, and epithelial-mesenchymal transition (EMT), as well, supported by some published papers . We might provide the possible
evidence that PCs arise from ductal epithelial-myoepithelial cells, as a result of neoplastic transformation of outer supporting
myoepithelial cells, as well as inner ductal epithelial cells . However, since other myoepithelial markers examined, such as α-SMA, S-100
protein, p63, and calponin, were completely negative, this implication would be highly speculative and unlikely. First of all, pathological
differential diagnosis of this mammary PC case could be metaplastic carcinoma, and indeed, metaplastic carcinoma of the breast include
squamous cell carcinomas, spindle cell carcinomas, or carcinomas with mesenchymal differentiation . In this context, not only by definition
but from the above immunohistochemistry, it is very likely that PCs with metaplastic spindle and/or squamous differentiation are metaplastic
carcinomas per se. Some confusion still exists in the newest WHO classification , and thus it could be very challenging that we pathologists
strictly make a final diagnosis as PC of the breast. It is possible that, based on these characteristic clinical and/or cytopathological
features, as described above, PC of the breast might be a special new entity of the breast cancer, but not a rare variant of invasive
carcinoma of no special type. In this context, the present case report could interest the scientific community, taken together with new
cytological findings and specific recommendations for cytodiagnostics. We herein reported an extremely rare case of PC of the breast
associated with cyst formation. The present case was tentatively made a diagnosis as high-grade invasive carcinoma, not otherwise specified,
on the cytology specimens, even though its features seemed to be very characteristic. All cytopathologists should be aware that its
cytomorphologically unique findings from extensively careful examination can induce one of differential diagnoses, and possibly a correct
diagnosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. SY and AN participated in conception of the idea and writing of the manuscript. SY, AN, TT, HN, SK, SK, YN, KYW, SS and YS
performed the cytopathological and immunohistochemical interpretation of the tumor tissue. All authors have read and approved the final
manuscript.
