Dear Editor Myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) are categorized on the basis of BCR/ABL translocation occurrence as either Philadelphia-
positive CML or Philadelphia-negative MPNs (Ph-MPNs). MPNs include polycythaemia vera (PV), essential thrombocythaemia (ET), and primary
myelofibrosis (PMF) . The JAK2V617F mutation, which is specific for Ph-MPN, occurs in more than 95% PV cases and in approximately 50% ET and
PMF cases . The 2008 revision of the WHO classifies MPNs into 2 categories, BCR/ABL positive CML and Ph-MPNs, on the basis of the presence
or absence of the Philadelphia chromosome . Although the 2008 WHO classification does not include MPNs with more than 1 genetic aberration
as a distinct disease entity, some cases with coexistence of JAK2V617F mutation and BCR/ABL translocation have been recently reported and up
to 28 cases have been previously reported . Among these reports, the majority of the patients either had pre-existing BCR/ABL-positive CML
and developed JAK2V617F mutation while undergoing tyrosine kinase inhibitor treatment or developed BCR/ABL-positive CML with a pre-existing
JAK2V617F mutation-positive MPN . In contrast, a small number of patients showed simultaneous occurrence of both JAK2V617F mutation and
BCR/ABL translocation, with a CML phenotype in the bone marrow (BM) with development of symptoms or morphology associated with JAK2V617F
mutation, and with MPN only after imatinib treatment [3, 6, 13-15]. We report 2 MPN cases that were simultaneously positive for both
JAK2V617F mutation and BCR/ABL translocation and that did not acquire the CML phenotype during hydroxyurea (Korea United Pharm, Seoul,
Korea) treatment. Case 1 was a 36-yr-old man who was admitted in November 2009 with severe thrombocytosis. The patient's hemogram results at
admission were as follows: white blood cells, 9.4×109/L, Hb, 13.8 g/dL, and platelets, 830×109/L. The peripheral blood smear (PBS) and BM
biopsy revealed a marked increase in the platelet and the clustered megakaryocyte numbers (9.2/high power field) without evidence of
dysplasia. Allele-specific PCR for JAK2V617F mutation detection and reverse-transcriptase PCR (RT-PCR) for BCR/ABL fusion transcript
detection using custom-designed primers was performed. The PCR and the RT-PCR analyses showed that the patient was positive for JAK2V617F
heterozygous mutation and the BCR/ABL fusion transcript (b3a2 type), respectively. Subsequently, the JAK2V617F mutation allele burden was
quantified by real-time quantitative PCR using JAK2 MutaQuant™ (Ipsogen, Marseille, France). The JAK2V617F mutation allele burden was
calculated as the percentage of the V617F copy number to the sum of V617F and wild-type copy number. The JAK2V617F mutation allele burden
was quantified to be 27.91% (7,200/25,800) at diagnosis. The major BCR/ABL fusion transcripts quantitation was also performed by real-time
PCR using the LightCycler t(9;22) Quantification kit (Roche Diagnostics, Mannheim, Germany) and the normalized copy number (NCN) was 0.02 at
diagnosis. The patient's karyotype was determined to be 46,XY ; however, his interphase FISH analysis result was nuc ish(ABL1x3,BCRx2)(ABL1
con BCRx1), representing cryptic BCR/ABL fusion on der(22)t(9;22) in 30.5% of the total cells. Thus, on the basis of these findings, the
patient was diagnosed to have ET with a major BCR/ABL fusion transcript. The patient was treated with hydroxyurea and the initial response
during the first year of treatment was promising (BCR/ABL fusion transcript maintained in the range of 0.005 NCN to 0.01 NCN). However,
despite continuing treatment, the number of BCR/ABL fusion transcripts increased to 5.0 NCN in the second year of follow-up, which indicated
treatment failure. Interestingly, the patient did not show morphological evidence of CML during the follow-up period. Case 2 was a 58-yr-old
man diagnosed with leukocytosis and splenomegaly on admission. The patient's hemogram results at admission were as follows: white blood
cells, 19.7×109/L, Hb, 13.0 g/dL, and platelets, 285×109/L. The PBS showed an occasional presence of tear-drop cells and immature
granulocytes with blasts (Fig. 1A). The BM biopsy showed extensive myelofibrosis (grade 2-3) with a cellularity of 90% and an increased
number of dysplastic megakaryocytes (Fig. 1B). The myelofibrosis was demonstrated by the reticulin silver stain (Fig. 1C). At diagnosis, the
JAK2V617F mutation analysis showed a heterozygous mutation (Fig. 1D) and the JAK2V617F mutation allele burden was quantified to be 69.66%
(2,640/3,790). The RT-PCR analysis revealed the presence of BCR/ABL fusion transcript (b3a2 type) (Fig. 1E). The patient's karyotype was
determined to be 46,XY, t(9;22)(q34;q11.2). The quantification result for the major BCR/ABL fusion transcript in BM was found to be 1.0 NCN
at diagnosis, which was 50-fold higher than that of case 1. The patient was treated with hydroxyurea for 6 months. However, the BCR/ABL
fusion transcript levels remained at the levels at diagnosis (1.0-1.6 NCN). Similar to the findings for case 1, the morphological evidence
of CML was not evident during hydroxyurea treatment. The drug treatment was changed to dasatinib and after 7 months of dasatinib treatment
the patient did not show conversion, which was indicative of successful treatment. Of the previously reported 28 cases with both JAK2V617F
mutation and BCR/ABL translocation, 15 patients had BCR/ABL-positive CML and acquired a JAK2V617F-positive MPN phenotype after tyrosine
kinase inhibitor treatment. Although 4 out of the 15 patients were diagnosed with CML and were shown to possess JAK2V617F mutation, 3 of the
4 patients did not show a morphology associated with JAK2V617F mutation-positive MPN until after treatment with imatinib. In contrast, 9 of
the 28 patients showed JAK2V617F mutation-positive MPN phenotype at initial diagnosis and developed BCR/ABL-positive CML during hydroxyurea
treatment. Finally, at initial diagnosis, 4 patients showed mixed phenotype associated with both BCR/ABL-positive CML and JAK2V617F
mutation-positive MPN . In recent studies, 2 hypotheses have been proposed to explain the coexistence of both BCR/ABL translocation and
JAK2V617F mutation in some patients. The first hypothesis which has been favored in the several literatures proposes that a single clone
possesses one aberration and the patient's phenotype (e.g. CML feature) is dependent on the dominant clone (e.g. BCR/ABL translocation
positive) which is determined by the selective pressure exerted by the specific treatment (e.g. hydoxyurea) prescribed for the other clone
(e.g. JAK2V617F mutation positive) . The second hypothesis proposes that a single clone concurrently possesses both the BCR/ABL
translocation and JAK2V617F mutation [3, 13-15]. This hypothesis was supported by a recent study, which reported that the BCR/ABL
translocation occurred in a pre-existing JAK2V617F mutation-positive clone . The data obtained in this study supports the second hypothesis
as shown by the detection of concurrent JAK2V617F mutation and BCR/ABL translocation at the initial diagnosis of MPN, and the lack of
phenotype switch, especially to the CML phenotype, during hydroxyurea treatment. Hence, a comprehensive molecular genetic analysis is needed
to elucidate the pathogenesis of these hematological chimeras. In addition, the 2 patients showed different outcomes according to both the
initial level of BCR/ABL fusion transcripts and the introduction of a tyrosine kinase inhibitor during the hydroxyurea treatment. The
patient with low initial BCR/ABL fusion transcript levels experienced a relatively good initial response to hydroxyurea treatment, although
the treatment failed 2 years later. In contrast, the patient with high BCR/ABL fusion transcript levels did not initially respond well to
hydroxyurea treatment, but a dramatic response was achieved after a treatment change to dasatinib. On the basis of these findings, we
speculate that treatment with a tyrosine kinase inhibitor can be effective and therefore recommend this approach in JAK2V617F-positive MPN
patients with a concurrent BCR/ABL translocation, particularly if the initial BCR/ABL fusion transcript level is high. In conclusion, we
report 2 cases of MPN with concurrent JAK2V617F mutation and BCR/ABL translocation without CML phenotype acquisition during the hydroxyurea
treatment. Treatment with tyrosine kinase inhibitors can be effective, particularly if the initial BCR/ABL fusion transcript level is high
in these patients. Further molecular genetic analysis is needed to elucidate the pathogenesis of these hematological chimeras. No potential
conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. The hematological and molecular characteristics of case 2. (A) A peripheral
blood smear revealed tear-drop cells, immature granulocytes, and blasts (Wright stain, ×400). (B) The patient's bone marrow biopsy showed
extensive myelofibrosis (H&E stain, ×100), demonstrated by reticulin silver stain (C, ×100) with cellularity of 90% and increased dysplastic
megakaryocytes. (D) Mutational analysis of JAK2V617F revealed bands that corresponded to both the mutant and wild-type JAK2 (sized 299 bp
and 229 bp, respectively). (E) Along with the myeloproliferative neoplasms (MPNs) diagnosis tests, reverse transcriptase (RT)-PCR analysis
of BCR/ABL fusion transcripts was performed and a single 305-bp band, representing the major BCR/ABL translocation (b3a2 type), was
obtained.
