Thyroid storm is a serious condition of thyrotoxicosis. Hyperthyroidism often presents with thrombotic events, especially at cerebral sites;
however, the possible association between a lower extremity deep vein thrombosis (LEDVT) and thyroid storm has not been previously reported.
We encountered a patient who developed thyroid storm, associated with rhabdomyolysis, followed by LEDVT and a small silent pulmonary
embolism (PE). The case is discussed with references to the pertinent literature. A 50-year-old woman with no past medical history was
referred to our hospital because of severe diarrhea, muscle weakness in her lower limbs (manual muscle testing: MMT 3), and disturbances of
consciousness. She was diagnosed as having Graves’ disease based on the presence of struma, exophthalmos, and hyperthyroidism with TSH
receptor antibody positivity; we further determined that the patient was experiencing thyroid storm based on the results of the Burch-
Wartofsky scoring system and a Japanese diagnostic criteria. Treatment with steroids, iodine potassium, methimazole, and propranolol was
initiated. Severe watery diarrhea continued, and the laboratory data revealed hypokalemia (2.0 meq/L). On day 14, a blood analysis showed a
sudden elevation in her creatinine kinase (CK) level, leading to a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis. Thereafter, the muscle weakness in her lower
limbs advanced to a degree of MMT 1. Seven days after the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis, pitting edema began to appear in bilateral lower
extremities. Contrast-enhanced CT scans revealed a LEDVT involving the left common iliac vein, bilateral femoral veins, and left popliteal
vein. Furthermore, a small PE was identified. Hyperthyroidism often presents with thrombotic events, especially at cerebral sites, but few
reports of PE or LEDVT have been made. This case suggests that the occurrence of thyroid storm may be associated with a risk of LEDVT and/or
PE. We suggest that DVT preventive measures are undertaken, and that a lower limb venous echo or contrast-enhanced CT examination would be
considered if LEDVT is suspected. Thyroid storm is a serious condition of thyrotoxicosis that is diagnosed based on a clinical examination
and is associated with a high mortality rate . Hyperthyroidism often presents with thrombotic events, especially at cerebral sites ;
however, few reports of lower extremity deep vein thrombosis (LEDVT) have been made. Recently, an increased risk of pulmonary embolism (PE)
among patients with hyperthyroidism has been reported . Most cases of PE arise from thrombi in the deep venous system of the lower
extremities , suggesting that LEDVT may be more likely to occur among patients with hyperthyroidism. Furthermore, thyroid storm is likely
associated with a much higher risk of LEDVT, because clinical conditions such as prolonged immobilization, congestive heart failure,
dehydration, and the presence of a central venous catheter are common in patients experiencing thyroid storm and are known to predispose an
individual to LEDVT. However, the possible association between LEDVT and thyroid storm has not been previously reported. We encountered a
patient who developed thyroid storm associated with rhabdomyolysis, followed by LEDVT and a small silent PE. The case is discussed with
references to the pertinent literature. A 50-year-old Japanese woman with no past medical history was referred to our hospital. Two weeks
prior to admission, she had developed fever, stomachache, and diarrhea. A diagnosis of gastroenteritis was made at a local clinic, and she
was treated with antibiotics and intestinal medications; however, no improvement in her symptoms was seen. A week later, she began to
experience lower extremity weakness, which soon led to a gait disturbance. As her consciousness began to deteriorate, she was transferred to
and was examined at the Department of Emergency Medicine of our hospital; she was subsequently admitted. Non-smoker, drinks alcohol
occasionally. Not contributory. Glasgow coma scale score for consciousness, 10 (E3V2M5); blood pressure, 158/90 mmHg; pulse, 145 beats/min,
irregular; body temperature, 38.3 C; respiratory rate, 30/min; oxygen saturation, 98% while she was breathing ambient air. A physical
examination revealed struma, exophthalmos, and significant muscle weakness in the lower extremities; the strength in the quadriceps,
hamstrings, tibialis anterior, and extensor halluces longus muscles was rated as 3 out of 5 using manual muscle testing (MMT). The patient’s
reflexes were decreased. A chest radiography was clear, and the cardiothoracic ratio was 44%. An electrocardiogram revealed atrial
fibrillation with a rapid ventricular response (pulse rate, 145/min). Echocardiography revealed no significant dilatation of the ventricles
and normal wall motion with an ejection fraction of 59%. Thyroid function tests showed severe thyrotoxicosis with a FreeT4 level > 6.0 ng/dL
and a FreeT3 > 30.0 pg/mL, as well as a low TSH level of < 0.05 μU/mL with TSH receptor antibody positivity. She was diagnosed as having
Graves’ disease. The serum concentration of brain natriuretic peptide was 109.2 pg/mL, which was suggestive of heart failure. An arterial
blood gas analysis (in ambient air) revealed a pH of 7.530, a PCO2 of 31.2 torr, a PO2 of 81.0 torr, an HCO3 of 25.4 mEq/L, and a BE of 3.0,
indicating respiratory alkalosis. Based on the Burch-Wartofsky-score , which is a widely used global scale for evaluating the severity of
thyrotoxicosis, the patient’s condition was diagnosed as thyroid storm (thyrotoxicosis with delirium [20 points], moderate heart failure [10
points], tachycardia of 145 beats/min [25 points], and atrial fibrillation [10 points]; a fever over 38.3C [15 points], diarrhea [10
points], for a total score of 90 points [61 points or higher is definitive of a thyroid storm]). The diagnosis was also supported by the
Japanese diagnostic criteria (Table 1). Blood examination findings on admission Treatment with steroids, 50 mg of iodine potassium (KI),
30 mg of methimazole (MMI), and propranolol (40 mg daily) was initiated. A central venous catheter was placed. Three days after admission,
an electrocardiogram showed a “coronary T” wave. A coronary angiography was performed, and no evidence of coronary stenosis or cardiac
dysfunction was seen. The severe watery diarrhea persisted, and the laboratory data revealed hypokalemia (2.0 meq/L). The control of the
hyperthyroidism was difficult even with 60 mg of MMI until day 68. On day 14, a blood analysis showed a sudden elevation in creatinine
kinase (CK) soaring to 4024 IU/L within a few days, with a CK-MM of 97%, leading to a diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis (Figure 1). The patient’s
serum potassium concentrations were transiently elevated during the CK elevation, suggesting the release of CK from the skeletal muscle.
Despite continuing antithyroid medications, fluids replacement, and electrolyte management, the muscle weakness in the hip joint and knees
advanced to a degree of MMT 1, while the muscle strength in the upper limbs was rated as MMT 4. Clinical course. Serum fT4, CK (creatinine
kinase), and K levels and the patient’s symptoms are shown, along with the administrations of MMI (methimazole), KI (potassium iodine),
heparin, and warfarin. Muscle strength was rated from 1 to 5 according to MMT (manual muscle testing). Graduated compression stockings were
used. Seven days after the diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis, pitting edema began to appear in bilateral lower extremities. Four days after the
appearance of the pitting edema, the swelling worsened and tenderness developed in the left extremity. Contrast-enhanced CT scans revealed a
LEDVT involving the left common iliac vein, bilateral femoral veins and left popliteal vein (Figure 2). Furthermore, a small PE in the left
upper lobe was identified (Figure 3). The D-dimer level was 22.3 ng/dL. The coagulation factor VIII levels, which have been reported to be
associated with thrombosis in Graves’ disease , were within the normal range. Treatment with heparin and warfarin was started. The LEDVT was
minimized, and the PE was no longer identifiable on CT scans performed on day 90. Medical rehabilitation enabled her to recover her muscle
strength to MMT 4. Once the thyroid function parameters had normalized, she was discharged from our hospital. Contrast-enhanced CT scans of
the lower limbs. Contrast-enhanced CT scans revealed a lower extremity deep vein thrombosis involving the left common iliac vein (1),
bilateral femoral veins (2, 3), and the left popliteal vein (4). Contrast-enhanced CT scans of the lung. A small pulmonary embolism in the
left upper lobe was identified. Thyroid storm is a serious condition of thyrotoxicosis that is diagnosed based on a clinical examination and
is associated with a high mortality rate . Our patient was diagnosed as having thyroid storm based on the Burch-Wartofsky-scoring system ,
and a Japanese diagnostic criteria . The present case was complicated by rhabdomyolysis. Although hyperthyroid patients characteristically
have normal or low serum levels of muscle enzymes, this case demonstrates that rhabdomyolysis can occur in patients with hyperthyroidism .
Circulatory collapse, hypokalemia and dehydration under the excessive hypermetabolic state presumably suppressed the supply of energy and
oxygen to the muscle cells, leading to cellular damage. Of note, the LEDVT apparently occurred after the onset of rhabdomyolysis in the
present case, possibly because of the immobilization caused by muscle damage. Increased factor VIII procoagulant protein may be a
predisposing factor for DVT , but the factor VIII activity was not elevated in our patient. Hyperthyroidism is associated with an increased
risk of venous thrombotic events. In particular, a number of case reports have documented acute venous thrombosis complications in patients
with overt hyperthyroidism , especially at cerebral sites . However the possible association between PE or LEDVT and hyperthyroidism has
rarely been reported. Recently, Lin reported an increased risk of PE among patients with hyperthyroidism . Most cases of PE arise from
thrombi in the deep venous system of the lower extremities . PE is a common complication of LEDVT, occurring in more than 50% of cases with
phlebographically confirmed LEDVT . One in every three patients with LEDVT may have a silent PE. This suggests that factors that promote the
development of LEDVT also increase the risk for PE. In adults, the clinical conditions that predispose an individual to LEDVT are prolonged
immobilization, congestive heart failure, dehydration, and the presence of a central venous catheter; these conditions are also common in
patients experiencing thyroid storm. Furthermore, it has been reported that the risk of DVT to gradually rise with increasing levels of free
thyroxine. In the absence of traditional acquired risk factors, free thyroxine levels above reference range, yielded a sex- and age-adjusted
odds ratio of 13.0 . However, many patients with LEDVT are often asymptomatic, and the association between LEDVT and thyroid storm may not
have been reported. This case suggests that the occurrence of thyroid storm may be associated with a risk of LEDVT and/or PE. We suggest DVT
preventive measures are undertaken, and that a lower limb venous echo or contrast-enhanced CT examination would be considered if LEDVT is
suspected. “Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of
the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.” The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. UT was the main contributor to the preparation of the rough draft. KA and TT were involved in the literature review and writing
of the article. TY critically revised the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
