The first two authors contributed equally to this work. To determine the underlying genetic cause of Duane retraction syndrome (DRS) in a
non-consanguineous Chinese Han family. Detailed ophthalmic and physical examinations were performed on all members from a pedigree with DRS.
All exons and their adjacent splicing junctions of the sal-like 4 (SALL4) gene were amplified with polymerase chain reaction and analyzed
with direct sequencing in all the recruited family members and 200 unrelated control subjects. Clinical examination revealed a broad
spectrum of phenotypes in the DRS family. Mutation analysis of SALL4 identified a novel heterozygous duplication mutation, c.1919dupT, which
was completely cosegregated with the disease in the family and absent in controls. This mutation was predicted to cause a frameshift,
introducing a premature stop codon, when translated, resulting in a truncated SALL4 protein, i.e., p.Met640IlefsX25. Bioinformatics analysis
showed that the affected region of SALL4 shared a highly conserved sequence across different species. Diversified clinical manifestations
were observed in the c.1919dupT carriers of the family. We identified a novel truncating mutation in the SALL4 gene that leads to
diversified clinical features of DRS in a Chinese family. This mutation is predicted to result in a truncated SALL4 protein affecting two
functional domains and cause disease development due to haploinsufficiency through nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. Duane retraction syndrome
(DRS) is a congenital disorder of ocular motility, which is pan-ethnic and accounts for approximately 1% of the total cases of strabismus .
Individuals with DRS typically manifest horizontal eye movement limitation, globe retraction with palpebral fissure narrowing in attempted
adduction. DRS can be classified into types I, II, and III, with the presence of abduction, adduction, or both, respectively . Occurrence of
DRS is usually sporadic. Reported familial DRS is mostly bilateral with vertical movement abnormalities and autosomal dominant inheritance .
In addition, several associated systemic manifestations have been described in patients with DRS, most commonly involving facial anomalies,
hearing dysfunction, vertebral column anomalies, and variable degrees of limb malformations . The exact etiology of DRS is still elusive.
Electromyographic and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) studies suggested that DRS might result from abnormal development of the abducent
nerve (sixth cranial nerve) . Linkage analyses of DRS have successfully mapped its associated loci to chromosomes 2q13, 4q27, 8q13, 22q11,
and 20q13 . Recently mutations of the sal-like 4 (SALL4; MIM# 607343) gene on chromosome 20 have been linked to DRS or DRS associated with
radial forearm malformations, also known as Okihiro syndrome . SALL4-related disorders include Duane-radial ray syndrome (DRRS, Okihiro
syndrome) and acro-renal-ocular syndrome (AROS). Okihiro syndrome, characterized by radial malformation associated with Duane congenital
abnormalities, is used interchangeably with DRRS. Another SALL-4 related syndrome is known as acro-renal-ocular syndrome (AROS),
characterized by radial ray malformation, Duane abnormality, renal malformation (mild malrotation, ectopia, horseshoe kidney, renal
hypoplasia, vesicoureteral reflux, bladder diverticula), and coloboma . More than 20 mutations in SALL4 have been reported in association
with these disorders. The SALL4 gene is located in chromosome 20q13–20q13.2, with a length of 18.14 kb and 4 exons, encoding for a 1053
amino-acid-residue protein. SALL4, a new member of the SAL family of proposed C2H2 zinc finger transcription factors, plays important
transcription roles during human embryogenesis . SALL4 is actually the first identified disease-causing gene of DRS and likely plays a
crucial role in the development of the abducens motoneuron. Although several mutations have been reported in SALL4, disease phenotypes vary
greatly among different SALL4 mutations, and the phenotype–genotype correlation remains elusive. In this paper, we report for the first time
a Chinese family with members presenting with isolated DRS or DRS associated syndromes in a dominant trait. This study was approved by the
Research Ethics Committees of the Chinese University of Hong Kong and conducted in accordance with the tenets of the Declaration of
Helsinki. Informed consent was obtained from each participant after detailed explanation of the nature of the study. A three-generation
Chinese Han family with DRS was recruited at the Department of Ophthalmology, Prince of Wales Hospital, Hong Kong (Figure 1). Affected
status was determined with detailed ophthalmic examinations that included visual acuity, refraction, intraocular pressure, slit-lamp
evaluation, and ocular motility testing. Additionally, systemic tests including audiometry and neurologic testing were performed. Detailed
medical and family histories were also documented. Peripheral blood was collected from five available members of the family, including I:1,
II:1, II:2, III:1, and III:2 (Figure 1). Peripheral blood was collected using EDTA tubes from five available members of the family, and
stored in -80 °C before processing for genomic DNA isolation. Pedigree of a Chinese family with Duane retraction syndrome. Squares: men;
circles: women; filled symbols: affected; empty symbols: normal individual; arrow: the proband; star: DNA samples available for this study.
Also included in this study was a group of 200 unrelated Chinese control subjects (age >40 years) who had undergone complete ocular
examination and were confirmed to be free of major ocular and systemic disorders. Peripheral blood samples were collected from each control
subject after informed consent was received. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood using the QIAmp Blood kit (Qiagen, Hilden, Germany)
according to the supplier's instructions. All exons and intron-exon boundaries of SALL4 were amplified with PCR and analyzed with direct
sequencing in all study subjects. In total, seven pairs of primers, designed by using Primer3 (accessed June 1, 2012) referring to the
sequence of human SALL4 gene from the Ensembl database (accessed June 1, 2012), were used (Table 1). Targeted regions were amplified by PCR
using 20 ng of genomic DNA in a 25 μl reaction mixture containing 0.2 μM primers, 0.2 mM deoxyribonucleotide triphosphate, 1 U Taq DNA
polymerase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), and 1.5/2.0 mM MgCl2 (indicated in Table 1). The PCR thermal cycling conditions were initial
denaturation at 95 °C for 2 min followed by 45 cycles of 95 °C for 40 s, 58/60 °C for 40 s (annealing Tm for each primer is indicated in
Table 1), and 72 °C for 40 s, with a final extension step of 72 °C for 10 min. Bidirectional sequencing of PCR products was performed using
the BigDye Terminator Cycle Sequencing (v3.1) protocol in an ABI 3130×l Genetic Analyzer automated sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster
City, CA). All mutation descriptions followed the nomenclature recommendations of the Human Genomic Variation Society (HGVS). Ta, Annealing
temperature. Sequences of SALL4 orthologs in other vertebrate species were retrieved from the NCBI Reference Sequence database (accessed
June 23, 2012). Multiple alignments of SALL4 orthologs from different vertebrate species were conducted using a Web-based program, T-Coffee
(ver. 7.71, provided in the public domain by the Center for Genomic Regulation, Barcelona, Spain, accessed June 23, 2012). As illustrated in
Figure 1, this family is represented by three generations of individuals. Five members consented to participate in this study, of whom four
are affected with isolated DRS or combined with bone abnormalities. The proband (III:1) was a 4-year-old boy, who was referred to us by his
pediatrician for suspected convergent squint. He was born with an uncomplicated normal delivery and enjoyed normal development and visual
acuity. Ophthalmic examination showed that he had right eye abduction weakness and noticeable narrowing of palpebral fissure on attempted
abduction gaze. He also presented with right esotropia at the primary position of gaze (Figure 2A). Other ocular examinations including
refraction were unremarkable. On physical examination, a surgical scar was noted at the medial side of his right thumb, which was created
after excision of his duplicated thumb (preaxial polydactyly; Figure 3A). Hearing test, cardiac examinations, limb examinations, and
ultrasound scans of the kidneys were normal. Clinical pictures showing photos of ocular gazes in proband III:1 (A: Four-year-old boy), II-2
(B. his mother) and I-1 (C. his grandfather). All shared similar features with limitation in right sided abduction, upshooting or
downshooting of right eye with narrowing of palpebral fissure on attempted adduction gaze. Phenotypic features of patients. A: A 4-year-old
boy (III:1) with left hand scar at thenar prominence at the site of previous surgery to excise of duplication of thumb. B: A 6-month-old
girl (III:2) has no signs of limb malformations. C: A 36-year-old woman (II:2) with residual signs of a previous extra left thumb , and left
thenar hypoplasia and hypoplasia of thumb. D: A 60-year-old man (I:1) with residual incomplete excision of an extra right thumb. The
proband’s younger sister (III:2), a 6-month-old girl, was referred at the same time to our clinic for convergent squint. She was born full
term, with normal prenatal and postnatal checkups. Ophthalmic examination showed that she had large angle convergent squint at the primary
position of gaze. Narrowing of bilateral palpebral fissure was noticed on both sides in attempted abduction. MRI was performed to rule out
any lesion occupying intracranial space causing bilateral sixth nerve palsy. MRI of the brain was normal, except the right abducens nerve
was absent (Figure 4). The brain MRI did not have information on the nuclei. Cycloplegic refraction showed mild hypermetropia. Physical
examination showed no signs of upper limb malformations (Figure 3B). In view of the esotropia in the primary position, bilateral medial
rectus recession was performed. Her preoperative renal function tests were normal. Their mother (II:2), a 36-year-old woman, was found to
have similar problems. She had right-sided DRS (Figure 2B) and left preaxial duplication of the thumb. Additional features including
hypoplasia of the thenar muscle and hypoplasia of the left thumb were also noted (Figure 3C). Their grandfather (I:1), a 72-year-old man,
had a similar clinical presentation as his daughter (II:2; Figure 2C and Figure 3D). Examination and further history-taking revealed no
history of cardiac abnormality, hearing problems, or skeletal malformations. Medical records including renal function tests were retrieved
for the mother (II:2) and grandfather (I-1), which were normal. Other members of the family did not have any clinical signs or symptoms
suggestive of DRS. In summary, all four affected family members have unilateral or bilateral Duane features with or without evidence of
radial-ray abnormality, and clinical evidence of other abnormalities including hearing, cardiac, or renal malformation was absent,
supporting clinical diagnosis of DRRS (Okihiro syndrome). Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain of proband III:2. The thin linear
structure coursing obliquely from the left pontomedullary region in the left pontine cistern suggests the left abducens nerve, which was
absent in the right side. Direct sequencing was performed to cover all exons and intron-exon boundaries of the SALL4 gene. A heterozygous
duplication c.1919dupT (Figure 5) in exon 2 was identified exclusively in all affected family members but not in any of the unaffected
family members. The duplication was absent in the 200 unrelated controls. No other variants were detected in the controls. The c.1919dupT
mutation was predicted to cause a frameshift introducing a premature stop codon after 73 bp in the messenger RNA, which encodes a truncated
SALL4 protein (p.M640IfsX25), affecting two zinc finger domains. Sequence chromatographs of the novel heterozygous mutation c.1919dupT in
SALL4 and the respective wild-type sequence. To evaluate the functional significance of this mutation, multiple alignments of SALL4
sequences were applied to compare the sequences of human, chicken, zebrafish, rhesus monkey, cattle, African clawed frog. The results showed
that the affected region of SALL4 was highly conserved across species and revealed the strong identity of the deleted region of protein at
SALL4 zinc finger domains (Figure 6). Multiple alignment of the SALL4 protein sequence (partial) from different species. The box indicates
that the deleted region affected by the mutation (p.Met640IlefsX25) in SALL4 was highly conserved. In this study, we identified a novel
SALL4 mutation in a Chinese family with DRS presenting with variable phenotypes. The mutation showed complete disease cosegregation and is
highly likely to be disease-causing, although further functional characterization is needed to confirm the mutation’s role in disease
etiology. Autosomal dominant DRS has a high penetrance, although considerable variability within a pedigree also exists. This may explain
the wide-spectrum phenotypes observed in the family evaluated. Until now, several sporadic cases or pedigrees and mutations implicated in
DRS have been reported in Caucasians. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first genetic study, and the first pedigree report, on DRS
in the Chinese population. Mutations in the SALL4 gene have been shown to cause DRS and DRS-associated disorders, namely, Okihiro syndrome,
acro-renal-ocular syndrome, Holt-Oram syndrome, or suspected thalidomide embryopathy . Several overlapping phenotypes are shared among these
disorders. Okihiro syndrome, an autosomal dominant disorder characterized by radial ray defects combined with Duane anomaly, is the most
common condition known to overlap clinically with DRS. The SALL4 gene consists of four coding exons and encodes a protein with three highly
conserved C2H2 double zinc finger domains, the second of which has a single C2H2 zinc finger attached at its C-terminal end, as well as an
N-terminal C2HC zinc finger motif . To date, 22 SALL4 mutations have been described in Duane-related syndromes, especially Okihiro syndrome
. Seventeen are located in exon 2, and five within exon 3. These known mutations are nonsense mutations, duplications, or deletions (Figure
7). Schematic representation of the SALL4 gene/protein and localization of all mutations identified in Duane-related syndromes. Oval
symbols: zinc finger domain. Symbols of mutations: open triangle, nonsense; black triangle, deletion; black circle; duplication; open
diamond, combined deletion-insertion. Previously found mutations are above the schematic gene, and the mutation (c.1919dupT) reported in
this study is under the schematic gene. The c.1919dupT mutation identified in this study was a duplication located in exon 2. This mutation
is predicted to generate a frameshift resulting in a truncated protein denoted as p.Met640IlefsX25. Thus, when translated, the premature
termination codon would truncate the SALL4 polypeptide by 414 residues, i.e., appropriately 40% of the total length. The codon would
truncate the second C2H2 double zinc finger domain and lead to a complete deletion of the third domain due to premature termination. The
region containing these three functional domains was conserved; our sequence analysis also showed the deleted residues in the second domain
of SALL4 to be highly conserved across different vertebrate species. This heterozygous c.1919dupT mutation plays a role in the disease
pathogenesis via haploinsufficiency through a pathway known as nonsense-mediated mRNA decay, an mRNA surveillance mechanism found in all
eukaryotic organisms that leads to a degradation of the transcripts with introns in the 3′ untranslated region. The mutation subsequently
prevents the synthesis of truncated proteins that may have toxic effects such as dominant negative interactions . In fact, all the mutations
identified thus far in SALL4 associated with Duane-related syndromes are likely to be disease-causing via haploinsufficiency . This
proposition was based on the observation that disease-causing deletions of all coding exons in two independent families that explicitly
resulted in haploinsufficiency . The c.1919dupT mutation described in our Chinese family with DRS provides further evidence supporting that
SALL4 mutations affect the disease phenotype through nonsense-mediated mRNA decay. To date, there is insufficient information to correlate
SALL4 mutations with the severity of the phenotypes of DRS and DRS-associated syndromes. Although the mutation p.R865X has been reported to
cause either a mild or severe phenotype , c.1919dupT in this present family gives clear variations in clinical features. Varying degrees of
ocular disorders and limb involvements were manifested in the c.1919dupT carriers. Such complex disease manifestation might have been
modified by local epigenetics or other mutations that have yet to be identified. Kohlhase et al. demonstrated that the expression of SALL4
in human could be detected only in the testis and ovary . In animal studies, SALL4 mRNA expression has been detected in the embryo and well
described during different developmental periods; the expression in the progress zone of the limb buds fitted well with the radial ray
anomalies in patients with Duane-related syndromes . In addition, a reduced dosage of SALL4 in the mid-hindbrain region was expected to
result in disturbed development of the sixth cranial nerve . Two independent studies noted no mutations in SALL4 could be detected in
isolated DRS cases, suggesting other genetic influences in addition to SALL4 . Recently, mutations in CHN1 have been found in association
with isolated families with DRS . In summary, we have identified a novel heterozygous SALL4 mutation cosegregating with DRS in a Chinese
pedigree. This mutation is predicted to result in a truncated SALL4 protein affecting two functional domains, and haploinsufficiency due to
nonsense-mediated mRNA decay may be responsible for the disease pathogenesis. The results of this study provide further evidence for
understanding the genetic causes of DRS and extend its phenotypic and mutational spectra. We express our greatest gratitude to all the
participants in this study. The work in this paper was supported in part by the Endowment Fund for Lim Por-Yen Eye Genetics Research Centre,
Hong Kong, China. Dr. Wilson W.K. Yip (ywk806@ha.org.hk) and Dr. Li Jia Chen (lijia_chen@cuhk.edu.hk) are co-corresponding authors.
