In this report, we describe the surgical resection of a pedunculated solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura (SFTP) by single-incision
thoracoscopic surgery (SITS). SITS may be a suitable surgical option for pedunculated SFTPs. Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura (SFTP) is
a relatively rare pleural tumor that generally arises from the visceral pleura as an asymptomatic pleural-based mass . We present a case of
SFTP, which was initially diagnosed as a thymoma during a preoperative computed tomography (CT) scan. We describe the first case of a
pedunculated SFTP, resected by minimally invasive single-incision thoracoscopic surgery (SITS). Furthermore, we discuss the advantages and
disadvantages of several practical treatments. An 81-year-old woman was admitted to our hospital for further examination of an abnormal
shadow found on a chest CT. She had a history of thymectomy for thymoma. A CT scan demonstrated a homogenous, sharply circumscribed mass in
the anterior mediastinum (Figure 1). The preoperative diagnosis was given as recurrent thymoma. However, surgery was required to arrive at a
pathological diagnosis and for curative resection. The patient was given general anesthesia using one-lung ventilation and was placed in a
semilateral position. Exploration through the left fifth intercostal space using a 5 mm trocar was performed. No tumor was found in the
thymic tissue. However, a pedunculated tumor that protruded into the thoracic cavity from the visceral pleura was observed. The tumor was
attached by its stalk to the left upper lobe, and moved freely (Figure 2B). We believed that a single-port surgery was feasible for this
type of lesion. Preoperative chest computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a homogenous, sharply circumscribed mass in the anterior
mediastinum. (A): Enhancement showed a mass that was not enhanced. (B) Sagittal view. Intraoperative findings. (A) A 2.5 cm skin incision
was made, and a wound retraction system (Alexis Wound Retractor, Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA USA) was placed through the
incision. (B) A pedunculated tumor protruded into the thoracic cavity from the visceral pleura, and was attached to the left upper lobe. (C)
The tumor stalk was resected using an articulating endostapler (Covidien, Norwalk, CT, USA). The 5 mm incision was extended to 2.5 cm, and
the wound retraction system (Alexis Wound Retractor, Applied Medical, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA USA) was then placed through the incision
(Figure 2A). The tumor stalk was suspended using articulating endograspers (Covidien, Norwalk, CT, USA) and was resected using an
articulating endostapler (Covidien) (Figure 2C). We did not perform frozen section during the procedure. Because the tumor was pedunculated
and relatively small, it could be resected with sufficient margin. Microscopically, the tumor was characterized by spindle cells that were
organized in short fascicles against a collagenous background. Areas of high cellularity and mitotic activity were absent (Figure 3).
Immunohistochemical staining was strongly positive for CD34, bcl-2, and vimentin in the cytoplasm of the tumor cells. The tumor was
determined to be a benign SFTP. The patient was followed up for 6 months, and no evidence of recurrence was observed. Tumor pathology. (A)
Cut surface of the resected specimen demonstrated a smooth margin with solid consistency and a heterogeneous appearance (4.0 × 3. 0 × 1.8
cm). (B) Histological specimen demonstrated that the tumor consisted of hypocellular and moderately cellular areas of bland spindle cells in
abundant collagen fibers. (H&E, ×200). Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura is a type of mesenchymal tumor that tends to involve the pleura.
Although most SFTPs are considered histologically benign, local recurrences and enlargements without any sign of invasion or metastasis have
been reported . Video- assisted thoracoscopic surgery is thought to be minimally invasive; therefore, it is perceived to result in less
postoperative pain and faster recovery . Takahama et al. reported that VATS is a powerful and useful approach for pedunculated tumors.
Recently, VATS has become a more commonly used technique for thoracic tumor surgeries . In particular, single-port VATS has been useful for
specific diseases, such as pneumothorax . To the best of our knowledge, there have been no previous reports on the use of single-port VATS
for SFTP. Because only one intercostal space is involved, the possible advantages of SITS over conventional three-port VATS include less
postoperative pain, fewer postoperative drainage days, shorter hospital stays, and cosmetic advantages. Some authors have reported less
postoperative pain and less paresthesia in patients who underwent minor procedures through a single-port approach than with the classical
three-port approach . There are obvious technical problems with single-port thoracoscopic surgery. It is not a naturally ergonomic
procedure, because the traditional thoracoscopic principles of triangulation are lost. In addition, positioning of multiple devices poses a
problem because they are passed through a single small incision in the chest. Instruments often interfere with each other, not only within
the pleural space, but also in the extrapleural space, where such attachments as a camera light lead often impede movements. To overcome
these limitations, the development of new instruments is needed. Increasing the length of the camera shaft will allow an assistant to stand
comfortably with his or her hands away from those of the surgeon. Use of a rotary articulating endograsper aids in achieving triangulation
and assists with the use of other devices, with good results. Nomori et al. reported that contact metastasis and local recurrence occur at
the port site. In the case presented here, the tumor was resected through a 2.5 cm incision wound, even though the tumor was 4.0 cm in
diameter. A wound retraction system should provide for wound dilation and protection when a specimen is to be removed through a small
incision. Initially, the patient’s tumor was thought to be a recurrent thymoma. In general, median sternotomy is planned for a thymoma. When
the diagnosis is suspected preoperatively, using a single-port VATS can contribute to the avoidance of obvious excessive invasion. In
conclusion, we recommend minimally invasive single-port VATS for resecting a thoracic pedunculated SFTP. ‘Written informed consent was
obtained from the patient for publication of this report and any accompanying images’. CT: Computed tomography; H&E: Hematoxylin and eosin;
SFTP: Solitary fibrous tumor of the pleura; SITS: Single-incision thoracoscopic surgery; VATS: Video- assisted thoracoscopic surgery. The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. M T drafted the manuscript. Y S and Y H participated in the sentence alignment and
editorial work of the picture. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
