We report the case of a 47-year-old woman who was referred to our unit for hypoglycemia. She was diagnosed with diabetes at age 30 years and
was previously treated with metformin, sulfonylureas, and glucagon-like peptide 1 agonists. Despite interruption of her treatments, she had
for 1 month clinical features evoking hypoglycemic spells, with adrenergic and neuroglycopenic symptoms subsiding after glucose
administration. Her BMI was 23.8 kg/m2. She had axillary acanthosis nigricans but no lipodystrophy. Continuous glucose monitoring showed
hypoglycemia down to 2.1 mmol/L, mostly during fasting periods, and hyperglycemia up to 13.7 mmol/L in the absence of any treatment. HbA1c
was 15%. During a fasting test, venous glucose concentration dropped to 2.5 mmol/L with concomitant low serum levels of C-peptide,
insulinemia, and proinsulinemia: <1.40, <3, and 3.6 pmol/L, respectively (reference ranges in healthy subjects 17.8–173, 370–1,470, and
3.3–28 pmol/L, respectively). Plasma levels of cortisol, somatostatin, IGF-1, and Western blot analysis of IGF-2 and its precursors were
normal. Thoraco-abdominal computed tomography and whole-body F-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography scan did not reveal any
abnormality. We evaluated the presence of anti-insulin receptor antibodies (AIRAs) using a radioreceptor assay (1). The patient’s total
serum and purified immunoglobulin fractions inhibited the binding of a tracer concentration of radiolabeled insulin, consistent with
significant titers of AIRAs. Patient’s serum and purified immunoglobulins activated proximal (tyrosine phosphorylation of insulin receptor
β-subunit and insulin receptor substrate-1) and distal (phosphorylation of Akt/PKB) insulin-signaling pathways in vitro in a dose-dependant
manner, mimicking insulin action. There was no clinical evidence of either systemic lupus erythematosus or another autoimmune disease, and
the search for anti-nuclear, anti-DNA, anti-thyroid, anti-GAD, and anti-insulin antibodies was negative. Serum protein electrophoresis was
also normal. A high-dose corticosteroid therapy (1 mg/kg prednisone) was introduced for 1 month with a progressive decrease over 4 months,
which allowed a complete disappearance of hypoglycemic events. Because of persistent hyperglycemia, decreasing doses of corticosteroid were
associated with insulin therapy. Search for serum AIRA after 3 months of treatment was negative. The occurrence of non–insulin-mediated
hypoglycemia requires the search for tumors secreting somatostatin, IGF-1, IGF-2, or its precursors (2). After having ruled out those
diagnoses, we detected serum AIRAs that activated insulin signaling in our patient. The concomitant disappearance of hypoglycemia and AIRAs
after corticosteroid therapy strongly suggested that AIRAs were the cause of hypoglycemias. In most reported cases, AIRAs have been shown to
occur in a context of autoimmune-associated disease—mostly preexisting systemic lupus erythematosus, primary biliary cirrhosis, or Hashimoto
thyroiditis. AIRAs were generally responsible for rapidly progressive insulin-resistant diabetes, sometimes associated with spontaneous
hypoglycemia with hyperinsulinemia that could be due to an impairment of insulin degradation (3,4). In our patient, we could not rule out
the responsibility of preexisting AIRAs in the development of diabetes, and AIRAs did not induce hyperinsulinemia. First-line treatment is
usually corticosteroid therapy, but the therapeutic strategies are not well defined because of the rarity of the disease (4). Our report
highlights the fact that non–insulin-mediated hypoglycemia must lead to the search of AIRAs even in case of preexisting long-lasting
diabetes and in the absence of autoimmune-associated disease. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.
J.-C.M., M.C.-D., C.V., and S.S. wrote the manuscript. J.-C.M. was involved in the management of the patient and wrote the manuscript.
M.C.-D. and C.V. did the laboratory analysis and wrote the manuscript. S.S. was involved in the management of the patient and wrote the
manuscript. J.-C.M. is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had full access to all the data in the study and takes responsibility for
the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
