The recent introduction of an intraoperative near infrared fluorescence (INIF) imaging system installed on the da Vinci Si® robotic system
has enabled surgeons to identify intravascular NIF signals in real time. This technology is useful in identifying hidden vessels and
assessing blood supply to bowel segments. In this study, we report 3 cases of patients with rectal cancer who underwent robotic low anterior
resection (LAR) with INIF imaging for the first time in Asia. In September 2012, robotic-assisted rectal resection with INIF imaging was
performed on three consecutive rectal cancer patients. LAR was performed in 2 cases, and abdominoperineal resection was performed in the
third case. INIF imaging was used to identify the left colic branch of the inferior mesenteric artery and to assess blood supply to the
distal rectum. We evaluated the utility of INIF imaging in performing robotic-assisted colorectal procedures. Our preliminary results
suggest that this technique is safe and effective, and that INIF imaging may be a useful tool to colorectal surgeons. Since the first robot-
assisted laparoscopic colorectal procedures were reported in 2002, this minimally invasive technique has been applied to many complex
surgical cases in the field of colorectal oncology.1,2 The development of medical imaging modalities such as three-dimensional CT, perfusion
MRI and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) PET scans has allowed for preoperative imaging that characterizes surgical anatomy, as well as tissue
perfusion, to more precisely guide the surgical approach. Although conventional techniques allow us to assess perfusion of the target area
preoperatively, it is seldom useful since vessels that are ligated during the surgery will alter blood flow to the targeted organs;
moreover, during gastrointestinal cancer surgery, it is often difficult to identify the critical vessels and lymph nodes and to assess
physiologic information such as perfusion of the bowel. Therefore, improving the identification of vascular structures and assessment of
perfusion of bowel segments in real time during surgery could be useful to surgeons and may improve patient outcomes. Intraoperative near
infrared fluorescence (INIF) imaging uses laser technology to activate an intravenously delivered agent, indocyanine green (ICG), which
rapidly binds to plasma proteins. This allows ICG to remain predominantly in the vasculature and provide visualization of vascular
structures. A recently introduced INIF imaging system (Firefly™, Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) installed on the da Vinci Si®
robotic system (Intuitive Surgical Inc., Sunnyvale, CA, USA) allows surgeons to identify intravascular NIF signals in real time. This
technology can be used to identify hidden vessels, assess blood supply to bowel segments, and locate sentinel lymph nodes. The utility of
ICG with INIF in safely performing robotic-assisted colorectal surgery has yet to be established however. In this study, we report 3 cases
in which rectal cancer patients underwent robotic LAR with INIF imaging for the first time in Asia. All patients successfully underwent
robotic-assisted rectal resection using INIF imaging without complications associated with ICG dye administration, as measured by changes in
vital signs, serum creatinine and liver function tests. Patient demographics and perioperative clinical outcomes are summarized in Table 1.
Two women and one man were included in this study, with a mean age of 66 years (range, 52-75). The mean tumor distance from the anal verge
was 11 cm (range 4-18). Operative times (skin-to-skin) ranged from 281-337 minutes, with a mean of 304 minutes. The mean postoperative
hospital stay was 10 days (range, 5-17 days). The postoperative pathologic diagnoses were adenocarcinoma in 2 patients and obstructing
urothelial carcinoma of the rectum originating from the urinary bladder in the third patient. Low anterior resection was performed in 2
cases, and abdominoperineal resection was done in one case in which the rectal carcinoma was in close proximity to the anal sphincter. No
mortality was associated with the operative procedure. During the surgery, INIF imaging allowed the surgeon to identify the left colic
branch of the IMA within the mesenteric tissue in all 3 cases (Fig. 1). The da Vinci Si® robotic system was equipped with an LED illuminator
as the visible light source, as well as a laser that emitted a near infrared wavelength of light. After changing the usual visual system to
the fluorescent mode, a fluorescence response in the mesenteric blood vessels and tissue was visible within 50 seconds of the injection of
the fluorescent dye. In the 2 LAR cases, INIF imaging demarcated the ischemic zone in the distal rectum, which helped the surgeon to define
the distal resection margin (Fig. 2). Two of the patients recovered without complications, and one experienced a postoperative ileus that
resolved with conservative management. Indocyanine green (ICG) is a fluorescent dye that absorbs near infrared wavelengths of light. ICG
emits an infrared signal when excited by laser light in situ, which can be detected with an NIRF camera. ICG has a half-life of 2-5 minutes
and is excreted mainly though the biliary system, making it impossible to visualize the ureters. The maximum dosage of ICG is 2 mg/kg, and
it must be given within 6 hours of reconstitution. Since gaining approval for its use from the FDA in 1959, adverse reactions to ICG have
been rarely reported (0.004%).3 The indications for use of INIF imaging include visual assessment of blood vessels, blood flow, and tissue
perfusion. By integrating INIF imaging into the da Vinci Si® robotic system, a 1080i 3-dimensional high definition stereoscopic fluorescence
capable camera attached to an endoscope enables infrared vision and detection of fluorescence ICG by the da Vinci computer core. By
switching between normal white light and fluorescence imaging modes, the surgeon can perform minimally invasive surgery using standard
endoscopic visibility without leaving the console. This allows the surgeon to view high resolution near infrared images of blood flow in the
microvasculature, as well as tissue perfusion, in real time during robotic surgical procedures. INIF imaging has been used in several other
surgical specialties for this purpose. During kidney surgery, it is used to accurately identify the renal vasculature and to differentiate
renal tumors from the surrounding normal parenchyma. Additionally, Wagner, et al. reported that during right robotic thymectomy,
fluorescence imaging facilitated identification of the contralateral phrenic nerve by fluorescing the pericardiophrenic vessels.4-6 We
propose that NIRF imaging can also be selectively used in colorectal procedures. INIF imaging using ICG offers a potentially more reliable
and less time consuming method for identification of the inferior mesenteric branches during low ligation. Because intraoperative
identification of the bowel resection margins is not always easily accomplished, the ability to assess blood flow to the distal rectum may
aid in creating safe anastomoses and improving patient outcomes. With increased patient volume and experience with this technique, INIF
imaging could be incorporated into several robotic-assisted colorectal procedures including sentinel lymph node detection in rectal cancer
patients and identification of the neurovascular bundle arising from the pelvic plexus. Further studies are needed to determine if this
technique will help improve patient outcomes after robotic-assisted colorectal procedures. In conclusion, we evaluated the utility of INIF
imaging in performing robotic-assisted colorectal procedures. Our preliminary results suggest that this technique is safe and effective, and
that INIF imaging may be useful to colorectal surgeons. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. White light imaging (A) and
INIF imaging (B) of dissection around the root of the IMA. Yellow circle demarcates left colic branch from IMA hidden in mesenteric tissue.
LCA, left colic artery; IMA, inferior mesenteric artery; INIF, intraoperative near infrared fluorescence. In contrast to standard white
light imaging (A), margin (yellow arrows) between fluorescent normal and ischemic rectum was readily apparent (B). Summary of the Patients
Undergoing Robotic Assisted Rectal Resection Using INIF Imaging ICG, indocyanine green; APR, abdominoperineal resection; LAR, low anterior
resection; INIF, intraoperative near infrared fluorescence.
