After bathing at a hot spring resort, a 75-year-old man presented to the emergency department because of seizure-like attack with loss of
conscious. This is the first case of primary amebic meningoencephalitis (PAM) caused by Naegleria fowleri in Taiwan. PAM was diagnosed based
on detection of actively motile trophozoites in cerebrospinal fluid using a wet-mount smear and the Liu's stain. The amoebae were further
confirmed by PCR and gene sequencing. In spite of administering amphotericin B treatment, the patient died 25 days later. Naegleria fowleri,
Acanthamoeba spp., and Balamuthia mandrillaris have been recognized as etiologic agents of encephalitis . N. fowleri causes primary amebic
meningoencephalitis (PAM), a rapidly fatal disease, while Acanthamoeba spp. and B. mandrillaris cause chronic granulomatous encephalitis .
N. fowleri is commonly found in warm freshwater environments such as hot springs, lakes, natural mineral water, and resort spas frequented
by tourists . Infection can occur when N. fowleri enter the nasal passages, attach to the olfactory mucosa, and migrate along the olfactory
nerve tracts, crossing the cribriform plate to the brain . Once N. fowleri infects the central nervous system (CNS), it divides rapidly and
death can occur within 1 to 2 weeks . A 75-year-old man presented to a local hospital complaining of headache, fever, and right arm
myoclonic seizures. He had mild leukocytosis; however, there was no indication of intracerebral hemorrhage or other obvious abnormalities.
He was transferred to Chung Shan Medical University Hospital (Taichung, Taiwan) due to sudden onset of convulsion and right side limbs
weakness. The neurologist diagnosed a CNS infection and seizure of unknown etiology and admitted the patient to Coronary Care Unit for
further evaluation and treatment. Laboratory studies showed a total leukocyte count of 12,190/µl (with 94.6% neutrophils, 3.0% lymphocytes,
and 2.2% monocytes), and a platelet count of 148,000/µl. The clinical biochemistry data showed blood urea nitrogen at 22.48 mg/dl, a blood
sugar (ac) level of 175 mg/dl, a blood sugar (pc) level of 255 mg/dl, and C-reactive protein level of 2.85 mg/dl. The serologic result for
HIV was negative. Blood cultures of bacteria and fungi were negative. Magnetic resonance (MR) imaging of the patient's brain showed that
sagittal and axial post-gadolinium T1-weighted images revealed diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement along the brain surface, including the
brainstem, frontal lobe, and cerebellum. A contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) scan showed diffuse leptomeningeal enhancement and
subarachnoid and intraventricular hemorrhages. A lumbar puncture was performed and showed slightly-turbid cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) with 4
mg/dl glucose, 954.1 mg/dl protein, and a leukocyte count of 560/µl with 90.5% neutrophils, 5.0% lymphocytes, and 4.5% monocytes. India ink
preparations, acid-fast stains and Gram stains for bacteria and fungi were all negative. The CSF was negative for viral detection. Also, CSF
cultures for bacteria and fungi were negative. A wet-mount CSF smear revealed numerous trophozoites of approximately 10-25 µm size, which
moved rapidly and directionally by pseudopodia. The cytoplasm of the trophozoites contained granular, abundant vacuoles. The amoeba was
identified as N. fowleri (Fig. 1). A cytospin preparation was used to examine the CSF and the CSF sediment preparations were fixed with
Liu's stain, which revealed amoebae containing nuclei and numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles (Fig. 2). N. fowleri infection was diagnosed and
intravenous amphotericin B (50 mg q.d.) was started. The CSF specimen obtained during hospitalization was examined at the Centers for
Disease Control (CDC) of Taiwan. N. fowleri infection was confirmed by PCR analysis using the primers Nae3-F (5'-CAA ACA CCG TTA TGA CAG
GG-3') and Nae3-R (5'-CTG GTT TCC CTC ACC TTA CG-3') to amplify fragments of a 183-bp product . For the detection of Acanthamoeba spp.,
primers AcantF900 (5'-CCC AGA TCG TTT ACC GTG AA-3') and AcantR1100 (5'-TAA ATA TTA ATG CCC CCA ACT ATC C-3') were used to amplify fragments
of a 180 bp product . N. fowleri Carter strain (American Type Culture Collection; ATCC no. 22758, Manassas, Virginia, USA) and A.
castellanii Neff strain (ATCC 30010) were used as positive controls. The PCR products (Fig. 3) were visualized after electrophoresis on 2%
agarose gels, where only a 183 bp amplicon of Naegleria spp. was detected in the CSF specimen, but no band for Acanthamoeba spp. was
detected. For further confirmation, the PCR product was subjected to DNA sequencing to identify the species. The 183 bp PCR product showing
higher similarity percentage to N. fowleri using the BLAST algorithm at the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) website
(http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/). Although amphotericin B treatment was started immediately, the patient fell into coma. After 21 days of
hospitalization, his health condition showed unstable hemodynamics and brain death. At 25 days post-treatment (beginning of treatment), the
patient sustained to suffer from severe shock, followed by PAM and multiple organ failure leading to the patient's death. N. fowleri is a
thermophilic amoeba that grows well in tropical and subtropical climates and can tolerate temperatures up to 45℃ . Warm fresh water coupled
with a bacterial food supply is an ideal habitat for amoebae. N. fowleri has a tendency to live in naturally or artificially heated water in
spas, hot springs, warm rivers, ponds, lakes, saunas and indoor swimming pools . In this case, the CDC of Taiwan analyzed the hot springs
and confirmed the water contained N. fowleri. Thus, the hot springs were possibly the source of infection. Based on these results, hot
spring water may be a threat to human health, and exposure to warm fresh water should be considered a possible causative agent of amoebic
meningoencephalitis. Also, it is important to rapidly detect thermotolerant amoebae in hot springs where people swim and bathe because of
the possible impact on human health. Based on clinical and laboratory diagnoses, N. fowleri causes PAM, which is difficult to distinguish
from bacterial meningoencephalitis. Therefore, it usually leads to an incorrect diagnosis. Once the CSF analysis indicates purulent
meningitis without bacteria, PAM should be suspected . The diagnosis is confirmed by further examination of CSF wet mounts for motile
trophozoites. However, failure to visualize the amoeba does not exclude PAM, and the diagnosis is often missed when Naegleria organisms are
mistaken for atypical mononucleocytes or lymphocytes in the CSF. CT and MR imaging may be normal in early PAM, with subsequent evidence of
brain edema and basilar meningeal enhancement. However, PAM imaging features are non-specific . Recently, a triplex real-time TaqMan PCR
assay was developed as a rapid laboratory diagnostic tool for simultaneous identification of Acanthamoeba spp., B. mandriallaris, and N.
fowleri . This approach may provide a relatively rapid means of detection to enhance identification of amoebae that are not easily
distinguished by conventional cultivation and microscopic methods. PCR methodology for specific amplification of N. fowleri DNA can identify
amoeba in CSF. This method is sufficiently sensitive to detect individual amoeba and is often employed as a confirmatory test for N. fowleri
identification. PAM is an acute disease, in which N. fowleri can grow to large numbers by feeding on bacteria. Thus, early diagnosis is
essential in order to initiate appropriate antimicrobial therapy before the amoebae do extensive damage . N. fowleri is highly sensitive to
the antifungal drug amphotericin B; however, PAM survival rate is low and few patients survive . In our case, amphotericin B was ineffective
possibly due to 1) high infectious dose, 2) rapid onset of disease, 3) delay in diagnosis, or 4) patient's immune system may have been
compromised. In our case, PAM developed within several days following exposure to contaminated water, and caused death on day 25 after
beginning of the chemotherapy. Therefore, we propose that critical points in determining PAM survival case include early diagnosis and
treatment initiation, the infectious dose of amoebae, the virulence of the infecting strain, and the health status of the patient. This is
the first PAM case that occurred in Taiwan following bathing in hot spring. Rapid diagnosis was made by microscopic examination to visualize
motile amoebae, and the diagnosis was further confirmed by PCR and sequencing. In spite of amphotericin B treatment, the patient passed away
on day 25 after beginning of the treatment. The presence of N. fowleri in hot spring water poses a threat to human health. Thus, the
relationship between public hygiene and the quality of hot spring water is worthy of future investigations. Motile forms of Naegleria
fowleri trophozoites in cerebrospinal fluid. (A) A motile N. fowleri, showing directional movements by means of blunt, bulbous pseudopodia
(arrowheads), with granular cytoplasm (arrow). (B) The trophozoite is characterized by a nucleus (arrow) and phagocytizing an erythrocyte
(arrowhead). Liu's stain of a cerebrospinal fluid specimen. Microscopic examination revealed numerous Naegleria fowleri trophozoites (black
arrowheads) containing nuclei (blank arrows) and numerous cytoplasmic vacuoles (black arrow). Blank arrowheads indicate leukocytes.
Identification of Naegleria fowleri by PCR. Lane 1. Positive control for Naegleria spp. Lane 2. DNA from the patient CSF for Naegleria spp.
Lane 3. Negative control for Naegleria spp. Lane 4. Positive control for Acanthamoeba spp. Lane 5. DNA from the patient CSF for Acanthamoeba
spp. Lane 6. Negative control for Acanthamoeba spp. M; 100-bp DNA ladder.
