Tenofovir was introduced as a second line drug for the treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in India in December 2009.
Although rare, renal toxicity is a recognized adverse drug reaction (ADR) of this drug, especially when administered with boosted lopinavir-
ritonavir. In this case, an HIV positive patient receiving tenofovir based antiretroviral therapy (ART) for last 1 year developed
albuminuria, glycosuria and hypophosphatemia. Renal function tests and random blood sugar were within normal limits. He was diagnosed as a
case of tenofovir induced Fanconi syndrome. Tenofovir was discontinued and patient was prescribed an alternate regimen. Five months later
clinical symptoms and renal functions returned to normal. A pharmacokinetic interaction between tenofovir and ritonavir may have resulted in
the toxicity. A periodic monitoring of renal functions is desirable in patients on tenofovir based ART. Tenofovir, a nucleotide reverse
transcriptase inhibitor is approved by US Food and Drug Administration for treatment of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection in
adults. It is generally well tolerated (except for flatulence). However, rare episodes of acute renal failure and Fanconi syndrome have been
reported. Fanconi syndrome is a generalized defect in proximal renal tubule transport involving amino acids, glucose, phosphate, uric acid,
potassium, bicarbonate and proteins. It can be due to outdated tetracycline, or drugs like gentamicin. cisplatin, valproic acid and
tenofovir. Here, we report a case of Fanconi syndrome probably induced by tenofovir. A 43-year old, HIV positive man was treated with
stavudine, lamivudine and nevirapine as per National AIDS Control Organization (NACO) guidelines for 30 months. However, his CD4 count (56
cells/μL) and plasma viral load (1,27,734/mm of blood) failed to improve. Hence the patient was advised the second line antiretroviral
therapy consisting of tenofovir 150 mg plus lamivudine 150 mg twice a day along with boosted lopinavir (LPV) 200 mg + 50 mg twice a day. He
was also prescribed co-trimoxazole 960 mg once a day, along with multivitamins and folic acid. After a year on this therapy, patient
complained of increased frequency of urination, ankle edema and knee pain. On investigations, serum creatinine and random blood sugar (RBS)
were within the normal range. Urine examination showed albuminuria (1 g/L) and glycosuria (30 mmol/L) on two subsequent investigations on
dates 28/09/2010, 27/10/2010. Serum phosphate was low (1.74, N: 2.7-4.5 mg/dL on 20/12/2010). His blood pressure was 118/78 mm of Hg, RBS
was 132 mg/dL and radiological appearance of kidneys and urinary bladder was also normal. Considering the clinical presentation and time
course of events the patient was diagnosed as a case of Fanconi syndrome. Tenofovir was suspected to be the causal drug (Stopped on 5th
January 2011) and patient was switched on alternative regimen consisting of abacavir 300 mg and lamivudine 150 mg, five tablets orally,
twice a day, along with didanosine 400 mg at bed time on 5th January 2011. The boosted LPV was continued. After 5 months, increased urinary
frequency, ankle edema and pain in knees were resolved and serum phosphate returned to normal level (2.8 mg/dL on 30/5/2011). Glycosuria
become absent 1-month after the drug stopped, as investigations were done one dates 3/2/2011, 28/2/2011 and 27/6/2011. Albuminuria was
absent when the patient was last followed up (27/6/2011). Causality assessment of the adverse drug event was carried out using WHO- Uppsala
monitoring centre (UMC) criteria and Naranjo's Scale. Both the algorithms labeled tenofovir as “probable.” ADR was severe in nature as
analysed on the Hartwig scale. Further, the preventability assessment carried out using Modified Schumock and Thornton criteria showed that
the ADR was probably preventable. Tenofovir is the only nucleotide analogue approved for treatment of HIV infection. It is available as
tenofovir disoproxil (prodrug) that has better oral bioavailability. In this case, the patient developed glycosuria, albuminuria and
hypophosphatemia after receiving tenofovir based antiretroviral therapy for 1 year. The laboratory and routine clinical examination had
ruled out the chronic kidney disease, diabetes and hypertension. A possibility of primary Fanconi syndrome was ruled out since the patient
had no history suggestive of this condition during the past. The signs and symptoms appeared after 12 months of drug therapy. Tenofovir was
discontinued and a regimen consisting of abacavir, lamivudine and didanosine along with lopinavir-ritonavir (LPV/r) combination was started.
The patient recovered and renal functions returned to normal, hence, suggesting the possibility of tenofovir induced Fanconi syndrome.
Confirmed cases of Fanconi syndrome due to tenofovir have been reported worldwide. In India also teneofovir associated renal dysfunction
have been reported. The mean duration of therapy with tenofovir before developing Fanconi syndrome is reported to be 11 months and it was
discontinued in all these cases and subsequently renal function tests were normalized. An important observation made in all these patients
was the concomitant treatment with boosted LPV. The risk of developing nephrotoxicty in patients prescribed tenofovir is nearly 4 times
higher with boosted LPV than with nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitor (NRTI) based therapy. Pharmacokinetic studies have shown that
concomitant therapy with LPV/r increases the plasma concentration of tenofovir. Tenofovir is predominantly secreted from the primary renal
tubule via multidrug resistance (MDR-2) protein. This MDR-2 is located in the apical side of proximal renal cells. Ritonavir inhibits MDR-2
protein and leads to accumulation of tenofovir in primary renal tubules resulting in toxicity. Proposed mechanism for this drug-induced
proximal renal tubular toxicity include epithelial cell mitochondrial DNA depletion and/or direct tubular cytotoxicity. Hence, it is
hypothesized that drug interaction between tenofovir and LPV/r combination may be responsible for this adverse drug reaction (ADR). An
effective management of this ADR is to stop tenofovir. India has a large pool of HIV infected patients and NACO has recommended tenofovir as
a second line antiretroviral drug. A substantial number of patients are prescribed this drug in combination with a protease inhibitor. It is
therefore, recommended that patients receiving this combination should be screened for renal functions and electrolyte balance from the
start of therapy and periodically during first year. This will ensure an early detection and management of the ADR. We express our gratitude
to Dr. Kiran K. Shah, Additional Project Director and Dr. Laxmikant Chavan, State Epidemiologist, Gujarat State AIDS Control Society for
their support and permission to publish this case report. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
