We present a case of a unique stenosis in a 12-year-old saphenous vein graft (SVG), to the right coronary artery, which was visualized by
optical coherence tomography (OCT), before percutaneous coronary intervention. The patient was an 80-year-old man in whom the stenosis was
documented by area-detector coronary computed tomography. OCT imaging demonstrated that the culprit lesion was a venous valve containing a
thrombus before preintervention imaging. Coronary stenting was performed with a distal protection device, and pathologic examination of the
aspirate verified the OCT findings. Coronary angiography 12 years previously, just after coronary artery bypass surgery (CABG), had shown a
completely normal SVG without any suspicion of a venous valve. These OCT images suggested the possibility that the culprit lesion was an
“upside down” venous valve that was not visualized by angiography just after surgery, but could be a cause of late SVG stenosis following
CABG. OCT imaging is very useful for clarifying the etiology of the stenosis in cases of ambiguous angiographic lesions. Coronary artery
bypass grafting (CABG) is established as a means of restoring blood flow to areas of myocardial ischemia in patients with coronary artery
disease. Owing to substantial advances in therapeutic strategies and optimal medical therapy, clinical outcomes after CABG have been
improved even in octogenarians . However, in patients who require coronary angiography after CABG, coronary risk factors tend to be poorly
controlled, and these patients are at high risk for adverse cardiac events . Therefore, extensive assessment and management would be
essential to improve outcomes in patients with prior CABG requiring coronary angiograms. Although saphenous vein grafting (SVG) is generally
used, it has lower patency rates compared with internal thoracic artery implantation, which is referred to as vein graft disease. Various
factors are pointed out as a cause of vein graft disease . In this case report we describe the occurrence of a unique SVG stenosis detected
by OCT imaging, and suggest that structural alterations in relation to venous valves may be responsible for other cases of vein graft
disease as well. An 80-year-old Japanese man with hypertension and dyslipidemia, with a history of acute inferior myocardial infarction 12
years previously, had undergone CABG to treat triple-vessel disease. His grafts were as follows: aorta → SVG → right coronary artery (RCA),
right internal thoracic artery graft → left anterior descending artery, left internal thoracic artery graft → left circumflex coronary
artery. Three months following CABG he again underwent coronary angiography (CAG) as a routine follow up (there were no clinical symptoms),
which did not disclose any stenosis of the SVG, or of any other graft (Fig. 1). Twelve years later, the patient underwent computed
tomographic coronary angiography (CTA) in ambulatory care, because he experienced chest oppression during effort. A stenosis was documented
at the mid portion of the SVG (Fig. 2). CAG revealed a nonsignificant stenosis at the mid portion of the SVG to RCA (Fig. 3A). We decided to
use intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) (Fig. 3B, C) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) imaging (Fig. 3D, E) to clarify the nature of
the SVG stenosis. The long-axis OCT image (Fig. 3E) disclosed morphology possibly representing a venous valve at the site of the culprit
lesion, leading us to speculate that the graft might have been attached upside down during CABG 12 years previously. According to the
operative note at the time, surgeons had not intentionally selected a nonreversed SVG with some modification [4, 5] to the venous valve.
There was no indication of the direction of the SVG in the record, or that it had been modified. This in turn may have caused thrombus
formation and graft stenosis at the site of a venous valve. Compared with venous valves of normal SVGs , the valve in this case was clearly
thickened. Venous valves differ in size or thickness depending on several factors, such as position, vessel diameter, and dynamic stress
caused by blood. Thickening of the venous valve in an upside-down SVG might be due to its position, which is against the direction of the
blood flow, leading to thrombus formation. This unique OCT image should be differentiated from spontaneous dissection or a ruptured
atheromatous plaque. However, after checking multiple long-axis OCT angles, we believe that it corresponds to a venous valve because of its
short symmetric and regular structure. Nevertheless, it is not clear from the three-dimensional OCT images whether the venous valve was
indeed upside-down (Fig. 4). On the other hand, IVUS was not helpful in clarifying the nature of this lesion. Percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI) was performed using a distal protection device, Filtrap (Osaka, Japan), and a drug-eluting stent, Nobori (3.5 × 16 mm)
(Terumo, Tokyo, Japan) (Fig. 3F). Thrombus was retained by the distal protection device (Fig. 5), and consisted of red blood cells and
platelets. There were also a few neutrophils, eosinophils, phosphotungstic acid hematoxylin (PTAH)-positive fibrin, and CD68-positive
macrophages. These pathologic findings are consistent with organized chronic thrombus. The presence of the venous valve may have played a
role in the formation of organized thrombus, which in turn may have affected the thickened appearance of the valve. It is known that SVGs
deteriorate following CABG (vein graft disease), with half being totally occluded or severely stenosed within 10 years [7, 8]. However, this
patient’s vein graft was patent for 12 years, a relatively favorable outcome.Fig. 1Saphenous vein grafting images of the graft angiography
12 years previously. Left anterior-posterior view. Right left anterior oblique viewFig. 2Saphenous vein grafting images of the computed
tomographic angiography. A stenosis at the mid portion of the saphenous vein graftFig. 3Comparison of intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS)
and optical coherence tomography (OCT) images of the culprit lesion. A The saphenous vein graft (SVG) before percutaneous coronary
intervention (PCI). Distal side of the culprit lesion was a, and proximal side was i. B, C IVUS, precise observation, and examination of the
lesion in this case were insufficient. D Images visualized by short-axis OCT view. E Image visualized by long-axis OCT view had the
appearance of a venous valve located in opposition to the blood flow. F The SVG after PCIFig. 4Three-dimensional reconstruction optical
coherence tomography (3D-OCT) images of the culprit lesion. The culprit lesion visualized by 3D-OCT images seen from a the right coronary
artery side and b the aorta side. There are at least three pass lines distally from the proximal site (right arrow)Fig. 5Pathologic images
of the thrombus trapped in the filter device. a Thrombus consisted of red corpuscles and blood platelets (hematoxylin–eosin (H&E), ×10). b
There were also a few neutrophils and eosinophils (H&E, ×40). c Phosphotungstic acid hematoxylin-positive fibrin (×20). d CD68-positive
macrophages (×40) Saphenous vein grafting images of the graft angiography 12 years previously. Left anterior-posterior view. Right left
anterior oblique view Saphenous vein grafting images of the computed tomographic angiography. A stenosis at the mid portion of the saphenous
vein graft Comparison of intravascular ultrasonography (IVUS) and optical coherence tomography (OCT) images of the culprit lesion. A The
saphenous vein graft (SVG) before percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI). Distal side of the culprit lesion was a, and proximal side was
i. B, C IVUS, precise observation, and examination of the lesion in this case were insufficient. D Images visualized by short-axis OCT view.
E Image visualized by long-axis OCT view had the appearance of a venous valve located in opposition to the blood flow. F The SVG after PCI
Three-dimensional reconstruction optical coherence tomography (3D-OCT) images of the culprit lesion. The culprit lesion visualized by 3D-OCT
images seen from a the right coronary artery side and b the aorta side. There are at least three pass lines distally from the proximal site
(right arrow) Pathologic images of the thrombus trapped in the filter device. a Thrombus consisted of red corpuscles and blood platelets
(hematoxylin–eosin (H&E), ×10). b There were also a few neutrophils and eosinophils (H&E, ×40). c Phosphotungstic acid hematoxylin-positive
fibrin (×20). d CD68-positive macrophages (×40) In conclusion, OCT is a very useful imaging modality for clarification of the nature of
angiographically ambiguous lesions, as it sheds light on the potential mechanisms and physiology of coronary artery and graft disease
progression.
