Migraine with aura is a complex neurological disorder modeled in animals by cortical spreading depression. It is less usual to find complete
animal models for the disease so any opportunity to test a human effect back at the bench is welcome. We report the case of a 24 year old
woman who developed new onset episodic migraine with visual aura shortly after treatment initiation with the If ion channel blocker
ivabradine for frequency control in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. We studied whether ivabradine could alter cortical spreading depression in
a suitable animal model. Sixteen rats received either ivabradine or saline, and the number of depolarization shifts and blood flow changes
induced by cortical spreading depression were measured in both groups. No significant differences between the ivabradine and saline group
were detected. Ivabradine is an interesting substance since it is known to produce migraine-like phosphenes frequently and the patient we
report developed de novo migraine with aura. However, we were unable to demonstrate that the drug influences the susceptibility of the brain
to cortical spreading depression with acute administration. The combined data show the relationship of migraine aura to cortical spreading
depression may have some nuances yet to be identified. Migraine is a disorder of the brain with recurrent attacks of head pain, photophobia,
phonophobia and nausea . About 20-30% of migraineurs also have episodes with aura, typically preceding the head pain and lasting between
five and sixty minutes . The most frequent aura symptom is visual disturbance with negative (scotomas) or positive (flickering lights)
visual phenomena . Somatosensory, motor or aphasic symptoms are also possible during migraine aura, but less common. The visual changes
often propagate throughout the visual field at a speed that has been proposed to reflect cortical spreading depression, a process
transiently compromising cortical function . Animal models of migraine are available, but they usually reflect only some aspects of the
human condition and additional models are hence useful. We report on the case of a patient with new onset migraine with aura after treatment
initiation with the novel ion channel blocker ivabradine, and explore the effect of this drug on the laboratory model of cortical spreading
depression. The patient, a 24-year-old Caucasian woman, gave a history of migraine with aura attacks starting about three years prior to
review. There was a clear correlation of the onset of migraine with aura with treatment initiation with the If ion channel blocker
ivabradine. Before treatment initiation, she had infrequent and low-intensity headaches without typical migrainous features, and without
migraine aura, starting in puberty. With ivabradine treatment, she suffered from migraine always with aura at a frequency between once every
three months and several times a week. She rated the headache intensity of these attacks as seven to ten out of ten on a verbal rating
scale. The pulsating and stabbing pain was usually unilateral in the temporal and parietal as well as periorbital area, more often on the
right than on the left. With the episodes she had nausea, photophobia, phonophobia and osmophobia, and no cranial autonomic symptoms. The
headache worsened with physical activity. She typically felt very tired during the pain. Migraine triggers included alcohol and potentially
high altitude. All migraine attacks were preceded by visual aura lasting between 10 and 30 minutes. She then saw flickering jagged lines,
typically in her left visual hemi-field. These jagged lines developed into growing scotomas during the evolution of the aura. She never
experienced somato-sensory, motor or aphasic aura. In addition to the classical aura, the patient also developed phosphenes every night
during dim light conditions. The family history was positive for occasional headaches in her father and infrequent headaches in her mother.
Her brother had headaches when drinking alcohol. No clear-cut migrainous features were stated in the family and nobody in the family had
aura. The patient had a history of severe familial hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy (HOCM) and suffered several syncopes and episodes
with difficult to control tachycardia. She underwent prophylactic implantation of an automatic implantable cardioverter-defibrillator (AICD)
in 2004. The heart condition was well-controlled in terms of frequency control only after ivabradine 5 mg twice daily was added to the
preexisting therapy with propranolol 40 mg once a day and verapamil 80 mg twice daily. We discussed the likely migraine with aura-triggering
effect of ivabradine with her cardiologist. However, stopping ivabradine was not an option since it was controlling a potentially fatal
heart problem. The patient had previously also been diagnosed with somnambulism. The patient had a history of infrequent motion sickness and
“seeing stars” when standing up. The neurological exam and a CT scan of the head with contrast including CT venography were unremarkable in
the patient. An MRI of the brain could not be performed because of the AICD device. All experiments were conducted under license of the
University of California, San Francisco Institutional Animal Care and Use Committee and conforming to the National Institutes of Health
Guide for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals. Male Sprague–Dawley rats (300-380 g) were anesthetized with 60 mg kg–1 sodium
pentobarbital intraperitoneally (i.p.). The femoral vein and artery were cannulated for fluid administration and monitoring of blood
pressure, respectively (CT-1000+ ALM 932, CWE Inc., Ardmore, PA, USA). The rats were maintained anesthetized with a 25–35 mg kg–1 h–1
infusion of propofol. The tracheal airways were cannulated and ventilated with oxygen enriched air, 2–3 ml, 80–100 strokes min-1 (Small
rodent ventilator––Model 683, Harvard Instruments, Kent, UK). End Tidal CO2 was monitored (Capstar––100, CWE Inc., Ardmore, PA, USA) and
kept between 3.5 and 4.5%. A thermostatically controlled homeothermic blanket system was used to keep the body temperature in physiological
range. The blood pressure, end tidal CO2, and temperature were electronically displayed. The head of the animal was fixed in a stereotaxic
frame. The withdrawal reflex after paw pinch and testing of the corneal reflexes were recorded allowing monitoring of the depth of
anesthesia. A midline cutaneous incision was made. A 2 mm craniotomy was performed at the parietal bone (7 mm posterior and 1 mm lateral to
bregma) using a saline-cooled dental drill. The dura mater was opened to expose the cortical surface. CSD was induced by cortical
application of a KCl pellet (3 mg) on the pia mater. The rats were separated into two groups. Ivabradine (2 mg/kg, n = 8) was given
intravenously (i.v.) after the first peak of depolarization shift (DC shift) and cerebral blood flow (CBF) changes induced by CSD. In the
control group, rats were injected with saline (0.9%, n = 8) intravenously. Cortical activity was monitored via another craniotomy done 1 mm
anterior and 1 mm lateral to the bregma. A glass microelectrode was filled with NaCl 4 M and then an Ag/AgCl wire was inserted perpendicular
to the cortex to a depth of 800–1000 μm from cortical surface using a micromanipulator. Another Ag/AgCl electrode was fixed to the nose,
which was used as a reference. After the microelectrode was inserted, the fiber optic needle probe of laser Doppler flow meter (Wavelength
780 nm) (VMS-LDF2, Moor Instruments, UK) was placed adjacent to the microelectrode. The tip of the probe was kept at a distance of 1 mm
above the cortical surface. All tracings were displayed and saved on a personal computer using an online data analysis system (Spike5, CED
UK). The number of peaks of CSD-evoked DC shifts and CBF in the first hour was counted. All data are presented as mean ± standard error.
Statistical analysis was carried out using SPSS (19.0, IL, USA). The DC shift and CBF were analyzed for possible statistical significance
between the ivabradine and control groups using Student’s t-test. A value of P < 0.05 was considered statistically significant. End-tidal
CO2 was 4.64 ± 0.11% (n = 8, mean ± SD) and 4.61 ± 0.14% (n = 8) in the control and ivabradine groups, respectively. Topical application of
KCl to the cortex triggered a series of DC shifts and cortical hyperemias characteristic of CSD. The number of CSDs was 9 ± 2, and 9 ± 1 in
control and ivabradine treated groups, respectively. There was no significant difference between the ivabradine treated group compared with
the control group in terms of CSDs (t14 = 0.0001, P = 1.000, Table 1). In addition, the amplitude and duration of individual DC shifts was
measured. The amplitude of DC shifts was 19.7 ± 3.2 and 21.4 ± 3.8 mV and the duration was 46.8 ± 12.6 and 45.0 ± 15.0 seconds in control
and ivabradine treated groups, respectively. The difference was not statistically significant for the amplitude (t14 = 1.413, P = 0.180) and
the duration (t14 = 0.313, P = 0.755; Table 1). The effect of ivabradine 2 mg/kg i.v. on the depolarization shifts and cerebral blood flow
induced by cortical spreading depression (3 mg solid KCl) The number of peak hyperemic events was similar: 11 ± 1, and 10 ± 1 peaks in the
first hour in the control and ivabradine treated groups, respectively (t14 = 1.024, P = 0.323; Table 1). The percent change from baseline of
peak hyperemia was 198 ± 43 and 216 ± 40 (t14 = 1.168, P = 0.262; Table 1) and the duration of peak hyperemias was 101.4 ± 47.4 and 117.0 ±
29.4 seconds (t14 = 0.895, P = 0.395; Table 1) in the control and ivabradine treated groups, respectively. There was no significant
difference between the ivabradine treated group compared with the control group (Figure 1). The effect of ivabradine (2 mg/kg, i.v.) on the
number of peak hyperemias in cortical blood flow and the number of depolarization shifts induced by cortical spreading depression. No
significant effects are seen in either measurement. Ivabradine given intravenously at a dose of 2 mg kg-1 significantly decreased the heart
rate with a maximum effect of 13% at 60 minutes after application (F2.2,0 = 15.008, P = 0.001; Figure 1). The independent t-test showed
significant results from 20 minutes (t7 = 3.297, P = 0.013) to 60 minutes (t7 = 4.637, P = 0.002) after injection, when compared with
baseline. Ivabradine did not elicit any significant blood pressure changes (F2.13 = 3.010, P = 0.088), nor did the control saline
administration (F2.16 = 1.849, P = 0.188). We report the case of a patient with new onset migraine with typical visual aura after treatment
initiation with ivabradine. Ivabradine is a novel If ion channel blocker in sinoatrial node cells and blocker of Ih channels in the retina
and brain. It is indicated for patients with chronic stable angina pectoris due to coronary heart disease, when patients have
contraindications for beta-blockers or combination therapy with a beta-blocker is necessary. In our patient, ivabradine was used for
frequency control in severe HOCM. There was a clear time-locked relationship between ivabradine treatment start and onset of migraine with
aura as well as onset of nightly phosphenes. A relation between ivabradine and migraine with aura has to our knowledge not been described in
the literature, although headache seems to be common (see Ivabradine prescribing information), as with many other drugs. Phosphenes are a
well-known side effect of ivabradine occurring in about 15% of patients in the clinical development program . This is thought to be related
to its action at the retinal Ih channels leading to an inhibition of hyperpolarization-activated current. However, a cortical mechanism is
possible as the same channels are also abundant in the cortex and thalamus . Phosphenes are common, although there is only a low passage of
ivabradine across the blood retinal and minimal blood brain barrier passage , so a small amount of the drug seems to suffice. Ih channels
are thought to have a role in modulating neuronal excitability and in light of the clinical observation of new onset migraine with
ivabradine, we hypothesized that ivabradine may have an effect on the cortical susceptibility to cortical spreading depression (CSD). As the
aura symptoms were lateralized to the left visual hemifield and were quite typical for migraine aura, we assumed the causal mechanism in the
patient must be cortical instead of retinal, where one would rather expect monocular visual symptoms or visual symptoms throughout the
entire visual field. Interestingly, the animal experiments were unable to demonstrate any effect of ivabridine on CSD. There are several
possible explanations for the absence of an effect: 1. the ivabradine effect could be via a different - non-CSD mediated mechanism; 2. the
clinical observation could have happened by chance although this seems unlikely given the strong temporal relationship and the known
mechanism of action of the drug, as well as the frequent phosphenes in the patient; 3. the intravenous drug dose used in the animal
experiment may have been too low to produce a measurable effect as only a small proportion of the drug is crossing the blood–brain barrier .
We applied a dose of 2 mg/kg, whereas a typical dose used in clinical practice is 5 mg bid via an oral route. Hence, with an oral
bioavailability of about 40% , the weight-adjusted dose used in the animal experiment was many times higher than the human dose, making it
unlikely that a dosing problem was the reason for the negative results. The dose did alter heart rate by 13%, which suggests it was
biologically active. Lastly, it may be that prolonged dosing is required for an effect . This is not the case for topiramate when used at a
clinical dose nor with recently identified effects on ASIC channels . This may highlight the extent of what we are yet to learn about CSD.
Certainly the ability to use acute administration to screen treatments would be a great advantage. In conclusion, the clinical case suggests
that ivabradine may have facilitatory effects on the development of migraine aura. Such effects may not be directly related to CSD, or may
require time to develop. Further knowledge about the exact biological and clinical properties of ivabradine with its more widespread use may
help to understand better the frequency of effects on migraine and aura as well as the potential mechanisms. The case serves to remind us
that the translation from bench to bedside and back has much to offer and continues to challenge our understanding of migraine mechanisms.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this report. The authors declared that they have no competing
interest. TS: contributed the case description and had the original idea of the study, drafted the initial manuscript, reviewed changes by
the co-authors and approved the final manuscript. WS: performed the animal experiments and the statistical analysis, commented on the
manuscript draft and approved the final manuscript. PJG: was the main supervisor of the project; had the original idea of the animal study,
supervised all animal experiments. Read, revised and approved the final manuscript.
