To the Editor: Rickettsia typhi is the causal agent of murine typhus, a febrile illness affecting humans worldwide (1). In Mexico, recent
studies demonstrated a 14% prevalence of antibodies against typhus group rickettsiae in healthy adult blood donors in Mexico City, and a
recent nonfatal case of endemic typhus was reported in Yucatan (2,3). In May 2011, a 42-year-old woman and her 12-year-old son sought care
at the clinical service of the Autonomous University of Yucatan. They had malaise, headache, fever (39°C), fibromyalgia, sore throat, and
fatigue and an erythematous rash on the chest that after 6 days spread to the abdomen and extremities. Dengue fever was diagnosed, and the
patients were treated empirically with acyclovir, methanesulfonamide, N-(4-nitro-2-phenoxyphenyl) and clarithromycin. Dengue could not be
confirmed by laboratory testing. Murine typhus was diagnosed on the basis of PCR amplification and immunofluorescent assay for antibodies to
R. typhi. Rickettsia species was determined by sequencing of rickettsial genes. Three serum samples were collected from the woman (8, 12,
and 16 days after illness onset) and 1 from the boy (8 days) in 3.8% sodium citrate as anticoagulant, and DNA was extracted immediately by
QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit (QIAGEN Valencia, CA, USA) in accordance with the manufacturer’s instructions. Single-step PCR amplification was
performed by using genus-specific primers for the rickettsial 17-kDa protein and citrate synthase (gltA) genes as reported (4) Sequences of
the citrate synthase and 17-kDa PCR products were compared at the National Center for Biotechnology Information BLAST software (5). Three
PCR amplicons of both genes were fully sequenced and compared with sequences in GenBank. The 17-kDa and citrate synthase fragment sequences
(GenBank accession nos. JX198507 and JX458814) showed 99% and 100% identity, respectively, with R. typhi strain Wilmington strain (GenBank
accession no. AE017197.1) (Table). *Identified species showed 99% identity with R. typhi Wilmington strain 17-kDa antigen gene (GenBank
accession no. AE017197.1) and 100% identity with R. typhi Wilmington strain gltA gene (GenBank accession no. AE017197.1). ND, species not
determined. Immunofluorescent assay was performed by using R. rickettsii and R. typhi antigen fixed on slides. We examined the serum samples
for IgG and IgM, assessing reactivity of γ chain–specific and μ heavy chain–specific secondary conjugates, respectively, with rickettsial
antigens. All 3 samples from the woman and the sample from the boy contained antibodies to R. typhi (Table). Both patients were treated with
100 mg of oral doxycycline 2×/day for 7 days (boy), and 10 days (woman); symptoms improved in 72 hours for the child. The woman’s symptoms
resolved completely in 5 days. Typhus has been endemic in Mexico since before the conquest period (6). Socioeconomic aspects play a major
role in zoonotic diseases, such as rickettsioses, especially in their distribution in urban and suburban areas because of factors such as
marginalized communities, animal breeding, education levels, poverty, and social exclusion from health systems. Overcrowding resulting from
migration from rural areas to large urban centers contributes to increased zoonoses in urban areas. Also contributing is the ecologic
imbalance of flora and fauna associated with deteriorating sanitary conditions in areas where mammals involved in the cycle of R. typhi,
such as rodents and opossum, may live in the same habitat as humans and colonize backyards, waste deposit area, and areas around the
neighborhoods where they can find food. The concurrence and presence of mammals, vectors, and humans may contribute to maintaining
transmission of endemic typhus in a reduced area, with the possibility to cause outbreaks (7,8). Housing conditions and culture, such as
courtyards with vegetation and presence of pets, in several suburban areas of Yucatán encourage close contact between humans and possible
reservoirs for several infectious diseases, such as mice, rats, opossums, dogs and cats, and their ectoparasites (9). Because housing and
cultural conditions are similar in all countries of Latin America, endemic typhus probably is transmitted in the same way: by coexistence
with domestic animals and close contact with wild reservoirs. Epidemiologic control should be closely linked to education aimed at
encouraging villagers to interrupt the cycle of transmission and thus prevent the disease. We have confirmed the presence of murine typhus
in Yucatan. The finding of human cases demonstrates the need to consider R. typhi infection in the differential diagnosis of febrile
illnesses considered endemic in Yucatan, such as dengue fever and leptospirosis (10). Early and accurate diagnosis should enable physicians
to treat this disease appropriately and early in the clinical course to prevent increased illness and death. Suggested citation for this
article: Dzul-Rosado K, González-Martínez P, Peniche-Lara G, Zavala-Velázquez J, Zavala-Castro J. Murine typhus in humans, Yucatan, Mexico .
Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Jun [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1906.121400 We thank to members of the Red Iberoamericana para la
Investigación y Control de las Enfermedades Rickettsiales for providing useful information for the preparation of this manuscript. This
research was supported by grants from the Consejo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (CB-2008-1-99890) to J.Z.-C. and facilitated by Ciencia y
Tecnologia para el Desarrollo. This work was done at the Centro de Investigaciones Regionales Dr. Hideyo Noguchi, Universidad Autónoma de
Yucatán, Mexico.
