The Bourneville-Pringle syndrome is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disorder characterized by the development of multiple hamartomas in
various systems, especially brain, skin, retina, kidney, heart and lung. The case of a patient with brownish plaques on the forehead and
temporal region, pink malar and chin papules, and hypopigmented macules on the back and trunk is described. The diagnosis of the
Bourneville-Pringle syndrome is based on clinical criteria. Presence of two major criteria, such as facial angiofibromas, forehead fibrous
plaques, three or more hypomelanotic macules establish the definitive diagnosis. The diagnosis should be made as early as possible in order
to assess and treat the associated complications. A Síndrome de Bourneville-Pringle é desordem neurocutânea autossômica dominante
caracterizada pelo desenvolvimento de hamartomas múltiplos em vários locais do corpo, especialmente cérebro, pele, retina, rim, coração e
pulmão. Descreve-se caso de paciente com placas acastanhadas na fronte e região temporal, pápulas róseas na região malar e mento e máculas
hipocrômicas no dorso e tronco. O diagnóstico da síndrome Bourneville-Pringle é baseado em critérios clínicos. Presença de dois critérios
maiores, como angiofibromas faciais, placas fibrosas frontais e 3 ou mais máculas hipomelanóticas estabelecem o diagnóstico definitivo.
Devese fazer o diagnóstico o mais precocemente possível para que as complicações associadas sejam avaliadas e tratadas. The case of a
13-year-old female patient is here described. Frontal and temporal lesions appeared at 4 years of age, followed by smaller malar and chin
lesions since age 5. Her mother referred hypochromic maculae on dorsum present from birth. In childhood, she had one episode of seizure
associated with fever, with normal EEG. There was no family history of similar skin lesions. In CT of the skull, multiple amorphous
subependimary calcifications were present. In thoracic and lumbar spine CT, partial defect in fusion of the posterior neural arch was found
at the T11, T12, S1 and L5 levels. On examination, she had multiple pinkish-brown, shiny papules, about 2 mm in diameter in the malar region
and chin, brownish frontal and pre-auricular plaques and multiple hypochromic stains on the trunk, including ash leaf spots (Figures 1,2 and
3). The frontal and pre-auricular lesions are probably fibrous plaques, classified as angiofibromas; the patient did not allow a biopsy, so
other possible diagnosis such as melanocytic naevi, verrucous naevi and even Shagreen patch with unusual localization should be considered.
Multiple pinkish-brown shiny papules, about 2 mm in diameter in the malar region Brownish pre-auricular plaque Ash leaf spot The
Bourneville-Pringle syndrome (Tuberous Sclerosis) is an autosomal dominant neurocutaneous disorder. Two thirds of cases are caused by
sporadic mutations; the incidence is 1:6800-10000 people.1,2 It is characterized by the development of multiple hamartomas in various
systems, especially brain, skin, retina, kidney, heart and lung.1 Two tumor suppressor genes are responsible for the syndrome, TSC1 and
TSC2, which encode the hamartin and tuberin proteins.1,2.3,4 The hamartin/tuberin complex is an important inhibitor of tumor growth; its
absence triggers the loss of proliferation and cell migration inhibition.4 As diagnosis is mainly based on clinical criteria, it may be
particularly difficult early in life, since many stigmas become apparent only in late childhood or adulthood. The consensus of Tuberous
Sclerosis Complex defines that the presence of two major criteria or one major and two minor criteria establish the definitive diagnosis of
the syndrome.3 The major features are:1,3 Facial angiofibromas or forehead plaqueNontraumatic ungual or periungual fibromaHypomelanotic
maculeShagreen patchMultiple retinal nodular hamartomasCortical tuberSubependymal noduleSubependymal giant cell astrocytomaCardiac
rhabdomyomaLymphangiomyomatosisRenal angiomyolipoma Facial angiofibromas or forehead plaque Nontraumatic ungual or periungual fibroma
Hypomelanotic macule Shagreen patch Multiple retinal nodular hamartomas Cortical tuber Subependymal nodule Subependymal giant cell
astrocytoma Cardiac rhabdomyoma Lymphangiomyomatosis Renal angiomyolipoma Minor features are: Multiple, randomly distributed pits in dental
enamelHamartomatous rectal polypsBone cystsCerebral white matter radial migration linesGingival fibromasNonrenal hamartomasRetinal achromic
patch"Confetti" skin lesionsMultiple renal cysts Multiple, randomly distributed pits in dental enamel Hamartomatous rectal polyps Bone cysts
Cerebral white matter radial migration lines Gingival fibromas Nonrenal hamartomas Retinal achromic patch "Confetti" skin lesions Multiple
renal cysts The most important skin lesions are:1,5 Hypomelanotic maculae: the earliest cutaneous lesions, present at birth or infancy. The
most characteristic hypochromic spots are those which have the form of leaves, called "ash-leaf spots".4 Facial angiofibromas: apparent
between the second and fifth year of life. Can be treated by cryosurgery, dermabrasion, curettage, peelings, laser or high radiofrequency.6
Recent studies described good results with topical rapamycin, that was also efficient in the treatment of hypomelanotic maculae.7,8 Shagreen
patches: yellowish or erythematous plaques on dorsal body surface, which are connective tissue nevi.Forehead fibrous plaques: yellowish-
brown, located on the forehead or scalp. They appear at any age and may be seen at birth.Periungual fibromas"Confetti-like" macules
Hypomelanotic maculae: the earliest cutaneous lesions, present at birth or infancy. The most characteristic hypochromic spots are those
which have the form of leaves, called "ash-leaf spots".4 Facial angiofibromas: apparent between the second and fifth year of life. Can be
treated by cryosurgery, dermabrasion, curettage, peelings, laser or high radiofrequency.6 Recent studies described good results with topical
rapamycin, that was also efficient in the treatment of hypomelanotic maculae.7,8 Shagreen patches: yellowish or erythematous plaques on
dorsal body surface, which are connective tissue nevi. Forehead fibrous plaques: yellowish-brown, located on the forehead or scalp. They
appear at any age and may be seen at birth. Periungual fibromas "Confetti-like" macules Patients also have other manifestations such as
dental pits, retinal hamartomas, renal angiomyolipoma, cardiac rhabdomyomas, cerebral hamartomas, epilepsy, and cognitive impairment.1.2 The
diagnosis should be made as early as possible so that the associated complications may be evaluated and treated. * Study carried out at a
Private Clinic - Belo Horizonte (MG), Brazil Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interests: None.
