Mammary Paget's disease is a rare intraepithelial adenocarcinoma, located on the nipple/areola complex, highly associated with breast
cancer. Although the international literature emphasizes the dermatoscopic pattern of mammary Paget's disease pigmented variant, the authors
describe the dermoscopic findings of classical Paget's disease and demonstrate the presence of chrysalis-like structures, criteria recently
described in the literature and not yet reported in Paget's disease. Doença de Paget mamária é considerada um adenocarcinoma intra-epitelial
raro, localizado no complexo mamilo-aréola,com alta associação ao câncer de mama. Apesar da literatura mundial realçar o padrão
dermatoscópico da doença de Paget mamária variante pigmentada os autores descrevem os achados dermatoscópicos da doença de Paget clássica
realçando a presença das estruturas crisálida-símiles,critério recentemente descrito na literatura mundial e ainda não relatado na Doença de
Paget. A 77- year- old woman was referred to our department by a gynecologist, regarding a 5- year history of progressively enlarged
erythematous plaque in her left breast, with occasional burning. She underwent a radical mastectomy and lymph node dissection of the right
breast due to adenocarcinoma diagnosed 15 years before the onset of this skin lesion (Figure 1). Clinical appearance of the lesion shows an
eczematous-like plaque with a thin, asymmetric and scaly surface, brownish-pink pigmentation in the left areola and nipple with centrifugal
growth associated with nipple retraction (Figure 1). General physical examination revealed no abnormalities. There were no palpable masses
in the breast or axillary lymphadenopathy. Dermoscopic examination of the central portion of the lesion showed a whitish-pink area with
irregular linear vessels and chrysalis-like structures (Figure 2), whereas the darker portion was characterized by dark brown diffuse
pigmentation with irregular blue-gray dots (Figure 2). The clinical and dermoscopic features, although not specific, suggested mammary
Paget's disease or amelanotic melanoma. Incisional biopsy was performed. Histopathological sections stained with hematoxylineosin showed
large atypical cells with hyperchromatic eccentric nuclei and abundant cytoplasm throughout all levels of the epidermis (Figure 1). The
tumor cells contained melanin granules within the cytoplasm and were positive for periodic acid-Schiff (PAS) staining - compatible with
Paget's disease of breast (Figure 1). The patient was referred to surgical excision and radical mastectomy and hormonal blockade was carried
out. A. Clinical appearance of lesion with radical mastectomy scar on the right and change in morphology and pigmentation of the left nipple
and areola; B. In more detail, lesion shows erythematous plaque on the left areolar region, with pinkish- brown color associated with
centrifugal growth and retraction of the left nipple; C. Histopathological sections of mammary Paget's disease: aggregates of atypical cells
in the epidermis, with large hyperchromatic nuclei and abundant cytoplasm (HE-200x); D. Melanin granules in the cytoplasm of tumor cells
(PAS- 200X) Dermatoscopic appearance of lesion. On dermoscopy the lighter portion corresponded to a whitish-pink area of the left nipple and
areola, whereas the darker portion was characterized as follows: A. Light brown diffuse pigmentation and B. Irregular black dots and small
blue-gray structures (peppering) irregularly distributed; C. Irregular linear vessels and D. Under polarized light, the presence of bright
white streaks structures called chrysalis-like structures; note the parallel arrangement of these structures Mammary Paget's disease, first
described in 1874, is an intraepidermal adenocarcinoma of the areola and/or nipple, generally associated with carcinoma of the underlying
lactipherous ducts.1,2 It is an uncommon form of breast cancer with prevalence in the sixth decade of life, developing in 70% of cases in
postmenopausal women. 1 Clinically, Paget's disease mimics inflammatory and infectious diseases; in dermoscopy, however, the diagnosis of
their pigmented variant is difficult, since it displays a nonspecific pattern, with diffuse irregular pigmentation and regression-like
structures, as observed in melanoma.2 So far, there are no descriptions in the literature of the dermoscopic criteria of the classic form of
Paget's disease. 3,4 The presence of irregular linear vessels represents the vascular pattern commonly found in melanoma.5 In addition,
multiple blue-gray dots (peppering) correspond to melanophages in the papillary dermis, while the white scar areas to fibrosis. Both
structures can be found in regression areas of melanocytic lesions. The shiny white streaks, originally termed chrysalis-like structures,
reveal shiny, bright white and linear streaks that can only be visualized with polarized light dermoscopy. The lines are generally oriented
parallel or orthogonally to each other. These structures represent new or remodeled collagen bundles. Collagen bundles are visible and more
evident under polarized dermoscopy due to their birrefringent properties that cause rapid randomization of polarized light. Similar criteria
have been described in many conditions like dermatofibroma, scars, basal cell carcinoma (including Pinkus' fibroepithelioma variant) and
piogenic granuloma.6,7 When present in melanocytic lesions, they are suggestive of Spitz nevus or melanoma.6 The diagnosis of Paget's
disease should be based not only on clinical and dermoscopic observation but also associated with histopathological and immunohistochemical
analysis.8,9 Surgical excision is the recommended treatment (modified radical mastectomy with lymphadenectomy), but recently studies have
shown that breast-conserving surgery found no significant differences in terms of overall or disease- free survival. Polarized dermoscopy is
a versatile optical tool, easy to use, practical and that can help in early diagnosis of mammary Paget's disease and their clinical and
histopathologic correlation. Until now, no description of the chrysalis-like structures in Paget's disease has been reported. Therefore,
shiny white streaks (or chrysalis-like structures) are an additional dermoscopic feature to be considered in mammary Paget's disease. *
Study carried out at the Dermatology Institute Rubem David Azulay - Charity Hospital of Rio de Janeiro - (Instituto de Dermatologia
Professor Rubem David Azulay - Santa Casa da Misericórdia do Rio de Janeiro - IDPRDA-SCMRJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil Conflict of
interest: None Financial funding: None
