The author observed a new accessory bone of the foot in the distal portion of navicular, which articulated with the medial cuneiform and the
intermediate cuneiform, and named it os infranaviculare. A degenerative change was observed between the accessory bone and the navicular;
this caused midfoot pain to the patient during weight-bearing. Thus, the patient was treated by excision of the accessory bone. The symptom
was relieved at one-year postoperative. Accessory bones are common skeletal variations of the ankle and foot, derive commonly from unfused
accessory ossification centers, and may appear to be normal subdivisions of ordinary bones or nearby additional free elements.1) The most
common accessory bones of the ankle and foot are the os trigonum, the accessory navicular, and the os intermetatarseum. Other less frequent
accessory bones include the os sustentaculi, os supranaviculare, os vesalianum, os calcaneus secundarius, os subtibiale and the os
subfibulare.2) Herein, the author describes a previously unreported accessory bone of foot, which was not encountered even in large series
on accessory bones of the feet.1,3) The accessory bone concerned was located between the navicular, medial cuneiform, and intermediate
cuneiform, and articulated with the medial cuneiform and the intermediate cuneiform. Accordingly, it was named os infranaviculare. A healthy
45-year-old man was referred to our clinic with an atraumatic 3-year history of pain on the dorsomedial surface of the right foot, which
worsened with activity. The pain began as a diffuse dull pain during running, and progressed to an exquisite pain during standing or after a
10-minute walk since 6 months before our clinic visit. Tenderness was noted around the symptomatic medial midtarsal area. However, no other
specific finding was found during a physical examination. His laboratory data, including his uric acid level, were also within the normal
range. Radiographs of the right foot revealed a 10 × 15 mm sized accessory bone between the navicular and the medial cuneiform (Fig. 1), but
no equivalent in the left foot. Computed tomography (CT) demonstrated that the accessory bone contacted the intermediate cuneiform and the
navicular and medial cuneiform; sclerotic change and a bony spur were observed between the accessory bone and the navicular (Fig. 2). His
symptom had not improved despite the 6 months of conservative treatment for pain control, and finally, the accessory bone was excised.
Intraoperatively, the tibialis anterior was not attached to the accessory bone, which articulated with the medial cuneiform and the
intermediate cuneiform. However, it was connected to the navicular by synfibrosis (Fig. 3). At his 12-month follow-up, the patient reported
pain relief during walking, but slight tenderness persisted on the surgical scar. When a patient without a recent trauma history complains
of medial side midfoot pain, several types of disease, such as, accessory bones around the navicular, osteonecrosis, and stress fracture of
the navicular, and gout may be considered.1,3-6) The most common accessory bone around the navicular is located on the medial side of the
navicular. However, other accessory bones have been sporadically reported around the navicular. An accessory bone between the navicular,
medial cuneiform, and intermediate cuneiform is extremely rare. The condition was initially reported by Dwight based on two macerated
specimens in 1902, and was named os intercuneiforme.7) The accessory bones were described as rounded, without an articulated connection with
surrounding structures, and as being embedded in connective tissue. The incidence rate of os intercuneiforme was reported to be one per
3,754 feet (0.026%) in one series,7) and as one per 3,460 feet (0.029%) in another.3) In the present case, although the accessory bone was
located between the navicular, medial cuneiform, and intermediate cuneiform, it differed from os intercuneiforme, because it articulated
with the medial cuneiform and the intermediate cuneiform. The navicular was the only surrounding bone without articulation contacted by
connective tissue, which means that the accessory bone was a secondary ossification center of the navicular, and thus, we name it os
infranaviculare. Accessory bones usually remain asymptomatic, but can become painful due to fracture, degenerative change, and avascular
necrosis and due to irritation or impingement of adjacent soft tissues.8) In the described case, advanced degenerative change between the
navicular and accessory bone was considered to be the main cause of foot pain. Symptoms caused by accessory bones are initially treated
nonoperatively, and thus, we adopted conservative treatment (rest, anti-inflammatory agents, and a shoe insert) for 6 months, but those
efforts were futile. Finally, because the patient wanted to participate in sports activities, we decided on surgical treatment. Simple
excision is recommended for an accessory bone of the foot and ankle, as long as excision does not create a large defect at the tendon
insertion.8) In this case, we were able to simply excise the accessory bone without additional procedures, because the tibialis anterior
tendon was not involved. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Radiograph of the affected right foot
revealing the 10 × 15 mm-sized accessory bone (arrow) between the navicular and medial cuneiform. Computed tomography showing that the
accessory bone was surrounded by the intermediate cuneiform, the navicular and medial cuneiform, sclerotic change, and a bony spur between
the navicular and the accessory bone (arrow). (A) Axial view and (B) sagittal view. Plantar view of excised accessory bone. The black arrow
indicates the articular surface between the accessory bone and the medial cuneiform. The white arrow indicates the articular surface between
the accessory bone and the intermediate cuneiform. Arrowhead indicates the contact surface between the accessory bone and the navicular.
