A 27 year-old-man, with no known personal or familial history of disease, mentioned a 10-year history of asymptomatic groups of
telangiectasias, with a Blaschko lines distribution on the right lateral aspect of the neck and asymptomatic. He denied any episodes of
disease or drug intake that could be associated with the disease. Blood work had no changes, namely of liver enzymes or infectious
serologies. The clinical diagnosis of Idiopathic Acquired Unilateral Nevoid Telangiectasia was made, an uncommon, benign vascular
malformation. The patient declined doing a cutaneous biopsy or treatment with a cosmetic intent. Um homem de 27 anos, sem quaisquer
antecedentes patológicos pessoais ou familiares conhecidos, mencionava dermatose com cerca de 10 anos de evolução, caracterizada por
agrupamentos de telangiectasias, de distribuição blaschkóide, na face lateral direita do pescoço e assintomáticas. Negava quaisquer
episódios de doença ou toma de fármacos que pudessem estar relacionados com esta doença. As análises sanguíneas do doente estavam
inalteradas, nomeadamente os enzimas hepáticos e serologias infecciosas. Foi efectuado o diagnóstico clínico de Telangiectasia Nevóide
Unilateral Adquirida, idiopática, uma malformação vascular benigna pouco comum. O doente prescindiu da realização de biópsia cutânea ou
tratamento de intenção cosmética. A 27 year-old-man with no known history of personal or familial illnesses was referred to our clinic with
a 10 year history of cervical telangiectasias with no associated symptoms. The patient denied any preceding or simultaneous episodes of
disease with this dermatosis, as well as concomitant or recent use of any medication. We found no changes on his physical exam, except the
presence of groups of blancheable, erythematous macules, of a bright red tone, with a Blaschko lines distribution and localized only on the
right lateral aspect of the neck (Figures 1 and 2). Blood work did not reveal any changes, namely in liver enzymes or infectious serologies.
What is your diagnosis? Telangiectasias on the right lateral aspect of the neck Detail of telangiectasias shown on figure 1 Unilateral
Nevoid Telangiectasia (UNT) was initially described by Blaschko in 1899.1 Its incidence is unknown, although it's probably underreported and
more frequent than previously recognized.2 UNT is a dermal vascular malformation of unknown cause and two presentations, congenital or
acquired.3 There is controversy in regard to the existence of a somatic mutation during embryogenesis in the congenital form or, in the
acquired form, the elevation of estrogen levels or vasoactive substances that may, in theory, be revealing of a state of hidden
mosaicism.4-6 Only one publication to date has identified the elevation of estrogen receptors in lesional skin.7 Others have proposed the
role of a still unidentified vasoactive substance.8 However, UNT favors female individuals, around puberty, that are on hormonal
contraception, pregnant women, or individuals with chronic liver disease.5 Indolent and asymptomatic, it is characterized by groups of
telangiectasias in variable number and sizes, with a linear, dermatomal, multidermatomal or Blaschko lines distribution, the 3rd - 4th
cervical dermatomes, face, shoulder, arm and upper trunk being the most commonly involved locations.2,4 Among main differential diagnosis
are: 1) primary telangiectasias, mainly Linear Atrophoderma of Moulin, telangiectatic variant, or Angioma Serpiginosum; and 2) secondary
telangiectasias, like Erithema ab Igne or use of topical corticosteroids.2 Pregnancy tests, dosing of liver enzymes or serologies for
hepatotropic viruses may be used.2,4,5 Histologically, the unspecific identification of capillary dilations on the superficial dermis only
confirms the clinical diagnosis of telangiectasias and may require biopsy of peri-lesional skin for comparison.3 Laser-Doppler Fluxometry
allows the noninvasive identification of local blood flow alterations.9 In the case of hyperestrogenemia related with ectopical estrogens,
their removal may improve the disease.4 The remaining cases may be approached cosmetically with the use of camouflage, Nd:YAG laser or Pulse
Dye Laser. The identification of this case of acquired idiopathic UNT in a healthy male individual may not be as rare as previously thought,
a dermatosis to be equated in the more frequent differential diagnoses of telangiectasias. * Study carried out at the Dermatology Service,
Santo Antonio dos Capuchos Hospital - Central Lisbon Hospital Center (Hospital de Santo António dos Capuchos - Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa
Central), E.P.E - Lisbon, Portugal. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
