A 58-year-old woman presented with a solitary myofibroma that arose in the sigmoid colon. Computed tomography revealed a highly enhanced
intramural mass (1.3-cm maximum diameter) in the proximal sigmoid colon. Histologically, the tumor exhibited a biphasic growth pattern,
which comprised haphazardly arranged, interwoven fascicles of plump, myoid-appearing spindle cells with elongated nuclei and abundant
eosinophilic cytoplasm, and more cellular areas of primitive-appearing polygonal cells that were arranged in a hemangiopericytomatous
pattern. The tumor cells were positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA), and negative for desmin, h-caldesmon, CD34, cytokeratin, S100 protein,
and CD117. The Ki-67 labeling index was not high (up to 7%). Based on these histologic and immunohistochemical features, our patient was
diagnosed with a myofibroma of the sigmoid colon. The presence of solitary myofibroma in the intestine of an adult requires attention to
avoid misdiagnosis as a more aggressive mesenchymal tumor. The virtual silde(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/2096403796957687 Myofibroma, a benign neoplasm composed of myofibroblastic cells, can occur as
a solitary form or as multiple or generalized form (myofibromatosis) . Myofibromatosis frequently involves deeper structures and even
visceral organs such as the lung, heart, gastrointestinal tract, liver, kidney, pancreas, and central nervous system . However, solitary
myofibromas usually present as a cutaneous or subcutaneous mass of the head and neck region. Solitary myofibromas involving visceral organs
are extremely rare, particularly in adult patients . We describe here a solitary myofibroma that arose in the sigmoid colon of a 58-year-old
woman, with a review of the relevant literature. A 58-year-old woman, who visited our hospital for an annual check-up, presented with an
incidentally found mass that had arisen in the sigmoid colon. The patient complained of intermittent abdominal discomfort, which had
developed one year before admission. Five years earlier, she had experienced a stroke caused by hypertension. She had also undergone total
abdominal hysterectomy due to uterine leiomyoma. Laboratory findings were unremarkable. Computed tomography revealed a highly enhanced
intramural mass (1.3 cm in maximum diameter) in the proximal sigmoid colon, which was resected (Figure 1). Radiologic characterization of
the lesion. CT imaging revealed a highly enhanced intramural mass (1.3 cm in maximum diameter; white arrows) in the proximal sigmoid colon.
Gross examination showed a 1.3 cm × 1.0 cm × 0.7 cm mass with an ulcerated surface. The mass was fairly well circumscribed without
encapsulation. The cut surface of the mass was homogeneously pale yellow in color, and rubbery (Figure 2). Gross features of the lesion. A
well-demarcated, ovoid 1.3 cm × 1.0 cm × 0.7 cm intramural mass (arrows) is noted in the colon. Microscopically, the tumor was moderately
cellular and consisted of both (i) haphazardly arranged, interwoven fascicles of plump, myoid-appearing spindle cells with elongated
tapering nuclei and abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm, and (ii) more cellular areas of primitive-appearing polygonal cells arranged in a
hemangiopericytomatous pattern (Figure 3). The myoid-appearing spindle cells blended into more cellular areas of smaller, primitive-
appearing polygonal cells to impart a biphasic appearance at low magnification. The typical zonation characterized by peripheral location of
the less cellular area composed of a plump, myoid-appearing, spindle cell was not evident. Intravascular proliferation of myoid-appearing
spindle cells was noted at the periphery of the lesion. Mitotic figures were occasionally identified, with a frequency as high as 3 per 10
hpf. There was no evidence of necrosis, calcification or inflammatory cell components. Histologic features of the tumor. A. The tumor is
well-demarcated and situated transmurally. There are alternating light and dark areas within the tumor (H&E, ×20). B. The light area
consists of haphazardly arranged, interweaving fascicles of plump, myoid-appearing spindle cells with elongated nuclei and abundant
eosinophilic cytoplasm (H&E, ×400). C. The dark, more cellular area consists of primitive-appearing polygonal cells arranged in a
hemangiopericytomatous pattern (H&E, ×400). D. Intravascular proliferation of tumor cells is noted at the periphery of the lesion (H&E,
×200). Immunohistochemically, the myoid-appearing spindle tumor cells were strongly positive for smooth muscle actin (SMA, 1:100; clone 1A4,
Dako, Glostrup, Denmark), whereas the primitive-appearing tumor cells stained focally (Figure 4A,B). The tumor cells were negative for
desmin (1:200; Cell Marque, Manchester, UK), suggesting myofibroblastic differentiation. The tumor cells were also negative for pan-
cytokeratin (CK, 1:400; Novocastra, Newcastle, UK), S100 protein (1:2,000; Dako), CD117 (1:200; Dako), CD31 (1:80; Dako), CD34 (1:400; Dako)
and h-caldesmon (1:100; Dako). The Ki-67 (1:100; clone 7B11, Invitrogen, UA) labeling index was not high both in the myoid-appearing spindle
cells and primitive-appearing tumor cells (up to 7% in the highest area) (Figure 4C,D). Based on these histologic and immunohistochemical
features, the tumor was diagnosed as a myofibroma. Immunohistochemical findings. A. The myoid-appearing spindle tumor cells show diffuse and
strong positivity for SMA (immunostaining, ×400). B. The primitive-appearing tumor cells are focally positive for SMA (immunostaining,
×400). C. The myoid-appearing spindle tumor cells show an increased Ki-67 labeling index (up to 7%) (immunostaining, ×400). D. The
primitive-appearing tumor cells display low Ki-67 labeling index (up to 1%) (immunostaining, ×400). The postoperative course was
unremarkable, with no evidence of recurrence 17 months after surgery. Myofibroma can occur as a solitary form or as multiple or generalized
form (myofibromatosis) . Myofibromatosis was originally described as “congenital generalized fibromatosis” in 1954 by Stout . The term
“infantile myofibromatosis”, which was coined by Chung and Enzinger in 1981 to distinguish it from more aggressive types of fibromatosis,
reflects both the young age of onset of this disease and the myofibroblastic nature of the tumor cells . Since then, the term myofibroma was
introduced by Smith et al. to reflect that such lesions frequently manifest as a solitary form and affect a broad range of patients .
Characteristically, myofibromas are circumscribed masses with a nodular or multinodular growth pattern. At higher magnification, they show a
biphasic growth pattern, consisting of fascicles or whorls of myoid-appearing spindle cells and primitive cells, arranged in a
hemangiopericytoma-like pattern. The myoid-appearing spindle cells have eosinophilic cytoplasm and elongated, tapering nuclei with a
vesicular chromatin, while the primitive cells have rounded nuclei and relatively scant cytoplasm with indistinct cell borders . Despite its
uniformly bland cytologic appearance, potentially worrisome histologic features can pose a great diagnostic challenge. These include
fingerlike extension of tumor cells into surrounding tissue, intravascular tumor growth, hemorrhage, coagulative necrosis, and high mitotic
activity (up to 10 per 10 hpf) . In our case, intravascular proliferation of tumor cells was noted at the periphery of the lesion.
Therefore, pathologists should be aware of the histologic spectrum of the tumors to avoid mistaken diagnosis of malignancy. For example,
pleomorphic lipoma can be misdiagnosed as a nonlipomatous tumor such as myxofibrosarcoma if the tumor lacks mature fat component .
Similarly, solitary fibrous tumor is one of the tumors which can show a wide range of morphologic features . Particularly, if solitary
fibrous tumor shows epithelioid growth pattern, other tumors having epithelioid features such as epithelioid sarcoma or synovial sarcoma
should be excluded. Approximately half of solitary myofibromas occur in the cutaneous or subcutaneous tissue of the head and neck region,
and the remaining half occur in deep-seated structures, such as skeletal muscle, aponeuroses, and bone. Solitary myofibromas involving the
viscera are very rare, whereas up to 40% of patients with myofibromatosis have visceral lesions. Solitary myofibromas involving visceral
organs have been described at various anatomic sites, including the pancreas, liver, testis, ovary, and brain parenchyma . Most of these
tumors appear within the first two years of life. The symptoms of visceral lesions are referable to the organs that are involved .
Intestinal involvement can be solitary or multifocal, and can involve any layer of the intestinal wall . Although the gastrointestinal tract
is one of the organs most frequently affected in patients with myofibromatosis, solitary gastrointestinal myofibromas are very rare,
particularly after infancy . When the tumor affects the gastrointestinal tract, the clinical manifestations are variable, with symptoms that
may include diarrhea, signs of intestinal occlusion, bowel perforation, or intussusception . This makes early diagnosis difficult. Because
myofibromas are extremely rare in the gastrointestinal tract, differential diagnosis to exclude other tumors is important. The differential
diagnosis of myofibroma includes various types of mesenchymal tumors, including gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST), and tumors showing
perivascular myoid differentiation, such as myopericytoma, hemangiopericytoma, glomus tumors (particularly glomangiopericytoma), and
angioleiomyoma . A possibility of GIST should be considered in the differential diagnosis because these are the most common mesenchymal
tumors of the intestinal tract. In addition, a hemangiopericytomatous vasculature and biphasic pattern can be observed in case of GISTs . In
such cases, the use of immunohistochemistry to detect the c-kit receptor tyrosine kinase (CD117) would be helpful in diagnosis, because
CD117 expression has apparently never been described for myofibromas. Myopericytoma should also be included in the differential diagnosis.
Myopericytoma forms a morphological continuum with myofibroma and can be easily confused with myofibromas . However, in the present case,
the lack of concentric perivascular proliferation of bland, round-to-ovoid cells, which is a characteristic feature of myopericytoma, favors
a diagnosis of myofibroma rather than myopericytoma. If a lesion histologically similar to myofibroma involves the gastrointestinal tract, a
possibility of infantile hemangiopericytoma should be considered. Infantile hemangiopericytomas, which share histologic features found in
myofibromas, are considered to arise via a morphologic continuum of the same process. Infantile hemangiopericytomas are characterized by a
multilobulated growth pattern, immature-appearing neoplastic cells surrounding hemangiopericytomatous blood vessels, and plump spindle cells
like myofibroma. Infantile hemangiopericytomas mostly occur in infants and frequently show increased rates of mitosis and focal necrosis .
Glomus tumors, particularly glomangiopericytomas, also show features of perivascular myoid differentiation. However, the tumor cells in
glomangiopericytoma are uniformly rounded glomus cells with distinct cell borders, rather than plump, myoid-appearing spindle cells.
Histologic features, such as the lack of myoid nodules and absence of round primitive cells in benign glomus tumors, also distinguish
glomangiopericytoma from myofibroma . Primary colonic glomus tumors are extremely rare, and occur almost exclusively in the stomach in the
gastrointestinal tract . Angioleiomyomas can show concentric structures of myoid cells like myopericytomas. However, the cellularity of
myopericytomas is generally higher than that of angioleiomyomas, whereas the rate of desmin positivity in myopericytomas is much lower than
in angioleiomyomas . Whereas up to 25% of myopericytomas are desmin-positive, desmin positivity has rarely been reported in myofibromas.
This suggests that myopericytomas have a myofibroblastic phenotype rather than features characteristic of smooth muscle differentiation . As
for h-caldesmon positivity, several studies have demonstrated that the majority of myopericytomas co-express α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) and
h-caldesmon . Expression of h-caldesmon has been reported in myofibromas, but needs to be validated in studies conducted at a larger scale .
Although myofibroma and myofibromatosis are defined as a benign fibroblastic/myofioblastic tumor , the biological behavior of the lesions is
determined by the pattern of organ involvement and not by histologic features. In cases of newborns and infants with multiple visceral
involvement, as many as 75% of patients die soon after birth . However, solitary or multiple lesions confined to soft tissues and bone have
an excellent prognosis. The local recurrence rates are reported to be 9% to 11% for solitary lesions. The lesions tend to undergo
spontaneous regression or be cured by simple local excision. Even in cases with visceral organ involvement, the prognosis for solitary
myofibromas is favorable . Therefore, an excellent prognosis is anticipated in the present case, based on the solitary involvement and
complete resection of the lesion. Solitary myofibromas involving the intestinal tract are extremely rare in adult patients. We here describe
a solitary myofibroma arising in the sigmoid colon of a 58-year-old woman, and present a detailed review of the relevant literature. Because
of its rarity and the presence of potentially worrisome histologic features, solitary adult-type myofibroma occurring in the intestine can
be misdiagnosed easily, particularly when the pathologists are not familiar with this entity. Solitary adult-type myofibroma should be
considered in the differential diagnosis of spindle cell tumors in the intestine and appropriate diagnosis is needed to distinguish it from
malignant tumors. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no conflict
of interest. MJK drafted the manuscript. SHL carried out pathological examination and participated in the design of the study. EGU was
responsible for the clinical data. SJL participated in the radiological analysis. JHC provided valuable insight for manuscript preparation
and carried out the immunohistochemical stain evaluation. KJC revised manuscript critically for important intellectual content and had given
final approval of the version to be published. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
