This report details laparoscopic remnant cholecystectomy and transcystic common duct exploration after previous single-port cholecystectomy.
Recent enthusiasm in the surgical community for less invasive surgical approaches has resulted in widespread application of single-incision
techniques. This has been most commonly applied in laparoscopic cholecystectomy in general surgery. Cosmesis appears to be improved, but
other advantages remain to be seen. Feasibility has been demonstrated, but there is little description in the current literature regarding
complications. We report the case of a patient who previously underwent single-incision laparoscopic cholecystectomy for symptomatic
gallstone disease. After a brief symptom-free interval, she developed acute pancreatitis. At evaluation, imaging results of ultrasonography
and magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography demonstrated a retained gallbladder with cholelithiasis. The patient was subsequently
referred to our hospital, where she underwent further evaluation and surgical intervention. Our patient underwent 4-port laparoscopic
remnant cholecystectomy with transcystic common bile duct exploration. Operative exploration demonstrated a large remnant gallbladder and a
partially obstructed cystic duct with many stones. Transcystic exploration with balloon extraction resulted in duct clearance. The procedure
took 75 minutes, with minimal blood loss. The patient's postoperative course was uneventful. Final pathology results demonstrated a remnant
gallbladder with cholelithiasis and cholecystitis. This report is the first in the literature to describe successful laparoscopic remnant
cholecystectomy and transcystic common bile duct exploration after previous single-port cholecystectomy. Although inadvertent partial
cholecystectomy is not unique to this technique, single-port laparoscopic procedures may result in different and significant complications.
New technologies and surgical approaches continue to advance the field of minimally invasive surgery. Laparoscopy has revolutionized
approaches to general surgical problems with improved outcomes of decreased postoperative pain and patients' quicker return to work. In
large part because of these successes, natural orifice and single-site approaches have been adopted. Although enthusiasm for transvisceral
approaches has waned, single-site operations have increased significantly. A PubMed search for “single-port laparoscopic surgery” generated
202 peer-reviewed articles in the past year, 163 articles in the year prior, and only 8 publications during the intervening 5 years from 5
to 10 years ago. Although many procedures have been described, it appears that the most common application for single-port surgery within
general surgery is transumbilical cholecystectomy. Trials are currently underway and certain benefits have been suggested, but the only
clear advantage at this time appears to be cosmesis.1 Difficulties with single-port access procedures include external clashing secondary to
lack of triangulation and possibly alterations in surgical approaches. As such, complications associated with this technique are now being
described and include common bile duct injury, subcapsular hematoma, and incisional hernia.2,3 We describe a case of laparoscopic completion
cholecystectomy with transcystic common bile duct exploration for incomplete cholecystectomy after single-port cholecystectomy resulting in
retained gallbladder and postoperative gallstone pancreatitis. A 51-year-old woman with symptomatic cholelithiasis underwent a single-port
cholecystectomy using a single-port device at an outside hospital. The presence of gallstones was confirmed by preoperative ultrasonography,
and the patient did not have a prior history of pancreatitis or jaundice. The operative report from the outside hospital was reviewed. The
operation was performed with a commercially available single-port trocar with 3 trocars for instruments and camera access. The report
described dissection within Calot's triangle and securing both the cystic duct and cystic artery with clips. There was no specific
description of removal of the adventitial tissue from Calot's triangle to obtain a critical view of safety. There was also no description of
difficulties or unusual circumstances during the operation. Cholangiography was not performed during this operation, and the patient was
subsequently discharged from the facility on postoperative day 0. On postoperative day 14, she presented to the same hospital emergency
department with back and flank pain. She was found to have elevated amylase and lipase levels, so right upper quadrant ultrasonography was
performed, which demonstrated an echogenic foci of stones in what appeared to be a cystic structure, or a dilated cystic duct.
Ultrasonography also demonstrated a common bile duct dilated to 1.2 cm, but no distal stone was visualized. The patient was admitted and
treated for acute pancreatitis with intravenous fluid resuscitation, analgesics, and slow reinstitution of diet. She was discharged after 3
days and was then referred to our facility as an outpatient for a retained remnant or duplicate gallbladder. As part of her workup, magnetic
resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) was performed (Figure 1), which demonstrated a large gallbladder remnant with gallstones and
normal caliber extrahepatic biliary tree. The patient was advised to undergo completion cholecystectomy with intraoperative cholangiogram.
MRCP. Arrow points to the remnant gallbladder with filling defects and normal extrahepatic biliary tree. At operation, the patient was
placed supine on a radiolucent bed. Entrance into the peritoneal cavity was obtained with a 5-mm optical trocar in the right subcostal
region, given her previous intraumbilical incision. After abdominal insufflation, 2 additional 5-mm trocars were placed, one in the
epigastrium and one in the right lower quadrant. After a brief sharp adhesiolysis, a 10-mm trocar was placed at the umbilicus. Inferior
margin of the liver was carefully elevated, and a large dilated gallbladder remnant was identified (Figure 2). The gallbladder remnant was
retracted lateral and cephalad toward the right shoulder. The peritoneum overlying the cystic duct and gallbladder junction was opened, and
the cystic artery and cystic duct were dissected out circumferentially. The hepatocystic plate was also partially mobilized, and a critical
view of safety with normal hepatic parenchyma behind this structure was obtained (Figure 3). One distal and two proximal clips were placed
across the artery, a single clip was placed on the duct, and a small cystic ductotomy was made. The cystic duct was gently compressed, and
several stones were removed retrograde through the cystic ductotomy. Cholangiography was performed and showed a normal-caliber common bile
duct and common hepatic duct without filling defects, as well as free contrast flow into the duodenum. There were, however, several filling
defects within the cystic duct at its insertion into the common bile duct. A transcystic common bile duct exploration was then performed
using a commercially available kit. After dilation of the cystic duct, the access cannula was placed into the duct and a guidewire was
inserted through this into the duodenum (Figure 4). Under fluoroscopic guidance, a balloon extraction catheter was used to successfully
remove several small stones retrograde through the dilated ductotomy incision. After several sweeps through the common bile duct, completion
cholangiography was performed that showed complete clearance of the stones. The cystic duct was controlled with a suture tie, and both the
cystic duct and artery were transected. The remnant gallbladder was dissected off the gallbladder fossa and removed in the standard manner.
Examination of the gallbladder was performed immediately after its removal (Figure 5a and 5b). Laparoscopic view of remnant gallbladder
during adhesiolysis. Black arrows denote the border of the gallbladder. Critical view of safety. The cystic duct (white arrow) and the
cystic artery (black arrow) seen to be the only 2 structures entering into the remnant gallbladder with normal liver demonstrated behind
them. Laparoscopic transcystic common bile duct exploration with a balloon extraction catheter in the cystic duct. The white arrow depicts
the cannula in the cystic duct; the black arrow shows the remnant gallbladder. A, Gross specimen. The white solid arrow marks clips from the
previous operation; the black thin arrow marks the clip on the cystic duct. B, The gross specimen, opened, demonstrating retained stones.
The procedure took 75 minutes, with minimal blood loss. No drain was left. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 0. Follow-up
in the office at 2 weeks and by phone at 2 months showed the patient to be symptom free. Final pathologic results were consistent with
chronic cholecystitis and cholelithiasis. The presence of the previously placed clips on the gallbladder fundus confirmed the diagnosis of
retained gallbladder versus a duplicate or accessory gallbladder. Minimally invasive surgery and its applications continue to progress. New
techniques have been introduced to deliver equal surgical results in a less invasive manner. Single-port laparoscopy is an extension of this
phenomenon. Advantages have been suggested and these may include less pain, but until more stringent trials are completed, cosmesis and
potential complications from additional trocar sites appear to be the main differences. Drawbacks of this technique, unique from standard
multitrocar laparoscopy, have also been identified. This is inherent to the single portal of access and may be related to technical
considerations including external clashing of instruments, poor visualization of critical structures, and surgeon fatigue. Complications
from single-port cholecystectomy have been described, although whether these are the result of the surgical approach or isolated events is
unclear, and large-scale comparative trials against standard laparoscopic approaches have not been performed. In addition, the learning
curve for these techniques has not been described. Currently, opportunities for training in single-site surgery are limited but include
formal and informal fellowship training, continuing medical education courses sponsored by surgical societies, and industry-sponsored events
including laboratory work and proctoring. Planned partial cholecystectomy is a described technique when dissection is inhibited by severe
inflammation, and it may prevent biliary injury in the setting of cholecystitis. Incomplete cholecystectomy may also arise inadvertently
with incomplete dissection of Calot's triangle, resulting in transection of the gallbladder fundus instead of the cystic duct. Although
inadvertent partial cholecystectomy was initially thought to have increased with the widespread adoption of laparoscopy, increased rates
have not been seen in the surgical literature.4 Retained gallbladder after cholecystectomy can manifest with symptoms similar to primary
gallstone-related disease. Biliary symptoms after cholecystectomy are evaluated with ultrasonography, and typically in these cases this will
demonstrate a cystic lesion containing stones.5 MRCP can further delineate biliary anatomy, and it is considered a definitive test for
diagnosis. Completion cholecystectomy, by means of laparotomy or laparoscopy, is the definitive treatment.4,6 As with all new technologies,
single-port access procedures have inherent limitations. Request for patient consent for single-port techniques should include full
disclosure of the risks, benefits, and alternatives to the procedure. Although there are not absolute contraindications to this technique,
patient selection should be left to the surgeon's discretion. With the adoption of multitrocar laparoscopic cholecystectomy, there was a
significant increase in common bile duct injuries. Although this rate improved with increased surgeon experience, the overall rate is still
higher than with the open technique. Standardized techniques for safe laparoscopic cholecystectomy have been developed and have resulted in
decreased rates of major biliary complications. Techniques of routine cholangiography to identify aberrant biliary anatomy and demonstration
of the critical view of safety have improved the overall conduct of cholecystectomy. If single-port applications are to become widespread
for cholecystectomy, the operation must not deviate from these protocols. Cholangiography can and should be used routinely to demonstrate
biliary anatomical variants, strictures or stones, or to identify structures for safe gallbladder removal. Dissection in Calot's triangle
must be complete to achieve a critical view of safety both to prevent major biliary injury and to perform a complete operation. This
visualization may be compromised by a single port of access originating from the umbilicus by not allowing cephalad and lateral retraction
of the gallbladder. The result may be biliary injury or, as in this case, incomplete cholecystectomy secondary to failure to remove all
adventitial tissue in Calot's triangle. Using different techniques including improved commercial access devices and instruments, as well as
robotics, may improve retraction and/or dissection and may represent an improvement in conduct and safety over current manual single-port
techniques.7 Surgeons should also have a low threshold to add additional trocars to recreate relationships seen in standard laparoscopy or
convert to open procedures as dictated on an individual patient basis. Recreation of a safe cholecystectomy technique, either laparoscopic
or open, must be paramount for single-port procedures, especially in light of the relative improvement over standard laparoscopy. In this
particular case, incomplete cholecystectomy resulted in acute gallstone pancreatitis requiring hospitalization and then an additional
surgical procedure for definitive care. This detailed report is the first in the literature to describe successful laparoscopic remnant
cholecystectomy and transcystic common bile duct exploration after previous single-port cholecystectomy. Although inadvertent partial
cholecystectomy is not unique to single-port techniques, careful attention to performing the appropriate procedure, regardless of technique,
must be achieved in the face of applying new technologies.
