Diseased, replaced or repaired mitral valve can lead to restricted blood flow to left ventricle and inadequate flow in left ventricular
assist device (LVAD). A middle age woman with ‘burnt out’ hypertrophic cardiomyopathy had mitral valve repair for mitral regurgitation. She
needed LVAD to support severe decompensating heart failure. Repaired mitral valve posed a risk of restricted flow through the device. Mitral
commissurotomy was performed on beating heart through the left ventricular apical hole created for insertion of inflow cannula of LVAD. Left
ventricular assist devices (LVADs) offer valuable therapeutic option for patients with end-stage heart failure, either as a short-term
support, as bridge to transplant, bridge to recovery or as destination therapy . Mitral valve disease pose a challenge during LVAD
implantation as diseased or previously repaired mitral valve can restrict flow to left ventricle (LV) and in turn to LVAD. Routinely, mitral
commissurotomy needs complete cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) with bicaval cannulation, cardioplegic arrest of heart and trans-septal or left
atrial access to the valve. Authors demonstrate commissurotomy on beating heart through LV apical orifice for ventricular assist device. A
44 year old lady presented with shortness of breath on minimal exertion and swelling over the legs. She was diagnosed of hypertrophic
obstructive cardiomyopathy in her early twenties which was successfully treated with trans-catheter septal ablation and she could manage two
pregnancies thereafter. She was apparently free of symptoms till last couple of years ago, when she started having dyspnoea on exertion and
pedal oedema which worsened rapidly. Echocardiography showed severe mitral regurgitation with dilated and poorly functioning left ventricle
for which she underwent mitral valve repair. Her symptoms were not relieved with the surgery and she was classified as decompensating heart
failure in NYHA stage three. Echocardiography showed severely dilated left ventricle with severe systolic dysfunction (ejection fraction of
25%). The patient was assessed for heart transplantation and was put on heart transplantation waiting list. However, due to progressive
clinical deterioration and hypo-perfusion related chronic renal failure, it was decided to bridge her to heart transplant with LVAD. Pre-
operative echocardiography showed mild mitral stenosis (mean gradient of 4 mmHg and valve area of 2 cm2). This could have cause obstruction
to flow across mitral valve and in turn inadequate flow through LVAD after implantation. Through median sternotomy, the patient was put on
CPB. A circular piece of myocardium (diameter of 2 cm) at LV apex just lateral to left anterior descending artery was resected for insertion
of HVAD (Heart Ware Inc, Framingham, MA) LVAD inflow cannula. Through this hole, mitral commissurotomy was performed by cutting open the
previously repaired mitral valve, starting at centre and progressing to both commissures. In addition, primary chordae attached to anterior
leaflet were also divided to offer complete opening of the valve. A HVAD was implanted through this hole in routine manner. Briefly, a metal
ring was suture fixed around the hole and HVAD pump was implanted on LV through the ring. The outflow graft was anastomosed to ascending
aorta using side biting clamp. The HVAD was started as CPB weaned off slowly to generate flows of 4 to 5 l/min. Postoperative
echocardiography at discharge showed no gradient across mitral valve. LVAD placement is now an accepted treatment for patients with end-
stage heart failure . Pre-existing native or prosthetic valve pathology does not increase the immediate perioperative risk of LVAD
insertion; however, these patients continue to pose a challenge for postoperative management while awaiting transplantation . Concomitant
valve surgery during VAD implantation appears to be a reasonable option in end-stage heart failure patients with valvular heart disease .
Mitral stenosis causing obstruction to blood flow from left atrium to ventricle needs commissurotomy before LAVD implantation to ensure
unobstructed flow to the LAVD. In the present case, due to previously repaired mitral valve potential flow obstruction was anticipated. The
conventional repair of mitral valve needs CPB and cardioplegic arrest of heart to open the left atrium. This imposes additional incision
over left atrium, time consumption and potential source for bleeding especially with anticoagulation for LVAD. Additional CPB time, bleeding
and transfusion may cause post LVAD right ventricular failure requiring temporary right ventricular assist. To avoid this, authors propose
repair of mitral valve through the left ventricular apical hole which is created for LVAD inflow cannula. Several approaches for mitral
valve are mentioned in the literature, however, the commonly used are left atriotomy through the inter-atrial groove and trans-septal
approach through the right atrium. Although, left atriotomy is more commonly used, trans-septal approach offers better mitral visualization
in difficult cases especially small left atrium and re-do surgery . The trans-septal approach is also useful in patients necessitating right
atriotomy for concomitant procedures and it facilitates beating-heart mitral valve surgery, because retraction of the atrial wall during the
trans-atrial approach often causes aortic insufficiency . One of the scarcely used access for mitral valve is aortotomy. Through a
conventional oblique aortotomy, the mitral valve can be repaired with techniques like neo-chorda implantation . Trans-aortic edge-to-edge
repair (Alfieri stitch) of the mitral valve along with minimally invasive aortic valve replacement can be performed to reduce the operative
risk . A trans-ventricular approach to mitral valve is ideally suited for patients having left ventriculotomy performed for left ventricular
aneurysm . The approach is useful for valve replacement or commissurotomy, although placement of an atrial mitral annuloplasty ring via this
approach has been reported . Trans-apical approach is further modification of trans-ventricular approach. Transcatheter mitral valve-in-ring
implantation (TVIR) in high-risk patients after failure of surgical ring annuloplasty through LV apex has recently been reported . The
approach is also utilized to close mitral para valvular leakage using Amplatzer duct occlude . Transapical beating heart chordae replacement
for MV repair using the NeoChord device has also been introduced . The apical orifice created to fit LVAD inflow is bigger than the one used
for above mentioned catheter based procedures. Exposure through this apical orifice may not be sufficient exposure for mitral valve repair,
but one can easily manage commissurotomy through it. This can be facilitated by bringing the orifice close to the mitral valve. In case of a
narrowed prosthetic valve, the leaflets may be cut open through the apical orifice. In case of a small prosthesis or a doubtful
commissurotomy, authors would prefer left atriotomy on beating heart (on-pump) and excision of prosthesis. Patients with end stage heart
disease related to valvular disease should not be denied LVAD solely due to valvular disease. Mitral commissurotomy is feasible through an
apical hole for LVAD inflow cannula. Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this Case report and
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. LVAD: Left ventricular
assist device; CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. PNM and NPP drafted the manuscript,
BZ & SL analyzed and interpreted the patient data, AFP and MH conceptualize the manuscript, AS involved in the crucial revisions of
manuscript, MA performed the surgery and participated in drafting the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. None
of the authors have any external funding source.
