To the Editor: Patients with underlying medical conditions travel more than ever (1), and such travelers may be exposed to uncommon
infections (2). We report 2 cases of melioidosis and hairy cell leukemia in travelers returning from Thailand. Case-patient 1 was a 48-year-
old man hospitalized in Paris with fever, asthenia, chills, and pancytopenia after returning from a 1-week visit to Thailand where he had
been in flooded regions (Koh Samui and Koh Samet). Clinical examination showed a temperature of 40°C and mucocutaneous pallor. Laboratory
tests showed a hemoglobin level of 7.9 g/dL, a platelet count of 33 × 109/L, a leukocyte count of 1.3 × 109 cells/L, a polymorphonuclear
cell count of 0.77 × 109 cells/L, a monocyte count of 0, and a C-reactive protein level of 158 mg/L. Results of tests for HIV, dengue, and
malaria were negative. Presumptive antimicrobial drug treatment with piperacillin/tazobactam (12 g/1.5 g/d) was initiated at admission. A
blood smear showed 10% hairy cells, and a bone marrow biopsy confirmed a diagnosis of hairy cell leukemia and interstitial infiltration of
CD20-positive, monoclonal antibody DBA.44–positive, and tartrate-resistant acid phosphatase–positive cells. Because of persistent
unexplained fever, full-body computed tomography (CT) was performed and showed multiple liver, spleen, and lung abscesses (Figure, panels A
and B). Culture of a CT scan–guided liver abscess puncture specimen was positive for Bukholderia pseudomallei after 12 days of antimicrobial
drug treatment. Treatment was changed to ceftazidime (120 mg/kg/d) and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (TMP/SMX) (10/50 mg/kg/d), and oral
doxycycline (200 m/d) for 3 weeks. The outcome was good. Oral treatment with TMP/SMX and doxycycline (200 mg/d) was continued for 20 weeks.
Treatment for hairy cell leukemia with cladribine was initiated after 10 weeks of antimicrobial drug treatment. Two years later, the patient
showed complete remission of hairy cell leukemia and melioidosis. Case-patient 2 was a 64-year-old man hospitalized in Paris for persistent
fever 16 days after his return from Thailand. Two months earlier in Thailand, he had received treatment for hepatosplenic melioidosis with
ceftazidime (120 mg/kg/d), TMP/SMX (10/50 mg/kg/d), and doxycycline (200 mg/d) for 15 days, and then oral amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (3
g/d) for 3 months. At admission, he had fever, chills, abdominal pain, and cough. Clinical examination showed a temperature of 40°C and left
lung crackles. Chest and abdomen CT images showed a focus of lung consolidations (Figure, panels C and D), left pleural effusion,
pericarditis, and spleen abscesses. Laboratory tests showed a leukocyte count of 1.05 × 109 cells/L, a monocyte count of 0.04 × 109 cells/L,
a hemoglobin level of 7.9 g/dL, a platelet count of 62 × 109/L, and a serum ferritin level of 8,530 IU/L. Blood cultures were positive for
B. pseudomallei. The strain was sensitive to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid. Bone marrow aspiration and biopsy showed hemophagocytosis and
interstitial infiltration of CD20-positive, monoclonal antibody DBA.44–positive, CD 103-positive, CD25-positive, CD11c-positive, and
CD123-positive cells, leading to a diagnosis of hairy cell leukemia. The patient was given a 2-week course of intravenous TMP/SMX (10 mg/50
mg/kg/d), oral doxycycline (200 mg/d), and intravenous ceftazidime (120 mg/kg/d), followed by a 6-month course of oral TMP/SMX (50 mg/10
mg/kg/d) and doxycycline (4 mg/kg/d). The condition of the patient improved and pancytopenia resolved. Thus, he did not require any
treatment for hairy cell leukemia. No relapse of melioidosis occurred. Melioidosis is endemic to the Pacific region and Southeast Asia
(3,4). Most cases reported in other regions are imported (5). In Thailand, where both patients had traveled, the number of cases increased
from 11.5/100,000 inhabitants in 1997 to 21.3/100,000 in 2006 (6). The 2 main routes of transmission are transcutaneous and aerosols.
Natural disasters, such as flooding, are a risk factor for melioidosis, as for case-patient 1. This disease has an overall mortality rate of
50%. The clinical spectrum ranges from acute septicemia (mortality rate 80%) to the subacute form. B. pseudomallei is difficult to detect by
culture of biologic samples, and serologic analysis or PCR for this bacteria are not routinely available. Therefore, a diagnosis of
melioidosis can be easily missed. Melioidosis occurs mainly in patients with underlying diseases such as diabetes (37%–60% of cases),
chronic alcoholism (12%–39%), thalassemia, and chronic nephropathy, and in persons receiving long-term corticosteroid treatment (7). Reports
of patients with melioidosis and hematologic malignancies or solid cancers are scarce (4,5,7). Hairy cell leukemia could now be included in
this group of diseases. Hairy cell leukemia is a rare chronic B-cell lymphoproliferative disorder characterized by pancytopenia;
splenomegaly; and infiltration of the bone marrow, spleen, and liver by malignant B cells that have hair-like cytoplasmic projections (8,9).
The incidence of hairy cell leukemia is <1 case/100,000 population/year, and the disease accounts for ≈2%–3% of all leukemias in adults in
the United States (8). Infections are a common complication for patients with this disease (10). These 2 cases of imported melioidosis show
that travelers with hematologic malignancies are at risk for such infections (1). Immunocompromised travelers might be first sentinels for
ongoing endemic diseases. When travelers return with uncommon diseases, physicians should check for underlying diseases. Physicians
providing care for patients with hairy cell leukemia should be aware of the risk for contracting melioidosis. Computed tomography (CT)
images of the chest and abdomen of case-patient 1 showing A) a subpleural nodular and cavitary lesion (arrow) in the left upper lobe of the
lung and B) multiple small round liver abscesses, seen as multiple foci of ill-defined areas of hypoattenuation (arrows), and enlargement of
the spleen. CT images of the chest and abdomen of case-patient 2 showing C) a focal area of parenchymal consolidation in the left lung
associated with an ipsilateral mild pleural effusion and D) and a spleen abscess (arrow). Suggested citation for this article: Rossi B,
Epelboin L, Jauréguiberry S, Lecso M, Roos-Weil D, Gabarre J, et al. Melioidosis and hairy cell leukemia in 2 travelers returning from
Thailand . Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Mar [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1903.121329 We thank Laurent Meyer for reviewing the
manuscript. These authors contributed equally to this article.
