To the Editor: Bulleidia extructa is an obligately anaerobic, nonmotile, non–spore-forming gram-positive bacillus first described in 2000 by
Downes et al. (1), after having isolated a bacterium from the oral cavity of persons with periodontitis and dentoalveolar abscesses that did
not correspond to any known species. After phenotypic and genetic characterization, the investigators proposed a new genus, Bulleidia, and
the species B. extructa. Since then, additional reports have associated the organism with oral infections, specifically periodontal disease
(2–5). While B. extructa’s association with human periodontal disease is well documented, the bacterium has so far not been implicated in
other pathogenic processes. We report here a case of a total hip arthroplasty infection caused by B. extructa in an immunocompetent patient.
In November 2010, an 82-year-old man with a non-cemented right total hip arthroplasty that was performed 26 years previously was evaluated
for right hip pain. He had been in his usual state of health without any complaints until a month earlier, when he lost his footing and
hyperabducted his hip joints, involuntarily performing a split, while washing a boat cover with a power washer. Since then, he reported
right hip pain that somewhat limited his mobility. Physical examination revealed an antalgic gait, mild swelling of the right lower
extremity, and impaired hip mobility related to pain on the right side, specifically with extension, flexion, abduction, and adduction.
Results of the patient’s blood work were notable for normocytic anemia (hemoglobin 10.6 g/dL), thrombocytosis (459 × 109/L), elevated
erythrocyte sedimentation rate (101 mm/h), and elevated C-reactive protein (88.7 mg/L). Leukocyte count was within normal limits (9.6 × 109
cells/L). An ultrasound examination of the right hip joint showed extensive synovitis and a large, 4.3 × 5.0 × 5.1–cm vascular mass
extending anteriorly from the joint space. Aspiration of the joint space yielded 1 mL of blood-stained fluid with 111,595 cells/µL (95%
neutrophils, 5% monocytes/ macrophages). Anaerobic bacterial culture grew a gram-positive bacillus identified as B. extructa by partial 16S
rRNA sequencing. DNA was prepared for PCR amplification by using PrepMan Ultra (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA) and amplified and
bidirectionally sequenced by using primers 5′-TGGAGAGTTTGATCCTGGCTCAG-3′ and 5′-TACCGCGGCTGCTGGCAC-3′. The generated 484-bp sequence
differed by 2 bp from 483 bp of available sequence from B. extructa GenBank accession no. AF220064. The isolate was susceptible to
penicillin, clindamycin, and metronidazole by using E-test. The patient underwent total hip arthroplasty resection. Intraoperatively,
purulence was noted upon entering the hip joint. Histopathologic examination of removed tissue revealed acute inflammation. Five hip tissue
specimens were obtained for culture; 3 specimens yielded B. extructa. Six weeks of intravenous ceftriaxone treatment was prescribed, and the
patient was instructed to revisit a dentist for a full dental examination. Before seeking treatment for this episode, he reported that he
was seeing a dentist on a regular basis and denied any recent dental surgery or infections. The patient was seen in a follow-up visit 2
months after reimplantation surgery; at that time, he reported minimal pain and had begun to bear weight on the affected side. There was no
evidence for infection recurrence. Periprosthetic joint infections are a major complication after joint replacement. The number of
procedures for total hip and knee replacements has increased during the past 13 years (6). This trend is accompanied by an increase in the
total number of periprosthetic joint infections, even though the overall percentage of this complication is low (7). The most commonly
isolated organisms in periprosthetic joint infections are gram-positive cocci, specifically Staphylococcus aureus and S. epidermidis (8). In
a retrospective review, Moran et al. (9) examined the microbiological spectrum of 112 patients undergoing debridement and irrigation for a
periprosthetic joint infection (hip , knee , elbow , ankle , shoulder ) at a tertiary care center in the United Kingdom during 1998–2003.
The most frequently isolated microorganisms were coagulase-negative staphylococci (47%) followed by methicillin-sensitive S. aureus (44%),
methicillin-resistant S. aureus (8%), aerobic gram-negative organisms (8%), and anaerobes (7%). Thirty-seven percent of patient specimens
grew multiple microorganisms. We document the ability of B. extructa to cause an infection beyond its usual habitat, the oral flora. We
hypothesize that the infection in this patient might have developed from hematogenous seeding in which an undiscovered and asymptomatic oral
infectious nidus might have served as the seeding focus while mild trauma to the hip could have facilitated access to the joint space.
Suggested citation for this article: Kloesel B, Beliveau M, Patel R, Trousdale RT, Sia IG. Novel Bulleidia extructa periprosthetic hip joint
infection, United States . Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Jul [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1907.130078 The authors thank Daniel R.
Gustafson and the outstanding staff of the Mayo Clinic anaerobic bacteriology laboratory for identification of this patient’s bacterium.
Support was provided solely from institutional and departmental sources (Department of Internal Medicine, Division of Infectious Diseases,
Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN). Dr Patel receives research support as a principal investigator from Pfizer, Pradama, Tornier, Pocared, and
Astellas. She also owns patents on a method and apparatus for device sonication (but has relinquished her rights to receive royalties), an
anti-biofilm substance, and Bordetella pertussis/parapertussis PCR.
