To the Editor: Guidelines for the diagnosis and management of Mycobacterium bovis BCG disease in HIV-infected children are lacking. BCG
strains are intrinsically resistant to pyrazinamide and in some cases have low-level resistance to isoniazid (6). However, data on acquired
drug resistance in M. bovis BCG are limited. We describe a case of BCG disease caused by a rifampin-resistant strain of M. bovis BCG in an
HIV-infected infant in Vietnam. The daughter of a known HIV-infected woman, who did not fully adhere to antiretroviral therapy (ART) during
pregnancy, received the M. bovis intradermal BCG (Pasteur strain) vaccine at birth. HIV infection was diagnosed in the infant by PCR when
she was 8 weeks of age. At 9 months of age, she was admitted to the Pediatric Infectious Diseases Department of the Pham Ngoc Thach Hospital
(Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam) because of a voluminous ipsilateral axillary mass at the site of the vaccination, fever, weight loss, and
hepatosplenomegaly. The percentage of CD4+ T cells was 27% (1,620 cells/mm3). Regional BCG disease was clinically diagnosed without
microbiological investigation, and a broad antimycobacterial therapy targeting M. tuberculosis complex species was started with 5 mg/kg
isoniazid, 10 mg/kg rifampin, and 25 mg/kg pyrazinamide. After 6 weeks of antimycobacterial therapy, ART was initiated with lamivudine,
stavudine, and abacavir. After 6 months of antimycobacterial treatment, the infant was hospitalized again for recurrent inflammation and
fistulization of the axillary lymph nodes associated with fever. Fluid from the axillary mass was collected by fine-needle aspiration for
bacteriologic investigations. Direct microscopic examination showed acid-fast bacilli, and the mycobacterial infection was confirmed by
culture. By using conventional biochemical methods, the mycobacterial isolate was assigned to the M. bovis species. Pyrazinamide was
discontinued, and antimycobacterial therapy was continued for 4 supplementary months with rifampin (15 mg/kg) and isoniazid (10 mg/kg).
After 2 months, drug susceptibility testing results confirmed pyrazinamide intrinsic resistance and isoniazid and ethambutol susceptibility
and showed rifampin resistance. The late inflammatory reaction after introduction of ART was evocative of immune reconstitution inflammatory
syndrome. Nevertheless, drug resistance may have contributed. Despite the rifampin resistance, the patient showed clinical improvement, and
the rifampin/isoniazid treatment was continued for 2 more months. The child’s BCG disease was cured on completion of 10 months of
antituberculous treatment. Retrospective molecular investigations using the GenoType MTBC Kit (Hain Lifescience, Nehren, Germany) enabled
identification of the isolate stored at −80°C as M. bovis BCG strain. A mutation in the rpoB gene (codon 531, Ser531Tyr) associated with
rifampin resistance was detected by using the GenoType MTBDRplus Kit (Hain Lifescience) and partial sequencing of the rpoB gene (5,7). No
mutation in the katG and inhA genes, frequently associated with isoniazid resistance, was detected. To our knowledge, this case is the
second report of rifampin-resistant M. bovis BCG disease in HIV-infected children. The first report involved a child in South Africa who was
vaccinated with the Danish BCG strain (4); this strain shows low-level resistance to isoniazid and therefore has a high risk of evolving to
multidrug resistance in instances of suboptimal isoniazid levels. The M. bovis BCG Pasteur strain (American Type Culture Collection 35734)
used for vaccination in Vietnam is isoniazid and rifampin susceptible and pyrazinamide resistant (9). Despite appropriate antimycobacterial
treatment, the relatively low doses of isoniazid (5 mg/kg), poor adherence, or inadequate absorption of drugs because of HIV-related
gastrointestinal disease may have resulted in subtherapeutic in vivo drug concentrations and thus in selection of a drug-resistant M. bovis
BCG strain. This case should alert clinicians of the possible emergence of rifampin resistant M. bovis BCG strains. Because disseminated BCG
disease in HIV-infected children presents a high risk for illness and/or death, these patients should receive optimal tuberculosis treatment
(2) based on 4-drug (rifampin, isoniazid, ethambutol, and pyrazinamide) regimen doses for at least 9 months until M. tuberculosis is ruled
out (3). Untreated local BCG immune reconstitution inflammatory syndrome may not necessarily progress to dissemination; therefore, treatment
would not appear necessary (8). Some studies suggest that the survival of HIV-infected children with BCG disease could be attributed to
early initiation of ART in combination with other treatments (1,3). In the South Africa case, the child died, and the authors suggested that
this outcome was related to the severity of the clinical features, the severe HIV-related immune suppression, and the absence of ART (4). In
the case in Vietnam, despite the emergence of drug resistance, the early initiation of ART in a child with a localized disease, the
persistent efficacy of isoniazid, and the spontaneous fistulization of the abscess probably contributed to the good outcome for the infant.
In conclusion, this case highlights the challenges in management of BCG disease in children. It also emphasizes the possible risk for
emergence of acquired drug resistance in M. bovis BCG strains, complicating the medical management of such cases. Suggested citation for
this article: Nguyen Hong D, Huyen MNT, Lan NTN, Duong NH, Nguyen Ngo VV, Ngoc DT, et al. Rifampin-resistant Mycobacterium bovis BCG–induced
disease in HIV-infected infant, Vietnam. Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Jul [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1907.130025 We are grateful
to all the health care teams of Pham Ngoc Thach Hospital for their help in this study. We acknowledge Didier Laureillard for the fruitful
discussions. The Institut National de la Santé et de la Recherche Médicale; Institut de Recherche pour le Développement; Centre National de
la Recherche Scientifique; and Pham Ngoc Thach Hospital, particularly the Reference Laboratory for Tuberculosis, provided financial and
technical support. This study was developed in the framework of the Centre National de la Recherche Scientifique–Groupements de Recherche
Internationau project entitled “Biodiversity and Infectious Diseases in Vietnam.”
