Acute myopericarditis and exertional rhabdomyolysis, two uncommon but well-described diseases with potentially life-threatening effects, are
generally considered as independent clinical entities. However, they may in fact be pathophysiologically related under certain
circumstances. This is the first ever report of influenza myopericarditis provoked by exertional rhabdomyolysis to the best of our
knowledge. A 25-year-old immunocompetent Chinese man presented with bilateral leg pain, dizziness, and shortness of breath on admission soon
after completing vigorous training comprising running drills. Exertional rhabdomyolysis was diagnosed with 44 fold high serum creatine
phosphokinase. Then he developed chest pain, pericardial effusion, changes of electrocardiography and positive troponin I suggestive of
myopericarditis. Influenza A (H3N2) virus infection was confirmed by polymerase chain reaction analysis of nasopharyngeal wash samples.
Other possible infective and autoimmune causes were excluded. Patient recovered completely with anti-inflammatory therapy and the supportive
care. This case suggests that clinicians who treat patients with exertional rhabdomyolysis should be aware of the potential vulnerability to
acute myopericarditis, especially in the presence of recent influenza A infection. Acute myopericarditis and exertional rhabdomyolysis, two
uncommon but well-described diseases with potentially life-threatening effects, are generally considered as independent clinical entities.
However, they may in fact be pathophysiologically related under certain circumstances. Here, we report an unusual case of an immunocompetent
man who presented to the emergency department after a resolving upper respiratory infection with an unusual presentation of exertional
rhabdomyolysis accompanied by acute myopericarditis caused by influenza A. The relationship among these three pathologies and their clinical
implications are discussed. A previously healthy 25-year-old male conscript presented to our emergency department. He complained of
bilateral leg pain, dizziness, and shortness of breath soon after completing vigorous training comprising running drills. Ten days before
admission, he attended his family clinic complaining of cough and a sore throat. The rapid test for influenza A was positive and he was
treated with a 5-day course of oseltamivir. Five days after completing the course, his symptoms had resolved completely and he recommenced
regular military training. There was no history of trauma or illicit drug use. He also denied having fatigue, weakness, or weight loss, and
the rest of his verbal review of systems was unremarkable. Physical examination revealed the following values: temperature, 38.2°C; heart
rate, 154 beats/min; respiratory rate, 26 breaths/min; and blood pressure, 93/48 mmHg. The results of his physical examination were
otherwise unremarkable except for tenderness on palpation of the muscle groups of the thighs. Of note, there were no neurological deficits,
and heart sounds showed no definite gallop rhythm. Laboratory investigations revealed the following values: creatine phosphokinase (CPK),
5,555 U/L with an MB fraction of 78 ng/mL; hemoglobin, 17.2 g/dL; platelet count, 348,000 cells/mm3; and total white blood cell (WBC) count,
15,840 cells/mm3 with a differential of 32% lymphocytes, 4% monocytes, 58% neutrophils, and 3% bands. The cardiac troponin I (cTnI) level
was 0.46 μg/L (reference < 0.1 μg/L) and the lactate dehydrogenase level was 836 U/L (reference 135–225 U/L). His serum creatinine level was
2.3 mg/dL and his serum electrolyte levels were normal. Liver function tests indicated an elevated aspartate aminotransferase concentration
of 47.8 U/L and alanine aminotransferase concentration of 58 U/L; total bilirubin, alkaline phosphatase, total protein, and albumin levels
were all within normal limits. The result of a urine toxicology screen was negative. His urine dipstick test was positive for blood with a
pH of 6.5 but no red blood cells or WBCs were observed by microscopy. A test for urine myoglobin had a positive result. The results of a
coagulation test, thyroid function test, complement test and antinuclear antibody test were normal. The C-reactive protein level and
erythrocyte sedimentation rate were initially slightly elevated but had normalized 7 days later. Cultures of blood samples tested negative,
and viral studies were negative apart from detecting influenza A (H3N2) virus by polymerase chain reaction analysis of nasopharyngeal wash
specimens. Chest radiography did not show any abnormalities. Electrocardiography revealed a regular narrow QRS complex but diffuse PR
segment depression and localized concave upward ST segment elevation in leads aVL and V1–V3 with reciprocal changes in the inferior leads
(Figure 1A). Echocardiography disclosed normal systolic function without pericardial effusion or valve regurgitation. Myopericarditis
associated with influenza A infection and exertional rhabdomyolysis. A: Electrocardiogram showing diffuse PR segment depression (arrowheads)
and localized concave upward ST segment elevation in leads aVL and V1–V3 (black arrows) with reciprocal changes in the inferior leads
(hollow arrows). B: Parasternal long-axis view on transthoracic echocardiography demonstrating a moderate-sized pericardial effusion (white
arrow). In the 3 days after admission, the CPK peaked at 34,308, and the cTnI and creatinine peaked at 1.17 and 2.46, respectively. He also
developed new-onset left-sided and central chest pain. The pain was pleuritic in nature, and a pericardial friction rub was noted on
auscultation. A second echocardiography demonstrated moderate circumferential pericardial effusion without any other abnormalities
(Figure 1B), consistent with myopericarditis with a predominant pericarditic component. Based on these findings, he was treated with aspirin
for acute myopericarditis and aggressive hydration and urinary alkalinization as per the local rhabdomyolysis protocol. After a total of
20 days of hospitalization, the patient’s leg pain resolved, chest pain relieved, and CPK level declined to 656 U/L. His serum cTnI and
creatinine levels normalized after anti-inflammatory therapy and supportive management. Preserved ejection fraction without deterioration of
the pericardial effusion was noted in subsequent serial follow-up echocardiographic assessments. The patient was discharged with a normal
electrocardiogram and no further sequelae. Myopericarditis, or inflammation of the myocardium and pericardium, can present with an overlap
of the symptoms of myocarditis (flu-like symptoms such as fever, fatigue and myalgias) and pericarditis (sharp or pleuritic chest pain that
is relieved with sitting forward and worsened by laying back) . In clinical practice both pericarditis and myocarditis coexist because they
share familiar causative agents, mainly cardiotropic viruses (Table 1) . Enteroviruses, especially group B coxsackieviruses, appear to be
the major implicated agents. The term “myopericarditis” indicates a primarily “pericarditic syndrome” and it is responsible for the majority
of cases. The inflammatory process is usually self-limited without overt sequelae and can occur as seasonal epidemics, especially
coxsackieviruses and influenza. Nevertheless, preliminary studies have shown that strenuous exercise can markedly accelerate viral
myopericarditis and enhance the inflammatory process . Etiologies of viral myopericarditis * Viral myopericarditis is usually a self-limited
disease and can occur as seasonal epidemics, especially coxsackievirus B and influenza. Influenza is an acute febrile illness caused by
influenza viruses. Most infections are uncomplicated and the illness is usually limited to symptoms of upper respiratory infection in
combination with several constitutional symptoms, including headache, lethargy, and myalgia. However, some patients are at risk of severe
illness and fatal complications affecting multiple organ systems . Various complications of influenza A infection have been reported in the
pulmonary, neurological, renal, cardiac and muscular systems . Our patient presented with exertional rhabdomyolysis and concurrent
myopericarditis, a rare combination. Reports in the literature have indicated that, in adults, exercise during or after a viral illness
increases the risk of rhabdomyolysis . As muscle damage occurs, release of constituents of necrotic muscle results in the accumulation of
free radicals and tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) in the serum, which are responsible for a systemic inflammatory reaction during
rhabdomyolysis. Experimental and necropsy studies have shown convincingly that free radicals produced in any organ of the body can induce
myocardial damage . Proinflammatory cytokines including TNF-α are also considered important in the initiation and development of the
pathophysiology of inflammatory cardiomyopathies . Moreover, human studies have shown that infection of the myocardium by influenza A is
associated with increased expression of TNF-α and its receptors in the myocardium . These findings suggest that exertional rhabdomyolysis
may be an important underlying condition for the development of cardiac involvement in influenza A infection. Cardiac involvement in
influenza occurs usually during the first week after the onset of influenza symptoms . This may result from direct viral invasion or from
the host immune-mediated inflammatory pathology; the immunological dissonance usually plays a major role in the later phases of infection,
even in the absence of viral genome . In our case, myopericardial damage occurred later in the course of infection, on the tenth day after
the onset of influenza symptoms, and was associated with exertional rhabdomyolysis. More intriguingly, the patient’s clinical manifestations
and echocardiographic images also progressed in parallel with the increase in CPK concentration. We consequently assume that this cardiac
disorder was provoked by exertional rhabdomyolysis, which may be due to the profound injury caused by inflammatory mediators to the heart,
predisposing it to develop influenza myopericarditis (Figure 2). Alternatively, there may be coincidence of both diseases with a time lag.
Further studies are needed to elucidate the molecular mechanisms associated with these clinical phenomena. Rhabdomyolysis and influenza A
infection may provoke an indirect inflammatory mechanism responsible for myopericardial damage. Exertional rhabdomyolysis with acute kidney
injury and acute myopericarditis are uncommon yet potentially life-threatening complications of influenza A infection. To the best of our
knowledge, this is the first case of influenza myopericarditis spurred by exertional rhabdomyolysis. It suggests that clinicians who treat
patients with exertional rhabdomyolysis should be aware of the potential vulnerability to acute myopericarditis, especially in the presence
of recent influenza A infection. Early diagnosis and the intensive care with supportive treatment of such cases can reduce the risk of
further cardiac events. As influenza A affects millions of people worldwide, clinicians should also advise patients to avoid strenuous
physical activities during and after the infection. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication of this case
report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CPK: Creatine phosphokinase; WBC:
White blood cell; cTnI: Cardiac troponin I; TNF-α: Tumor necrosis factor-α. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All
authors were involved in the management of the patient. GST and JSC researched the background literature on the case and wrote the first
draft. CYH and JCL contributed towards the discussions and analysis of the case. CTH contributed to the clinical management of the patient.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/13/283/prepub
