We report the case of a patient diagnosed with genitogluteal porokeratosis, a disorder of epidermal keratinization. The location described
is extremely rare and very often late diagnosed or even misdiagnosed. Histopathology showed a typical cornoid lamella of great value to
support this diagnosis. The importance of awareness of this entity by the specialist is emphasized as a differential diagnosis among genital
diseases of chronic evolution and difficult treatment. Relata-se o caso de um paciente com diagnóstico de poroqueratose genitoglútea, uma
desordem da queratinização epidérmica, cuja localização exclusiva é extremamente rara, sendo muitas vezes tardia ou erroneamente
diagnosticada. A histopatologia demonstra a clássica lamela cornóide, de grande valia para elucidação diagnóstica. Ressalta-se a importância
do conhecimento desta entidade pelo especialista como diagnóstico diferencial entre as afecções genitais de evolução arrastada e de difícil
tratamento. Porokeratosis is a primary disorder of epidermal keratinization of unknown aetiology. It presents localized and generalized
forms.1-9 It is thought that the different forms of porokeratosis are phenotypic expressions of a common genetic disorder. Autossomal
dominant inheritance of several clinical variants has been reported, as well as sporadic adult-onset cases associated with
immunosuppression, AIDS, kidney or liver transplantation, drugs such as thiazide diuretics and immunodeficiency, hematolog-ic malignancies,
autoimmune diseases, and occupational exposure to benzene.2-5 The involvement of the genital region and extension to adjacent areas occurs
in both forms (localized or generalized), and localized presentation confined to these regions is extremely rare, with few cases reported in
the literature.2-7 The skin lesions are typically characterized by erythema-tous to brownish papules and plaques with elevated borders,
single or multiple.1 Histopathological examination demonstrates the classic cornoid lamella. The clinical exuberance, rarity and involvement
of unusual locations led us to the presentation of this case. Male patient, 37 years old, complained of the onset of skin lesions on the
groin and buttocks for approximately two years accompanied by intense local itching. The dermatological examination showed erythematous
papules and plaques with elevated and well-defined borders on the scrotum; brownish macules and papules on the groin and thighs; well-
defined brownish erythematous keratotic papules and annular plaques on the buttocks and gluteal cleft (Figures 1,2 and 3). The lesions
started located on the scrotum and groin, with progression to the buttocks region (gluteal cleft). Currently stable. The patient received
previous treatment with systemic and topical antifungal drugs, isolated or combined topical corticosteroids, without clinical improvement.
No significant personal or familiar pathological history. The previous topical therapy was discontinued, and an incisional biopsy of a
papule of the left scrotum was performed. The histopathological examination showed superficial perivascular dermatitis with columns of
parakeratosis, consistent with the diagnosis of porokeratosis (Figure 4). Scrotum - Papules and plaques with elevated and well-defined
borders Groin - brownish macules and papules Buttocks and gluteal cleft - well-defined brownish erythematous keratotic papules and annular
plaques Underlying dyskeratotic cells and absence of the granular layer (HE, 100x) Porokeratosis is a primary disorder of epidermal
keratinization of unknown aetiology. It can be classified into localized and generalized forms.1-9 The localized forms include porokeratosis
of Mibelli, linear porokeratosis, and punctate porokeratosis, and the generalized variants include disseminated superficial porokeratosis,
disseminated superficial actinic porokeratosis, and disseminated palmoplantar porokeratosis.1,2,7-9 Porokeratosis involving the genital
region occurs in generalized forms or localized confined to the genital area and adjacent sites (buttocks, perineum, groin and thighs),
being the latter an extremely rare presentation, generally classified as a plaque-type porokeratosis of Mibelli, with 23 cases reported in
the literature. Based on published reports, the skin lesions are typically characterized by well-defined brownish erythematous keratotic
papules and annular plaques single or multiple. The center of the lesion can be hyperpigmented or hypopigmented and atrophic. They can be
asymptomatic or with severe local itching.1,2,7 There is a predominance of males, and possible increased incidence may be observed in Asian
and African American populations.1-5,7 The pathogenesis of this entity remains uncertain and both genetic and environmental components have
been implicated. Autosomal dominant transmission and associated conditions such as local and systemic immunosuppression have been
reported.2,3,7 Despite presenting a typical cutaneous manifestation the diagnosis is delayed because of the rarity of location, and often
misdiagnosed as sexually transmitted disease. The main differential diagnoses are condyloma acuminatum, syphilis (condiloma latum),
granuloma annulare, lichen simplex chronicus, extramammary Paget disease and eczema. The skin biopsy is essential for the diagnosis.4
Histologically, the characteristic alteration is called cornoid lamella, a column of parakeratotic cells in the epidermis.2-4 A variant
called porokeratosis ptychotropica, that was initially described in 1995 as a pruritic eruption of the gluteal cleft, typically involves the
buttocks and gluteal cleft mimicking an inflammatory disorder and is an important differential diagnosis in genitogluteal porokeratosis.7
Although affecting similar locations, with clinical features that can be histologically superimposable, the ptychotropic form presents an
unique feature that is the presence of multiple cornoid lamellae7,8, not detected in this case. Therefore we preferred the term
genitogluteal porokeratosis to encompass both the clinical and histopathological findings of this case. The elective treatment is the
surgical treatment, depending on the number and the size of the lesions. Other treatment options include cryotherapy (liquid nitrogen), CO2
laser therapy, oral and topical retinoids, topical vitamin D3 analogs, keratolytic agents, 5 - fluorouracil - occlusive and more recently
with topical imiquimod 5% and topical diclofenac sodium 3% gel - with symptomatic and stabilizing effects on the lesions, with emphasis on
its use in genital or genitogluteal porokeratosis. Photodynamic therapy is also described with different results. Regular monitoring is
necessary because of the potential for malignant transformation, although there are no reports yet in the literature.1-7 The authors thank
their colleagues Érico Pampado di Santis and Samuel Henrique Mandelbaum for helping with the references. * Study carried out at the
University Hospital of Taubaté - University of Taubaté (HUT-UNITAU) - Taubaté (SP), Brazil Conflict of interest: None Financial funding:
None
