Malakoplakia is a rare acquired disease that can affect many systems but is more common in the urogenital tract. Cutaneous malakoplakia is
even rarer. It is far more frequent in immunodeficient patients. We report a case of cutaneous malakoplakia in a kidney transplant patient
who had recently stopped receiving immunosuppressive therapy to illustrate a review of the relevant recent literature. Malacoplaquia é uma
doença adquirida rara que pode afetar diversos órgãos e sistemas, mas é mais comum no trato urogenital. O acometimento cutâneo é ainda menos
frequente. Atinge principalmente imunodeficientes. Relatamos caso de malacoplaquia cutânea em um paciente transplantado renal que havia
recentemente deixado de receber a terapia imunossupressora, a fim de ilustrar uma revisão da literatura recente relevante. Malakoplakia is a
term derived from the Greek, meaning "soft plaque".1,2 The disease was first described in 1902 by Michaelis and Gutman.3 It describes a
granulomatous process of infectious etiol ogy triggered by bacteria that occurs preferentially in subjects affected by primary or secondary
immunodeficiency.4,5 The pathogenesis of malakoplakia remains poorly understood, and it is thought to represent an acquired bactericidal
defect of macrophages associat ed with infection, immunosuppression, and/or immunosuppressive agentes.4.6,7 The most common site of
occurrence is the urogenital tract, although the condition has also been found to affect the gastrointestinal and respiratory tracts,
retroperitoneum, thyroid gland, lymph nodes, bones/joints, middle ear, eyes and brain.4-9 The condition has been considered rare, and
cutaneous malako plakia is even rarer; the first case was reported by Leclerc and Bernier in 1972.10 We report a case of cutaneous
malakoplakia in a kidney transplant recipient and proceed with a review of the topic. A 51-year-old white man from Brazil, suffering from
idiopathic chronic renal failure, presented with a immunosuppressive agentes.4.6,7 2-year history of asymptomatic cutaneous lesion on the
left groin, noticed by his nephrologist during hospitalization due to sepsis caused by catheter infection. The patient was frequently
catheterized at this site since an unsuccessful kidney transplantation 2 years before. The lesion was a yellow-erythematous-purple plaque
measuring around 1 cm in diameter, on the left groin, near a femoral vein catheter (Figure 1). Malakoplakia: Picture of the yellow-
erythematous- purple plaque measuring little more than 1 cm in diameter on the left groin of the patient near a femoral vein cateter The
lesion was sampled for histopathologic and culture studies. The culture results revealed the growth of Providentia spp and Candida albicans.
Histopathologic analysis revealed a chronic inflammatory process characterized by sheets of closely packed macrophages containing PAS-
positive inclusions (von Hansemann cells) and calcospherites known as Michaelis-Gutmann bodies, as demonstrated by Von Kossa stain, which
shows the homogeneous bodies in black (Figures 2A, 2B e 2C). Prussian blue staining demonstrated the presence of hemosiderin inside
macrophages, which may explain the purple color of the lesion (Figure 2D). Malakoplakia: A-hematoxylin-eosin (400 X) stain showing the
sheets of macrophages. B-von Hansemann cells in PAS stain (400 X)(black arrow). C-Michaelis- Gutmann bodies, shown in black after Von Kossa
staining (400 X)(black arrow). D-Prussian blue demonstrates hemosiderin inside macrophages (400 X) The patient was treated with surgical
excision in association with sulfametoxazol-trimetoprin antibiotic therapy. No evidence of recurrence was detected on 3-year follow-up, as
shown in figure 3. Malakoplakia: Left groin picture of the same patient after treatment and 3-year follow-up Malakoplakia is a rare
granulomatous disease in which a defect of the killing capacity of macrophages after endocytosis is considered to be the central event.
Disturbed phagosome-lysosome fusion was suggested, but it is still not clear how and why this disorder happens, and the hypothesis is not
fully accepted.11-13 We reviewed published articles in indexed periodicals that appeared in a PubMed search performed using the term
"cutaneous malakoplakia". Based on Kohl et al. 2008, we added cases of cutaneous malakoplakia published from January 2006 until January
2012, as demonstrated in chart 1. 14 Reported cases of cutaneous Malakoplakia While the majority of subjects are immunodeficient patients,
including HIV-infected patients, patients with neoplasia, transplanted patients and others, more recently cases involving previously healthy
patients have been reported.15-17 Almost all transplanted patient cases refer to kidney recipients, as the one in this article, but two were
reported in heart transplant recipients.18,19 There are few reports in which prevalence among women is higher (2:1).20,21 The age peak
occurs between the sixth and seventh decades, being even rarer in children.17,22 Approximately 90% of patients have coliform bacteria
detected in urine, blood, or tissue, suggesting an infectious cause.4 The most commonly found bacterium is Escherichia coli, but Klebsiella,
Proteus, Pseudomonas, Mycobacterium avium, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Shigella, Staphylococcus aureus and Enterococcus spp were also
found.23,24 Rhodococcus equi is the most commonly implicated microbe in HIV-infected patients.25 In 75% of cases, the disease affects the
genitourinary tract, but other systems have been implicated, including the skin.26 No typical clinical presentation is described, skin
presentation varies from papules, plaques, nodules, abscesses with or without fluctuation, and fistula to ulcers, cystic and polypoid
masses.14 Therefore, the diagnosis is predominantly confirmed by anatomopathologic and culture studies. Vanbrabant et al.2004 recently
described the possibility of using 18fluoro-deoxyglucose positron emission tomography for diagnosis and follow-up.27 Histopathologically,
the pathognomonic finding of Michaelis-Gutmann bodies, which represent partially degraded bacterial organisms, can establish the diagnosis.
Michaelis-Gutmann bodies are intracytoplasmic, round-ovoid, basophilic, concentric laminated inclusions in macrophages that are typically
enlarged and display foamy cytoplasm and eccentric, hyperchromatic, round nuclei, denoted as Hansemann cells. Differential diagnosis is
possible with other infectious diseases or neoplastic and reactive/reparative processes. Infections to consider include tuberculosis,
Whipple's disease, lepromatous leprosy, fungus (Cryptococcus), and parasites (leishmaniasis). Special stains for microorganisms and tissue
culture are necessary. Reactive and neoplastic processes include Langerhans cell histiocytosis, fibrous histiocytoma, lymphoma, granular
cell tumor, xanthoma, foreign-body granuloma, hemophagocytic syndromes, and sarcoidosis.14 Although generally presenting benign self-limited
evolution, a fatal outcome is possible, but none was described in cutaneous malakoplakia.28 Pseudomalakoplakia was once described as a
proliferation of histiocytes at a previous surgical site, but only as an abstract. No other publications on this theme are found.29 Our
observation that the disease developed on a site of recognized trauma and contamination, in accordance with other related cases, highlights
the importance of direct inoculation of bacteria in the pathophysiology, since the presence of immunosuppression is necessary, but not
sufficient for its development. There are no prospective comparative studies, probably due to the limited incidence, so approaches to
management vary from surgical excision, with or without antibiotics, to the use of antibiotics alone.8 Van der Voort et al. 1996 compared
treatments and concluded that surgical excision achieved the higher cure rate (90%), and that, when comparing antibiotics, quinolones seemed
to be superior.7 The discontinuation of immunosuppressives and treatment of HIV could also be helpful.7,9 Sulfamethoxazole-trimethoprim is
also cited as effective.30 It was selected by us due to considerations such as cost, access and drug interaction. We illustrated this
article reporting a case of cutaneous malakoplakia synchronous to previous immunosuppressive therapy, in a subject with no current
immunosuppressive treatment. The option for surgical plus antibiotic treatment resulted in cure with no recurrence to date. We also reviewed
the literature and counted the reported cases of cutaneous malakoplakia described on chart 1 (including this one).31-66 Syudy carried out at
the Dermatology Department of Paulista Medical School (Departamento de Dermatologia da Escola Paulista de Medicina - UNIFESP) - São Paulo
(SP) Brazil. Financial funding: None Conflict of interest: None
