Malignant melanoma can present a variety of histopathological patterns. Cartilaginous change in the absence of osteogenic differentiation is
extremely rare in malignant melanoma, being among the least frequent of the wide range of melanoma histologic patterns. We report a case of
a 47-year-old woman with a subungual nodule on her right great toe for many years. Histopathological examination of the lesion led to a
diagnosis of malignant melanoma with cartilaginous differentiation devoid of concomitant osseous areas. It would appear that this unusual
form of melanoma has a predilection for acral location, particularly the subungual region. Malignant melanoma with chondroid stroma should
therefore be considered in the differential diagnosis of cartilaginous lesions of the toes and fingers. Careful examination of the overlying
epidermis and identification of an in situ component of melanoma may be necessary in order to establish the correct diagnosis. O melanoma
maligno pode apresentar uma grande variedade de padrões histopatológicos. A presença de diferenciação cartilagínea, na ausência de
diferenciação osteogénica, é extremamente rara no melanoma maligno. O melanoma cartilagíneo está entre os padrões histológicos menos
frequentes. Relatamos um caso de uma doente do sexo feminino de 47 anos de idade com um nódulo subungueal no 1º dedo do pé direito com
muitos anos de evolução. O exame histopatológico da lesão revelou melanoma cartilagíneo, sem áreas de diferenciação osteogénica. Esta
variante de melanoma parece ter predileção pela extremidades, sobretudo pela região subungueal. Assim, o melanoma maligno com diferenciação
condróide, deve ser tido em consideração no diagnóstico diferencial de lesões acrais cartilagíneas. A observação cuidadosa da epiderme e a
identificação de um componente do melanoma in situ podem ser necessários para estabelecer um diagnóstico correto. Malignant melanoma can
present a wide variety of histopathological patterns, mimicking other malignant tumors. A number of variants have been described in addition
to the classic forms of melanoma, such as polypoid, verrucous, desmoplastic, myxoid, chondroid, ballooning cell, rhabdoid, animal type,
amelanotic, spitzoid, and nevoid.1 Divergent differentiation is a rare phenomenon and, when it occurs, can be missed by unwary pathologists
and lead to diagnostic uncertainty. The clinical significance of such aberrations is uncertain, as are their underlying mechanisms.
Cartilaginous change in the absence of osteogenic differentiation is extremely rare in malignant melanoma,2 being among the least frequent
of the wide range of melanoma histologic patterns.2 To date only 12 reported cases have shown cartilaginous differentiation devoid of
concomitant osseous areas.2-11 A 47-year-old woman presented with a painful subungual lesion on the right big toe which appeared one year
before as a hyperkeratotic lesion and treated with oral terbinafine, with no improvement. Twelve years ago she underwent laser therapy for a
lesion at the same location. A histopathological examination was not performed. Physical examination revealed a painful subungual nodule on
her right big toe. There was no regional lymphadenopathy. An excisional biopsy of the nodule was performed. Histopathological examination
showed an ulcerated tumor extending in a diffuse pattern from the epidermis to the inferior limit of the specimen. Rounded cells with
vesicular nucleus, scant cytoplasm, numerous mitotic figures, dyskeratotic and apoptotic cells were observed (Figure 1). Rounded cells with
vesicular nucleus, scant cytoplasm, numerous mitotic figures, and dyskeratotic and apoptotic cells (hematoxylin and eosin stain, x 40
objective) The presence of nests of large, bizarre chondrocytes embedded in a chondroid matrix was observed in around one third of the
lesion, strongly suggesting positivity for Alcian Blue (Figure 2). Nests of large, bizarre chondrocytes embedded in a chondroid matrix
(hematoxylin and eosin stain, x 40 objective) On the periphery of the specimen hyperplasia and acanthosis of epidermis were observed as well
as intracytoplasmic melanin pigment in small aggregates (Figure 3). Nests of atypical melanocytes were observed at the dermoepidermal
junction without evidence of pagetoid spread, and isolated atypical melanocytes were present in the upper dermis (Figure 4). Hyperplasia and
acanthosis of epidermis, intracytoplasmic melanin pigment in small aggregates (hematoxylin and eosin stain, x 10 objective) Nests of
atypical melanocytes at the dermoepidermal junction (hematoxylin and eosin stain, x 40 objective) Immunohistochemistry showed positivity of
the junctional component and of melanocytes in the upper dermis for S-100 protein and positivity of the tumor cells for HMB-45 (Figures 5,6
and 7). The cartilaginous component showed positivity for S-100 protein and for neuron specific enolase (Figure 8). We diagnosed melanoma
with cartilaginous differentiation. The tumor had a Breslow depth higher than 5 mm (Clark level V). Junctional component positivity for
S-100 protein (S-100 protein, x 40 objective) Melanocytes in the upper dermis positivity for S-100 protein (S-100 protein, x 40 objective)
Cellular area positivity for HMB 45 (HMB 45, x 40 objective) Cartilaginous area positivity for S-100 protein (S-100 protein, x 40 objective)
and for neuron specific enolase (NSE, x 40 objective) The patient subsequently underwent amputation of the distal phalanx of the big right
toe. Histopathological examination of the lesion confirmed the biopsy findings of malignant melanoma with cartilaginous differentiation,
with a Breslow thickness of 9,9 mm and a Clark level of V. Sentinel lymph node biopsy was also performed, which proved negative for tumor.
According to the TNM staging this malignant melanoma was T4b N0 M0, stage II B. Two years after surgery an ulcerated lesion at the same
location appeared. This was excised and proved by histopathological examination to be a local recurrence. The big and second toes were
amputated. This subsequent wider excision showed no residual melanoma. Neither local recurrence nor metastasis were observed during the
following three years of followup. There have been some reports of melanomas with pure cartilaginous differentiation, including primary
melanomas and metastatic melanoma. 2- 11 Eight cases of primary melanomas with cartilaginous differentiation have been reported.2,3,4-8 In
two of these cases the location was subungual on the toe, as in our patient. Other locations include nose, lip, shoulder, ankle and mucosa
(vagina, nasal cavity). All were amelanotic melanomas, with a lentiginous component present in the majority of them, and ulceration in five
cases. Although immunohistochemical studies were not documented in all the cases, those that were tested showed consistent positivity for
S-100 protein, and HMB-45 staining was variable. The four cases of metastatic melanomas with cartilaginous differentiation reported had more
variable features.5,9-11 The mechanisms underlying these heterologous differentiations are not well understood. As in our case, previous
trauma (laser therapy) was a common feature of the reported cases with cartilaginous differentiation.3,6,7,9,11 It may represent a form of
host response to injury, i.e. alteration of benign stromal fibroblastic cells to differentiate along cartilaginous or osseous lines.4
Although the exact mechanism of cartilaginous differentiation in melanoma devoid of concomitant osseous areas is not well understood either,
there have been recently speculative explanations have been advanced related to melanoma-inhibiting activity (MIA) factor, a soluble
autocrine growth factor, secreted by melanoma cell lines but not by normal melanocytes.2,8,10 Over-expression of the MIA factor might
contribute to the exceptional development of cartilaginous differentiation in melanoma, supporting the chondrogenic phenotype while
inhibiting osteogenic differentiation.2,8 The differential diagnosis of a cutaneous or soft tissue tumor exhibiting cartilaginous
differentiation is mandatory with other benign and malignant cartilaginous tumors, including malignant mixed tumor, chondrosarcoma,
osteosarcoma with extensive cartilaginous matrix, malignant chondroid syringoma, extraskeletal chondroma, chondroid syringoma,
myoepithelioma, parachordoma and myositis ossificans.2,4 When identifying a junctional melanocytic component or areas of conventional
melanoma it is important to diagnose melanoma with cartilaginous differentiation (as in our case). The immunohistochemical stains for S-100
protein, which is virtually positive in all cases, and for HMB-45, which is positive in the majority of cases, are also important elements
in the diagnosis of melanoma.6 The application of immunoperoxidase stains, including microphthalmia transcription factor protein, will also
assist in future in correctly identifying this rare melanoma variant.8 It has been impossible to attribute prognostic implications to this
rare melanoma variant due to the small number of cases. However, in the reported cases there were no deaths due to melanoma. Local
recurrence occurred in our case and in another case reported. 4 In summary, our report focuses on one case of an extremely rare type of
primary melanoma with cartilaginous differentiation, in the absence of osteogenic differentiation. It would appear that this unusual form of
melanoma has a predilection for acral location, particularly the subungual region. Therefore, malignant melanoma with chondroid stroma
should be given special attention in the differential diagnosis of cartilaginous lesions of the toes and fingers. Careful examination of the
overlying epidermis, and identification of an in situ component of melanoma, may be necessary in order to establish the correct diagnosis.
Study conducted at the Department of Dermatology, Santarém Hospital, EPE (HDS) - Santarém, Portugal. Financial support: None. Conflict of
interests: None.
