Congenital Hypertrichosis Lanugionsa is a rare autosomal dominant genetic disorder, with fewer than 50 cases reported in the literature. It
is characterized by excessive lanugo hair, sparing only the mucous membranes, palms and soles. It may be associated with other organic
abnormalities and should form part of the dermatologist's current knowledge. We discuss some aspects of the syndrome in question arising
from the case report of a 2-year-old female patient, black, with classic clinical presentation, with no other associated congenital
abnormalities. A hipertricose Lanugionsa Congênita é uma desordem genética rara, autossômica dominante, com menos de 50 casos descritos na
literatura. É caracterizada por pêlo lanugo excessivo, poupando apenas membranas mucosas, palmas e plantas. Pode estar associada a outras
anormalidades orgânicas, devendo ser de conhecimento do dermatologista. Discutiremos aspectos da síndrome em questão a partir do relato de
caso de uma paciente do sexo feminino, negra, 02 anos, com apresentação clínica clássica, sem outras anormalidades congênitas associadas.
The case described here refers to a female patient, black, 2-years-old, accompanied by her mother who reported the increase of hair in the
external ear and face of her baby since birth. At 5 months, the thin, light blond lanugo hair covered the entire face, armpits, groin and
lower limbs. The parent denied the presence of lanugo hair on the mucous membranes, palms and plants. The patient was born by cesarean
delivery at term and had had normal psychomotor development, but with delayed dentition. The dental units available were deformed. The
child's parents were second cousins. The mother denied the use of drugs or alcohol during pregnancy, as well as any family members with
similar signs or symptoms. On examination, the patient had long thin and light-colored hair on the face, especially on the upper lip and
mandibular regions, axillae, external genitalia, back and lower limbs (Figures 1 and 2 ). The presence of five abnormal dental units was
observed. The patient, showing no other associated anomalies, was diagnosed with Congenital Hypertrichosis Lanuginosa, and referred for
evaluation to the dentistry, genetics and ophthalmology clinics. Child with lanugo hair distributed over entire body, sparing mucosal, palms
and soles Detail of long lanugo hair in the axilla Congenital Hypertrichosis Lanuginosa (CHL) is a rare autosomal dominant disorder with
variable expressivity, characterized by excessive lanugo hair, sparing only mucous membranes, palms and soles.1 It may be associated with
other congenital abnormalities, mainly dental, but can also affect the ears, as well as being a symptom of glaucoma, pyloric stenosis,
skeletal disorders and, more rarely, mental retardation.2 CHL is a sporadic disease.3 Clinical manifestations occur because there is no
replacement of the lanugo hair by vellus or terminal pili.4 Some 50 cases have been reported in the literature, with an estimated incidence
of 1:10,000,000. The condition may get worse during childhood and puberty, causing serious social and aesthetic impacts. Aesthetic
correction of the excessive hair is the priority treatment, although the results are disappointing. Several depilatory procedures can be
used such as hair removal lasers, creams, razors etc, to improve the patient's appearance. Published reports exist of the use of laser
Q-switched Nd: YAG, effecting a reduction of 40-80% of the hair density, with little pain and low fluences.5 Management of CHL also includes
dental care, while genetic counseling is mandatory. The differential diagnosis embraces diseases related to hypertrichosis in childhood
including: universal hypertrichosis, Ambras syndrome, hypertrichosis linked X (Table 1).6 Differencial diagnosis of hypertricosis in
childhood Adaptated: Bolognia JL, et al. 20106 Recognition of the disease is important for screening other potential abnormalities and
instituting genetic counseling. Study conducted at the Federal University of Bahia Dermatology Center, Professor Edgar Santos Hospital
Complex (COMHUPES-UFBA) - Salvador (BA), Brazil. Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interests: None.
