Epithelioid sarcoma, first described by Enzinger in 1970, is a rare soft-tissue sarcoma typically presenting as a subcutaneous or deep
dermal mass in distal portions of the extremities of adolescents and young adults. In 1997, Guillou et al. described a different type of
epithelioid sarcoma, called proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma, which is found mostly in the pelvic and perineal regions and genital tracts
of young to middle-aged adults. It is characterized by a proliferation of epithelioid-like cells with rhabdoid features and the absence of a
granuloma-like pattern. In this paper we present a case of proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma with an aggressive clinical course, including
distant metastasis and death nine months after diagnosis. O sarcoma epitelióide, primeiramente descrito por Enzinger, em 1970, é uma
neoplasia de partes moles que ocorre principalmente nas extremidades distais de adolescentes e adultos jovens. Em 1997, Guillou e cols.
descreveram um tipo diferente de sarcoma epitelióide, que afetava frequentemente a região pélvica, períneo e áreas genitais de pacientes de
média idade, com exame histológico caracterizado pela proliferação de células com aspecto epitelióide. Neste trabalho, descreve-se caso de
paciente que apresentava há três meses duas lesões na região glútea, cujo exame histológico confirmou diagnóstico de sarcoma epitelioide do
tipo proximal, já com presença de metástases pulmonares e cerebrais e que foi a óbito nove meses após o diagnóstico. Epithelioid sarcoma,
first described by Enzinger in 1970, is a rare soft-tissue sarcoma typically presenting as a subcutaneous or deep dermal mass in distal
portions of the extremities of adolescents and young adults. It is a slowly growing neoplasm with a strong propensity for local recurrence
and, ultimately, metastasis.1 Microscopically, most tumors are characterized by a granuloma-like pattern: nodules of spindled and
epithelioid cells circumscribe areas of central hyalinization and necrosis. Fibrous histiocytoma-like and angiomatoid subtypes have also
been reported as less common histologic variants.2 In 1997, Guillou et al. described a different type of epithelioid sarcoma, called
proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma, which is found mostly in the pelvic and perineal regions and genital tracts of young to middle-aged
adults and is characterized by a proliferation of epithelioid-like cells with rhabdoid features and the absence of a granuloma-like
pattern.3 In 2009, a 25-year-old man was referred to the dermatology department with a 3-month history of a rapidly growing painful mass on
his right buttock which subsequently ulcerated. Skin examination revealed an erythematous infiltrated plaque and an ulcerated lesion with
fibrinous exudate in the gluteal region (Figure 1). There were no lymphadenopathies or other abnormalities on physical examination. A skin
biopsy of the ulcerated lesion revealed proliferation of pleomorphic epithelioid cells with eosinophilic cytoplasm and vesicular nuclei with
prominent nucleoli. Scattered rhabdoid cells characterized by abundant glassy cytoplasm, eccentric nuclei and prominent nucleoli were
observed throughout the lesion (Figure 2). Immunohistochemistry showed positivity for vimentin, cytokeratin, EMA, CAM 5.2, MIB and CD34 for
the latter marker positivity was focal confirming the diagnosis of proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma (Figure 3). Blood count and serum
biochemistry were unremarkable, and culture for mycobacteria, fungi and aerobic bacteria were negative. At the time of diagnosis, the tests
to define clinical staging, which included a computed tomography scan, revealed numerous metastatic lesions in the brain and lungs (Figure
4). The patient received chemotherapy at a reference oncology institute but died in the ninth month of follow-up. Two lesions located on the
gluteus: the first, which is 6 cm in diameter, is ulcerated and has elevated, infiltrated edges; the second, a plaque, is reddishpurple with
a fibrous consistency and 4 cm in diameter Epithelioid cells with moderate pleomorphism, eosinophilic cytoplasm and prominent vesicular
nuclei and scattered rhabdoid cells with hyaline intracytoplasmic inclusions displacing the nucleus eccentrically Epithelioid and rhabdoid
cells exhibiting positivity for vimentin and cytokeratin Tomography scans showing lung and brain metastases The clinical, morphological and
immunohistochemical features of the case described here are in accordance with those of proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma. Clinically, the
proximal-type variant differs from the classic form of epithelioid sarcoma in that it frequently occurs in older patients in a proximal/
axial often deep-seated location, preferentially involving the pelvic, perineal and genital regions, it is apparently more aggressive and
metastasizes earlier than the conventional distal-type epithelioid sarcoma4 Histologically, it tends to be characterized by predominantly
epithelioid cells, marked cytologic atypia, the frequent occurrence of rhabdoid features and the absence of a granuloma-like pattern.5 All
variants of epithelioid sarcoma co-express vimentin and cytokeratin. The histogenetic origin of epithelioid sarcoma is unknown, but a
hypothesis that it originates from mesenchymal cells undergoing epithelial differentiation has been favored.6,7 Differential diagnosis of
proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma includes epithelioid malignant peripheral nerve-sheath tumor, clear cell sarcoma, epithelioid
hemangioendothelioma, angiosarcoma, epithelioid leiomyosarcoma, synovial sarcoma, rhabdomyosarcoma and metastatic carcino ma. In an endemic
area for leishmaniasis, it should also be differentiated from an ulcerated lesion with infiltrated edges caused by leishmaniasis.8 In this
paper we present a case of proximal-type epithelioid sarcoma with an aggressive clinical course, including distant metastasis and death nine
months after diagnosis. Study carried out at the Tropical Medicine Foundation of the Amazon State (Fundação de Medicina Tropical Dr. Heitor
Vieira Dourado - FMT-HVD) - Manaus (AM), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
