Antibodies against exogenously injected insulin are common with insulin treatment but seldom have serious effects on blood glucose (1). In
insulin autoimmune syndrome (IAS), however, the insulin antibody causes hypoglycemia (2) in the absence of exogenous insulin treatment.
Here, we report a case of type 1 diabetes with insulin antibody, whereby the patient developed nocturnal hypoglycemia after desensitization
therapy for an insulin allergy. After receiving insulin therapy for 1 year, a 61-year-old man was admitted to our hospital because of an
insulin allergy and poor control of diabetes. He had an itchy eruption at the insulin injection site. At the time of admission, the patient
presented with an HbA1c level of 16.2% (154 mmol/mol); anti-GAD antibody 80.0 U/L (<1.5 U/mL); serum C-peptide level 0.01 ng/mL after
glucagon injection (fasting 0.67–2.48 ng/mL); and insulin-specific IgE 41.5 UA/mL (<0.34 UA/mL). He tolerated three daily injections of NPH
insulin because it produced a lesser reaction than other insulin or its analogs. In fact, almost all human insulin or insulin analogs caused
a skin reaction during the skin test, whereas protamine, zinc, and glycerol did not. We therefore diagnosed him with an insulin allergy and
initiated desensitization using an increasing dose of human regular insulin, according to the procedure reported by Hayashi et al. (3).
Following desensitization with up to 4.0 U of regular insulin, the patient’s skin reaction to insulin improved and he was able to tolerate
insulin injections four times daily. However, at the same time, he developed nocturnal hypoglycemia. We subsequently reduced his bed-time
dose of NPH insulin and finally stopped the treatment. We examined the binding kinetics of his insulin antibody using serum samples before
and after desensitization. Scatchard analysis revealed two binding components (high and low affinity), although the former (i.e., K1)
principally reflects each antibody's affinity as reported previously (4). Before desensitization, the affinity constants (K1) and binding
capacities (b1) for the high-affinity components were K1 9.19 × 10−2 (1/10−8 M) (insulin antibodies in patients with diabetes who are
treated with insulin, 1.45–7.11) and b1 199 (10−8 M) (insulin antibodies in patients with diabetes who are treated with insulin , 0.08–1.1)
(4), suggesting that the antibody had relatively low affinity (i.e., smaller K1) but high capacity (i.e., larger b1) for insulin binding.
Interestingly, after the desensitization therapy, K1 and b1 values changed to 4.37 × 10−4 (1/10−8 M) and 424 (10−8 M), respectively,
indicating that the binding affinity had been attenuated further. The kinetics after desensitization is comparable to that reported in
patients with IAS (4). In IAS, although the autoantibody binds to a large amount of insulin with a resulting high capacity, the insulin-
autoantibody complex is considered to become unstable and uncouples suddenly, leading to a hypoglycemic attack. Accordingly, in this
particular case, this shift in binding kinetics after desensitization may account for the nocturnal hypoglycemia. The increased
concentrations of blocking antibodies that inhibit IgE-facilitated binding of allergens to B cells are one mechanism for desensitization
(5). In our case, it is possible that insulin desensitization therapy induced these blocking antibodies with properties similar to those in
IAS. In summary, we observed hypoglycemia induced by insulin desensitization therapy. Desensitization therapy is the standard treatment for
patients with insulin allergy. It must be recognized, however, that the characteristics of the insulin antibody could be altered by
desensitization therapy to that of an antibody observed in IAS. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported.
All authors analyzed data and contributed to the discussion. T.K., K.S., K.I., T.M., and K.Y. wrote and edited the manuscript. K.T. and H.Y.
collected and analyzed data and contributed to manuscript preparation. K.S. is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had full access to
all the data in the study and takes responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
