Knowledge about how to support nutritional self-care in the vulnerable elderly living in their own homes is an important area for health
care professionals. The aim of this case study was to evaluate the effects of nutritional intervention by comparing perceived health, sense
of coherence, self-care ability, and nutritional risk in two older home-dwelling individuals before, during, and after intervention and to
describe their experiences of nutritional self-care before and after intervention. A study circle was established to support nutritional
self-care in two older home-dwelling individuals (≥65 years of age), who participated in three meetings arranged by health professionals
over a period of six months. The effects of this study circle were evaluated using the Nutritional Form For the Elderly, the Self-care
Ability Scale for the Elderly (SASE), the Appraisal of Self-care Agency scale, the Sense of Coherence (SOC) scale, and responses to a number
of health-related questions. Qualitative interviews were performed before and after intervention to interpret the changes that occurred
during intervention. A reduced risk of undernutrition was found for both participants. A higher total score on the SASE was obtained for one
participant, along with a slightly stronger preference for self-care to maintain sufficient food intake, was evident. For the other
participant, total score on the SASE decreased, but the SOC score improved after intervention. Decreased mobility was reported, but this did
not influence his food intake. The study circle was an opportunity to express personal views and opinions about food intake and meals. An
organized meeting place for dialogue between older home-dwelling individuals and health care professionals can stimulate the older person’s
engagement, consciousness, and learning about nutritional self-care, and thereby be of importance in reducing the risk of undernutrition.
Studies have shown that older home-dwelling individuals value maintaining their independence and caring for themselves,1–3 suggesting that
the elderly should be supported in independent living and self-care.1 It is also well known that old age may be accompanied by increasing
health problems, which are often of a chronic nature.4 Most older people in Western societies, including the Nordic countries, live in their
own homes, and often live alone.5 In these parts of the world, it is desirable for older people to live in their own homes for as long as
possible, and be supported by formal care, and locally based care if necessary.6 Living in one’s own home in older age requires that older
individuals take care of themselves.7 Orem8 describes self-care as the performance of activities that the person initiates and does on
his/her own behalf to maintain health and well-being, and includes activities of daily living, such as preparation of and eating meals.9
Studies have identified groups of older home-dwelling people as being at nutritional risk, and living alone is highlighted as a particular
risk factor.10–12 Further, it has been reported that the risk of undernutrition is increased in the elderly with chronic illness.13 Among
older home-dwelling people, risk of undernutrition is also related to perceived ill health,11,12 receiving help,10,11 perceived
helplessness, and inactivity.10 Older home-dwelling individuals identified to be at risk of undernutrition also report that their health
problems can impair their social and physical activity, that being active is important to their health and well-being, and activity
stimulates the appetite. Eating alone has been described as a challenging experience.3 Supporting nutritional self-care in the vulnerable
elderly living in their own homes is considered important by health care professionals and is an important area of research. When supporting
self-care in this age group, the elderly themselves are the key informants regarding their own health as well as contributors to their
health-related circumstances.14 This perspective may be based upon health professionals considering the views of the elderly to be the most
important when defining their own lives and needs, and letting them use their own words to represent themselves.15 Therefore, a meeting
place, designed as a study circle, for the elderly and professionals from the health care services to come together may be of value in
supporting daily nutritional self-care in older individuals. The aim of this case study was to evaluate the effects of a nutritional
intervention by comparing perceived health, sense of coherence, self-care ability, and nutritional risk in two older home-dwelling
individuals before, during, and after intervention, and to describe their experiences of nutritional self-care before and after
intervention. The specific research question was: how is it possible to support nutritional self-care and reduce nutritional risk in older
home-dwelling individuals? To realize the aim and answer the research question, this research was designed as a case study based on an
intervention. A case study design was considered to be important in studying the question of “how”.16 By focusing on the individuals and
using both qualitative interviews and quantitative self-report instruments, individual perspectives could be highlighted in the context of
daily living16 and provide meaningful data about nutritional self-care in daily life and the potential effects of intervention. Two men,
referred to here as Andrew and Ben, were recruited with the assistance of a local home care service in a small municipality in Norway, and
both met the inclusion criteria of being older than 65 years, able to participate in a study circle that included three meetings over a
period of six months, answer a questionnaire before, during, and after intervention, and take part in a qualitative interview before and
after intervention. In cooperation with the local home care service, a study circle was established to support and inform on nutritional
self-care with the aim of reducing nutritional risk in older home-dwelling individuals. Health personnel from the home care service, ie, a
nurse, an auxiliary nurse, and the leader of the kitchen at the local nursing home and day care center, were responsible for facilitating
three meetings of the study circle during the spring of 2012. The professionals responsible for the study circle were instructed and guided
by the first and second authors, by written guidelines, literature, and meetings. A lesson was also given about being older and the risk of
undernutrition. The content of the meetings of the study circle were primarily based upon the participants’ daily experience regarding food
and meals. They could express how they experienced nutritional self-care and received advice from professionals or each other. The
professionals also focused on special nutritional themes, including the preparation of attractive meals. Study circle meetings took place in
February, March, and May 2012 at the nursing home and the day care center. Each meeting lasted about 1.5 hours and included a meal. The
questionnaire consisted of the Norwegian versions of the following instruments: the Nutritional Form For the Elderly (NUFFE),17–19 the Self-
care Ability Scale for the Elderly (SASE),20–22 the Appraisal of Self-care Agency (ASA) scale,23 and the 29-item Sense of Coherence (SOC)
scale.24 In addition to the instruments, the questionnaire included health-related questions about perceived health, receiving help,
perceived meaningful life, helplessness, manageability, and comprehensibility, being active, perceiving a satisfying life, and adequacy of
food intake. Such questions could be responded to with yes or no. Questions about height and weight were included, along with background
characteristics such as age, civil status, type of residence, and previous occupation. The participants answered the questionnaire in
December 2011 (before intervention), in April 2012 (during intervention), and in June 2012 (after intervention). Data collection was
performed by the first author during home visits. The NUFFE was originally developed to identify older individuals at nutritional risk and
was tested in Sweden.17,18 The scale consists of items focusing on important factors related to being at risk for undernutrition, such as
dietary history, dietary assessment, and assessment of ease of obtaining food products, company at meals, activity, and number of
medications being taken. It is a summated ordinal scale and consists of 15 three-point items.17,18 The score on each item ranges from 0 to
2. The most disadvantageous option gives a score of 2 and the most advantageous option gives a score of 0. Maximum score is 30. All items
are displayed in the results. The instrument has been translated and tested in older Norwegian populations.19,22 Cutoff points <6,
indicating lower risk of undernutrition, ≥6, indicating medium risk of under nutrition, and ≥11, indicating higher risk of undernutrition,
were used.19 The SASE was developed as a self-reporting instrument to measure self-care ability among older persons. It has an attitude
scale format based upon a construct of self-care ability, including cognitive, affective, and behavioral components. The SASE is designed as
a summated ordinal five-point Likert scale and includes 17 items dealing with activities of daily living, well-being, mastery and volition,
determination, loneliness, and dressing. There are five response categories for each item, ranging from 1 (totally disagree) to 5 (totally
agree). Four items are negatively stated and have to be reversed when the scores are summated. The maximum score is 85.20,21 The original
Swedish version of the SASE has been translated into the Norwegian language, and this version was also found to have satisfactory
psychometric properties. A cutoff point ≤71 indicates lower self-care ability and ≥72 indicates higher self-care ability.22 The ASA measures
self-care agency, that can be described as engagement and activation of power in self-care actions25,26 and reflects the self-care theory of
Orem.8 It consists of 24 items and is a summated ordinal, bipolar Likert-type scale with five response categories for each item. The
categories range from 1 (totally disagree), to 5 (totally agree). The highest score is 120 and the lowest 24. Higher scores indicate higher
self-care agency. Because nine items are negatively stated, they must be reversed in the summation.25,26 The scale has been translated into
the Norwegian language.23 The SOC scale was developed by Antonovsky24,27 to reflect the construct of a fundamental attitude in the sense of
a dispositional orientation to life and includes three basic components, ie, comprehensibility, manageability, and meaningfulness. The scale
consists of the constructs of comprehensibility (eleven items), manageability (ten items), and meaningfulness (eight items). Each of the
items has a corresponding seven-point assessment scale, and there are 13 items that are negatively expressed and have to be reversed before
summation. The highest score is 203, and the lowest is 29. A higher score indicates a stronger sense of coherence.24 The qualitative
interviews were performed by the first author in the participants’ homes in February 2012 and June 2012. The same opening question was asked
on both occasions. The interviewer asked the participants to describe their daily food intake and meals. Follow-up questions on that theme
were then asked. The interviews lasted on average 40 minutes. The recorded interviews were transcribed verbatim. Changes in health-related
variables that occurred during and after the intervention were identified and described. The same procedure was used for weight. To evaluate
the effects of the intervention, total scores for each measurement, ie, NUFFE, SASE, ASA, and SOC, were calculated. Score for all the items
on the NUFFE before, during, and after intervention were registered. If changes occurred in the total score for the SASE, single items that
appeared with changed scores after intervention were identified and described. The transcribed interviews with each participant were
analyzed using the qualitative content analysis described by Graneheim and Lundman.28 The entire text was read first, then reread and broken
into meaning units. The meaning units were condensed, while retaining the core. Creating categories that shared commonalities was the next
step.28 Regarding the underlying content of the text,28 the content of the categories of both interview texts for each participant was used
as the basis for interpretation of changes regarding nutritional issues that occurred, from a self-care perspective. This research was
designed and performed in accordance with the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki29 concerning autonomy, justice,
beneficence, and nonmaleficence.30 The study was approved by the Regional Committee for Medical Research Ethics in Southern Norway (REK Sør-
Øst B, registration number 2011/1344B), and by the Norwegian Social Science Data Services (project number 28183). Andrew was in his early
seventies and lived alone in a flat. He received help from his family, and had home nursing and home help. Andrew was not in good health
before, during, or after the intervention. His life was not satisfying and he was not an active person before intervention. After
intervention, he reported that life was more satisfying and that he was an active person. A change also occurred after the intervention in
terms of perceiving lack of comprehensibility concerning all that happens in daily life. Ben was in his late seventies, and lived alone in a
flat. He did not receive help from his family, but did receive home nursing and home help. He perceived life as satisfying and he was in
good health before, during, and after intervention. However, he reported increasing health problems after intervention. He was an active
person before, during, and after intervention, but expressed a slight reservation regarding activity level after intervention. Measurements
on the NUFFE, SASE, ASA and SOC are presented for each participant in Table 1 as total scores for each instrument before, during, and after
intervention. Scores on items in the NUFFE are shown in Table 2 for Andrew and in Table 3 for Ben. With regard to changes in SASE items,
Andrew obtained higher scores after the intervention than before on items such as dental care (+1), adequate mobility (+1), strength (+3),
desire to manage alone (+2), and managing alone (+1). A decreased score appeared regarding being able to go to places that are not within
walking distance (−1). Ben obtained a moderately higher score after intervention on the item about desire to manage his own housekeeping
(+1). However, lower scores were obtained on several items, eg, being able to go to places that are not within walking distance (−1),
adequate mobility (−1), and safety when moving in his own environment (−2). Items concerning feeling satisfied with life (−1) and strength
(−3) also had lower scores after intervention. Measurements of height and weight for each participant before, during, and after intervention
are presented in Table 4. Andrew reported that he had lived with health problems for several years. He had to take several medicines that
interfered with his food intake, and he was not able to eat first thing in the morning. He had previously experienced a weight loss of
several kilograms. His appetite had decreased, but he said he had to eat. “There is not much I’d like, but I have to eat.” Further, his
particular health problems required an awareness of daily food intake and meals, and this was a challenge for him. “Everything that I enjoy
I am not allowed to eat.” Andrew also lived with health problems that were perceived as painful and limiting, and increasing oral health
problems were a challenge in his daily life and interfered with his food intake. Being able to obtain professional help for oral health
problems was important to him. However, working towards a sufficient and healthier food intake was particularly focused on in the second
interview. Andrew reported that making special effort regarding food choices in the morning was a positive experience. Family members also
gave advice regarding food choices and health. However, Andrew was able to prepare all his meals himself if he wanted, and considered
himself to be a good cook. If he needed advice, he could call on his extended family. He preferred home-cooked meals. But, because he was
living alone, he ate more fast foods. However, he considered that food did not taste good whether prepared carefully by himself or if it was
fast food. “It does not taste good irrespective of what I eat. This is also the case, even if I have prepared the food myself.” Andrew was
eating dinner every day, but not at set hours. He organized his meals as he pleased and did not give preference to specific times, nor sit
down at every meal. He referred to the meetings in the project and recalled that one of the health professionals and the other participant
had underlined the importance of having attractive meals. Further on, he mentioned that the health professional spoke in a comprehensible
way. When having increasing oral health problems, Andrew worked towards having an adequate food intake. He planned to go to the day care
center to eat dinner once a week when he had received treatment for his oral health problems. When the weather was fine, Andrew preferred to
take a morning walk around the neighborhood. He was aware that it was necessary to eat beforehand. He had a motorized wheelchair, but
slippery roads limited his mobility. However, living alone, he felt he could do what he wanted. He felt that to sleep on the sofa was okay.
If he became tired, he often preferred to rest. He developed headaches from watching television, and did not read. He had knowledge about
the many local activities available for older persons, and previously had been more active, but still visited the day care center often for
a cup of coffee. He had previously enjoyed travelling to a health care center abroad where he was able to be more mobile. Having regular
short visits from family members for a cup of coffee in the mornings was perceived as important support for facing the day. Others in the
family would visit him in the afternoons, and he could call the family if needed. Andrew also greeted other family members who usually
passed his residence in the mornings. If he did not, they called him. He had always experienced support from his family, and he perceived
that they still readily supported him. “And they continue to do that. Either they visit me, or I visit them.” Andrew had a strong sense of
local belonging and good memories, and was well known in his neighborhood, but wished to have more visitors. When his wife was alive, their
friends often came for coffee, but less so after her death; however, he still had friends to visit, and he met people on his trips to the
day care center. With his decreasing oral health, he preferred not to have company at mealtimes. Andrew reported being helped to feel safe
by daily visits from local health care personnel. In addition to his family members, health personnel could buy his groceries if there were
any barriers to him doing that himself, such as slippery roads. Andrew also reported that he could call in for dinner at the day care center
if he was sick. He had a safety alarm, and he was confident that he would get help at once if it was needed. He could also go to his doctor
or to the day care center when necessary. Facing each day as it came was considered to be a useful attitude to life. He was mostly
satisfied. If his life situation changed in the future, he was prepared to move to the local nursing home, which he knew well. Performing
daily activities, including food choices and meals, was based on varied preferences depending upon the actual situation. Health problems,
such as deteriorating oral health, chronic illness, and his medication regimen influenced his daily food intake. Reflection on possibilities
for organized meals was encouraged, including consideration of the nutritional information communicated in the study circle. Andrew had a
stronger preference for self-care in the maintenance of adequate food intake, despite his health problems. Ben experienced changes in his
life situation when his wife became seriously ill, and losing her some years ago resulted in a sense of insecurity. The simple act of
preparing meals together at home and having company at mealtimes had gone, and he experienced a sense of loneliness. Living alone was seen
as a challenge that had demanded rethinking his routines of daily living, so Ben had decided to increase his participation at the day care
center. “To sit back and stare out of the window was not my style. Therefore, I increased my participation there.” However, Ben had been
prepared for the fact that his life situation could change, and he felt that this had helped him to adapt to this change. Although he missed
his wife, when living alone he had only himself to take care of on a day-to-day basis. Ben considered it important to have an organized
daily program that included set times for meals and activities. Every day Ben ate a meal at the local health center, which also included
activity. Other meals he had at home at set hours. Organizing the days, including mealtimes, made life simpler for him. “My day is
complicated and simple, simple because I eat dinner every day at the day care center.” Having dinner on most days at the local health
center, Ben felt that he was eating wholesome food. He reported that the cook was actively engaged in preparing and serving food that, for
example, included fish several times a week. “The leader of the kitchen underlines the importance of eating fish, and I agree with that.
Fish dishes are served weekly up to three times, and also there is well tasting and varied food.” Dinner there also included dessert,
coffee, and cake, and Ben was pleased with the service provided. However, if he was having a bad day, Ben could ask for his dinner to be
delivered to his flat. Preparing other meals at home was simple, because he mostly prepared meals consisting of sandwiches, coffee, milk,
juice, and fruit. He bought his food at a local shop, and could walk the distance required and carry his groceries with the help of a
walker. Ben was aware of choosing food that tasted good, and appreciated being able to prepare attractive meals and having the time to enjoy
them. When he did not eat enough, he did not feel well. Ben had complex health problems and reported that these increasingly impaired his
mobility. He needed a wheeled walker when moving outside, but he could drive his car for a longer distance. Ben’s approach was to seek
professional help regarding his health problems, but also to accept that his mobility had decreased and that he needed to adapt accordingly.
However, he reported that his health problems did not impact negatively on his appetite. Ben considered that an important aspect of safety
in old age included living in a place where help was readily available if needed. Previously, he had used his safety alarm, and reported
that local health personnel came immediately. He also mentioned that he could call them and ask for a visit if necessary, which could
include having dinner brought to his home. Ben had mastered living alone. However, he spoke of the importance of being in contact with other
people. For him, it was important to eat dinner every day with other people at the health center. “To eat alone is a dreary business.” At
the health care center, Ben met people with similar experiences. These gatherings were important for his mental health, his engagement with
others, and the opportunity to help other people. His family did not live nearby. Belonging to a church was also a part of his social
network, but increasing health problems limited how often he was able to go to meetings there. Ben was aware of being active according to
his health limitations. He appreciated the three hours he spent every day at the health center, where he could help with setting the table
and washing the dishes. This was also a place where he could be helpful to others. At home, Ben spent time reading books and watching
television. Keeping abreast of news was important to him. Sometimes he took a trip in his car, but he felt that his desire to travel had
decreased in older age. He received regular help with housework, but preferred to do the more simple housework himself. Every day he did
physical exercises at home to maintain his mobility. Ben valued participating in the self-care project meetings. He considered these as an
opportunity to have a voice. “I have said what I wanted to say.” However, he would have liked to have a compendium containing the meeting
program. Ben reported that he was satisfied with his present daily life. His Christian faith provided safety regarding the future, and this
orientation also meant a change in how he considered other people and engaged with others. Ben felt that maintaining a balance between his
physical capacity and goals regarding daily activities including meals was important, but reported a deterioration in his mobility. His
health problems did not affect his appetite. The study circle was considered an opportunity to express his personal views and opinions about
food intake and meals in old age. However, he would have preferred to have a written compendium outlining the themes discussed in the study
circle. In this case study, we examined the effects and changes occurring in a nutritional intervention based on the concept of self-care.
The main question to be answered was how to support nutritional self-care and reduce nutritional risk in two older home-dwelling
individuals. The study circle intervention in the present study was primarily focused on the participants’ experiences of nutritional self-
care in their daily lives. An important source of information about nutritional needs and possible challenges of daily life in the elderly
is the elderly themselves,31 and to support self-care in older age, health personnel need to facilitate thought processes in the elderly.
Therefore, dialogue between the elderly and health professionals is important,32 and is feasible in a study circle. Further, it can be
argued that no knowledge can be gained without referring to consciousness,33 for which there is an opportunity within a study circle, which
may also be helpful when evaluating the changes and effects of an intervention based upon narratives and self-reported data. Andrew reported
that obtaining adequate nutrition in daily life was a problem. He described a complex situation regarding food intake and meals influenced
by chronic illness, substantial medicine intake, and decreasing oral health. He had suffered significant weight loss, and food did not taste
good. He also reported not being in good health, and before the intervention he was neither satisfied with this nor active. Nutritional
screening identified Andrew to be at risk of undernutrition. Chronic illness and polypharmacy are known to have a negative influence on
eating habits in older people.34 Inability to chew properly has also been reported to be a risk factor for undernutrition.35 However, it is
well known that being old and having nutritional problems is a complex issue, and may be related to somatic, psychic, and social problems.35
This should be borne in mind when evaluating the changes and effects of the intervention used in the present study. Andrew valued the
freedom to spend his days as he wanted and to take life day by day. He did not attach importance to having regular meals. Food restrictions
were reported as difficult, and spending time preparing attractive meals was not prioritized. However, Andrew did reflect on information
communicated in the study circle about spending more time preparing palatable meals. Of note, he valued dialogue with a health professional
who talked in a way he could understand, and an ability to do this may depend on the interpersonal skills of the health professional.14
Another advantage of the study circle was the opportunity to learn from others, and Andrew reflected on Ben’s experiences regarding food
intake and meals. Learning from others may be a fruitful way to be engaged and involved in self-care by learning how other people handle
similar problems.32 In the study circle, there was the opportunity to share stories about self-care, including food intake and preparation
of meals. Such stories may also serve as a map enabling a person to reflect on the past, the present, and what changes might be made in the
future.14 For example, Andrew had entered a more constructive phase regarding nutritional self-care during the intervention, including a
plan to have dinner at the day care center once a week. This positive process was confirmed by Andrew’s scores on the NUFFE, showing a
reduction in risk of undernutrition after intervention. However, Andrew’s body weight was measured to be relatively and consistently high,
although he reported weight loss before and after intervention. Going solely on the basis of weight, Andrew may well have been
overnourished, but the NUFFE scores showed a risk of undernutrition. This paradox is actually possible.36 Identifying undernutrition at an
early stage, including unintentional weight loss, among older persons with high body weight may be a challenge, but is important.36,37 After
the intervention, Andrew also reported being more active, and this would be a positive factor regarding nutritional self-care.3,10
Measurements of ability to self-care showed that Andrew had the potential to perform such activities. However, the item on the SASE with the
greatest increase in score after the intervention was about recognition of how little strength he had. It is also interesting that he
reported less understanding of what happened in daily life after the intervention. This self-knowledge may be of importance to Andrew’s
self-care in the future. Andrew also had a sense of safety which stemmed from being supported by his family. However, his scores on the SASE
indicated a stronger desire to manage alone. His decision to eat dinner at the day care center may be promising regarding his nutritional
self-care. Ben undertook activities of daily living that are in line with what studies have shown to be important regarding good nutritional
self-care. Ben was aware of his food choices and attached importance to having attractive meals. He also appreciated the social aspects of
eating dinner at the day care center, and valued being active and engaged with other people. It has been reported that social contact may
protect against nutritional risk38 and stimulate the appetite.3 Being active and engaged3 have also been found to be important in
nutritional self-care. Ben highlighted his social engagement at the day care center as important for his mental well-being, and this is
again consistent with the literature.39 Knowledge of self and one’s environment is considered to be of importance in effective self-care.8
Ben was aware of the balance between these aspects. However, he reported increasing health problems and decreasing mobility. His scores on
the SASE decreased after the intervention, in particular for items on mobility in the environment and physical strength. However, he
reported that his increasing health problems did not influence his food intake. After the intervention, slightly increasing body weight was
recorded. His NUFFE scores suggested a low risk of undernutrition, showing a slight decrease during and after intervention. To participate
in the study circle might have stimulated Ben’s ability to be engaged. Here, he had an opportunity to have a voice and address the themes he
considered to be important regarding food intake and meals, and to relate his experiences. Fenge15 underscored the importance of putting the
voice of older persons on the agenda and letting them speak for themselves, and this was particularly relevant for Ben in view of his
increased score on the SOC after intervention. A high SOC score might indicate a strong potential to invest engagement in what happens in
daily life.24 It can be argued that to be able to perform useful self-care activities, a person has to possess the relevant knowledge,40
which Ben was probably aware of when suggesting a written compendium containing the nutritional themes discussed. However, the other
participant referred to Ben’s experiences regarding preparing meals. It is possible that Ben gained a favorable position in the group.
Consequently, it is possible that his negative outcome regarding self-care ability was a result of unawareness of his decreasing health and
impaired mobility. For a case study, the goal is not to generalize the findings to a population, but rather to arrive at theoretical
propositions,16 which, in the case of the present study, concerns how to support nutritional self-care and reduce the risk of undernutrition
among the home-dwelling elderly. The results of this study indicate that an organized meeting place for dialogue between the home-dwelling
elderly and health care professionals can stimulate engagement, consciousness, and knowledge about nutritional self-care in older people,
and be of importance in reducing the risk of undernutrition. The authors are grateful to the informants and to health professionals who
contributed to this study. The study was supported by funds from two county councils, West Agder and East Agder, in southern Norway.
Disclosure The authors report no conflicts of interests in relation to this work. Total scores on the NUFFE, SASE, ASA and SOC before,
during, and after intervention for the two participants known as Andrew and Ben Abbreviations: NUFFE, Nutritional Form For the Elderly;
SASE, Self-care Ability Scale for the Elderly; ASA, Appraisal of Self-care Agency scale; SOC, Sense of Coherence scale. NUFFE items with
changes in response alternatives before, during, and after intervention, and items with stable higher scores for the participant known as
Andrew Abbreviation: NUFFE, Nutritional Form For the Elderly. NUFFE items with changes in response alternatives before, during, and after
intervention, and items with stable higher score for the participant known as Ben Abbreviation: NUFFE: Nutritional Form For the Elderly.
Measurements of height and weight for the two participants known as Andrew and Ben
