Hepatogenous diabetes is a common complication of liver cirrhosis (1). It develops gradually as a result of profound insulin resistance and
increased endogenous glucose production that unmask or lead to pancreatic β-cell dysfunction. Since the liver plays a major role in
maintaining glucose homeostasis, it is important to investigate whether liver transplantation (LT) could prevent or cure hepatogenous
diabetes in patients with liver cirrhosis. We report a case of 2-year diabetes remission in a 49-year-old Chinese female LT recipient
treated with tacrolimus who had previously been on intensive insulin therapy for 5 years. The patient was diagnosed with diabetes in July
2006 at the age of 43 years, when she presented to the clinic because of severe ascites and peripheral edema. Subsequent investigations
revealed the presence of hepatitis B with secondary liver cirrhosis, complicated by portal hypertension and esophageal varices. Her initial
HbA1c was 12.8% (116 mmol/mol), and the patient already had bilateral nonproliferative diabetic retinopathy. Intensive insulin therapy was
initiated (36 IU/day). At the 3-month follow-up, the patient’s overall glycemic control improved, as reflected by an HbA1c of 6.6% (49
mmol/mol) that further decreased and remained stable at >6% (42 mmol/mol) while on a basal-bolus regimen. Since January 2009, the diabetes
control had deteriorated, with an HbA1c of 7.6 (60 mmol/mol) to 8.4% (68 mmol/mol), along with a progression of diabetic retinopathy with
proliferative changes. Concurrently, the patient was under regular review by hepatologists. Additional medications included propranolol,
spironolactone, and tenofovir. In March 2011, the patient successfully underwent LT and was subsequently treated with steroids, tacrolimus,
and mycophenolate mofetil. Her glycemic control improved after prednisolone was discontinued. In July 2011, the HbA1c was 5.0% (31
mmol/mol). Because of recurring nighttime hypoglycemia, the doses of basal insulin were gradually decreased, and the overall insulin therapy
was further adjusted. Since January 2012, the patient has been completely off insulin/any antidiabetic medication while continuing her
antiviral (telaprevir) and combined immunosuppressive therapy (tacrolimus plus mycophenolate). The HbA1c level continued to remain good at
5.2 (33 mmol/mol) to 6.3% (45 mmol/mol). Since LT, the patient's kidney function has been stable, and her BMI had decreased from 27 to 24
kg/m2 after regression of ascites and peripheral edema. The cause of diabetes resolution in this case remains less well-understood. Although
current evidence suggests that immunosuppressive agents generally increase risk of diabetes after organ transplantations (2), our
observations strengthen previous findings (3,4) of hepatogenous diabetes resolution after LT in some of the cyclosporine-treated patients
with post–hepatitis B or C cirrhosis. It is important to point out that tacrolimus rather than cyclosporine is associated with
hyperglycemia, one of the main side effects ascribed to reduced insulin secretion (5). Surprisingly, and as shown in our case, successful LT
with subsequent tacrolimus therapy led to a complete diabetes remission in an insulin-treated cirrhotic patient. The findings suggest that
normalized glucose production and insulin sensitivity after LT may reverse β-cell dysfunction and thus cure hepatogenous diabetes in
patients with preserved β-cell function. Further prospective studies should be conducted to test this hypothesis. M.P. is supported by the
National Institute for Health Research through the Collaborations for Leadership in Applied Health Research and Care for Birmingham and
Black Country (CLAHRC-BBC) programme and by the Slovakian Diabetes Association/Lilly Diabetes Clinical Research Initiative Postgraduate
Academic Fellowship Programme for Young Researchers in Diabetes. S.T. is funded through the CLAHRC-BBC. The views expressed in this
publication are not necessarily those of the National Institute for Health Research, the Department of Health, NHS Partner Trusts,
University of Birmingham, or the CLAHRC-BBC Theme 8 Steering Group. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were
reported. M.P. drafted the initial letter. V.W., R.J., and S.T. provided care for the patient. All authors contributed to discussions that
resulted in the final letter. S.T. is the guarantor of this work and, as such, had full access to all the data in the study and takes
responsibility for the integrity of the data and the accuracy of the data analysis.
