This is a description of an unusual case of conjunctivitis caused by a trombiculid red mite, Neotrombicula autumnalis. The patient’s
condition improved only after its removal and with application of carbomer gel eye drops. There have been reports of increasing numbers of
severe cases of trombiculosis over the last 15 years particularly in Germany and a number of cases have also been reported in the United
Kingdom. Cases where trombiculid larvae feed on any region of the head or face of humans are unknown. In addition it is most likely the
patient acquired the infection from her pet cat and this is the first description of acquisition from this animal. Ceci est la description
d’un cas inhabituel de conjonctivite causée par un acarien Trombiculidae, Neotrombicula autumnalis. La condition de la patiente ne s’est
améliorée qu’après extirpation de l’animal et application de gouttes pour de gel pour les yeux au carbomer. Un nombre accru de cas sévères
de trombiculose a été rapporté ces quinze dernières années d’Allemagne et des cas ont aussi été rapportés du Royaume Uni. Les cas où les
aoûtats se nourrissent sur une région de la tête ou de la face sont inconnus. De plus, il est très probable que la patiente a acquis
l’infection de son chat, et ceci est la première description d’une transmission depuis cet animal. One of the most common red bodied mites
in Europe is Neotrombicula autumnalis which is known by many names such as the harvest mite, lepte autumnal and aoutat [1, 2]. There exist
over 1,200 species of trombiculid mite found widely distributed in many countries of which approximately 50 can cause disease in humans or
animals. They belong to the family Trombiculidae . Clinical presentations of Neotrombicula autumnalis include pruritic dermatitis described
as trombiculosis or Scrub itch. Previously, patients were rarely referred for dermatologist review unless symptoms were severe. Over the
last 15 years, cases of severe trombiculosis have increased in Western Germany and in the United Kingdom [2, 3]. A 72-year-old female from
Perthshire, Scotland, United Kingdom presented to the Outpatient Ophthalmology Clinic with a two-week history of a painful, gritty, red left
eye which failed to improve with a liquid paraffin eye ointment, Lacri-Lube. On examination, her conjunctiva was found to be mildly red and
she had normal visual acuity. On close inspection, a live mite was identified in contact with the left upper eyelid margin. The patient’s
past medical history included left eye cataract surgery twelve weeks prior, not thought to be of significance to her current presentation
and from which she had made a full recovery. She reported no history of travel or hill walking, lived independently and kept a pet cat. The
mite was photographed and removed without local anaesthetic. Photographic images were sent to the Scottish Parasite Diagnostic and Reference
Laboratory, Stobhill Hospital (Figure 1). On examination the mite’s mouthparts were attached and inserted into the tissue of the host. The
mite was identified as the six-legged larva of a red bodied trombiculid red mite, Neotrombicula autumnalis which is a common ectoparasite on
mammals in the United Kingdom. After removal of the mite, the patient was treated with Carbomer gel eye drops, namely Viscotears, and her
symptoms resolved.Figure 1.Neotrombicula autumnalis mite in contact with the left upper eyelid margin. Neotrombicula autumnalis mite in
contact with the left upper eyelid margin. Mite larvae, also known as chiggers, are most active from May to October . They hatch from eggs
in the soil after 10 days and climb onto grass or leaves and are barely visible without magnification. The six-legged larvae may be white to
bright red in colour and are 0.25 mm long . It is the larvae that are animal and human ectoparasites and they have a unique way of feeding
on human hosts . The larvae do not burrow but tend to attach in clusters . They pierce the skin using sharp mouthparts (chelicerae) and
tissue dissolving saliva is injected via a straw-like hollow tube (hypostome) . The larvae usually feed for approximately 2–10 days or
longer and then fall to the soil. Here, they develop into eight-legged nymphae then undergo another quiescent phase to become adults [1, 4,
5]. Adult and nymphal mites are soil dwelling predators which feed on other arthropods and their eggs . Feeding can result in a pruritic
dermatitis described as trombiculosis presenting with red macules, or wheals with papules 3–6 h after exposure . In severe cases
papulovesicles with regional adenitis can occur . Distribution of the lesions depends on the type of clothing worn and area of invasion by
the mites [2, 3]. Usually it is the ankles that are affected although any area exposed can result in dermatitis. There have been reports of
severe cases of trombiculosis over the last 15 years particularly in Western Germany and in the United Kingdom [2, 3, 6, 7]. Trombiculosis
is well recognised in areas where the harvest mite is common and cases are rarely referred to local dermatologists unless severe . Treatment
recommendations for trombiculosis are mostly supportive and have included topical agents such as methyl alcohol or camphor . Even common
household vinegar (5% acetic acid) has been described in one case as an effective agent to reduce infestations . Gamma benzene hexachloride,
oral antihistamines, topical steroids, vacuuming and washing clothes at 55 °C have been advised . As most cases are transmitted when humans
or animals come into contact with vegetation or soil that is infested, measures such as wearing protective clothing, avoiding walking
through long grass, soaking socks and trouser legs with benzyl benzoate, dimethyl phthalate (DPM) or diethyltoluamide insect repellents
(DEET) have also been recommended as ways to prevent infestation. Permethrin repellent has been used in the past however the active
ingredient is no longer available for this purpose in the European Union [1, 3]. Trombiculid mites, in particular those of the genus
Leptotrombidium, are known to be vectors of Tsutsugamushi disease (“scrub typhus”) in the South Pacific, Oceania and Asia . Neotrombicula
autumnalis larvae were not believed to transmit any infections however, a recent study suggests that they may have the potential to
transmit, via transstadial and transovarial routes, the bacterium Borrelia burgdorferi, the cause of human Lyme disease . In addition,
another recent study has suggested that Neotrombicula autumnalis may be a carrier of Anaplasma phagocytophilum (formerly Ehrlichia
phagocytophila) which causes human granulocytic anaplasmosis. This was previously believed to be transmitted by ticks only [5, 8]. Both
these infections can cause significant morbidity and fatalities. The numbers of these infections have also increased overall over the last
ten years . Further studies are needed to demonstrate transmission of these infections to hosts as diagnostic methods and treatment are
available. We believe that the patient acquired the mite from her cat as she had no history of travel, hill walking, gardening or contact
with long grass or vegetation. This is an unusual route of infection and only one previous publication has described trombiculosis acquired
from close human contact with pet dogs . Disease of the head or face is unknown and this is the first reported case of conjunctivitis caused
by a red bodied mite, demonstrating the importance of this differential diagnosis for those living in geographical areas in which the mite
is particularly abundant. We would like to thank the patient for allowing us to publish her experience and photograph. We would also like to
acknowledge the late Professor Huw Smith for his advice. Cite this article as: Parcell BJ, Sharpe G, Jones B & Alexander CL: Conjunctivitis
induced by a red bodied mite, Neotrombicula autumnalis. Parasite, 2013, 20, 25.
