Klinefelter syndrome (KS), with an incidence of 1 in 600 male newborns, is the most common type of X chromosome aneuploidy. Individuals with
KS are characterized by tall stature, decreased secondary sexual characteristics, small testicles, gynecomastia, and infertility. About 80%
of patients have the karyotype 47,XXY . An extra X chromosome as a sole acquired abnormality has also been reported in patients with several
hematologic malignancies such as acute lymphoblastic leukemia , AML [3, 4], and chronic neutrophilic leukemia . It has been suggested that
an extra X chromosome has high oncogenic potential, predisposing the carriers to leukemia. In practice, it is sometimes difficult to
distinguish whether the extra X chromosome is constitutional or acquired in a patient with hematologic malignancy. Here, we describe a
mosaic KS patient who was diagnosed with primary myelofibrosis, which progressed to AML. Because of the obscure clinical phenotype, we
originally reported his sex chromosome aneuploidy as an acquired anomaly secondary to his hematologic malignancy. A 62-yr-old man presented
with pancytopenia with sustained fatigue, poor general condition, and excessive weight loss (10 kg in 2 months). His complete blood count
revealed the followings: hemoglobin, 7.4 g/dL; leukocyte count, 3.45×109/L (absolute neutrophil count, 0.93×109/L); and platelets, 42×109/L.
In addition, analysis of the peripheral blood revealed 3% myeloblasts and leukoerythroblastic features. The patient had mild splenomegaly on
the abdominal computed tomography scan. For further evaluation, the patient underwent bone marrow aspiration and biopsy, and the results
suggested primary myelofibrosis (PMF), fibrotic stage, with diffuse bone marrow fibrosis that was evident on Masson-trichrome and reticulin
staining. The estimated cellularity of the bone marrow section was 100%. JAK2 V617F mutation analysis was negative. Conventional cytogenetic
evaluation of the peripheral blood lymphocyte culture using conventional G-banding revealed 2 cell lines, 47,XXY and 46,XY, with the
dominant karyotype being 47,XXY (Fig. 1). Clinical investigation revealed normal-sized testes, masculine pubic and axillary hair, no
gynecomastia, average height (174 cm) and weight (75 kg), and a normal serum testosterone level (0.75 µIU/mL; cut-off level, 0.35-5.5
µIU/mL). The patient was married and fathered a child, inconsistent with KS. Therefore, we reported the karyotype of 47,XY,+X as an acquired
anomaly rather than a constitutional abnormality. Two months later, the blasts in the patient's blood increased up to 47%, and marrow
examination revealed a packed marrow with myeloperoxidase (MPO)-positive blasts and diffuse fibrosis, as observed before. Flow cytometric
immunophenotyping revealed blasts positive for CD33, CD117, CD11c, CD64, CD56, and MPO. These findings were consistent with a diagnosis of
AML with monocytic differentiation. At the time of AML transformation, the chromosome analysis still showed the 47,XXY karyotype in all 23
metaphase cells analyzed. After induction chemotherapy, the patient achieved complete remission; however, the karyotype abnormality did not
disappear. To evaluate the persistent cytogenetic abnormalities, we further investigated lymphocytes and buccal mucosa cells using sex
chromosome-specific probes that targeted the α-satellite of the X centromere region and satellite III of Yq12 (CEP X, Spectrum Orange; CEP
Y, Spectrum Green) as described by the manufacturer (Abbott Molecular, Abbot Park, IL, USA). These probes were hybridized to interphase
cells and visualized by fluorescence microscopy using FISH. The number of individual cells was expressed as a percentage of the total number
of interphase cells analyzed. A specimen that contains >2.30% of cells with a signal pattern other than XY in male patients was considered
to have an abnormal complement of sex chromosomes. The FISH results for 200 interphase nuclei from buccal smear cells were as follows: 86%
XXY, 11.5% XY, and 2.5% XX (Fig. 2). With the exception of the XX signals, the proportions of XXY and XY signals in lymphocytes were similar
to those observed in buccal cells (91.2% and 8.8%, respectively). The XX signal pattern observed in the buccal smear cells was probably due
to the artificial loss of 1 Y chromosome during the FISH procedure or true mosaicism with 3 cell lines . Consequently, the patient was
diagnosed with mosaic KS. The classical phenotype of KS is widely recognized, but some affected individuals have no discrete clinical
features, especially in mosaic KS. They may have normal-sized testes and less severe endocrine abnormalities; further, they may be fertile
because of the presence of some normal clones of cells within the testes, as observed in our case . The variation in phenotype most likely
depends on the number of abnormal cells and their location in the body . Consequently, the disorder might be underdiagnosed; only
approximately 25% of adult men with KS are diagnosed , and the referring primary or secondary centers do not suspect 60% of KS patients to
have the disorder, despite previous clinical investigations . There are several reports of hematologic malignancies with unusual, sole X
chromosome aberrations [2-5, 11-13]. These observations suggest that we should be careful when concluding whether an abnormality is
constitutional or acquired, especially when the patient has a hematologic malignancy. To prevent misinterpretation, it can be helpful to
perform serial cytogenetic evaluation. If an initial abnormal karyotype returns to a normal female or male karyotype after chemotherapy,
then the initial cytogenetic abnormality represents an acquired aberration rather than a constitutional one. Careful clinical investigation
should be performed in every case, although general features should be regarded with caution because patients with chromosomal mosaicism
commonly show very few clinical symptoms, as described in this case. Another approach can be the use of complementary diagnostic methods,
such as interphase FISH. Although cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood lymphocytes is the gold standard to confirm KS, interphase FISH
for different somatic cell lines (for example, buccal cells, skin fibroblasts, or testicular biopsy samples) can be used to confirm
chromosomal mosaicism when cytogenetic analysis of peripheral blood reveals a normal male karyotype in a patient with suspected KS . FISH is
more accurate in determining the exact number of sex chromosomes, defining the cytogenetic status as mosaic or nonmosaic, and assessing the
ratios of cell populations in mosaicism . In conclusion, we described a mosaic KS patient who had PMF with AML transformation. Chromosomal
mosaicism was confirmed by additional FISH analysis of the buccal smear cells. We suggest that interphase FISH should be performed in
different somatic cells in order to determine the cytogenetic status of a patient with suspected KS, especially when an extra X chromosome
is the only abnormality. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. Karyotyping of peripheral blood cells
using conventional G-banding revealed an extra X chromosome. FISH analyses using sex chromosome-specific probes to the α-satellite of the X
centromere region (red signal) and satellite III of Yq12 (green signal) on a buccal smear specimen revealed 86% XXY and 11.5% XY. The
remaining 2.5% of cells had an XX signal pattern, probably due to the artificial loss of 1 Y chromosome in the FISH procedure or true
mosaicism with 3 cell lines.
