Sphingobacterium spiritivorum has been rarely isolated from clinical specimens of immunocompromised patients, and there have been no case
reports of S. spiritivorum infection in Korea to our knowledge. We report a case of S. spiritivorum bacteremia in a 68-yr-old woman, who was
diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia and subsequently received chemotherapy. One day after chemotherapy ended, her body temperature
increased to 38.3℃. A gram-negative bacillus was isolated in aerobic blood cultures and identified as S. spiritivorum by an automated
biochemical system. A 16S rRNA sequencing analysis confirmed that the isolate was S. spiritivorum. The patient received antibiotic therapy
for 11 days but died of septic shock. This is the first reported case of human S. spiritivorum infection in Korea. Although human infection
is rare, S. spiritivorum can be a fatal opportunistic pathogen in immunocompromised patients. Sphingobacterium species are non-fermentative,
gram-negative rods that are positive for biochemical tests such as catalase and oxidase production, but are negative for that of indole .
Sphingobacterium species were previously described as unnamed bacteria (part of Centers for Disease Control and Prevention group IIk).
Holmes et al. [2, 3] proposed the genus name Flavobacterium for the bacteria, while in 1983, Yabuuchi et al. first proposed the name
Sphingobacterium for the genus. The genus Sphingobacterium was created to classify organisms that contain large amounts of
sphingophospholipid compounds in their cell membranes, and have other taxonomic features that distinguish them from Flavobacterium species .
Sphingobacterium species have usually been isolated from soil, plants, foodstuffs, and water sources, but the isolation of the species from
human clinical specimens has been rarely reported worldwide . Furthermore, Sphingobacterium spiritivorum have been rarely isolated from
clinical specimens of immunocompromised patients, and there have been no case reports of S. spiritivorum infection in Korea to our
knowledge. We report a case of S. spiritivorum bacteremia in a patient, who had undergone chemotherapy for acute myeloid leukemia. A 68-yr-
old woman was admitted to our hospital for dyspnea that had lasted for 7 days. She had no history of smoking or pulmonary diseases. A
physical examination did not find lymphadenopathy or organomegaly. An initial complete blood cell count showed the following results:
hemoglobin, 11.3 g/dL; white blood cell counts, 2.86×109/L (neutrophils, 40%; lymphocytes, 57%; and monocytes, 3%); platelet counts,
47×109/L. A peripheral blood smear revealed pancytopenia with no leukemic blasts. A bone marrow (BM) examination was performed to evaluate
pancytopenia. The BM aspirate smears and cytochemical staining showed increased myeloblasts (40%) and other myeloid precursors. The patient
was diagnosed with acute myeloid leukemia, not otherwise specified, based on the 2008 WHO classification system . She received chemotherapy
of cytarabine 160 mg and idarubicin 20 mg for 3 days, and idarubucin 20 mg for 4 days. One day after the chemotherapy ended, her body
temperature increased to 38.3℃. Her blood pressure, pulse rate, and respiratory rate were 90/70 mmHg, 110/min, and 20/min, respectively. Her
C-reactive protein (CRP) level increased to 6.31 mg/dL, and her procalcitonin level was 0.08 ng/mL (reference range: <0.05 ng/mL). Four sets
of blood cultures were collected: 2 sets from peripheral veins and 2 sets from the central venous catheter. The patient received empirical
antibiotic therapy with intravenous cefepime (2 g every 12 hr). After 1 day of incubation, gram-negative bacilli grew in an aerobic culture
bottle that contained the culture from the central venous catheter. After 2 days of incubation, Gram-negative bacilli also grew in an
aerobic culture bottle containing the culture from the peripheral vein (Fig. 1A). The positive culture broth was inoculated onto a blood
agar plate (BAP) and a MacConkey agar plate (MAC) and incubated for 48 hr at 37℃ with 5% CO2. Non-hemolytic, light yellow-colored colonies
grew on the BAP (Fig. 1B). A few colonies also grew on the MAC. Catalase and oxidase tests were positive, but the indole test was negative.
The organism was identified as S. spiritivorum with 98.0% probability using the Vitek 2 Gram-Negative Identification card (BioMérieux inc.,
Marcy-l'Etoile, France). To confirm the identity of the isolate, 16S ribosomal RNA (rRNA) sequencing analysis was performed. InstaGene
Matrix (Bio-Rad Laboratories, Hercules, CA, USA) was used to extract the bacterial genomic DNA, and the first 500 base pairs on the 5' end
of the 16S rRNA gene were amplified and sequenced using MicroSeq 500 16S rDNA Bacterial Identification PCR and Sequencing Kits (Applied
Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). The sequencing product was analyzed on a 3130 Genetic Analyzer (Applied Biosystems) according to the
manufacturer's instructions. The resulting sequence of the patient-derived isolate was compared with sequences stored in GenBank
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank), EMBL (The European Molecular Biology Laboratory, http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl), RDP-II (The Ribosomal
Database Project, http://rdp.cme.msu.edu), and EzTaxon (http://www.eztaxon.org) databases. The percent identity between the isolate from the
patient and its closely related Sphingobacterium species of the 4 databases are shown in Table 1. The GenBank and RDP-II databases showed
that the 16S rRNA gene sequence of the isolate from the patient was 100% homologous with that of S. spiritivorum strain NCTC 11386
(Accession number: GenBank, NR044077.1; RDP-II, S000752320). The EMBL and EzTaxon databases showed that the 16S rRNA gene sequence of the
isolate from the patient was 100% homologous with that of S. spiritivorum strain ATCC 33861 (Accession number: EMBL, ACHA02000013; EzTaxon,
ACHA01000008). The isolate from the patient showed percent identity of >99% with S. spiritivorum and >0.8% separation from other species.
Thus, the isolate was confirmed to be S. spiritivorum . For phylogenetic analysis, the resulting sequence was compared with those of
reference strains of the most closely related Sphingobacterium species present in the GenBank databases. A phylogenetic tree was constructed
by the neighbor-joining method using the Microseq 500 bp 16S rRNA sequences (Fig. 2). Antimicrobial susceptibility was tested using the
AST-N132 card from the Vitek 2 system (BioMérieux). The isolate was susceptible to cefepime, ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, meropenem,
minocycline, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole; had moderate susceptibility to cefotaxime, ceftazidime, imipenem, and ticarcillin-clavulanic
acid; but was resistant to amikacin, aztreonam, colistin, gentamicin, piperacillin, piperacillin-tazobactam, ticarcillin, and tobramycin.
The central venous catheter was removed. The antibiotic regimen was changed from cefepime to ciprofloxacin, because nephrotoxicity was
suspected to be due to increased blood urea nitrogen and creatinine levels. After 3 days, the patient's fever subsided. Subsequent blood
culture tests were negative for S. spiritivorum and any other microorganism. However, on the fifth day of ciprofloxacin therapy, she
developed a fever again and her general condition worsened. On the eleventh day, she died of septic shock. Sphingobacterium species are non-
fermentative, non-motile, non-spore-forming aerobic gram-negative bacilli. They produce catalase, oxidase, and urease . Sphingobacterium
species grow on both BAP and MAC [2, 3]. Colonies are yellowish, circular, slightly convex, smooth, opaque, and non-hemolytic on BAP after 2
days of incubation [2, 3]. To date, 15 species, including S. anhuiense, S. antarcticus, S. bambusae, S. canadense, S. composti, S.
daejeonense, S. faecium, S. heparinum, S. kitahiroshimense, S. multivorum, S. piscium, S. shayense, S. siyangense, S. spiritivorum, and S.
thalpophilum, have been described in the genus Sphingobacterium [4, 8-17]. Sphingobacterium species are usually isolated from soil, water,
and plant material, and only a few case reports of human infections caused by the species have been published . Previously reported
Sphingobacterium species isolated from human clinical specimens were S. multivorum and S. spiritivorum. To date, 7 cases of S. multivorum
infection have been reported worldwide in relation to septicemia [5, 18-20], peritonitis , respiratory tract infection , and necrotizing
fasciitis . Only 3 cases of S. spiritivorum infection have been reported worldwide . The present case and previously reported cases are
compared in Table 2. In 2002, Marinella first described a case of cellulitis-associated sepsis caused by an S. spiritivorum infection. In
2003, Tronel et al. reported a case of S. spiritivorum bacteremia. In 2005, Kronel et al. reported a case of cellulitis-associated sepsis
caused by S. spiritivorum from the water reservoir of a steam iron. In the present case, the patient was in an immunosuppressed condition
due to the chemotherapy to treat acute myeloid leukemia. The patient was diagnosed with a catheter-related blood-stream infection because
the time interval of positive blood culture signs from those between the peripheral vein and central venous catheter cultures was more than
2 hr. The source and transmission route of the S. spiritivorum infection in this case may have been a skin entry site of an intravascular
device or a subcutaneous path of the catheter that had been in a close proximity with the natural habitats of this organism. The 16S rRNA
sequencing analysis can be a useful and definitive method particularly for the identification of clinically significant bacterial isolates
with ambiguous biochemical profiles or of rarely encountered bacterial species [27, 28]. We confirmed the identity of the blood isolate,
first identified biochemically as S. spiritivorum, by 16S rRNA sequencing analysis. Sphingobacterium species are generally resistant to
aminoglycosides and polymyxin B, but are susceptible to quinolones and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole in vitro. Susceptibility to β-lactam
antibiotics is known to vary . In 2009, Lambiase et al. reported that 13 S. multivorum and 8 S. spiritivorum isolates from sputum samples in
332 patients with cystic fibrosis were resistant to aminoglycosides, but susceptible to quinolones and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. They
also found that S. multivorum isolates were resistant to all β-lactams, whereas the S. spiritivorum isolates were susceptible to
ceftazidime, piperacillin, and carbapenems. The isolate of this case was susceptible to cefepime, meropenem, minocycline, as well as
ciprofloxacin, levofloxacin, and trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole. This is the first reported case of human S. spiritivorum infection in Korea,
which shows that S. spiritivorum can be a fatal human opportunistic pathogen in immunocompromised patients, despite human infection being
rare. This work was supported by a 2-Year Research Grant of Pusan National University. No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this
article were reported. (A) Gram-negative bacilli from smear preparations of the positive blood cultures (Gram stain, ×1,000). (B) Yellow-
colored colonies of Sphingobacterium spiritivorum on a blood agar plate. Phylogenetic relationships of the isolate from the present patient
and related Sphingobacterium species, constructed by the neighbor-joining method by using the Microseq 500 bp 16S rRNA sequences. All names
and accession numbers are given as cited in the GenBank database. The tree was drawn with branch length as the evolutionary distances. The
scale bar length of 0.01 indicates 1% sequence distance. Sequence comparison between the isolate from the patient and its most similar
species Database: GenBank (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/genbank), EMBL (The European Molecular Biology Laboratory,
http://www.ebi.ac.uk/embl), RDP-II (The Ribosomal Database Project, http://rdp.cme.msu.edu), and EzTaxon (http://www.eztaxon.org). Cases of
Sphingobacterium spiritivorum infection Abbreviations: M, male; F, female; BAL, bronchoalveolar lavage; PR, present report; NA, not
available.
