A 60-year-old lady with history of reflux disease and breast cancer status post-lumpectomy and lymph node dissection followed by
chemotherapy and now in remission, was admitted with progressively increasing nausea and vomiting of 2 months duration. She also described
episodic epigastric abdominal pain, which increased on food intake and led to vomiting, which brought her instant relief. She had lost about
80 lbs of weight during her chemotherapy, which stabilized for few months but was now again falling because of her inability to eat. There
was no alteration in bowel habits, fever or any other associated symptoms. She had two previous admissions for similar problems at a local
hospital where symptomatic relief was achieved with dobhoff tube placement. She had been tolerating the tube feeds well, however, for last 2
days her symptoms reappeared raising concern of obstructed dobhoff and hence a gastroenterologist was consulted for endoscopic evaluation.
Her blood-work was normal. Barium swallow showed extrinsic compression of the 3rd portion of duodenum, at the level of superior mesenteric
artery (SMA) crossing, causing partial obstruction as barium passes through the 3rd to 4th portion [Figure 1]. Computed tomography (CT) scan
was obtained which was diagnostic [Figure 2]. Esophagogastroduodenoscopy revealed a patent 3rd part of duodenum. Barium swallow: Extrinsic
compression of the 3rd portion of duodenum, at the level of superior mesenteric artery crossing, causing partial obstruction as barium
passes through the 3rd to 4th portion An aorta-SMA angle of less than 25° is considered diagnostic of SMA syndrome Q1. What is the
diagnosis? This CT image is the classical presentation of SMA syndrome. The normal angle between the aorta and SMA is 38-65°, but in SMA
syndrome the angle is narrowed which results in compression of 3rd part of duodenum as it traverses between aorta and SMA causing functional
obstruction. An aorta-SMA angle of less than 25° is considered diagnostic, in adjunct to shortened aorto-mesenteric distance (2-8 mm). There
may be several causes for decrease in this angle, including congenital abnormalities, but the most noteworthy is loss of intra-abdominal
adipose tissue, which in healthy individuals prevents duodenal compression by maintaining distance between aorta and SMA. Patients with
severe weight loss, irrespective of the cause, suffer from loss of this intra-abdominal fat and hence narrowing of the aorta-SMA angle. This
is commonly seen in patients with malignancies, chronic medical conditions like malabsorption, and wasting syndromes like AIDS. It has also
been reported with profound weight loss after bariatric surgery. A high-index of suspicion is the key to diagnosis of this relatively rare
but important condition. Treatment approach is usually conservative and includes nutritional support via naso-jejunal tube or total
parenteral nutrition, with a hope of increasing body weight to restore the aorta-SMA angle. This approach is advocated in pediatric patients
but often fails in adults with chronic conditions, who need surgical intervention eventually. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest:
None declared.
