Metronidazole is a widely used antimicrobial usually prescribed by many specialist doctors for a short duration of 10-15 days. Prolonged use
of metronidazole is rare. The present case is of a patient who used the drug for 4 months and developed peripheral neuropathy, convulsions,
and cerebellar ataxia. He was treated with diazepam and levetiracetam. The patient recovered completely following discontinuation of
metronidazole. Metronidazole is a nitroimidazole antiprotozoal drug used in different indications. General practitioners use the drug for
control of amoebiasis, giardiasis, and trichomonas infection. Surgeons, gynecologists, dental surgeons, and physicians use it to control
anaerobic organisms. Neurologists use metronidazole in amoebic infections of nervous system and also in treating meningitis. It is also used
controlling pseudomembranous colitis caused by clostridium difficile and for control of Helicobacter pylori causing gastric ulcer. The gel
preparation is use in the treatment of dermatological conditions such as, rosacea and fungating tumor. It is used as a radiosensitizer by
oncologists while treating malignancies. Often the use of metronidazole is not associated with any serious adverse effects except mild
change in taste, nausea, and occasional hypersensitivity reactions following intravenous use. The drug can interact with alcohol leading to
severe reactions and sometimes sudden death. It also interacts with some antidepressant drugs, especially, selective serotonin reuptake
inhibitors leading to “serotonin syndrome.” Prolonged use can result in peripheral neuropathy. We report a case of prolonged metronidazole
administration resulting in seizures and cerebellar ataxia. A 31-year-old male patient, carpenter by occupation was admitted to the hospital
on 25-01-2012 for instability of gait since 1 month duration. There was also slurring of speech since then. There was a history of tingling
and numbness of both lower limbs, which had gradually ascended up to the knees for the past 1 month. The footwear used to slip off his feet
while walking. Because of the numbness of the feet and the in coordination he was dependent on the family members for most of his daily
activities. He experienced clumsiness while buttoning his shirt and mixing the food was also observed. Tremulous and overshooting of hand
while eating, food was observed. The patient had a generalized tonic-clonic seizure in the hospital, on the day of admission. There was a
past history of 3 seizures 3 weeks earlier, on 15-12-2011 however, he was not evaluated at that time and was not on any antiepileptic
medication at the time of admission. He was not a known epileptic before starting the anti-amoebic medication. There was a history of weight
loss of 11 kg in the past 4 months. He was admitted to the gastroenterology unit of the hospital 4 months ago, where he was diagnosed to be
suffering amoebic liver abscess. The liver abscess was drained twice in 15 days’ time and he was administered metronidazole infusion in the
hospital at that time and he was asked to stop alcohol. As the abscess was resolving, he was advised to continue metronidazole tablets 400
mg 5 tablets daily for a long period for another 2 weeks. Patient came for review after nearly 3 months with diarrhea. The patient was
taking metronidazole for nearly 4 months before admission. In the last 1 month, Ornidazole 250 mg + Diloxanidee furoate 200 mg twice daily
were added for control of diarrhea (without the knowledge that he was also taking metronidazole), The latter combination was taken for 3
weeks and discontinued, thereafter since the patient could not afford it. On examination, he was alert and co-operative; there were no
cranial nerve deficits. Speech was slurred with a scanning character. There was hypotonia in all 4 limbs. The muscle power on medical
research council (MRC) grading scale was normal except minimal weakness of toe extensors bilaterally. The plantar reflexer were flexor, deep
tendon reflexes were normal. There was intention tremor, dysmetria, dysdiadochokinesia in both upper limbs. In-coordination was noted in
both upper and lower limbs. He was unable to stand on a narrow base. The gait was ataxic and he was unable to walk tandem. There was
impairment of all modalities of sensation in both lower limbs below the knees. The patient was investigated for his complaints. The
laboratory work-up showed total leucocyte count of 8600/Cu mm with normal differential count. Platelets were adequate on smear and the count
was 230,000/Cu mm. Random blood glucose was 143 mg/dl, blood urea was 37 mg/dl, and serum creatinine was 1.2 mg/dl. Liver function tests
were normal. An ultrasound examination of the abdomen was normal, and the abscess had resolved. Nerve conduction study of the limbs
suggested a length dependent axonal sensorimotor neuropathy. X-ray chest and electrocardiogram ruled out any cardiac involvement. Magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) scanning of the brain showed faint hyper-intense signals on T2 and FLAIR imaging from the dentate nucleus
bilaterally more prominent on the left side [Figures 1-3]. There was also hyper-intense signal in the splenium of corpus callosum. FLAIR
magnetic resonance imaging images showing hyper-intense lesion in the dentate nucleus (white arrow) Axial view Faint T2-hyper-intense
lesions in dentate nuclei of cerebellum axial view and sagittal view On the day of admission, the seizures were controlled with diazepam. He
was started on an anti-epileptic drug, levetiracetam. A diagnosis of post-infectious immune mediated disease like acute disseminated
encephalomyelitis (ADEM) was considered initially as the seizures and ataxia followed a diarrheal illness. He was given one bolus of high-
dose methylprednisolone as part of treatment for ADEM. When the MRI did not reveal typical lesions of ADEM, the history and clinical
findings were reviewed. Metronidazole was suspected to cause the adverse reaction and was discontinued. The patient was discharged after 7
days and followed-up after 10 days. Dysarthria and ataxia had resolved. There were no more seizures. Levetiracetam was also discontinued.
The sensory symptoms in the lower limbs were persisting; however, he was able to walk independently. Prolonged use of metronidazole 4 months
is rare. It is the drug of choice for amoebic liver abscess. In endemic areas prolonged treatment may be necessary, but never for more than
3 weeks. in vivo resistance to metronidazole has not been reported. Secnidazole or Ornidazole may be substituted for metronidazole however,
there is no indication for use of two drugs together. A luminal amoebicidal like diloxanide furoate agent may be administered to eradicate
the intestinal carriage after the amebic liver abscess has been treated with one of the above tissue amebicides. Alcohol as a cause of the
cerebellar ataxia in the present case was also considered but was excluded as the patient had discontinued alcohol nearly 3-4 months before
the onset of ataxia. The clinical scenario, imaging appearances of hyper-intense signal in the cerebellar dentate nuclei and splenium of the
corpus callosum, and rapid resolution of dysarthria and ataxia following discontinuation of the offending drug suggest that metronidazole is
the cause of the adverse drug reaction. Usual adverse effects of metronidazole include nausea, headache, and metallic taste. Abdominal
cramps, vomiting, diarrhea, and dizziness also may occur. Dark urine may occur from one of the metabolites of the drug. The most serious
side effects of metronidazole involve the nervous system. There can be acute encephalopathy, seizures, headache, dizziness, syncope, ataxia,
dysarthria, hallucinations, agitation, disorientation, and insomnia. Aseptic meningitis and optic neuropathy are also described. Reversible
optic neuropathy was described after 8 months use of metronidazole by McGrath et al. Prolonged oral administration of metronidazole has been
associated with peripheral neuropathy, which probably is related to the dose and duration of therapy. Mostly a dose of 1000-2400 mg/day for
at least 30 days or a total dose of 50 g can result in neuropathy. Patients taking large doses in a short time for acute infection may also
develop such neuropathy. Axonal degeneration of both myelinated and unmyelinated fibers can occur, with slow improvement after the agent is
stopped. The mechanism may involve deoxyribonucleic acid binding. It is a length dependent neuropathy generally seen in the lower limbs
first. Neuropathy may persist even after the drug is discontinued, for a few more weeks. Harati Y et al and Mulcahy et al. described
patients with dysarthria and ataxia who were shown to be having MRI abnormalities in the form of increased signal intensity in the dentate
nuclei of the cerebellum bilaterally on T2-weighted and FLAIR images. Gadolinium contrast did not show any enhancement in these lesions and
the lesions resolved several weeks after discontinuing metronidazole. An analysis of the case report suggests that the present case is an
uncommon Adverse drug reaction (ADR) (Type 3 variety of adverse drug reaction) that occurs on long term exposure of the drug and is dose
related. Causality analysis using Naranjo's scale showed that metronidazole is the probable cause of the adverse reaction (score = 8). Thus,
metronidazole when judiciously used is useful in management of amebiasis, both hepatic and intestinal forms. However, when inadvertently
administered for longer periods can lead to neurotoxicity. There can be seizures, cerebellar ataxia or length dependent peripheral
neuropathy. The neuropathy worsens as the total dose consumed increases the recovery may be incomplete even after discontinuation of the
offending drug. We would like to thank Dr. Moin Don, Pharmacovigilance advisary and consultant for his guidance and support. Source of
Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
