Adverse effects due to use of fibrates often relate to the skeletal muscle, kidneys, or liver. Rhabdomyolysis is a most serious potential
adverse effect. We present a case of resumed fenofibrate induced rhabdomyolysis complicated with acute renal failure. Fibrates, a wide
variety of fibric acid derivatives, are commonly used to treat dyslipidemia and hypertriglyceridemia. Adverse effects due to the use of
fibrates affect the skeletal muscle, kidneys, or the liver. Although rare, the most serious potential adverse effect is rhabdomyolysis.
Rhabdomyolysis is defined as a syndrome of skeletal muscle cell damage that leads to the release of toxic intracellular material into the
systemic circulation. Reports of rhabdomyolysis associated with fenofibrate therapy are few. We present here a case of rhabdomyolysis
complicated with acute renal failure, caused by resuming fenofibrate therapy after discontinuation of the drug for a short period of time. A
51-year-old female patient with generalized muscle weakness, fatigue, and dark urine was admitted to the out-patient clinic of our hospital.
The medical history revealed that she was on fenofibrate therapy (initial dose of 250 mg/day) for 2 years for her hypertriglyceridemia. In
Turkey, fenofibrate are marketed as capsules of 250 mg or 267 mg micro pellets which make titration of the drug impossible. She neglected a
refill of the initial prescription and ceased her therapy with fenofibrate for a month. Her laboratory analysis revealed a high triglyceride
level and her doctor prescribed the same brand of fenofibrate with the same dosage (250 mg/day) two weeks before she was admitted to our
hospital. Patient also had associated Hypertension treated with 5 mg/day of ramipril since 5 years. On Physical examination, she had
disclosed 3/5 reduced muscle strength in her upper left extremities, 2/5 in the lower extremities reduced muscle strength with reduced deep
tendon reflexes. No other pathology was detected. Laboratory findings at presentation were as follows: Creatine kinase:9627 IU/L (normal:
33-211 IU/L), aspartate aminotransferase: 188 IU/L (normal: 7-38), alanine aminotransferase: 68 IU/L (normal: 7-35), lactate dehydrogenase:
785 IU/L (normal: 80-245), serum creatinine: 1.49 mg/dL (normal: 0.6-1.2), blood urea nitrogen: 56 mg/dl (normal: 8-23). No other abnormal
laboratory findings were found [Table 1]. A complete ultrasound of the abdomen was normal. Rhabdomyolysis with acute renal failure in a
patient treated with fenofibrate The case was diagnosed as rhabdomyolysis complicated with renal failure, secondary to use of fenofibrate.
Fenofibrate therapy was withdrawn; fluid resuscitation, and urine alkalization were performed and no hemodialysis was required. The
patient's complaints and laboratory abnormalities were resolved at day 7 after hospitalization. She was discharged and monitored as an
outpatient [Table 1]. As with statins, fibrates are well-tolerated by most people. The most common reported adverse effects of fibrates have
been gastrointestinal in nature, but even these are mostly mild and generally transient. Other reported adverse effects include headache,
anxiety, vertigo, dizziness, sleep disorders, arthralgia, rash, pruritus, urticaria, and blurred vision. Rare but serious adverse effects of
fibrates are often related to skeletal muscle, kidneys, or the liver. Rhabdomyolysis is a most serious and potentially fatal adverse effect
with fibrates. Acute renal failure is the most common complication of rhabdomyolysis, occurring in 10% to 40% of patients. Very few cases of
rhabdomyolysis due to monotherapy with fibrate derivatives have been reported. Graham et al., evaluated 252, out of 460 patients treated
with lipid-lowering agents, and reported 24 cases of rhabdomyolysis occurring during the treatment. They found that the average incidence
per 10,000 person-years for monotherapy with atorvastatin, pravastatin, or simvastatin was 0.44 and for cerivastatin, 5.34, and for fibrate,
2.82. Risk factors for rhabdomyolysis associated with lipid-lowering agents (statins and fibrates) include older age (≥65 years),
comorbidities such as diabetes mellitus, renal, and liver disease, female gender, and using higher doses of drugs (≥80 mg/day for
atorvastatin or ≥200 mg/day for fenofibrate). The patient in our case was younger with no history of renal or liver disease, but had used a
high dose of fenofibrate (250 mg/day). Fenofibrate-induced rhabdomyolysis in patients with hypothyroidism has also been reported; however,
the results of the thyroid function tests of our patient were within the normal range. It was distinctive in our case that the
rhabdomyolysis occurred after the resumption of fenofibrate therapy a month after discontinuation of the drug. The patient had been using
the drug for 2 years with no adverse effects until then. Wu et al. Have also reported that the time of onset of the rhabdomyolysis varied
between 36 h and 6 months after starting treatment, The sudden onset of the symptoms with resumed therapy, rapid increase in CK levels, and
rapid resolution of the clinical symptoms and laboratory abnormalities after withdrawal of the drug and supportive treatment suggested that
rhabdomyolysis was associated with fenofibrate. Naranjo causality assessment score of six suggested a probable association between
rhabdomyolysis and fenofibrate while the World Health Organization Uppsala Monitoring Centre (World WHO-UMC) causality assessment system a
probable association between the adverse event and fenofibrate. What remains unclear, however, is why rhabdomyolysis occurred only when
fenofibrate therapy was resumed. In conclusion, physicians prescribing lipid-lowering agents should be aware of their potential fatal
adverse effects as rhabdomyolysis and acute renal failure. A gradual increase in dose at initiation or when the therapy resumed, rather than
using a fixed high dose may be a prudent practice. Renal and liver function tests along with analysis of muscle enzymes should be closely
monitored in patients receiving this drug. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
