A 53-year-old malnourished man, presented to the emergency room with 2 months of poor appetite, malaise, high spiking fevers, 10 Kg weight
loss and night sweats; he also noted progressive exertional dyspnea and anterior chest pain developing over the last 2 days. On physical
examination he was afebrile, had 90/60 arterial pressure, 100 × min heart rate, pulsus paradoxus, jugular vein engorgement, sudden
inspiratory splitting of the second heart sound, and soft heart sounds on auscultation. A contrasted tomography of the thorax showed a large
pericardial effusion with pericardial contrast enhancing and no pulmonary opacities. Histologic examination of pericardial tissue showed
multinucleated giant cells with scarce acid-fast bacillae, and on pericardial culture grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A 53-year-old
malnourished man with no significant past medical history had worked his entire life as a farmer in rural Colombia. He went to a local
emergency room because of 2 months of poor appetite, malaise, high spiking fevers, 10 Kg weight loss, and night sweats. He also had
progressive exertional dyspnea and anterior chest pain for 2 days. On physical examination he was afebrile, arterial pressure 90/60, and
heart rate 100/min. A pulsus paradoxus, jugular vein engorgement, soft heart sounds, and sudden inspiratory splitting of the second heart
sound were found. A computed tomographic scan of the thorax showed a large pericardial effusion with pericardium contrast enhancing but no
pulmonary opacities (Figures 1 Figure 1.Coronal view of thorax CT showing a large amount of pericardial effusion with pericardium contrast
enhancing. and 2 Figure 2.Axial view of thorax CT showing a large amount of pericardial effusion with pericardium contrast enhancing.). A
transthoracic echocardiography confirmed pericardial tamponade (Figures 3 Figure 3.Transtoracic echocardiographic image of the heart showing
a large pericardial effusion. and 4 Figure 4.Transthoracic echocardiography showing the surface of the heart with a shaggy appearance, with
frond-like structures extending to the parietal pericardium.) that led to pericardiocentesis, which yielded 2,200 mL of reddish liquid with
5.9 gm/dL total protein; 2,300 leukocytes/mL (70% Lymphocytes); glucose 2 mg/dL; and an adenosine deaminase level of 234 U/L. Histologic
examination of pericardial tissue showed granulomas with multinucleated giant cells (Figure 5 Figure 5.Histologic examination of pericardial
tissue showing granulomas with multinucleated giant cells.) and scarce acid-fast bacillae (Figure 6 Figure 6.Ziehl-Neelsen stain showing
scarce acid-fast bacillae.); culture of pericardium grew Mycobacterium tuberculosis. A test for human immunodeficiency virus was negative.
He was started on four antituberculosis medications plus Prednisone, and discharged 2 weeks after admission. Unfortunately, 2 months later
he was readmitted because of constrictive pericarditis, and a pericardiectomy was performed. After 6 months of anti-TB therapy, the patient
remained well. Coronal view of thorax CT showing a large amount of pericardial effusion with pericardium contrast enhancing. Axial view of
thorax CT showing a large amount of pericardial effusion with pericardium contrast enhancing. Transtoracic echocardiographic image of the
heart showing a large pericardial effusion. Transthoracic echocardiography showing the surface of the heart with a shaggy appearance, with
frond-like structures extending to the parietal pericardium. Histologic examination of pericardial tissue showing granulomas with
multinucleated giant cells. Ziehl-Neelsen stain showing scarce acid-fast bacillae. Author's address: Juan Carlos Cataño, Infectious Diseases
Section, Internal Medicine Department, University of Antioquia Medical School and Fundacion Antioqueña de Infectologia, Medellin, Colombia,
E-mail: kataju@hotmail.com.
