Park, K.-M. and Nam, H.-S. contributed equally to this study. An 8-year-old male mongrel dog that had undergone renal transplantation was
presented 25 days later with an acute cough, anorexia and exercise intolerance. During the investigation, neutrophilic leukocytosis was
noted, and thoracic radiographs revealed caudal lung lobe infiltration. While being treated with two broad-spectrum antibiotics, clinical
signs worsened. Pneumonia due to infection with multidrug-resistant (MDR) Pseudomonas (P.) aeruginosa, sensitive only to imipenem and
amikacin, was confirmed by bacteria isolation. After treatment with imipenem-cilastatin without reducing the immunosuppressant dose,
clinical signs completely resolved. During the 2-year follow-up period, no recurrence was observed. To the best of authors’ knowledge, this
is the first report of pneumonia caused by MDR P. aeruginosa in a renal recipient dog and successful management of this disease. Infectious
pneumonia is a severe complication at the early stage of kidney transplantation and is associated with significant mortality in recipients
not only in human clinics but also in veterinary medicine [11, 12, 22]. However, no standard guidelines for managing infectious
complications after transplantation have been set in veterinary medicine. Potent immunosuppressants given to prevent host rejection could
increase opportunities for microorganism infection and lead to difficulties with treatment . Previous reports in humans have suggested that
significantly reducing immunosuppressant doses are extremely important to treat bacterial pneumonia in kidney transplant recipients . Unlike
human and feline renal transplant patients, canine recipients require highly aggressive immunosuppressive therapy, because of the intense
host response these animals mount against the graft . A previous veterinary report has shown that the death of canine patients can occur due
to graft rejection when immunosuppressive drug doses are decreased to control infectious pneumonia . Therefore, it is difficult for
veterinarians to decide whether the doses of immunosuppressant reagents should be reduced to treat an infection in a transplant recipient.
In this report, we describe a case of pneumonia due to infection with MDR P. aeruginosa in a kidney recipient dog during the high-risk
period of acute allorejection and the successful treatment of this case without reducing the immunosuppressive medication dose. An 8-year-
old, 6.3 kg, male mongrel dog was referred to Kangwon National University Veterinary Hospital for treatment of end-stage chronic kidney
disease. The dog underwent heterotrophic renal transplantation in the iliac fossa with a kidney from a healthy dog leukocyte antigen cross-
matched littermate donor. To assess whether a littermate dog is compatible as a kidney donor, blood typing, erythrocyte cross-match and
complement-dependent cytotoxic cross-match tests were performed . The transplant recipient also underwent bilateral native nephrectomy and
had been given 20 mg/kg microemulsified cyclosporine (Implanta, PO, q24h; Hanmi, Seoul, Korea), 1 mg/kg predinisolone (Solondo, PO, q24h;
Yuhanmedica, Ochang, Korea) and 5 mg/kg azathioprine (Immuthera, PO, q48h; Celltrion, Incheon, Korea) as immunosuppressive therapy 2 days
prior to transplantation according to a previously described protocol . The cyclosporine trough concentration was maintained approximately
400–700 ng/ml for the first 6 months after surgery, and then the dosage was reduced to maintain a trough concentration of 250–350 ng/ml as
measured by high-performed liquid chromatography . Prednisolone dose was gradually reduced 1 month after surgery and discontinued after 3
months . We administered 22 mg/kg cefazolin (Cefazolin, IV, q12h; Chong Kun Dang Pharm, Seoul, Korea) for 5 days after surgery as
prophylaxis. The dog showed good postoperative recovery. Laboratory evaluation results including complete blood count (CBC), serum
biochemistry, urinalysis and ultrasonography were also normal 18 days after transplantation. Twenty-five days after surgery, the dog was
readmitted to the hospital due to acute onset anorexia, frequent coughing and exercise intolerance. Physical examination revealed a body
condition score of 4/9, mild exertional dyspnea, increased respiratory rate (36 breaths/min) and fever (39.8°C). Slight crackling lung
sounds were also heard during inspiration, but a cardiac murmur was not detected. Laboratory examination including serum chemistry analysis,
blood gas analysis, pulse oxymetry, urine examination, excretory urography and ultrasonography did not produce any atypical findings. Lung
lobe infiltration and air bronchogram signs with a generalized increase in lung opacity in both the left and right side caudal lobes were
viewed on ventrodorsal and right lateral thoracic radiographs (Fig. 1a and 1bFig. 1.Thoracic radiographs of a dog with pneumonia after renal
transplantation. Ventrodorsal (a) and right lateral thoracic radiographs (b) were taken 25 days after surgery. Infiltration in the caudal
lung lobe and air bronchogram signs (white arrowheads) were observed. Ventrodorsal (c) and right lateral thoracic radiographs (d) were taken
10 days after imipenem-cilastatin administration. Abnormal lung infiltration had disappeared.). CBC test results (Fig. 2Fig. 2.White blood
cell (WBC) count of a dog with pneumonia during the post-transplantation period. The black arrow indicates the day clinical symptoms of
respiratory infection were observed. The white arrow indicates the first day of imipenem-cilastatin administration.) were indicative of
neutrophilic leukocytosis (37.0 × 103/µl, reference range 4 to 15.5 × 103/µl) with a mild left shift (band neutrophils 1.0 × 103/µl,
reference range 0 to 0.3 × 103/µl). Results of a canine distemper polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test (Neodin Vetlab, Seoul, Korea) and
heartworm antigen kit test (SNAP® Heartworm RT Test, IDEXX Laboratories Inc., Westbrook, ME, U.S.A.) were negative (data not shown). There
was no clinical evidence of renal graft failure or rejection based on the results of CBC, serum chemistry and urinalysis. Thoracic
radiographs of a dog with pneumonia after renal transplantation. Ventrodorsal (a) and right lateral thoracic radiographs (b) were taken 25
days after surgery. Infiltration in the caudal lung lobe and air bronchogram signs (white arrowheads) were observed. Ventrodorsal (c) and
right lateral thoracic radiographs (d) were taken 10 days after imipenem-cilastatin administration. Abnormal lung infiltration had
disappeared. White blood cell (WBC) count of a dog with pneumonia during the post-transplantation period. The black arrow indicates the day
clinical symptoms of respiratory infection were observed. The white arrow indicates the first day of imipenem-cilastatin administration. We
made a provisional diagnosis of bacterial pneumonia based on radiography, CBC and physical examination findings. Empirical treatments were
started with a combination of two broad-spectrum antibiotics [10 mg/kg enrofloxacine (Baytril, SQ, q24h; Bayer Korea, Seoul, Korea) and 22
mg/kg ampicillin-sulbactam (Ucillin, IV, q12h; Dongkoo, Seoul, Korea)], fluids, nebulizer treatment combined with gentamycin (Gentamycin
sulfate, Kukje, Seongnam, Korea) and coupage for 5 days until the final diagnosis was made. We continued immunosuppressive therapy without
any dosage reduction due to concerns about the high risk for acute rejection during the early stage of kidney allograft. A microorganism
culture test was performed with tracheal wash fluid, blood and urine from the recipient dog as well as blood and urine from the donor
animal. To obtain a tracheal wash specimen, the canine was anesthetized with 5 mg/kg propofol (Provive, Myungmoon, Seoul, Korea). We
subsequently inserted an endotracheal tube with a rubber catheter into the trachea, pushed in 5 ml of warm saline and immediately withdrew
the liquid to collect a sample. Bacterial pneumonia caused by P. aeruginosa was confirmed by a microorganism isolation test carried out
according to a previous protocol . Test results revealed that the bacterial infection was localized in the respiratory tract. Bacterial
cultures of urine and blood from both the recipient and donor were both aerobically and anaerobically negative. Despite administration of
broad-spectrum antibiotics (enrofloxacine and ampicillin-sulbactam) for 5 days, clinical symptoms of the recipient dog did not improve. The
P. aeruginosa strain isolated from the tracheal washing was sensitive to only imipenem and amikacin, had intermediate susceptibility to
gentamycine and polymixinB; and was resistant to ceftazidime, piperacillin and ciprofloxacine. The patient was started on 5 mg/kg imipenem-
cilastatin (Imipenem-cilastatin, IV over 30 min, q8h; Yungjin, Goyang, Korea). After 10 days of treatment, the cough and nasal discharge had
markedly diminished, and neutrophil counts were in the normal range (Fig. 2). Lung lesions observed on thoracic radiographs had clearly
improved. (Fig. 1c and 1d). Blood urea nitrogen (17–25 mg/dl, reference range 5–30 mg/dl) and serum creatinine (0.9–1.3 mg/dl, reference
range 0.7–1.8 mg/dl) concentrations were maintained within the reference range during the entire post-transplantation period (Fig. 3a and
3bFig. 3.Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) as well as serum creatinine and cyclosporine trough concentrations was maintained within the reference
range during the post-operation period. An arrow indicates the day on which acute onset of clinical signs of pneumonia occurred. The shaded
area indicates the reference range.). Blood cyclosporine levels did not show any marked changes during the course of anti-pneumonia therapy
(Fig. 3c). The antibiotic therapy was continued for 1 week, after all symptoms had subsided to prevent recurrent pneumonia. No complications
or disease recurrence was observed during the 2-year follow-up period. Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) as well as serum creatinine and
cyclosporine trough concentrations was maintained within the reference range during the post-operation period. An arrow indicates the day on
which acute onset of clinical signs of pneumonia occurred. The shaded area indicates the reference range. Reports of renal transplantation
in canines have been sporadically published in veterinary literature . Most of these studies have focused on the effectiveness of
immunosuppression protocols, surgical techniques and the survival of the animal recipients [4, 9, 17]. Although some reports have briefly
described successful recovery from bacterial complications that were not due to MDR strains, others have presented cases in which the
infections did not respond well to treatment with antimicrobials [9, 11]. Infection with multidrug-resistant (MDR) Pseudomonas (P.)
aeruginosa in kidney transplant recipients leads to life-threatening complication in humans . This condition is difficult to manage due to
the limited susceptibility of MDR P. aeruginosa to antibiotics [7, 15]. To the best of our knowledge, several case reports on this topic
have been published in human medicine, but no report has appeared in veterinary medical literature and no standard guidelines for diagnosis
or treatment have been established for animal recipients [15, 16, 20, 23]. We performed a tracheal wash to obtain a sample to identify the
best antibiotics for the bacteria isolated from the trachea. Cultivation of sputum or blood is not specific and sensitive method to
distinguish real pathogen. On the other hand, transbronchial or open lung biopsy is effective for diagnosis, but is associated with high
morbidity . In our protocol, the recovery of a patient from anesthesia and tracheal wash procedure was relatively fast, and no complication
has occurred. Tracheal wash would be a necessary protocol for early diagnosis of pulmonary infection in the canine transplant patients. The
strong immunosuppressants that are administered to prevent host rejection can increase the risk of bacterial infection, because these
reagents impair cell-mediated immunity while reducing T cell and immunoglobulin function. Moreover, neutrophils and alveolar macrophages
also become unresponsive to chemoattractants and their phagocytotic activities decrease . In the case presented in this report, we did not
reduce the immunosuppressant drug dosage, because sufficient immunosupression is necessary to prevent organ rejection during the early stage
of transplantation and reducing the medication dosage could lead to irreversible acute organ rejection and eventual failure. It is unclear
how MDR P. aeruginosa pneumonia occurred. We speculate that the MDR P. aeruginosa infection in this case was opportunistic or acquired in
the hospital. P. aeruginosa is an opportunistic human and animal pathogen that can be isolated from the ear canal, skin, nasal cavity and
mouth of healthy dogs . This bacterial strain is the second most common (17%) cause of nosocomial pneumonia in human clinics . However, no
surveillance data are available for veterinary patients to determine which microorganism is the most common cause of pulmonary infections.
P. aeruginosa is notorious for its MDR characteristics and causes concern among clinicians, because it can induce a life-threatening disease
in immunocompromised patients . In the present case, we used erofloxacin and ampicillin-sulbactam for the initial treatment protocol. These
antibiotics are recommended for ameliorating severe and community-acquired cases of pneumonia [10, 21]. However, the reagents we
administered were ineffective against the MDR P. aeruginosa infection in this case. P. aeruginosa is often resistant to ampicillin,
cephalosporin, chloramphenicol and sulphonamides . The traditionally preferred antibiotics include ciprofloxacine, ceftazidime,
aminoglycosides and carbapenem [2, 7, 18]. In human medicine, new anti-pseudomonal antibiotics including doripenem, ceftobiprole and
sitafloxacine have been dispensed due to the increased resistance rate of P. aeruginosa against traditionally preferred antibiotics . A more
recent study reported that the resistance rates of P. aeruginosa isolated from dogs and cats against enrofloxacine, ciprofloxacine and
cefotaxime were 31.5, 20.5 and 17.8%, respectively . Another report showed that large numbers of P. aeruginosa isolated from canine otitis
externae are resistant to enrofloxacine (51.9%) and gentamycin (43.3%) . In the present study, we showed that tracheal washing was a safe
and effective approach for making an early diagnosis of pneumonia during the initial stage of renal transplantation in canines. We
demonstrated that localized pneumonia caused by MDR P. aeruginosa infection after renal transplantation in a dog could be treated using
appropriate antibiotics according to the results of an antibiotic susceptibility test. We suggest that small animal clinicians do not need
to consider reducing the dosage of immunosuppressants to treat MDR P. aeruginosa pneumonia during the early stage of renal transplantation
in canines. However, effective management protocols for systemic MDR P. aeruginosa-associated complications, such as bacteremia, neutropenia
and vascular dehiscence, in canine renal transplant patients should be described in future studies. Our case report provides beneficial data
for establishing standardized diagnostic and therapeutic guidelines to manage MDR bacterial pneumonia in canine renal transplant patients.
This work was supported by a grant from the Next-Generation BioGreen 21 program (No.PJ009627), Rural Development Administration, Republic of
Korea. This work was also supported by the Korea Research Foundation Grant funded by the Korean Government (KRF-2010-0025387).
