These Authors contributed equally to this work. We report the first Italian kindred with Familial Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (FALS) due
to c.149T>C mutation in the exon 5 of superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1) gene. The proband was a 49-year-old woman who came to our observation
because of an history of progressive limbs weakness and gait impairment. She belonged to a family of 24 affected members. The prevalent
phenotype of the affected members was characterized by slowly progressive spinal impairment with proximal distribution of weakness, and
bulbar involvement in advanced stages. We briefly reviewed the few previous reports about the same SOD1 mutation and discussed the
hypothesis that structural instability of the mutant codon 149 protein may underlie some toxic effects significantly involved in FALS
pathogenesis. Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is a progressive and fatal disease, characterized by degeneration of motor neurons. Around
5-10% of cases are considered to be familial (FALS) when the disease is present in both a proband and a first-degree or second-degree
relative (1). FALS is usually inherited in an autosomal dominant manner, though there are rarer cases of autosomal recessive and X-linked
disease. FALS is genetically heterogeneous, including 15 mapped loci, of which the causative genes are identified for 11 (1). A number of
genes has been recently identified, including TAR DNA binding protein/TDP-43 (TARDBP), fused in sarcoma/translocated in liposarcoma
(FUS/TLS) and C9ORF72 (1, 2). Specifically, the large hexanucleotide repeat expansion in the first intron of the C9ORF72 gene is resulted
the most common genetic cause of FALS. It was detected in more than one-third of FALS cases of European ancestry and in nearly one-half of
Finnish FALS cases, unlike other gene mutations (2, 3). Mutations in the copper/zinc superoxide dismutase-1 (SOD1, OMIM 147450) gene account
for about 10% of FALS cases, though the frequency varies depending on the population sampled (1). To date more than 150 disease-causing
mutations have been reported, spread throughout all five exons of the gene. They are mainly missense mutations but small deletions or
insertions have also been described (www.alsod.org) (1). The phenotypes largely depend on the different mutations with significant intra and
inter familial variability. However, a classical rapidly progressive ALS phenotype, clinically indistinguishable from sporadic disease,
predominates (4). Remarkably, more than 10 mutations in the SOD1 gene have been previously reported in FALS Italian patients (5), although
no mutation has been observed in the exon 5. Here we report a missense mutation c.149T>C in the exon 5 of the SOD1 gene, identified in an
Italian patient with ALS belonging to a large family with FALS. A 49-year-old woman (Fig. 1, individual IV-9) came to our observation with a
five-years history of progressive limbs weakness and gait impairment. Pedigree of the described Italian family with FALS due to c.149T>C
mutation in the SOD1 gene. The proband (IV-9) is marked with an arrow. The filled symbols indicate affected individuals. She came from
Aversa, near Naples in the South of Italy, as also her family for at least three generations. Neurological examination showed right leg
atrophy and weakness of proximal muscles of the legs (Medical Research Council, MRC 3/5), widespread fasciculations, and mild hypertonia of
the limbs. After about eight months, clinical features of the patient worsened with progressive wasting of the upper and lower extremities
of the limbs. Gradually bulbar signs emerged. She did not show cognitive or behavioural disturbances, except for a mild mood depression.
Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI) scans of the brain and the spinal cord were normal. Electromyography (EMG) revealed acute and chronic
denervation changes in bulbar and all limbs muscles, whilst motor and sensory nerve conductions were normal and conduction blocks were not
detected. Diagnosis of ALS was made according to the revised El Escorial criteria (6). The patient was treated with riluzole (50 mg x two /
die) and physiotherapy and did not need artificial respiratory support or percutaneous endoscopic gastrostomy (PEG) until nowadays. In her
family a total number of 24 affected family members, distributed across four generations, were detected (Fig. 1, Table 1). We directly
examined 7 patients belonged to IV (IV-5, IV-8, IV-9, IV-11) and III generations (III-3, III-6, III-8), whilst the remaining 17 patients
were identified from medical records. Certainly no generation was skipped from the second, suggesting an autosomal dominant inheritance.
Detailed patient characteristics. Abbreviations: LMN, lower motor neuron; UMN, upper motor neuron; LL, lower limb; UL, upper limb; and NA,
data not available. Values in the last row represent mean ± standard deviation. Accidental death. After obtaining written informed consent,
genomic DNA from the proband and the affected members IV-8 and IV-11 was extracted from leukocytes of whole blood samples. The remaining
patients of the family did not give their consent or were not available for the analysis. The five coding exons of SOD1 gene and at least 30
bp of flanking intronic sequence, amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR), were sequenced using the Big- Dye Terminator Cycle
Sequencing Ready Reaction Kit (Applied Biosystems) and run on a capillary sequencer (ABI Prism 310 Genetic Analyzer, Applied Biosystems).
TARDBP, FUS/TLS and C9ORF72 genes were also screened to better characterize the genotypes of the three patients. DNA analysis of the proband
and members IV-8 and IV-11 showed a heterozygous mutation c.149T>C in the exon 5 of the SOD1 gene, causing a substitution of isoleucine to
threonine threonine (p.Ile149Thr). Regarding TARDBP, FUS/TLS and C9ORF72, the three patients showed no pathologic mutations. We report the
first Italian kindred of FALS due to exon 5 missense mutation c.149T>C in the SOD1 gene. Previously, the same mutation has been identified
in a few Caucasian (7, 8) and Asian (9) families, and has been revealed able of inducing structural modifications of the relative charges of
amino acids, significantly affecting the SOD1 enzymatic activity. In fact, about p.Ile149Thr mutation, it was found that the heterodimers
composed by one normal and one mutant molecules appeared to be less efficient or stable, causing a relevant destabilization of SOD1 dimer
structure, and promoting the accumulation of toxic intracellular aggregates (7, 8). However, the exact mechanisms by which mutant SOD1
(mSOD1) causes motor neuronal cell death have yet to be established (1). Recently, evidence from transgenic models expressing mSOD1 has
allowed to hypothesize a potential contribution of non-motor neuron cells, such as microglia, in triggering an alteration of the balance
between neuroprotection and cytotoxicity in favor of the latter (10). In fact, misfolded proteins, such as mSOD1, seem to induce impairment
of mitochondrial function and axoplasmic flow and release from motor neurons of abnormal signals able to activate microglia. About genotype-
phenotype correlations, in our case, the clinical presentation of the seven patients examined (III-3, III-6, III-8, IV-5, IV-8, IV-9, IV-11)
was characterized by mean age of onset of 40.8 ± 9.1 years, spinal impairment with proximal distribution of weakness, bulbar involvement in
advanced stages, and slowly progressive disease course, except for patient III-8 who had a more rapid disease progression. However, it
should be taken into account that, in case of FALS, genotype-phenotype correlations have been established only for some SOD1 mutations and
clear relations between mutations in critical residues and the age of onset or disease severity have not yet been identified (4). Further
analyses on this and other families with the same c.149T>C mutation of the SOD1 gene might help to explain its role in ALS pathogenesis and
to evaluate the clinical and functional differences of these FALS phenotypes with those of sporadic ALS. Finally, in our as well in other
similar cases, beyond the usual clinical management of the affected members, clinicians should be prepared to address also the needs of
young subjects of the family who could consider to make genetic testing for this or other SOD1 mutations. Therefore, a genetic counseling
should be planned to discuss the risks, benefits, and limitations of testing. The authors thank Dr. Francesca Caso (Scientific Institute and
University Ospedale San Raffaele, Milan, Italy) for her support in collecting the data of this family, and Prof. Adriano Chiò (University of
Turin, Turin, Italy) and Dr. Gabriella Restagno (St. Anna Hospital, Turin, Italy) for their contribution in carrying out the genetic
assessment. The authors report no disclosure of potential conflict of interest.
