Spontaneous crescentic glomerulonephritis (CrGN) in animals has only been reported in dog and sheep. We report the pathological features of
CrGN in a 17-year-old male polar bear that died due to renal failure. Histologically, the lesions were characterized by fibrocellular
crescents, adhesion between Bowman’s capsule and the glomerular capillary tuft and an increase in the mesangial matrix in glomeruli. The
proliferating cells in the crescent were partly immunopositive for cytokeratin and intensely positive for vimentin, WT-1 and α-smooth muscle
actin, suggesting they originated from parietal epithelial cells. Ultrastructually, thickening of the glomerular basement membrane and loss
of epithelial cell foot processes were observed with electron-dense deposits. Primary glomerular disease, based on the WHO classification
for humans , is classified into the following three categories: 1) minor glomerular abnormalities, 2) focal/segmental lesions and 3) diffuse
glomerulonephritis. Of these, crescentic glomerulonephritis (CrGN) is classified as diffuse glomerulonephritis. A simple classification
system that consists of membranous, mesangioproliferative, membranoproliferative and glomerulosclerosis is currently used for
glomerulonephritis in domestic animals, because, compared with that in humans, knowledge about glomerular disease in animals is
insufficient. CrGN is very rare and poorly understood in animals; therefore, it is not included in this classification . In animals,
glomerular crescent formation produced in association with various glomerular diseases, namely, familial renal disease in dog , sodium
chloride poisoning in chick and induced CrGN, has been reported in laboratory animals including mouse , goat , sheep and rabbit . However,
reports of naturally occurring CrGN as diffuse glomerulonephritis with poor prognosis are extremely rare. In livestock, it has been reported
only in sheep . Even though dogs with glomerular disease have been studied relatively well, CrGN has been documented in only 2 articles [11,
19]. Reports on renal disease in Ursidae are rare, and only one study has examined the effects of organic halogen concentration on renal
tissue in 75 polar bears (Ursus maritimus), but there are no reports on primary glomerular disease . This report contains the first
description of CrGN in Ursidae. The animal was a 17-year-old male polar bear born at the zoo. From January 30, 2010, diarrhea and vomiting
were observed. Severe renal failure (BUN: 305 mg/dl and creatinine: 9.95 mg/dl; normal ranges: 5–43 mg/dl and 0.4–2.4 mg/dl, respectively )
and liver failure (AST: 340 IU/l; normal range: 24–197 IU/l ) were revealed by blood biochemical tests on January 30, 2010. Urine was not
examined. The animal died on February 8, 2010 and was necropsied. Body weight was 300 kg at the time of death. The bear had not been given
food or drugs with renal toxicity or inoculated with any vaccines. Grossly, all reniculi of both kidneys were discolored, with a lightly
tanned color, in association with moderate sclerosis. Brown spots of 1–2 mm were diffusely scattered throughout the parenchyma. On the cut
surface of kidney cortex, pinhead-sized white nodules were densely distributed, and there were a lot of petechiae. The liver was enlarged
and yellow-brown in color with multiple dark-brown patches of 2–7 mm. Partial specimens from visceral organs, including the kidneys, were
fixed in 10% neutral buffered formalin and provided for histopathological examination. Three-micrometer-thick sections were prepared from
paraffin-embedded tissues and stained by HE, periodic acid-Schiff (PAS), Azan-Mallory (AZAN), periodic acid methenamine silver (PAM) and
phosphotungstic acid-hematoxylin (PTAH). Acid fuchsin orange G (AFOG) stain was used to demonstrate immune deposits. The ratio of affected
glomeruli was calculated using the HE sections. For investigation of the crescent components, immunostaining was performed on kidney
sections with the following antibodies: cytokeratin (clone AE1/AE3, × 400, Dako, Japan Co., Kyoto, Japan), vimentin (clone V9, × 200, Dako),
Wilm’s tumor 1 (WT-1, clone 6F-H2,× 100, Dako), α-smooth muscle actin (α-SMA, clone 1A4, × 20,000, Dako), lysozyme EC 3.2.1.17 (Muramidase)
(lysozyme, × 500, Dako) and myeloid /histiocyte antigen (MAC 387, clone MAC 387, × 300, Dako). To confirm the specificity of these
antibodies, the tissues of this case were used as internal positive controls. In addition, for ultrastructural examination, a portion of the
kidney tissue after formalin fixation was refixed with 2.5% glutaraldehyde, post-fixed in osmium tetroxide and embedded in epon resin.
Ultra-thin sections (90–150 nm) were stained with uranyl acetate and lead citrate and then examined under a Hitachi H300 electron
microscope. Histopathological examination of both kidneys revealed extensive interstitial fibrosis and multifocal tubular atrophy with
hyaline casts. Seventy-two percent of the glomeruli had crescent formation in Bowman’s space (Fig. 1Fig. 1.Many glomeruli had fibrocellular
crescents. There was extensive interstitial fibrosis. HE stain.). These crescents consisted of a mixture of spindle-shaped to oval cells and
cuboidal cells with a variable amount of extracellular matrix or hyaline material (Fig. 2AFig. 2.A: The glomerulus had formed fibrocellular
crescents. The glomerular mesangial matrix was expanded, and mesangial cells had increased slightly. PAS reaction. B: Fibrin deposits in the
crescents and Bowman’s spaces were observed. PTAH stain. C: Most crescent component cells and podocytes were immunoreactive for vimentin.
Hematoxylin counterstain. D: WT-1-positive nuclei were observed in most crescent component cells as well as glomerular podocytes (internal
positive control). PAS/hematoxylin counterstain. E: Spindle-shaped cells in the crescents were immunoreactive for α-SMA. Hematoxylin
counterstain. F: Some cells lining tubule-like structures in crescents were positive for cytokeratin. Other cells were weakly
immunoreactive. Hematoxylin counterstain. Bars of Fig. 2A–F=50 µm.). Adhesion between Bowman’s capsule and a segment of the glomerular
capillary tuft was also associated with fibrous crescent formation. PTAH staining revealed fibrin deposits in the crescents and Bowman’s
spaces in about half of the affected glomeruli (Fig.2B). As features of the glomeruli, segmental duplications of the glomerular basement
membrane, mesangial expansion, which exhibited a mild increase of mesangial cellularity, and glomerular fibrosis were generally observed.
Focally, segmental or global glomerulosclerosis was observed. Deposits of bright red material were visible by AFOG staining in a small part
of the mesangial matrix and in the capillary walls, which gave a positive reaction for fibrin on PTAH staining. The grade of the lesion did
not differ according to the location or reniculus. Diffuse degeneration and multifocal necrosis of cardiac muscle and hepatocytes were
observed. Many glomeruli had fibrocellular crescents. There was extensive interstitial fibrosis. HE stain. A: The glomerulus had formed
fibrocellular crescents. The glomerular mesangial matrix was expanded, and mesangial cells had increased slightly. PAS reaction. B: Fibrin
deposits in the crescents and Bowman’s spaces were observed. PTAH stain. C: Most crescent component cells and podocytes were immunoreactive
for vimentin. Hematoxylin counterstain. D: WT-1-positive nuclei were observed in most crescent component cells as well as glomerular
podocytes (internal positive control). PAS/hematoxylin counterstain. E: Spindle-shaped cells in the crescents were immunoreactive for α-SMA.
Hematoxylin counterstain. F: Some cells lining tubule-like structures in crescents were positive for cytokeratin. Other cells were weakly
immunoreactive. Hematoxylin counterstain. Bars of Fig. 2A–F=50 µm. On immunostaining, cellular components of crescents stained diffusely
positive for vimentin (Fig. 2C). WT-1-positive nuclei were observed in most crescent component cells as well as glomerular podocytes
(internal positive control) (Fig. 2D). These crescentic cells were mainly composed of α-SMA-positive spindle-shaped cells (Fig. 2E).
Variable cytokeratin expression was also found in crescentic cells (Fig. 2F). Lysozyme and MAC387 immunostaining did not reveal monocytic
infiltration into the crescents, despite the existence of a positive reaction of macrophages of lung and liver as internal positive controls
(Table 1Table 1.Results of immunoreactivities of the crescent component cellsantigen/cellparietalepithelial
cellpodocytemacrophagemyofibroblastcrescent component cells (present case)vimentin–++++keratin+–––weakly
positiveWT-1++––+Mac387––+––lysozome––+––SMA–––++ (spindle-shaped cells)). Ultrastructurally, the crescent component cells had moderate
organelles without the phagocytic vesicle that characterizes monocytes/macrophages and some dense attachments. The predominant lesions
consisted of varying degrees of wrinkling and thickening of the glomerular basement membrane (GBM) and effacement and fusion of the
overlying foot processes (Fig. 3AFig. 3.A: Cellular crescent and glomerulus with thickened basement membrane were observed. Bar=5 µm. B:
Massive electron-dense deposits (arrows) in the basement membrane and duplicated GBM were observed. In significant swollen glomerular
endothelial cells, degeneration with a large number of intracytoplasmic vacuoles was observed. Loss of podocyte foot processes was also
observed. En: endothelial cell. Electron microscopy. Uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Bar=10 µm.). Massive electron-dense deposits in the
duplicated GBM were occasionally observed (Fig. 3B). A: Cellular crescent and glomerulus with thickened basement membrane were observed.
Bar=5 µm. B: Massive electron-dense deposits (arrows) in the basement membrane and duplicated GBM were observed. In significant swollen
glomerular endothelial cells, degeneration with a large number of intracytoplasmic vacuoles was observed. Loss of podocyte foot processes
was also observed. En: endothelial cell. Electron microscopy. Uranyl acetate and lead citrate. Bar=10 µm. CrGN is a typical pathological
finding that characterizes the pathology of rapidly progressive glomerulonephritis in humans, and crescent formation is observed in>50% of
the glomeruli in human CrGN patients [9, 13]. Since frequent crescent formation observed in more than 70% of the glomeruli and the presence
of fibrin exudation indicating rapid progression are consistent with CrGN of fibro-cellular crescents in humans and animal-induced models,
the present case was diagnosed as CrGN in a polar bear. To our knowledge, this is the first reported case of CrGN in Ursidae. The
pathogenesis of CrGN has not been fully elucidated, but it has been considered to involve an immune-mediated mechanism [8, 12]. On the basis
of the immunological findings, CrGN in humans is classified into the following three types: 1) anti-glomerular basement membrane (GBM) type,
2) pauci-immune type and 3) immune-complex type . Spontaneous CrGN in animals has not been studied sufficiently, because CrGN is rarely
seen. In this case, the involvement of an immune-complex mechanism was suspected, because the electron-dense deposits in GBM were observed
by transmission electron microscopy and there is no glomerular disease associated with glomerular crescent formation. However, in order to
draw a definitive conclusion, further examination by immunostaining is required. In humans, monocytes/macrophages [2, 7, 10, 18] and
parietal epithelial cells (PEC) have been considered as the origin of crescent component cells. In addition, a positive reaction for α-SMA
of crescent component cells has been interpreted as an epithelial-mesenchymal transition . From these findings of ultrastructural
examination and immunostaining of crescent component cells in this case, showing a similar immune phenotype to human PEC , the crescents
themselves seemed to originate from the proliferation of PEC.
