To the Editor: Enterovirus 71 (EV-71) causes primarily asymptomatic or benign infections in children <5 years of age. However, it may cause
severe and sometimes fatal neurologic complications, such as brainstem encephalitis and polio-like paralysis (1). Over the last 15 years,
large outbreaks of EV-71 infection have been described in the Asia–Pacific region, associated with the regular emergence of new genetic
lineages (2). Since the 1978 outbreak in Hungary, rare sporadic cases have been reported in Europe (1). In France, during 2000–2009, a total
of 81 hospitalized patients with EV-71 infection were reported by the sentinel surveillance system, including 2 child deaths, 1 due to
proven rhombencephalitis (3,4). We report here a fatal case of EV-71 rhombencephalitis in an immunocompromised adult who was receiving
rituximab therapy. Rituximab is a chimeric anti-CD20 monoclonal antibody that is widely used for treating B-cell lymphoma and an increasing
number of autoimmune diseases. Since rituximab became commercially available, several infectious side-effects for the drug have been
reported, including hepatitis B reactivation, progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy, and enteroviral meningoencephalitis (5). The first
2 cases of rituximab-associated enteroviral meningoencephalitis were reported in 2003 (6), and 5 additional cases have been reported to date
(7,8). In May 2012, a 66-year-old woman was hospitalized in the neurology unit of Bordeaux University Hospital with a 10-day history of
fever, asthenia, and psychomotor retardation. She had no history of travel and had not been in close contact with sick persons. She had
received a diagnosis of grade I follicular lymphoma 3 years earlier, and it had been treated with 6 cycles of R-CHOP (rituximab,
cyclophosphamide, hydroxydaunorubicin, oncovin, prednisolone). Since July 2010, the lymphoma had been in remission, and she had been
receiving maintenance therapy with rituximab since that time. The most recent rituximab infusion had been administered in March 2012. Her
condition was treated initially with broad-spectrum antibiotics and acyclovir. Still, aphasia, facial paralysis, spastic movements, and
consciousness disorders rapidly developed. On day 6, she was transferred to the intensive care unit for ventilatory support. On patient’s
admission, blood samples showed lymphopenia (0.64 × 103 cells/mm3) and low immunoglobulin levels, i.e., IgG 4.5 g/L (reference range
6.75–12.8 g/L) and IgM 0.33 g/L (reference range 0.56–1.9 g/L). Three cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) samples were collected on days 1, 4, and 6.
CSF leukocyte count rose from 5 to 89 cells/mm3, with lymphocytes from 24% to 95%, and protein levels rose from 0.68 to 1.03 g/L (reference
range 0.15–0.45 g/L). CSF glucose level varied from 3.5 to 4.5 mmol/L (reference range 2.7–3.9 mmol/L). Enterovirus RNA was detected in the
patient’s first 3 CSF samples and in CSF, stool specimens, and blood until 4 weeks after admission (Technical Appendix Table 1). PCR assays
of the first 3 CSF samples were negative for JC polyomavirus, herpes simplex virus, varicella-zoster virus, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr
virus, human herpesvirus 6, adenovirus, and Toxoplasma gondii. Serologic tests for parvovirus B19, mumps virus, and measles virus were IgM
negative. Samples were also negative for antibodies against Hu, Ri, Yo, and voltage-gated potassium channel antigens. All bacterial cultures
were negative. No evidence for central nervous system infiltration by lymphoma cells was found, on the basis of CSF cytology. Results of
brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans performed on days 2 and 6 were normal, despite the patient’s consciousness disorders (Figure,
panel A). However, on day 13, MRI scans showed bilateral and symmetric T2 and FLAIR hypersignals in the medulla, the pons, and the
mesencephalon, compatible with rhomboencephalitis (Figure, panel B). On day 24, the MRI scan showed a supratentorial extension involving
white matter, the insular cortex, and basal ganglia (Figure, panel C). The patient’s neurologic condition deteriorated progressively, and
she died of enteroviral rhomboencephalitis 32 days after admission. The EV associated with the rhomboencephalitis was identified as an EV-71
genogroup C2 isolate by 1D gene complete sequencing and phylogenetic analysis (Technical Appendix Figure; Technical Appendix Table 2). The
1D gene sequences determined from cerebrospinal fluid and fecal specimens from the patient showed 95%–97% nucleotide homology and clustered
with 1D gene sequences from strains detected during 2006–2012 in France, the Netherlands, Germany, Spain, Canada, United Kingdom, and
Singapore. Only 7 cases of rituximab-associated EV encephalitis have been reported in the literature. Of the case-patients, 3 died from
enteroviral meningoencephalitis, 1 showed partial neurologic improvement but died later from another infection (not specified), 2 suffered
permanent sequelae, and 1 recovered completely (6–8). The first case of fatal rituximab-associated EV-71 encephalitis was reported in
Australia in 2011 (8). The Australian patient and the French patient reported here were adults, although most EV-71 encephalitis cases have
been described in children (1). Neither adult patient exhibited neurogenic pulmonary edema. Both cases were associated with genogroup C2
EV-71 strains that were closely related to those that have been detected in recent years in Europe and worldwide (3). Because invasive EV
infections have been described in adults with hereditary or congenital defects in B-lymphocyte function, humoral immunity is likely to play
a key role in EV infection control (9). Passive protection against lethal EV-71 infection in newborn mice by neutralizing antibodies is
another convincing argument that the antibody-mediated response is critical (10). Thus, because rituximab is associated with long-lasting
B-cell depletion and, in some patients, a decrease in immunoglobulin, it may lead to an increased risk for EV encephalitis. Although EV
encephalitis seems to be rare in patients who receive rituximab treatment, cases may have been underdiagnosed. To detect this condition and
prevent possible deaths, physicians should routinely screen for EV RNA in patients receiving anti-CD20 therapy who have neurologic symptoms
and should consider the early administration of immunoglobulin. Magnetic resonance imaging axial flair sequence of brain of 66-year-old
woman with fatal encephalitis, Bordeaux, France, 2012. A) No hypersignal at day 6. B) Bilateral posterior hypersignals in the medulla at day
13. C) Bilateral supratentorial hypersignals at day 24 in the cortex, the white matter, and the basal ganglia. Hypersignals are indicated by
white arrowheads. Enterovirus RNA detected in the patient’s cerebrospinal fluid, blood, and stool specimens and identified as an EV-71
genogroup C2 isolate and phylogenetic analysis of complete viral protein 1 coding sequences of enterovirus 71 strains. Suggested citation
for this article: Kassab S, Saghi T, Boyer A, Lafon M-E, Gruson D, Lina B, et al. Fatal case of enterovirus 71 infection and rituximab
therapy, France, 2012 . Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Aug [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1908.130202
