Proximal radioulnar translocation with radial neck fracture and elbow dislocation is extremely rare. We report a case of a 5-year-old boy
who was presented with elbow dislocation, and proximal radioulnar translocation was diagnosed a day after the injury. Mini-open technique
was used to reduce the translocation and radial neck fracture. The patient finally regained full range of elbow motion and forearm rotation.
This case had clinical importance in that the reverse instability of the elbow was observed compared with the previous reports. The proximal
radioulnar translocation means that both the radius and ulna are dislocated from the humerus. Then, transposed such that the ulna appears
opposite to that of the capitellum, and the radial head appears opposite to the trochlea on radiographs . Dislocation of the elbow in
children is an uncommon injury and only 3–6 % of all elbow injuries . In addition, proximal radioulnar translocation associated with elbow
dislocation is an extremely rare combination of trauma to children. Since MacSween first reported in 1979, only 17 cases have been reported
in children [1, 2, 5, 8]. Initial diagnosis is sometimes difficult because the unexpected anatomical relationship is easily overlooked in
radiographs . We report an even rarer subtype of this translocation associated with a radial neck fracture and elbow dislocation. This case
had clinical importance in that reverse instability was observed compared with the previous reports. A 5-year-old boy was admitted to our
emergency center after a fall from a 2 m jungle gym onto his outstretched left hand. The patient complained of left elbow pain and
limitation of motion. Initial examination revealed a painful, swollen left elbow without neurovascular problems. The left elbow was held in
50o flexed position with the forearm in supinated position. The posterior elbow dislocation and radial head fracture were recognized at
initial radiographs (Fig. 1). The closed reduction was performed under intravenous sedation and the elbow was immobilized with long arm
splint. However, the pain did not subside on the following day and the forearm showed limatation of rotation, especially pronation. The
radiographs after reduction were reviewed carefully, and we realized the reversal anatomical relationship of the forearm bone with the
humerus. Magnetic resonance image was taken before surgery to evaluate associated soft tissue injury. The radial head was incarcerated
between the coronoid process and brachialis insertion (Fig. 2).Fig. 1Initial anteroposterior and lateral radiographs show elbow dislocation
and translocation of proximal radioulnar joint with radial neck fractureFig. 2Magnetic resonance image shows the radial head being caught
between brachialis tendon and cononoid process Initial anteroposterior and lateral radiographs show elbow dislocation and translocation of
proximal radioulnar joint with radial neck fracture Magnetic resonance image shows the radial head being caught between brachialis tendon
and cononoid process Closed reduction was planned again. Under general anesthesia, forearm can be extended and supinated, but cannot be
pronated beyond the neutral position (Fig. 3). Longitudinal traction and forced supination of the forearm with manual reduction on the
radial head failed to achieve reduction. A 1 cm skin incision was made on medial aspect of the proximal ulna. Freer was inserted through the
incision, and manual reduction of proximal radius was performed by pushing it laterally (Fig. 4). After reduction, stability of the proximal
radius was checked under fluoroscopy. The proximal radius was subluxated in supination of the forearm, but reduced in pronation of the
forearm (Fig. 5). After closed reduction for radial neck fracture using freer, the elbow was immobilized at 90o flexion and 45o pronation of
the forearm in long arm splint for 4 weeks. At the 2-month follow-up, flexion-extension arc of the elbow was almost recovered; however,
forearm rotation is limited yet. At the 6 and 12-month follow-up, the radiographs showed complete healing without pain but heterotopic
ossification was observed at anterior aspect of the proximal ulna (Fig. 6). The range of elbow motion and forearm rotation was completely
recovered (Fig. 7).Fig. 3Clinical photographs of forearm rotaion under general anesthesia show limitation of pronation beyond netral
position (left) comparing with supination (right)Fig. 4Intraoperative fluoroscopy shows freer pushing the proximal radius
laterallyFig. 5Fluoroscopic images show that the radial head is reduced in pronation (left), but subluxated in supination
(right)Fig. 6Radiographs at 6 months after the injury show well reduced elbow with calcification at proximal ulnaFig. 7Follow-up clinical
photographs 6 months after the injury show full flexion/extension of the elbow and full supination/pronation of the forearm Clinical
photographs of forearm rotaion under general anesthesia show limitation of pronation beyond netral position (left) comparing with supination
(right) Intraoperative fluoroscopy shows freer pushing the proximal radius laterally Fluoroscopic images show that the radial head is
reduced in pronation (left), but subluxated in supination (right) Radiographs at 6 months after the injury show well reduced elbow with
calcification at proximal ulna Follow-up clinical photographs 6 months after the injury show full flexion/extension of the elbow and full
supination/pronation of the forearm Proximal radioulnar translocation with elbow dislocation, also known as convergent elbow dislocation, is
exceedingly rare in children. Ever since MacSween reported the first case, there have been only 17 cases reported [1, 5, 8]. This
dislocation can be easily overlooked if the radiographs are not carefully evaluated . In seven cases among the 17 reported cases, there has
been a significant delay (from 5 days to 2 months) in recognizing the translocation . There are several reasons for delayed diagnosis.
Because the incidence of this injury is very low, a physician does not think about translocation. Clinically, the dislocated elbow is
reduced with “clunk” and flexion-extension arc is improved. However, the forearm is locked in almost complete pronation . Radiologically,
the lateral view may sometimes give an appearance of a well reduced joint after closed reduction . This finding makes us to overlook the
abnormal finding on the anteroposterior view, in which the radius is articulates with the trochlea, while the ulna is articulating with the
capitellum . In this case, we also initially missed the translocation. Clinical sign of continuous pain and limited rotation of forearm led
us to look at radiographs again, and then translocation could be diagnosed. This follows the pattern in the literature with almost half of
the cases being diagnosed late . The key to a correct early diagnosis is extra vigilance and careful inspection of the true anteroposterior
and lateral radiographs, as well as clinical suspicion about the possibility of translocation, when clinical signs of restricted forearm
rotation and pain continue even after reducing the dislocation. The mechanism of this injury is a fall onto the hyperpronated outstretched
hand, producing an axial load on the proximal aspect of the radius . Combourieu et al. also suggested the mechanism of translocation. The
proximal radioulnar translocation is thought to be caused by hyperpronation of the radius with substantial disruption of the ligaments and
soft tissues regarding the proximal radioulnar joint, especially the radial collateral ligament and the annular ligament. The radius then
spins along the anteriorly through the injured brachialis anterior tendon. MRI of this case shows that the dislocated radial head is
incarcerated between the coronoid process and brachialis tendon. The tendinous lesion becomes visible after a few weeks because of
heterotopic ossification at the anterior aspect of the ulna . Isbister proposed a different mechanism for translocation . Under axial
loading and continuous valgus strain, the ulna passed posterolaterally; whereas the radius crossed over the ulna in the medial aspect of the
joint. Associated injuries are radial head fractures [4, 9], radial neck fracture , coronoid process fracture and ulnar nerve palsy [3–5,
7]. Concomitant fractures can complicate the treatment plan, and hence the outcome can be less satisfactory [4, 7, 8]. Growth disturbance of
the radial head is a common potential outcome following elbow trauma in children. This finding suggests a disruption of epiphyseal vessel
due to the wide displacement of the proximal part of the radius at the time of injury . The clinical finding in this case is different from
the previous cases. Limitation of forearm pronation was more prominent than supination before reduction. In addition, subluxation of the
proximal radioulnar joint was observed in supination even after reduction. Radial neck fracture was suspected as a reason of different
clinical finding and reduction of the radial neck was attempted. However, instability did not improve although neck-shaft angle of the
radius was restored. Successful closed reduction had been reported in only a minority of cases . The reason may be late diagnosis,
significant soft tissue interposition preventing reduction, and the presence of associated injuries which necessitate operative
intervention. Open reductions through medial or lateral approach were performed in reported cases when the closed reduction failed. We
suggest a mini-open technique described in this case report. This method can lessen the additional soft tissue injury to the elbow and
chance of heterotopic ossification. Failure to diagnose this injury early may lead to severe restriction of elbow motion with significant
functional impairment . There are two keys to a early diagnosis. First is careful inspection of the true AP radiograph, which shows abnormal
articulation between the proximal radioulnar joint and humerus. The second is clinical sign after closed reduction of elbow dislocation,
limitation of forearm rotation and elbow motion, and unexplained continuous pain even after reduction. None.
