Hodgkin disease (HD) and medulloblastoma (MB) are common malignancies found in children and young adults, and radiotherapy is part of the
standard treatment. It was reported that these patients who received radiation therapy have an increased risk of cardiovascular late
effects. We compared the predicted risk of developing radiogenic cardiac toxicity after photon versus proton radiotherapies for a pediatric
patient with HD and a pediatric patient with MB. In the treatment plans, each patient’s heart was contoured in fine detail, including
substructures of the pericardium and myocardium. Risk calculations took into account both therapeutic and stray radiation doses. We
calculated the relative risk (RR) of cardiac toxicity using a linear risk model and the normal tissue complication probability (NTCP) values
using relative seriality and Lyman models. Uncertainty analyses were also performed. The RR values of cardiac toxicity for the HD patient
were 7.27 (proton) and 8.37 (photon), respectively; the RR values for the MB patient were 1.28 (proton) and 8.39 (photon), respectively. The
predicted NTCP values for the HD patient were 2.17% (proton) and 2.67% (photon) for the myocardium, and were 2.11% (proton) and 1.92%
(photon) for the whole heart. The predicted ratios of NTCP values (proton/photon) for the MB patient were much less than unity. Uncertainty
analyses revealed that the predicted ratio of risk between proton and photon therapies was sensitive to uncertainties in the NTCP model
parameters and the mean radiation weighting factor for neutrons, but was not sensitive to heart structure contours. The qualitative findings
of the study were not sensitive to uncertainties in these factors. We conclude that proton and photon radiotherapies confer similar
predicted risks of cardiac toxicity for the HD patient in this study, and that proton therapy reduced the predicted risk for the MB patient
in this study. Hodgkin disease (HD) and medulloblastoma (MB) are among the most common malignancies found in children and young adults, and
radiotherapy (mediastinal radiation for HD and radiotherapy to the cranium and spine for MB) is part of the standard treatment. Coronary
vascular disease was found to be associated with a higher radiation dose in HD survivors , and the leading cause of noncancer mortality in
radiation-treated HD patients is cardiovascular disease . It was found that craniospinal irradiation (CSI) patients are at risk for
significant cardiac dysfunction and asymmetric impairment of heart development, where asymmetric distribution of radiation may be the cause
. Pediatric survivors who received radiotherapy and chemotherapy for brain tumors are at increased risk for cardiovascular late effects .
Proton therapy typically delivers a lower dose to normal tissues than photon therapy . However, stray radiation dose from neutrons generated
during proton therapy is of concern . Realistic calculations of stray radiation dose within a patient are computationally complex and have
only recently been accomplished for proton therapy . Recently, there has been much progress in research to compare the risks of second
cancers after photon and proton radiotherapies . In contrast, relatively little attention has been paid in the literature to predictive
comparisons of other late effects, such as cardiac toxicity , for pediatric patients who received radiotherapy. The aim of this work was to
compare the predicted risks of cardiac toxicity after photon versus proton radiotherapies for a pediatric HD patient and a pediatric MB
patient. Both therapeutic and secondary radiation doses were included in the risk predictions. We calculated the therapeutic photon and
proton absorbed doses and secondary photon absorbed doses using a commercial treatment planning system (TPS); the secondary radiation dose
for proton therapy was obtained from Monte Carlo simulations. Dose-risk models from the literature were used to estimate the risk of cardiac
toxicity, and rigorous uncertainty analyses were carried out on risk predictions. For the purposes of this study, we created new proton and
photon treatment plans using the same commercial TPS (Eclipse version 8.9, Varian Medical Systems, Palo Alto, CA) for two patients who were
formerly treated at The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center following protocol approved by our institutional review board. Both
patients were treated with passively scattered proton therapy with treatment plans having the same beam arrangements as those planned for
this study, but were originally planned using an earlier version of the TPS software. Our proton therapy facility uses a synchrotron
accelerator and passive scattered proton beams (PSPT) were used for the treatment plans in this study. The photon treatment plans in this
study were planned for 6MV beams delivered using a linear accelerator (Varian 2100, Palo Alto, CA) equipped with a 120 leaf multileaf
collimator (Millenium, Varian, Palo Alto) . We decided not consider intensity modulated proton therapy (IMPT) because at the time the study
was conducted, IMPT was not in clinical use for HD or MB. Therefore, this would have reduced the clinical relevance of the paper.
Furthermore, the management of organ motion and interplay effects with scanned beams are not well understood or sufficiently developed to
allow a comparison of comparable levels of radiotherapy technologies. Furthermore, IMPT is not even available at many proton centers. The
first patient was a 10-year-old girl diagnosed with HD. The clinical target volume (CTV) was delineated by the radiation oncologist and
included demonstrated tumor and tissue with presumed tumor . The proton treatment plan comprised parallel opposed anterior-posterior (AP)
and posterior-anterior (PA) fields having energies of 140 and 180 MeV, respectively. A range compensator and collimating aperture for each
field were separately designed to achieve coverage of the CTV while including allowances for uncertainties in beam range, penumbra, patient
set-up, and potential target motion. The photon plan included five co-planar intensity-modulated beams with five gantry angles (0°, 20°,
170°, 190°, and 340°), selected to minimize dose in the lungs. The CTV was expanded 5 mm isotropically to create a planning target volume
(PTV) for the photon plan, and the plan was optimized using the inverse planning method. The total prescribed dose (according to National
Cancer Center Network (NCCN) guideline) was 36 Gy relative biological effectiveness (RBE) (i.e., 32.7 Gy × 1.1 to reflect the biological
effectiveness of protons relative to photons) and 36 Gy for the proton and photon treatment plans, respectively; 18 fractions were used for
both treatment plans. The second patient was a 4-year-old boy who was diagnosed with MB. His proton treatment plan included right and left
posterior oblique cranial fields (gantry angles 105° and 255°) and two PA spinal fields. The target volume included the cranial and spinal
cavities and entire vertebral body (to prevent asymmetric bone growth caused by non-uniform dose distribution in the vertebral bodies). The
photon treatment plan consisted of two opposed lateral cranial fields (gantry angles 90° and 270°) and one PA spinal field. The beam energy
for all photon fields was 6 MV, and the plan included junction shifts after 9 Gy and 16.2 Gy. The prescribed dose was 23.4 Gy (RBE) and 23.4
Gy for the proton and photon treatment plans, respectively; 13 fractions were used for both treatment plans. Additional details of the CSI
treatment planning can be found elsewhere . The external surface of the heart was contoured in every computed tomography (CT) slice from the
inferior border of the right pulmonary artery to the apex of the heart. The pericardium was defined as a 2-mm shell inside the external
heart surface contours. The myocardium was a shell having an external contour identical to the internal contour of the pericardium and a
thickness varying from 1 cm to 2 cm, with the thickness on the left side being twice that on the right side. The therapeutic doses from
photon and proton plans were estimated from the TPS directly. The secondary dose from proton therapy was calculated by our Monte Carlo
Proton Radiotherapy Treatment Planning system, which uses the Monte Carlo N-particle eXtended code (MCNPX, version 2.6, Los Alamos National
Laboratory) as a dose engine. Details of this system were previously described . The secondary dose from the photon plan was obtained from
the TPS for the following reasons. Howell et al. recently reported that the TPS used in this work (for 6 MV) was accurate to the level of 5%
of the prescribed dose. In this study, the heart and major cardiac substructures were entirely within the 5% isodose line for both patients;
consequently, it was feasible to accurately assess the organ dose directly using the TPS. The equivalent dose in each organ, HT, was
calculated by multiplying the organ dose, DT, by a mean radiation weighting factor, wR—. The wR— values were taken as 1.1 for proton primary
fields-that is, dose values were reported in Gy (RBE)-and 1.0 for photon fields. The mean radiation weighting factor wR— values for neutrons
were obtained from Monte Carlo simulations (unpublished data) and previous report , following the methods in literature . Based on modeling
methods we found in a comprehensive search of the literature, we calculated the relative risks (RR) of radiogenic cardiac toxicity using the
linear model (α1 = 0.6, 95% confidence interval , 0.2 to 2.5) and normal tissue complication probability (NTCP) using relative seriality
(RS) and Lyman models. (The models are summarized in the Appendix.) Table 1 lists the NTCP model parameter sets from the literature. The
model parameters are from patients treated for HD , breast cancer , esophageal cancer , and historical outcome data . Only the parameters
based on HD data were used in the risk calculations for the HD patient in this study. However, to our knowledge, the literature contains no
report that establishes a detailed relationship between radiation dose and the incidence of cardiac toxicity for MB patients. Consequently,
NTCP model parameters specific to MB patients were not available. Thus, all the possible sets of parameters in Table 1 were tried for the MB
patient, but the ratios of NTCP (RNTCP), from proton therapy to photon therapy, were presented instead of NTCP values themselves, because of
the large uncertainties associated with the NTCP values. Predicted NTCP and RNTCP values for cardiac structures based on existing model
parameters; for the HD patient, NTCP and RNTCP values based on correct literature parameters were listed; for the MB patient, calculations
were carried out by using all possible parameter sets, and only RNTCP values were listed To compare risk values between photon and proton
plans, we defined the ratio of RR (RRR), based on the linear model, as (1) RRR = R R proton / R R photon , and the RNTCP was defined as (2)
RNTCP = NTC P proton / NTC P proton . The mean whole-heart doses were used to calculate RR values. Dose volume histograms (DVHs) for heart
structures were exported from the TPS to calculate the corresponding NTCP values. For the photon plan, the DVHs were taken from the TPS
directly. For the proton plan, the DVHs for primary dose were obtained from the TPS and a mean neutron equivalent dose (neutron absorbed
dose multiplied by neutron wR—) was then added uniformly to the primary DVH, which was appropriate considering the secondary neutron dose
was spatially nearly uniform. Each step in the differential DVH was corrected to a 2 Gy or Gy (RBE)/fraction schedule by using the linear
quadratic model . An α/β ratio of 3 was chosen for the late effects in the heart . There are potentially large and poorly known
uncertainties in the NTCP model parameters for the MB patient. We performed a sensitivity test of the predicted RNTCP values to these
uncertainties by varying each model parameter over its plausible range (see Table 2). Predicted RNTCP values for cardiac structures for the
MB patient using combinations of NTCP model parameters (min: D50 = 40 Gy, n = 1, m = 0.05; max: D50 = 80 Gy, n = 0.2, m = 0.5), the
myocardium (min: D50 = 40 Gy, γ = 1.5, s = 0.5; max: D50 = 80 Gy, γ = 0.8, s = 1), and the whole heart (min: D50 = 40 Gy, γ = 1.5, s = 0.5;
max: D50 = 80 Gy, γ = 0.8, s = 1) There are large uncertainties associated with neutron wR—. The International Commission on Radiological
Protection recommended in Publication 92 that the maximum neutron wR should be 20. We performed a sensitivity test to quantify the impact of
uncertainty on the wR— values by using different scaling factors in cardiac toxicity calculations (see Figure 1). Sensitivity tests.
Sensitivity of the predicted (a)RRR values, and RNTCP values for the (b) pericardium, (c) myocardium, and (d) whole heart to changes in the
neutron radiation weighting factor wR—. The NTCP model parameters used for the calculations are listed in each panel. Contouring of heart
substructures was challenging and may have introduced large uncertainties. In the prevailing standard of care, CT imaging methods used in
treatment planning for external beam radiotherapy do not clearly show these substructures. The methods for radiographic identification and
delineation of the heart substructures are not standardized, and knowledge of the uncertainty in the contouring process is incomplete . For
these reasons, we performed sensitivity tests to quantify the influence of heart contouring on the RNTCP values. We redefined the
pericardium as a 1-cm shell (i.e., 5 times thicker than the shell in the baseline calculations) inside the external heart surface and the
myocardium to be a 1-cm shell inside the inner surface of the thicker pericardium (Figure 2). Heart substructure contouring: (a) baseline
contouring, and (b) revised contouring that was used for uncertainty analysis. Figure 3 shows therapeutic dose distributions in the heart
area from photon and proton treatment plans, clearly revealing that proton beams provided a much lower exit dose to the heart for the MB
patient, while comparable doses were delivered to the heart from both plans for the HD patient. The mean organ doses to the heart
substructures are listed in Table 3, including the secondary neutron doses from proton therapy. Figure 4 shows the differential DVHs from
photon and proton plans. Axial and sagittal slices of dose distributions from the photon and proton plans. (a, b) Slices for the HD patient
and (c, d) slices for the MB patient. Heart contour (red) was displayed for both patients, and CTV contour (blue) was displayed for the HD
patient. Differential DVHs of the whole heart and heart substructures. DVHs from (a) proton and (b) photon treatment plans for the MB
patient and the HD patient. For the photon plan, the DVHs were taken from TPS directly; for the proton plan, the DVHs for primary dose were
obtained from TPS, then a mean neutron equivalent dose was added uniformly to the primary DVHs. Mean organ doses (Gy) and equivalent doses
(Sv) to heart and substructures from proton and photon plans for the pediatric MB patient and HD patient The RR values of cardiac toxicity
following proton and photon therapies for the HD patient were 7.27 (95% CI, 3.09 to 27.12) and 8.37 (95% CI, 3.46 to 31.70), respectively,
and the corresponding RRR was 0.87. The RR values following proton and photon CSI for the MB patient were 1.28 (95% CI, 1.09 to 2.18) and
8.39 (95% CI, 3.46 to 31.78), respectively, and the corresponding RRR was 0.15. Table 1 lists the predicted NTCP and RNTCP values for the
heart structures. The NTCP values for the HD patient were 2.17% (proton) and 2.67% (photon) with the myocardium as the organ at risk, and
were 2.11% (proton) and 1.92% (photon) with the whole heart as the organ at risk. The predicted RNTCP values for the MB patient were always
much less than unity, regardless of the parameter sets used. Figure 5 plots RNTCP values for the whole heart, myocardium, and pericardium
for the MB patient, using various NTCP model parameters. The Lyman model was tested for the pericardium, while the RS model was tested for
the myocardium and the whole heart. For the pericardium, the RNTCP values were not sensitive to changes in n values but were sensitive to
changes in D50 values and very sensitive to changes in m values (as m increased from 0.1 to 1, the RNTCP increased substantially). For the
myocardium and the whole heart, the RNTCP values were not sensitive to changes in D50 or s values but were very sensitive to changes in γ
values (as γ increased from 0.1 to 2, the RNTCP decreased substantially). Given these results, we selected reasonable combinations to
estimate the minimum and maximum RNTCP values (Table 2). The intervals for the NTCP model parameters were set large enough to include all
published parameters from the literature. Results of the RNTCP calculations are listed in Table 2, and they are all less than unity.
Surfaces of predicted RNTCP values for heart substructures as functions of different NTCP parameters for the MB patient. (Top) The surfaces
displayed were calculated for m values of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, and 1 (pericardium) and γ values of 0.1, 0.5, 1, and 2 (myocardium and whole
heart). (Bottom) The surfaces displayed were calculated for n values of 0.1, 0.3, 0.5, and 1 (pericardium) and s values of 0.1, 0.5, and 1
(myocardium and whole heart). Color has been interpolated to facilitate visualization. The sensitivity of RRR to scaling factor of neutron
wR— values and the sensitivity of RNTCP to the wR— scaling factor are shown in Figure 1. The RRR value changed between 0.85 and 1.29 for the
HD patient as the wR— value was scaled from 0.5 times to 10 times the nominal value; they were less than unity for the MB patient in all
cases considered. The RNTCP values varied between 0.79 and 1.36 for the HD patient with myocardium as the organ at risk, and they varied
between 1.06 and 1.86 for the HD patient with the whole heart as the organ at risk. The RNTCP values were all much less than unity for the
MB patient. The RNTCP calculations obtained when using different heart-contouring methods are listed in Table 4. In all cases, the predicted
RNTCP values did not change much from the baseline for both patients. Predicted RNTCP values for cardiac structures for the HD patient and
the MB patient when using revised contours We predicted risks of cardiac toxicities for a 4-year-old boy receiving photon or proton CSI for
MB and a 10-year-old girl receiving photon or proton therapy for HD. Therapeutic and stray radiation doses were considered. To our
knowledge, this study incorporated, for the first time, patient-specific stray neutron doses into the NTCP calculations. We used published
model parameters in the risk calculations, and we examined the sensitivity of RR values to NTCP model parameter values, the neutron wR—
values and heart contouring. The major finding of this study is that proton and photon therapies conferred comparable predicted risk of
radiogenic cardiac toxicity for the HD patient, and proton therapy reduced the risk for the MB patient compared to photon therapy. Our
predicted RR and NTCP values for the HD patient agree well with those in the literature, in which the relative risks of cardiac mortality
among HD patients range from 2.2 to 12.7 , and the relative risk of myocardial infarction of pediatric HD survivors is reported as 12.2 (95%
CI, 5.2 to 28.2) . Those data agree well with our calculated RR of 8.37 (95% CI, 3.46 to 31.7) for the photon plan, considering that most of
the historical treatments used photon techniques. The absolute excess risk of cardiac mortality ranges from 0.093% to 0.5% per year among HD
patients in the literature , which means a 0.47% to 2.5% risk in the first 5 years after exposure. Our predicted NTCP values at 5 years
after exposure were 2.67% for myocardium and 1.92% for the whole heart. Again, they are in reasonable agreement with the literature. The RRR
and RNTCP values for cardiac toxicity were sensitive to the uncertainties in wR— for neutrons. Especially for the HD patient, the RRR and
RNTCP values were higher than unity when wR— was scaled to high values, indicating that the predicted risk of cardiac toxicity from proton
therapy may be higher than that from photon therapy if the RBE of stray neutrons is large. While the advantage of proton therapy is not
obvious in terms of reducing cardiac toxicity for this HD patient, the lower out-of-field dose would possibly decrease risks of other late
effects . It is possible that risk from proton therapy could be reduced if IMPT were used rather than PSPT. However, we focused on PSPT
because it is the technique that is most widely available. Considering the breadth of NTCP model parameters we tested, and the substantial
differences in the dose distributions between proton and photon CSI, we interpret the results of this work as suggesting that proton CSI
carries a lower risk of cardiac toxicity than photon CSI. In this type of predictive analysis, the calculated NTCP values are highly
dependent on the clinical data and thus are more suitable for comparing the relative risks of treatments rather than predicting absolute
outcomes . This study has some limitations. First, we used a single case for each type of disease. While CSI is the standard for MB
treatment, various treatment fields exist for HD patients. However, the emphasis of this paper is on the methodology and this paper is the
preliminary report of a follow-up cohort study, which is being carried out by our group. Second, we applied risk models that carry large
uncertainties to the MB patient. However, our sensitivity test revealed the robustness of the qualitative finding that proton CSI carries a
lower risk of cardiac toxicity than photon CSI. Third, the heart contouring was simplified in this study, but we believe this kind of
simplification is warranted, given the large uncertainties associated with the NTCP model itself. Again, our sensitivity tests of the
effects of varying the heart contouring strengthened our conclusion. Finally, we only considered radiation induced cardiac toxicity because
this is the focus of this study, while chemotherapy was also reported to significantly increase risk of cardiac toxicity . However,
according to Tukenova et al. , the radiation dose did not significantly interact with chemotherapy dose, which justified the risk
calculations in our study. Proton therapy conferred a similar risk of radiogenic cardiac toxicity as photon therapy for the HD patient in
this study, while substantially reducing the risk for the MB patient in this study. Sensitivity analyses revealed that RRR and RNTCP values
were sensitive to uncertainty in the mean neutron wR— values, and RNTCP was sensitive to the NTCP model parameters but not sensitive to
variations in the heart structure contours. The qualitative findings of the study were not sensitive to the uncertainties in these factors.
Tukenova et al. reported a relationship between the mean radiation dose to the heart and the risk of cardiac mortality based on a large
sample of follow-up data on childhood cancer survivors and they concluded the best dose–response model was: (3) RR = 1 + α 1 D , where RR is
the relative risk, D is the mean heart dose, and α1, which is the linear coefficient, is 0.6 (95% CI, 0.2 to 2.5). The same group reported a
linear model to estimate risk of cardiac disorder and a linear quadratic model to estimate risk of cardiac failure in 2006 . Considering
that reference is the most up-to-date, the linear model in it was chosen for this study. The relative seriality model is based on the
Poisson model of cell survival . The probability of cell death when irradiating a tissue to dose D is (4) P D = 2 − exp eγ 1 − D / D 50 ,
where γ is the maximum relative slope of the dose–response curve and D50 is the dose that will result in a 50% probability of a
complication. The normal tissue complication probability (NTCP) due to inhomogeneous irradiation is given by (5) NTCP = 1 − ∏ i = 1 n 1 − P
D i s V i / V 1 / s , where s is the relative seriality that describes the hybrid serial/parallel architecture of the organ, (s = 0
indicates parallel organization, while s = 1 indicates serial organization), n is the number of voxels in the dose-calculation volume, Di is
the dose in each subvolume, Vi is the volume of each subvolume in the differential dose-volume histogram, and V is the total volume of the
organ. The Lyman model assumes that the probability of complication is a normal distribution as a function of dose to the partially
irradiated volume V. The NTCP is given by(6)NTCP=12π∫−∞te−t2/2dt (7) t = D − T D 50 V / m ⋅ T D 50 V (8) T D 50 V = T D 50 1 / V n where
TD50(V) is the tolerance dose that would result in a 50% complication probability for the partial volume V, TD50(1) is the tolerance dose
that would result in a 50% complication probability for the full organ, n indicates the volume effect (n close to 1 means the volume effect
is strong), and m is inversely proportional to the slope of the dose–response curve. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. RZ participated in the design of the project, participated in dose reconstructions, did the risk calculations and data analysis,
and drafted/edited the manuscript. RH participated in creating photon plans and assisted with reviewing/editing the manuscript. KH
participated in creating proton and photon plans and dose reconstructions. AG participated in creating proton plans. PT assisted with
reviewing/editing the manuscript and participated in dose reconstructions. AM provided guidance on treatment plan design and approved all
treatment plans. WN designed the project, assisted in reviewing/editing the manuscript and provided funding. All authors read and approved
the final manuscript. The authors are grateful to Luanne Jorewicz and Kathryn Carnes for their assistance in preparing and editing this
manuscript. This work was supported in part by Sowell-Huggins scholarship (R Zhang), The University of Texas Graduate School of Biological
Sciences Presidents’ Research Scholarship (R Zhang), the National Cancer Institute (award 1 R01 CA131463-01A1) (W Newhauser), Northern
Illinois University through a subcontract of a Department of Defense contract (award W81XWH-08-1-0205) (W Newhauser), and the Fogarty
International Center (award K01TW008409) (P Taddei).
