The first two authors contributed equally to this work Hereditary vitreous amyloidosis (HVA) is a genetic ophthalmological disorder. The
purpose of this study was to investigate whether a mutation in the transthyretin (TTR) gene is associated with HVA in Han Chinese families.
We performed clinical evaluation of three Han Chinese families with HVA and sequenced the entire exon of the TTR gene in probands and normal
individuals from the families. The identified mutation was further genotyped in 196 unrelated healthy controls. Evolutionary conservation
analysis and structural prediction were used to infer the potential pathogenicity of the mutation. Clinical penetrance of HVA varied in the
three families (11/30 in Family A, 8/83 in Family B, and 7/47 in Family C). A comprehensive medical examination of the patients showed no
signs of abnormality except ophthalmologic symptoms, in which floccular turbidity and high echo in both vitreous bodies were observed in all
probands. Further histochemical examination of the vitrectomy specimen with Congo red staining identified amyloid deposits. A heterozygous
mutation c.307G>C (p.G83R) in exon 3 of the TTR gene was identified in all patients, but not in some unaffected family members. Screening of
196 unrelated normal controls revealed no presence of this mutation. This mutation changed the highly conserved glycine to arginine in the
83rd position and altered the tertiary structure of the TTR protein. Mutation p.G83R in the TTR protein is associated with HVA in Chinese
families. The seemingly specific distribution of this mutation in Han Chinese may be used for clinical diagnosis. Familial amyloidotic
polyneuropathy (FAP; MIM #105210) is an autosomal dominant neurodegenerative disease, which affects multiple tissues and organisms, such as
the kidney, heart, and eyes. FAP occurs worldwide, and most patients develop clinical expression of the disorder in their 30s and 40s . In
some cases, vitreous opacity is the first and/or the merely clinical feature . Several genes have been reported to be the pathogenic factors
for this disorder. Among them, the transthyretin (TTR) gene is the most common; about 99% of cases are caused by mutations in this gene .
TTR is one of three plasma proteins with a tetrameric structure. The main function of TTR is to transport thyroid hormones and retinol
(vitamin A) in vertebrata. TTR exists and is highly conserved only in vertebrates . Since the first pathogenic mutation in the TTR gene was
reported in 1984 , more than 100 mutations have been identified in patients with FAP . Mutation p.V30M is the most frequent and occurs in
different populations, albeit it is mainly distributed in patients from Sweden, Japan, and Portugal . Heterogeneity of clinical symptoms is
common in families with FAP, even in the presence of the same TTR mutation . The exact pathogenic mechanism of FAP caused by the TTR
mutation(s) has not been well explained, but liver transplantation has been reported to relieve disease expression and prolong patients’
lifespans . There have been limited reports of FAP in Chinese families . In this study, we report three Chinese families with merely
clinical expression of hereditary vitreous amyloidosis (HVA) and a TTR gene mutation, c.307G>C (p.G83R). Clinical examination and molecular
analysis indicated that this rare mutation was the etiological factor for the three families and affected only the vitreous body. Nine
patients with decreasing vision and six individuals without any ophthalmological disorders from three Han Chinese families were clinically
evaluated, diagnosed, and recruited at the Yunnan Aier Eye Hospital. The general clinical information of these 15 subjects was listed in
Table 1. The families were from Yunnan Province, China, and they have no self-reported affinity with each other. All patients developed
blindness or had seriously visual impairment at the time when we collected the biological samples. Blood samples from nine patients and six
normal individuals (each 3 ml) from the three families were collected by using vacuum blood collection tubes with K2EDTA, and stored at -20
°C prior to use. Written informed consent conforming to the tenets of the Declaration of Helsinki was obtained from each participant before
the study was conducted. The institutional review board of the Kunming Institute of Zoology approved this study. amutation c.307G>C in the
TTR gene is heterozygous in all patients. bindicates the visual acuity before operation; OS and OD mean left and right eye, respectively. LP
- light perception. cindicates the visual acuity after operation; OS and OD mean left and right eye, respectively. Physical measurements for
each family member were performed following the World Health Organization Multinational Monitoring of Trends and Determinants in
Cardiovascular Disease Project standards. Ophthalmological measurements, including visual acuity test, intraocular pressure, visual field,
color vision, slit-lamp photograph, dilated fundus examination, B-mode ultrasonography, electroretinogram, and visual evoked potential test,
were analyzed blindly by two ophthalmologists. Routine blood tests and biochemical tests, urine routine examination, liver function test,
kidney function tests, chest X-rays, electrocardiograph, and examinations of peripheral nerve system were performed to reveal potential
dysfunction of these organs. Pathological tests of the vitreous bodies of the probands with Congo red staining were performed after
vitrectomy and gas tamponade. Genomic DNAs were isolated from the whole blood of all examined individuals from the three families by using
the AxyPrep Blood Genomic DNA Miniprep Kit (Axygen Biosciences, Union City, CA). We also isolated genomic DNA using the same approach from
the whole blood of 196 unrelated healthy individuals from Yunnan Province who attended regular medical examinations. Three pairs of primers
were designed to amplify and sequence four exons of the TTR gene in all examined family members (Table 2). The PCR amplification consisted
of an initial denaturing cycle at 94 °C for 5 min, 30 cycles of denaturation at 94 °C for 30 s, annealing at 50 °C for 30 s, and extension
at 72 °C for 30 s, followed by a final extension 72 °C for 5 min. We further sequenced the exon with the identified mutation in 196 healthy
individuals by using the BigDye Terminator v3.1 Cycle Sequencing Kit (ABI, New York, NY) and the 3730 DNA Analyzer. Evolutionary
conservation analysis of the TTR protein mutation was performed in ten vertebrate species (including Homo sapiens, Pan troglodytes, Mus
musculus, Rattus norvegicus, Bos taurus, Ovis aries, Sus scrofa, Gallus gallus, Xenopus laevis, and Danio rerio). Swiss-PdbViewer software
was used to predict whether the TTR mutation could change protein structure. In addition, we determined the mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA)
haplogroup status of each maternally unrelated patient using the methods described in our previous study to discern potential maternal
kinship among the three families. In brief, each sample was amplified and analyzed for a 1.4 kb fragment (region 16024-850) that covers the
entire mtDNA control region and was classified on the basis of haplogroup motif and (near-)matching with reported Chinese. aExons 1 and 2
were amplified together by one pair of primers. In Family A, the proband (III:20) is a 34-year-old man who had had vision failure for 1
year. His visual acuity was gradually impaired: He saw floaters in both eyes, and finally developed complete vision loss. Eleven of 30
members in this family (including one deceased patient, I:1) experienced vision loss in their 30s (Figure 1A). The proband (III:21) of
Family B is a 50-year-old woman who suffered vision problem in both eyes 5 years before and underwent an operation in her left eye 2 years
before. Eight of 83 members of Family B had ophthalmologic features of FAP (Figure 1B). The proband (III:7) of Family C is a 59-year-old man
who had vision loss at the age of 40. Seven of 43 individuals of Family C were confirmed to suffer visual problems. Pedigrees of three
Chinese families with hereditary vitreous amyloidosis. The filled symbols indicate patients with vitreous amyloidosis. Penetrance of disease
varied in Family A, Family B, and Family C. The probands are marked with arrows. The samples with a slash indicate deceased individuals. The
clinical phenotypes and examination results were similar in the three families. Though some patients in the three families, such as II:7 in
Family A and the probands in Family B (III:21) and Family C (III:7), were older, they did not express any abnormality in other
organs/tissues. The visual acuity of the patients ranged from light perception to 1.2 before surgery (Table 1), but the intraocular pressure
was normal in all patients. Amyloidosis and high echoes were identified with the slit-lamp photograph test and B-mode ultrasonography
(Figure 2), respectively. The results for the visual evoked potential test, retinal vessels, electroretinogram, and other routine
measurements were normal in all patients. Eyesight of all patients was rescued after vitrectomy and gas tamponade. Pathological examination
of Congo red staining showed amyloid deposition in the vitreous body of all probands (Figure 2). Other physical examinations, including
routine blood tests and biochemical tests, urine routine examination, liver function test, kidney function tests, chest X-rays,
electrocardiograph, and the examinations of peripheral nerve system revealed no potential dysfunction of these organs in the probands.
Ophthalmologic examinations of the left eye of the proband (III:20) from Family A. Slit-lamp photograph (A) and dilated fundus examination
(B) show the floccular turbid of the vitreous body. B-mode ultrasonography shows the high echo in the vitreous body (C). Histochemical
examination of vitrectomy specimen stained with Congo red shows amyloid deposits (in red; D). We amplified and sequenced the most common
candidate gene, the TTR gene, and detected only a rare missense heterozygous mutation c.307G>C (p.G83R) in exon 3 of the probands of the
three families (Figure 3A). After screening this mutation in all collected subjects from the three families and 196 unrelated healthy
controls, we found that all patients, but not the normal controls (excluding individuals III:27 and IV:20 in Family B who had no
ophthalmological or other symptoms but had mutation c.307G>C), harbored this mutation. Conservation analysis of ten vertebrate species
indicated this rare mutation changed a highly conserved glycine to arginine in position 83 of the TTR protein (Figure 3B). As shown in
Figure 4, the predicted three-dimensional structure of the TTR protein was changed by p.G83R. Analysis of the pathogenic mutation p.G83R of
the transthyretin (TTR) protein in vertebrates. A: The sequencing electropherogram shows the mutated region in a normal control (III:23) and
a patient (III:21) in Family B. B: Evolutionary analysis of position 83 in the TTR protein is shown. Protein sequences of Homo sapiens
(CAG33189), Pan troglodytes (NP_001009137), Mus musculus (AAH24702), Rattus norvegicus (NP_036813), Bos taurus (NP_776392), Ovis aries
(NP_001009800), Sus scrofa (NP_999377), Gallus gallus (NP_990666), Xenopus laevis (NP_001081348), and Danio rerio (AAI64894) were retrieved
from GenBank. Comparison of homology modeling predicted transthyretin protein with and without mutant p.G83R. The side chain of the mutant
was changed by p.G83R. mtDNA analysis of five maternally unrelated patients from the three families suggested that they belonged to
different mtDNA haplogroups (Table 3): Patients III:14 and III:20 in Family A belonged to haplogroup D4b1 and B5a, respectively. Patient
III:21 in Family B had a haplogroup status of G. Patients II:1 and III:1 in Family C belonged to haplogroups D4 and F, respectively. This
result indicated that there is no potential maternal kinship among these families. The five mtDNA control region sequences have been
deposited in GenBank under accession numbers JX988785-JX988789. amtDNA sequence variation was scored relative to the revise Cambridge
Reference Sequence . Though familial amyloidotic polyneuropathy occurs and is distributed worldwide, most cases have been reported in Japan,
Portugal, and Sweden . Some patients with FAP express complex clinical features, and the most frequently impaired tissue is the peripheral
nerve system . However, several patients experienced only decreasing eyesight and vitreous amyloidosis . Here we reported three Chinese
families with vitreous amyloidosis and the same rare heterozygous mutation p.G83R in the TTR protein. The affected members in Family A
presented progressive visual disturbance in their 30s; the patients in Family B and Family C had visual failure in their 40s. All patients
in the three families expressed only visual impairment, and their eyesight was rescued after ophthalmologic surgery. Most of the cases of
FAP are caused by a common mutation p.V30M of the TTR protein, and only a few have been caused by other rare mutations . The mutant spectra
of the TTR protein are diversiform in different populations . In this study, the patients from the three Chinese families harbored the same
mutation p.G83R. Intriguingly, this mutation was previously reported in three Chinese families with vitreous amyloidosis (note that one of
the two families reported in was first reported in , but this was not mentioned in their later paper ; mutation p.G83R was named p.G103R in
the family reported in ). Similar to our study, there are no other clinical features excluding decreasing vision and vitreous amyloidosis in
the probands of these three reported Chinese families . A search for literature identified three more Chinese families with HVA with
different TTR mutations (p. K35Y and p.L55R were reported in ; p.R54G was reported in ). Evidently, mutant p.G83R is common in Chinese
patients with HVA (six occurrences in nine families), similar to mutant p.V30M in patients with FAP. More Chinese patients with HVA, even
sporadic cases of vitreous amyloidosis, should be screened to validate this pattern. We determined the mtDNA background and haplogroups of
five patients from the three families and excluded the possibility of potential maternal kinship among these families. This result suggests
that mutation p.G83R might occur independently in the three families. The seemingly common distribution of this mutation in Han Chinese with
HVA may be used for clinical diagnosis. Two individuals with c.307G>C (III:27 and IV:20) in Family B did not express any symptoms at the
time of analysis. As these two individuals were younger than the average age of onset of the other patients in Family B, we speculate that
the clinical onset of HVA is influenced by age, at least for members in this family. Detection of the mutation in these normal members may
offer insight into early protection and prevention treatments. Conservative evolution analysis indicated that mutation p.G83R occurs in a
highly conserved position and might impair the protein structure and function (Figure 4). We have speculated that the presence of mutation
p.G83R might impair the tertiary structure of the TTR protein, leading to production of insoluble aggregates of the mutant protein . Further
experimental analyses should be performed to confirm the predicted pathogenicity of mutant p.G83R. Moreover, it is worth clarifying why the
TTR mutant p.G83R influences only the vitreous body but not other tissues and how this mutation causes the disorder. In short, we reported
three Chinese families with HVA and mutation c.307G>C (p.G83R) in the TTR gene. Our study indicated that TTR mutant p.G83R might be a common
pathogenic mutation in Chinese patients with HVA. Examining more families with HVA and functional characterization of mutant p.G83R is
essential to further confirm our findings. We thank the individuals who participated in this study. This study was supported by the National
Natural Science Foundation of China (30925021 and 81200725), Yunnan Province (2009CI119).
