Head rotation in a patient with diagnosis of brain death (BD) has been scarcely reported. We report a new case, in order to highlight the
importance of a correct identification of such movements to consider the legal implication revolving around the diagnosis of BD. A 42-year-
old male mechanic was admitted to the ICU, after a 10-minute cardiopulmonary resuscitation for asystole following thoracic trauma. Left
mydriasis and a Glasgow Coma Score of 3/15 were objectified. By 28 hours post arrest, brainstem reflexes disappeared, and profound
cardiovascular instability developed 45 hours post arrest. Criteria for BD were fulfilled . On day 5 post arrest, the electroencephalogram
was isoelectric; the correlated video displayed images consisting of a slow turning movement of the patient's head from side to side after
nociceptive stimuli, as well as spontaneously, with a persistence of seconds (see Additional file 1). Angiographic computed tomography
documents the intracranial circulatory arrest, confirming BD. The lateral head rotation arises primarily from activity of the spinal portion
of the accessory (XI cranial) nerve and the cervical spinal cord (for example, sternocleidomastoid, trapezius and anterior vertebral
muscles). The accessory nerve has a cranial and spinal component. The second to fourth spinal roots supply motor fibers to
sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles. The anterior vertebral muscles receive innervation from the second to seventh cervical nerves. In
a BD patient, head turning movements have been described as a spontaneous automatism, as well as a reflex when induced after a stimulus . In
BD, the mechanisms underlying such movement remain obscure; nevertheless, it has been postulated that disconnection of the motor control
corticospinal tracts may increase the excitability at the spinal level, and the cervical spinal cord may be a trigger of spontaneous
movements in a hypoxic condition . Further studies that clarify the characteristics of the involved generator will play a role in
demonstrating these theories, confirming the spinal genesis of such complex movements. BD: brain death. The authors declare that they have
no competing interests. A video showing the slow turning movement of the BD patient's head from side to side after nociceptive stimuli.
Click here for file The authors thank the Radiology Department for technical and analytical support with the angiographic computed
tomography images. Written consent to publish was obtained from the patient's next of kin.
