Nascimento HM wrote the manuscript and collected the data. Sousa JM wrote the manuscript. Campos M collected and revised the data. Belfort
Jr collected the data and revised the final draft. Dear Editor, Quinolones were first introduced in 1962, and their excellent oral
absorption, good tissue distribution in tissue, and urinary concentrations, which exceed the minimum inhibitory concentration for many
common pathogens, popularized their use in routine clinical practice. Structural modifications of quinolones resulted in improved
pharmacokinetics, with a longer elimination half-life, which permitted once-daily dosing and improved tissue penetration. For this reason
and many others, fourth generation compounds, such as moxifloxacin, are increasingly being prescribed (1,2). Moxifloxacin is licensed to
treat acute bacterial sinusitis, acute bacterial exacerbation of chronic bronchitis, community acquired pneumonia, complicated and
uncomplicated skin and skin structure infections, and complicated intra-abdominal infections. In 2007, moxifloxacin ranked 140th among the
top 200 drugs prescribed in the United States, and it has proven to be a blockbuster drug, generating billions of dollars in revenue. In
2007 alone, Avelox® generated $697.3 million in sales worldwide (2). In ophthalmology, moxifloxacin is widely prescribed as eye drops to
treat infectious keratitis and as a postoperative prophylactic regimen during cataract surgery. It is also injected intraocularly to prevent
and treat intraocular infections (3). Acute depigmentation of the iris is a new clinical condition that is characterized by an acute onset
of pigment dispersion in the anterior chamber, depigmentation and discoloration of the iris stroma, pigment deposition in the anterior
chamber angle, and positive transillumination (4). Systemic moxifloxacin treatment has been associated with this condition (5). Several
types of iris changes, such as positive transillumination, dyschoria, and depigmentation, have been reported; anterior chamber reaction and
anterior uveitis-like syndrome have also been observed in some cases. Patients usually have bilateral asymmetrical involvement. Atonic
pupils with distorted margins and occasionally ocular hypertension were described by Tugal-Tutkun et al. (4,5). This assemblage of clinical
findings is distinct from other known causes of iris depigmentation and pigment dispersion, such as Fuchs' uveitis syndrome, viral
iridocyclitis, Horner's syndrome, Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada disease, and pigment dispersion syndrome (4,6,7,8). Acute depigmentation of the iris
may be more common than expected in many countries, including Brazil. Therefore, it is important to detect and correctly diagnose it. Below,
we describe three recent cases of acute depigmentation of the iris. THMZ, a 70-year-old white female with diabetes and hypothyroidism,
presented with photophobia for 15 days. Her eyes were examined twice in the previous 2 years and found normal. A current exam revealed best
corrected visual acuity of 20/20 OU. The IOP was 14 mmHg OU. Anterior biomicroscopy showed positive iris transillumination in both eyes and
a heavily pigmented anterior chamber angle. No anterior chamber reaction or signs of inflammation were noted. The lens was clear OU. The
fundoscopic findings were unremarkable. The patient had been prescribed a 15-day course of systemic moxifloxacin (Avalox®) for pneumonia 3
months before the onset of symptoms. TF, a 32-year-old white female complained of low visual acuity and photophobia in the left eye for 10
weeks and the right eye for 8 weeks. The exam revealed visual acuity of 20/20 OU. Biomicroscopy showed bilateral positive iris
transillumination, dense atrophy, and dyschoria. The lens was clear OU. The IOP was 16 mmHg OU, and the fundoscopic findings were normal. No
signs of active ocular inflammation were noted. The patient had been extensively examined for uveitis and pigmentary glaucoma, with negative
results. She had been prescribed systemic moxifloxacin (Avalox®) for pneumonia 2 months before the onset of symptoms. RMP, a 26-year-old
male, also had a previous history of systemic moxifloxacin use for upper respiratory infection 3 months before the onset of symptoms. An
exam revealed visual acuity of 20/20 OD and 20/30 OS. Biomicroscopy showed a normal right eye, positive transillumination and dyschoria in
the left eye, and a moderate anterior chamber reaction. The lens was clear OU. The IOP was 12 mmHg OU, and the fundoscopic evaluation was
normal. No keratic precipitates were noted, and the condition was resolved with a short course of mild steroids. Our cases indicated that
these Brazilian patients had unilateral or bilateral asymmetrical involvement, transillumination defects, and dyschoria. Photophobia was the
main complaint. The first two patients were examined after complaining of photophobia. We presume that iris transillumination was already
present, although we do not know whether the patients had prior inflammation signs. The third patient was observed earlier in the course of
the disease, and signs of mild inflammation were observed. All patients were treated with mild topical steroids, and their symptoms
improved, although the clinical signs remained stable. The differential diagnosis involves inflammatory and non-inflammatory entities; in
most cases, the etiology and physiopathology mechanisms leading to the iris changes are unclear. Herpetic iridocyclitis without associated
keratitis is a distinct entity that is characterized by unilateral recurrences in the same eye, sectoral or patchy atrophy of the iris, and
an acute IOP increase (4). Sectoral iris atrophy is rarely observed in immunocompetent patients with CMV anterior uveitis. Sectoral atrophy
resulting from ischemic necrosis of the iris and loss of function of the sphincter muscle may cause pupillary distortion, which is sometimes
associated with iris spiraling. Transillumination caused by the loss of iris pigment epithelium may be observed in the absence of apparent
iris stromal atrophy. Posterior synechiae develop in more than 50% of cases (5). Fuchs' uveitis syndrome is another unilateral uveitic
entity that is associated with diffuse atrophy of the iris with or without heterochromia. One of the early diagnostic features is iris
stromal smoothing, with loss of the normal corrugated texture. Iris stroma does not assume a granular appearance in Fuchs' uveitis syndrome,
and atrophy, with or without hypochromia, is diffuse (6,7). The pharmacokinetics of moxifloxacin demonstrate that the aqueous concentration
is higher than the vitreous concentration upon topical administration. However, the aqueous concentration is similar to that in the vitreous
when moxifloxacin is taken orally. Knape et al. observed that only phakic patients have been reported with acute depigmentation of the iris
associated with moxifloxacin, most likely because the posterior-to-anterior clearance may be impaired or perhaps posterior synechiae trap
the drug in the posterior chamber. This explanation might be the reason why only systemic and not topical moxifloxacin causes this condition
(9). All physicians, not just ophthalmologists, should be aware of this entity. The potential associations should be better understood
because it is still unclear whether this disease represents an adverse effect of fluoroquinolone use or the sequelae of a systemic
infectious disease. No potential conflict of interest was reported. Right and left eye anterior segment photograph. Positive iris
transillumination. Bilateral iris depigmentation and dyschoria.
