This study presents an extremely rare case of constrictive bronchiolitis obliterans (BO) associated with Stevens-Johnson Syndrome (SJS)
provides the morphological and immunohistochemical features using histopathological bronchial reconstruction technique. A 27-year-old female
developed progressive dyspnea after SJS induced by taking amoxicillin at the age of 10. Finally, she died of exacerbation of type II
respiratory failure after 17 years from clinically diagnosed as having BO. Macroscopic bronchial reconstruction of the whole lungs at
autopsy showed the beginning of bronchial obliterations was in the 4th to 5th branches, numbering from each segmental bronchus. Once they
were obliterated, the distal and proximal bronchi were dilated. Microscopic bronchial reconstruction demonstrated the localization of
obliteration was mainly from small bronchi to membranous bronchioli with intermittent airway luminal narrowing or obliteration. Moreover,
CD3-, CD20-, and CD68-positive cells were found in the BO lesions. CD34- and D2-40-positive cells were mainly distributed in the
peribronchiolar lesions and bronchiolar lumens, respectively. SMA- and TGF-β-positive cells were seen in the fibrous tissue of BO lesions.
The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here: http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/1071703140102601. Stevens-Johnson
syndrome is also called mucocutaneous ocular syndrome and causes severe erythema exsudativum multiform . SJS is caused by various drugs
including antimicrobial or antiepileptic drugs and infectious diseases such as mycoplasma and viruses . Although pulmonary complications are
often observed in SJS, bronchiolitis obliterans (BO) is extremely rare and its incidence is not still understood. We described a patient of
constrictive BO associated with SJS that progressively deteriorated during long-term period and demonstrated characteristic
histopathological features by bronchial reconstruction and immunohistochemical stain. A 25-year-old female had a history of SJS after oral
administration of amoxicillin at the age of 10. Two months after the onset of SJS, she began to suffer from dyspnea on exertion and
bilateral pneumothorax repeatedly. The patient was referred to our hospital due to fever and progressive dyspnea at the age of 25. On
admission, the pulmonary function tests showed mixed ventilatory and small airways impairment as follows: vital capacity (VC) of 1.12 L
(36.8% of predicted), forced expiratory volume in 1 second (FEV1) of 0.60 L (53.1% of predicted), residual volume/total lung capacity
(RV/TLC) of 52.3%.Blood gas analysis showed PaO2 of 79.5 Torr and PaCO2 of 60.1 Torr under inhaling oxygen on 1.5 L/min. Chest X-ray
revealed severe hyperinflation in both lung fields and pleural adhesion in the right lower lung field. Chest computed tomography (CT) scan
revealed a widespread mosaic pattern with air trapping and diffuse pleural thickening in both lungs and prominent broncho-bronchiolectasis
in the bilateral lower lobes predominance (Figure 1). During the clinical course, she underwent thoracoscopic cyst stitch surgery for right
pneumothorax. Afterward, a single dose of carbapenem antibiotics administered due to postoperative infection triggered an anaphylactic
shock. She was immediately treated with corticosteroids and her symptoms improved. However, withdrawal from a mechanical ventilator was
difficult due to postoperative pneumonia, she underwent tracheotomy with continuous mechanical ventilation. At the same time, the patient
was clinically diagnosed as having BO associated with SJS. Although azithromycin was administered to treat a chronic respiratory tract
infection, Pseudomonas aeruginosa were frequently positive in sputum cultures. After 2 years from the initial admission to our hospital, she
suffered septic shock with an exacerbation of type II chronic respiratory failure. Finally, she died after 17 years from the onset of BO.
Chest CT scan revealed a widespread mosaic pattern with air trapping and diffuse pleural thickening in both lungs and prominent broncho-
bronchiolectasis in the bilateral lower lobes predominance. The autopsied lungs were fixed in 10% formalin solution and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and elastic van Gieson (EVG). After macroscopic examination with bronchial reconstruction, 2 cm serial sections
along each bronchus were obtained from each lobe in both lungs for the microscopic reconstruction studies. Tissue samples for microscopic
analyses were embedded in paraffin, and sliced into 1,200 serial sections with a thickness of 4 μm as described previously . Morphological
analysis was performed under a conventional light microscope to determine the characteristics of the BO lesions, including degrees of
bronchiolar epithelial cell damage, fibrosis, inflammation in the lumen and wall, destruction of wall structure, and dilated airway. The
localization and distribution of the BO lesions were histologically reconstructed. A membranous bronchiole (i.e. non-respiratory bronchiole)
was defined as an airway with a diameter of 2 mm or less and lack of both cartilage and bronchial glands, and a small bronchus was defined
as a cartilaginous airway with diameter of 2 mm or more, which was located in more proximal of membranous bronchiole. 4 μm-thick paraffin
sections were immunohistochemically stained with the following mouse monoclonal antibodies: T cells with anti-CD3 (clone UCH-T1, Santa Cruz
Biotechnology), anti-CD4 (clone MT310, Santa Cruz Biotechnology), anti-CD8 (clone 5F10, Santa Cruz Biotechnology); B cell with anti-CD20
(clone L26, Dako); macrophages/histiocytes with anti-CD68 (clone KP-1, Dako); myofibroblasts with α-smooth muscle actin (SMA) (clone 1A4,
Dako); vascular and lymphatic endothelial cells, anti-CD34 (clone NU-4A1, Nichirei), and anti-D2-40 (clone D2-40, Dako), and transforming
growth factor-beta 1 (TGF-β1) (clone 9016, R&D). Immunohistochemicalstaining was graded on a semi-quantitative scale of as follows: absent,
weak (weak staining in < 50% of cells), moderate (weak staining in > 50% or strong staining in < 50% of cells) and intense (strong staining
in > 50% of cells). Randomly selected high power fields were evaluated. Grossly, autopsied lungs showed diffuse pleural adhesions as well as
multiple, and whitish nodules in both lungs. Most of the bronchi and bronchioli in the right middle lobe and both lower lobes showed tubular
dilatation and partially cyst-like dilatation with thickened walls. No other apparent abnormalities such as pneumonia were seen in both
lungs. Macroscopic bronchial reconstruction showed the beginning of bronchial obliterations was in the 4th to 5th branches when each
segmental bronchi are regarded as the first branch. As compared with macroscopic and full-scale microscopic appearance of the left superior
horizontal bronchiole, the localization of the BO lesions with airway luminal narrowing were mainly observed in membranous and more proximal
bronchioli corresponding to macroscopic appearance of a whitish small nodule. After the membranous bronchiolar lumen was completely
obliterated, again the more distal bronchiole than the membranous bronchiole was dilated. As a result, the occlusion of the bronchiole was
located discretely (Figure 2). No other abnormalities were seen in the systemic organs other than both lungs. Comparison between macroscopic
and full-scale microscopic appearance of the left superior horizontal bronchiole. (A) A small bronchus was dilated and the lumen surrounded
by fibrosis. (B) The localization of the BO lesions with airway luminal narrowing was mainly observed in a membranous bronchiole
corresponding to macroscopic appearance of a whitish small nodule. (C) The membranous bronchiolar lumen was completely obliterated. (D) The
more distal bronchiole than the membranous bronchiole was dilated. (arrows) (Scale bar = 1 mm) (Elastic van Gieson stain). The airway lumens
of the BO lesions were obliterated by the fibrous tissues accompanying a proliferation of the elastic fibers with mild infiltration of small
round inflammatory cells and accumulation of foamy macrophages, and the structures of the bronchiolar wall were preserved, indicating
constrictive BO. On the other hand, the bronchial wall structure was completely destroyed and replaced by fibrous granulation tissue
accompanied by infiltration of foamy macrophages, lymphocytes, and plasma cells with intraluminal neutrophils as well as collections of
mucus in the dilatation of bronchi of the right middle lobe and both lower lobes. Constrictive BO was observed at the periphery of the
bronchiolectasis. Moreover, a colony of Actinomyces was found in the right lower lobe. On microscopic bronchial reconstruction, small
bronchi were dilated with mild infiltration of small round inflammatory cells and their epitheliums were replaced by goblet cell
hyperplasia. The prominent concentric fibrosis with mild infiltration of small round inflammatory cells was present in the submucosal
layers, resulting in membranous bronchiolar luminal narrowing and complete occlusion. In addition, the marked proliferation of elastic
fibers with a few inflammatory cells infiltration was observed in the more distal bronchioli than membranous bronchioli. Some BO lesions
were sporadically and intermittently located with varying degrees of narrowing and/or obliteration from the small bronchi to the membranous
bronchioli. There was no evidence of BO lesions in respiratory bronchioli and alveoli (Figure 3). Microscopic bronchial reconstruction. (A)
Small bronchi were dilated with mild infiltration of small round inflammatory cells and their epitheliums were replaced by goblet cell
hyperplasia. (Scale bar = 500 μm) (Elastic van Gieson stain). (B) The prominent concentric fibrosis with mild infiltration of small round
inflammatory cells was present in the submucosal layers, resulting in membranous bronchiolar luminal narrowing and complete occlusion.
(Scale bar = 500 μm) (Elastic van Gieson stain). (C) The marked proliferation of elastic fibers, lack of inflammatory cells infiltration was
observed in the more distal than membranous bronchioli. (Scale bar = 200 μm) (Elastic van Gieson stain). A widespread mosaic pattern with
air trapping and diffuse pleural thickening in both lungs on chest CT corresponded to obliterative bronchiole and diffuse pleural adhesions.
In addition, varicose or cylindrical bronchiectasis in the bilateral lower lobes on chest CT consisted of bronchiolectasis with tubular and
cystic dilatation. CD3, CD4, CD8, CD20 and CD68 were localized in lymphocytes and macrophages infiltrating the BO lesions of membranous
bronchioli. The expression of CD8 (moderate) was higher than that of CD4 (mild) in the BO lesions. Numerous SMA-positive myofibroblasts
(intense) were present in airway lumens (Figure 4A) and TGF-β-positive lymphocytes and macrophages (moderate) were sporadically seen in the
fibrous tissue of BO lesions (Figure 4B). CD34-positive cells were mainly distributed in the peribronchiolar lesions, in contrast,
D2-40-positive cells were uniformly distributed in the bronchiolar lumens and peribronchiolar lesions. The expression of D2-40 (intense) was
higher than that of CD34 (moderate) in the BO lesions (Figure 4C, D). Immunohistochemical findings. (A) Numerous SMA-positive myofibroblasts
(intense) were present in airway lumens (Scale bar = 100 μm). (B) TGF-β-positive lymphocytes and macrophages (moderate) were sporadically
seen in the fibrous tissue of BO lesions (Scale bar = 20 μm). (C) CD34-positive cells (moderate) were mainly distributed in the
peribronchiolar lesions (Scale bar = 100 μm). (D) D2-40-positive cells (intense) were uniformly distributed in the bronchiolar lumens and
peribronchiolar lesions (Scale bar = 100 μm). SJS is known as mucocutaneous ocular syndrome and causes severe erythema exsudativum multiform
. The syndrome is caused by many drugs, including antibiotics or antiepileptic, as well as by infection such as viruses or mycoplasma . The
pathogenesis of chronic pulmonary disorders such as BO in SJS remains obscure. BO is a rare disease in which granulation tissue mainly
obliterates the lumen of the membranous bronchioli. It is useful to diagnose as having BO clinically based on mosaic appearance on chest CT
images or small airway obstructive impairment on pulmonary function test, but as confirmed diagnosis of BO requires lung specimens obtained
by video-assisted thoracic surgery or autopsy, it may be difficult to make a correct antemortem diagnosis. Theegarten et al. reported that
diagnosis of interstitial pneumonias, a group of quite rare diseases, by open lung biopsies required sufficient clinical information because
of the overlap of histological patterns and especially in non idiopathic interstitial pneumonias, an interdisciplinary case evaluation was
needed. Therefore, we believe it is necessary to find a correct diagnosis histologically. More recently, Griff et al. reported that
specimens obtained by transbronchial cryobiopsy technique were significantly larger than those by conventional transbronchial biopsies, in
addition the alveolar tissue of cryobiopsy specimens did not show any artifacts. This technique may be useful for the diagnosis of BO.
Yamanaka, et al. conducted a histopathological study of BO associated with rheumatoid arithritis or SJS, and proposed bronchobronchiolitis
obliterans (BBO) as the pathological condition in which the BO lesions were seen from the small bronchi to membranous bronchioli. A small
number of BO cases caused by drug-induced SJS which were histologically confirmed have been reported so far . As reported by Tsunoda, et al.
, autopsied lung in BO associated with SJS showed macroscopically airway obliterations were located in the 3rd and 5th branches, numbering
from each lobar bronchus. Histological examination revealed loss of bronchial epithelium and narrowing or obliteration of the bronchiolar
lumen due to proliferation of granulation tissue not only in membranous bronchioli but also cartilaginous bronchi. In the present case,
macroscopic appearances showed extensive occlusion of the bronchi at the 4th or 5th branches, which were located in more distal bronchi than
each segmental bronchus. Histologically, the bronchial wall structure such as the smooth muscle layer and the elastic fiber layer was
maintained, and the airway lumen was markedly occluded due to fibrous tissue, suggesting constrictive BBO. Interestingly, the BO lesions
were sporadically and intermittently located from the small bronchi to the membranous bronchioli. On the other hand, bronchiectasis and the
bronchial wall structures were completely destroyed and replaced by fibrous tissue in the right middle lobe and in both lower lobes in our
case. We speculated that after SJS caused constrictive BBO throughout most of the lungs, bacterial infection such as Pseudomonas aeruginosa,
etc. induced inflammations in the airways repeatedly, resulting in bronchial mucosal ulcers, bronchiectasis and bronchiolectasis during the
following 17 years. Hebisawa, et al. histopathologically searched for patients who died of diffuse bronchiectasis associated with chronic
respiratory infections, and found destructive BO showing complete destruction of the bronchiolar wall structures and its lumen replacement
with collagen fibers. The pathogenic mechanism of BO in SJS is not well understood, but we believe that BO in SJS appears as a consequence
of bronchiolar epithelium and mucosal damage due to immune complex deposition in SJS. Furthermore, the combination of the immune response
abnormality and respiratory infection may play an important role in its development. According to previous reported cases, respiratory
symptoms appeared within a few weeks to months after mucosal or skin symptoms improved. Also in the present case, respiratory symptoms
appeared 2 months after treatment with large amounts of corticosteroid for SJS. We assumed that some kind of injuries to bronchiolar
epithelial cells initiate its changes in necrosis and shedding of them, and then followed exudation of the fibrin and inflammatory cells
such as lymphocytes, macrophages, and proliferation of the myofibroblasts and capillary vessels. Finally, the bronchiolar lumens were
obliterated by fibrous granulation tissue. Therefore, it is considered that formation of BO requires certain intervals after the onset of
SJS. However, the mechanisms of selective damages to mainly membranous bronchioli in BO remain obscure. Recently, Nicod described that using
heterotopic tracheal transplant models with mice obliteration of airway lumen may result from the overactivation of repair mechanisms by
fibroblasts in damaged bronchioli and progressive structural reconstruction (remodeling) or fibrosis around the lesions. On
immunohistochemical study of the present case, CD3-, CD20-, CD68-, and TGF-β positive cells were found partly but prominent SMA-positive
cells infiltration in the BO lesions. In fact, the differences in the disease duration of BO or the immunocompromised state of the host
associated with treatments or underlying disorders will influence the extent of inflammatory cells and myofibroblasts. Finally, production
of growth factors such as TGF-β which promote fibroblast proliferation may result in fibrosis at late phase of BO formation. In addition,
Shah et al. reported that a case of constrictive BO and eosinophilic micro-abscesses after SJS. It is known that eosinophils are important
sources of a variety of pro-fibrogenic mediators such as TGF-α , TGF-β , vascular endothelial growth factor , and interleukin-13 . Although
eosinophils were not found in the BO lesions at autopsy in the present case, increased eosinophils could be determined at an earlier stage
of BO. This study provides important information on the morphological and immunohistochemical features in an extremely rare constrictive BO
associated with SJS using histopathological bronchial reconstruction technique. The involvement of epithelial-mesenchymal transition or pro-
fibrotic growth factors will need to be investigated in the future to clarify the mechanism of development of fibrotic lesions in BO
associated with SJS. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient's next-of-kin for publication of this manuscript and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. SJS: Stevens-Johnson
syndrome; BO: Bronchiolitis obliterans; BBO: Bronchobronchiolitis obliterans; CT: Computed tomography; H&E: Hematoxylin and eosin; EVG:
Elastic van Gieson; TGF-β: Transforming growth factor-beta; SMA: α-smooth muscle actin. All authors declare that they have no competing
interest. K S participated in the design of the study and histopathological evaluation, and drafted the manuscript. S H assisted in drafting
the manuscript and revised the manuscript. A H, T U, and K H made contributions for analyzing the histopathological characteristics. H A
sliced each lung specimen into serial sections and carried out the H&E, EVG, and immunohistochemical stains evaluation. All the authors read
and approved the final manuscript. This work was supported by a grant-in-aid for interstitial lung diseases from the Japanese Ministry of
Health, Labour and Welfare.
