To the Editor: Salmonella Matadi (S. Matadi) was firstly isolated in 19541 from Matadi, the regional capital of Belgian Congo which was the
former name of Democratic Republic of the Congo. This is a very rare serotype, and a few cases have been reported in Denmark during 1960 and
19682 and USA in 1993,3 although the incidence of S. Matadi has recently increased in USA, Canada and Japan. Reptile is regarded as a source
of infection, particularly the intestine of adult female iguana,4 and there is also a report on the infection of 2 teenage boys who handled
a green iguana.3 In Korea, S. Matadi was first isolated recently from 15-month old baby who suffered from severe fever and mucous diarrhea
for 5 days. Cefotiam as antimicrobial and general medicines for intestinal disorder were given as the first treatments on 5 days after
symptom appeared. However, fever and diarrhea continued until cefotaxime treatment on 7 days after the appearance of the symptoms. S. Matadi
was isolated from diarrhea samples and its serotype was determined by agglutination test and MLST. Hematological test was performed twice;
on the day of hospitalization and second treatment. MCV, MCH and Hb showed relatively low rate, compared with normal range, indicating
dehydrated body condition. S. Matadi was susceptible, but not resistant to antimicrobial agents that were given along with 17 agents which
are generally used for Enterobactericeae. Cefotiam is a good antimicrobial agent, however, it may not be appropriate choice to treat
Salmonella spp. infection. It is not clear how 15-month old baby was infected with S. Matadi: whether through infected reptile or
contaminated food. He was too young and fed only powdered milk and weaning food. He was not in nursing facility or did not travel foreign
country. His family members did not bring in any reptiles as a pet and did not show similar symptoms. However, his father was suspected as
carrier because he worked in the import and export shipments Co. at Busan port and used to handle luggage by hands. Susceptibility of
Salmonella infection in children younger than five years of age is five times higher than in adults. Therefore, small amount of S. Matadi in
father's hand might have infected 15-month old baby who was more sensitive than his parents. In recent years, new Salmonella serovar has
often been brought in from other countries by travelers, such as S. Wandsworth from Vietnam to Korea in 2012. Such cases are not common,
nevertheless, the possibility is increasing because of increase of international trade.
