Preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low-platelet count), and acute fatty liver of pregnancy are the main
causes of thrombotic microangiopathy and severe liver dysfunction during pregnancy and represent different manifestations of the same
pathological continuum. The case of a 35-week pregnant woman who was admitted to an intensive care unit immediately after a Cesarean section
due to fetal death and the presence of nausea, vomiting, and jaundice is reported. Postpartum preeclampsia and acute fatty liver of
pregnancy were diagnosed. The patient developed an acute subdural hematoma and an intracerebral hemorrhage, which were subjected to
neurosurgical treatment. The patient died from refractory hemolytic anemia and spontaneous bleeding of multiple organs. Preeclampsia, HELLP
syndrome, and acute fatty liver of pregnancy might overlap and be associated with potentially fatal complications, including intracranial
hemorrhage, as in the present case. Early detection and diagnosis are crucial to ensure appropriate management and treatment success. Pré-
eclâmpsia, síndrome HELLP (hemólise, elevação de enzimas hepáticas e plaquetopenia) e fígado gorduroso agudo da gestação são as principais
causas de microangiopatia trombótica e disfunção hepática grave durante a gestação, representando um spectrum do mesmo processo patológico.
Relatou-se aqui o caso de uma gestante com 35 semanas internada em unidade de terapia intensiva no pós-operatório imediato de cesariana por
morte fetal, com náuseas, vômitos e icterícia. Diagnosticaram-se pré-eclâmpsia pós-parto e fígado gorduroso agudo da gestação. Houve
evolução tardia com hematoma subdural agudo e hemorragia intracerebral, sendo realizado tratamento neurocirúrgico. A paciente foi a óbito
por anemia hemolítica refratária, com sangramento espontâneo em múltiplos órgãos. Pré-eclâmpsia, síndrome HELLP e fígado gorduroso agudo da
gestação são processos patológicos que podem se sobrepor e se associar a complicações potencialmente fatais, como a hemorragia intracraniana
aqui descrita. Sua detecção e diagnóstico precoces são fundamentais para a instituição de manejo adequado e sucesso do tratamento. Pregnancy
induces physiological, hormonal, and physical changes that may cause hypertensive, hemorrhagic, hematological, and liver complications. Less
than 1% of women require admission to an intensive care unit (ICU) during pregnancy and the peripartum period, which is associated with
increased maternal and fetal mortality.(1) Preeclampsia, HELLP (hemolysis, elevated liver enzymes, and low-platelet count) syndrome, and
acute fatty liver of pregnancy (AFLP) are the main causes of thrombotic microangiopathy(2) and severe liver dysfunction during pregnancy and
most likely represent several manifestations of the same pathological continuum.(3) The present article describes an uncommon case of acute
subdural hematoma and intracerebral hemorrhage occurring as fatal complications of severe thrombotic microangiopathy during pregnancy. The
patient was a black female, aged 36 years old, with a past history of an abortion two years prior. As an asthmatic, she used inhaled
bronchodilators and was admitted to the hospital at a gestational age of 35 weeks due to nausea, vomiting, jaundice, abdominal pain, and
cessation of fetal movements starting two days prior; fetal death was diagnosed. The patient's blood pressure was normal (maximum of 130/80
mmHg before delivery), and she presented without fever but developed tachycardia during the first hours of hospitalization. A cesarean
section with general anesthesia was performed on day two of hospitalization, and the patient was immediately transferred to the ICU. Upon
admission to the ICU, crystalloid fluid resuscitation was performed, and the patient's vital signs, level of consciousness, lochia, and
surgical wound were closely monitored. The laboratory tests (Table 1) indicated anemia with a hemoglobin concentration of 10.6 g/dL;
fragmented red blood cells; a platelet count of 232,000/mm3, leukocytosis with a left shift (total white cell count, 24,800/mm3; and band
cell count 2,728/mm3); aspartate transaminase (AST), 150 U/L; alanine transaminase (ALT), 152 U/L; total bilirubin, 6.31 mg/dL; direct
bilirubin, 4.29 mg/dL; lactic dehydrogenase (LDH), 1,249 U/L; alkaline phosphatase (ALP), 314 U/L; kidney failure (creatinine, 2.88 mg/dL;
urea, 94 mg/dL); increased partial thromboplastin time (51.5 seconds), normal initial prothrombin time, negative D-dimer non-coagulant
fibrinogen (more than ten times the upper limit); significant proteinuria with a proteinuria/creatinuria ratio of 0.7; uric acid, 7 mg/dL;
pH 7.30; pCO2, 36 mmHg; HCO3, 18.3 mmol/L; Base Excess, -7.4 mmol/L; and arterial plasma lactic acid, 3.7 mmol/L. The patient exhibited
frequent hypoglycemic episodes from day two to day six of hospitalization. Based on the clinical and laboratory data at the time of ICU
admission, the following diagnostic possibilities were suggested: postpartum preeclampsia, AFLP, and/or HELLP syndrome. Laboratory tests
performed during hospitalization ---- not performed on that day. Intermittent peaks of systemic arterial hypertension started on day three,
reached a maximum of 178/86 mm Hg, and lasted 18 days. To assess the liver and kidneys, total abdomen computed tomography (CT) was performed
on day six, which revealed a hematoma at the rectus abdominis muscle (mostly on its right side), the lower portion of which measured
approximately 4.5 cm (an usual finding after cesarean sections). No other significant changes were found. The patient exhibited oligoanuria
starting on day 10, which was accompanied by signs of anasarca and necessitated hemodialysis. A large left pleural effusion (Figure 1) with
transudate characteristics developed on day 15 after delivery and was accompanied by acute respiratory failure. Left chest drainage was
performed, and mechanical ventilation was initiated following intubation. Chest computed tomography scan showing a large left pleural
effusion and a left collapsed lung. Until pre-intubation sedation, the patient's level of consciousness was normal, with no abnormal
findings on the neurological examination, a score of 15 on the Glasgow coma scale, equal-size and light-reactive pupils, and no focal signs.
Two days later, while still sedated, intubated, and under unweanable mechanical ventilation, the patient exhibited a sudden hypertensive
crisis with vomiting and the appearance of mydriasis in the left eye. The hypertension was immediately treated, an antiemetic was
administered, and the analgesic doses were increased. Cranial CT was performed (Figure 2), which revealed the presence of an acute subdural
hematoma and a parietal-occipital intracerebral hemorrhage on the left side. The patient was immediately subjected to emergency
neurosurgical treatment. Cranial computed tomography scan showing an acute subdural hematoma with a midline shift and a subcortical
hemorrhage in the left occipital lobe. The patient exhibited profuse bleeding with an onset at the beginning of surgery and lasting
throughout the transoperative period, accompanied by hemodynamic instability that was difficult to manage despite fluid replacement, blood
component transfusion, and the use of vasoactive drugs. Following two trepanations, the hypertensive hygroma and hematoma, which displayed
both acute and chronic components, were drained. Notably, the original neurosurgical plan had been to perform a decompressive craniotomy and
to treat the acute subdural hematoma; however, the anesthetist had to interrupt the procedure because of progressive and refractory
hemodynamic deterioration despite aggressive management. Therefore, only the two trepanations were performed to drain the subdural
collection. Subsequently, the patient exhibited spontaneous bleeding at other sites, such as the mouth, nose, and vagina (although the
coagulation tests had been normal up to that point), with persistence of hemolytic anemia and refractory shock. Four days after
neurosurgery, the patient presented with bilateral mydriasis and nonreactive pupils. Sedation was discontinued, and her Glasgow score was 3.
The maximal LDH level was 2,357 U/L, being 1,143 U/L at 20 days after delivery. The maximal total bilirubin concentration was 12.23 mg/dL.
The maximal direct bilirubin was 8.29 mg/dL, being 1.43 at 20 days after delivery, when the AST was 118 U/L, and the ALT was 192 U/L. The
minimal hemoglobin concentration was 4.6 g/dL and occurred five days after delivery, whereas it had risen to 5.8 g/dL on the day
neurological deterioration occurred. The minimal platelet count was 54,000/mm3, reaching and maintaining normal levels starting at day 15
after delivery. Leukocytosis with a left shift was found on most of the days, with a maximum of 29,700 white blood cells/mm3. The maximal
creatinine concentration was 3.67 mg/dL, and that of urea was 202 mg/dL. Serologic tests for hepatitis and the human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) were performed but were negative. Furthermore, the immunological tests for systemic lupus erythematosus and rheumatoid arthritis
failed to detect any alteration. Plasmapheresis was not performed at any time because the hypothesis of AFLP predominated in the clinical
diagnosis. Likewise, magnesium sulfate was not administered to prevent seizures because of the late diagnosis of postpartum preeclampsia.
Nevertheless, the levels of magnesium were measured and found to be normal (2.1 to 2.4 mg/dL) throughout the hospitalization. The diagnosis
of brain death could not be established because the patient was absolutely unresponsive to stimuli and exhibited a complete absence of brain
stem reflexes upon neurological examination, due to the refractory hemodynamic instability that had set in combined with the clinical and
neurological deterioration despite the fluid resuscitation, use of vasopressors, and blood component transfusion. The patient died five days
after surgery, which was 22 days after the delivery. Preeclampsia is characterized by hypertension, proteinuria, and edema. It affects
approximately 5 to 7% of pregnant women, 65% of whom might progress to HELLP syndrome. For these reasons, preeclampsia remains a significant
cause of maternal morbidity and mortality. Typically, preeclampsia occurs during the second or third trimester of pregnancy, but
occasionally, the disease has been detected before gestational week 20. Its consequences include hypertensive crises, kidney failure, liver
rupture, neurological complications such as seizures and stroke, and increased perinatal morbidity and mortality. The pathogenesis of
preeclampsia is believed to be associated with placental ischemia, endothelial dysfunction, and cytotoxic and genetic factors. Severe
preeclampsia is defined by systolic arterial pressure levels that are persistently >160 mmHg or diastolic arterial pressure >110 mmHg,
massive proteinuria (4+ in a dipstick, or >2.0 g/24 hours), or the presence of clinical (epigastric pain, nausea, and vomiting) and
laboratory (platelet count <50,000/mm3, creatine kinase >200 U/L, LDH >1,400 U/L, AST >150 U/L, ALT >100 U/l, uric acid >7.8 mg/dL, and
serum creatinine >1.2 mg/dL) manifestations.(4) AFLP is a rare and potentially fatal disorder that might occur at the third trimester of
pregnancy, involves microvesicular fatty infiltration of hepatocytes, and has a mortality rate of up to 70%. In most studies, the estimated
incidence is 1:10,000-15,000 pregnancies, with mortality of 10 to 20%. AFLP occurs more often in multiple pregnancies, male fetuses, and
nulliparous women. AFLP is associated with inherited defects of the mitochondrial fatty acid beta-oxidation, as well as with long-chain
3-hydroxyacyl-CoA dehydrogenase deficiency (LCHAD), including the G 1529C mutation.(3) The earliest symptoms usually include nausea,
vomiting, abdominal (mainly epigastric) pain, lack of appetite, jaundice, fever, headache, and itch. Approximately one third of patients
exhibit signs of preeclampsia at the onset or during the progression of the disease. The diagnosis is usually clinical and is based on the
laboratory and compatible imaging findings, including increased values for AST, ALT, bilirubin, uric acid, creatinine, leukocytes, clotting,
and electrolytes, as well as blood glucose (hypoglycemia) disorders and lactic acidosis. The present case exhibited clinical and laboratory
features compatible with AFLP, HELLP syndrome, and severe preeclampsia. As the clinical manifestations of AFLP prevailed at the disease
onset, treatment was directed against that condition and was thus limited to intensive clinical support care, which includes immediate
delivery following maternal stabilization because there is no specific treatment for this disease. HELLP syndrome is a severe form of
preeclampsia that usually affects 4 to 12% of women with preeclampsia. This syndrome is associated with microthrombi, thrombocytopenia, and
clotting disorders and has a poor prognosis. HELLP syndrome may appear from the second trimester of pregnancy up to several days after
delivery; in one third of cases, the syndrome appears after childbirth.(3) HELLP syndrome is associated with vasoconstriction, increased
vascular tonus, platelet aggregation, and an altered thromboxane/prostacyclin ratio. HELLP syndrome is partially caused by activation of the
complement and consequent coagulation cascade, resulting in endothelial and microvascular injury in multiple organs, microangiopathic
hemolytic anemia, periportal and liver necrosis with increased liver enzymes, and thrombocytopenia. Both AFLP and HELLP syndrome affect the
liver, but HELLP syndrome is more common (1:5,000 births). AFLP tends to occur later in the pregnancy and causes reduced liver synthetic
function, resulting in hypoglycemia, increased ammonia levels, and clotting disorders. Disseminated intravascular coagulation is common in
both conditions; however, the AST and ALT disorders and the increased LDH are more typical of HELLP syndrome, whereas the bilirubin increase
is greater in AFLP (Table 2).(5) Clinical features of the liver diseases during pregnancy Adapted from: Sibai BM. HELLP syndrome. Up to
Date. 2013 [cited January 29, 2013]. Available at http://www.uptodate.com/contents/hellp-syndrome.(5) ALT - alanine-aminotransferase; AST -
aspartate-aminotransferase; LDH - lactic dehydrogenase; ALP - alkaline phosphatase; PT - prothrombin time. The risk of stroke during
pregnancy is low; however, when stroke does occur, the morbidity and mortality of its complications are high. Recent studies reported an
association between stroke during pregnancy and a history of migraine, gestational diabetes, preeclampsia, and eclampsia,(6) which most
likely indicates physiopathological mechanisms other than those associated with stroke that is unrelated with pregnancy. The hematological
disorders occurring in these conditions increase the risk of spontaneous postpartum bleeding, with intracranial hemorrhage as the main cause
of death in women with preeclampsia.(7) In addition, hypertension acts as an independent cause of stroke because the loss of the self-
regulatory mechanisms of the brain blood flow leads to vasodilation and brain edema, particularly in the case of individuals without chronic
hypertension. Brain ischemia and hemorrhage are almost always accompanied by a blood pressure increase of at least 10% due to alteration of
the self-regulatory mechanisms induced by vasoactive substance release at the injury site.(8) Cases of spontaneous peripartum acute subdural
hematoma and intracerebral hemorrhage have been reported in the literature, but in association with the HELLP syndrome(9) or with
thrombocytopenia caused by idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura.(10) No case of spontaneous acute subdural hematoma associated with AFLP
could be found in the literature. The present patient exhibited an unfavorable progression partially due to the late diagnosis of
preeclampsia. In this regard, it is noteworthy that the hypertension peaks first appeared a few days after the delivery and that the patient
had undergone regular prenatal care. In addition, the late diagnosis of fetal death contributed to the fatal outcome. Indeed, the fetal
movements had ceased two days prior to hospital admission, and the patient had sought medical care from the very onset of the symptoms, thus
indicating a delay in the pre-hospital and emergency care. Retrospectively, one might wonder whether plasmapheresis might have modified the
clinical progression, as hemolysis remained throughout the disease course. Plasmapheresis is indicated for patients with persistent HELLP
syndrome,(11) but there are no reports on the use of this modality for AFLP. Preeclampsia, HELLP syndrome, and acute fatty liver of
pregnancy are pathological disorders that may overlap with one another and be associated with potentially fatal complications, such as
intracranial hemorrhage, as in the case reported herein. Early detection and diagnosis are crucial to ensure appropriate management and
treatment success. Conflicts of interest: None. This study was conducted at the Adult Intensive Care Unit, Hospital de Caridade de Ijuí -
Ijuí (RS), Brazil.
