Posaconazole is a second-generation triazole with a broad spectrum. However, there is a lack of data to support a significant role for
posaconazole in the treatment of invasive fungal infection (IFI), especially in Korea. Until recently, posaconazole was available only
through the Korean Orphan Drug Center. This study was designed to review the use of posaconazole at a single-center in Korea. Data from
patients who received posaconazole treatment at Catholic Blood and Marrow Transplantation Center were retrospectively reviewed between
January 2007 and September 2012. A total of 11 cases (3 males and 8 females, median age 52 years) received posaconazole. Five patients were
given the drug for mucormycosis, two for invasive aspergillosis, and four for unspecified IFI for which galactomannan (GM) assays were
negative. The treatment duration ranged from 4-250 days. Three patients received posaconazole for management refractory IFI, two for
intolerance of previous antifungal therapy, and six for long-term maintenance treatment. The overall successful response rate to
posaconazole was 55% (six of eleven patients). Five of eleven patients died during the study period. However, only one death was attributed
to the progression of IFI. None of the patients discontinued posaconazole therapy due to adverse events. Posaconazole is an attractive oral
antifungal agent for salvage treatment of IFI, particularly upon diagnosis of mucormycosis or in cases in which mucormycosis cannot be ruled
out due to a negative GM. Posaconazole (Noxafil®, Merck Sharp & Dohme Corp., Whitehouse Station, NJ, USA) is a second-generation triazole
that exhibits in vitro activity against many filamentous fungi and yeasts.1 It exerts its effects by direct inhibition of the enzyme
lanosterol 14-α demethylase, which is responsible for the development of ergosterol.2 Posaconazole is highly lipophilic, orally absorbed,
and distributed extensively in tissues.3 It has been approved by Korea Food and Drug Administration for antifungal prophylaxis in high risk
patients with acute myeloid leukemia or myelodysplastic syndrome, who are expected to have prolonged neutropenia after cytotoxic
chemotherapy, and in immunosuppressed patients with graft-versus-host disease after hematopoietic stem cell transplant. Also, it has
received approval from US Food and Drug Administration or European Commission, for treatment of oropharyngeal candidiasis patients who
require systemic administration of an antifungal agent, as well as for treatment invasive aspergillosis (IA) patients who have refractory
diseases to amphotericin B deoxycholate (AMB) or itraconazole, or who are intolerant to these drugs. Posaconazole has also been proposed as
an alternative therapeutic agent for infections caused by some filamentous fungi, including Mucorales.4,5 However, in Korea, there is a lack
of data to support a significant role for posaconazole in the treatment of invasive fungal infection (IFI). Until recently, posaconazole was
available through the Korean Orphan Drug Center. Here, we describe the use of posaconazole for the salvage treatment of patients with IFI at
a single-center in Korea. Data from patients who received posaconazole at Catholic Blood and Marrow Transplantation Center between January
1, 2007 and September 15, 2012 were retrospectively reviewed. Information from case notes, radiological findings and laboratory results were
compiled using a structured case-report form. The endpoint of the study was set to September 15, 2012 or time of death or loss to follow-up.
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Seoul St. Mary's hospital at the Catholic University of Korea (No.
KC12RISI0411). The classification of proven, probable, and possible IFI was made based on the European Organization for the Research and
Treatment of Cancer/Mycoses Study Group (EORTC/MSG) criteria.6 Posaconazole salvage treatment was applied when cases fulfilled at least one
of the following criteria: 1) presence of a refractory IFI (disease progression, or failure to improve clinically after at least 7-day use
of other licensed antifungal agents); 2) history of intolerance of standard antifungal therapy due to toxicity; 3) preexisting organ
dysfunction that prevented the administration of other licensed antifungal therapies; or 4) need for long-term maintenance treatment of IFI
with posaconazole after treatment with any other antifungal agent.1 Clinical responses were evaluated at the end of treatment using both
clinical and radiological data. However, if posaconazole was administered to the subject after the end of the research period, clinical
responses were assessed in September 15, 2012, the end of this study. Assessments of IFI treatment responses were made based on EORTC/MSG
criteria.7 Successful response were defined as either a complete response (CR) or partial response (PR).8 Neutropenia was defined as an
absolute neutrophil count <500 cells/mm3 or expected to be <500 cells/mm3 within 2-3 days.9 Toxicity was recorded and categorized using the
National Cancer Institute Common Toxicity Criteria, version 4.0 when possible.10 A total of 11 patients (3 males and 8 females) received
posaconazole treatment between January 1, 2007 and September 15, 2012. The characteristics of the patients are shown in Table 1. The median
age of the patients was 52 years. All patients had hematologic diseases. Most patients [seven (64%) of eleven] had neutropenia at the
diagnosis of IFI. Five of the 11 patients received posaconazole treatment for mucormycosis, two for IA, and four for unspecified IFI for
which galactomannan (GM) assays were negative. The six patients had proven, two had probable, and three had possible IFI categories. The
most common site of infection was the lungs, which was documented in 6 cases (55%). Antifungal agents administered prior to initiation of
posaconazole therapy included either AMB, liposomal amphotericin B deoxycholate (LAMB), caspofungin (CSFG), or voriconazole (Table 2).
Surgical resection was performed in six patients. Among them, five patients had mucormycosis and one patient (No. 9) had IA at the paranasal
sinus and eye which was distinguished between mucormycosis and aspergillosis. Posaconazole was administered for an average of 75 days
(range, 4-250 days) (Table 2). The median duration of treatment was 37 days. Of the 11 patients, three met the criteria for infection
refractory to other licensed antifungal therapy and two had demonstrated intolerance to standard therapy. Six required long-term maintenance
therapy of IFI in which mucormycosis could not be ruled out. The overall successful response rate to posaconazole was 55% (6 of 11
patients). CR was seen in patient No. 2, who had cerebral mucormycosis. Five of the 11 patients died during the study period. However, only
one death was attributed to the progression of IFI. Two subjects developed hepatotoxicity (grades II and III), but the clinical pictures
were reversed without discontinuation of posaconazole. Anorexia (grade I) and nausea (grade II) were considered possibly related to the
drug. All adverse events were mild to moderate in severity. None of the patients discontinued use due to clinical or laboratory adverse
events. There was no visual disturbance or QT prolongation. In general, posaconazole appeared to be safe and well tolerated in this study
group. A 47-year-old woman with acute myeloid leukemia developed fever and chills after the reinduction of chemotherapy. Twelve days after
the initiation of chemotherapy, she was started on cefepime and isepamicin for neutropenic fever. However, the fever persisted in spite of
the administration of broad-spectrum antibiotics. Chest computed tomography (CT) revealed multiple consolidations with surrounding ground-
glass opacities in the right-upper lobe (Fig. 1A). AMB was administered empirically for fungal pneumonia. Three days after starting AMB, she
began to experience severe chills, nausea, and headache upon AMB administration. AMB was substituted with CSFG, but 10 days later both the
chest CT and clinical status had worsened (Fig. 1B). Instead of CSFG, LAMB therapy was started. On the eighth day of LAMB treatment, follow-
up chest CT showed a slight interval decrease in consolidations, and the patient's condition had improved. GM assays were consistently
negative, therefore, the patient had the possibility of mucormycosis. Long-term LAMB therapy was required for complete resolution, but the
patient wished to be discharged. Therefore, posaconazole was administered for continued treatment of IFI in the outpatient clinic. After 40
days of posaconazole treatment, the patient underwent successful allogeneic stem cell transplantation. Following the initiation of
posaconazole, liver enzymes were slightly elevated, but returned to normal without discontinuation of posaconazole. The patient continues to
take posaconazole and her IFI has shown a PR, as revealed by 6-month follow-up chest CT (Fig. 1C). A 47-year-old woman was admitted to the
hospital because of cough, sputum, and fever. Allogeneic stem cell transplantation for severe aplastic anemia was performed 1 month
previously. Chest CT revealed necrotizing pneumonia with abscesses in the right peribronchial area and subpleural portion of the right lower
lobe (RLL) (Fig. 2A and B). Serum GM assay was negative. AMB was administered in addition to meropenem. After 21 days, AMB was changed to
LAMB to increase treatment efficiency. Bronchoscopic biopsy of the lung tissue showed sporangiophores in terminal swellings with positive
Gomori methenamine-silver and periodic acid-Schiff stains. Cultures from bronchial-wash fluid were positive for Cunninghamella
bertholletiae. Follow-up chest CT revealed little interval change in pneumonia. After 10 days, LAMB was discontinued and posaconazole was
started for the treatment of refractory IFI. After posaconazole administration, her clinical status improved. About six months later, chest
imaging (Fig. 2C) showed a PR in the right peribronchial region. However, abscess in the subpleural portion of the RLL remained with little
interval decrease. The patient subsequently underwent a video-assisted thoracoscopic wedge resection of the RLL abscess. The pathologic
results of the RLL lung abscess were consistent with Cunninghamella bertholletiae. Posaconazole was discontinued after the resection, and
the patient showed no relapse. Posaconazole has been proposed as an option for salvage treatment of IFI. Because posaconazole is not readily
available in Korea, there are few clinical reports of its use.11,12 Here, we present our experience with posaconazole as an IFI salvage
treatment. In this study, a total of 11 patients received posaconazole over the last 5 years; among them, five (45%) exhibited mucormycosis.
In the rest of the subjects, however, among whom GM assays were negative in 4 IFI patients, mucormycosis could not be ruled out. It is well-
known that only AMB formulations and posaconazole have shown activity against Mucorales.13 Even though AMB formulations have been
recommended as first-line therapies for mucormycosis treatment, posaconazole has been shown to be effective as a salvage therapy of
refractory mucormycosis.3 Posaconazole may represent an alternative option for patients intolerant of AMB formulations.14 Among the subjects
of the present study, two received posaconazole due to AMB and LAMB intolerance. Two cases received posaconazole for treatment-refractory
mucormycosis. Cornely, et al.14 suggested that if impaired kidney function is overt or expected, posaconazole could be a reasonable option
for the primary treatment of mucormycosis. However, it should be noted that posaconazole has a lower efficacy than AMB against some
Mucorales species, as suggested by an in vitro study.15 In our study, posaconazole was used only for salvage treatment. Posaconazole can be
also applied for refractory IA.16,17 Previously, an externally controlled trial was conducted to determine the efficacy and safety of
posaconazole salvage treatment in patients with IA.18 The overall success rate was 42% in posaconazole recipients and 26% in controls. Our
study comprised one refractory invasive pulmonary aspergillosis patient who received posaconazole treatment, after the use of AMB, CSFG and
voriconazole. The outcome of posaconazole for the patient was PR. Voriconazole has been recommended as a first-line treatment for IA;
however, posaconazole may be an attractive option for salvage therapy of IA.19 The efficacy of posaconazole salvage therapy in 91 cases of
mucormycosis infection was examined retrospectively.20 The rate of success (CR and PR) was 60%, and 21% of the patients had stable response.
In our report, the overall success rate was 55%, and only one death was attributed to IFI. Furthermore, CR was seen in a patient with lethal
cerebral mucormycosis. Thus, posaconazole may be an effective modality for salvage therapy of IFI, especially mucormycosis. In this study, 6
patients received posaconazole as maintenance therapy after using an intravenous antifungal agent. Krishnan-Natesan, et al.21 examined the
fungicidal activity of AMB and posaconazole against Mucorales in vitro. They reported that the fungicidal activity of AMB was more rapid
than that of posaconazole. The authors pointed out that using AMB in the early phase, followed by a later switch to posaconazole, may have
had a clinical benefit. The findings of our study are consistent with Kontoyiannis' strategy.22 The author suggested AMB use (with or
without an echinocandin) for the first 2-3 weeks in patients with mucormycosis as an induction therapy, and a subsequent step-down to oral
posaconazole as maintenance/secondary prophylaxis. This is a useful clinical modality because few drugs are effective against mucormycosis.
In addition, no oral drug is currently available for mucormycosis outpatients. Posaconazole may thus facilitate a reduction in the
hospitalization period. In terms of safety, 11 patients had no evidence of nephrotoxicity after using posaconazole. Thus, posaconazole can
be safely given to patients who are intolerant to AMB because of nephrotoxicity. The most common side effects of posaconazole are
gastrointestinal disturbances [nausea (5%), vomiting (4%), and diarrhea (3%)].23 The safety of posaconazole was previously examined, and
treatment-related adverse effects were reported in 38%.24 The authors concluded that long-term posaconazole treatment is associated with a
generally favorable safety profile. In our study, three patients (No. 2, 5, and 6) received posaconazole treatment for more than 3 months.
Although two patients (No. 2 and 5) had hepatotoxicity and nausea, these adverse events were transient and did not warrant withholding of
the medication. To our knowledge, our results are the first report of the current status of posaconazole treatment in Korea. There were two
case reports of posaconazole treatment in rhinocerebral mucormycosis in 2010.11,12 Our findings suggest that posaconazole is an effective
and safe oral antifungal agent for salvage treatment of IFI, particularly when mucormycosis is diagnosed or when it cannot be ruled out due
to a negative GM result. Limitations of this study include its retrospective design and use of a small sample size from a single-center. In
addition, we were unable to obtain information regarding serum levels of the drug. Further investigations should evaluate posaconazole
treatment in Koreans, including its role in the prevention of IFIs and its pharmacokinetic properties. This study was presented in part as a
poster presentation at the 2012 annual spring conference of the Korean Society for Chemotherapy and Korean Society of Infectious Diseases.
The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. The chest computed tomography of patient No. 5 shows two, round consolidations with
surrounding grounding glass opacities in the right upper lobe: (A) at the time of diagnosis of fungal pneumonia, (B) 2 weeks later, (C) 6
months later. The chest computed tomography of patient No. 6 shows necrotizing pneumonia: (A) superior segment of the right lower lobe at
the time of diagnosis of pulmonary mucormycosis, (B) subpleural portion of the right lower lobe at the time of diagnosis of pulmonary
mucormycosis, (C) 6 months later. Clinical Characteristics of Patients Who Underwent Posaconazole Treatment IFI, invasive fungal infection;
EORTC/MSG, the European Organization for Research and Treatment of Cancer/Invasive Fungal Infections Cooperative Group and the National
Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases Mycoses Study Group; GM, galactomannan assay; AML, acute myeloid leukemia; CTx, chemotherapy;
MM, multiple myeloma; PBSC, peripheral blood stem cell; MPAL, mixed phenotype acute leukemia; CNS, central nervous system; SAA, severe
aplastic anemia; SCT, stem cell transplantation; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; IA, invasive aspergillosis; IPA, invasive pulmonary
aspergillosis. Antifungal Treatments and Outcomes AMB, amphotericin B deoxycholate; QD, every day; LAMB, liposomal amphotericin B
deoxycholate; SR, stable response; CR, complete response; CSFG, caspofungin; PD, progression of fungal disease; PR, partial response; AML,
acute myeloid leukemia; ALL, acute lymphoblastic leukemia; VCZ, voriconazole; BID, twice a day.
