No external financial support was received for this project Dr. Dennis Scribner is a paid proctor for the GelPort trocar (Applied Medical
Systems, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA). None of the other authors have any conflict of interest with the content of this report. Large benign
adnexal masses may be safely managed with single-site laparoscopy. Single-site laparoscopy is gaining acceptance in many surgical fields
including gynecology. The purpose of this report is to demonstrate the technique and outcome for removing a large adnexal mass through a
single site. A 41-y-old female was referred to gynecology oncology for increased abdominal girth for 3 mo. An ultrasound confirmed a benign-
appearing, 37-cm left adnexal mass. The mass was removed through a single-site laparoscopic incision with the aid of drainage and a
morcellator. The operating time was 84 min. The patient was discharged 2 h and 35 min later with full return to normal activity in 5 d.
Large, benign-appearing adnexal masses can be managed safely with superior cosmetic results using single-site laparoscopy. With improved
technology, training, and experience, minimally invasive surgical techniques are now the standard approach for many gynecological
procedures. Currently, single-site laparoscopic surgery is gaining acceptance for gynecologic surgical management of benign adnexal masses,
hysterectomies, and even oncologic procedures.1 Single-site laparoscopy has the potential for less pain, fewer postoperative complications,
and improved cosmetic results. A retrospective study comparing single-site laparoscopic hysterectomies versus traditional laparoscopy showed
those who underwent single-site surgery had less intraoperative blood loss, shorter hospital stay, earlier diet intake, and lower pain
scores immediately after surgery.2 Several case reports of adnexal surgery have been published with successful single-site laparoscopic
management of masses as large as 12cm.3,4 The purpose of this case report is to present the management of a large 37-cm benign adnexal mass
with single-site laparoscopy and to document the safety and feasibility of single-site laparoscopic surgery with the use of a tissue
morcellator. A 41-y-old woman (gravida 2, para 2) presented to the gynecology clinic with complaints of abdominal pain for 3 mo. The pain
had gotten worse and was associated with increased abdominal girth, early satiety, and difficulty breathing. The patient had not had a
gynecologic examination within the last 3 y and did not have any surgical history. The patient's body mass index was 34.4 kg/m2. Abdominal
examination revealed a large mass 10 cm above the umbilicus. Her serum pregnancy test was negative. An ultrasound confirmed the mass to be
37cm in diameter and revealed the contents to be homogeneous with clear fluid. There were no solid components, excrescences, or ascites, and
her cancer antigen 125 level was normal. The patient was referred to gynecology oncology for surgical management. A single-site laparoscopic
left salpingo-oophorectomy with morcellation was performed without complications and minimal blood loss. Once anesthesia was induced, the
patient was placed in the dorsal lithotomy position within Allen stirrups and prepped and draped in the usual fashion (Figure 1). A Foley
catheter was placed in her bladder, and a uterine manipulator in her uterus. A 2-cm skin incision was created within her umbilicus and
carried out through the fascia into the peritoneal cavity where the large ovarian cyst was identified. A 12-mm trocar was placed directly
into the ovarian cyst. The suction irrigator was introduced through the trocar sheath, and 5.5 L of clear fluid was extracted. This step
decompressed the cyst, allowing for proper placement of the single GelPort trocar (Applied Medical Systems, Rancho Santa Margarita, CA).
Three ports for the single-site system where utilized: one 12-mm port to accommodate the 10-mm bariatric laparoscope and two 5-mm trocars
for the Harmonic Ace (Ethicon Endosurgery, Cincinnati, OH), along with a standard straight laparoscopic grasper (Figure 2). The abdomen and
pelvis were inspected and found to be normal. The Harmonic Ace was used to successfully disconnect the left ovary, tube, and cyst from its
blood supply and attachments to the left pelvis and uterus. Given the benign nature of this cyst, washings were not performed, and the cyst
fluid was not sent to pathology for cytologic evaluation. An initial attempt was made to deliver the left adnexa out of the umbilical
incision for external morcellation. Due to the large amount of tissue that had to be morcellated, external morcellation was abandon after 10
min and replaced with internal morcellation. The Gynecare Morcellex Tissue Morcellator (Ethicon Endosurgery) was then placed through the
Gelpoint trocar, replacing the 12-mm trocar, and a 5-mm, zero-degree laparoscope was used for visualization. Intraoperatively, the ovary was
inspected and found to be free and smooth walled exteriorly, and once an incision was made, the inside of the ovary was then inspected with
the camera and was free of any nodularity, solid components, or excrescences. Therefore, the fluid that was saved was discarded, and the
morcellated ovary was not sent for frozen histologic evaluation. With adequate visualization throughout the process, the left adnexa was
morcellated into 2 pieces and taken out of the abdomen in less than 1 min. The left ovarian tissue was grossly inspected by pathology and
found to be benign. The pelvis was inspected and found to be free of tissue fragments, remaining organ injury, or active bleeding. The
pelvis was irrigated, and the instruments and CO2 gas were removed. The anterior rectus fascia was closed with a running 0-polyglactin
suture. The skin was closed with 4–0 monofilament absorbable suture and covered with topical skin adhesive. Local anesthesia was applied
postoperatively using 10 mL bupivacaine. Figure 3 shows the abdomen after wound closure. Total time in the operating room was 124 min, with
84 min of actual operating time. The patient was discharged when she met routine outpatient surgical criteria 2 h and 35 min later without
the need for narcotics. The pathology revealed a benign serous cystadenoma. The patient was seen on postoperative day 14 with a well-healed
umbilical incision and reported being back to normal activities since 5 d after the surgery. Abdominal appearance prior to incision.
Placement of single site GelPort trocarTM (Applied Medical Systems Rancho Santa Margarita, CA). Final appearance after closure. The use of
single-site laparoscopic incisions for gynecologic surgery dates back to 1969 when Wheeless5 first reported on the use of one incision to
perform female sterilizations. Pelosi and Pelosi6 in 1992 published the first case of a supracervical hysterectomy through a single
laparoscopic incision, and since then a case series in gynecology has been published reporting ovarian cystectomies; management of ectopic
pregnancies, benign adnexal masses, and hysterectomies; and gynecologic oncology staging.1–4 The published gynecologic literature however
lacks randomized clinical trials of single-site laparoscopic procedures. The largest published series of adnexal mass management through a
single site included 24 patients with masses that ranged in size from 3cm to 12cm. The average operating room time was 70 min, and patients
were restricted to a body mass index <30 kg/m2.3 The only comparative study was from Seoul, Korea, where the authors retrospectively
reviewed their experiences performing hysterectomies through a single site versus traditional laparoscopy. Their analysis showed less blood
loss, shorter length of hospital stay (3.4 versus 4.3 d), and less postoperative pain within the first 24 h in favor of the single-site
group.2 The only published literature describing single-site morcellation involved supracervical hysterectomies, and the morcellation was
performed through the dilated cervical stump.7 The potential advantages of single-site laparoscopy include improved cosmetic results, less
pain, and potentially decreased recovery time. Fewer incisions could reduce the risks for laparoscopic incisional hernias, bleeding, wound
separation, and infection. The larger single incision compared to traditional laparoscopic incisions also makes for easier removal of normal
to slightly enlarged adnexal masses, with less need for external morcellation. Single-site laparoscopy is not without its difficulties;
however, instrument triangulation, collision, and limited degrees of freedom are a significant deterrent to its use. Other potential
problems include poor ergonomics, a long learning curve, and the lack of proven clinical benefits as reasons for not adopting this new
technology. To help alleviate some of the triangulation pitfalls, angulated and articulating instruments as well as laparoscopes have been
developed. We did not have access to this advanced technology. Traditional instruments and laparoscopes were utilized throughout the entire
case. It is our preference to use the GelPort trocar (Applied Medical Systems) for single-site laparoscopy. It allows for the versatility of
placing trocars through the gel to optimize space between the cannulas, limiting instrument collision. The movements of the surgical
instruments are less subjected to triangulation as they rotate around the fulcrum point within the gel. This case report is the first to
document successful removal of a large, benign ovarian cyst through a single site, as well as the first to show the safety and feasibility
of the use of a morcellator through a single incision. To advocate this approach, surgeons must determine preoperatively whether a low risk
for a malignancy is present. Morcellating cancerous tissue with spillage of malignant cells into the peritoneum can be detrimental to the
patient's survival as well as alter the need for postoperative chemotherapy. Patients with unilocular cysts without any other risk factors
have been shown to be at minimal risk for cancer and ideal candidates for a laparoscopic surgical approach.8 It is our experience that
adnexal surgery lends itself to single-site laparoscopy with less of a learning curve than more complex procedures. Morcellation of the
adnexa, fibroids, and/or uteri can be done safely with a 5-mm laparoscope visualizing the morcellation process throughout its entirety to
prevent complications. This process facilitates successful completion of procedures as well as increases surgical efficiency with more
timely removal compared to external morcellation of large masses, as demonstrated in this case. We were successful despite this patient
being obese with surgical times comparable to those of previous reports. This patient benefited from avoiding a laparotomy, experiencing
limited pain without a narcotic requirement after discharge, and a quickly returning to normal activity. A single, randomized clinical trial
published in the literature in laparoscopic cholecystectomies showed single-site surgery resulted in lower pain scores but slightly longer
operating room times (49 versus 37 min) compared to traditional laparoscopy.9 Future clinical trials will provide more definitive data on
whether single-site laparoscopy provides these potential clinical benefits for gynecologic patients. This case report documents the
feasibility and potential safety of utilizing single-site laparoscopy and morcellation for patients with large benign adnexal masses. Large,
benign-appearing adnexal masses can be managed safely with superior cosmetic results using single-site laparoscopy.
