Although various congenital abnormalities have been described, congenital absence of calf musculature is extremely rare, with only one
report on its complete absence. We are the first to describe a case of congenital absence of muscles of the superficial posterior
compartment of the calf presenting in a toddler. The child presented with a history of a painless limp, however no significant difference
was found in functional gait analysis. We suggest that such cases should be monitored and parents can be reassured that no immediate
treatment is required. The incidence of congenital absence of muscles is rare and reported to be 1:11,000 . Although various congenital
muscular abnormalities have been described, there is only one report on the complete absence of calf musculature ; that case was diagnosed
in the early postnatal period. We are the first to describe a case of congenital absence of muscles of the superficial posterior compartment
of the calf presenting in a toddler. A 2-year, 4-month-old Afro-Caribbean boy presented to our clinic with a history of abnormal gait and a
size discrepancy in the legs noticed by the mother. He was born at term by normal spontaneous vaginal delivery following an uneventful
pregnancy. No abnormalities were noted at birth, and he had achieved normal developmental milestones. From the age of 6 months, the
patient’s mother noticed that his left leg appeared different to the right; as he grew, it appeared that the right leg grew faster than the
left. This difference became more apparent when the child started walking, and the mother noticed the gradual onset of a painless limp and
leaning towards the left side. She also noticed a difference in the size of the feet when the child started using footwear, with the left
shoe always being too big for the left foot. At this stage, the mother noticed that the child was occasionally tripping when walking or
running and that the lower left leg was much thinner than the right. On review in our clinic, the patient was walking and running
appropriately. There were no tripping, functional nor balance difficulties. Leg lengths, foot lengths and thigh circumferences were equal;
however, there was an obvious asymmetry of the calves, with the left smaller than the right. We found a 4-cm difference in calf
circumference measured at a fixed point (4 cm) below the lower pole of the patella. Neurological, vascular and cutaneous examination of the
lower limbs was normal. There were no abnormalities of upper limbs or spine. Radiographs of the lower limbs revealed normal bony
architecture; renal ultrasound was normal, as was magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of his brain and spine. MRI of his lower limbs (Figs. 1,
2, 3) confirmed complete absence of the soleus and medial gastrocnemius, with a rudimentary lateral gastrocnemius arising from the
semimembranosus to form the Achilles tendon. The MRI also revealed hypertrophy of the deep posterior compartment and peroneal compartment
muscles on the left side. Creatine kinase was mildly raised at 193 IU/L (normal 0–170 IU/L), but all other blood markers and genetic
testings were normal. Static and dynamic gait analysis revealed no significant difference between feet, including foot phasing, calcaneal
stance angles and rearfoot/forefoot angles (Table 1). We counseled the parents and reassured them that no intervention was required. At
latest follow-up, the child was 5 years and 4 months old and progressing well clinically. Although there remains an obvious difference in
calf size (Figs. 4, 5), there are no functional difficulties. The patient’s parents gave informed consent prior to our writing this
report.Fig. 1Axial T1-weighted spin-echo magnetic resonance image (TE-11 TR-656) sequences through the proximal aspect of both lower limbs.
This demonstrates a normal superficial posterior compartment on the right. There is absence of most of the superficial compartment on the
left, apart from atrophied lateral gastrocnemius and compensatory hypertrophy of the left deep posterior compartment and peroneal
compartmentFig. 2Axial T1-weighted spin-echo magnetic resonance image (TE-10, TR-442) sequence of the left leg just above the ankle. Arrow
identifies atrophied Achilles tendonFig. 3Magnetic resonance imaging scan of both limbs showing absent musculature in the left. Axial
T1-weighted spin-echo (TE-11 TR-656) sequences through the proximal aspect of both lower limbs demonstrating the absent superficial
posterior compartment on the left. Note the compensatory hypertrophy of the deep compartment and peroneal compartment muscles on the left.
The solid line represents the superficial posterior compartment. The interrupted line represents the deep posterior
compartmentFig. 4Difference in calf size from the frontFig. 5Difference in calf size from behindTable 1Comparison of gait analysis
findingsLeft footRight footRearfoot phase (%)6.99.09Midfoot phase (%)41.3643Forefoot phase (%)5550Neutral calcaneal stance angle6° varus5°
varusRelaxed calcaneal stance angle11° valgus10° valgus Axial T1-weighted spin-echo magnetic resonance image (TE-11 TR-656) sequences
through the proximal aspect of both lower limbs. This demonstrates a normal superficial posterior compartment on the right. There is absence
of most of the superficial compartment on the left, apart from atrophied lateral gastrocnemius and compensatory hypertrophy of the left deep
posterior compartment and peroneal compartment Axial T1-weighted spin-echo magnetic resonance image (TE-10, TR-442) sequence of the left leg
just above the ankle. Arrow identifies atrophied Achilles tendon Magnetic resonance imaging scan of both limbs showing absent musculature in
the left. Axial T1-weighted spin-echo (TE-11 TR-656) sequences through the proximal aspect of both lower limbs demonstrating the absent
superficial posterior compartment on the left. Note the compensatory hypertrophy of the deep compartment and peroneal compartment muscles on
the left. The solid line represents the superficial posterior compartment. The interrupted line represents the deep posterior compartment
Difference in calf size from the front Difference in calf size from behind Comparison of gait analysis findings Congenital absence of
muscles is rare, with those of the axial skeleton being the most frequently absent. Within this group, the most commonly described are
pectoralis major and trapezius [3, 4]. The appendicular skeleton, however, is even more rarely affected. Reported absences include thigh
muscles , gluteal muscles , muscles of the anterior compartment of the leg and elbow flexors . In our case, there was absence of the
musculature of the superficial posterior compartment of the calf, which only became clinically apparent once the child began walking. The
only similar case described an absence of the entire (superficial and deep) posterior compartment musculature in addition to the Achilles
tendon. This case was first identified in the immediate postnatal period and thought to be a calcaneus deformity of the foot. In our case,
an Achilles tendon was present, and no abnormality was discovered until the child started ambulating. The aetiology of this form of anomaly
can be divided into vascular, mechanical, teratogenic, congenital or developmental . In our case, the origin was congenital: there was no
history of a vascular injury, other insult or trauma; brain and spinal imaging were normal; there were no visceral or skeletal deformities,
no clinical evidence of neuromuscular disorders and no genitourinary abnormalities. Other than a cosmetic deformity, no functional deficit
was apparent. This was initially confirmed by gait analysis, and no treatment was required. Even though this patient has no soleus or medial
head of the gastrocnemius, there is a rudimentary lateral head of the gastrocnemius, with an atrophied Achilles tendon (Fig. 1). MRI also
revealed hypertrophy of the deep posterior compartment muscles and peroneal compartment muscles on the left side. We believe the patient is
able to plantar flex his ankle using these rudimentary superficial compartment muscles and the compensatory hypertrophied deep compartment
muscles (Figs. 3, 4, 5). We suggest there is potential for future problems with the Achilles mechanism and plantarflexion in this patient.
We counseled the family with regards to this possibility and suggested that, although we do not expect any difficulties, the child be
monitored locally until he has fully developed to ensure no such problems arise. Congenital absence of calf musculature is extremely rare.
We suggest that similar patients should be monitored as they develop and that parents can be reassured that no immediate treatment is
required. The authors confirm that there are no conflicts of interest.
