Complications can arise from spilled gallstones during cholecystectomy. A surgeon should make every effort to avoid gallbladder perforation
and spillage of stones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is the procedure of choice for the treatment of
symptomatic biliary disease. There is currently no agreement on the management of spilled gallstones, which commonly occurs during
laparoscopic cholecystectomy and may produce significant morbidity. We present a case of spilled gallstones causing cicatrical cecal
volvulus and also provide a review of pertinent literature. Controversy has surrounded laparoscopic cholecystectomy since it was first
performed in 1985 and reported in 1986 by Eric Muhe.1,2 Laparoscopic cholecystectomy has become the procedure of choice for the treatment of
symptomatic biliary disease, but there is still debate regarding the disposition of spilled gallstones. We present the first reported
incidence of gangrenous perforation secondary to cicatrical cecal volvulus. A 71-y-old female patient was transferred from an outside
hospital with primary complaints of progressive diffuse abdominal pain, associated with nausea and emesis. The pain had lasted for 24 h.
Initial presentation was diagnosed as constipation, which was treated with oral magnesium citrate. The patient returned several hours later
with progressive symptoms. Complete bowel obstruction was diagnosed following computed tomography (CT) imaging. The patient was then
transferred to our institution. Past medical history was significant for asthma, hypertension, fibromyalgia, degenerative disc disease,
chronic pain disorder, chronic affect disorder, hypothyroidism, major depressive disorder, cerebral meningioma, coronary artery disease, and
congestive heart failure. Past surgical history included craniotomy with resection of meningioma, and laparoscopic cholecystectomy performed
15 y before. The patient also presented with hypotension complicated by a prescribed daily calcium channel blocker. Other vital signs were
within normal limits. Physical examination demonstrated a distended abdomen with involuntary guarding and rebound tenderness. Laboratory
findings revealed an elevated white blood cell count of 11,200, with 87% neutrophils. Mild microcytic anemia was noted along with mild
hyperglycemia (165 mg/dL), mild acute renal insufficiency (BUN/cre 32/1.4 mg/dL), and a hypochloremic metabolic alkalosis (Cl 96 mmol/L &
CO2 35 mmol/L). Initial arterial blood gas (ABG) determination at 40% FiO2 demonstrated an elevated pH of 7.50, normocarbia with a pCO2 of
42 mm Hg, hypoxia with a pO2 of 30 mm Hg, and an elevated base excess at 8.7 mmol/L. Lactate was elevated at 4.0 mmol/L. Roentgenographic
(Figures 1a, 1b) and CT (Figures 2 & 3) imaging were reviewed and intestinal obstruction secondary to cecal volvulus was noted.
Intraabdominal sepsis secondary to cecal volvulus was detected. a. Supine Roentgenogram demonstrating “coffee bean” sign. Figure 1b. Upright
Roentgenogram demonstrating air-fluid levels with “coffee bean” sign. CT scout film demonstrating “coffee bean” sign. CT coronal image
demonstrating cecal volvulus. Carbapenem antibiotics were initiated, and fluid resuscitation was started with bolused crystalloid as the
patient was prepared for emergency exploratory laparotomy. Purulent ascites effused from the abdominal cavity immediately upon entry and was
evacuated with suction irrigation. Gangrenous cecal volvulus was promptly diagnosed. Multiple cholesterol gallstones were found embedded
within a dense mesenteric cicatrix causing ileocolic torsion. Mesenteric venous outflow was obstructed with hemostats to prevent circulation
of the products of ischemia and necrosis. The volvulus was then reduced and ileocectomy was performed. Anastomosis was deferred due to the
patient's vasopressor requiring septic shock. Additional justification for intestinal discontinuity and damage control election was the
patient's perceived need for significant volume resuscitation with attendant iatrogenic bowel edema, clinically apparent coagulopathy and
hypothermia. Abdominal exploration revealed multitudinous gallstones throughout the abdomen. Marked sclerosis associated with these
gallstones was appreciated along the left anatomic gutter, the right subphrenic space, and within the mesentery and omentum. Gallstones were
found embedded in Couinaud segment 7 of the liver and the sigmoid colon. All encountered cholesterol gallstones were removed and the abdomen
was irrigated. Temporary abdominal closure was provided with a negative pressure intraabdominal dressing, and the patient was transported to
the intensive care unit for resuscitation. Following resuscitation, the patient returned to the operating room within 24 h for peritoneal
toilet, reexamination, and ileocolostomy anastomosis. The patient tolerated these procedures well and was transferred to the floor. She
progressed to a solid diet within 7 d and was discharged. The patient's recovery was smooth and limited to incisional pain controlled with
oral analgesics. Pathology evaluation reported the following findings: “Focally transmural necrosis of the cecum associated with marked
acute inflammation and focal hemorrhage, fibrous serosal adhesions, fibrous obliteration of the appendiceal lumen, and focal foreign body
reaction to embedded periappendiceal gallstones.” The reported incidence of gallbladder perforation during laparoscopic cholecystectomy
varies from 6% to 40%, and the incidence of stone spillage varies from 5.7% to 12.3%.3–6 Established risk factors that predispose to
gallbladder perforation during laparoscopic cholecystectomy are surgeon inexperience, acute cholecystitis, tensely distended gallbladder,
right upper quadrant adhesive disease, thermal injury during dissection, and excessive traction.3,7,8 Morbidity related to spilled stones
occurs with an incidence of 0.08% to 6%.4,9 There are currently no indications for conversion to open cholecystectomy for retrieval of
spilled stones, but risk factors for postoperative complications have been identified.10 These established risk factors are old age,
spillage of infected bile, acute cholecystitis, pigmented stones, stones (>15cm), and perihepatic localization of lost stones.4,10,11
Multiple gallstones were found throughout the abdomen of the patient described herein. Informed consent was obtained by discussing risks
such as gallbladder perforation and benefits of laparoscopy with the patient. A review of the literature found a report on mechanical bowel
obstruction as a consequence of spilled gallstones.12 Cases of volvulus of the small intestines, cecum, and sigmoid have been reported
following laparoscopic cholecystectomy, but they have not been directly attributed to ectopic intraperitoneal gallstones. Bariol et al.13
reported the first case of cecal volvulus after laparoscopic cholecystectomy in a patient with mobile cecum syndrome, though no anatomic
abnormality was found. Duron et al.14 presented a second case of cecal volvulus following laparoscopic cholecystectomy in a patient
predisposed to the condition due to malrotation. The third case report by Ferguson et al.15 described cecal volvulus secondary to cecal
bascule, occurring 6 mo after complicated laparoscopic cholecystectomy. The current case study describes the first reported cecal volvulus
secondary to iatrogenic laparoscopic gallbladder perforation with unretrieved ectopic intraperitoneal gallstones, causing cicatrical
mesenteric rotation. Peritoneal adhesions secondary to ectopic intraperitoneal gallstones have been reported in both animal models and
humans.8,16 The number of ectopic concrements within the peritoneal space and the presence of infected bile appears directly related to the
development of adhesions. Cecal mobility as a result of abnormal peritoneal fixation and anatomical distortion secondary to intraperitoneal
adhesions or masses are predisposing risk factors for cecal volvulus.17,18 The patient presented herein developed marked fibrosis of the
cecal mesentery leading to sclerotic contracture and cecal volvulus. Multiple ectopic gallstones were located throughout the peritoneal
cavity with marked accumulation in the affected cecal mesentery. Erosion of spilled biliary concrements has been reported into the hepatic
parenchyma and sigmoid colon.19–21 Ectopic gallstones were found eroding into the liver parenchyma of segment 7 and the sigmoid colon in our
subject patient. No hepatic fistula or sigmoid perforation developed but concern for such complications is based on prior reporting.
Radiographic evaluation is recommended when a clinician suspects cecal volvulus, as it may lead to perforation or strangulation of bowel. In
addition, a small bowel obstruction, appendicitis or inflammatory bowel disease may be indistinguishable from volvulus at presentation.22
Plain film may demonstrate classic “bent inner tube” or “coffee bean sign,” but most often shows a collection of gas-filled colon extending
from the right lower to left upper abdominal quadrant, similar to a coffee bean with a paucity of distal air or feces.17 This classic
finding is evident in the patient's abdominal roentgenograms and CT scout film (Figures 1a, 1b & 2). Barium enema may demonstrate a “bird
beak sign” as contrast tapers at the site of volvulus, but should be deferred if clinical concerns for perforation exist due to increased
morbidity and mortality.23–25 Computed tomography (CT) has become the preferred radiographic method to investigate volvulus, as shown by
“coffee bean,” “bird beak” and “whirl” signs.17 The “whirl” sign describes the torsion of cecum and ileum with enhancing mesenteric vessels.
These classic findings are shown in the CT imaging (Figure 3). Endoscopy is an accepted diagnostic and initial therapeutic method for
sigmoid volvulus, but colonoscopy is limited in the management of cecal volvulus with successful reduction of volvulus in approximately 30%
to 50% of cases.26–28 Surgical detorsion with or without cecopexy, cecostomy, ileocectomy, and right colectomy are possible treatment
options, but ileocectomy or colectomy should only be used in cases with bowel necrosis. Surgical detorsion by open or laparoscopic approach
demonstrates a recurrence rate of 50% and a mortality rate as high as 25%.22,27 Detorsion with cecopexy results in decreased recurrence
rates of 30% to 40%, although mortality remains high.27 Initial reports for laparoscopic detorsion and cecopexy show decreased morbidity
when compared with the open approach, though recurrence rates are unknown.29 Detorsion with cecostomy provides another option for fixation
of the cecum with similar recurrence rates to those of cecopexy, although mortality rates may be higher.2 Resection by ileocectomy or
colectomy with primary anastomosis is an accepted surgical option in all cases of cecal volvulus, offering the lowest risk of recurrence.26
In the setting of gangrenous bowel and perforation, resection should be performed to remove affected bowel and allow anastomosis of
nonischemic tissues.30 The current study reports a case of cecal volvulus caused by spilled gallstones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
Adhesion formation has previously been linked to the formation of cecal volvulus, but ours is the first report of spilled gallstones causing
intraperitoneal adhesions and resultant volvulus. This case also emphasizes spillage of multiple gallstones as a direct cause of
postoperative morbidity. In a patient presenting with multiple risk factors for gallbladder perforation or stone spillage, a surgeon should
make every attempt to avoid gallbladder perforation and spillage of stones during laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
