Direct puncture cholangiography is a simple technique that may be of help in clarifying difficult anatomy. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy is a
very frequently performed procedure. Its most dreadful complication is bile duct injury. Difficulty in appreciating the biliary anatomy
plays an important role in its causation. Here we describe our technique in clarifying the difficult anatomy by directly injecting the
radiologic contrast in the ambiguous area, and thus avoiding a potential injury. Shortly after its inception, laparoscopic cholecystectomy
(LC) became the gold standard for cholecystectomy. Its perceived advantages over the open procedure convinced the surgical fraternity to
embrace it without prior validation through randomized trials. An upsurge of LC followed, with 1.6 million procedures performed in the
United States between 1992 and 1996 alone.1 This upsurge was accompanied by an associated increase in the rate of bile duct injuries,
certainly due to unfamiliarity with the laparoscopic techniques. In this technical report, we present an unconventional way of performing
peroperative cholangiography, which was utilized in 2 cases and helped to prevent biliary injury in one of them. A 31-y-old female, with no
chronic medical illness, presented with vomiting and upper abdominal pain radiating to the back for 2 days duration. The patient sought
medical advice in another hospital where ultrasound examination showed cholelithiasis with dilated biliary radicles. On examination, her
vital signs were normal as well as her chest and heart, but there was minimal tenderness in the epigastrium and right upper quadrant of the
abdomen. Laboratory investigations showed a normal blood count and deranged liver enzymes. Her alkaline phosphatase was 236U/L (reference
range, 36 to 126), alanine aminotransferase 513U/L, (reference range, 30 to 56) aspartate aminotransferase 722U/L (reference range, 10 to
42), gamma glutamyl transferase 205U/L (reference range, 5 to 64), total bilirubin 35 μmol/mL, (reference range, 3 to 17) direct bilirubin
13 μmol/mL (reference range, 0 to 8), and amylase was 27U/L (reference range, 27 to 130). The patient was admitted as a case of obstructive
jaundice and was allowed a fat-free diet. An ultrasound scan confirmed the presence of gallstones in a thick-walled gallbladder with
pericholecystic fluid collection. The common bile duct (CBD) measured 7 mm, and there was a stone in its lower end with dilatation of the
intrahepatic biliary radicles. Endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) was attempted, but the presence of a scarred papilla
prevented CBD cannulation. In the meantime, the patient desaturated and the procedure was terminated. Reattempted ERCP with the patient
under general anaesthesia succeeded to clear the CBD from different-sized stones, and the free drainage of bile was established. Three days
later, a laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed. The procedure was initiated by creating the pneumoperitoneum, utilizing a Veress needle
through an umbilical incision, and the laparoscope was inserted. This was followed by inserting 3 more ports according to the standard
procedure. The gallbladder was then grasped at the fundus, and retracted in a cephalad and lateral direction. The lower part of the
gallbladder appeared to extend downwards behind the duodenum (Figure 1), raising the possibility of it being the CBD. Intraoperative
cholangiography was performed using the direct puncture technique, with the laparoscopic aspiration cannula inserted into the target region
(Figure 2). At this point, it was immediately evident that this was in fact the CBD (Figure 3). Due to the uncertainty of the limits between
the gallbladder and the CBD, conversion to open cholecystectomy was performed. Postoperatively, the patient tolerated the procedure well and
was discharged for outpatient follow-up, where she appeared 2 weeks later in good health. Extension of the lower part of the “gallbladder”
behind the duodenum. Injection of the contrast into what appeared to be the lower part of the gallbladder. What appeared to be the
gallbladder proved to be the common bile duct after contrast injection. A-56-y-old male with no past medical history, presented with upper
abdominal pain of 4 days duration. The pain radiated to the back and was associated with discoloration of the eyes. On examination, his
vital signs were normal as were his chest and heart, but there was mild tenderness in the right hypochondrium. His blood results,
coagulation profile, renal values and electrolytes were all normal. His liver enzymes showed alkaline phosphatase of 167U/L (reference
range, 36 to 126), gamma glutamyl transferase 184U/L (reference range, 5 to 64) alanine aminotransferase 419U/L (reference range, 30 to 56)
aspirate aminotransferase 310U/L (reference range, 10 to 42), total bilirubin 111 μmol/L (reference range, 3 to 17), direct bilirubin 74
μmol//L (reference range, 0 to 8). An ultrasound scan showed mild fatty changes of the liver and gallstones in a thick-walled gallbladder,
with no intra- or extrahepatic biliary dilatation. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography (MRCP) showed a small filling defect in the
lower end of the common bile duct that was cleared by endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography (ERCP) and a small stone retrieved.
Laparoscopic cholecystectomy was performed 2 days later after the serum amylase level came down to normal after an initial post-ERCP rise to
403U/L (reference range, 27 to 130). The procedure started as previously described, and the fundus was retracted upward in a cephalad
direction. The lower half of the gallbladder was covered by omentum and adherent duodenum. Tedious blunt dissection teased these tissues
down, exposing the covered part of the gallbladder, which took an unusual L-shaped configuration, ending in a tapered portion (Figure 4).
The gallbladder with L shaped configuration tapering down (white circle). Because there was some anatomic uncertainty, a peroperative
cholangiography was performed by injecting the contrast directly into the tapered portion, which then proved to be the cystic duct (Figure
5). It was divided between clips, and the gallbladder was removed after the cystic artery was controlled. A drain was inserted into the
subhepatic region and the operation was concluded. The injected contrast visualized the mucosal valves of the cyst duct. Postoperatively,
the patient tolerated the procedure well; the drain was removed 2 days later and he was discharged. Unfortunately, he returned 3 weeks later
with a subhepatic collection, which was successfully drained percutaneously, with no ill effects. Although the initial high incidence of
biliary injury rate associated with laparoscopic cholecystectomy has decreased, it remains higher than that of the open procedure. A rate of
0.5% has been attributed to laparoscopic cholecystectomy, compared to 0.2% of its open counterpart.2 Moreover, the severity of laparoscopic
injuries is usually greater than that of the open technique.3 The most common cause of iatrogenic bile duct injury is failure to identify
the anatomy, with the surgeon's misperception playing a prominent role.4 Acute cholecystitis, the inexperience of the surgeon, and anatomic
uncertainty are definite risk factors for CBD injury.2,5 On occasions, the CBD has been mistaken for the cyst duct and consequently
severed.6 There are many variations of the biliary anatomy, the appreciation of which may be made more difficult by the inherent limitations
of laparoscopic surgery, with lack of depth perception and the absence of direct tactile sensation. In this regard, intraoperative
cholangiography and ultrasonography offer a great help in verifying any anatomic ambiguity. Intraoperative cholangiography may be performed
by injecting the contrast directly into the gallbladder (cholecystocholangiography) or, more commonly, the cystic duct, the latter being the
standard technique. Cystic duct catheterization is usually performed by clipping the duct at its junction with the gallbladder, then nicking
it below the clip to thread the cholangiocatheter.7 Its major disadvantage is that if the supposed cystic duct was in reality the common
bile duct, biliary damage would occur, resulting in a Stewart and Way type 1 injury,4which requires a delicate repair. Laparoscopic
ultrasound (LUS) is another imaging modality used to detect CBD stones and to verify biliary anatomy,8 but training and familiarity with the
techniques are prerequisites for its adoption. Additionally, it may not provide accurate anatomic details, and the findings might need
confirmation with intraoperative cholangiography, resulting in an unnecessary waste of time. Currently, the debate over the routine versus
selective use of intraoperative cholangiography is still running,9,10 In one study, its routine use decreased the incidence and severity of
CBD injury and increased its intraoperative recognition rate. However, it did not completely prevent it.11 Certain operative strategies have
been recommended to avoid biliary injury. The creation of the critical view of safety, introduced by Strasberg in 1995,12 is one such
strategy.13,14 Although this is true in the many cases, in others, performing the necessary dissection may be hampered by the presence of
dense adhesions in the region, as observed in the second case presented here. In our practice, we perform preoperative cholangiography on a
selective basis, according to the standard technique during which the cystic duct is catheterized, if this duct can be easily dissected and
isolated. In the presence of dense adhesions in the area or uncertainty of the anatomy, we directly puncture the target spot for the
injection of the contrast. As was observed in the cases reported here, the uncertainty immediately unfolds, with the needle serving as a
landmark to where we exactly are. In this way, CBD injury is avoided, as no harm results from the needle puncture. Direct puncture
cholangiography is a simple technique, which can be applied during difficult laparoscopic cholecystectomy procedures. In the presence of
anatomic uncertainty, the injection of the contrast directly into the target location may clarify the anatomy and thus help to avoid a
potential CBD injury. It should be considered as an addition to the surgeon's armamentarium during laparoscopic cholecystectomy.
