This article presents and discusses a long-term repeated-immersion research process that explores meaning allocated to an episode of 50
seconds of music improvisation in early neurosurgical rehabilitation by a teenage boy with severe traumatic brain injury and his music
therapist. The process began with the original therapy session in August 1994 and extends to the current time of writing in 2013. A diverse
selection of qualitative research methods were used during a repeated immersion and engagement with the selected episodes. The multiple
methods used in this enquiry include therapeutic narrative analysis and musicological and video analysis during my doctoral research between
2002 and 2004, arts-based research in 2008 using expressive writing, and arts-based research in 2012 based on the creation of a body cast of
my right hand as I used it to play the first note of my music improvising in the original therapy episode, which is accompanied by
reflective journaling. The casting of my hand was done to explore and reconsider the role of my own body as an embodied and integral, but
originally hidden, part of the therapy process. Put together, these investigations explore the potential meanings of the episode of music
improvisation in therapy in an innovative and imaginative way. However, this article does not aim at this stage to present a model or theory
for neurorehabilitation but offers an example of how a combination of diverse qualitative methods over an extended period of time can be
instrumental in gaining innovative and rich insights into initially hidden perspectives on health, well-being, and human relating. On any
one day, in any place on the planet where motorization has spread, there is the risk that a healthy member of society might be torn from the
very material and meaning of their lives and the lives of those around them as a result of a road traffic incident. Worldwide, road traffic
crashes have been estimated to be responsible for approximately 1.2 million deaths and up to 50 million injuries per year (World Health
Organization, 2004). Although the World Health Organization (2004) describes the relative risk of serious injury during each single journey
as being low, every year there is an increase in the total number of survivors of road traffic crashes living around the world. In terms of
severity, survivors of road traffic crashes who experience a traumatic brain injury experience a sudden and dramatic loss of health and
well-being. These catastrophic events often occur before the very eyes of those around them, and “for people who have experienced traumatic
brain injury, meaning and sense in life may become disrupted, distorted and, for some, hidden” (Gilbertson & Aldridge, 2008, pp. 11, 12).
The National Institute for Health (NIH, 1999) has provided a sequence of descriptions of the effects of traumatic brain injury in which,
first, the neurological consequences of how the brain may be damaged are described, and, second, a list of concepts is given concerning how
the site of brain damage will negatively affect the performance of movement, cognition, speech, and social interaction. In the same
document, the NIH (1999) provides a list of therapies, including music therapy, with information regarding the level of evidence of effect
of the treatment for the consequences of the traumatic brain injury. Importantly, other commentators (Agrawal, 2012; Kreutzer et al., 2009;
Perlesz, Kinsella, & Crowe, 1999) have highlighted the need for an additional consideration of the effects of traumatic brain injury on the
lives of the injured individual's closest family. The literature on music therapy and traumatic brain injury has grown during the past
decades to include guidelines for therapists, a Cochrane review and literature reviews on children and adults (Baker & Tamplin, 2006; Bradt
et al., 2010, Gilbertson 1999; 2005a; 2008; 2009). But how, then, can qualitative research aid in identify the meaning of therapeutic
strategies, such as, in this particular case, music therapy? This is the question addressed in the remainder of this article, which presents
and discusses how multiple qualitative research methods can be created and applied to generate different understandings and perspectives
from a single case of study. By considering one case of a young boy with severe traumatic brain injury in this manner, this article offers
an example of how long-term repeated-immersion in research can be used to identify significant aspects of the process of rehabilitation. In
August 1994, a 15-year-old boy was referred to individual music therapy in the early neurosurgical clinic in Germany where I worked as one
of a small group of music therapists. The teenager, who I will call “Bert,” had been involved in a serious road traffic incident in which a
car had crashed into him as he was riding his bicycle. The incident caused a multitude of injuries, including a severe traumatic brain
injury and fractures of his skull and both legs. As a result of the initial injuries, Bert presented extreme levels of increased muscle
tone, and he did not have any spontaneous speech, verbal gestures, or capacities of conventional physical gestures. He did not follow
movement with his eyes, nor was it possible to effectively determine the ways in which he might or might not perceive the environment and
those around him. On 11 August, Bert's mother brought him in his wheelchair to one of the clinic's music therapy rooms for his first
individual music therapy session with me. The events of that music therapy session would turn out to be the subject of many years of
reflection and research. In particular, there was one episode of interaction lasting 50 seconds in which the young boy moved his left leg,
which created sounds from a percussion instrument called a wind chime, while I was improvising on the piano. This motion occurred at a time
at which this same leg movement had been observed outside of the music therapy setting, but had not convinced any observers that it was of a
communicative nature and was considered within the multidisciplinary team meetings to be without any meaning, simply being a meaningless
result of neural activity. Contrastingly, in that music therapy session I had experienced a tentative sense of some form of connectedness
with Bert, but could not at that time clearly identify the exact nature or content of this experience. A consideration of an individual's
ability to improvise sounds and music with the music therapist allows for the expression and perception of communicative potential even at
times when a full realization of this potential is not conventionally considered. Though it is beyond the scope and intention of this
current article, a full portrayal and discussion of the improvisational approach to working with Bert and other individuals in early
neurosurgical rehabilitation are presented elsewhere (Gilbertson & Aldridge, 2008). Whereby this process of improvisation may require a
phase of exploration and adjustment on the part of the therapist, co-improvised music making becomes an arena of interpersonal exchange.
This may apply no matter how unconventional or idiosyncratic it may be in comparison to conventional and integrated actions and
interactions, as portrayed in the following descriptions of events in music therapy in early neurorehabilitation:Single, breathy, vocal
utterances have completed cadences and led to a sharing of melodic phrases. Finger movements limited by spastic muscle patterns and so fine
that they must be described in millimetres have determined the direction of musical improvisations and dialogues. These fine, often minute,
movements and vocal sounds have sometimes developed into a repertoire of physical and communicative gestures that can form the basis of
developing relationships in the context of shared musical activities. Gigantic, explosive explorations of steel drums, gongs and large drums
have contrasted the stillness of patients no longer able to speak. (Gilbertson & Aldridge, 2008, p. 13)In the subsequent years after 1994,
the music therapy department in the clinic grew to become the workplace for seven full-time music therapists. Music therapy became
established as an integrated and integral element in the multidisciplinary approach to early neurosurgical rehabilitation. In those years, I
returned to the episode many times for reflection and viewing with colleagues from various professions. I used the video recording of the
episode in national and international presentations to provide an example of the work we were doing at the clinic. Through a pragmatic
process of archiving, only those recordings of episodes of therapy considered to be significant and representative for our practice and this
particular episode were archived. Single, breathy, vocal utterances have completed cadences and led to a sharing of melodic phrases. Finger
movements limited by spastic muscle patterns and so fine that they must be described in millimetres have determined the direction of musical
improvisations and dialogues. These fine, often minute, movements and vocal sounds have sometimes developed into a repertoire of physical
and communicative gestures that can form the basis of developing relationships in the context of shared musical activities. Gigantic,
explosive explorations of steel drums, gongs and large drums have contrasted the stillness of patients no longer able to speak. (Gilbertson
& Aldridge, 2008, p. 13) In 2002, I began my doctoral research on music improvisation with people with severe traumatic brain injury
(Gilbertson, 2005b). In the study, I chose to carry out a retrospective explorative study to find out if it was possible to identify any
links between the elements of music improvisation and clinical change during the rehabilitation process. To undertake this exploration, I
selected the method of therapeutic narrative analysis (Aldridge & Aldridge, 2002), a form of qualitative research based on personal
construct theory (Kelly, 1955). Within that framework, I included musicological and video analysis in the research process. After reviewing
many tens of hours of video and audio archives of music therapy sessions that I had carried out during the previous 8 years, I selected
“Episode 1,” from 11 August with Bert, as one of 12 episodes for closer examination (Gilbertson & Aldridge, 2008). Episode 1 represented a
specific situation representative of many processes of recovery following severe traumatic brain injury. In the episode, the extreme level
of isolation and idiosyncratic actions of the person with traumatic brain injury creates a high level of interpersonal disorientation and
secondary isolation of the person they are currently with, in this case the music therapist. Within the therapeutic narrative analysis, I
created and included various sources of data: a musicological transcription and analysis, a sonograph of the frequencies and dynamic
qualities of the episode, alongside a narrative text based on actual clinical notes made at the time of the therapy process. It is from this
episode that the significance of the role and nature of isolation and minimal contact in early neurorehabilitation was elicited. This is a
significant aspect of early phases of rehabilitation in regard to actions made by severely traumatically injured patients, particularly as
these actions are commonly at risk of initially being interpreted as being without meaning or consequence. In the episode, which I labeled
“First foot forward” during the research process, I improvised a four-phrase melody beginning on the note “f” with my right hand, which was
accompanied by simple, open-chord structures in my left hand in the tonality of “F” major (for a full transcription of the episode, please
refer to Gilbertson & Aldridge, 2008). Using video analysis, it became evident that there were possible tentative links between the timing
of my improvising on the piano with Bert's mouth movements and leg movement at the close of the melodic phrase and cadence. The narrative
analysis of my therapy notes showed that a form of initial, but uncertain, synchronization was being attempted, although my notes also
showed that I was not certain at the time whether Bert was aware of the potential link or not. Interestingly, in the process of peer
checking the validity of my video transcription and repeated viewing with colleagues and my research supervisor David Aldridge, clear signs
of changes in my improvising were commented upon. It seemed that the movements and actions that Bert was making were leading and directing
aspects of my actions. It became clear that, particularly during this initial phase of isolation following severe traumatic brain injury, I
was changing and adapting my own musical behavior in minute detail and relation to the minimal movements and sounds made by Bert. Thus, by
allowing myself to be led to improvise music based on Bert's actions, it was possible to gain a perspective from which it is possible to
perceive myself in relation to Bert. A relational description of the quality of isolation became possible through identifying links between
real-time music improvising. Through analysis and synthesis of constructs and core themes of the further 11 episodes, I selected the
superordinate category pairs of isolation and integration, and idiosyncrasy and convention to represent the findings at higher levels of
abstraction. These superordinate concepts led to the elicitation of the core category of relation(ship) and its significance in the process
of rehabilitation following severe traumatic brain injury (Gilbertson & Aldridge 2008). In 2007, I moved from Germany to Ireland to work at
the Irish World Academy of Music and Dance, University of Limerick. There, I worked together with Professor Jane Edwards and Dr Alison
Ledger at the Master of Music Therapy training course. With the episode still in my consciousness, my new teaching role and the curriculum
designed by Jane Edwards brought me into contact with ecological and relational perspectives informed by the work of authors, including
Bronfenbrenner (1979), Vygotsky (1978), Salter Ainsworth and Bowlby (1991), and Schore (2000). At exactly the same time, I began working
with David Aldridge on adapting the manuscript of my doctoral research into a book format (Gilbertson & Aldridge, 2008). During 2007–2008, I
had become aware of how my understandings of the original Episode 1 from 1994 had become reframed and recontextualized through these
curriculum readings. I became starkly aware of the need to reconsider the episode in terms of Bert, his family, and indeed the nature of my
own decisions as a therapist in 1994. During this time of reconsideration, it was necessary for me to contact Bert's mother in relation to
requesting permission to publish the details of the therapy process in the planned book. During written exchanges with Bert's mother, she
wrote to me that she was never really sure what had gone on in the music therapy room, but that she had always believed that it was
something good for her son. Rather than experiencing this potentially as flattery, I was deeply disturbed by the fact that it had taken me
nearly 14 years to find a theoretical stance from which I could consider the episode in light of the needs of the families of those injured
by traumatic brain injury. It felt as if a very significant new aspect of the episode was emerging. I decided to explore this situation in a
very raw and direct manner and engaged in expressive writing about the episode and my experiences of the therapy process with Bert. This
choice had been sparked by conversations with my colleague Jane Edwards and also my colleague Alison Ledger's use of arts-based research
methods, including poetry writing, in her then ongoing doctoral research (Ledger & Edwards, 2011). In one of the various pieces of
expressive writing, I explored my reflections in relation to Bert, his mother, and my actions in a fictitious letter to Bert's mother.
Before drafting the actual letter, I first described the moment of engaging with the writing process as follows:As I write in this moment, I
sense my breath leaning heavily outwards onto my ribs and feel my chest filling slowly and deeply. The time has come to write an apology,
from a space that is open and authentic, but also respectful and timid.The letter, which appears below, was not written to be sent to Bert's
mother, but to explore and verbalize new perspectives through the creative writing research process:Dear Mrs. D.,After your son was admitted
to the rehabilitation clinic, he received music therapy sessions with me four times a week. As I am certain you will remember, each session
lasted somewhere between 15 and 20 minutes depending on how things were going on that day. Your son was in a non-life-threatening but
serious health situation as I met him for the first time. His arms and legs were contorted and twisted by the high level of muscle tone in
his body and the scars on his shaven head caused by injury and surgery were clearly visible.His body-sweat and drooling left him permanently
soaked and towels were drenched within minutes. His gaze, unchanging, gave nothing away to us about his actual experience of his life. You
had bought him some stuffed toys to support his arms and to stop the plastic of his wheelchair table digging into his skin. He was in good
hands.During the 20 minutes he was in the music therapy room, you sat outside, alone. Though it is many years ago, I remember there were two
chairs outside of each therapy room in the corridor. They were put there extra for Mum, Dad, daughters and sons, brothers and sisters,
grandmas and grandpas, and everyone else who was visiting.The music therapy room was well sound insulated. The architects had been well
informed, taking advice from a music therapist whilst drawing up the plans. A small amount of noise leakage is inevitable in any
construction like this. After all, it is a hospital and not a famous recording studio.I imagine that the sounds ‘leaking’ from the therapy
room must have been unusual. Your son was severely injured, not long since surviving a horrendous road traffic incident. Now, someone was
singing for your son, playing music on the piano.I know we spoke with each other after every single session. As I steered your son carefully
in his oversized wheelchair through the doorway, you would ask, ‘How did it go? How was he today?’ and I would tell you what I had done,
singing to the rhythm of his breath, opening to any signs of communication. … It was often hard to find words to describe the immeasurable
changes that I thought I had perceived, or not. Not many people thought I would ever have anything to report. But we carried on meeting
undeterred. You stayed outside patiently waiting.One day he moved his leg which caused the wind chimes to sound right at a point in the
improvised music that it sounded like a film score, arranged to the perfect moment. No professional composer would have been able to do it
better. You would have loved it. I wish I had been ‘awake’ enough to let you in.Another day, he started to play the grand piano. Yes, it was
unconventional – it was with the big toe of his right foot – but it was great. He plonked around on the high keys while I played some
heavily rhythmic stuff down at the lower end of the piano keyboard. It would have been great for you to see it. Particularly as things were
so difficult at that time, with all the rest of life.There were so many days that you would have enjoyed seeing his progress. Or even joined
in. Maybe it would have helped? I'll never know.After a very long time, your son was doing really fine and ended his individual music
therapy sessions with me. Together with a colleague we decided it would be good to start up a new music therapy group, and your son should
be one of the first members. The group was quickly arranged and I remember you came in. You stayed for the whole session sitting next to
your son. The memory of your smiles still brings me to tears. You seemed so proud, so full of something essential to life, something that
rehabilitation is all about. You didn't say much. Here and there, a little ‘well done’, a quiet ‘great!’ and a touch as light as a feather
on his arm after he had played his musical instrument together with the others. You went completely red in the face as the therapist asked
if you would like to have a go, joking the offer off with a huge ‘What me? I can't play for my life!’I know I'm rambling on a bit, but what
I really wanted to say was, I'm sorry.I'm sorry I didn't recognise that you were missing – missing from the room and from the opportunity to
use music, just as I had done, to reduce the isolation and trauma caused to you and your son by the traumatic injury to his brain.By not
entering the music therapy space, it was you who had made it possible for me to enter into such an intimate microcosm with your son. Of
course, there are things that I can do with music. If it is possible, as research has shown, that music can be used in therapy to reduce
isolation and idiosyncratic situations, and to increase integration and the use of conventions, then I must apologise that you were missing
from this situation.I am grateful to you for providing a frame of trust as a mother for your son, a young man with traumatic brain injury,
and for me, the music therapist I was back then.Through this reframing and recontextualization of Episode 1, which was initiated by new
reading and the expressive writing process, it was possible to express a hidden realization of the importance of the interpersonal and
social contextualization of the individual with traumatic brain injury and the people affected by the injury, in this case Bert's mother.
The self-immersed quality of the letter is as striking as the heavy emphasis of gratefulness and my use of “I” whilst articulating the
fragility of the therapist's role. Alongside domains of relational aspects that were hidden in the first research project, the letter also
communicates an impression of the naïveté of an early-stage therapist. The session from which Episode 1 is taken took place approximately 1
year after I completed my formal training as a music therapist. It may be that the content and expressions used in the letter overemphasize
the significance of the therapist, but more importantly though than considering the therapist alone, the letter aids in recognizing the role
of active relating for the patient and his or her family members. Rather than considering this aspect as an auxiliary or solely
complementary perspective in rehabilitation, the central importance of the meaning of music therapy in rehabilitation processes in terms of
the social nature of the traumatic injury became clearer and could be verbalized. Many years after the original episode, engaging in
expressive writing as an additional methodological strategy added an additional layer of understanding and reflection on Episode 1. The
verbalization of the social nature of traumatic brain injury pointed toward the significance of a social response in the rehabilitation
process. This hinted strongly toward the need for a consideration of a model of music therapy in the early neurosurgical rehabilitation that
is based on social, and not individualized, conceptualizations of function, cognition, capabilities, and agency in future research. Rather
than looking solely at issues of how therapy can enhance individual brain plasticity, this work suggests the relevance of a consideration of
the concept of social plasticity that acknowledges the unavoidable nature of both constructive and destructive change as collective and
relational. As I write in this moment, I sense my breath leaning heavily outwards onto my ribs and feel my chest filling slowly and deeply.
The time has come to write an apology, from a space that is open and authentic, but also respectful and timid. Dear Mrs. D., After your son
was admitted to the rehabilitation clinic, he received music therapy sessions with me four times a week. As I am certain you will remember,
each session lasted somewhere between 15 and 20 minutes depending on how things were going on that day. Your son was in a non-life-
threatening but serious health situation as I met him for the first time. His arms and legs were contorted and twisted by the high level of
muscle tone in his body and the scars on his shaven head caused by injury and surgery were clearly visible. His body-sweat and drooling left
him permanently soaked and towels were drenched within minutes. His gaze, unchanging, gave nothing away to us about his actual experience of
his life. You had bought him some stuffed toys to support his arms and to stop the plastic of his wheelchair table digging into his skin. He
was in good hands. During the 20 minutes he was in the music therapy room, you sat outside, alone. Though it is many years ago, I remember
there were two chairs outside of each therapy room in the corridor. They were put there extra for Mum, Dad, daughters and sons, brothers and
sisters, grandmas and grandpas, and everyone else who was visiting. The music therapy room was well sound insulated. The architects had been
well informed, taking advice from a music therapist whilst drawing up the plans. A small amount of noise leakage is inevitable in any
construction like this. After all, it is a hospital and not a famous recording studio. I imagine that the sounds ‘leaking’ from the therapy
room must have been unusual. Your son was severely injured, not long since surviving a horrendous road traffic incident. Now, someone was
singing for your son, playing music on the piano. I know we spoke with each other after every single session. As I steered your son
carefully in his oversized wheelchair through the doorway, you would ask, ‘How did it go? How was he today?’ and I would tell you what I had
done, singing to the rhythm of his breath, opening to any signs of communication. … It was often hard to find words to describe the
immeasurable changes that I thought I had perceived, or not. Not many people thought I would ever have anything to report. But we carried on
meeting undeterred. You stayed outside patiently waiting. One day he moved his leg which caused the wind chimes to sound right at a point in
the improvised music that it sounded like a film score, arranged to the perfect moment. No professional composer would have been able to do
it better. You would have loved it. I wish I had been ‘awake’ enough to let you in. Another day, he started to play the grand piano. Yes, it
was unconventional – it was with the big toe of his right foot – but it was great. He plonked around on the high keys while I played some
heavily rhythmic stuff down at the lower end of the piano keyboard. It would have been great for you to see it. Particularly as things were
so difficult at that time, with all the rest of life. There were so many days that you would have enjoyed seeing his progress. Or even
joined in. Maybe it would have helped? I'll never know. After a very long time, your son was doing really fine and ended his individual
music therapy sessions with me. Together with a colleague we decided it would be good to start up a new music therapy group, and your son
should be one of the first members. The group was quickly arranged and I remember you came in. You stayed for the whole session sitting next
to your son. The memory of your smiles still brings me to tears. You seemed so proud, so full of something essential to life, something that
rehabilitation is all about. You didn't say much. Here and there, a little ‘well done’, a quiet ‘great!’ and a touch as light as a feather
on his arm after he had played his musical instrument together with the others. You went completely red in the face as the therapist asked
if you would like to have a go, joking the offer off with a huge ‘What me? I can't play for my life!’ I know I'm rambling on a bit, but what
I really wanted to say was, I'm sorry. I'm sorry I didn't recognise that you were missing – missing from the room and from the opportunity
to use music, just as I had done, to reduce the isolation and trauma caused to you and your son by the traumatic injury to his brain. By not
entering the music therapy space, it was you who had made it possible for me to enter into such an intimate microcosm with your son. Of
course, there are things that I can do with music. If it is possible, as research has shown, that music can be used in therapy to reduce
isolation and idiosyncratic situations, and to increase integration and the use of conventions, then I must apologise that you were missing
from this situation. I am grateful to you for providing a frame of trust as a mother for your son, a young man with traumatic brain injury,
and for me, the music therapist I was back then. When reading my clinical notes on Episode 1 during the past 19 years, I have repeatedly
been struck by the languaging and coding of the narrative reports of my experience. One such comment caught my attention: “It would be great
to find a way of getting in touch with each other.” Although not of a particularly refined professional vocabulary, this metaphor referred
to my wish to explore any possibilities of reducing the extreme level of isolation in interpersonal actions caused by a brain injury to one
of the individuals. In considering the human social brain, Cozolino (2006) suggested, “Our ubiquitous use of physical metaphors to describe
our inner experiences may also betray the sensory-motor core of both our subjective experience and abstract thought” (p. 190). Though
challenging a purely cognitive explanation of human experience, Cozolino (2006) goes on to argue, “In the same way, many believe that human
reason is not derived from abstract logic but rather emerges from our bodily experience within our social and physical environments” (p.
190). Many years after the original event of Episode 1, I engaged in a new research study to uncover an additional layer of meaning of
Episode 1. In 2010, I moved from Ireland to Norway to take up a position as associate professor in music therapy at the Grieg Academy and
the Grieg Academy Music Therapy Research Centre (GAMUT) at the University of Bergen. Once there, my research continued to extend from the
neurobiological foundations of attachment that I had come into contact with thanks to Jane Edwards in Ireland, and to move toward the themes
of non-individualized cognition and socioneural ecologies. It was clear from the constructs and categories from my doctoral research and
expressive writing that I needed to further explore the relational aspects of Episode 1, not from a psychodynamic and interpersonal
understanding of the concept relationship, but from one that focuses on a hypothesis of the social core of intrapersonal processes and
extended mind theory in relation to the shared and ecological processes of perception, action, and cognition. In this new theoretical and
geographic space, I became interested in a hypothesis that no individual can be authentically and rationally considered without an
integration of “the other” in that consideration. The initial impulse for this new study began after I viewed Episode 1 together with a
newly arrived colleague, Dr Jill Halstead. Jill is a musicologist and scholar with extensive knowledge of a wide range of topics, including
feminist theory and the domains of music action, creativity, and embodiment. In our initial conversations, Jill and I found out that we
share a passion for topics and themes that cross conventional domains, bridging and fusing to create new areas and forms of enquiry. After
one discussion, I watched Episode 1 once again and realized that something was missing from the visual material on the video. Although the
recorded artifact contained the complete audio scenario, it became clear that a most obvious element of the lived interaction was missing –
my body. Jill had begun introducing me to the work of authors such as Mark Johnson (1990) and Beatrice Allegranti (2011) on embodiment and
meaning, and these writings highlighted the absence of my body and, through that, its potential presence. The video camera had captured only
Bert's movements and the back of the upright piano, behind which my bodily self was completely hidden. Obviously, my mind had been, up to
that point, content with artificially “ghosting” my physical existence back into the scene by acoustic association, rather than by actual
visual presence in the video documentation. The very hand that had played the four-phrase melody pattern was missing. There was no finger
that played the first note “f” of the melody in Episode 1. My hands were invisible. As a result of this initial thought in 2011, I began
thinking about applying for research funding for a project that would explore the meaning that music therapists gave to their hands in
relation to specific moments in their creative music making in their work as a music therapist. The title of the project was chosen to be
“In Visible Hands” to signify the bodily site of potential meaning in music therapy work. Frequently, when I began describing the idea of
the project to my colleagues, I noticed myself forming my right hand into the position of the very first few moments of the video footage,
perhaps the very first note of Episode 1. Whereby my words in the past research steps were telling the story of those actions, it was my
body that showed that story. The narrative was becoming visible through my hand's reenactment of the episode. I felt a confirming sense that
the reconstruction of my hand in that episode was the next piece of work in this long-term repeated-immersion process of research. I began
playing with the idea of creating a sculpture of my hand in a stance or position from that episode. I dreamt of using three-dimensional
digital scanning and virtual representation. I took multi-angle photographs of my hand and attempted to create classic red–green 3D images
that could be viewed with 3D glasses and other technological solutions such as 3D printing or holograms. I also filmed my hand playing the
music of the episode on the piano from six different angles with a video camera to create a video reconstruction of my hand's movements in
Episode 1. Finally, I rested with the idea of creating a highly detailed body mold and cast of my hand that would result in a physical
restructure or sculpture of my hand with the finest level of detail possible. Convinced by the potency of this process of physical
reconstruction, I applied together with Jill for funding for the materials for an arts-based research study to produce between 10 and 12
body molds and casts of hands of music therapists who had worked in a variety of areas related to the use of music in health and well-being.
The production of the hand casts was augmented by a semistructured interview during the casting processes, to be followed up with a written
interview based on initial analyses of the first verbal interview. The project is in progress at the time of writing and includes the hands
of music therapists working in prisons, child and adolescent welfare, adult mental health care, kindergartens, and neurological
rehabilitation. It is planned that the project will come to a conclusion in 2014. In the first steps of the project, I had to learn a great
deal about the materials, techniques, and challenges of human body casting, which I managed only with the kind assistance of Germain Ngomo,
an artist and educator of body casting and sculpture at the Norwegian Academy for Fine Arts, and Maurice Velterop, an industrial supplier of
materials to the fine arts and construction professions. Once skilled, I began with creating my first-ever cast of Jill's hand and then
progressed a few days later, on 30 October 2012, to reconstruct my own right hand. I chose the position of playing the first note (“f1”) of
the episode with the index finger of my right hand, as captured in the video footage of Episode 1 with Bert. The process is straightforward.
A mix of alginate powder with water is used to create a mold by immersing the hand in the desired position into the mix and waiting for
approximately 10 min whilst the mixture becomes firm but flexible enough to remove the hand without damaging the rubber-like mold. I then
used two-component acrylic, which was poured into the mold, shaken, tapped, and rolled around to release air bubbles before being left to
stand for 1 h to set into a very hard but not brittle, off-white duplication of my hand. On removing the cast from the mold, I was struck by
the lifelike quality of the cast. Every fingerprint, vein, fold, and contour of my hand was present. All of the scars of my biography were
glaringly present. A curious inconsistency in the molding mixture led to imperfections in the cast of my little finger, the only finger on
that hand that I have ever significantly damaged as a child in sports. This elicited the important consideration of the physicality of the
body of the therapist and how this too places restraints or characteristics of improvisation and interaction, infusing the meaning of the
body in music improvisation. Once I was finally sitting with my “hand” in my hands, many thoughts sprinted into my consciousness. Initially,
I began to realize that I could begin to contemplate why I had improvised what I had from completely new vantage points. For example,
earlier studies on neurofunction and the peripheral nervous system provide a great deal of knowledge about how the index finger and
particularly the thumb (which were prominent in Episode 1) are well represented at cortical levels of the brain and how the representation
of the hand of musicians develops differently at a neural level than it does for non-musicians (Münte, Altenmüller, & Jäncke, 2002). This
accounts for the extreme differentiation of the resolution of movement and overall fine motor abilities of musicians. This may also provide
a neurophysiological rationale for the selected action when improvising in a situation that demanded extremes in terms of temporal physical
control, immaculate control of the trajectories and dynamics of my music-making body. It became clear through the pilot study that my body
may be considered as the main vehicle of relating in that scenario and that it makes sense to make use of those parts of my body that are
most extensively trained (I have played the piano since I was 6 years old) in exactly that way. The sense of touch on the index finger of my
dominant (right) hand is my most diversified and biographically significant resource that I may have. Not only in terms of music performance
skills on the piano, but also in terms of semantic connectivity in gestures and cognition, it is a primary point of orientation in terms of
body scheme. It seems likely that I may have chosen this finger in many occasions during my 11 years of improvising in therapy for such
important duties. After all, earlier parts of these research studies hint that it is this finger that is a part of Bert's emergent agency in
determining the actions of another person – my perception of Bert's actions determines what my finger does (Figure 1). The body cast of the
author's hand playing the first note of Episode 1 in the arts-based research project titled “In Visible Hands.” On holding the hand cast, I
was reminded that my thumb and little finger are just as important as my index finger. The thumb has the largest area of representation in
the motor cortex of all fingers. Together with the little finger, a hand form is created that provides the most stable and balanced movement
pattern when spread over an octave of piano keys as in the episode. My body, as seen through my right hand, is generating physical
stability, contrasting the interpersonal scenario of insecurity, uncertainness, and hypothetical propositions of coordinative attempts of
musical expression and communication with Bert. The hand is a part of isolation, and it is a resource of minimal contact that is elementary
in the exploration of the ways in which Bert and I are connected or interrelated. Through putting various perspectives together, it becomes
clearer and clearer that I am in fact being led by Bert. He is leading me (without any conventionally obvious signs of consciousness or
intentionality about this at that time) through his movements. In fact, my finger movements are both responses to his movements and also
provide me with a unique way of perceiving him. Action, in this context, is a perceptive act of intention. Though 19 years have passed, I
can today still feel the surface of the piano key of that first note of Episode 1. It was my sense of touch, through my embodied
intentionality to communicate, that supported the process of searching for “a way to get in touch” with Bert. While meaning at the outset
was hidden, it has become clearer over time and has shown that some aspects of meaning were present, if not then visible or obvious. By
considering the potential meaning held in the visible hand (both real and reconstituted in the body cast or sculpture), potential meaning
has become visible. Interestingly, this meaning has been “held” and embodied in my hand over the past 19 years. Fascinatingly, meaning is
also embodied in this visible acrylic hand crafted from the fleshy, sensing, and pulsating reality of my being. After studying Episode 1 for
many years, I have experienced a shifting and diversification of perspectives on the episode of therapy that has been led by continuing
research and immersion, study and learning, and moving toward new people and theories. Through this long-term process, it has become more
and more obvious that the conventional ways of analyzing the video material with music transcription and narrative analysis only made it
possible to consider what could be easily seen and heard. It was then at this junction that the idea emerged to look for what was missing
from the video footage. Whilst reading classic and contemporary texts on the senses (MacPherson, 2011) and human dynamics (as discussed in
Stern, 2010), I experienced a twist of my focus onto my own senses and how they may be used to access what was missing from the video
footage. Initially, I was most interested in my sense of touch on the piano keys, and this emerged to represent a milestone in the
maturation of my research outlook. Focusing on the sense of touch led me to consider my hand itself, my understanding of theories of
embodiment, and the relationships between the central and peripheral, the individual and social. By considering the visible, audible, and
embodied material of music therapy, it is possible to consider and reflect on the meaning of our bodies, individual and social. As Aldridge
(1996) noted, “he body has a central role in post-modern society. The relationship with the self is with the body; it is here that we have
the interface of internal and external. How we experience the unfolding of our experience is reflected in our bodies” (p. 110). Although
bodily reflection of experience is undoubtedly significant, the research reported in this article highlights ways in which a relationship
with the “other” occurs within, and can be extracted through, our bodies. This acknowledgment of the body's significance should not be
restricted to the bodies of clients or patients. Music therapists are encouraged to consider their own bodies in relation to the bodies,
minds, and social roles that we choose or are given by others. We may consider music in therapy at a cellular or community level and all
resolutions in between. This perspective is endorsed by Cozolino (2006) in his eloquent portrayal:If we use Mother Nature as a guide, we see
that when she likes an idea, she tends to stick with it, and she does so by conserving structures and strategies through increasing layers
of complexity. Assuming this is true (which I do), we stand to learn a great deal from zooming in and out, from “neurons to neighborhoods,”
while resisting the urge to become attached to any particular frame of reference. In this way, we may gain a deeper understanding of the
interwoven tapestry of biological, psychological, and social processes that comprise human life. (Cozolino, 2006, pp. 3, 4) If we use Mother
Nature as a guide, we see that when she likes an idea, she tends to stick with it, and she does so by conserving structures and strategies
through increasing layers of complexity. Assuming this is true (which I do), we stand to learn a great deal from zooming in and out, from
“neurons to neighborhoods,” while resisting the urge to become attached to any particular frame of reference. In this way, we may gain a
deeper understanding of the interwoven tapestry of biological, psychological, and social processes that comprise human life. (Cozolino,
2006, pp. 3, 4) As described at the outset of this article, traumatic brain injury is conventionally described in terms of the person
injured. Unfortunately, however, this has serious consequences in terms of the limited conceptualization of the nature of traumatic brain
injury. Although the individual must be considered, this should never be in isolation and it is the damage to the access and integration of
the ecological context of the patient that is of consequence for their care and potential of rehabilitation. This demands a perhaps
reluctant, but necessary, reconsideration of the nature of traumatic brain injury and indeed the fundamental conceptualization of the brain,
body, and ecological context in everyday life. One way of achieving this is to consider not only the brain or central nervous system but
also the peripheral nervous system both in terms of the role it plays in responding to impulses for movement and as a perceptive system that
is capable of directing the work of the central nervous system. Thus, the brain may be considered to be just one part (albeit a highly
important one) of the systems of action and perception and should not be considered as the sole site of meaning and sense of being. This is
a stance taken in recent considerations of embodied cognition (Shapiro, 2011), extended cognition (Menary, 2010), and social neuroscience
(Cacioppo, Visser, & Pickett, 2006). If we then add to this scenario not just one individual but also a second one, a partner within a human
ecological scenario, we may be compelled to consider the central and peripheral nervous systems of both individuals. An action and
perception scenario becomes at once more interesting and messy. In fact, to generate this perspective, we need only to acknowledge that we
are naturally social beings and thatthe individual neuron or a single human brain does not exist in nature. … Thus, understanding the brain
requires knowledge of the healthy, living brain embedded within a community of other brains: Relationships are our natural habitat.
(Cozolino, 2006, p. 11) the individual neuron or a single human brain does not exist in nature. … Thus, understanding the brain requires
knowledge of the healthy, living brain embedded within a community of other brains: Relationships are our natural habitat. (Cozolino, 2006,
p. 11) As this research process has shown, traumatic brain injury is characterized by extremes of isolation and idiosyncratic needs and most
severe social devastation. The experience of severe traumatic brain injury is unimaginable, a prime example of the nature of destructive
plasticity (Malabou, 2012) that changes lives beyond the boundaries of what we are commonly prepared to believe. Through long-term repeated-
immersion, the multiple perspectives generated by the use of multiple and different qualitative research methods have shown that music
therapy contributes to a reduction of isolation and an increase in the opportunity for the injured person and the music therapist to connect
and relate. This epistemological commitment to the use of multiple methods and long-term immersion has clearly identified the need for a
consideration of an innovative model of music therapy that considers the interrelated and socioplastic nature of injury and rehabilitation,
a worthy work agenda for the future beyond the scope of this article. Although this exploration of meaning in music improvisation for people
affected by traumatic brain injury began many years ago, it may be that innovative understandings not only are to be found in our brains or
recorded artifacts, but also may lie in our very own hands, whether analogic or fleshy. The author has not received any funding or benefits
from industry or elsewhere to conduct this study. The study, In Visible Hands, was funded through a Grieg Academy Small Project Grant,
University of Bergen, Norway.
