Either metastatic or primary squamous cell carcinoma in the gastrointestinal tract is extremely rare, with very few cases reported in the
literature. In this paper, we report a case in which the patient presented with dysphagia during the course of radiotherapy for recurrent
lung cancer in a mediastinal lymph node. Although the dysphagia mimicked radiation esophagitis, the ultimate cause proved to be gastric and
duodenal metastases from primary lung squamous cell carcinoma. Taking into account the value of identification of metastatic or primary SCC
in the stomach and duodenum on the prognosis and treatment options, it is imperative that the correct diagnosis be established. This report
is followed by a discussion of the differential diagnosis between metastatic and primary squamous cell carcinoma in the stomach and
duodenum. Either metastatic or primary squamous cell carcinoma (SCC) in the gastrointestinal tract is extremely rare, with very few cases
reported in the literature. The gastrointestinal tract has rarely been reported as a metastatic site of various tumors, such as lung cancer,
breast cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma, melanoma, testicular seminoma, choriocarcinoma, Merkel cell carcinoma, malignant fibrous
histiocytoma and others . Most occurrences of metastatic SCC involving the gastrointestinal tract originate from lung primary tumors, but
these occurrences remain extremely rare, with very few cases of stomach or duodenal involvement reported in the literature . The incidence
of primary SCC of the stomach or duodenum is also very low. It is estimated that the worldwide incidence of primary SCC of the stomach is
0.04% to 0.07% . Fewer than ten cases of primary SCC of the duodenum have been noted . In this report, we present an unusual case of gastric
and duodenal metastases from primary lung SCC with a discussion of the differential diagnosis between metastatic and primary SCC in the
stomach and duodenum. A 54-year-old man was referred to our hospital because of a 1-month history of cough. He had smoked one pack of
cigarettes per day for the past 20 years. A mass shadow in the hilum of the right lung with an enlarged subcarinal lymph node was found by
contrast-enhanced computed tomography (CT) of the chest. A bronchoscopic biopsy yielded the diagnosis of SCC. After metastatic workup with
abdominal ultrasonography, magnetic resonance imaging of the brain and bone scan, the patient was staged with T3N1M0 disease. Thereafter he
underwent definitive right-middle lobectomy, revealing well- to moderately differentiated SCC and multiple lymph node metastases. He
received four cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy comprising taxotere and cisplatin. Five months after his lobectomy, an enlarged mediastinal
lymph node was discovered on a routine follow-up chest CT scan. Solitary lymph node recurrence was diagnosed by coincidence circuit single-
photon emission CT assessment. The patient then underwent a course of conformal external beam radiation to the mediastinal lymph node at a
dosage of 6,000 cGy in 30 fractions. He complained of dysphagia without melena or hematemesis during the fourth week of radiotherapy, which
was attributed to radiation esophagitis. However, the patient’s symptoms worsened despite symptomatic treatment. A gastroduodenoscopy
performed 10 days after the completion of radiotherapy revealed a giant gastric ulcer in the greater curvature of the stomach with mucosal
edema and congestion as well as a huge cauliflower-like mass in the descending part of the duodenum (Figure 1). Biopsies of both lesions
revealed SCC. On histopathological examination, hematoxylin and eosin–stained sections of gastric and duodenal biopsies revealed typical SCC
and large, eosinophilic cells with distinct cell borders growing beneath the normal gastric and duodenal mucosa (Figure 2). Keratinization,
formation of small horn pearls and malignant squamous cells in capillaries were also observed. The morphology of the gastric and duodenal
lesions is similar to that of primary tumor of the lung. To confirm the metastatic nature of the lesions, additional immunohistochemical
staining analyses of the duodenal lesion were performed. These showed the lesion to stain focally positive for cytokeratin 7 (CK7) and
negative for cytokeratin 20 (CK20) and thyroid transcription factor 1 (TTF-1), a staining pattern identical to that of the patient’s primary
lung SCC (Figure 3). The patient refused further medical interventions and died of progressive disease 2 months later. Gastrointestinal
tract metastases revealed by gastroduodenoscopy. (A) A giant gastric ulcer in the greater curvature of body is shown. (B) A huge
cauliflower-like mass in the descending part of duodenum is shown. Histopathological views of gastric (A) and duodenal (B) specimens showing
squamous cell carcinoma with morphology similar to that of the primary tumor in the lung (C). Focal positive staining to cytokeratin 7 of
the duodenal lesion (A) and the primary of the lung (B). Because of the absence of continuity between the gastric and duodenal metastatic
lesions, our present case report is probably the first to describe gastric and duodenal metastases from primary lung SCC. Taking into
account the value of identification of metastatic or primary SCC in the stomach and duodenum on the prognosis and treatment options, it is
imperative that the correct diagnosis be established. Usually, the visual diagnosis followed by tissue diagnosis of the tumor is enough to
establish the diagnosis of SCC. However, it is rarely possible to differentiate metastatic SCC from primary SCC involving the stomach and
duodenum based on symptoms and imaging findings, because the major manifestations are the same. A documented history of SCC in other primary
sites lends weight to the diagnosis of metastasis, especially in patients with diffuse metastases involving other organs. In this case,
recurrence in the mediastinal lymph node and involvement of both stomach and duodenum were highly suggestive of metastatic rather than
primary lesions. However, it could be argued that a history of malignancy does not necessarily imply that the new lesions are metastatic in
nature. An early-stage primary malignancy followed by new ostensibly metastatic lesions after a relatively long interval will make the
differential diagnosis of metastasis versus new primary tumor difficult. More importantly, the diagnosis of metastatic tumor to
gastrointestinal tract is challenging on the rare occasions when it represents the first and only metastatic site. It would be even more
challenging where the gastrointestinal involvement presents prior to the detection of the primary site. Histological examination is critical
as the most valuable way to differentiate metastatic from primary tumors involving the gastrointestinal tract. The differences in the
pathogenensis of metastatic or primary SCC in the gastrointestinal tract are also helpful to the differential diagnosis. The
gastrointestinal tract may be metastatically involved by direct invasion, intraperitoneal dissemination and/or lymphatic or hematogenous
cancer spread. The pathogenesis of SCC in the stomach and duodenum has not been well-elucidated. Several theories regarding the origin of
SCC in the stomach and duodenum have been proposed, including nests of ectopic squamous cells, the proliferation of uncommitted mucosal
basal cells into squamous cells, squamous metaplasia secondary to chronic mucosal damage, squamous differentiation in a preexisting
adenocarcinonma and multipotent stem cells in the gastrointestinal mucosa . Endoscopically, nearly all the meatastatic cases present as
submucosal tumors with bridging folds and small ulcerations at the top, termed volcano-like ulcers. The morphologic finding at low
magnification of inverted tumor cell growth (that is, with the tumor growth mainly involving the serosal surface and perivisceral adipose
tissue with or without ulceration of the mucosa) often suggests a metastatic tumor . Unfortunately, these features can be obscured by biopsy
artefact and will disappear as the tumor progresses. Patients with gastrointestinal metastases are often asymptomatic. Less frequently,
these metastases can cause various symptoms such as gastrointestinal perforation, obstruction and/or hemorrhage. These nonspecific symptoms
may be misinterpreted as indefinite complaints or as a side effect of treatment. For our patient, his complaint of dysphagia was transiently
misdiagnosed as radiation-related esophagitis. Therefore, preemptive endoscopic examinations and careful biopsies are recommended in
symptomatic patients. The presence of misplaced squamous cell nests or squamous metaplasia in the mucosa adjacent to the infiltrative tumor
growth is highly suggestive of a primary SCC. However, in most of the reported cases of primary gastric SCC, precursor lesions were not
demonstrated . Immunohistochemistry may also be useful in reaching the correct diagnosis. Over the past decade, expression levels of CK7,
CK20 and TTF-1 have been widely used to distinguish pulmonary from gastrointestinal carcinomas, especially when evaluated as a panel of
markers . However, these markers are mainly used to discriminate adenocarcinoma or carcinoid tumors from different sites and have limited
value in the differential diagnosis of SCC. Kanthan et al. adopted CK5, p63 and p16 as immunohistochemical markers to confirm the diagnosis
of SCC of the cervix metastatic to the duodenum . Strikingly, Gevaert et al. studied the expression profiles of a series human epithelial
cancers and their metastases by microarray technology and concluded that SCCs do not reflect their primary tissue expression profile . Huang
et al. performed immunohistochemical staining to compare the expression pattern of the epithelial-mesenchymal transition markers between
primary SCC of the hypopharynx and a metastatic lesion of the duodenum. Impressively, dissociation of E-cadherin in cellular junctions and
nuclear expression of Snail were detected in the primary tumor sample; in contrast, restoration of membranous E-cadherin and disappearance
of nuclear Snail expression were demonstrated in the duodenal metastatic sample . Their result may partially explain the unusual metastasis
from the metastatic mechanisms, which await further verification. The prevalence of SCC of the stomach and/or duodenum is very low. The
clinician should be aware of the possibilities of either metastatic or primary involvement of the stomach and duodenum with SCC.
Distinguishing between the two requires extensive evaluation, including the patient’s clinical history, histological examination,
immunohistochemical staining and possibly microarray data. Written informed consent was obtained from a son of the patient for publication
of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. XS and JH designed the study. JH and YZ drafted the manuscript. All
authors contributed to the intellectual content and approved the final version of the manuscript for publication. XS is the guarantor. We
thank Dr. Case Ketting (Mission Hope Cancer Center, Santa Maria, CA, USA) for polishing the English writing of the article. Funding was
received from the Program for Innovative Research Team in Zhejiang Province (Grant 2012R50046).
