Interferon beta-1a is available as an immunomodulating agent for relapsing forms of multiple sclerosis. Common side effects include flu-like
symptoms, asthenia, anorexia, and administration site reaction. Kidney disorders are rarely reported. In this study we describe the case of
a woman who has been undergoing treatment with interferon beta-1a for multiple sclerosis for 5 years. She developed a hemolytic-uremic
syndrome with intravascular hemolysis in a context of severe hypertension. A kidney biopsy showed a thrombotic microangiopathy. This
observation highlights an uncommon side effect of long-term interferon beta-1a therapy. Pathophysiological mechanisms leading to this
complication might be explained by the antiangiogenic activity of interferon. Thrombotic microangiopathies (TMA) are microvascular occlusive
disorders characterized by systemic or intrarenal aggregation of platelets, thrombocytopenia, and mechanical injury to erythrocytes.
Thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura (TTP) and hemolytic uremic syndrome (HUS) represent the two most frequently encountered clinical
presentations of TMA. Sometimes TTP and HUS can overlap, and the clinical distinction between these two entities may be difficult to
discern. The typical form of HUS occurs most commonly in children about a week after an episode of bloody diarrhea caused by Escherichia
coli O157:H7. But infections with other E. coli serotypes also cause HUS in children and adults. Less frequently, there is no preceding
diarrheal illness, and this form of the disease is known as atypical HUS (aHUS), and can either be sporadic or, when more than one member of
a family is affected, familial.1 Atypical HUS designates a primary disease caused by a disorder in complement alternative pathway
regulation.2 In both cases, there is an acute kidney disease. Although TMA has multiple etiologies, adverse effects of drugs have been
increasingly reported for several years as probable causes of TMA.3 Drug-associated TMA can be an acute, immune-mediated disorder or the
result of gradual, dose-dependent toxicity.4 Interferon alpha (IFNα) has been implicated in the development of lesions of thrombotic
microangiopathies in patients treated for chronic myeloid leukemia.5 We speculate that interferon beta-1a (IFNβ-1a) therapy may be involved
in the development of TMA, and we propose a hypothesis for the mechanism by the antiangiogenic activity of interferon (IFN) to explain this.
Here we report the case of a woman who has been treated for 5 years with IFNβ-1a for multiple sclerosis (MS), and has developed renal
failure with hypertension due to TMA with clinical presentation of HUS. The 38-year-old Caucasian woman was diagnosed with MS in August
2006. Treatment was started 7 months later with IFNβ-1a (Rebif®, Merck Serono Europe Limited, London, UK) and before this, no treatment was
initiated. The IFNβ therapy was well tolerated for 5 years, with ibuprofen and acetaminophen also taken to treat flu-like symptoms. In
recent years, she reported using oxcarbazepine therapy for neuralgia and a clonazepam therapy for cramps, but these drugs were taken over a
short period of time. For several weeks before the first admittance in our hospital, she reported a history of asthenia, cramps, headaches,
and anorexia with weight loss. Discovery of anemia motivated the hospital admission of the patient. At admission, the patient showed
evidence of kidney insufficiency in the context of severe hypertension (180/130 mmHg). Laboratory investigations are summarized in Table 1.
Viral, bacteriological, and immunological studies, including antinuclear antibodies, were all etiologically negative. The results of gene
mutation analysis in Factor H, Factor I, membrane cofactor protein (MCP), complement C3 and Factor B were also negative. A kidney biopsy
revealed both acute and chronic lesions of TMA. A few glomeruli presented with capillary-loop double contours, fibrin thrombi, and zones of
mesangiolysis (Figure 1). One arteriole showed marked mucoid intimal expansion with focal fibrinoid necrosis (Figure 2). Chronic ischemic
changes were predominant, with diffuse interstitial fibrosis, tubular atrophy, extensive ischemic changes in glomeruli, and severe fibrous
intimal thickening of interlobular arteries (Figure 3). During the 7 days of hospitalization, a symptomatic treatment with red blood cell
transfusion resulted in the correction of anemia. Blood pressure control was initially achieved with intravenous nicardipine therapy and
relayed with triple antihypertensive therapy (propranolol, amlodipine, and irbesartan). Consequently, IFNβ-1a was discontinued. At the end
of hospitalization, kidney failure persisted in this patient, consistent with the chronic lesion identified on kidney biopsy. One month
after the first episode, the patient was readmitted following difficulties in controlling blood pressure (140/100 mmHg) and kidney function
deterioration (Table 1). During the second admittance there was no biological argument in favor of a recurrence of TMA: no biological
argument for mechanical hemolysis, and complement C3 and C4 levels were normal. The introduction of urapidil, an adrenergic alpha-1 receptor
antagonist, was required for blood pressure control, in addition to the triple therapy already established. At the end of 7 days of
hospitalization, the blood pressure control was achieved (110/80 mmHg). Nine months after the last hospitalization, the patient has chronic
kidney disease with stabilization of creatinine 225 μmol/L and creatinine clearance at 22 mL/min (estimated using the modification of diet
in renal disease formula). She is not receiving dialysis, and her hypertension is controlled with irbesartan, furosemide (switched to
urapidil) and propranolol. The patient is currently neurologically stable, and she is not undergoing treatment for MS. IFNs are cytokines
that mediate antiviral, antiproliferative, and immunomodulatory activities. IFNβ-1a is prescribed for the treatment of relapsing forms of MS
to slow down the development of physical disability and decrease the frequency of clinical exacerbations. IFN therapy is associated with
adverse effects such as flu-like symptoms, asthenia, anorexia, and injection site reaction. Renal side effects are uncommon, but severe
manifestations are reported, including acute renal failure related to acute tubular necrosis, or acute interstitial nephritis, hemolytic-
uremic syndrome, focal segmental glomerulosclerosis, and minimal change disease.6 These side effects are more often associated with IFNα
therapy rather than IFNβ. TMA caused by IFNα therapy has been reported for several years.7 The concept that the TMA presented by our patient
was secondarily related to IFNβ treatment is supported by several factors. Concerning the concomitant medications, the literature does not
describe TMA induction by ibuprofen and acetaminophen, moreover, oxcarbazepine and clonazepam were taken several years before the first
hospitalization and over a short period. The patient presented with an increased blood pressure (180/130 mmHg) before the first
hospitalization, and severe or malignant hypertension may accompany TMA.8 The pathological changes from kidney damage in malignant
hypertension are sometimes similar to renal lesions in HUS/TTP, leading to difficulties in the differential diagnosis for other TMA
etiologies.9 Among the conditions linked to TMA, malignant hypertension is associated with a predominance of vascular rather than glomerular
findings.10 In our case, the patient had no medical history of hypertension, and the IFNβ therapy is not known to be associated to the
occurrence of hypertension. She also had no sign of malignant hypertension. The presence of antiphospholipid antibodies can be induced by
IFN therapy: Piette et al suggested the role of antiphospholipid antibodies in hemolytic-uremic syndrome induced by IFNα.11 The presence of
antiphospholipid antibodies was found in patients who have been diagnosed with MS since they can be induced by IFN therapy.12 In our case,
autoimmune serologies were negative, including antiphospholipid antibodies. Genetic abnormalities in the complement cascade are associated
in approximately 50% of patients with atypical HUS.13 Six different mutations in genes coding for various components of the complement
alternative pathway (Factor H, Factor I, Factor B, MCP, thrombomodulin, and C3 complement component) have been identified to date.14–16 In
our case, there is no evidence in favor of gene abnormalities as the results of genetic analysis were negative. Activity of von Willebrand
protease factor was not assessed in our case report. An ADAMTS 13 (A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin 1 motifs)
deficiency could be due to autoantibodies against various epitopes of this protease during treatment with IFNα-2a.17 This could explain the
formation of occlusive platelet thrombi in microvessels, but no similar mechanism has been described with IFNβ. Several hypotheses have been
proposed to explain the mechanisms that can lead to TMA development with IFN therapy, but none can be considered in this case. The
pathogenesis of TMA may involve inhibition of vascular endothelial cell growth factor (VEGF) in renal podocytes.4 VEGF stimulates signal
transduction pathways and transcriptional programs through activation of its receptor, VEGFR2.18 These events are essential for de novo
formation of blood vessels (ie, angiogenesis, a process that involves proliferation and migration of endothelial cells),14 while this
process is inhibited by cytokines of the type 1 IFN family (including IFN-α/β).19 IFN-α/β exert their effects via binding to the type 1 IFN
receptor and activation of Janus kinases and signal transducers, and activators of transcription.20 The role of VEGF in renal physiology is
not completely known,21 but it has been involved in the pathophysiology of several renal diseases, and TMA is a lesion commonly reported
with anti-VEGF drugs. Also IFN therapy could be considered as an etiological agent to TMA through this antiangiogenic activity. Both
clinical presentations of TMA, TTP and HUS are listed in the Summary of Product Characteristics of IFNβ-1a (Rebif®), and were identified
during the postmarketing surveillance.22 A literature review in the PubMed database was carried out, and to our knowledge, this is the sixth
case of TMA induced by IFNβ. A summary of TMA case reports induced by IFNβ is presented in Table 2. In one case, the patient developed
systematic lupus erythematosus, positive antiphospholipid antibodies, and acute renal failure due to thrombotic microangiopathy. The TMA may
be associated with systematic lupus erythematosus or antiphospholipid syndrome, and it is difficult to speculate on the role of IFN
therapy.23 Moreover, there are few reported cases of systematic lupus erythematosus linked to IFNβ therapy.24 For two other cases, the
therapy duration was very short (44 days and 2 weeks),25,26 while a hypothesis suggests that the cumulative effects of IFN may result in the
development of renal lesions.27 TMA occurred several months or years after starting the treatment with IFN-α,5 whereas other nephropathies
are usually diagnosed in the first weeks of treatment. The duration of IFN therapy may therefore be the cause of some cumulative endothelial
toxicity, which corroborated with our patient, who has been receiving IFNβ-1a for 5 years. A search in the French Pharmacovigilance Database
using the terms “thrombotic microangiopathy”/“thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura”/“hemolytic-uremic syndrome” combined with “interferon
beta-1a” found ten other cases. The notifications with renal biopsy confirming the diagnosis of TMA only are presented in Table 3. For two
cases, the investigations showed an ADAMTS 13 deficiency (with anti-ADAMTS 13 autoantibodies for one case), and for one case, the patient
serum was positive for antiphospholipid antibodies. For all notifications, the delay of IFN therapy was consistent with the hypothesis of
cumulative effects. In conclusion, our observations added to the other reported cases, support the hypothesis that IFNβ-1a is a causative
agent in the occurrence of TMA. A serious renal prognosis with chronic kidney disease was reported in most of these cases. Assessing kidney
function and detecting the onset of hypertension is justified to identify renal toxicity as soon as possible during IFNβ therapy. Disclosure
The authors report no conflicts of interest in this work. Acute glomerular lesion. Notes: There is global thickening of glomerular capillary
walls caused by subendothelial expansion associated with focal mesangiolysis and a few capillary thrombosis (HES ×400 magnification).
Abbreviation: HES, hematoxylin, eosin, saffron. Acute arteriolar lesion. Notes: Mucoid intimal thickening with focal fibrinoid necrosis is
responsible for occlusion of the lumen (HES ×400 magnification). Abbreviation: HES, hematoxylin, eosin, saffron. Severe chronic ischemic
changes. Notes: There is diffuse interstitial fibrosis with focal tubular atrophy. The three glomerular (on the left) show severe wrinkling
of the basement membranes with sclerotic changes. The interlobular artery shows marked intimal fibrous thickening with resultant severe
narrowing of the lumen (trichrome ×200 magnification). Laboratory test results during hospital admissions Notes: Autoantibodies included
anti-nuclear antibodies, anti-neutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, anti-GBM antibodies and anti-phospholipids. - indicates results not
available. Abbreviations: MDRD, modification of diet in renal disease; GBM, glomerular basement membrane. Summary of thrombotic
microangiopathy case reports induced by interferon beta (IFNβ) therapy from literature review Abbreviations: APS, anti-phospholipid
syndrome; SLE, systemic lupus erythematosus; HUS, hemolytic-uremic syndrome; MS, multiple sclerosis; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic
purpura; HCV, hepatitis C virus; N/A, not available. Summary of thrombotic microangiopathy notifications induced by interferon beta-1a
(IFNβ) from French Pharmacovigilance Database Abbreviations: ADAMTS, A disintegrin and metalloproteinase with thrombospondin 1 motifs; Ig,
immunoglobulin; NA, not available; HUS, hemolytic-uremic syndrome; MS, multiple sclerosis; TTP, thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura.
