We have read the journal's policy and have the following conflicts: FMM's, PLAF's, and ADMEO's scientific work is supported by the Virgo
consortium, funded by the Dutch government (project number FES0908). In addition ADMEO has share certificates in ViroClinics Biosciences
B.V. The majority of the shares in ViroClinics Biosciences B.V. (>75%) are owned by Erasmus MC through its Erasmus MC Holding B.V. To avoid
any possible conflict of interest and to safeguard its employees against the possibility of unethical decisions, the Erasmus MC does not
allow any of its employees to hold shares in person in any companies that are (partly) owned by Erasmus MC. As a result thereof, any shares
provided by such companies to any Erasmus MC employees are held by a Foundation Administration Office. The board of this foundation is
appointed by Erasmus MC. The employees receive share certificates of their shares. Apart form those described above the authors have
declared that no competing interests exist. A ten-year-old girl with sickle cell disease (SCD) (combined heterozygosity for the abnormal
hemoglobin S and abnormal HbC; HbSC) presented to our clinic with a history of four days fever, malaise, and a generalized tonic-clonic
convulsion. At presentation she was alert, nauseous, and complained of headache and retro-orbital pain. Temperature was 38.0°C, heart rate
(HR) 135/min, blood pressure (BP) 94/62 mmHg, respiratory rate (RR) 20/min; minor hepatosplenomegaly and upper-quadrant abdominal tenderness
were present. No further abnormalities were reported on physical examination. Initial lab results revealed a moderate increase of CRP,
anemia, thrombocytopenia, prolonged activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and prothrombin time (PT), increased liver enzymes, and
decreased albumin and hematocrit (Ht) (Table S1). On day two, during defervescence she became hypotensive and was treated with fluid
resuscitation and inotropic agents. Blood products were transfused to correct anemia and thrombocytopenia. Hemolysis and acute hemorrhage
with gastrointestinal, vaginal, and later on venipuncture sites bleeding developed. Splenic sequestration was also considered as the cause
of anemia, but could not be confirmed with abdominal ultrasound. Pleural effusion, gallbladder wall thickening, and ascites were seen. On
day three, she lost vision. A brain CT scan revealed no abnormalities. Lumbar puncture was deferred and antibiotic treatment was adjusted to
cover possible meningitis. Hereafter she developed acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) requiring mechanical ventilation. Dengue
serology was positive for IgM (titer: 3.26) and IgG (3.26) (Focus Diagnostics), and RT-PCR showed dengue virus serotype 2 (DENV-2). Her
clinical situation deteriorated with an increased hemorrhagic tendency, and blood, clotting products, and clotting factors were
administered. In time multiorgan dysfunction syndrome (MODS) developed. Blood cultures remained negative for bacteria, but antibiotics were
administered anyway. Candida was cultured and antifungals were initiated. Despite intensive treatment the patient did not recover,
disseminated intravascular coagulation (DIC) progressed and kidney function did not return. Consequently further treatment was discontinued
and the patient died, 28 days after admission. A 19-year-old female presented to our clinic with fever, headache, retro-orbital pain, and
muscle ache for two days. In addition hematemesis and epistaxis started on the day of admission. Her medical history revealed sickle cell
anemia (SCA) (homozygosity for abnormal HbS; HbSS). On examination she was alert, with a temperature of 37°C, BP 120/80 mmHg, HR 100/min,
and RR 15–20/min. She had right upper-quadrant abdominal tenderness. No other abnormalities on physical examination were found. Initial lab
results revealed moderate increase of CRP, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and increased liver enzymes. NS1-antigen tested positive and dengue
serology was negative for IgM (0.41) and positive for IgG (5.71), and RT-PCR showed DENV-2. Shortly after admittance she became hypotensive,
with distension of her abdomen. Intravenous fluid resuscitation was started and further intervention was implemented on the basis of the
monitoring of hematocrit, urine output, and blood glucose. Profuse abdominal bleeding was suspected, with marked decrease of Hb, low
platelets, severe disrupted coagulation parameters, and intra- and retro-abdominal free fluid with fibrin strands on ultrasound. Moreover
extensive capillary leakage and anuria developed. She was intubated due to seizures and following sedation. Although in the course of time
shock and bleeding stabilized, she continued to develop MODS and both pupils became progressively less reactive to light until nonreactive.
CT brain imaging could not be performed. On day four, she died due to cardiac arrest. No autopsies were performed on either of the patients.
Written informed consent for publication of the disease histories was obtained from the direct relatives of both patients. During the past
decades dengue has been reported to occur in Curaçao. Until now fatal cases were never documented. However the 2010–2011 outbreak with 1,822
serologically confirmed cases was associated with four deaths (personal communication). Two of these patients had been previously diagnosed
with SCD type HbSC and SCA. SCD is not uncommon in Curaçao, with a prevalence of approximately 0.25% . Although chronic diseases such as SCD
are considered to be a risk factor for development of severe dengue, few cases of children or adolescents have been reported . Both in the
Americas and Asia all four serotypes of DENV circulate with frequent reports of fatal dengue. Until now no cases of DENV infection in SCD
patients have been described in Asia, probably due to the relatively low prevalence of SCD . Furthermore reports describing patients with
this combination of diseases are scarce, little-detailed, and restricted to a few fatal cases apart from the Cuban study concerning adults
only (see Table 1) . Bravo et al. reported 158 fatal cases during the 1981 DENV-2 epidemic in Cuba (72 children and 26 adults) . Eight
patients were suffering from sickle cell anemia, of which five presented with hemorrhages and three with shock. Half of them died within 24
hours after admission. The second article from Cuba describes a DENV-3 outbreak in 2001 . Two fatal cases with HbSS and HbSC were reported.
Both patients presented with fever. In one patient hemorrhage predominated, with plasma leakage leading to shock in the other case. Five or
six days after admission, both patients died. In 1999 Ware et al. reported one fatal case of DHF in a SCA patient . She presented with bone
pain and fever, and she died four days after admission. Most cases described are HbSS patients. However none of the described cases suggests
treatment options or case management, and interaction between both diseases is not described. M, male; F, female; ND, no data available;
DENV, dengue virus serotype; (s), secondary; HbSC, heterozygote sickle cell disease; HbSS, homozygote sickle cell anemia; HbAS, sickle cell
trait; no abstract available; review describing Bravo et al. article. The clinical findings of the two cases described here are difficult to
interpret because of the apparent complementary vascular endothelial damage in SCD, SCA, and severe dengue. As proposed in the model of
dengue pathogenesis by Martina et al., DENV might replicate in selective endotheliocytes . In SCD, endothelial dysfunction is known to occur
. There is no direct evidence from fatal dengue cases that dengue virus replicates in endothelial cells. Nonetheless, damage to endothelial
cells as reflected by increased vascular permeability is central to the dengue vascular permeability syndrome (DHF/DSS). Vascular
endothelial cells (VEC) play an important roll in inflammation and coagulation. By damaging the VEC either through infection of DENV or by
sickling of erythrocytes, the permeability of the vascular endothelial layer can increase, which may induce plasma leakage, release of
cytokines, and cause profound shock. Based on these findings, we hypothesize an essential role for endothelial cells to contribute to
disease severity. The similarities between the cases are striking: shock, plasma leakage, hemorrhage, and MODS . However plasma leakage
predominated in case 1, whereas hemorrhage did in case 2. The onset of vaso-occlusion with SCD and SCA is often triggered by inflammation,
as is the case in a DENV infection . Severe bleeding seldom happens in children, but only in cases of profound shock, and no thrombotic
complications are seen . In treating dengue patients with underlying SCD or SCA, the treating physician is facing a dilemma. In SCD and SCA,
it is preferred to maintain a low Ht to reduce the risk of vaso-occlusion. Treating physicians may be reluctant to perform blood
transfusions in SCD patients because of concerns of excessive accumulation of iron, transfusion reactions, and alloimmunization. However
severe anemia as a result of SCD or dengue may necessitate blood transfusion. The WHO reports an increase of Ht as a sign of plasma leakage
with subsequently a decrease that may be due to hemorrhage. Both cases showed a continuing decrease of Ht, associated with hemorrhage with
plasma leakage also predominating, suggesting Ht should not be used as a marker in patients with SCD or SCA. Iatrogenic interstitial fluid
overload in patients with SCD, SCA, and severe dengue, due to preexisting vascular endothelial damage, is not just a theoretical hazard.
Whether the clinical manifestations would just have been the result of secondary DENV infection only, despite SCD or SCA, remains a matter
for debate. To further address this issue, we suggest that a case-control study should be performed to further elucidate the proposed
association between severe dengue and SCD or SCA. This report is based on two fatal cases of severe dengue with underlying SCD/SCA in
Curaçao during the 2010–2011 epidemic. Currently no guidelines exist on how to treat such patients. In populations with a high prevalence of
SCD, SCA, and dengue activity, clinicians should be aware of the challenges in clinical management. This case report is suggestive of a
fatal interaction between dengue and sickle cell disease or sickle cell anemia. Hematocrit values are of limited use for treatment decisions
in patients with severe dengue infection and sickle cell disease or sickle cell anemia. Detailed laboratory data of both patients. (DOC)
Click here for additional data file.
