The aim of this study was to investigate the outcome, and optimal duration of medical treatment in children with superior mesenteric artery
syndrome (SMAS). Eighteen children with SMAS were retrospectively studied. The data reviewed included demographics, presenting symptoms, co-
morbid conditions, clinical courses, nutritional status, treatments, and outcomes. The three most common symptoms were postprandial
discomfort (67.7%), abdominal pain (61.1%), and early satiety (50%). The median duration of symptoms before diagnosis was 68 days. The most
common co-morbid condition was weight loss (50%), followed by growth spurt (22.2%) and bile reflux gastropathy (16.7%). Body mass index
(BMI) was normal in 72.2% of the patients. Medical management was successful in 13 patients (72.2%). The median duration of treatment was 45
days. Nine patients (50%) had good outcomes without recurrence, 5 patients (27.8%) had moderate outcomes, and 4 patients (22.2%) had poor
outcomes. A time limit of >6 weeks for the duration of medical management tended to be associated with worse outcomes (P=0.018). SMAS often
developed in patients with normal BMI or no weight loss. Medical treatment has a high success rate, and children with SMAS should be treated
medically for at least 6 weeks before surgical treatment is considered. Superior mesenteric artery syndrome (SMAS) is a symptom complex
resulting from vascular compression of the third portion of the duodenum between the superior mesenteric artery (SMA) and the aorta (1).
SMAS is frequently associated with rapid linear growth without weight gain, scoliosis, spinal surgery, weight loss, and an abnormally high
position of the ligament of Treitz (2-5). The typical symptoms of SMAS are similar to those of incomplete duodenal obstruction, including
postprandial fullness, intermittent abdominal pain, early satiety, nausea, vomiting, and anorexia. This condition can be diagnosed by the
radiologic evidence of vascular obstruction of the third portion of the duodenum using a barium upper gastrointestinal (UGI) series,
computed tomography (CT), CT angiography or magnetic resonance angiography (MRA). However, the identification of SMAS can be difficult and
diagnostic delays are common because of lack of high indices of clinical suspicion (4, 6). A diagnosis of SMAS is usually made by a process
of exclusion, and such delays result in ineffective symptomatic therapies and inappropriate investigations. Many of SMA obstruction cases
can be resolved with nutritional treatment, but surgical intervention is required in some patients. There is no data on the appropriate
duration of medical treatment before consideration of surgical correction and on the association with worse outcomes of SAMS in children.
The aims of this study were to evaluate the clinical features and outcomes of SMAS and to determine the optimal duration of medical
treatment in children with SMAS. We collected 23 patients who were diagnosed with SMAS between February 2003 and January 2013. All diagnoses
of SMAS were established based on the findings of a barium UGI series: dilatation of the first and second portions of the duodenum, abrupt
compression of the third portion of the duodenum, and antiperistaltic waves of barium proximal to the obstruction. Five patients were
excluded because of insufficient medical records. Thus, we analyzed a total of 18 patients with SMAS. The following parameters were recorded
and analyzed: demographics, presenting symptoms, co-morbid conditions, clinical courses, nutritional statuses, treatments, and outcomes. The
weight-for-age, body mass index (BMI)-for-age, and weight-for-height Z scores were used to evaluate each patient's nutritional status before
and after treatment. The Z scores were computed according to the stature percentiles of the Korean National Growth Charts drafted by the
Korea Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The BMI-for-age Z score was classified as severely wasted (Z score <-3), wasted (-3≤Z
score <-2), normal (-2≤Z score <1), possible risk of overweight (1≤Z score <2), overweight (2≤Z score<3), or obese (Z score≥3) according to
the WHO Child Growth Standards (7). The results of medical treatment were divided to 3 categories: response, partial response, and non-
response. A response was defined as improvement of gastrointestinal symptoms with medical treatment, a partial response as slight
improvement, and a non-response as no improvement. A recurrence was defined as the reappearance of gastrointestinal symptoms after response
to medical treatment. On the basis of responses to the medical treatment and recurrences, the outcomes of the patients who received medical
treatment were classified into 3 groups: good, moderate, and poor. A good outcome was defined as a response without recurrence after medical
treatment. A moderate outcome was defined as a partial response or response to retreatment after recurrence. A poor outcome was defined as a
non-response to medical treatment or to retreatment after recurrence. The data were analyzed using SPSS version 19.0 (SPSS Inc., Chicago,
IL, USA). Growth statuses before and after medical treatment were compared using the Wilcoxon signed rank test and the Mann-Whitney U test.
The associations between the durations of medical treatment and the outcomes were analyzed using the Chi-square-test of linear by linear
test. A value of P<0.05 was considered significant. This study was approved by the institutional review board of Chungnam National
University Hospital (IRB No. 2013-03-022-001). Informed consent was exempted by the board. The total number of patients available for this
study was 18; 11 (61.1%) were female. The patients' ages ranged from 8.5 to 16.2 yr (median, 11.9 yr) at diagnosis. The body weight ranged
from 22 to 61 kg (median, 36.5 kg). The height ranged from 129 to 178 cm (median, 160.5 cm). The mean weight-for-age Z score and height-for-
age Z score were -0.75 and 0.81, respectively. The BMI ranged from 12.2 to 19.7 kg/m2 (mean, 15.6 kg/m2). The mean BMI-for-age and weight-
for-height Z scores were -1.55 and -1.86, respectively. Nine patients (50%) who had shown weight loss before diagnosis of SMAS lost weight
by 2 to 17 kg (mean 6.7 kg). Of these 9 patients, 7 (77.8%) lost more than 10% of their body weight. Four patients (22.2%) were wasted, 1
(5.6%) was severely wasted, and 13 (72.2%) were normal in BMI-for-age Z scores. The presenting symptoms and co-morbid conditions are shown
in Table 1. Duration of symptoms before the diagnosis ranged from 1 to 730 days (median, 68 days). The 3 most common symptoms were
postprandial discomfort (67.7%), abdominal pain (61.1%), and early satiety (50%). Other symptoms included anorexia (44.4%), nausea (33.3%),
vomiting (33.3%), heartburn (16.7%), and reflux (16.7%). All patients had a constellation of the above mentioned symptoms: 2 (33.3%), 3
(33.3%), 4 (11.1%), and 5 (22.2%). Sixteen (88.9%) of the patients with SMAS had co-morbid conditions (Table 1). The most common co-morbid
condition was weight loss (50%), followed by growth spurt (22.2%), bile reflux gastropathy (16.7%), and acute gastric mucosal lesion
(16.7%). Other less-infrequent conditions included depression, reflux esophagitis, gastric ulcer, anorexia nervosa, irritable bowel
syndrome, and scoliosis. All patients underwent barium UGI series and upper endoscopy. On UGI series, all patients had an abrupt vertical
cut off of the third portion of the duodenum with dilatations of the first and second portions and also antiperistaltic movement of the
barium proximal to the obstruction (Fig. 1). Endoscopy revealed bile reflux gastropathy, acute gastric mucosal lesions, reflux esophagitis,
or gastric ulcers in 8 patients (Table 2). Abdominal CT was performed on 8 patients (44.4%) and a gastric emptying time (GET) scan was
performed on 6 patients (33.3%) at diagnosis. On abdominal CT, mean SMA angles and SMA-aorta distances were 12.8° (range, 9°-18.8°) and 3.9
mm (range, 2.3-5.3 mm), respectively (Fig. 2). GET ranged from 99 to 385 min (mean, 253 min). All patients began with conservative
treatment. Table 2 summarizes the clinical features and outcomes of the patients with SMAS. Medical treatment was successful in 13 patients
(72.2%). Abdominal symptoms were relieved by postprandial changes to the left lateral decubitus or in the prone position in 12 (70.6%) of
the 17 patients. Patients took the following medications: prokinetics (domperidone or metoclopramide) in 17 patients (94.4%), histamine H2
receptor antagonists in 13 patients (72.2%). Seven patients (38.9%) were admitted for parenteral nutrition, and 2 patients required
nasogastric tube placement for bowel decompression. The median duration of parenteral nutrition was 20 days (range, 7-127 days). Of these 7
inpatients, 4 improved with medical treatment, 1 slightly improved, and 2 did not improve. Of the 11 patients who were treated on an
outpatient base, 9 improved, 1 slightly improved, and 1 did not improve. Of the 13 patients who responded to the medical treatment, there
were recurrences in 4 patients (30.8%). Three of these 4 patients had success with further medical treatment and 1 did not improve with
medical retreatment because of anorexia nervosa. Of the 5 patients who had failed medical treatment, 1 female presented with persistent
anorexia, abdominal pain, and vomiting despite 2 months of medical treatment. These symptoms improved within 2 weeks after laparoscopic
gastrojejunostomy. The others were lost to follow-up. The median duration of treatment was 45 days (range, 18-365 days) and the median
follow-up period was 57 days (range, 18-376 days). After medical treatment, 15 patients (83.3%) had weight gain and the mean weight gain was
2.2 kg (range, -0.6-9.2 kg). The mean weight and weight-for-age Z-score were 40.8 kg and -0.57, respectively. The mean BMI and BMI-for-age
Z-score were 16.4 kg/m2 and -1.12, respectively. The mean weight-for-height Z-score was -1.56. All indices significantly increased in the
group that responded to treatment compared to indices from before treatment (Table 3). Weight-for-age Z scores before treatment were
significantly different between the medical responders and the partial/non-responders (P=0.026). Finally, 9 patients (50%) had good outcomes
without recurrences, 5 (27.8%) moderate outcomes, and 4 (22.2%) poor outcomes with medical treatment. In assessment of the association
between the durations of medical treatment and outcomes, a time limit of >6 weeks seemed to be associated with worse outcomes (P=0.018)
(Table 4). The present retrospective analysis of our 10-yr experience contributes to our understanding of the clinical features as well as
clinical courses and outcomes of medical management for children with SMAS. We make the first attempt to evaluate the appropriate period for
medical treatment before any consideration of surgical treatment. Our results indicate that children with SMAS should have a trial of at
least 6 weeks of medical treatment before consideration of surgical intervention. In our study, SMAS affected females more commonly than
males. Postprandial discomfort, abdominal pain, and early satiety were the major presenting symptoms. All patients had 2 or more symptoms.
These results support the findings of other studies in children with SMAS (5, 8). The median duration of symptoms before the diagnosis is
variable from 5 days to 18 months (5, 9). In our study, the median duration was 68 days (range, 1-730 days) before diagnosis. This indicates
that SMAS can present acute or chronic in nature. Low BMI, weight loss, and growth spurts are well-known risk factors of SMAS (5, 10). Some
previous studies suggest that low BMI or weight loss is not a prerequisite for the development of SMAS (5, 10). BMI was normal in 72.2% of
our patients and no weight loss was recorded in 50%. Ozbulbul et al. (11) have reported that SMA angle correlates better with visceral fat
than with BMI in adults, whereas BMI correlates better with subcutaneous fat than with visceral fat. Unal et al. (12) have shown that the
SMA-aorta distance (aortomesenteric distance; AMD) significantly correlates with BMI. The reason for the development of SMAS in children
with normal BMI is not yet known. In our study, weight loss developed in 9 patients with bacterial enteritis, post-appendectomy, anorexia
nervosa, or food intolerance. Of these 9 patients, 6 (66.7%) responded to medical management, and 50% experienced recurrence. Weight loss is
commonly associated with the development of SMAS, resulting in a vicious cycle (5, 14). However, weight loss did not significantly affect
clinical outcomes. There were 4 patients who experienced growth spurts without the appropriate weight gain. Of these patients, 3 (75%)
responded to medical treatment. Rapid linear growth without weight gain may result in an elongated mesentery as well as loss of the
mesenteric root fat pad. This explains why SMAS occurred in our 4 patients during their growth spurt. The traditional diagnostic method for
SMAS is UGI series. The following radiological criteria are reported to be indicative of SMAS: dilatation of the first and second parts of
the duodenum, abrupt vertical or oblique compression of the third part of the duodenum, antiperistaltic waves of barium proximal to the
obstruction, significant delays in gastroduodenal transit, and relief of obstruction after postural changes (2, 14). Most cases of SMAS have
recently diagnosed by abdominal CT (4, 10). Its diagnostic criteria include a reduction in the SMA angle from the normal values of 28°-65°
to <22°, a decrease in the SMA-aorta distance from the normal values of 10-28 mm to <8 mm, and gastric and proximal duodenal dilatation with
obstruction of the third part of the duodenum (16-18). In our study, the mean SMA angle and SMA-aorta distance were 12.8° (range, 9°-18.8°)
and 3.9 mm (range 2.3-5.3 mm), respectively. A SMA angle of <22°-25° and a SMA-aorta distance of <8 mm correlated well with development of
SMAS symptoms in adults (1, 12, 15, 18). Thus, these are commonly used as cutoff values for the diagnosis of SMAS in adults. However, there
are no established cutoff values for diagnosing SMAS in children. Arthurs et al. (19) found that the mean SMA angle was 45.6°±19.6° (range,
10.6°-112.9°) and the mean SMA-aorta distance was 11.3±4.8 mm (range, 3.6-35.3 mm) in normal children. They also described that 9.3% of
asymptomatic children were diagnosed with SMAS based on an SMA angle of <25° and that 20% of asymptomatic children were diagnosed with SMAS
based on an SMA-aorta distance of <8 mm. These findings suggest that there is a wide range of normal values of SMA angles in asymptomatic
children and that absolute cutoff values of SMA angles may not be the best indicator of SMAS. Therefore, CT results should be used with
caution as a gold standard in the diagnosis of children with SMAS. The initial treatment of SMAS should always be conservative: maintenance
of fluid and electrolyte balances, stomach decompression, and nutritional support (8). Small frequent high caloric feedings with
postprandial assumption of the left lateral decubitus, knee-chest, or prone positions may be helpful (4). If symptoms persist, enteral
feeding through a nasojejunal tube passed distal to the compression or parenteral nutrition may be required, aiming at increasing the
mesenteric fat pad, which in turn increases the SMA angle (9, 20). Nasojejunal feeding tubes were not used in our patients because they
refused it. The patients were supported by parenteral nutrition. Concomitant treatment with antacids, histamine H2 receptor antagonists,
proton pump inhibitors, prokinetics, or anti-depressants may also be useful for treating the symptoms and presenting co-morbidity conditions
(4, 10). Positive response rates to medical management as documented in larger series have been observed in 71.3% (57/80) (10) and 83%
(38/46) (21), and in 14% (3/22) (9), 52% (14/27) (4), and 82% (18/22) (5) of pediatric cases. Ha et al. (9) reported that the success rate
of children is as low as 14%, which resulted from low compliance with medical treatment and little fear of surgery. In our study, the
response rate to medical treatment was 72.2% (13/18) and the recurrence rate was 30.8%. The rate of outpatient care was 61% (11/18), which
was higher than those of other studies (4.5% and 8.8% ) (4, 5). Of the outpatients, the response rate to medical treatment was 82% (9/11).
Depending on the severity of symptoms, patients can be treated at the outpatient clinic. Recent advances in nutritional treatments have also
led to a substantial shift towards medical treatment rather than surgery (10). Similar to a previous study (4), our study showed that there
were no significant differences in sex, age, the duration of symptoms, height, weight, BMI, weight loss, weight for height, SMA angle, and
SMA-aorta distance between the responders and the partial/non-responders to medical treatment. Weight-for-age Z scores at diagnosis were
significantly lower in the responders to medical treatment than in the partial or non-responders. Both weight and BMI status increased
significantly after the medical treatment in medical responders, but no differences in the partial or non-responders. Weight gain generally
alleviates symptoms (2). All but 1 medical responder showed weight gain. Surgery is warranted in cases of non-responders who have undergone
sufficient medical treatment. To date, there has been no scientific data that suggests the appropriate time limit for the duration of
medical management or the optimal period before surgery (1, 6). The median durations of medical treatment have been shown to be 9 days
(range, 2-62 days) and 65 days (range, 13-169 days) in a pediatric case series (5, 10). In our study, the median duration of treatment was
45 days (range, 18-365 days). The outcomes seemed to be worse when the time limit for the duration of medical treatment exceeded 6 weeks.
Although the limitations of present study include the facts that the sample size was small, that some patients were lost to follow-up, and
that this was a retrospective study, the results correspond with those of the earlier studies, which reported that patients should have a
trial of at least 4 to 6 weeks of conservative treatment with optimal nutritional support before surgery (9). Associations of SMAS with
anorexia nervosa, drug abuse, and other psychiatric disorders have been reported (6, 13, 22-24). These factors can cause malnutrition and
weight loss, resulting in a vicious cycle. It is difficult to manage patients with such conditions. In our study, 1 patient with anorexia
nervosa responded to initial medical management but deteriorated after 2 months. Therefore, medical treatment should be performed with a
multidisciplinary team of psychologists and dieticians. In conclusion, although low BMI or weight loss is a common predisposing factor for
SMAS, this disease often develops in patients with normal BMI or no weight loss. Treatment of SMAS is usually conservative and the success
rate is high. The treatment period of >6 weeks may predict poor outcomes in patients treated conservatively. Therefore, medical treatment
should be instituted for at least 6 weeks before surgical intervention. The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. Upper
gastrointestinal series shows an abrupt cutoff of the third portion of the duodenum and dilatations of the first and second portions of the
duodenum. Abdominal 3D CT scan shows gastric and proximal duodenal dilatations with compression of the third portion of the duodenum
(arrows) between the superior mesenteric artery and the aorta. The aortomesenteric distance in this patient was 4 mm (A) and the
aortomesenteric angle was 9.5° (B). Presenting symptoms and co-morbid conditions of patients with SMAS SMAS, superior mesenteric artery
syndrome. Clinical features and outcomes of patients with SMAS *Patient underwent surgical treatment. A, anorexia; AP, abdominal pain; ES,
early satiety; H, heartburn; N, nausea; PD, postprandial discomfort; R, reflux; V, vomiting; AGML, acute gastric mucosal lesion; AN,
anorexia nervosa; BRG, bile reflux gastropathy; DEP, depression; GS, growth spurt; GU, gastric ulcer; IBS, irritable bowel syndrome; RE,
reflux esophagitis; SC, scoliosis; WL, weight loss ++, response; +, partial response; -, non-response. Comparison between growth statuses
before and after medical treatment Values are expressed as mean±SD. *Comparisons between the responders and partial responders/non-
responders (P=0.026). Associations between durations of medical treatment and outcomes χ2-test of linear by linear association.
