Neuroglial heterotopia is a rare congenital anomaly that mostly involves the head and neck region. We report a female fetus with
multicentric paraspinal neuroglial heterotopia in the retropharyngeal and retroperitoneal spaces, right renal agenesis, left renal
hypoplasia, and Müllerian agenesis. Additional findings included bilateral preaxial polydactyly of the hands, megacystis, rectovesical
fistula, and imperforate anus. The karyotype was 46, XX. This fetus had the features of Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome with
paraspinal neuroglial heterotopia. This is the first report of the co-occurrence of these two malformations which could share a common
pathogenetic mechanism. We suggest this to be a variant MRKH syndrome. The virtual slide(s) for this article can be found here:
http://www.diagnosticpathology.diagnomx.eu/vs/3246922721015286. Neuroglial heterotopia is a rare congenital anomaly that is probably related
to neural tube defects . It mostly affects the head and neck region, especially the nasal cavity. Only a few cases have been reported at
other sites, such as the lungs and retroperitoneum . Multicentricity is exceptional , and concomitant congenital anomalies have not been
reported in English literature. Here we present an unusual case of multicentric neuroglial heterotopia involving the retroperitoneal and
retropharyngeal spaces accompanied by Müllerian agenesis, bilateral ovarian agenesis, right renal agenesis, left renal hypoplasia,
rectovesical fistula, imperforate anus, and polydactyly. A 26-year-old female received regular prenatal care at our obstetric department
during her second pregnancy. Oligohydramnios and fetal megacystis were detected by routine ultrasound at the 14th week of gestation. An
amniocentesis test revealed a normal female 46, XX karyotype. The mother decided to terminate the pregnancy. At autopsy, the female fetus
weighed 85 g, and the crown-rump length was 12.2 cm. External examination revealed a typical phenotype of Potter sequence. Bilateral
preaxial polydactyly of the hands was also noted. Internal examination revealed a disproportionately large urinary bladder, measuring
2.4 × 1.7 × 0.6 cm, accompanied by a rectovesical fistula and imperforate anus (Figure 1A). The left kidney was very small and weighed
0.02 g. The right kidney and bilateral ureters were not found. The bilateral ovaries and the müllerian structures, including the fallopian
tubes, uterus, and vagina, were absent (Figure 1B). A white, soft and partially liquefied mass (2.8 × 2.2 cm) was found in the
retroperitoneum (Figure 1A, 1B &1D). Another mass (1.5 × 1 cm) with a similar gross appearance was identified in the retropharyngeal space
(Figure 1C &1D). The cranium and vertebral column were intact. No evidence of dorsal or ventral dysraphism or craniofacial defect was found.
The leptomeninges were intact. The gross appearance of the brain and spinal cord was normal with autolysis. Internal examination in autopsy.
(A &B) Megacystis (asterisk), retroperitoneal neuroglial heterotopia (arrowhead), and uterine agenesis. (C) Retropharyngeal neuroglial
heterotopia with autolysis (arrow). (D) Partially liquefied retroperitoneal and retropharyngeal neuroglial heterotopia after evisceration.
Histologically, both masses were composed of autolysed neuroglial tissue characterized by layers of cellular cortical plate and hypocellular
white matter, resembling normal fetal cerebral tissue (Figure 2A &2B). Both the cortical plate and the white matter show positive
immunoreactivity for CD56 and neuron-specific enolase (NSE) (Figure 2C). The glial tissue of the white matter was also positive for glial
fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) (Figure 2D). No other ectodermal, mesodermal or endodermal derivative was observed. Microscopic features of
neuroglial heterotopia. The retroperitoneal (A) and retropharyngeal (B) masses were composed of cellular cortical plate and hypocellular
white matter. Both the cortical plate and the white matter were reactive for NSE (C) and the latter was also reactive for GFAP (D).
Heterotopia, or choristoma, is applied to aggregates of normally formed tissues that are present in aberrant anatomical locations. Examples
of heterotopias include a patch of gastric mucosa in the upper third of the esophagus, a rest of pancreatic tissue in the gastrointestinal
wall, or a parathyroid gland within the thymus in the anterior mediastium. Heterotopia is usually an incidental finding, but it can be
confused clinically with a neoplasm. In exceptional cases, true neoplasms may arise from heterotopic tissues . Neuroglial heterotopia is a
rare developmental anomaly with a rich variety of clinical features, pathological findings, and pathogenetic mechanisms. Based on anatomical
location and pathological differentiation, Hori et al. proposed a classification of neuroglial heterotopia into extraneuraxial and
paraneuraxial groups . Extraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia is much more common and usually involves the nasal cavity or the superficial
soft tissue of the head and neck. Pathologically, it is characterized by a disorganized mixture of neuroglial and mesenchymal tissues or a
lump of organized neural tissue similar to normal brain histology. It is often obvious at birth but may remain asymptomatic until late
childhood or even adulthood. Complete surgical excision is curative in most cases . On the other hand, paraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia
is rare and may involve the paracranial or paraspinal spaces, such as the occipital bone, retroperitoneum, and deep neck. It is composed of
organized brain tissue and is usually diagnosed shortly after delivery or in early childhood. Disease-related complications are common . The
pathogenesis of neuroglial heterotopia is uncertain. Several pathogenetic hypotheses of extraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia have been
proposed, including (1) herniation of neuroectodermal tissue through a primary bony defect that is followed by a partial or complete
secondary closure resulting in sequestration of the herniated tissue ; (2) separation and detachment of cerebral precursors (which later
mature ectopically) from the brain primordium in early embryogenesis ; (3) aberrant migration of pluripotential embryonic tissue with
subsequent neuroglial differentiation ; (4) retention of neuroectodermal remnants ; and (5) teratoma formation with a predominant or
exclusive neuroglial component . However, no single hypothesis can completely explain all the varieties of extraneuraxial neuroglial
heterotopia. In contrast, paraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia is closely related to neural tube defects, such as encephalocele and
myelomeningocele. For instance, paraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia shares a similar anatomical distribution and histological features with
encephalocele and myelomeningocele . A connection between the heterotopic neuroglial tissue and the intervertebral region via a string of
connective tissue is found in some cases, and this gross picture is not much different from that of a myelomeningocele with an obliterated
connection to the spinal cord . Accordingly, the “herniation and sequestration” hypothesis seems tenable to explain the pathogenesis of
paraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia. The process of “herniation and sequestration” acts like a mild or “partially corrected” version of
neural tube defects. This is probably why concomitant congenital anomaly is far less frequent in paraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia than
in encephalocele and myelomeningocele. In this report, we present a case of multifocal paraneuraxial, paraspinal neuroglial heterotopia
concomitant with congenital anomalies associated with Mayer-Rokitansky-Küster-Hauser (MRKH) syndrome. MRKH syndrome is regarded as an
inhibitory malformation of the Müllerian ducts. It is characterized by agenesis of the uterus and the upper two-thirds of the vagina in
individuals with a normal female karyotype . Associated anomalies of the renal, skeletal and cardiovascular systems are present in about
half of cases, and this severe form of the disease is categorized as atypical MRKH or MURCS association . Ovarian agenesis, imperforated
anus, polydactyly, and encephalocele have also been reported . Although the pathogenesis of MRKH syndrome remains unclear, it is suggested
that the spectrum of anomalies are attributed to the extent of developmental field defects that primarily affect the fetal mesoderm or its
progenitor tissue in early embryogenesis . When such mesodermal defects involve the paraaxial mesoderm, encephalocele, myelomeningocele and
paraneuraxial neuroglial heterotopia may develop . Given the similarity of the pathogenetic hypotheses for paraspinal neuroglial heterotopia
and Müllerian agenesis, we suggest that the present case constitutes an unusual variant of MRKH syndrome. Written informed consent was
obtained from the parent of the fetus for the use of the images and case presentation for educational and scientific purposes provided the
unique personal identification is not revealed. Both authors declare that they have no competing interests. LHD prepared this case report
and literature review. CHL is the attending pathologist who performed the autopsy, made the diagnosis and finalized the manuscript. Both
authors read and approved the final manuscript.
