Primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus is an uncommon tumor, with approximately 300 cases having been reported thus far. The purpose of
this study was to describe a case of a 60 year-old man with a 10 month history of progressive dysphagia and thoracic pain, the
investigations of which led to a diagnosis of primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus. The patient underwent a transhiatal esophagectomy
with subcarinal lymphadenectomy, and isoperistaltic gastric tube replacement of the esophagus. Nine months after surgery, he developed
ischemic colitis, and metastasis in the mesentery was diagnosed. His disease progressed and he died one year after the esophagectomy. A
review of the literature was performed. Melanoma is more frequently found in sun-exposed areas; however it can appear in other sites
including the mucosal surfaces . Primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus is more common in the elderly and the diagnosis is usually made
in advanced stages of the disease; it has a worse prognosis than cutaneous melanoma. Melanocytes are present in small amounts in the
squamous epithelium or basal membrane of the esophagus, and can be the precursors of melanocytosis and primary malignant melanoma. Primary
malignant melanoma of the esophagus is characterized by aggressive local invasion and multiple and early metastasis. Despite the
availability of multimodal therapies such as radical surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and immunotherapy, the prognosis is still poor .
More recently, the prognosis seems to have improved, and studies suggest that this may be associated with tumor early detection. A 60 year-
old man was hospitalized with a 10 month history of progressive dysphagia and chest pain. He was a former smoker for 50 years (40
cigarettes/day). He denied personal or family history of cancer. On physical examination, no skin, ocular lesions, or palpable lymph nodes
were detected. Upper digestive endoscopy showed an 8.0 cm polypoid tumor, located in the lower third of the esophagus, about 30 cm from the
upper dental arch, which occupied 80% of the esophageal lumen (Figure 1). Biopsies with immunohistochemical studies were compatible with
malignant melanoma: AE-1/AE-3 negative, P63 protein negative, S-100 protein positive focal, melanA positive and HMB-45 positive (Figures 2,
3, 4, 5 and 6). Polypoid tumor measuring 8.0 cm, located in the lower third of the esophagus, which occupied 80% of the esophageal lumen.
Immunohistochemical staining negative for AE-1/AE-3 (X100). Immunohistochemical staining negative for P63 protein (X100).
Immunohistochemical staining positive focal for S-100 protein (X400). Immunohistochemical staining positive for melanA protein (5A. X100 and
5B. X200). Immunohistochemical staining positive for HMB-45 protein (6A. X100 and 6B. X200). Computed tomography (CT) was performed for
clinical staging which showed a 4.7 × 3.8 × 2.1 cm tumor in the lower third of the esophagus (Figure 7). There were peritracheal lymph nodes
measuring 1.4 × 0.9 cm near the esophagogastric junction. Positron emission tomography (PET-CT) showed uptake of
fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose (FDG) only in the esophageal tumor, with no evidence of lymph node or distant metastatic disease
(Figures 8). CT scan shows a bulky tumor in the lower third of the esophagus (arrow). PET-CT demonstrates FDG uptake only in the esophageal
lesion, with no evidence of lymph node or distant metastatic disease.a) front view; b) lateral view; c) PET-CT transversal section showing
the esophageal tumor uptake. The patient underwent transhiatal esophagectomy with subcarinal lymphadenectomy, and isoperistaltic gastric
tube replacement of the esophagus. During the operation, no evidence of metastatic disease was observed. Anatomopathologic examination
confirmed malignant melanoma of nodular type, measuring 8.5 cm, with infiltration of the muscular layer up to 3.3 cm. There was no lymphatic
or venous invasion. There was evidence of perineural invasion, desmoplasmin mild peritumoral, mild intra and peritumoral lymphocytic
response, ulceration, and the rate of four mitoses per 10 fields. The margins were free from malignant involvement. There were 26 dissected
lymph nodes (11 in the esophageal adventitia, 1 at the esophagogastric junction and 14 at the lesser curvature and celiac trunk) without
evidence of malignancy. The patient’s postoperative recovery was uneventful. Five months after the surgery, a CT scan suggested lymph node
recurrences in the left external iliac chain, subcarinal and perigastric nodes. A fine-needle endoscopic-ultrasound-guided aspiration
confirmed the recurrence. The molecular analysis for mutation of c-KIT was negative. Afterwards, chemotherapy with dacarbazine was started.
Nine months after surgical treatment and the second cycle of chemotherapy, he was admitted to hospital due to abdominal distension and pain.
The abdominal CT showed pneumoperitoneum (Figure 9) without evidence of iodine outside the intestinal lumen. The main features were of
intestinal gaseous distension of the colon (Figure 9) and the presence of free fluid in the abdominal cavity. There was a hypodense nodular
lesion next to the jejunum in the left flank measuring 2.5 × 1.8 cm that appeared to be metastatic disease (Figure 10). Pneumoperitoneum
(arrow 1), gaseous distension of the colon (arrow 2) and the presence of free fluid in the abdominal cavity is shown in the abdominal CT.
Abdominal CT shows hypodense nodular lesion next to the jejunum in the left flank, measuring 2.5 × 1.8 cm. Also observed were left external
iliac chain lymphadenopathy, bilateral pleural effusions and a poorly characterized mediastinal mass. An exploratory laparotomy was
performed which diagnosed an ischemic colitis, and a lobulated pigmented lesion measuring 2.0 cm, located 40 cm from the Treitz’s angle.
Subtotal colectomy and terminal ileostomy were performed. The patient’s recovery was uneventful and he was started on therapy with
ipilimumab. However, his disease progressed and he died one year after the first surgical intervention. The first case of primary malignant
melanoma of the esophagus was reported by Baur in 1906. It is believed that in common with those occurring in the skin, melanocytes present
in the esophageal epithelium are derived from neural crest tissue from where they migrate during embryogenesis . It is a rare disease with
estimated frequency of 0.1 to 0.2% of all malignancies in the esophagus, with a total of 337 reported cases up to the year 2011 . Up until
now, no risk group has been identified. Studies have been showing an average age at diagnosis of 60.5 years, and a male to female prevalence
ratio of 2:1 , the present case providing an example of this male preponderance. The most common locations are in the lower and middle
thirds of the esophagus, as reported in more than 90% of cases in some series. This is due to the fact that there is a greater concentration
of melanocytes in this location . Esophageal melanocytosis is a benign condition in which there is proliferation of melanocytes in the basal
layer, with consequent increase in the amount of melanin in the mucosa. The immunohistochemistry is positive for melanocytic markers, such
as S-100, melanA and HMB-45. Melanocytosis occurs in 25 to 30% of patients with primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus and in 7.7% of
subjects without esophageal disease, suggesting this as a predisposing factor for this disease . The most common symptoms of primary
malignant melanoma of the esophagus are dysphagia and epigastric pain which are present in 70% of patients, as well as in our case. The
occurrence of hematemesis or melena is unusual. The diagnosis is often difficult, since the symptoms are nonspecific and there is often a
low suspicion level due to the rarity of the disease. This is especially so in the absence of evident melanin granules as diagnostic errors
may occur because the lesions are not considered as showing clearly differentiated carcinoma. In addition, the differential diagnosis
between primary and metastatic melanoma of the esophagus is difficult and some published studies suggest some criteria for differentiation
between primary and metastatic disease . Although radiological studies such as esophagography, computed tomography and magnetic resonance
imaging can identify and locate the tumor, the diagnosis can only be established by upper digestive endoscopy with biopsy and
immunohistochemical studies . During endoscopic examination, primary esophageal melanoma usually appears as a pedunculated polypoid and
pigmented tumor, covered by normal mucosa and not ulcerated. Its color varies depending on the amount of melanin, which can be absent
(amelanotic melanoma). The presence of other lesions in the esophageal wall, called satellite injuries, indicates intramural metastasis of
the melanoma. In addition to the presence of melanocytosis, the diagnosis of melanoma in situ can support the diagnosis of the primary
disease. Histological findings consist of pigmented cells that grow wildly and show irregular, fusiform or similar structures to the
epithelioid cells. In nearly 20 to 50% of the cases, melanin granules are not detected in the cytoplasm. In these cases, immunohistochemical
positive study for S-100 protein, HMB-45, neuron-specific enolase and negative for cytokeratin and CEA confirm the diagnosis of melanoma and
exclude carcinoma. In a review of 10 cases, in order to differentiate between primary and metastatic lesions, of which five had primary
malignant melanoma of the esophagus, and the other five, metastatic melanoma to the esophagus, it was observed that in 100% of the cases of
metastatic disease, there was a prior history of cutaneous malignant melanoma which was not present in any of the cases in the other group.
Most patients with metastatic disease in the esophagus had metastases in other sites, suggesting that metastasis to the esophagus occurs
only in a very advanced stage of the disease. The criteria established by this study indicate that primary melanomatous diseases of the
esophagus were: the presence of melanoma in situ, the presence of a radial growth phase, melanocytosis and a mixture of histology of
epithelioid and fusiform cells, in the absence of a history of melanoma at another site . The most frequent site of metastasis is the
regional lymph nodes (40 to 80%) such as the periesophageal chain followed by distant lymph nodes and organs including the liver (31%),
lungs (18%) and brain (13%). Autopsies of 45 patients showed evidence of metastasis in 78% . The clinical staging can be performed by
endoscopic ultrasound, especially in non-advanced tumors, CT, and/or magnetic resonance imaging, and PET. The seventh edition of the TNM,
published by the American Joint Comission on Cancer in 2010, introduced a new classification for melanoma of the upper aerodigestive tract.
In this classification T1, T2 and stages 1 and 2 were left out due to the aggressive nature of mucosal melanomas (Tables 1 and 2) . This
classification is not widely utilized in the literature and it was mentioned only by Langer et al. . Other authors have used the TNM
classification similarly for staging of squamous cell carcinoma and adenocarcinoma. T classification for melanoma of the upper aerodigestive
tract AJCC . TNM classification AJCC . This classification differentiates adequately the prognosis, T3 having a considerably better
prognosis than T4, and emphasizes the aggressive nature of melanoma compared to adenocarcinoma and squamous cell carcinoma. The rarity of
primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus prevents randomized studies to support therapeutic decisions being carried out. In the absence
of prospective randomized controlled studies, the review of case reports points out that total, almost total, or partial esophagectomy, with
or without gastrectomy is the preferred surgical treatment in resectable disease patients . Surgical resection is the only modality
treatment that influences survival. Esophagectomy with three-field lymph node dissection (periesophageal, mediastinal and celiac trunk) is
the treatment of choice when possible . Surgical margins must be broader than in other esophageal malignancies, as satellite lesions are
frequent. However this procedure is associated with high postoperative morbidity and mortality, and it is difficult to determine the cost
benefit, since most patients die from disease recurrence in a short period of time even after curative resection, as occurred in this
present case . As reported by Adili and Mönig, the resection of isolated metastases even in different locations, can be beneficial for long-
term survival . Mukaya et al. reported a case of successful surgical treatment for tumor recurrence. In a literature review conducted by the
authors (another case), it has been shown that surgical resection, when possible, is the treatment of choice in cases of tumor recurrence .
Endoscopic mucosal resection can be performed for tumors restricted to the mucosal layer. It is mainly indicated for patients with
associated diseases which discourage surgery. It should not be performed for tumors that invade the submucosal layer or in the presence of
metastatic lymph nodes. The degree of tumor invasion and metastatic lymph node involvement can be effectively evaluated using endoscopic
ultrasound . A careful histological analysis of the resected segment, ensuring free margins and a rigorous post-procedure follow-up are
necessary. Endoscopic laser ablation can be used as palliative treatment in locally advanced tumors. Other therapeutic modalities such as
radiotherapy, chemotherapy and immunotherapy have controversial efficacy. Radiation therapy is indicated for obstructive unresectable tumors
as a palliative treatment. Endoscopic metallic stents can also be used for this purpose. Chemotherapy usually includes dacarbazine,
nimustine, vincristine and cisplatin. Dacarbazine confirmed its efficacy for cutaneous malignant melanoma. A randomized controlled trial
which compared the Dartmouth regimen (dacarbazine, cisplatin, bischloroethylnitrosourea and tamoxifen), CVD (cisplatin, vindesine and
dacarbazine) and BOLD (bleomycin, vincristine, dacarbazine and loumostine) with only dacarbazine, for patients with metastatic melanoma, did
not show survival improvement for these associations when compared with isolated dacarbazine . Immunotherapy has evolved considerably.
Currently, new therapeutic modalities have appeared in addition to interferon, as vaccines for activating the dendritic cells as well the
passive immunotherapy as lymphokine-activating killer cell and monoclonal therapy directed to specific antigens of the melanoma. Studies
with various agents were performed but no gold standard systemic therapy has been found. None of these agents showed increased overall
survival, although they have shown some beneficial effect. It is difficult to assess the value of these studies for primary malignant
melanoma of the esophagus because these tumors are rare; most of what is applied is the extrapolation of results from studies of melanomas
of other sites or from studies providing low grades of evidence. Molecular analysis could identify targets as an option for additional
specific therapy in tumors of a high degree of malignancy. In a series of ten patients with primary malignant melanoma of the esophagus
studied by Langer et al., the mutation of c-KIT, among others was detected in two by molecular analysis, and in all by immunohistochemistry
. The detection of this mutation by molecular analysis is relevant, since its presence, although rare, in primary malignant melanoma of the
esophagus, may be related to response to therapy with tyrosine kinase inhibitor. In the reported case, the research for molecular analysis
of mutation of c-Kit was negative. The prognosis of malignant melanoma of the esophagus is dreadful , because in addition to having a highly
aggressive biological behavior, most patients are diagnosed late, with the disease at an advanced stage . The improvement in survival of
these patients depends on early diagnosis. In a literature review, Bisceglia et al. studied the rate of long-term survival adjusted to the T
stage. They found that all patients who survived 36 months or more had stage T1, except for one whose staging of the tumor was pT2pN0,
therefore, emphasizing the importance of early diagnosis. Sabanathan, in a series of 139 patients, reported an average survival rate of 10
months and a five-year survival after surgical treatment of 4.2% . More recently, Volpin et al. published a study with 25 patients, in whom
the five-year survival was 37%, and this finding was mainly attributed to early diagnosis. Malignant melanoma of the esophagus is a rare and
aggressive disease. Its diagnosis is difficult and usually made late, in the advanced stages of the disease, providing a poor prognosis with
low long-term survival rates even after appropriate treatment. A better survival rate can be achieved if the diagnosis is made early. The
treatment of choice is surgical resection whenever possible, even in cases of recurrent or metastatic disease. Radiotherapy and chemotherapy
have not shown benefits in survival rates to date. Other forms of therapy are being studied, but still no benefits in survival rates have
been demonstrated. Currently, studies with a high level of evidence are not feasible for implementation, due to the rarity of the disease.
The patient consented to the study and publication of this case report and images. A written consent is available for review. CT: Computed
tomography; PET-CT: Positron emission tomography; FDG: fluorine-18-2-fluoro-2-deoxy-D-glucose. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. We declare that FHAM, URJ, RAAS, MRT, FRT, JRMR, ESM, WMP and IC were involved in the care of the patient. GSCL
reviewed and photographed the pathology and immunohistochemistry analysis. All authors performed research/study. FHAM and URJ wrote the
first draft of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
