A.B. and M.C. contributed equally to this manuscript. • Disease-causing missense mutations mainly impair protein biosynthesis and/or
function. • The p.Y450C mutation in factor IX (FIX) provided a model to study their interplay. • The mutation in the carboxyl-terminus
impairs both FIX protein secretion and activity. • The phenyl group at this relatively conserved position (c234) has a key role. • The
differential effects have pathophysiological and evolutionary implications. Disease-causing missense mutations mainly impair protein
biosynthesis and/or function. The p.Y450C mutation in factor IX (FIX) provided a model to study their interplay. The mutation in the
carboxyl-terminus impairs both FIX protein secretion and activity. The phenyl group at this relatively conserved position (c234) has a key
role. The differential effects have pathophysiological and evolutionary implications. The interplay between impaired protein biosynthesis
and/or function caused by missense mutations, particularly in relation to specific protein regions, has been poorly investigated. As model
we chose the severe p.Y450C mutation in the carboxyl-terminal region of coagulation factor IX (FIX) and, by expression of a panel of
recombinant variants, demonstrated the key role of the tyrosine phenyl group for both FIX secretion and coagulant activity. Comparison among
highly homologous coagulation serine proteases indicate that additive or compensatory pleiotropic effects on secretion and function by
carboxyl-terminal mutations produce life-threatening or mild phenotypes in the presence of similarly reduced protein amounts. The main
mechanisms through which amino acid changes produce human disease forms consist of quantitative reduction of the protein amount and/or
synthesis of dysfunctional molecules. The combination of these effects accounts for the overall extent of the reduction of functional
protein levels, which has major pathophysiological relevance. However, due to the limited availability of informative model mutations, the
interplay between these pathogenic molecular mechanisms has been poorly elucidated, particularly in relation to specific protein regions.
The features of coagulation factor IX (FIX) deficiency (Hemophilia B) make this disorder an ideal model to address this issue. The
extensively characterized mutational pattern (http://www.factorix.org/) of F9 gene displays a large predominance of missense mutations
(>65%), mainly occurring in the chymotrypsin-like catalytic domain. Notwithstanding, only few pathogenic molecular mechanisms have been
detailed . Strikingly, these changes are responsible for the most variable clinical phenotypes, ranging from asymptomatic to life-
threatening conditions. It is worth noting that Hemophilia B, having an X-linked inheritance pattern, strongly favors the investigation of
the relationship between molecular defects in the hemizygous condition and the underlying residual function. The latter is of extreme
importance in bleeding disorders since even low amounts of functional protein in plasma substantially ameliorate the bleeding phenotype in
patients . Moreover, being FIX a secreted serine protease, its protein concentration and enzymatic activity can be finely measured by
biochemical assays. Within the family of the coagulation serine proteases, FIX is highly homologous to factor VII (FVII), factor X (FX) and
protein C (PC) . In spite of their similarities, these proteins display remarkable differences both in length and amino acid composition of
the carboxyl-terminal region (Fig. 1), which could underlie different structural and/or functional roles. Previous studies indicated that
the carboxyl-terminus has an essential role for the secretion of FIX and also of FVII and PC . On the other hand, alterations in this region
resulted in poor secretion of normal or hyperactive variants of PC and FVII . Taken together, these features make missense mutations in the
carboxyl-terminal region of coagulation factors of particular interest for the investigation of the potential interplay between impaired
biosynthesis and enzymatic function. In this study, we characterized the p.Y450C missense change in the carboxyl-terminus of FIX
(chymotrypsin numbering c234). By expression of a panel of recombinant FIX variants and evaluation of the secreted protein and activity we
(i) dissected the contribution of the p.Y450C missense change to the extent of reduction of functional protein amounts, (ii) provided
evidence for the crucial role of the phenyl ring at this position in the FIX carboxyl-terminal region and (iii) indicated major functional
differences among mutations in the carboxyl-terminus of highly homologous serine proteases. The propositus was referred to the coagulation
centre at 1 year of age because of a spontaneous hematoma. Coagulation laboratory assays indicated FIX coagulant (FIXc) activity below 1%
and circulating protein levels of 0.6% (30 ng/ml) of pooled normal plasma (PNP). The family history of bleeding was negative. Upon
development of an initial target joint (left ankle), he entered prophylaxis with recombinant FIX concentrate (Benefix, Baxter, 50 IU/kg)
once a week, which prevented bleedings and the related complications. Sequencing of F9 gene identified the c.1349 A > G in exon 8 that
predicts the Y450C amino acid substitution in the FIX serine protease domain. This mutation has been previously found in severe Hemophilia B
patients with undetectable FIXc levels .The parents gave informed consent to conduct the study, which was in accordance with the Helsinki
Declaration. Expression vectors for the recombinant FIX (rFIX) variants were produced by site-directed mutagenesis using the QuickChange® II
Site-Directed Mutagenesis Kit (Stratagene, La Jolla, CA, USA). The mutations (referred as the underlined letter in the primer sequences)
were introduced into the human FIX cDNA cloned into the pCMV5 vector using the following forward primers: 5′CAAGGTATCCCGGTGTGTCAACTGG3′
(Y450C), 5′AAGGTATCCCGGTCTGTCAAC3′ (Y450S), and 5′AAGGTATCCCGGTTTGTCAAC3′ (Y450F). Reverse primers were complementary to the forward
oligonucleotides. Direct sequencing confirmed the presence of the desired mutations. Expression vectors for FIX variants were transiently
transfected in Human Embryonic Kidney (HEK293) cells as previously described . Forty-eight hours later, conditioned media were collected and
cells lysed using a non-reducing lysis buffer (25 mM Tris–phosphate, 10% glycerol, 1% Triton® X-100, pH 7.8) supplemented with a protease
inhibitor cocktail (Sigma–Aldrich, St. Louis, MO, USA). FIX protein levels in plasma and in conditioned medium were evaluated by ELISA
(Affinity Biologicals™ Inc., Canada) using serial dilutions of a PNP as reference curve. Comparison with known amounts of purified plasma-
derived FIX (Haematologic Technologies Inc., Essex Junction, VT, USA) indicated that FIX protein concentration in the PNP aliquots used in
all assays was 4.5 ± 0.1 μg/ml, and this mean value was used to calculate the FIX concentration. Western blotting analysis was conducted by
SDS–PAGE on 4–15% polyacrilamide precast gels (Bio-Rad, Hercules, CA, USA). A HRP-conjugated polyclonal anti-human FIX antibody (Affinity
Biologicals™ Inc.) and the enhanced chemiluminescence (ECL) reagent (Pierce®, Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL, USA) were exploited for the
detection of rFIX proteins. FIX coagulant activity in patient plasma was assessed by standard activated partial thromboplastin time
(aPTT)-based coagulation assays. To measure the coagulant activity of rFIX variants, FIX-depleted plasma (HemosIL, Instrumentation
Laboratory, Lexington, MA, USA) was supplemented with rFIX-containing conditioned medium followed by aPTT assays . Coagulation times were
measured upon addition of a contact activator (SynthASil, Hemosil) and CaCl2 on a ACLTOP700 instrument (Instrumentation Laboratory).
Coagulation times from serial dilutions of rFIX-wt were used to create a standard curve, which was optimized for the determination of low
activity levels. The specific activity of rFIX variants was calculated as the ratio between coagulant activity and protein levels expressed
as % of the rFIX-wt used in the coagulation assays. To obtain the standard deviation, we assessed the activity in media from three
independent transfections for each mutant, and each medium has been evaluated in duplicate. The F9 p.Y450C missense mutation identified by
us in a Hemophilia B patient was chosen as model to investigate the interplay between the pathogenic molecular mechanisms impairing protein
biosynthesis and enzymatic activity caused by alterations of the variable carboxyl-terminus of coagulation serine proteases. We took
advantage from the expression of recombinant FIX variants evaluated through immunological and coagulation assays, an approach that we
previously exploited to dissect the molecular bases of severe coagulation factor deficiency forms also caused by potentially “null
mutations” . Transient transfection experiments indicated that the introduction of the p.Y450C mutation into the human FIX cDNA (Fig. 1)
resulted in markedly reduced secreted amounts of rFIX-450C molecules, as indicated by the protein concentration in medium of
18.9 ± 6.2 ng/ml, corresponding to 4.9 ± 1.1% of those of rFIX-wt (373.8 ± 119.6 ng/ml)(Fig. 2A). The observation that protein concentration
of the secreted rFIX-450C variant was higher than that measured in patient plasma (0.6% of PNP, 30 ng/ml) might underlie a reduced stability
into the circulation and/or a preferential removal of the FIX mutant molecules in vivo, which cannot be properly assessed in cellular
models. On the other hand, the accumulation of the rFIX-450C in medium may have led to overestimate the secreted levels. We therefore
conducted a time-course experiment. While the amount of rFIX-wt was clearly appreciable in medium even at 6 h post-transfection
(3.4 ± 0.2 ng/ml), that of the rFIX-450C variant became barely detectable only at 18 h and slowly increased over time (Fig. 2B). This
observation indicates a remarkable delayed secretion of the mutant FIX and, taking into account the one day half-life of FIX , provides a
plausible explanation for the very low amount of circulating FIX in the patient. We subsequently assessed the impact of the amino acid
change on the FIX coagulant properties. To this purpose, we exploited functional aPTT-based assays by supplementing FIX-depleted plasma with
the rFIX-containing medium. Whereas the coagulation time upon addition of 25 ng/ml of rFIX-wt was 88.0 ± 0.8 s, that of a similar amount of
rFIX-450C was prolonged (105.4 ± 3.3 s), thus leading to estimate a specific activity of 0.14 ± 0.006 (Fig. 3A). Taken together these data
demonstrated that introduction of cysteine at position 450 not only severely impairs biosynthesis but also affects coagulant function, thus
causing a severe Hemophilia B form. Analysis of the primary sequences of serine proteases revealed that the phenyl group at position c234 is
highly conserved . Taking into account the highly homologous coagulation serine proteases, tyrosine is present in FVII, FIX and PC but not
in FX, which displays phenylalanine (Fig. 1). Moreover, previous studies on the rFIX-450H and rFIX-450P variants, whose secretion levels
were reduced to 7% and undetectable , respectively, further support the detrimental impact of amino acid changes at this position. On the
other hand, inspection of the crystallographic structure of activated FIX (ID 1RFN) suggests that tyrosine 450 is partially exposed on the
serine protease domain. The cysteine sulfhydryl group introduced by the p.Y450C mutation could lead to illegitimate disulfide bridges,
and/or induce FIX dimerization in the endoplasmic reticulum, thus contributing to the biosynthetic impairment. To address this issue, we
performed Western blotting analysis in non-reducing conditions of cell lysates, which did not reveal FIX isoforms compatible with the
presence of dimers (Fig. 2A, inset). Moreover, we did not observe appreciable quantitative differences between the rFIX-wt and rFIX-450C.
This observation is consistent with the intracellular rFIX-450C levels measured by ELISA (112.8 ± 2.6% of rFIX-wt), which excludes its
intracellular accumulation and is compatible with a quick degradation of the mutant protein by the quality control system. In an attempt to
dissect the biochemical bases of our experimental observations, we studied the effects on FIX biology of the introduction of phenylalanine
and serine (Fig. 1), maintaining the phenyl ring or the oxydryl groups of tyrosine, respectively. Similarly to the natural rFIX-450C
variant, the secretion of the rFIX-450S was markedly reduced (5.5 ± 0.2% of rFIX-wt) and delayed (Fig. 2). At variance, the rFIX-450F was
secreted in medium at appreciable levels (25.3 ± 2.3%). Functional assays in plasma systems revealed remarkable differences among mutants.
In particular, the specific activity of the rFIX-450S (0.15 ± 0.05) was strongly reduced and comparable to that of the natural rFIX-450C
variant, while the rFIX-450F variant displayed a virtually normal specific activity (0.78 ± 0.19) (Fig. 3A). These findings indicate that
the removal of the phenyl ring, rather than the introduction of the sulfhydryl group, has the major detrimental effect and is responsible
for both impaired secretion and dysfunctional FIX molecules. The importance of the phenyl rings in the FIX carboxyl-terminus is further
highlighted by the observation that substitutions involving the other two tyrosine residues of this region (p.Y441C and p.Y444S) are
associated to Hemophilia B . However, the absence of information on the circulating FIX protein levels in these patients does not permit a
proper comparison with the mutation under study. Interestingly, for the mutations at position 450 not preserving the phenyl ring the two
detrimental effects on secretion and function were not disentangled. Their direct relation implies an additive behavior, which produces a
steep gradient of function impairment (Fig. 3A). The present findings on FIX differ substantially from our observations in FVII , and from
those obtained in PC . Indeed, substitutions of R462 (c253) or short deletions at the FVII carboxyl-terminus resulted in reduced secreted
levels of proteins with normal specific activity (Fig. 3B). The R462X paradoxically displayed gain-of-function features that produced an
asymptomatic FVII deficiency form. Noticeably, these observations indicate that additive or compensatory pleiotropic effects elicited by
mutations in the carboxyl-terminus of FIX and FVII, which similarly reduce the circulating protein amount, give rise to life-threatening or
mild phenotypes. On the other hand, a deletion scanning of the carboxyl-terminal region of PC revealed that alterations of this protein
region have a major impact on secretion, as indicated by the normal specific activity of the secreted truncated PC variants (Fig. 3B). Taken
together these information suggest that the carboxyl-terminal region of these highly homologous proteins does not represent a sole secretion
determinant, but has a still undefined role for FIX and FVII function. The study of model mutations in the carboxyl-terminus of FIX is
particularly informative to elucidate the interplay between pathogenic molecular mechanisms impairing protein biosynthesis and function. We
provide evidence for a dual role of the FIX carboxyl-terminus for both secretion and coagulant activity and for additive effects of the
p.Y450C mutation, which explain a particularly severe Hemophilia B form. Comparison of findings in the highly homologous coagulation serine
protease family members suggests that variations in this protein region might have contributed to the evolution of this protein family sub-
group. The study was supported by University of Ferrara, Telethon – Italy (GGP09183), Ministero dell’Universita‘ e della Ricerca
(MIUR)-Progetti di Ricerca di Interesse Nazionale (PRIN) and AIFA (AIFA 2008 – Bando per le malattie rare – Progetto RF-null-2008-1235892).
Recombinant FIX variants and sequence alignment of highly homologous coagulation factors. Schematic representation of the FIX structure with
the natural (in bold) and artificial amino acid substitutions reported on the top. LC, light chain; HC, heavy chain. The box reports the
sequence alignment of the carboxyl-terminal region of FIX, FVII, PC and FX and the numbers indicate the protein residues including the pre-
propeptide sequence. The arrow indicates the position (c234, chymotrypsin numbering) of the FIX mutation under study. Expression levels of
the recombinant FIX variants (A) Protein (white bars) and coagulant activity (grey bars) levels of secreted rFIX variants. Results are
expressed as the percentage of rFIX-wt, and are reported as mean ± standard deviation from three independent experiments. Inset. Western
Blotting analysis in non-reducing conditions of rFIX variants in cell lysates. MW, molecular weight marker. (B) Secreted levels of the
rFIX-450C (■), rFIX-450S (□), rFIX-Y450F (○) and rFIX-wt (●) variants in time-course experiments. Conditioned media were collected at 6, 18,
24, 30 and 48 h after transfection. Protein levels are expressed as the log10 of concentration. Relationship between secreted protein levels
and specific activity of FIX, FVII and PC carboxyl-terminal variants. The specific activity was calculated as the ratio between activity and
protein levels. The wild-type specific activity (referred as 1.00) is indicated by the dotted line. (A) FIX variants are: rFIX-wt (●),
rFIX-450C (■), rFIX-450S (□), rFIX-450F (▾) and rFIX-450H variant (▴) ; °, rFIX-450P variant (not detectable, ). The rFIX-450C and rFIX-450S
are superposed. The chemical structure of the side chains at position 450 is displayed aside. (B) FVII variants are: rFVII-466X (□),
rFIX-465X (○) rFVII-464X (♢),rFVII-463X () rFVII-462A (○), rFVII-462 W (△), rFVII-462Q (∇). ∗, gain-of-function R462X variant . PC variants
are: rPC-459X (■), rPC-456X (▾), rPC-453X (▴) and rPC-452X (●). †, further deletions of the PC carboxyl-terminus resulted in undetectable
secreted PC protein levels.
