To investigate and report on the clinical and epidemiological characteristics of the first case of human infection with avian influenza
A(H7N9) virus in Hangzhou, China. A field epidemiological survey was used to study the first case in Hangzhou. The patient was a 39-year-old
male chef with a history of exposure to a farm product market and to poultry prior to the onset of disease on 15 March 2013. He had
diarrhea, chills, pyrexia, and intermittent cough with freshly red foamy bloody sputum early in his disease. His fever > 39 °C continued for
a week with rapid progression. Computed tomography findings showed extensive bilateral consolidation, followed by multiorgan failure. The
patient died on the morning of 27 March. His infection was eventually confirmed 1 week later on 3 April. Flu-like symptoms including fever
and cough were found in 46 of his 138 close contacts. This was the first case of human infection with avian influenza A(H7N9) virus in
Hangzhou. None of the close contacts had onset of the disease. The case patient’s condition progressed rapidly. The source of infection
might be his exposure to the farm product market, but the mode of exposure remains unclear. Cases of avian influenza A(H7N9) virus infection
were first reported in Shanghai and Anhui, China, in March 2013 [1, 2]. Human infections with influenza A (H7) viruses have been reported
sporadically, but infection of H7N9 in humans has never been documented before [3, 4]. On 24 March 2013, the First People’s Hospital of
Xiaoshan District, Hangzhou City reported admission of a patient with pyrexia and a cough, later complicated by severe pneumonia and
multiorgan failure. The patient died eventually from multiorgan failure 12 days after disease onset and was confirmed as having had H7N9
virus infection 1 week later. The clinical and epidemiological investigation and response measures are reported as follows. The
epidemiological case survey was conducted according to the Prevention and Control Protocol for Human Infections with Avian Influenza
A(H7N9), 1st edition, issued by the National Health and Family Planning Commission (NHFPC) of the People’s Republic of China, to trace the
infection sources, observe the patient’s close contacts, and to disinfect his household. Criteria in the Diagnosis and Treatment Protocol
for Human Infections with Avian Influenza A(H7N9, 1st edition, 2013) were referred to for diagnosis and management of the case [5, 6]. We
used a standard surveillance report form to collect the epidemiological and clinical data on the case, including his demographic
information, visits to medical facilities, hospitalization, clinical outcome, recent exposures to poultry or other animals, and other
relevant epidemiological information. Close contacts of the H7N9 patient were identified according to the criteria defined in the field
survey of H5N1 influenza . Once they were identified, the close contacts were followed up for the presence of symptoms with daily telephone
calls for 7 consecutive days. Throat swabs were collected from the close contacts with symptoms such as fever and a cough and were tested
for H7N9 virus. Results of the patient’s blood routine, biochemistry, and chest radiography work-up were collected. The patient was a
38-year-old male chef, who worked in Jiangsu Province. His past history included obesity, hepatitis B, and chronic cholecystitis. The
patient had chills, a fever (39.5 °C), and an intermittent cough with bright red foamy bloody sputum on 15 March 2013, but did not seek
medical attention. He presented to the Emergency Department of a hospital in Jiande City on 18 March and was admitted for hepatitis. His
blood test results on 19 March were WBC, 2.33*109 /L; CRP, 43.7 mg/L; AFP, 336.8 mg/L; HBV, positive; and the chest radiography showed
infection of the lower lobe of the right lung. The chest CT finding on 20 March indicated infection of the lower lobe of the right lung. He
began to experience shortness of breath and hemoptysis on the evening of 20 March, was transferred to the Emergency Department of a hospital
in Xiaoshan District at about 22:00 the same night, and admitted for lobar pneumonia. Chest CT findings indicated infectious changes in both
lungs with pleural effusion in the right lung. The primary diagnosis of the local hospital was severe pneumonia, type I respiratory failure,
and chronic viral hepatitis B. After hospitalization, he was given integrated management including respiratory isolation, combined
antibiotic therapy, lamivudine for hepatitis B virus, liver and gastric protective treatments, and fluid infusion. No bacterial, fungal or
other pathogenic organisms were found by sputum culture. No anti-viral medication such as oseltamivir was administered. Moist rales were
heard all over the lungs on 27 March. His heart rate dropped suddenly to 68 bpm on the morning of 27 March, with ABP of 40/16 mmHg and
massive bloody fluid aspirated from the airway. He died at 07:00 on 27 March after failed rescue. The total course of the disease was
12 days. An expert team from the Zhejiang Provincial Health Department confirmed the diagnosis of the first case of human infection with
avian influenza A(H7N9) virus on 3 April 2013 according to his clinical presentation, epidemiological information, and test results.
Figure 1 shows the clinical sequence.Fig. 1Timeline of clinical symptoms, signs, and laboratory test results of the first H7N9 case in
Hangzhou. 18–20 March: treated in the Second People’s Hospital of Jiande; 21–24 and 25–27 March treated in the Respiratory Disease
Department and the ICU of the First People’s Hospital of Xiaoshan District respectively Timeline of clinical symptoms, signs, and laboratory
test results of the first H7N9 case in Hangzhou. 18–20 March: treated in the Second People’s Hospital of Jiande; 21–24 and 25–27 March
treated in the Respiratory Disease Department and the ICU of the First People’s Hospital of Xiaoshan District respectively The patient was a
chef residing in Taicang City, Jiangsu Province. He had bought two chickens at a farm product market on the morning of 8 March, cooked them
by braising, and ate the meat the next day. He went to the headquarters of his work affiliation in Xiaoshan, Hangzhou, Zhejiang Province by
company car for a 2-day service training course and returned to Taicang by company car on the afternoon of 10 March. He walked 2 km to a
farm product market to buy food ingredients on 11 and 12 March, where his exposure to poultry or vendor booths and mode of exposure were
unclear. He had no visitors, travel history or contact with similar patients during the 2 weeks before disease onset. The patient lived with
his wife and son in two intercommunicating rooms (30 m2) in the building where he worked. The rooms were well illuminated and ventilated.
The dwellers had good hygienic habits, and aired and cleaned the rooms every day. The building was surrounded by farmlands with no poultry
farm or living garbage dump within a 2-km radius. Epidemiological survey and screening identified 138 close contacts, including 29 family
members and relatives, 18 colleagues, 6 patients sharing a ward, and 85 healthcare providers with unprotected contact. The close contacts
were followed up for 7 consecutive days; flu-like symptoms were noted in 46. Throat swabs were collected from the symptomatic close contacts
and all tested negative for H7N9 virus nucleic acid. The chest X-ray, chest CT, and routine blood test results are shown in Table 1 and
Fig. 2.Table 1Chest X-ray and routine blood test results of the patient during hospitalizationDate of examinationChest X-ray or chest
CTBlood routineWBC (109/L)NE %18 MarchInfection in the right lower lobeN/AN/A20 MarchInfectious changes in both lungs, pleural effusion in
the right side1.678.423 MarchExtensive bilateral consolidation, bilateral pleural effusion4.280.125 MarchExtensive exudative changes in both
lungs with unclear diaphragmatic surface on either side6.984.7The test results of 18 March were from the Second People’s Hospital of Jiande
City and the remaining were hospitalization test results from the First People’s Hospital of Xiaoshan District WBC white blood cell count,
NE % percentage of neutrophilic granulocytes, N/A not availableFig. 2Chest X-ray of the patient during hospitalization Chest X-ray and
routine blood test results of the patient during hospitalization The test results of 18 March were from the Second People’s Hospital of
Jiande City and the remaining were hospitalization test results from the First People’s Hospital of Xiaoshan District WBC white blood cell
count, NE % percentage of neutrophilic granulocytes, N/A not available Chest X-ray of the patient during hospitalization Terminal
disinfection was carried out in the places involved in the diagnosis and management processes. The corpse of the deceased was disinfected
and treated for preservation before cremation 6 days later. Emergency surveillance for pneumonia with unknown causes was implemented,
appropriate screening and triage practices were enforced at the medical facilities, diagnosis and treatment at the febrile respiratory
clinics were standardized at all medical facilities and local health stations, and a zero and daily report mechanism was devised. The
patient had a past history of obesity, hepatitis B, and chronic cholecystitis. When his symptoms first appeared, he overlooked them and
failed to seek medical attention. His condition deteriorated rapidly. The clinical features were consistent with the H7N9 cases reported in
Shanghai . After hospitalization, no bacterial, fungal or other pathogenic organisms were found by sputum culture. No anti-viral medication
such as oseltamivir was administered. The patient went to the local farm product market for food ingredients, where his exposure was
unclear. Given a typically 7-day incubation period of H7N9 infection, he could have been infected in his workplace, where the source of
exposure remains unidentified. It is thus suggested that Jiangsu Provincial CDC should be contacted for external environment sampling and
testing. Timely investigation and result analysis for key information are crucial once human or animal influenza breaks out . Prospective
follow-up investigations of the close contacts have failed to conclusively establish human-to-human transmission of H7N9 virus from the
confirmed cases . However, reported non-sustained transmission of avian flu viruses between humans and genetic mutation during genome
replication [10, 11] are good reasons for Chinese health authorities and researchers to remain on high alert for potential emergence of
human-to-human transmission. Li Xie and Hua Ding authors contributed equally to this work. The authors declare that they have no conflict of
interest.
