A 45-year-old male presented with a 3-week history of hyperpigmentation of the lip, tongue, and oral cavity (Fig. 1). He had attended an
endocrinology outpatient clinic for evaluation of diabetes or adrenal insufficiency. The patient did not have diabetes, but had a 7-year
history of hypertension. The endocrinologist diagnosed acanthosis nigricans clinically. On systematic review, the patient stated that he had
abdominal distension, discomfort, and easy satiety for several months. He was referred to us for an evaluation of the abdominal discomfort
and internal malignancy. Computed tomography of the abdomen and pelvis revealed an enhancing infiltrative mass involving the entire
peritoneum in the mid to lower and left upper quadrants of the abdomen and a small amount of ascites in the perihepatic space extending into
the right paracolic gutter and pelvic cavity. This suggested a peritoneal carcinomatosis-like malignancy involving the peritoneum, such as
peritoneal mesothelioma diffuse type, lymphoma, or desmoplastic small round cell tumor (Fig. 2A). A peritoneoscopic biopsy showed diffuse
scattered nodules up to 1 cm on the viscer omentum (Fig. 2B). These bled readily on touch. Histological and immunohistochemical analyses of
the biopsy specimen showed diffusely c-kit-positive epithelioid cells, which are consistent with a malignant gastrointestinal stromal tumor
(GIST) (Fig. 3). After diagnosing a GIST, we planned palliative chemotherapy with imatinib as it was inoperable. However, the patient was
lost to follow-up. Acanthosis nigricans is a paraneoplastic dermatosis characterized by velvety, hyperpigmented plaques on the skin in body
folds, typically the armpits, groin, and neck. Sometimes the lips, palms, or soles are affected. Malignant acanthosis nigricans is
associated with various neoplasms, most often gastrointestinal adenocarcinoma. The association of this condition with sarcoma is extremely
rare. Here, we report acanthosis nigricans on the lip and oral mucous membrane in a patient with GIST. To our knowledge, this is the first
case of acanthosis nigricans associated with a malignant GIST. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported. The
patient presented with a hyperpigmentation of (A) tongue, (B) lip, and (C) gum. (A) Computed tomography scans of abdominopelvis revealed
that enhancing infiltrative mass lesion replacement whole peritoneum in mid to lower and left upper quadrant of abdomen, small amount of
combined ascites along perihepatic space extending into right paracolic gutter and pelvic cavity. (B) On peritoneoscopic finding, there was
diffuse scatterd up to 1 cm sized nodular masses on visceral and parietal peritoneum and omentum. Biopsy specimen showed round to oval
shaped epithelioid cells with diffuse positive to c-kit, which were consistent with a malignant gastrointestinal stromal tumor (A, H&E, ×
400; B, c-kit, × 400).
