These authors contributed equally to this work Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI) is an autosomal recessive disorder
characterized by congenital calcification of large and medium sized arteries, associated with early myocardial infarction, heart failure,
and stroke, and premature death. Most cases of GACI are caused by mutations in the ENPP1 gene. We first studied two siblings with GACI from
a non-consanguineous family without mutations in the ENPP1 gene. To search for disease-causing mutations, we identified genomic regions
shared between the two affected siblings but not their unaffected parents or brother. The ABCC6 gene, which is mutated in pseudoxanthoma
elasticum (PXE), resided within a small region of homozygosity shared by the affected siblings. Sequence analysis of ABCC6 revealed that the
two affected siblings were homozygous for the missense mutation p.R1314W. Subsequently, ABCC6 mutations were identified in five additional
GACI families with normal ENPP1 sequences. Genetic mutations in ABCC6 in patients with PXE are associated with ectopic tissue mineralization
in the skin and arterial blood vessels. Thus, our findings provide additional evidence that the ABCC6 gene product inhibits calcification
under physiologic conditions and confirm a second locus for GACI. In addition, our study emphasizes the potential utility of shared
homozygosity mapping to identify genetic causes of inherited disorders. Generalized arterial calcification of infancy (GACI, OMIM# 208000)
is an autosomal recessive disorder that is characterized by calcification of the internal elastic lamina of large- and mediumsized arteries
and stenosis due to fibroproliferation of the intima of muscular arteries. Radiographs show both arterial and periarticular soft tissue
calcifications. GACI usually presents with congestive cardiac failure, hypertensive disease, and/or myocardial ischemia, and the majority of
children die within the first 6 months of life (Maayan et al., 1984), with only a few case reports of survivors into later childhood or
adulthood (Ciana et al., 2006; Patel et al., 2004; Rutsch et al., 2003; van der Sluis et al., 2006). Most, but not all, patients with GACI
have recessive mutations in the ENPP1 gene (OMIM# 173335) located on chromosome 6q22-q23 (Rutsch et al., 2003), suggesting that GACI is
genetically heterogeneous. ENPP1 encodes the ecto-nucleotide pyrophosphatase phosphodiesterase 1 (ENPP1, EC 3.6.1.9, EC 3.1.4.1) enzyme that
regulates soft tissue calcification and bone mineralization by generating inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), an essential inhibitor of
hydroxyapatite deposition. Hence, GACI patients with deficiency of ENPP1 are unable to synthesize sufficient PPi to inhibit ectopic
mineralization and are, therefore, prone to arterial calcification. In addition to a deficiency of PPi, recent studies indicate that some
children with GACI due to ENPP1 mutations develop hypophosphatemia after the first year of life (Rutsch et al., 2008). Hypophosphatemia is
assumed to be mediated by elevated plasma levels of the phosphatonin FGF23, which inhibits expression and internalization of the renal
sodium-phosphate cotransporters SLC34A1 and SLC34A3 and inhibits synthesis of 1.25-dihydroxyvitamin D. In patients with GACI,
hypophosphatemia appears to ameliorate soft tissue calcification (Rutsch et al., 2008). Remarkably, other patients with ENPP1 mutations
develop hypophosphatemic rickets rather than GACI, a paradox that at present lacks a biochemical explanation (Levy-Litan et al., 2010;
Lorenz-Depiereux et al., 2010; Rutsch et al., 2008). Sequence analyses of ENPP1 have failed to disclose disease-causing mutations in
approximately 25% of subjects with GACI (Le Boulanger et al., 2010), and linkage analyses have pointed to other chromosomal regions where
other pathogenic genes may be located (Ruf et al., 2005). Recently Nitschke et al. (Nitschke et al., 2012) described a cohort of patients
with GACI with mutations in ABCC6, which has previously been implicated in pseudoxanthoma elasticum (PXE) (Uitto et al., 2010) and a variant
of GACI (Le Boulanger et al., 2010), suggesting that this gene plays a causative role in this disorder. Prior to these publications we
investigated two siblings born to non-consanguineous parents with severe GACI and normal sequences for ENPP1 (Li et al., 2012a). We
performed a genome-wide search for a genetic defect underlying GACI and searched for replication of the best candidates in a larger
independent cohort of children with GACI. Here we describe additional patients with mutations in the ABCC6 gene as the second locus for
GACI, emphasizing the genotypic overlap between GACI and PXE. A total of seven patients in six families with clinical manifestations
consistent with GACI were examined; these families are referred to as Families A–F. The nuclear pedigrees of these families are shown in
Fig. 1, and the diagnostic clinical characteristics are shown in Fig. 2 and are detailed in Supplementary Material. We initially focused on
Family A with two affected siblings with characteristic features of GACI (Fig. 2A). Sequencing of ENPP1 as one of the candidate genes for
mutations (Table 1), which is known to cause GACI, did not reveal the presence of pathogenic mutations. To facilitate the identification of
the molecular basis of GACI in this family, we performed genome-wide (610K) SNP array analysis on all individuals. We analyzed the data from
the three siblings and the parents to phase informative SNP markers and determine shared haplotype segments between the affected siblings
that were not also shared with the unaffected sibling. As expected, this analysis confirmed the exclusion of ENPP1 as a candidate gene, as
well as the MGP and ADIPOQ genes, each considered as candidates based on known association to mineralization (Table 1). Further analysis of
the genotypes within the region containing the ABCC6 gene revealed that the shared haplotypes between the affected siblings reside in a
relatively small, 799 kb region of homozygosity, thus identifying ABCC6 as the primary candidate gene for mutations in this family. We
subsequently used Sanger sequencing to assess the ABCC6 gene for mutations in affected members of this family and other unrelated
individuals in additional families with GACI. We used PCR to amplify and directly sequence all 31 exons and the flanking intronic sequences
of the ABCC6 gene in patients with GACI with normal ENPP1 sequences, as well as their unaffected family members. Affected members of Family
A (Patients 1 and 2), who shared a 799 kb region of homozygosity on chromosome 16, were found to have homozygous missense mutations
(c.3940C>T, p.R1314W) in exon 28 of ABCC6 (Fig. 3). This missense mutation replaces a conserved arginine residue with tryptophan in the
second nucleotide binding fold of ABCC6. The proband in Family B (Patient 3) was found to have compound heterozygous mutations (c.2787+1G>T
and c.3736-1G>A) in introns 21 and 26 of ABCC6. The proband in Family D (Patient 5) had compound heterozygous mutations c.346-6G>A and
p.R1141× in intron 3 and exon 24 of ABCC6. In Family F, the proband (Patient 7) was found to carry compound heterozygous mutations
consisting of a large deletion (g.del 23–29) and a missense mutation (p.R760W). The arginine-to-tryptophan substitution affects the first
nucleotide binding fold of ABCC6 protein. Only one ABCC6 mutation has been identified for the proband of Family C (Patient 4; p.R391G) and
the proband of Family E (Patient 6; c.3692insTT). The p.R391G mutation resides in the fourth intracellular loop corresponding to the second
transmembrane domain of ABCC6 protein, while the c.3692insTT mutation causes a frameshift and predicts truncation of the protein as a result
of a premature termination codon 125 bp downstream of the mutation and likely leads to nonsense-mediated mRNA decay (Table 2). Multiplex
ligation-dependent probe amplification (MLPA) failed to identify additional deletion mutations in Families C and E. All the identified
mutations, with the exception of the mutation c.3692insTT, have previously been reported in subjects with PXE as biallelic mutations, and
are predicted to result in reduction or loss of ABCC6 activity (Pfendner et al., 2007; Uitto et al., 2010). Serum levels of calcium,
phosphorus, and alkaline phosphatase were normal in all subjects (data not shown). In addition, because circulating FGF23 is elevated in
patients with GACI due to ENPP1 mutations, we measured plasma levels of FGF23 using an immunoassay that detects both the intact form and
carboxy-terminal fragments of FGF23 protein. We found that circulating levels of FGF23 were normal in all affected subjects from whom serum
could be obtained (Table 2). To further characterize the consequences of the ABCC6 mutations, we performed histopathologic examination of
arteries in patients with GACI, investigating the activation status of matrix gla protein (MGP), a powerful, local anti-mineralization
factor when activated by γ-glutamyl carboxylation and which has been implicated in the pathomechanism of PXE (Berkner, 2008; Uitto et al.,
2010). We also examined for the presence of fetuin-A, a systemic anti-mineralization factor on the lesional area of mineralized blood
vessels (Brylka and Jahnen-Dechent, 2013). Histopathology of the affected vessels revealed extensive mineralization. Because MGP has been
shown to participate in the arterial mineralization processes, the presence of both carboxylated (cMGP, active) and uncarboxylated (ucMGP,
inactive) forms of this protein was investigated by immunofluorescence with conformation-specific monoclonal antibodies (Schurgers et al.,
2005). While the active form (cMGP) was detectable in association with the mineral deposits (Fig. 4, frame A), a similar, but stronger
staining pattern was noted with the antibody recognizing ucMGP (Fig. 4, frame B), suggesting that MGP was predominantly in the inactive
form. Immunostaining with an antibody recognizing fetuin-A revealed co-localization of the protein with the mineral deposits (Fig. 4, frame
C). The controls without the primary antibody were negative (Fig. 4, frames D–F). In this study we used a strategy of shared haplotype
mapping to identify potential candidate genes for GACI in a family with two affected siblings and one unaffected sibling, confirmed by
Sanger sequencing. This mapping led to the identification of ABCC6, which has been previously shown to be mutated in patients with PXE
(Pfendner et al., 2007; Uitto et al., 2010) or associated in heterozygous state with premature coronary artery disease (Köblös, 2010; Trip
et al., 2002), as the candidate gene. These studies indicate the usefulness of both shared haplotype and homozygosity analysis for
identification of genetic causes of rare inherited disorders in patients even from apparently non-consanguineous families. Our results
confirm the successful use of individuals from outbred populations in homozygosity mapping (Hildebrandt et al., 2009), which together with
rapid next generation sequencing, should greatly accelerate gene discovery. We subsequently used Sanger sequencing to confirm the
association between ABCC6 and GACI in five additional unrelated families where the clinically affected subjects had normal ENPP1 gene
sequences. We identified mutations in both alleles of ABCC6 in three subjects, but we found only a single mutant allele in two patients with
GACI. Our results are similar to those noted in other studies in which mutations in both ABCC6 alleles were disclosed in only ~80% of
patients with PXE (Pfendner et al., 2007; Uitto et al., 2010). Because GACI, similar to PXE, is an autosomal recessive disease, it is likely
that individuals with a detectable mutation in only one allele harbor a second mutation in the other ABCC6 allele in trans. In this context,
it should be noted that the mutation detection strategy we used to analyze the ABCC6 gene employs PCR amplification of all exons and
flanking intronic sequences, combined with multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification. This combined approach should detect most point
mutations, insertion/deletion mutations and copy number variants, but would not detect small mutations in the promoter region or imbedded in
the introns of ABCC6 that might affect transcription or splicing. An alternate, less likely possibility is that the affected individuals in
Families C and E demonstrate digenic inheritance due to one mutation in the ABCC6 gene and a second heterozygous mutation in another,
genetically distinct, yet functionally overlapping gene involved in ectopic tissue mineralization. This possibility is raised in light of
our recent demonstration that heterozygosity for one mutation in the ABCC6 gene and one mutation in the GGCX gene can result in PXE-like
cutaneous findings (Li et al., 2009a). Our molecular results confirm and extend previous studies that have indicated a significant overlap
between the clinical features of PXE and GACI (Nitschke and Rutsch, 2012). PXE predominantly affects the elastic tissues of the skin, eyes,
and cardiovascular system (Neldner, 1988). In the skin, histopathology demonstrates accumulation of pleiomorphic elastic structures in the
mid- and upper reticular dermis with profound, progressive mineralization. The eye manifestations characteristically consist of angioid
streaks due to mineralization of an elastinrich Bruch’s membrane behind the pigmented retina (Georgalas et al., 2009). Mineralization of
this membrane results in blood vessel rupture and subsequent neovascularization, leading to loss of visual acuity and occasionally to
blindness. The cardiovascular manifestations include arterial calcification resulting in intermittent claudication, decreased peripheral
pulses, hypertension, hemorrhage, and early myocardial infarcts. A recent report described two siblings with identical ABCC6 gene mutations
that led to classical PXE in the older brother and a phenotype similar to GACI in the younger brother (Le Boulanger et al., 2010). The
authors demonstrated that MGP and fetuin-A, involved in the mineralization process in PXE, were also expressed in the affected younger
sibling with GACI. These proteins act physiologically as local and systemic inhibitors of mineralization. Additionally, a patient with GACI
due to homozygous missense mutation in the ENPP1 gene has recently been reported to have PXE-like cutaneous manifestations consisting of
yellowish papules coalescing into plaques of inelastic skin (Li et al., 2012b). Skin histopathology of this patient demonstrated
accumulation of pleiomorphic elastotic structures with progressive mineralization, a diagnostic feature of PXE. Hence, GACI may be an
atypical and severe end of the vascular phenotype spectrum of PXE. A comparison of clinical features of PXE and GACI is provided in Table 3.
It should be noted that all the ABCC6 mutations discovered in this study in patients with GACI, with the exception of a mutation c.3692ins
TT, have been previously reported in patients with PXE (Li et al., 2009b; Pfendner et al., 2007). The reasons for the development of such
divergent phenotypes as a result of the same mutation in ABCC6 remain unclear. One could postulate, however, that genetic modifier genes or
epigenetic factors profoundly alter the phenotypic expression of the ABCC6 mutations. This notion is supported by recent mouse studies
indicating that a non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphism in the Abcc6 gene, which results in aberrant mRNA splicing, can result in
highly different degrees of mineralization in four inbred mouse strains (Berndt et al., 2013). Finally, diet, lifestyle variables and
environmental factors can modify the phenotypic presentations of patients with PXE, possibly extending to GACI (Uitto et al., 2013). The
basis for the ectopic mineralization in GACI is only partially understood. Loss of function mutations in ENPP1 result in decreased
extracellular levels of inorganic pyrophosphate (PPi), an inhibitor of tissue mineralization. As a result, ectopic deposition of
hydroxyapatite occurs in large and medium-sized arteries leading to intimal proliferation, arterial stenosis, and visceral ischemia.
Recently, biallelic loss of function mutations in ENPP1 have also been identified as a cause of autosomal recessive hypophosphatemic rickets
(Levy-Litan et al., 2010; Lorenz-Depiereux et al., 2010; Mehta et al., 2012; Saito et al., 2011). As in other forms of hypophosphatemic
rickets, serum levels of the phosphatonin FGF23 are elevated in rickets patients with ENPP1 mutations. Hence, we sought to determine whether
loss of ABCC6 might also be associated with elevated serum concentrations of FGF23. Using an immunoassay we found that serum concentrations
of FGF23 were essentially normal in all affected patients that we assessed. Thus, it is unlikely that FGF23 plays a significant role in the
development of intraarterial calcification in patients with GACI. The mechanism for vascular and soft tissue calcification in patients with
GACI or PXE due to mutations in ABCC6 is unknown (Uitto et al., 2013). The mineral deposits in the affected tissues of patients with PXE
have been shown by Alizarin Red and von Kossa staining to consist of calcium and phosphate, and this composition has been confirmed by
energy dispersive X-ray analysis (Kavukcuoglu et al.). ABCC6 encodes a putative transmembrane transporter protein, ABCC6, expressed
primarily in the baso-lateral surface of hepatocytes, and previously shown by in vitro studies to serve as an efflux pump that transports
anionic small molecular weight conjugates (Ilias et al., 2002). Interestingly, in vitro, ABCC6 does not transport calcium or phosphate. In
conclusion, our findings confirm that loss of function mutations in the ABCC6 gene provide the second genetic basis for GACI. In addition to
ABCC6 and ENPP1, a number of additional genes can harbor mutations causing heritable diseases manifesting with ectopic mineralization of the
skin and/or vascular tissues due to mutations in different genes. These include familial tumoral calcinosis, the normophosphatemic type
being due to mutations in the SAMD9 gene, and the hyperphosphatemic types due to mutations in FGF23, GALNT3, and KL genes (Sprecher, 2010).
In addition, CD73 deficiency due to mutations in the NT5E gene manifests with vascular mineralization similar, but distinct from that in PXE
(Markello et al., 2011). At the same time, a number of different gene products, such as MGP, α-fetuin, and osteopontin can serve as powerful
anti-mineralization factors. Thus, there is an intricate network of factors which either promote or antagonize mineralization processes, and
a delicate balance between these factors is required under normal physiologic conditions to maintain tissue homeostasis and prevent ectopic
mineralization (Li and Uitto, 2013; Rutsch et al., 2011). Collectively, these observations underscore the role of aberrant expression of
such regulatory factors in ectopic mineralization in humans, providing potential opportunities for pharmacologic intervention to prevent the
development and progression of these disorders. We studied seven affected individuals from six unrelated families with clinical features of
GACI and normal sequences of the ENPP1 gene (Fig. 1). In all patients the serum levels of calcium, phosphorus, alkaline phosphatase and
vitamin D metabolites were normal. The clinical details of these patients are presented in the Supplementary Material. All patients were
enrolled with written informed consent or assent into an institutional review board-approved study at either The Children’s Hospital of
Philadelphia or the National Institutes of Health. All studies adhered to the Helsinki Guidelines. DNA samples from Family A were analyzed
using Illumina HapMap Quad610 arrays per manufacturer’s protocol (Illumina, San Diego, CA), and copy number analysis was performed as
described previously (Conlin et al., 2010; Shaikh et al., 2009). The Homozygosity/LOH Detector v.1.0.3 Auto-Bookmark plug-in within Illumina
Beadstudio 3.1.3 Genotyping Module 3.3.4 (Illumina, San Diego, CA) was used for detection of regions of homozygosity. We excluded the X
chromosome from our homozygosity analyses because the male and female siblings were similarly affected. Shared haplotypes were determined
using parental genotypes to phase parental alleles for each of the three siblings in Family A. Subsequently, inconsistent and uninformative
genotypes were removed from the analysis and regions were identified where both maternal and paternal haplotypes were shared among the
affected siblings but not with the unaffected sibling. Candidate genes were assessed regarding their exclusion or inclusion from approximate
shared regions (Table 1). Genomic DNA was isolated from peripheral blood (QIAamp Blood Maxi kit; Qiagen Inc., Valencia, CA). PCR was
performed using Taq polymerase (Qiagen) according to the manufacturers’ instructions. The entire coding region and intron/exon boundaries of
the ABCC6 gene were amplified using PCR primers as described previously (Pfendner et al., 2007). For the detection of the genomic deletion
of exons 23–29, the primers previously described (Le Saux et al., 2001) were used. The PCR products were analyzed with direct sequencing
using an Applied Biosystems 3730 Sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA). The +1 in the ABCC6 gene corresponds to the A nucleotide
in the ATG translation initiation codon (GenBank accession no. AF076622). We subjected DNA from patients in whom only a single ABCC6
mutation was identified to direct sequencing analysis by multiplex ligation-dependent probe amplification (SALSA MLPA P092 ABCC6 probemix,
MRC-Holland, Amsterdam) according to the manufacturer’s recommendations. Sequencing of the ENPP1 gene was performed as described previously
(Nitschke et al., 2012). Immunofluorescence of the human arterial sections was performed on tissues embedded in paraffin. Sections were
stained with moAb-cMGP (4.5 mg/ml; monoclonal antibody towards the carboxylated forms of human MGP), moAb-ucMGP (4.5 mg/ml; monoclonal
antibody towards the uncarboxylated forms of human MGP) (Schurgers et al., 2005), and goat anti-human fetuin-A (10 Pg/ml; R&D Systems,
Minneapolis, MN), respectively. The secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 488 goat anti-mouse IgG (1:800) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA) or Alexa
Fluor 488 donkey anti-goat IgG (1:800) (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA), was applied. Controls for the immunoreactions were performed by
incubating the sections with blocking buffer instead of the primary antibody. Conflict of Interest The authors state no conflict of
interest. We thank Dr. Steven Mumm at Shriner’s Hospital, St Louis, for sequencing the ENPP1 gene in Patient 4 in Family C. Carol Kelly
assisted in manuscript preparation. This work was supported by National Institutes of Health Grants K08HD055488 (NICHD; MAD) and R01AR28450
(NIAMS; JU), by Institutional funds from the Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, and by the Division of Intramural Research, NIDCR, NIH,
DHHS. QL is recipient of a Dermatology Foundation Research Career Development Award. generalized arterial calcification of infancy
pseudoxanthoma elasticum The mutations discovered in the ABCC6 gene in the individual family members are indicated below each individual:
+/+, homozygous for the wild-type allele; +/−, heterozygous carrier; −/−, mutations in both alleles. A: Ultrasound of Patient 1 in Family A
(II-3) reveals, in lateral sagittal view of head, calcifications along the cores of lenticulostriate vessels (arrow). B-D: Histopathology of
Patient 3 in Family B (II-1) shows calcification of mesenteric artery (B), abdominal artery (C), and left renal artery (D); Hematoxylin-
eosin stain, original magnifications ×150. E: Patient 6 in Family E (II-1) demonstrates by ultrasound imaging portions of the proximal
external carotid artery with thickened walls and irregular, speckled calcification (arrows). F: Patient 7 in Family F (II-3), prenatal
ultrasound of aortic bifurcation demonstrates extensive calcification (arrows). Sequencing of the ABCC6 gene in Patients 1 and 2 (II-3 and
II-4 in Figure 1) revealed a homozygous nucleotide T substitution (B) replacing nucleotide C in the control DNA (A). This mutation results
in substitution of arginine (R) by tryptophan (W) at amino acid position 1314. The arginine residue is well conserved through evolution (C).
Immunofluorescence with antibodies recognizing carboxylated (A) and uncarboxylated (B) forms of MGP, and fetuin-A (C). Frames D, E and F
represent the corresponding negative controls in which the primary antibodies were omitted. Candidate genes for GACI identified by shared
homozygosity analysis in Family A with two affected patients with an unaffected sibling. Molecular and biochemical features of GACI patients
ND, not detected. MS, missense; SS, splice site; NS, nonsense; FS, frame shift FGF23 normal range is < 230 RU/mL for ages 3 months to 17
years. Values greater than 900 RU/mL are present in infants. The effects of the c.346-6G>A mutation on splicing have not been experimentally
confirmed NT, not tested as serum sample was not available Genotypic and phenotypic overlaps of PXE and GACI
