Peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) is an unmet medical need. Despite recent improvements, systemic chemotherapy has limited efficacy. We report
the first application of intraperitoneal chemotherapy as a pressurized aerosol in human patients. Three end-stage patients with advanced PC
from gastric, appendiceal, and ovarian origin were treated as a compassionate therapy. All patients had received previous systemic
chemotherapy. A pressurized aerosol of CO2 loaded with doxorubicin 1.5 mg/m2 and cisplatin 7.5 mg/m2 (pressurized intraperitoneal aerosol
chemotherapy, PIPAC) was applied into the abdomen for 30 min at a pressure of 12 mmHg and a temperature of 37 °C. No side-effects >2 CTCAE
were observed, and the procedures were well tolerated. Early hospital discharge was possible (days 2–5). Nuclear presence of doxorubicin was
documented throughout the peritoneum, reaching high local concentration (≤4.1 μmol/g) and plasma concentration was low (4.0–6.2 ng/ml).
PIPAC created no significant adhesions, could be repeated, and was applied 6×, 4×, and 2×. Two patients showed a complete and one a partial
histological remission. Mean survival after the first PIPAC was 288 days. One patient is alive after 567 days. PIPAC shows superior
pharmacological properties with high local concentration and low systemic exposure. PIPAC can induce regression of PC in chemoresistant
tumors, using 10 % of a usual systemic dose. The online version of this article (doi:10.1245/s10434-013-3213-1) contains supplementary
material, which is available to authorized users. Life expectancy in peritoneal carcinomatosis (PC) is limited due to advanced tumor stage
and poor therapeutic response. Resistance of PC to systemic chemotherapy (SC) is explained by molecular mechanisms and by limited drug
distribution.1,2 This is the rationale for locoregional therapy combining cytoreductive surgery (CRS) with intraperitoneal chemotherapy
(IPC).3 However, this approach is debated: IPC is hampered by limited drug distribution within the abdominal cavity and poor penetration
into PC nodules.4,5 Thus, the benefit of combined CRS and IPC compared with CRS alone might be marginal.6 We have proposed to apply
chemotherapy as a pressurized aerosol within the abdominal cavity to take advantage of following physical properties: applying an aerosol
allows a homogeneous repartition of the substance within a closed space; generating an artificial pressure gradient counterbalances tumoral
interstitial fluid pressure, an obstacle in cancer therapy.7,8 In the large animal model, pressurized aerosol improved both distribution of
a vital staining within the abdominal cavity, and depth of penetration into the peritoneum, as compared to peritoneal lavage with a liquid
solution.9 When treating human PC ex vivo, we achieved a superior distribution onto the peritoneum and a better penetration into PC nodules
than IPC.10 This was the rationale for the first application in the human patient. Pressurized intraperitoneal aerosol chemotherapy (PIPAC)
was offered as a treatment option to three patients suffering from a fatal disease for which no satisfactory alternative therapy was
available, pursuant to the individual compassionate use of medicinal products according to the German Medical Act (AMG) and with documented
favorable opinion by the Ethics Committees of the University of Münster, Germany. Patients were evaluated by our multidisciplinary team
before onset of treatment and provided written, informed consent. Clinical and histological confirmation of PC, including small bowel
involvement, was required. No patient had parenchymatous metastases. Patient histories are summarized in Table 1. PIPACs were performed
between November 2011 and March 2013.Table 1Patient characteristics and therapy summaryPatientSexAge at first PIPACDiagnosisFirst
diagnosisPrevious surgeryPrevious chemotherapy regimenKarnovsky before therapy (%)PCI before PIPAC therapyPIPAC procedures (n)Secondary
CRSAdverse effects (Grade CTAEC)Intraperitoneal tumor remission: macroscopyIntraperitoneal tumor remission: histologyTumor ascites
controlMax. Karnovsky after therapy (%)StatusCause of deathSurvival (days)1M38Gastric Ca, signet ring2009 (2 years)Gastrectomy, LAD D2ECF,
paclitaxel (disease progression)4062NoFever (2), vomiting (2), Pain (2)CRCRN/A40DeadMetastasis, cachexia1092M45Appendix Ca, signet
ring9.2011 (6 weeks)Ileo-caecal resection5-FU (adverse effects)40164YesBowel perforation (4)a PRPRN/A70DeadBowel obstruction1873F73Ovarian
Ca2001 (10 years)Hysterectomy, adnexectomy, LADMultiple regimen40146NoFatigue (1)CRCRYes90AliveN/A567 PIPAC pressurized intraperitoneal
aerosol chemotherapy, PCI peritoneal carcinomatosis index, CRS cytoreductive surgery, N/A no ascites, LAD lymphadenectomy, PR partial
(intraperitoneal) remission, CR complete (intraperitoneal) remission aBowel perforation after CRS combined with PIPAC Patient
characteristics and therapy summary PIPAC pressurized intraperitoneal aerosol chemotherapy, PCI peritoneal carcinomatosis index, CRS
cytoreductive surgery, N/A no ascites, LAD lymphadenectomy, PR partial (intraperitoneal) remission, CR complete (intraperitoneal) remission
aBowel perforation after CRS combined with PIPAC PIPAC is described in Fig. 1. After insufflation of a 12 mmHg of capnoperitoneum at 37 °C,
two balloon trocars (Applied Medical, Düsseldorf) were placed. Explorative laparoscopy was performed as usual and PC index was determined.11
Parietal biopsies were taken and ascites was removed. A nebulizer (MIP, Reger Medizintechnik, Rottweil) was connected to a high-pressure
injector (Injektron 82M, MedTron, Saarbruecken) and inserted into the abdomen through a trocar. A pressurized aerosol containing cisplatin
(Hexal, Barleben) at a dose of 7.5 mg/m2 body surface in 150 ml NaCl 0.9 % was applied immediately followed by doxorubicin (Hexal, Barleben)
1.5 mg/m2 in 50 ml NaCl 0.9 %. Then, the system was kept in steady-state for 30 min (application time). Toxic aerosol was exhausted over a
closed system. Trocars were retracted. PIPAC was repeated two to five times at various time intervals. Occupational health safety aspects
are described elsewhere.12Fig. 1 Pressurized intraperitoneal aerosol chemotherapy (PIPAC). The procedure is performed in an operating room
equipped with laminar air-flow and is remote-controlled. In a first step, a normothermic capnoperitoneum is established with a pressure of
12 mmHg at body temperature. A chemotherapy solution (about 10 % of a normal systemic dose) is nebulized with a micropump into the tightly
closed abdominal cavity, and maintained for 30 min. The toxic aerosol is then exhausted through a closed system and released into the
external environment Pressurized intraperitoneal aerosol chemotherapy (PIPAC). The procedure is performed in an operating room equipped with
laminar air-flow and is remote-controlled. In a first step, a normothermic capnoperitoneum is established with a pressure of 12 mmHg at body
temperature. A chemotherapy solution (about 10 % of a normal systemic dose) is nebulized with a micropump into the tightly closed abdominal
cavity, and maintained for 30 min. The toxic aerosol is then exhausted through a closed system and released into the external environment
Assessments for patient safety and tolerability were performed from days 1–5 after treatment and included medical examination and routine
laboratory measures. Adverse effects were graded according to the NCI Criteria for Adverse Events (CTCAE).13 Tumor response was assessed by
laparoscopy with macroscopic assessment and histology, as part of the next PIPAC cycle. Patients were followed up for analysis until June
20, 2013 or until death. Biopsies were analyzed for possible tumor response by conventional HE microscopy. Analysis is based on eight PIPAC
in three patients. Blood samples were drawn before, during, and up to 12 h after start of PIPAC. At the end of PIPAC, biopsies from
peritoneal tissue and tumor nodules were snap-frozen. Doxorubicin plasma levels were determined by UHPLC-MS/MS using -doxorubicin as
internal standard. Pharmacokinetics parameters were derived by non-compartmental analysis (WinNonLin 6.3, Pharsight, Cary, NC, USA). The
area under the plasma concentration-time curve (AUC) was calculated by the linear trapezoidal rule. A 45-year-old male patient was operated
because of acute bowel obstruction due to PC from signet-ring appendiceal cancer. Postoperative high-dose chemotherapy (5-FU) was
interrupted due to acute heart failure. After recovery, Karnovsky index was 40 %. First PIPAC was performed, showing a PCI of 16 (Fig. 2a1,
b1). Four weeks later, second PIPAC showed stable disease. Four weeks later, 3rd PIPAC showed hard, glassy nodules (a2), histology showed
regressive changes with nodular sclerosis (b2). Six weeks later, small bowel nodules were regressive (a3), histology showed regressive
changes with 60 % vital cells and large devitalized areas (b3). Complete CRS was performed, and fourth PIPAC administered. A postoperative
bowel perforation required surgical revision. After recovery, the patient developed bowel obstruction and tumor progression was confirmed by
laparotomy. He died 187 days after first PIPAC.Fig. 2Macroscopical and histological response after PIPAC. Forty-five year male patient with
diffuse peritoneal carcinomatosis (PCI = 16) from a signet-ring cells appendiceal cancer with inaugural small bowel obstruction. Macroscopy
before (a1), after 1st (a2) and after 3rd PIPAC (a3) showing regression of small bowel PC nodules. Histology shows vital tumor before PIPAC
(b1), inflammatory reaction with nodular sclerosis after 1st PIPAC (b2) and large areas of devitalized tumor after 3rd PIPAC (b3). Scale bar
100 µm Macroscopical and histological response after PIPAC. Forty-five year male patient with diffuse peritoneal carcinomatosis (PCI = 16)
from a signet-ring cells appendiceal cancer with inaugural small bowel obstruction. Macroscopy before (a1), after 1st (a2) and after 3rd
PIPAC (a3) showing regression of small bowel PC nodules. Histology shows vital tumor before PIPAC (b1), inflammatory reaction with nodular
sclerosis after 1st PIPAC (b2) and large areas of devitalized tumor after 3rd PIPAC (b3). Scale bar 100 µm A 38-year-old male patient with a
2-year history of signet-ring gastric cancer, gastrectomy, and two chemotherapy lines presented with tumor progression and end-stage disease
requiring parenteral nutrition. Karnovsky index was 40 %. A PCI of 6 was documented at first PIPAC (Supplementary material 1, a1). Four
weeks later, during the second PIPAC, macroscopy showed complete remission (a2), and multiple biopsies confirmed absence of tumor cells
(b2). Eight weeks later, the patient developed liver and bone metastases and died 109 days after the first PIPAC. Two weeks before death,
abdomen CT showed no evidence of PC. A 73-year-old female patient with a 10-year history of ovarian cancer, surgery, and multiple
chemotherapy regimens presented with tumor progression and hemorrhagic ascites. Karnovsky index was 40 %. At first PIPAC, a PCI of 14 was
documented and 2.5 l ascites removed (Fig. 3a1, b1). At second PIPAC after 4 weeks, PC nodules were hard and glassy, and ascites volume
dropped to 1 l. Histology showed no regression (not shown). Six weeks later at the third PIPAC, ascites was <500 ml (a2), and histology
showed partial tumor response with fibrotic reaction (b2). Karnoswky index was 90 %. Eight months after first PIPAC, fourth PIPAC showed
complete remission (a3), and multiple biopsies showed apoptotic inflammatory cells (b3) but no tumor. After 15 months of follow-up, the
asymptomatic patient underwent control laparoscopy; tumor was documented in two of five peritoneal biopsies, so fifth PIPAC was applied. Six
weeks later, a single, 6-cm, large tumor node was resected. All other biopsies were negative; sixth PIPAC was applied. After 567 days, the
patient is alive with an excellent quality of life.Fig. 373-year-old patient (patient 3) with therapy-resistant peritoneal carcinomatosis
and malignant ascites of ovarian origin. Shown is the macroscopic (upper fig) and histological (HE staining, lower fig) appearance before
(left column), after PIPAC (middle column) and at later stages of follow-up (right column). a, b Show partial and then complete macroscopic
and microscopic tumor remission after repeated PIPAC. Scale bar 100 µm 73-year-old patient (patient 3) with therapy-resistant peritoneal
carcinomatosis and malignant ascites of ovarian origin. Shown is the macroscopic (upper fig) and histological (HE staining, lower fig)
appearance before (left column), after PIPAC (middle column) and at later stages of follow-up (right column). a, b Show partial and then
complete macroscopic and microscopic tumor remission after repeated PIPAC. Scale bar 100 µm All 11 PIPAC procedures were technically easy to
perform. For PIPAC alone, mean operating time was 93 ± 13 min. No intraoperative complication was noted. PIPAC alone was very well
tolerated, no adverse effect >2 CTCAE was noted (Table 1). After PIPAC alone, patients were discharged from hospital 2–5 days after
treatment. In two instances, PIPAC was combined with another operation (small-bowel resection, complete cytoreductive surgery): in the
latter case, a postoperative bowel perforation (see Patient 1 above) required surgical revision. The plasma concentration-time curve fitted
best to a two-compartment model with first-order absorption. Peak doxorubicin plasma concentrations were low (4.0–6.2 ng/ml) and were
reached with the end of nebulisation. Doxorubicin was eliminated from the body with a clearance (Cl/F) of 2.6–6.0 ml/min. Half-lives and
AUCs ranged from 86 to 468 min and 415 to 915 ng/ml min, respectively (Fig. 4a). Tissue concentration of doxorubicin was high (mean
1.7 μg/g) and variable (SD ± 1.45 μg/g). In tumor nodules, fluorescence microscopy showed nuclear presence of doxorubicin up to 500 μm depth
(Fig. 4b) and throughout the whole peritoneal layer into the properitoneal fatty tissue (>600 μm, Supplementary material 2). Highest
concentration was achieved within 100–200 μm from the surface.Fig. 4Local and systemic doxorubicin exposure during PIPAC. Local disposition
is high with 1.70 ± 1.45 µg/g. In a fluorescence microscopy shows a nuclear presence of doxorubicin up to 500 µm depth. Red doxorubicin.
Green picogreen nuclear counterstaining. Scale bar 100 µm. b Shows a typical pharmacokinetic profile in peripheral venous blood after PIPAC
with doxorubicin 1.5 mg/m2 body surface for 30 min at an intraabdominal pressure of 12 mmHg. Peak doxorubicin plasma concentrations were low
(4.0–6.2 ng/ml). Line predicted profile. Dots experimental values Local and systemic doxorubicin exposure during PIPAC. Local disposition is
high with 1.70 ± 1.45 µg/g. In a fluorescence microscopy shows a nuclear presence of doxorubicin up to 500 µm depth. Red doxorubicin. Green
picogreen nuclear counterstaining. Scale bar 100 µm. b Shows a typical pharmacokinetic profile in peripheral venous blood after PIPAC with
doxorubicin 1.5 mg/m2 body surface for 30 min at an intraabdominal pressure of 12 mmHg. Peak doxorubicin plasma concentrations were low
(4.0–6.2 ng/ml). Line predicted profile. Dots experimental values To our knowledge, this is the first report of successful application of
chemotherapy as a pressurized aerosol within the abdomen of human patients. It has been predicted that innovative concepts overcoming
pharmacologic limitations of IPC could improve, perhaps dramatically, its efficacy.5 A superior dose–response ratio after PIPAC could be
expected from preclinical data. In the human patient, plasma concentration-time profile analysis now confirms such superior ratio between
dose, systemic, and local drug concentration: PIPAC required only 1/10 of the doxorubicin dose to achieve higher tumor concentrations
(0.03–4.1 μmol/g) as reported for HIPEC (0.02 μmol/g).15 In contrast, systemic availability of doxorubicin after PIPAC and HIPEC were equal
as indicated by the approximately ten times lower maximal plasma concentration after PIPAC. We and others have reported that increasing
intraperitoneal pressure enhanced particularly the uptake of drugs into the tumor, resulting in a higher local disposition.9,10,15,16 After
PIPAC, doxorubicin was not only detected in significant concentrations in PC nodules, but nuclear staining was demonstrated throughout the
peritoneum, up to deeply into the retroperitoneal fatty tissue. Another explanation for superior local disposition could be the high drug
concentration in the aerosol. Although used in only 1/10 of the total dose, doxorubicin concentration in the aerosol (52 μM) is three times
higher as in the intraperitoneal fluid usually used in HIPEC (18 μM) without impairing tolerability, which was reported after applying
higher concentrations of IPC.15,17 Tumor response was observed in all three cases after PIPAC, as a consequence of the well-documented
antitumor activity of doxorubicin and cisplatin and the superior local disposition. However, we were surprised by the extent of macroscopic
and microscopic response in these multidrug-resistant tumors. We documented a complete remission of PC in two patients, which was indeed
unexpected. At this stage, it would be clearly premature to claim that combined PIPAC with cisplatin and doxorubicin improves survival in
advanced PC. However, in our three patients with multiresistant tumors, low performance index, and very limited life expectancy, we observe
a mean survival of more than 288 days. Remarkably, 567 days after her first PIPAC patient 3 is still alive. In sharp contrast to HIPEC,
PIPAC was very well tolerated and the only severe adverse effect observed was a bowel perforation after CRS (Table 1). Otherwise,
postoperative courses were uneventful, with early hospital discharge. PIPAC might create synergies with SC. Liver and renal tests showed
neither acute nor cumulative toxicity after PIPAC, which appears reasonable bearing in mind the 90 % dose reduction compared with
conventional SC.19 Moreover, PIPAC permits repeated cycles of IPC and therefore might allow effective regimen combining SC and PIPAC.
Importantly, repeated laparoscopy enables objective staging, assessment of therapeutic response, and adaptation of further therapy
accordingly, which was barely possible until now. Finally, considering that all three patients were in poor physical condition with a low
performance index, PIPAC might allow therapy in polymorbid patients—when SC is contraindicated. We observed tumor regression even in platin-
resistant tumors, after application of cisplatin and doxorubicin. This is not surprising since drug effect is usually dose-dependent. PIPAC
might become an alternative therapy for platin-resistant tumors, in particular in women with ovarian cancer where tumor progression is
diagnosed after first-line therapy with carboplatin–Taxol. Repeated intraoperative analysis of the environmental air showed that PIPAC is
safe for staff and meets the requirements of the German working safety regulations.12 These early data are promising: PIPAC can induce
remission in end-stage, therapy-resistant PC, and first safety data are encouraging. PIPAC is well tolerated, a decisive feature in patients
with limited life expectancy. By requiring only 10 % of the dose of conventional IPC, PIPAC shows an excellent local distribution with low
systemic exposure. Furthermore, PIPAC permits repeated cycles of IPC as well as objective tumor staging and response assessment. PIPAC is
easy to use. PIPAC is complying with EC occupational safety regulations. The potential of this generic technology for a variety of
indications and drugs has now to be determined with adequate studies. A 38-year male patient (patient 1) with a 2 year history of signet-
ring gastric cancer, gastrectomy and two chemotherapy lines. Macroscopy before a1 and after 1st PIPAC a2 showing vanishing of small bowel PC
nodules. Histology b confirms complete remission of PC 4 weeks after PIPAC. Scale bar 100 µm (JPEG 98 kb) Fluorescence microscopy shows
doxorubicin nuclear staining with doxorubicin (red) throughout the whole peritoneal layer into the properitoneal fatty tissue (>600 µm).
Green picogreen nuclear counterstaining. Scale bar 100 µm (TIFF 313 kb) This study was supported by Robert Bosch Foundation (Stuttgart,
Germany) and the Federal Ministry for Education and Research (BMBF, Berlin, Germany) Grant #0316186D.
