A 62-year-old man, without a medical history of cardiovascular disease, was transferred to our hospital due to sudden-onset chest pain. His
blood pressure was 101/21 mmHg, and heart rate was 87 beats per minute. A physical examination revealed a diastolic murmur, but we could not
find an obvious Quincke pulse, only by nail bed pressure. However, applying Quincke's pocket f lashlight method revealed momentary
accentuation of reddening of the nail bed and fingertips of the left hand (Fig. 1 and Supplementary Video 1 [available online at
http://www.kjim.org/]). We suspected aortic regurgitation associated with an aortic dissection, which was conf irmed by trans-thoracic
echocardiography and contrast-enhanced computed tomography. Therefore, we performed an emergency operation, and his clinical course was
good. Aortic regurgitation is one of the most common causes of death in patients with an aortic dissection. However, the sensitivity of
auscultation for detecting a diastolic murmur is very low. Therefore, at our institution, we have added several other physical signs and
imaging modalities to diagnose aortic regurgitation in clinical practice. The Quincke pulse is a famous physical sign, but it is also
difficult to define without a microscope and microcapillary tonometer. To address this problem, introduced the pocket f lashlight method,
whereby a light source is used to illuminate the fingers. We diagnosed aortic regurgitation based on a diastolic murmur and the Quincke
pulse as determined using the pocket flashlight method. This method is a simple tool for diagnosing aortic regurgitation in patients with
chest pain. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article is reported. (A) Diastole; pocket flashlight illumination easily
reveals pulsatile redness. (B) Systole; redness of nail bed moves slightly towards the fingertip. Capillary redness moves towards the right
side of the figure during systole (white arrow shows movement of capillary redness towards the fingertips).
