We present the case of a 26-year-old male Peruvian patient who presented with disseminated intra-abdominal hydatidosis. The patient was
treated with surgical removal of the cysts and prolonged medical treatment with albendazole. A 26-year-old male patient from the highlands
of Peru was admitted with a 2-month history of early satiety, nausea, and progressive dyspnea. The physical examination showed decreased
breath sounds on the left lung and abdominal distention with multiple painless palpable masses. The chest X-ray showed a well-defined
rounded cystic pulmonary lesion located in the left lower lobe (Figure 1A). The abdominal computed tomography scan revealed multiple thin-
walled abdominal cystic lesions in the liver and spleen and within the abdominal cavity (Figure 1B and C). A serum Western blot test was
positive for hydatidosis. Multiple hydatid cysts were surgically removed (Figure 1D). The patient was treated with a prolonged course of
albendazole with good clinical evolution. (A) Rounded cystic lesion located on the left lobe of the lung. (B) Multiple intra-abdominal
cystic lesions. (C) Multiple intrahepatic, splenic, and intra-abdominal cystic lesions. (D) Macroscopic aspect of surgically removed intra-
abdominal hydatid cysts. Hydatidosis caused by Echinococcus granulosus remains a major public health problem in developing countries.
Disseminated intra-abdominal hydatidosis is an infrequent condition that usually results from the rupture of a liver cyst, with subsequent
seeding of protoscolices in the abdominal cavity.1 There is no standard treatment for this disorder; careful surgical removal of the cysts
and prolonged medical treatment with albendazole with or without praziquatel are recommended.2 Authors' addresses: Fátima Concha and Ciro
Maguiña, Hospital Nacional Cayetano Heredia, Enfermedades Infecciosas Tropicales y Dermatologicas, Lima, Peru, E-mails: faliricc@hotmail.com
and ciromaguina@yahoo.com. Carlos Seas, Instituto de Medicina Tropical Alexander von Humboldt, Universidad Peruana Cayetano Heredia, Lima,
Peru, E-mail: carlos.seas@upch.pe.
