Cardiobacterium hominis is a member of the HACEK (Haemophilus sp., Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, C. hominis, Eikenella corrodens,
and Kingella kingae) group commonly associated with endocarditits and is normally present in the respiratory tract. We describe the first
case of acute dacryocystitis with lacrimal abscess caused by C. hominis along with a brief review of the literature. The patient responded
to oral and topical ciprofloxacin after incision and drainage and awaits dacryocystorhinostomy. Acute dacryocystitis is an inflammation of
the lacrimal sac with symptoms such as pain, swelling at the medial canthus, watering eye, and discharge. It has a potential to progress to
the orbital cellulitis and rarely to life-threatening infections like meningitis. Several studies have described the microbiologic profile
of dacryocystitis. In a multicentric study, Mills and co-workers found Gram-positive organisms such as Staphylococcus to be the most
predominant organism and the frequency of methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus was high in the acute dacryocystitis group. Recent
studies have shown a change in the trends of the microbiologic spectrum with an increase in the frequency of isolation of Gram-negative
bacteria. Cardiobacterium hominis is a member of the HACEK (Haemophilus sp., Actinobacillus actinomycetemcomitans, C. hominis, Eikenella
corrodens, and Kingella kingae) group commonly associated with endocarditits and is normally present in the oropharynx andtherespiratory
tract. To the best of our knowledge, we report the first case of C. hominis dacryocystitis. A 55-year-old female presented to us with
complaints of swelling and pain below the right medial canthus since five days and a yellowish discoloration of the lesion since two days.
There was a history of watering from the right eye since six months; however, there was no significant systemic history. On examination, her
best corrected visual acuity was 20/20 and N6 in both eyes. The right eye showed an ill-defined swelling below the right medial canthus. The
swelling was fluctuant, tender, and non-motile with surrounding hyperemia and induration. There was a pus point threatening to drain
spontaneously [Fig. 1]. Otherwise, anterior and posterior segments of both the eyes were within normal limits. Based on this, a diagnosis of
right lacrimal abscess following acute dacryocystitis was made. The cardiac and respiratory examination was within normal limits. The
patient was subjected to an incision and drainage, pus was sent for complete microbiological work-up, and oral and topical ciprofloxacin and
oral ibuprofen were started as post operative medications. Evaluation at the end of one week was suggestive of resolution of the
dacryocystitis. The patient underwent a successful dacryocystorhinostomy with intubation to bypass the blocked nasolacrimal duct and prevent
recurrence of acute dacryocystitis. Lacrimal abscess of the right eye with surrounding acute inflammation The pus specimen collected was
subjected to direct smear Gram staining as well as inoculated in blood agar and chocolate agar medium. The direct smear revealed the
presence of polymorphs 0-plenty/HPF (HPF: High power field) and Gram-negative bacilli 0-10/HPF. Growth was observed after three days of
incubation on chocolate agar at 37°C with 5% carbon dioxide (CO2), and scanty growth on blood agar. Colonies appeared as smooth, butyrous,
and glistening [Fig. 2]. Gram stain revealed Gram-negative, pleomorphic organisms. Conventional biochemical tests revealed that the organism
was indole producing, catalase negative, oxidase positive, and urease negative. Sugars including glucose, sucrose, maltose, and mannitol
were fermented. The isolate was eventually identified as C. hominis using a Vitek® 2 compact identification system (Biomerieux, North
Carolina, USA) [Fig. 3]. Antibiotic-susceptibility test was determined by the Kirby Bauer disk diffusion method. Guidelines of the Clinical
and Laboratory Standards Institute (CLSI) were followed for performing and interpreting the tests. Amikacin (30 μg), ofloxacin (5 μg),
gentamicin (10 μg), tobramycin (10 μg), ceftazidime (30 μg), moxifloxacin (5 μg), gatifloxacin (5 μg), cefuroxime (30 μg), chloramphenicol
(30 μg), and ciprofloxacin (5 μg) were used. C. hominis was sensitive to all the drugs tested. Choclate agar showing confluent bacterial
growth Vitek® data identifying the organism as Cardiobacterium hominis C. hominis is a Gram-negative bacilli of HACEK. It is a normal flora
of the respiratory tract. It mainly causes endocarditis, and it accounts for 0.1% of all the cases of endocarditis. Several studies have
shown the relationship of C. hominis with endocarditis. The identification of C. hominis is well established with the Vitek® 2 compact
identification system. Association of the HACEK group with ocular infections has been reported. Bilateral endogenous endophthalmitis caused
by A. actinomycetemcomitans has been reported. To best of our knowledge, there is no report of dacryocystitis caused by the HACEK group.
Following incision and drainage of the lacrimal abscess, the patient was adviced oral and topical ciprofloxacin for a week. The patient
responded well with a good clinical resolution of the acute infection. The patient later underwent a successful dacryocystorhinostomy with
intubation to bypass the blocked nasolacrimal duct and prevent recurrence of acute dacryocystitis. It is important to take the history of
past upper respiratory or cardiac infections preceding acute dacryocystitis as the original focus of C. hominis may be in these organs. The
clinical significance of the microbiological evaluation of the pus and discharge following an incision and drainage needs to be emphasized,
as sometimes we may isolate common organisms with resistantant antibiotic profiles and occasionally rare organisms with unknown profiles as
in the present case, thus helping in the appropriate management of the patient. In summary, we present the first case report of isolation of
C. hominis from a case of acute dacryocystitis. It is important for the ophthalmologists and ocular microbiologists to be aware of the
presence of such organisms for the proper management and treatment of the patients. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
