Bladder cancer is the most common malignancy in the urinary tract. Urothelial carcinoma is the most common histologic type of bladder cancer
in the United States, accounting for approximately 90%. Squamous cell carcinoma is less common, making up 3-5% of bladder cancers. We
present a case of squamous cell carcinoma in a female associated with multiple bladder stones. A 76-year-old Caucasian woman presented to
the emergency department with gross hematuria and dysuria for one month. Urinalysis showed many RBCs and WBCs with positive nitrite. She was
admitted with an initial impression of urinary tract infection and intravenous ceftriaxone was started. Urine culture grew greater than
100,000 cfu/ml of Enterococcus species. Computed tomographic imaging of the abdomen/pelvis with oral contrast revealed a markedly distended
bladder with hemorrhage, multiple calculi, and diffuse bladder wall thickening. Cystoscopy was performed for diffuse bladder wall thickening
and demonstrated numerous bladder stones, a bladder mass, and organized blood clots. Biopsy of the mass was consistent with high-grade
carcinoma with squamous differentiation. The bladder cancer was not surgically resectable and radical cystectomy was not recommended due to
old age and poor functional status. The patient refused chemotherapy and she died in 6 months. The association between foreign bodies in the
bladder and sqaumous cell carcinoma is well established. Long-standing bladder stones have been implicated as a cause of squamous cell
carcinoma of the bladder. Our female patient’s unusual presentation with multiple bladder stones and sqaumous cell carcinoma of the bladder
highlights the association between these two conditions. Bladder cancer is the most common malignancy in the urinary tract. Urothelial
carcinoma is the most common histologic type of bladder cancer in the United States, accounting for approximately 90%. Nonurothelial bladder
cancers are less common, comprising approximately 5% of all bladder cancers. In parts of the world where infection with Schistosoma
haematobium is prevalent, squamous cell carcinoma is the most common bladder cancer, responsible for approximately 50% of all bladder
cancers . In North America, however, squamous cell carcinoma is less common, making up only 3-5% of bladder cancers . We present a case of
squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder in a female associated with multiple bladder stones. A 76-year-old Caucasian woman with no
significant past medical history presented to the emergency department with gross hematuria and dysuria for one month. She also reported a
sensation of bladder fullness, constipation, and 12–13 pounds of unintentional weight loss over the past 1.5 months. She was a former smoker
who quit smoking many years ago. Vital signs were normal. Abdominal exam was significant for mild lower abdominal tenderness without
rebound. Genital exam was unremarkable. Complete blood count was unremarkable. Comprehensive metabolic panel revealed sodium 122 mmol/L,
blood urea nitrogen 16 mg/dL, creatinine 0.7 mg/dL, and glucose 130 mg/dL. Urinalysis showed many RBCs and WBCs with positive nitrite and 3+
protein with no crystals. She was admitted with an initial impression of urinary tract infection and intravenous ceftriaxone was started.
Urine culture grew greater than 100,000 cfu/ml of Enterococcus species. Computed tomographic imaging of the abdomen/pelvis with oral
contrast (Figure 1) revealed a markedly distended bladder with hemorrhage, multiple calculi, and diffuse bladder wall thickening. Cystoscopy
(Figure 2) was performed for diffuse bladder wall thickening and demonstrated numerous bladder stones, a bladder mass, and organized blood
clots. Clot removal and biopsy of the mass were performed. One small stone was irrigated out of the bladder and the biochemical analysis of
the calculi revealed carbonate apatite. Biopsy of the mass was consistent with high-grade carcinoma with squamous differentiation
(Figure 3). CT brain did not show any evidence of metastasis. The bladder cancer was not surgically resectable and radical cystectomy was
not recommended due to old age and poor functional status. She was referred to medical oncologist but refused chemotherapy. She declined
slowly thereafter and died in 6 months. CT of the abdomen/pelvis with oral contrast, coronal view (A) and axial view (B). Cystoscopy showing
a bladder mass and multiple calculi. Biopsy of the mass (H&E, X100) showing high-grade carcinoma with squamous differentiation. Bladder
stones commonly occur in the setting of bladder outlet obstruction, genital prolapse, pelvic surgery, neurogenic bladder, or foreign bodies.
In adults, bladder calculi rarely occur spontaneously in the absence of risk factors. The cause of our patient’s multiple bladder stones is
unclear and unusual in a female patient. However, her squamous cell carcinoma can perhaps be attributed to multiple bladder stones. The
association between chronic bladder irritation and squamous cell carcinoma has been postulated by many researchers . Chronic bladder
irritation includes chronic or recurrent urinary tract infection, chronic indwelling urinary catheter, bladder calculi, foreign bodies,
intravesical Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) and prolonged exposure to cyclophosphamide . Bladder cancer is associated with upper and lower
urinary tract stones . A 2-fold increase in bladder cancer risk was observed with a history of bladder stones in a case–control study .
Several studies also showed positive association between kidney or ureteral stones and the risk of bladder cancer . Long-standing bladder
stones have been implicated as a cause of squamous cell bladder cancer via chronic mucosal injury with resulting inflammation and disruption
of the protective glycosaminoglycan layer . Our patient’s unusual presentation with multiple bladder stones and squamous cell carcinoma
highlights this association. The 5-year and 2-year overall survival rates have been reported as 10.6% and 47.6% respectively from M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center . Radical cystectomy remains the mainstay of therapy in select patients with resectable disease. Chemotherapy and
radiation therapy can be considered in patients who are not surgical candidates or patients with metastasis. The association between foreign
bodies in the bladder and sqaumous cell carcinoma is well established. Long-standing bladder stones have been implicated as a cause of
squamous cell carcinoma of the bladder. Our female patient’s unusual presentation with multiple bladder stones and sqaumous cell carcinoma
of the bladder highlights the association between these two conditions. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JHC and JLH contributed to the writing of the manuscript. Both
authors reviewed and approved the final version of the manuscript.
