Laparoscopic undiversion with ileal augmentation cystoplasty appears to be a feasible and effective procedure in a child with sacral
agenesis. In neurogenic bladder with compromised renal function or when complex reconstruction is not preferred, ileal conduit is
considered. Undiversion is performed when the patient prefers the procedure, once the renal function improves, or when complications
resulting from diversion are present. We present the case of a 10-y-old boy with sacral agenesis, who underwent laparoscopic-assisted ileal
conduit diversion in 2006, because he had a grossly unstable, small-capacity bladder and was not compliant with intermittent self-
catheterization. At present, he preferred not to have a conduit. Laparoscopic undiversion with ileal augmentation cystoplasty was performed.
The postoperative course was uneventful, and he is now on intermittent self-catheterization with healthy renal function. Laparoscopic
undiversion is technically challenging, yet feasible, and is an effective option in children. To our knowledge, this is the first such case
reported. Ileal conduit is a temporary option in neurogenic bladder with compromised renal function or as a last option in neurogenic
bladders when complex reconstruction is not preferred or possible.1 Undiversion is performed when the patient prefers the procedure or when
there are complications resulting from the diversion. In patients with compromised renal function, the ileal conduit can be undiverted once
the renal function improves.2 We present the case of a 10-y-old boy who underwent laparoscopic undiversion. To our knowledge, this is the
first such case reported. A 10-y-old boy with sacral agenesis, ventricular septal defect, and bilateral ureteric stricture (after ureteric
reimplantation for bilateral vesicoureteric reflux in childhood) presented, in 2006, with constant dribbling resulting from gross
instability and a small-capacity bladder. He was not compliant with intermittent self-catheterization in 2006, and various options were
discussed with the parents. The parents preferred an ileal conduit (which could care for the leak and avoid complex reconstructive surgery),
with an option of reconstruction later.3 Laparoscopic-assisted ileal conduit was performed.3 In 2011, the patient and his parents were keen
to be relieved of the conduit and have an option of urethral voiding. Hence, undiversion (augmentation cystoplasty), along with self-
intermittent catheterization, was discussed. His bladder was reassessed with a urodynamic study, which revealed a bladder capacity of 50 mL
and compliance of 4 mL/cm H2O. Renal parameters were normal. Isotope renogram showed a glomerular filtration rate (GFR) of 54.4 mL/min and
14.1 mL/min in the right and left kidney, respectively, and there was no obstruction. Imaging (computed tomography urogram) revealed
bilateral residual hydroureteronephrosis with healthy parenchyma on the right side and thinned out parenchyma on the left side (Figure 1).
The length of the ileal conduit was approximately 10cm. The boy and his parents were counseled regarding the need for lifelong clean
intermittent catheterization. The boy was trained to do self-intermittent catheterization of the native bladder and was compliant. CT
urogram showing the conduit and both kidneys (note the thin parenchyma in the left kidney). While under general anesthesia, the patient was
placed in the supine position with head low, and laparoscopy was done using 5 ports (Figure 2). As a result of the previous surgery, dense
adhesions were present around the bladder and laparoscopic dissection was difficult. Adhesiolysis was done. Bladder was mobilized,
dissected, and prepared for cystoplasty. Circumferential incision was made around the ileal conduit stoma, and the conduit was released from
the abdominal wall (Figure 3). The ileal stoma edges were freshened and closed in 2 layers using a 3–0 Vicryl suture. The conduit could not
be brought out for detubularization, because of previous surgery and also because pulling it out could jeopardize the vascularity of the
previous ureterointestinal anastomosis. Further, the detubularization was to be planned according to the lie of the ileal loop and the
cystotomy. The conduit was pushed back into the peritoneum. The stoma site was closed to prevent gas leak. The ileal loop was opened along
the antimesenteric border (for detubularization), except at the site of ureteric reimplantation. Transverse cystotomy was done from one
ureteric orifice to the other, and the detubularized ileum was sutured to the cystotomy using continuous 3–0 Vicryl sutures (Figures 4 and
5). The posterior layer was sutured first. Omental wrapping was done. The ureteroenteric anastomosis was left undisturbed. A suprapubic
catheter, urethral catheter, and drain were placed, and the port sites were closed. Operative time was 250 min, and approximate blood loss
was 180 mL. Image showing port positions. Stoma being released. Ileo cystoplasty (anastomosis in progress). Completed augmented cystoplasty
(note the suprapubic Foley catheter). The child had an uneventful postoperative recovery. He was on analgesics for 3 d postoperatively. Oral
feeding was started on the second postoperative day. The analgesic requirement was minimal, considering the major procedure undertaken. The
drain was removed on the fifth postoperative day, and he was discharged on the same day. A cystogram done on the 1fourth postoperative day
showed no leak, and the suprapubic catheter was removed. The urethral catheter was removed on the 2first postoperative day. The boy was able
to empty his bladder by self-intermittent catheterization comfortably. At 1-y follow-up, the child has healthy renal parameters with no
clinical urinary tract infection. Ileal conduit urinary diversion is a temporary option in neurogenic bladder with compromised renal
function or as a last option in neurogenic bladders when complex reconstruction is not preferred or possible. Undiversion
(refunctionalization) can be undertaken electively when the patient prefers the procedure.2 This child with sacral agenesis had static
neurological status and was doing well 5 y after ileal conduit diversion. However, management of ileal conduit with an external urinary
collection device (urostomy bag) was difficult, and the parents and the boy sought alternative methods to get rid of the urostomy. His renal
parameters were stable. Isotope renogram showed no obstruction and improved GFR on the left side. The boy was older at this point and was
more receptive to intermittent self-catheterization, and hence an option of undiversion was discussed. Because laparoscopy is associated
with less morbidity, laparoscopic undiversion (refunctionalization) was carried out. The cystogram taken after 1 y showed improvement in the
bladder capacity to 150 mL (Figure 6). Urodynamic study showed increase in the compliance to 10 mL/cm H2O. He is comfortably emptying his
bladder by intermittent self-catheterization. Postoperative cystogram. Urinary undiversion is predominantly performed in pediatric patients
with myelodysplasia and other neurogenic bladder dysfunctions.4 Laparoscopic undiversion was first reported by Wolf et al.5 in 1998 in a
patient with bladder and rectal injuries. Laparoscopic-assisted undiversion to orthotopic neobladder was reported in 2006 by Castillo et
al.6 The laparoscopic approach is postulated to reduce ileus resulting from less bowel handling and less pain because of avoidance of
abdominal wall retractors.6 Our report is the first case report of laparoscopic undiversion with augmentation in a child. Laparoscopic
undiversion with augmentation is a feasible, effective, and less-morbid procedure in a child and is possibly a better alternative to open
undiversion.
