Delayed massive bleeding from an ischemic ulcer after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass is a rare and challenging event for the gastroenterologist as
well as the bariatric surgeon. Delayed massive bleeding from an ischemic ulcer is a complication after Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB).
Ischemic ulcers that present with massive bleeding are rare and challenging for the gastroenterologist as well as the bariatric surgeon.
This report reviews the case of a 63-year-old man who underwent an uncomplicated laparoscopic RYGB for morbid obesity and experienced two
episodes of massive hemorrhage after the procedure, almost 1 year apart. To our knowledge, there are only a few such specific cases
reported. Here, we describe the treatment and outcome for such a case and present a review of the literature. Obesity, defined as a body
mass index (BMI) of >30 kg/m2, is an increasing problem in the Western world. In the United States, the prevalence is approximately 30% in
the adult population.1 The incidence is increasing, and the World Health Organization (WHO) predicts that worldwide, in 2025, there will be
300 million obese people.2 Obesity is associated with the development of metabolic syndrome, early osteoarthritis, obstructive sleep apnea,
and a high risk of cardiovascular disease.3 So far, the only treatment for morbid obesity with good long-term results is bariatric surgery.
Bariatric surgery aims at inducing weight loss by reducing gastric volume, or absorption capacity of the intestines, or both of these
together. Over recent decades, a wide variety of bariatric procedures have been developed, such as adjustable gastric banding, gastric
sleeve, and Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB). At present, laparoscopic RYGB (LRYGB) is the gold standard. The results are superior compared
with the results of gastric banding in sustained weight loss and resolution of diabetes.4 However, RYGB is a major operation that has a risk
of severe early and late complications. Most complications occur during the procedure or directly after (eg, anastomotic leakage and
bleeding); however, a few also potentially life-threatening complications can manifest years later.5 The patient was a 63-year-old man with
a BMI of 57 kg/m2. His medical history included hypertension, hyperlipidemia, insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus, and obstructive sleep
apnea syndrome. Preoperative esophagogastroscopy duodenoscopy (EGD) showed no abnormalities apart from a distinct sliding hernia
diaphragmatica. In February 2009, the patient underwent an uneventful laparoscopic antecolic and antegastric RYGB with a 120-cm alimentary
limb. The gastrojejunostomy was constructed using a linear Endo-GIA Universal stapler (Johnson & Johnson, Somerville, New Jersey, USA); the
anterior side of the anastomosis was closed with uninterrupted Vicryl 2.0 (Ethicon Inc., Somerville, New Jersey, USA). The postoperative
course was uncomplicated, and discharge followed after 3 days. Weight loss was 75 kg in 15 months. In March 2010, he developed idiopathic
atrium fibrillation de novo, which was treated with acenocoumarol. In August 2010, he underwent an uncomplicated abdominoplasty. In May
2010, he was admitted to the hospital with severe melena and hematemesis; hemoglobin (Hb) at admission was 5.6 mmol/L. After 6 packet cells
(PCs), he was hemodynamically stable. At EGD, a visible vessel was observed around the anastomosis. Hemostasis was achieved with adrenaline
(7 mL) and hemoclip (Resolution Clip, Boston Scientific, Natick, Massachusetts, USA). One day later, at control EGD, a superficial ulcer of
10 mm to 15 mm was detected near the anastomosis. After hemostasis, the patient received intravenous (IV) proton-pump inhibitors (PPIs) and
prothrombin complex to antagonize the acenocoumarol. After 9 days, the patient was discharged and prescribed 40 mg of pantoprazole once
daily (twice daily for week 1), and the acenocoumarol was restarted. At discharge, Hb was 7.7 mmol/L. Almost 1 year later, the patient was
readmitted to the hospital with a second bleeding episode and Hb of 4.3 mmol/L. EGD showed a slightly restricted anastomosis and an ischemic
ulcer with an adherent blood clot behind it. Close to the ulcer, an active bleeding focus was observed. Around the bleeding focus (17 mL),
adrenaline was injected and hemostasis was reached. The blood clot could not be removed for the surgeon to examine the ulcer or to add
additional therapy (eg, Goldprobe or hemoclip). Again, the acenocoumarol was antagonized using prothrombin complex, and IV pantoprazole was
started. The patient received 5 PCs and became hemodynamically stable. Five days later, during the same admission, the patient developed
massive hematemesis and melena during a third episode of bleeding, with Hb dropping from 6.3 mmol/L to 5.0 mmol/L. Another EGD was
performed, but the bleeding could not be stopped by use of adrenaline or clips. He became hemodynamically unstable, and admission at the
intensive care unit was necessary. After administration of vitamin K and 13 PCs, the patient was optimized for semielective surgery. Eleven
days after the first hemorrhage and stabilization, the patient underwent surgery. At laparoscopy, adhesiolysis took place, and the marginal
ulcer (MU) was resected by creation of a new smaller pouch with a 60-mm Echelon stapler (Johnson & Johnson). The proximal part of the
alimentary limb, including the anastomosis, was resected, and a tensionless anastomosis was created as described above. The specimen,
including the ulcer, was removed with an endobag (Figure 1), and a 27-Charrière (correct measurement) drain was left behind. Total blood
loss was 300 mL, and no complications occurred during the procedure. Microscopic examination showed multifocal inflammation of the jejunum
near the gastrojejunostomy, matching ischemia. No cell dysplasia or malignancy was found. His hospital stay was uncomplicated, and he was
discharged in good condition after 8 days. Resected dilated part of the pouch (P) and alimentary limb (A), including anastomotic ulcer (not
visible from the outside). One of the late complications of RYGB is marginal ulceration. In the literature, mainly 3 synonyms are used to
describe the same kind of ulcer: marginal, ischemic, and anastomotic. Below, we refer to those types of ulcers as marginal (MU). The
literature reveals that developing MU after LRYGB is a relatively common complication, ranging between 0.6% and 16%.6–8 A prospective study
performing routine postoperative endoscopy after 1 month and 17 months found an incidence of 4.1% MU in the first month. After 2 years, the
incidence was 0.5%. Another study,9 examining only symptomatic patients, found an incidence of 6.7% based on the symptoms, but endoscopy
confirmed this diagnosis in only 4% of patients. Although typical complaints of MU, such as abdominal pain, nausea, and vomiting, are
identified,8,10,11 all 7.6% of patients with MU in Garrido et al.'s study were asymptomatic.12 Other studies confirm this asymptomatic
presentation. Furthermore, 28% to 61% of patients present with massive bleeding and perforation; of those, 43% to 87% do not have any
symptoms of dyspepsia or other gastrointestinal (GI) symptoms. Because of this result, it is likely that the incidence of MU is
underestimated.9,12–17 Pathogenesis of the development of MU is unclear. It is thought that marginal ulceration and gastrogastric fistulas
are likely a result of mucosal disruption and the digestive action of gastric secretions. It is thought that staples and other nonabsorbable
materials have the tendency to migrate to the lumen of the bowel and create MU. The incidence of ulceration decreased significantly from
5.1% to 1.5% when absorbable suture material was used.12,14,17,18 An overload of gastric acid, medication, persistent Helicobacter pylori
infection, pouch size, or suture material can be contributing factors.7,8,18–21 It is important that the pouch is small and limited to the
cardia of the stomach, which reduces the percentage of MU to 0.01% in 1 year.22 With this technique, the parietal cell mass in the fundus is
excluded, resulting in limited acid production, but tests have shown that although the acid secretion is almost none, the pH of the stomach
is still low in an important part of the patients.23 A dilated pouch may predisposeto late ulceration, as in our case, because of the
increasing number of parietal cells after dilatation.8,20 dditionally, acid secretion is partially regulated by gastrin levels, so in a
negative-feedback mechanism, acid secretion increases. Hypothetically, gastric acid plays a role in the development of MU. This is supported
by the fact that a part of the marginal ulcers are curable by PPI treatment only.9,20,24,25 The contribution of H pylori to MU formation is
questionable. Some studies found that infection with H pylori is a risk factor, even after eradication therapy. In the same study, 32% of
ulcer beds on EGD showed remnants of suture material. Most remnants, although not significant, were of nonabsorbable materials.7 Other
studies point in the opposite direction. A comparison of patient demographics (eg, H pylori seropositivity) showed seropositivity was equal
in the group of patients with and without MU; occasionally, patients had no H pylori infection at all.26,27 Treatment of MU with PPIs is
sufficient in most cases.9,20,28 Treatment of ulcer disease exists in PPIs for 6 months and, if necessary, is combined with H pylori
eradication therapy. Endoscopy confirmed the healing properties of PPIs in late MU. In a group of 550 patients, 6 presented with late MU and
were treated for at least 12 months. After 7 months, healing was complete in all patients.29 Any anticoagulation therapy should be
antagonized and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs should be stopped. Patients who smoke tobacco should be motivated to quit. Another
study showed that 4% in a group of 347 patients developed MU. All patients responded to 8 weeks of high-dose oral PPIs and received low-dose
maintenance therapy.9 Subsequent to that study, the investigators recommended prophylactic PPI treatment after RYGB postoperatively. This
resulted in a significantly lower incidence of MU. None of the 73 patients who received PPI treatment developed symptoms of MU. However, the
effect of prophylactic PPI usage is questionable because of the wide incidence of MU with and without PPIs. In different published studies,
administration and/or recommendation differs from 30 days and 2 years to lifelong. Currently, administration of PPI after RYGB as
prophylactic therapy for 6 months is standard protocol in our facility.30 The surgical approach to MU is another option, especially for
those MU that are resistant to medical treatment. However, revisional bariatric surgery is technically demanding and has been associated
with high morbidity and mortality rates in acute situations.31–33 The mortality rate for an emergency operation to treat upper GI bleeding
is still 10% to 30%. When done electively, it is <2%.33,34 Therefore, a semielective operation in a stable situation is preferred. This
circumstance makes the recognition of ulcers with a risk of bleeding a crucial part of treatment. Operations for intractable MU are very
successful in nonsmokers; 87% remained free of MU after revision. No data are available as specified for smokers.31 In addition to its
success in treating MU, surgery gives the opportunity to correct any pouch dilatation or remove foreign material. Most data reflect the
laparotomic technique, which is known for its greater complication rate, including leakage, wound infections, higher intraoperative blood
loss, and a higher mortality rate.28,33,35 The fear of not being able to perform laparoscopic revisions after open procedures seems to be
illegitimate. Currently, laparoscopic revisions are more successful, even after open gastric bypass.36 The treatment aim is resection of the
ulcer. Ulcers and less-vital tissue should not be included in the new anastomosis.33,35,36 We present a case of a 63-year-old man who
underwent LRYGB surgery for morbid obesity and developed repetitive delayed episodes of massive hemorrhage resulting from an ischemic ulcer.
He was treated successfully with semielective revisional surgery. Factors related to a lower incidence of MU include a small pouch of only
the cardia of the stomach, no tension on anastomosis, the use of absorbable suture material, and prescribing PPIs for at least 30 days after
the operation. However, no consistent evidence of duration of administration exists. In the literature, this differs from 1 month to
lifelong. Symptoms may vary from no symptoms to massive bleeding. In most cases, treatment of the ulceration is successful with PPIs.9,29,31
However, in 32% of cases, reoperation is required. Reoperation is a difficult approach that is necessary only for patients who present with
chronic anemia, gastrogastric fistulae, acute life-threatening upper GI bleeding, gastric perforation, and occurrence of nonhealing ulcers
despite maximum pharmaceutical treatment. A surgical resection is performed with excision of the gastrojejunostomy, including the ulcerated
areas. After revisional surgery, subsequent therapy with PPIs is required. It can be concluded that as a result of the relatively limited
number of studies with a wide variety in the incidence of MU, no robust conclusion can be drawn. This overview of the literature published
about MU and RYGB raises more questions than answers, especially concerning the role and effect of PPIs and the determination of patients
who are more at risk than others to develop MU. A major limitation of recent studies is that all but a few focus on and consequently test
symptomatic patients. However, the chances of this complication in asymptomatic patients are not clear.
