Lane Ritter, M.D. University of Virginia, 703-402-1934, rittermd@surgical-assoc.com, lane.ritter17@gmail.com Disclosure statement: No
competing financial interests exist. The authors suggest that endoclip closure should be considered in stable patients with delayed
presentation of foregut anastomotic leaks following bariatric surgery. Endoscopists have used clipping devices to successfully close acute,
iatrogenic perforations throughout the gastrointestinal tract. We applied this technology to our bariatric patients, who tend to present
with a more delayed anastomotic leak, to determine whether these leaks and fistulae would also heal with endoclip application. We describe a
small series of 2 clinically stable bariatric patients who presented with postoperative anastomotic leaks who met criteria for nonoperative
therapy. The first underwent a laparoscopic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass and presented postoperatively with a leak at her gastrojejunal
anastomosis. The location was not amenable to stent placement; therefore, 2 endoclips were placed. The leak was sealed by fluoroscopic
examination 14 d later. The second had a reversal of a previous gastric bypass, creating a new gastrogastric anastomosis. A leak was found
at this new connection postoperatively. After failure of a stent to seal the leak, 8 endoclips were used. This patient also had successful
closure of her leak on fluoroscopy 14 d postprocedure. Anastomotic leaks after bariatric surgery can incur severe morbidity, cost, and
detriment to patients' quality of life. Unstable patients require operative intervention. Stable patients are candidates for more-
conservative measures. Endoscopic stents have been successful in closing gastric leaks, though some are not anatomically amenable to stent
placement, and stents also have the potential to migrate distally. We demonstrate 2 cases of successful closure of leaks in bariatric
patients by using endoclips and suggest that this be considered an option in appropriate cases. Anastomotic gastric leaks remain a dreaded
complication in bariatric surgery. Various management strategies include exploratory surgery with drain placement, endoscopic stenting, or
image-guided percutaneous catheter placement, or a combination of these methods. The strategy utilized is guided by patient clinical
stability. A patient with clinical sepsis or hemodynamic instability requires operative intervention and rapid source control of their
enteric leak. If a patient is stable by clinical parameters, endoscopic and percutaneous approaches may be entertained. If nonoperative
measures are taken, a standard treatment algorithm of nil per os, intravenous (IV) hydration, and IV antibiotics is immediately used. The
gastroenterology literature includes another option for closure of gastrointestinal (GI) perforations: placement of endoscopic clips
(endoclips). With the increased interest in natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery (NOTES), and the more-widespread application of
endoscopic mucosal resection (EMR) and endoscopic submucosal dissection, there has been simultaneous interest in how to most effectively
close iatrogenic perforations. Results using clipping devices in this acute setting have had excellent outcomes.1 Our experience with the
following 2 patients demonstrates that endoclips can also be effective in achieving successful closure in the more chronic and inflamed
leaks and fistulas that can occur in our bariatric population. A 43-y-old female (body mass index = 49) underwent an uneventful laparoscopic
Roux-en-Y gastric bypass (RYGB) and was discharged home on postoperative day (POD) 3. She presented to the emergency department on POD 11
with complaints of abdominal pain and fever. An abdominal computed tomography (CT) scan demonstrated a fluid collection near the
gastrojejunal (GJ) anastomosis. The patient was hemodynamically stable on presentation. A subsequent upper GI (UGI) series confirmed a
contained leak at the GJ anastomosis (Figure 1). During endoscopic examination, the anastomosis appeared erythematous and ulcerated, and
fluoroscopy showed a small, linear extravasation of contrast. The endoscopist felt that an intraluminal stent would be ineffective because
of the large luminal diameter at this location. Therefore, 2 endoscopic clips were placed at the area of extravasation. A percutaneous drain
was also placed into the adjacent fluid collection by our radiology department. The patient had only clear liquids by mouth and completed a
course of antibiotics. A follow-up UGI series done 14 d postprocedure showed no further anastomotic leak. patient 1: UGI series with GJ
anastomotic leak. A 44-y-old female with a history of an RYGB 6 y previously presented with a gastrogastric (GG) fistula secondary to a
chronic marginal ulcer. The patient ultimately required reversal of her gastric bypass with takedown of her fistula and creation of a new GG
anastomosis. She was discharged home on POD 4 from this operation. She was readmitted to the hospital on POD 7 with complaints of abdominal
pain and general malaise. An abdominal CT scan showed extraluminal air around the GG anastomosis, and a subsequent UGI series confirmed a
leak at this site. The patient remained nontoxic and hemodynamically stable during this time. On endoscopic examination, the GG anastomosis
was found to have some surrounding ulceration, and contrast extravasation was confirmed on fluoroscopic images. Two endoscopic clips were
placed across the defect, but because a small leak persisted, the endoscopist also placed a covered esophageal stent across the anastomosis.
A percutaneous drain was placed in the adjacent fluid collection by radiology. The patient presented again on POD 15 and was found to have
migration of this stent and persistence of the leak on UGI series, along with distal migration of the stent (Figure 2). The patient was
again brought to the endoscopy suite; the previously placed stent was removed and had subsequent placement of 8 clips across the full extent
of the mucosal defect (Figure 3). The patient was given a course of antibiotics and allowed only clear liquids by mouth. The patient
henceforth did well, and a follow-up UGI series done 14 d after this final procedure showed healing of the anastomotic leak. patient 2: UGI
series with persistent leak at GG anastomosis and stent migration. patient 2: final endoclip placement with sealing of leak. The use of
endoclips for closure of iatrogenic foregut perforations is not novel. In 1999, Kaneko et al.2 reported on the use of a clipping device to
close iatrogenic duodenal perforations during EMR. Minami et al.3 published their series of 117 patients who had gastric perforations during
EMR and had 98% success in healing with endoclips. Raju4 wrote an excellent review of the literature in 2009 that supports the use of
endoclips and other tissue-approximation devices in closing iatrogenic perforations in NOTES procedures. An acute perforation of a GJ
anastomosis after a balloon dilatation is found in the bariatric literature5 that describes successful closure with the application of 4
endoclips. Bariatric patients often present with GI anastomotic leaks in a delayed fashion. In these cases, the tissue is much more inflamed
and ulcerated, and there is an assumption that this more-friable tissue will be more difficult to successfully approximate with endoclips.
The European literature introduces an overthe-scope clip device that has been used successfully in a few case reports of bariatric patients
with more chronic leaks and fistulas.6,7 Reportedly, these devices can grasp and approximate a larger amount of tissue and have shown
promising results in small series of complicated GI leaks. There are also a few series in the GI literature reporting the use of advanced
endoscopic strategies with combinations of stents, clips, and synthetic glue to address leaks after RYGB.8,9 We have achieved success in our
2 complicated bariatric patients using readily available instruments. With the collaborative effort between surgeons and
gastroenterologists, we were able to avoid subsequent operative intervention and morbidity. We suggest that the use of endoclip closure be
considered in stable patients with delayed presentations of foregut anastomotic leaks after bariatric surgery, particularly if the area has
failed endoscopic stenting or is not anatomically amenable to stent placement. Importantly, this is only a very small case series that
suggests a possible nonoperative strategy in appropriately identified patients. Further investigation in the form of a larger series or
collaborative clinical trial is certainly warranted to verify the reproducibility of our results on a larger scale.
