Paraquat is a highly toxic herbicide, which not only leads to acute organ damage, but also to pulmonary fibrosis. There are only anecdotal
reports of rescue lung transplantation, as paraquat is stored and only slowly released from different tissues. Bridging the time to complete
depletion of paraquat from the body could render this exceptional therapy strategy possible, but not much is known on the time interval
after which transplantation can safely be performed. We report on a case of accidental paraquat poisoning in a 23 years old Caucasian man,
who developed respiratory failure due to pulmonary fibrosis. The patient was listed for high urgency lung transplantion, and extracorporeal
membrane oxygenation was implemented to bridge the time to transplantation. The patient died 32 days after paraquat ingestion, before a
suitable donor organ was found. In postmortem tissue specimen, no paraquat was detectable anymore. This case report indicates that complete
elimination of paraquat after oral ingestion of a lethal dose is achievable. The determined time frame for this complete elimination might
be relevant for patients, in which lung transplantation is considered. Paraquat (1,1’-dimethyl-4,4’ bipyridinium dichloride) is a highly
toxic contact herbicide, which has been banned in Germany since 2007. However, there are still rare cases of paraquat intoxications with
leftovers of paraquat purchased prior to the ban, mostly in form of suicide attempts. After oral ingestion, the intestinal absorption of
paraquat is poor (1-5%), but still sufficient to elicit a severe and potentially fatal intoxication. Early toxicity includes oral,
pharyngeal and gastrointestinal ulcerations and necroses, acute kidney injury and liver failure . Ingestion of two or more mouthful of
paraquat usually leads to circulatory failure within two days, whereas patients, who swallow not more than one mouthful, often survive the
early phase of paraquat intoxication . Late toxicity is mostly due to the storage of paraquat in alveolar macrophages, where it reacts with
the highly abundant oxygen to form radicals and reactive oxygen species. The reactions of paraquat simultaneously deplete the body of
antioxidants . The consequences are pulmonary inflammation and fibrosis, which is the main cause of death in patients surviving the early
phase of paraquat poisoning. In case of attempted suicide, the psychiatric background does not allow lung transplantation. In accidental
paraquat ingestion, however, lung transplantation could be the only therapeutic strategy, if it is performed after complete depletion of
paraquat from the body to prevent recurrence of fibrosis in the allograft. The first attempt of lung transplantation in paraquat
intoxication in 1968 failed as the single lung transplantation was performed as early as 7 days after intoxication of a 15 years old boy .
Due to recurrence of fibrosis in the allograft, these authors speculated already that paraquat stored in the tissue caused fibrosis of the
allograft. Hence, complete depletion of paraquat from the body to prevent fibrosis of the allograft due to redistribution of paraquat from
the tissue is necessary. After what time this complete depletion would occur is unknown. Yet the first successful lung transplantation
reported by Walder et al. was performed 44 days after intoxication. Here, we report on a case of accidental paraquat intoxication, in which
we attempted to bridge the time to transplantation with extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. A 23 years old Caucasian man was admitted to a
local hospital after reporting that he had accidentally ingested paraquat. Allegedly he had filled the paraquat (Gramoxone®, 20% ) into a
soda bottle a few days before in order to facilitate the dosing of the herbicide at his job as a gardener, avoiding the use of the
industrial size original container. On a Monday morning he confused the bottle with the paraquat aliquot with a real soda bottle and
accidentally swallowed one mouthful, which probably accounts for an ingested amount of paraquat of 6–10 g. He immediately provoked emesis
and presented to the nearest emergency room. There, a gastric lavage was performed, 40 g of activated charcoal were administered and
paraquat levels in serum (2.12 mg/l) and urine (350.00 mg/l) were determined (Figure 1A), suggesting that the ingested amount of paraquat
was at a lethal dose . After developing acute non-oliguric kidney injury within 48 h, which is another known sign indicating a fatal outcome
, the patient was transferred to our tertiary care centre for further treatment. At this time, the patient did not report any shortness of
breath, nausea, pain or impaired diuresis. Physical examination revealed mild jaundice and swelling and redness of the throat. Laryngoscopy
showed redness and necroses of the hypopharynx, the epiglottis and the vocal cords. Otherwise, physical examination was unremarkable, with
normal findings for chest and abdominal examination and a normal chest X-ray (Figure 2A). Forced vital capacity was reduced to 38% predicted
on day 4, the alveolar-arterial oxygen gradient was 34 mmHg. Laboratory values revealed pathological liver function tests, mildly elevated
inflammatory parameters and acute kidney injury (Table 1), so daily hemodialysis was started. Using the GENIUS® system with a sleddFlux
dialysator (Fresenius Medical Care GmbH, Bad Homburg, Germany) and a blood flow of 300 ml/min, a paraquat clearance of 122 ml/min was
achieved. No paraquat (i.e., < 0.01 mg/l) was detectable in the collected spent dialysate. In addition, a therapy with methylprednisolone
(5 × 1 g i.v.) and cyclophosphamide (15 mg/kg bodyweight per day i.v. for two days) was started to delay the development of pulmonary
fibrosis . Additionally, we initiated treatment with tamoxifen (3 × 20 mg p.o.), for which a hormone-independent antiproliferative and anti-
inflammatory effect is well known in retroperitoneal fibrosis . However, 72 h after paraquat ingestion, desaturation occured, and the
patient had to be transferred to the medical intensive care unit. Due to progressive respiratory failure, oxygen supplementation had to be
started despite its potentially enhancing effect on paraquat toxicity . On the 9th day after paraquat ingestion, invasive ventilation became
necessary due to the progression of pulmonary fibrosis (Figure 2B). Because of the convincing negation of a suicidal attempt, confirmed by
repeated psychiatric evaluation, we decided to list the patient for high urgency double lung transplantation. The patient’s condition
worsened progressively with development of a systemic inflammatory response syndrome. On his 12th hospital day, FiO2 had to be increased
from 50 to 100% due to deteriorated oxygenation, and a veno-venous extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (vvECMO) was implemented
(Figure 2C-D). Even with maximum support by vvECMO, multiple drastic declines in gas exchange led to hemodynamic instability, so that the
veno-venous system had to be switched to veno-arterial ECMO (vaECMO) on the 20th day. After initial stabilization on a poor clinical level,
septic multiorgan dysfunction with kidney, liver and hemodynamic failure developed from the 29th day on. Thirty-two days after paraquat
ingestion, the patient died from cardiac failure with pulseless electrical activity. An autopsy was performed, showing fibrotic remodelling
of the lungs and ubiquitous signs of shock, such as swelling of the brain, liver and kidneys. Postmortem tissue specimens were examined for
paraquat levels (Table 2). For this purpose, frozen tissue specimens were mechanically homogenized, extracted with perchloric acid and
neutralized. After pre-purification, paraquat levels in extracts or serum samples were quantified by reverse-phase HPLC and UV detection at
270 nm with a detection limit of 0.01 mg/l for serum and 0.2 μg/g for processed tissues (intraassay imprecision 2.4%). Clinical course. A)
Paraquat serum and urine levels over time. Serum levels exceeding 0.6 mg/l at 6 h or 0.1 mg/l at 24 h predict an unfavourable outcome . The
low serum values on day 3 and 4 reflect post-dialysis values. B) Arterial partial oxygen tension and flow chart of therapeutic interventions
(HD: hemodialysis; CYC: cyclophosphamide). Progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Chest X-ray (A-C) and computed tomography (D; 11th day)
demonstrating progressive pulmonary fibrosis on day 3 (A), 9 (B), and 12 (C). Laboratory values after referral (3rd day after paraquat
ingestion); pathological values are bold Paraquat levels in different tissues / materials *17 d after paraquat ingestion. Treatment options
in paraquat poisoning are limited. This holds especially true for the use of extracorporeal treatment methods, which are currently evaluated
in a standardized approach . Since the main problems arise from irreversible lung damage, the major goal is to reduce intestinal absorption
and enhance elimination of paraquat before it can be stored in the tissue. Administration of activated charcoal and gastric lavages are
regularly performed. However, intestinal absorption of paraquat is a rapid process and high paraquat plasma levels are reached within
minutes to 4 hours after paraquat ingestion . When our patient came to the hospital approximately 6 h after paraquat ingestion, serum levels
might already have reached their maximum, so charcoal administration and gastric lavage probably had no effect. Although paraquat is
eliminated by the kidneys, forced diuresis has no proven benefit on mortality. The early initiation of charcoal hemoperfusion within the
first hours after paraquat poisoning seems to have a beneficial prognostic effect on survival , but the majority of patients with paraquat
poisoning do not benefit from extracorporeal methods including hemoperfusion, hemodialysis or hemofiltration . The reason for that might be
that the ingested paraquat reaches the lungs before renal replacement therapy can be implemented. Paraquat is stored in different tissues,
expecially the lung, but also in brain, liver, kidney, bile and muscle in varying amounts , from where it is only released slowly. Finally,
immunosuppressive therapy regimens and antioxidants have been used to prevent the development of fibrosis, including high-dose steroids,
cyclophosphamid , and sirolimus , with varying success. But even with this aggressive therapy, pulmonary fibrosis develops in most patients
including ours, so that lung transplantation seems to be the last option in absence of contraindications. However, lung transplantation can
only be successful, if the body is completely depleted of paraquat. Otherwise, fibrosis would potentially recur in the allograft. The first
attempt of single lung transplantation in a case of paraquat poisoning was reported as early as 1968. The transplantation was performed
seven days after accidental paraquat ingestion, when there was still paraquat detectable in the patient’s blood (0.4 mg/l) and the explanted
left lung (8.50 μg/g). Two weeks after the transplantation, the patient died from respiratory failure. Postmortem histopathology revealed
the same paraquat-induced fibrotic changes in both the native right and the transplanted left lung, indicating a recurrence of fibrosis
caused by paraquat released from its body stores. At this time, no paraquat could be detected in both the native and the transplanted lung
postmortem, but other tissues were not examined . Walder et al. reported the first successful single lung transplantations performed 44 days
after paraquat ingestion. The patients showed no signs of recurrent pulmonary fibrosis in the allograft and survived at least one year.
However, serum was free from detectable paraquat levels as early as 4 d after paraquat ingestion, when serum levels still reached 0.15 mg/l
in our patient despite daily hemodialysis. Our patient was listed for high-urgency lung transplantation, because all of the described
treatment strategies failed. We used extracorporeal support to bridge the time to transplantation, but the patient developed septic
multiorgan failure and finally died before a suitable donor organ was available. In postmortem tissue specimen no paraquat could be
detected, suggesting that lung transplantation would potentially have been successful. Furthermore, the donation of otherwise undamaged
organs would have been possible without endangering the recipient, as has been demonstrated for corneas in single cases . In a variety of
tissue samples obtained postmortem, we can show that complete elimination paraquat after oral ingestion of a lethal dose is achievable. The
determined time frame for this complete elimination might be relevant for patients, in which lung transplantation is considered. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient’s legal representative for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A
copy of the written consent is available for review by the Series Editor of this journal. vvECMO: Veno-venous extracorporeal membrane
oxygenation; vaECMO: Veno-arterial extracorporeal membrane oxygenation. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JH, MH,
JG, GW, CH and JTK were the treating physicians of the patient reported. DG performed autopsy. NKV conducted the measurement of paraquat.
AB, SSH, SK and JTK evaluated the test results and designed the manuscript and figures. All of the authors have participated in the
discussion and in writing of the submitted manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for
this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/2050-6511/14/45/prepub The publication of the study is supported by the DFG-
project “Open Access Publication”.
