We investigated the safety and clinical applicability of 7.0 Tesla (T) brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in patients with brain tumors.
Twenty-four patients with intraaxial or extraaxial brain tumors were enrolled in this study. 7.0T MRIs of T2*-weighted axial and T1-weighted
coronal or sagittal images were obtained and compared with 1.5T brain MRIs. The T2*-weighted images from 7.0T brain MRI revealed detailed
microvasculature and the internal contents of supratentorial brain tumors better than that of 1.5T brain MRI. For brain tumors located in
parasellar areas or areas adjacent to major cerebral vessels, flow-related artifacts were exaggerated in the 7.0T brain MRIs. For brain
tumors adjacent to the skull base, susceptibility artifacts in the interfacing areas of the paranasal sinus and skull base hampered the
aquisition of detailed images and information on brain tumors in the 7.0T brain MRIs. This study shows that 7.0T brain MRI can provide
detailed information on the intratumoral components and margins in supratentorial brain tumors. Further studies are needed to develop
refined MRI protocols for better images of brain tumors located in the skull base, parasellar, and adjacent major cerebrovascular
structures. Since the clinical introduction of magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) in the 1980s, the magnet field strength of MRI has
continuously increased for better quality images because higher field strength MRIs have increased the signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and
contrast-to-noise ratios (CNR) (1). Several pilot studies using ultrahigh-field strength brain MRIs at 7.0T have been performed in a small
series of brain tumors (2, 3). Besides increased costs and limited availability, concern about safety and imaging artifacts has prevented
further widespread dissemination of ultrahigh-field brain MRI for clinical practice. In this study, we investigated the 7.0T brain MRIs of
patients with intraaxial or extraaxial brain tumors (WHO grades I-IV) to document the safety and potential benefits in clinical application
of ultrahigh-field MRI for the diagnosis of brain tumors. Patients who had brain tumors diagnosed with 1.5T MRI or pathologically proven at
the Department of Neurosurgery at Seoul National University Hospital between April 2009 and August 2010 were enrolled in this study. The
inclusion criteria included ages between 18 and 70 yr and Karnofsky Performance Scale scores over 70. Those patients who had psychiatric
diseases were excluded from the study. Those patients who had any systemic diseases and abnormalities in their complete blood count and
blood chemistry for liver and renal panels were also excluded from the study. Those patients who had a pacemaker, aneurysm clip, artificial
heart valve, and implants indwelled in their body were excluded from the study. Those patients who were claustrophobia were also excluded
from the study. Finally, twenty-four patients with various brain tumors (WHO grade I-IV) were included in this study. The 7.0T MRI device
(Magnetom 7.0T, Siemens, Munich, Germany) at the Neuroscience Research Institute of Gachon University of Medicine and Science was used to
perform the brain imaging. All sequences of the 7.0T measurement protocol were initially optimized in healthy volunteers. The sequences were
adapted to obtain an optimal image contrast, complete coverage of the brain tumor and a higher spatial resolution within a reasonable
examination time (Table 1). The 7.0T magnet, with a clear bore of 90 cm, is equipped with a water-cooled gradient and RF coils. The gradient
system operates at 2000 V/650 Amp with a gradient amplitude of 40 mT/m, a maximum slew rate of 200 mT/m/ms, and a minimum gradient rise time
of 200 microseconds. A homemade 8-channel TX/RX coil was used. The pulse sequence used was the 3D Magnetization-Prepared Rapid-Gradient Echo
(MPRAGE). The scanning parameters were as follows: TR = 4,000 msec, TE = 3.0 msec, TI = 1,100 msec, thickness = 0.6 mm, flip angle = 10°,
number of slices = 256, voxel size = 0.6 × 0.6 × 0.6 mm, and matrix size = 384 × 384 (Table 1). T1-weighted MRI was performed before and
after the injection of a contrast agent. The Magnevist (Bayer Healthcare Pharmaceuticals Inc., Leverkusen, Germany) was used as the contrast
agent (0.2 mL/kg, 0.01 mM/kg). T2-weighted images using 2D Turbo Spin Echo were acquired with the following scanning parameters: TR = 8,500
ms, TE = 33.0 ms, thickness = 2.0 mm, gap = 2.0 mm, flip angle = 60°, number of slices = 24, voxel size = 0.43 × 0.43 × 2.0 µL, and matrix
size = 518 × 518, echo train = 7. High resolution resolution T2*-weighted images using 2D Gradient Echo were acquired with the following
scanning parameters: TR = 850 ms, TE = 21.0 ms, thickness = 1.5 mm, gap = 1.5 mm, flip angle = 30°, number of slices = 20, voxel size = 0.20
× 0.20 × 1.5 µL, and matrix size = 1,024 × 864. All twenty-four patients with brain tumors had a 1.5T MRI (Signa HDXT, General Electric
Medical Systems, Milwaukee, WI, USA) examination within a couple of weeks before or after the 7.0T brain MRI examination. The preoperative
MRI was performed using a quadrature transmit-receive head coil. The MRI protocol included the following: axial unenhanced and enhanced
T1-weighted (TR = 11.5 msec; TE = 5 msec; number of excitations, 2; flip angle, 20°) 3-dimensional spoiled gradient acquisitions with a
section thickness of 1.5 mm, field of view of 24 cm, and matrix size of 256 × 256 and T2-weighted acquisitions (TR = 4,000 msec; TE = 102
msec; number of excitations, 2) in the axial planes with a section thickness of 2 mm, field of view of 24 cm, and matrix size of 256 × 256.
All the patients were requested to fill out the prepared questionnaires to describe any adverse effects during or after the examinations
with the 7.0T MRI. The tumors were reviewed on the T2* weighted and pre- & post-contrast T1 weighted images from the 7.0T brain MRI to
assess the contrast enhancement patterns in the tumor bed and the tumor margin of the interface between the tumor bed and the surrounding
brain paenchymes, as well as to delineate peritumoral edema and displaced normal anatomical structures adjacent to the brain tumors compared
with that of the 1.5T brain MRI. The presence of microvascularity and tumor necrosis within the tumor mass was investigated on the
T2*-weighted images from 7.0T MRI compared with the T2-weighted images from the 1.5T MRI. And the descriptive assessment of the image
findings on the pre- and post-contrast 7.0T gradient-echo brain images were further interpreted with histopathological findings and tumor
location. Two different examiners blindly evaluated the findings of 1.5T and 7.0T brain MRIs. The research protocol used in this
investigation was approved by the institutional review board (IRB) of Seoul National University Hospital (IRB number: H-0802-046-234) and
Gacheon University of Medicine and Science (IRB number: H-0806-004-006). This study was also approved by the Korea Food and Drug
Administration Ministry, the Republic of Korea (Permit Number: 182). The written consents were obtained from all twenty-four patients with
various brain tumors. Twenty-four patients, of which eleven were men, were aged 27 to 63 yr (mean age 43.3 yr). Four metastatic brain
tumors, four glioblastomas, three meningiomas, an anaplastic oligoastrocytoma, an oligodendroglioma, a central neurocytoma, an
extraventricular neurocytoma, a germinoma, a chordoma, and a cavernous hemangioma were confirmed by histological examination. Two
meningiomas, two metastatic brain tumors, a vestibular schwannoma, and a pituitary adenomaa were diagnosed by typical radiological findings
from 1.5T brain MRIs (Table 2). Thirteen patients underwent craniotomies and two patients underwent stereotactic biopsies after the 7.0T
brain MRIs. One patient underwent the trans-sphenoidal approach after the 7.0T brain MRI. Seven patients underwent gamma knife radiosurgery
and one patient was followed up with antiepileptic drugs alone after the 7.0T brain MRI. The total scanning times of the 7.0T brain MRIs
ranged from one hour to two hours. The T2-, and T2*-weighted and pre- and post-contrast T1-weighted images of the 7.0T MRIs were obtained
without serious adverse effects in all twenty-four patients with brain tumors. The patients felt transient dizziness (n = 6), skeletal
muscle contraction (n = 3), headache (n = 2), back pain (n = 1), neck stiffness (n = 1), and a subjective feeling of electrical sensation (n
= 1) during the examination with the 7.0T brain MRI. Among them, transient vertigo was the most common symptom during the scanning with the
7.0T brain MRI (Table 2). All adverse effects were episodic and transient, which did not interfere with the 7.0T brain MRI examination at
any time. The 7.0T brain MRIs showed a different appearance for the brain tumors in terms of the intratumoral vasculature, hemorrhage,
necrosis, degree of contrast enhancement, tumor margin, and peritumoral edema in relation to the degree of pathological malignancy (Table
2). Malignant brain tumors of WHO grade III or IV showed a moderate to high degree of intratumoral vasculature frequently associated with
hemorrhage, necrosis, and a higher degree of contrast enhancement of the tumors and pertumoral edema. In contrast to those findings, benign
brain tumors with a WHO grade of I or II showed a low degree of intratumoral vasculature with a lower degree of contrast enhancement of the
tumors and peritumoral edema but were rarely associated with hemorrhage and necrosis. However, the tumor margin was clearly delineated
between the brain tumors and the surrounding brain parenchyma in both the benign and malignant brain tumors in the 7.0T brain MRIs in 20
patients with brain tumors located in the cerebral hemispheres compared to the 1.5T brain MRIs (Table 2). In addition, the quality of the
7.0T brain MRIs for various brain tumors was also dependent on the locations, which included the infratentorial region, parasellar region,
supratentorial hemispheric region, deep nucleic regions, and so on. Sixteen were located in the supratentorial hemispheric regions; four
were located in the sellar and parasellar regions; two were located in the infratentorial regions; and two were located in the deep nuclei.
For tumors located adjacent to the sellar areas and skull bases which included orbital/skull base meningioma, pituitary adenoma, vestibular
schwannoma, and chordoma, the 7.0T brain MRIs did not show better images compared to the 1.5T MRIs. The coronal images from the 7.0T MRI did
not provide clear images of the extents of the tumors and their surrounding margins in tumors such as pituitary adenoma or orbital
meningioma, located in the parasellar area due to artifacts caused by the vascular flows of both the internal carotid arteries (ICAs) in the
cavernous sinuses as well as to susceptibility artifacts coming from the interface of the air-density area of the paranasal sinuses and bony
structures of the skull base shown in Fig. 1. The T2-weighted axial and post-contrast sagittal images of the 7.0T brain MRIs also showed
exaggerated flow-related artifacts and susceptibility artifacts in the scanning of the chordoma located in the petroclival area compared
with the T2-weighted axial and postcontrast sagittal images of the 1.5T brain MRIs shown in Fig. 2. In contrast to the images from the 7.0T
brain MRI of tumors located in the parasellar area and the petroclival area, the 7.0T brain MRIs of the supratentorial hemispheric tumors
provided sharpened images of the internal components of the tumors and their surrounding brain parenchyma with a high SNR. Moreover, the
7.0T brain MRIs showed detailed vasculatures of the tumors as well as the surrounding vasculatures around the tumors located in the
supratentorial hemispheres. Brain images with a T2-weighted axial image from the 1.5T brain MRI and T2*-weighted axial image from the 7.0T
brain MRI of a patient with a central neurocytoma were well contrasted shown in Fig. 3. Dark signals in T2* and susceptibility images
represent the vascularity of the brain tumor and draining veins on the surface of the tumor exposed to the lateral ventricle. The
T2*-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI showed more prominent dark signals caused by high vasculature within the tumor as well as
a clearer image of the tumor margin between the tumor and its surrounding normal brain structures such as the thalamo-caudate nucleus
compared with the T2-weighted axial image from the 1.5T brain MRI. The post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain MRI
showed better contrast between the white matter and gray matter in the cortical surface of the brain compared with those of the 1.5T brain
MRI. However, the flow-related local magnetic inhomogeneity from deep draining veins of the internal cerebral veins and both transverse
sinuses resulted in linear artifacts crossing over the midline in the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain MRI. The
7.0T brain MRI provided detailed images of vascular mass lesions such as cavernous hemangioma (Fig. 4). The T2*-weighted axial images from
the 7.0T brain MRI showed a clear margin for a dark signal lesion in the left frontal lobe with surrounding edema and compressed cerebral
cortex. The images clearly showed the displaced and compressed normal brain structures adjacent to the brain lesions. The posteriorly
displaced globus pallidus in the left cerebral hemisphere was clearly visualized in the T2-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI.
The dimension of the globus pallidus shown as the dark signal in the T2-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI was bigger than that
in the T2-weighted axial images from the 1.5T brain MRI. The hemorrhagic content in different stages of cavernous hemangioma was clearly
visualized in the T2-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI. The line of Gennari was also well recognized in the T2-weighted axial
images from the 7.0T brain MRI. The post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain MRI showed a clearer margin between the
white matter and cavernous hemangioma than that of the 1.5T brain MRI. Moreover, the dark signal shown in the internal portion of the
cavernous hemangiomas was clearly noticeable in the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain MRIs. However, the flow
from both middle cerebral arteries caused flow-related linear artifacts crossing over the midline in the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal
images from the 7.0T brain MRI. The 7.0T brain MRI provided detailed images of metastatic brain tumors compared to that of the 1.5T brain
MRI shown in Fig. 5. The T2*-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI showed multi-loculated mixed signals representing the cystic and
vascular components of the metastatic brain tumor with a clearer margin of the peritumoral edema in the surrounding white matter than that
of the T2-weighted axial images from the 1.5T brain MRI. The T2*-weighted axial images from the 7T brain MRI showed a clearer image of the
tumor margin between the tumor and its surrounding white matter as well as fiber projections such as the left optic radiation & line of
Gennari compared to the T2-weighted axial images from the 1.5T brain MRI. The post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain
MRI showed sharply demarcated enhancing tumor lesions with a distinct tumor margin from the normal white matter and had better contrast
between the white matter and gray matter in the cortical surface of the brain compared to those from the 1.5T brain MRI. A small enhancing
nodule of recurrent glioblastoma was detected in the right temporal lobe in the post-contrast T1-weighted axial images from the 1.5T and
7.0T brain MRIs shown in Fig. 6. The post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain MRI showed sharply demarcated enhancing
tumor lesions with its distinct tumor margin from the normal white matter as well as better contrast between the white matter and gray
matter in the cortical surface of brain with a high SNR compared to those from the 1.5T brain MRI. However, flow related artifacts caused by
the posterior circulation arteries in the Circle of Willis, including the basilar artery, superior cerebellar artery, or posterior cerebral
artery crossed over the midline in the T2*-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI compared to the T2-weighted axial images of the
1.5T brain MRI. In this study, twenty-four patients with intraaxial and extraaxial brain tumors (WHO I-IV) were safely examined without any
serious adverse effects from 7.0T brain MRI. The safety issue of ultrahigh magnetic fields has been rarely investigated in the literature
(4-9). In this study, there were no serious side effects in all twenty-four patients with brain tumors during or after the 7.0T brain MRI
examination. The symptoms that patients felt during the 7.0T MRI examination were transient vertigo, skeletal muscle contraction, headache,
back pain, neck stiffness, and a subjective feeling of electrical shocks. Transient vertigo was the most common symptom during scanning with
the 7T brain MRI. Based on our observations, we believe that contrast-enhanced 7.0T brain MRI can be safely performed without any serious
adverse effects in patients with both benign and malignant brain tumors. Several pilot studies using 7.0T ultrahigh field strength MRI have
been performed in a small series of brain tumors (2, 3, 10-21). Such studies have focused on visualization of the microvasculature and
hemorrhaging within brain tumors with T2*-weighted imaging. The T2*-weighted images from the 7.0T brain MRI may provide additional detailed
information on the vasculature in brain tumors. However, with respect to tumor enhancement, they reported that comparisons between 7.0T MRI
and lower field strengths showed no differences in the presence and size of the enhancing region after administration of the contrast agent.
In this study, we observed that the T2*-weighted images from the 7.0T brain MRI revealed detailed microvasculature and the internal contents
of supratentorial brain tumors compared to that of the 1.5T brain MRI. In addition, we observed a clearer delineation of the tumor margins
and detailed information on the microvasculature inside and outside of the intraaxial and extraaxial brain tumors in the images from the
7.0T brain MRI in contrast to the images from the 1.5T brain MRI. The post-contrast T1-weighted images from the 7.0T brain MRI provided
clearer images of the enhanced portions of the tumors and detailed anatomical information on the tumor margins between the brain tumors and
the surrounding neurovascular structures. The degree of pathological malignancy, which determines the prognosis and therapeutics, can be
estimated based on such detailed information obtained by the 7.0T brain MRI of brain tumors. The WHO classification of brain tumors is based
on their principal cell type, nuclear atypia, mitotic activity, microvascular proliferation, and necrosis (10). In general, T2*-weighted
gradient-echo sequences provide excellent image contrast of the presumed microvasculature and microarchitecture of brain tumors. Noninvasive
visualization of microvascularity appears to be one of the favorable clinical indications for brain tumor examinations with the 7.0T brain
MRI, as previously reported in the literature (2, 3). Microvascular proliferation and/or necrosis, augmented mitotic activity of
proliferating cells, cellular and nuclear pleomorphism, and mostly central areas of necrosis are the histological hallmarks of malignant
brain tumors. Early estimation of low-grade brain tumors and malignant brain tumors are essential to allow for the estimation of the degree
of malignancy of the brain tumors and treatment planning. One major limitation is the fact that the location of the tumor vascularity in
histological tumor sections or biopsy specimens could not be directly linked to the foci of the tumor microvascularity on the MR images.
However, this study demonstrated, similar to previous reports, the potential clinical applicability of 7.0T brain MRI showing tumor
microvascularity in vivo. Low-grade gliomas tend to progress into high-grade gliomas with increasing vascular changes and abnormalities.
Under conservative treatment, monitoring of low-grade gliomas and early detection of malignant transformation are essential to allow for
accurate prognostication and suitable treatment planning. Hence, 7.0T MRI may develop as a valuable tool for the assessment of tumor
vascularity and for the monitoring of anti-angiogenic therapies for brain tumors. This developing imaging technique may provide useful
information for grading gliomas and for monitoring tumor angiogenesis and anti-angiogenetic therapies. Furthermore, optimized multi-channel
head coils, tailored imaging protocols, and new parallel imaging techniques are expected to further improve the image quality of ultrahigh
field MRI. In this current study, however, 7.0T brain MRI revealed different appearances of various brain tumors depending on their
locations: parasellar and infratentorial regions vs supratentorial hemispheric & deep nucleus regions. For brain tumors located in the
parasellar areas or areas adjacent to major cerebral vessels, flow-related artifacts were exaggerated in the images from the 7.0T brain MRI.
For brain tumors adjacent to the skull base, susceptibility artifacts in the interfacing areas of the paranasal sinus and skull base were
prominent in the images from the 7.0T brain MRI. In an ultrahigh magnetic field, severe inhomogeneity in the applied transmit field (RF
field) can be seen. Because of this inhomogeneity, the achieved pulse angle will vary between locations in the brain. This results in a
spatially varying SNR (16). More importantly and dependent on the sequence that is used, this might lead to deviations in the contrast
obtained from different locations in the image. These effects are most pronounced at the temporal lobes of the brain and the cerebellum.
Therefore, in the peripheral areas, brain assessment of anatomical structures and possibly the pathology are currently difficult. Because of
the higher susceptibility sensitivity of 7.0T, the image quality of gradient-echo sequences may be reduced compared to that of 1.5T because
of local magnetic field inhomogeneities near the skull base and the aerated paranasal sinuses. These artifacts could possibly prevent the
depiction of brain tumors located in the basal parts of the brain. Compared to 1.5T brain MRI, whole-brain imaging at 7.0T is restricted by
SAR limitations for most sequences, and changes in tissue relaxation times can lead to altered contrast behavior at 7.0T. In conclusion,
this study showed that 7.0T brain MRI was safely performed in twenty-four patients with intraaxial or extraaxial brain tumors of WHO grade
I-IV. 7.0T brain MRIs offer a more detailed depiction of tumor microvascularity and necrosis within intracranial gliomas because of the
higher achievable spatial resolution and increased sensitivity for susceptibility contrast compared to 1.5T brain MRI. This developing
imaging technique could provide useful information for grading gliomas and for monitoring tumor angiogenesis and anti-angiogenetic
therapies. However, further study is needed to develop refined MRI protocols for better images of brain tumors located in the skull base,
parasellar region, and adjacent to major cerebrovascular structures. Thus, optimized multi-channel head coils, tailored imaging protocols,
and new parallel imaging techniques for 7.0T brain MRI are expected to further improve the image quality of brain tumors. This study was
supported by a grant from the Korea Healthcare technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare, Republic of Korea
(A101446-1011-0000400&1020380). The authors have no conflicts of interest to disclose. 1.5T and 7.0T MRI for pituitary adenoma. The pre- and
post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 1.5T (A, B) and 7.0T brain MRI (C, D) in a patient with pituitary adenoma (Patient Number 3 in
Table 2). Precontrast (A) and postcontrast (B) T1-weighted sellar images from 1.5T brain MRI show a well-enhancing intrasellar mass lesion
located on the left side of the sellar turcica with a deviated pituitary stalk to the right side. In contrast, the precontrast (C) and
postcontrast (D) T1-weighted sellar images from 7.0T brain MRI do not provide a clear margin of the sellar mass lesion and its margin with
the adjacent neurovascular structures in the left cavernous sinus. The flow related artifacts of both internal carotid arteries (ICAs) in
the cavernous sinus as well as the susceptibility artifacts coming from the interface of the air-density area of the paranasal sinus and
bony structures of skull base are noticeable around the surrounding structures of the pituitary adenoma. 1.5T and 7.0T MRI for chordoma. The
T2-weighted axial and contrast-enhancing T1-weighted sagittal images from 1.5T (A, B) and 7T brain MRI (C, D) in a patient with a chordoma
(Patient Number 22 in Table 2). T2-weighted axial (A) and postcontrast (B) T1-weighted sagittal images from 1.5T brain MRI show an
irregularly enhancing multi-loculated mass lesion located in the clivus extending into the sphenoid sinus. In contrast, T2-weighted axial
(C) and postcontrast (D) T1-weighted sagittal images from 7.0T brain MRI do not provide a clear margin between the sellar mass lesion and
the adjacent neurovascular structures in the skull base area. The flow related artifacts of both ICAs in the cavernous sinus as well as the
susceptibility artifacts coming from the interface of the air-density area of the paranasal sinus and bony structures of skull base are
noticeable around the surrounding structures of the chordoma. 1.5T and 7.0T MRI for central neurocytoma. T2-weighted axial and post-contrast
T1-weighted coronal images from 1.5T brain MRI (A, B) and T2-weighted axial and post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 7.0T brain MRI
(C, D) in a patient with a central neurocytoma (Patient Number 7 in Table 2). A T2-weighted image from 1.5T brain MRI (A) shows the
vascularity of the brain tumor & draining veins on the surface of the tumor located in the central portion of the lateral ventricles. Post-
contrast coronal images from 1.5T brain MRI (B) demonstrate an intraventricular enhancing mass lesion mainly located in the left lateral
ventricle extending into the right lateral ventricle. In contrast to the 1.5T MRI, T2 axial images from 7.0T brain MRI (C) show a clearer
image of the tumor margin between the tumor and its surrounding structures and the interface with the thalamo-caudate nucleus. A post-
contrast T1-weighted coronal image from 7.0T brain MRI (D) shows better contrast between the white and gray matter in the cortical brain
surface in contrast to the 1.5T brain MRI. However, the flow from the deep draining veins of the internal cerebral veins and both transverse
sinuses results in linear artifacts crossing over the midline in the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 7.0T brain MRI. In
addition, chemical shift artifacts caused by the interface between the cerebellar hemisphere and petrous bone hampers the signal-to-noise
ratio of the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal image from 7T brain MRI. 1.5T and 7.0T MRI for cavernous hemangioma. T2-weighted axial and
post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 1.5T brain MRI (A, B) and T2-weighted axial and post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from
7.0T brain MRI (C, D) in a patient with a cavernous hemangioma (Patient Number 20 in Table 2). Compared to the T2-weighted axial image from
1.5T brain MRI (A), the hemorrhagic contents in different stages of the cavernous hemangioma are more clearly visualized in the T2-weighted
axial images from the 7T brain MRI (C). Compared to the 1.5T brain MRI (B), the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 7.0T brain
MRI (D) show a sharper margin between the white matter and cavernous hemangioma in the brain parenchyma. However, the flow from both the
middle cerebral arteries causes flow-related linear artifact crossing over the midline in the post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from
the 7T brain MRI (D). 1.5T and 7.0T MRI for metastatic brain tumor of non-small cell lung carcinoma. T2-weighted axial and post-contrast
T1-weighted coronal images from 1.5T brain MRI (A, B) and T2*-weighted axial and post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 7.0T brain
MRI (C, D) in a patient with a metastatic brain tumor of non-small cell lung carcinoma (Patient Number 23 in Table 2). Compared to the 1.5T
brain MRI (A), the T2*-weighted axial images from the 7.0T brain MRI (C) show a clearer image of the tumor margin between the tumor and its
surrounding white matter fiber projections such as left optic radiation. Compared to the 1.5T brain MRI (B), the post-contrast T1-weighted
coronal images from the 7.0T brain MRI (D) show sharply demarcated enhancing tumor lesions with distinct margins from the normal white
matter. 1.5T and 7.0T MRI for glioblastoma. T2-weighted axial and post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 1.5T brain MRI (A, B) and
T2-weighted axial and post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from 7.0T brain MRI (C, D) in a patient with a glioblastoma (Patient Number 8
in Table 2). Compared to the T2-weighted axial images from the 1.5T brain MRI (A), the flow related artifacts caused by the posterior
circulation arteries such as the basilar artery, superior cerebellar artery, or posterior cerebral artery are exaggerated crossing over the
midline in the T2-weighted axial image from the 7.0T brain MRI (C). The post-contrast T1-weighted coronal images from the 1.5T (B) and 7.0T
(D) brain MRI show a small enhancing nodule of recurrent glioblastoma in the right temporal lobe. Imaging parameters for 7.0T MRI sequences
TR, repetition time; TE, echo time; FA, flip angle; FOV, field of view; MPRAGE, multiplanar rapid acquisition gradient-echo sequence; Gd,
gadolinium. Clinical summary of 7.0T brain MRI for 24 patients with brain tumors compared to 1.5T brain MRI F, female; M, male; Lt, left;
Rt, right; Bilat, bilateral; CPA, cerebellopontine angle; CS, cavernous sinus; LV, lateral ventricle; PS, parasaggital; BG, basal ganglia;
Mets, metastasis; Adenoca, adenocarcinoma; MNG, meningioma; NSCLC, non-small cell lung carcinoma; Oligo, oligodendroglioma; GBL,
glioblastoma; YST, yolk sac tumor; CA, cavernous angioma; EVN, extraventricularneurocytoma; NC, not confirmed by pathological examination;
GK, gamma knife radiosurgery; Obs, observation; STX Bx, stereotactic biopsy; TSA, transsphenoidal approach; mod, moderate; BP, back pain;
D,dizziness; ES, feeling of electrical shocks; HA, headache; MC, skeletal muscle contractions; N, No. *1.5T MRI findings are described in
the parenthesis.
