Dextrocardia is a rare condition usually diagnosed incidentally and associated with other congenital anomalies. It is characterized by the
position of the heart in the right hemithorax, with its base-apex axis directed to the bottom right. Its incidence associated with situs
inversus, in the general population, is 1:10.0001. Non-compaction cardiomyopathy (non-compaction CMP), in turn, has an incidence ranging
from 0.014 to 1.3%2, may occur alone or associated with other congenital defects and results from failure in the process of compaction of
myocardial fibers, resulting in the persistence of trabeculations and deep recesses that communicate with the ventricular cavity2. A rare
association of these two diseases is described. Cases similar to the one reported have not been found3-5. A 53-year-old male patient who, in
the past 2 years, has presented brief episodes of collapse and presyncope when performing daily activities, with recent worsening in the
frequency of symptoms. Regarding the habits of life, the patient was sedentary, smoker and social alcoholic. He sought a general
practitioner who requested examinations for initial evaluation. The resting electrocardiogram (ECG) revealed sinus bradycardia (heart rate -
HR: 39 bpm), deviation of the electrical axis to the right and right bundle branch block (Figure 1). The exercise test was considered
abnormal due to arrhythmia (ventricular extrassystoles with periods of bigeminy during exercise and recovery). 24-hour Holter monitoring
showed average heart rate of 37 bpm (minimum of 25 and maximum of 81 bpm) with sinus rhythm interspersed with junctional rhythm.
Atrioventricular conduction was within the normal range and intraventricular conduction revealed right bundle branch disorder. The patient
presented 11,596 pauses lasting longer than 2 seconds, rare and isolated monomorphic ventricular extrasystoles and an episode of non-
sustained supraventricular tachycardia. 12-lead electrocardiogram at rest revealing sinus bradycardia (heart rate: 39 bpm), deviation of the
electrical axis to the right and right bundle branch block. Given the clinical suspicion of sinus node disease, the patient was referred to
a cardiologist, who continued the investigation. Transthoracic echocardiography was requested, which revealed dextrocardia (presence of
situs inversus, heart positioned in the right hemithorax with apex facing right); images suggestive of trabeculations in the left ventricle
(LV); moderate LV diastolic dysfunction with preserved systolic function; left atrial enlargement (57 mm); mild mitral regurgitation. For
diagnostic elucidation and evaluation of cardiomyopathy, CMRI was performed and cine sequences were obtained (balanced steady-state free
precession - b-SSFP), anatomy with black-blood turbo spin-echo sequences, with T1 and T2 weighting with and without fat suppression (TSE BB-
PD and STIR) and delayed enhancement (turbo-field echo with inversion pulse and recovery, 10 minutes after injection of 0.2 mmol/kg of
gadolinium contrast; TE: 6.1; TR 3.0). Besides confirming dextrocardia associated with situs inversus, a slight increase in the left
ventricular cavity associated with excessive trabeculations in the middle and apical segments of the inferior, lateral and anterior LV walls
was observed. The non-compacted/compacted myocardium relationship was higher 2.3 and the trabecular mass corresponded to 38% of the total
left ventricular mass compatible with diagnosis of non-compacted CMP. There were no direct or indirect signs of restriction, thrombus or
pericardial abnormalities. There were no areas of fibrosis or infarction detectable in the sequences after gadolinium injection (Figure 2).
Turbo field echo sequence demonstrating situs inversus characterized by dextrocardia, and transposition of the abdominal organs (2A). Cine
sequences (b-SSFP) in four chambers (2B), two chambers (2C) and short axis (2D), revealing severe trabeculation in middle-apical segments of
lower, lateral and anterior walls. Electrophysiological study was performed; programmed ventricular stimulation caused the induction of
ventricular fibrillation (two extrasystoles). Cardioverter defibrillator (CD) was implanted as a normal procedure. Four months after the CD
implantation, the patient developed deep vein thrombosis in the left upper limb. The patient was anticoagulated and is currently
asymptomatic, with atrial pacing in 100% of the time and no sustained ventricular arrhythmias, treated with amiodarone 200 mg and aspirin
100 mg. Dextrocardia is a rare congenital malformation characterized by displacement of the heart to the right hemithorax with its base-apex
axis oriented to the bottom right1. It is caused by factors intrinsic to the heart and there is no relationship with extracardiac
abnormalities. It has a variable intracardiac anatomy and is usually associated with other congenital abnormalities, such as defects in the
interatrial and interventricular septa, abnormalities of the pulmonary artery and univentricular heart6. Dextrocardia with situs solitus
(dextroversion) corresponds to isolated malposition of the heart and other organs in normal position4-6. In dextrocardia with situs
inversus, there is formation of a mirror image of the heart, great vessels and other organs, preserving the relationship between them. This
is an approximate incidence of 1:10.0001, while in the former one it is of 1:2.8006. The non-compacted CMP is a rare congenital heart
disease with an incidence ranging between 0.014 and 1.3% marked by abnormality of the endomyocardial morphogenesis due to an arrest of
compaction of its fibers2. It is characterized by the presence of a number of prominent trabeculae with intertrabecular recesses which
penetrate deeply through the ventricular myocardium forming a loose network of intertwined muscle fibers. Isolated impairment of LV occurs
in 59% of patients and biventricular impairment occurs in 41%. It is presented in sporadic and familial forms. Only in the latter, genes
related to the disease were described7. The natural history of the disease is not yet well established. Patients with non-compacted CMP may
remain asymptomatic throughout their lives or develop signs and symptoms of heart failure (53%), ventricular tachycardia (41%) or
thromboembolic events due to thrombus in the atria or intertrabecular recesses (24%). Sudden arrhythmic death is the leading cause of
mortality2,4. Doppler echocardiography is the diagnostic procedure of choice in the evaluation of cardiomyopathies, and the incorporation of
new techniques such as tissue Doppler, strain and strain rate imaging, and speckle tracking has been useful in distinguishing normal
myocardial trabeculation and non-compacted CMP2. Jenni et al8, based on observational studies, described with good accuracy, the following
criteria for the echocardiographic diagnosis of non-compacted CMP: (a) presence of numerous and prominent trabeculae (at least four in the
apical area) with deep intertrabecular recesses; (b) two-layer ventricular wall where the thickness of the non-compacted layer is at least
two times greater than the thickness of the epicardial compacted layer; (c) demonstration, through color Doppler, of the presence of blood
flow directly from the ventricular cavity into the intertrabecular recesses; (d) common involvement of the middle lateral, lower middle or
apical LV areas; and (e) absence of other cardiac abnormalities. However, echocardiography is operator-dependent and still has certain
limitations, such as misdiagnosis of non-compacted CMP in normal individuals with fine trabeculations9. Thus, especially in cases with
inadequate echocardiographic window, the combination of imaging methods is useful for confirming or excluding the diagnosis of non compacted
CMP. Hence, the subsequent use of CMRI is valuable because it has greater diagnostic accuracy due to three dimensional cardiac imaging. It
has been shown, in a sample of seven patients with non-compacted CMP, that a > 2.3 ratio between the non-compacted myocardial layer and
compacted myocardial layer during diastole has 86% sensitivity and 99% specificity for the diagnosis of this pathology10. Jacquier et al10
observed that the presence of trabecular mass corresponding to more than 20% of the total LV mass could distinguish, with satisfactory
accuracy, patients with non-compacted CMP of normal controls, with sensitivity and specificity of 93.7%10. In this case, the two criteria
above were found. The combined use of two imaging procedures, including echocardiography and CMRI, has been suggested to confirm or exclude
the diagnosis of non-compacted CMP.2 However, it is important to note that the diagnosis of non-compacted CMP should not be solely based on
the diagnostic criteria of imaging methods. Kolhi et al9 showed that about 24% of patients with dilated CMP and 8% of normal controls
fulfill diagnostic criteria for non-compacted CMP when the diagnostic criteria of imaging methods are used alone. This must be, therefore, a
diagnosis of exclusion. Friedman et al4 and Baskurt et al5 reported cases of association dextroversion and non-compacted CMP in the LV while
Grattan et al3 demonstrated dextroversion associated with biventricular non-compacted CMP. No studies describing the association of
dextrocardia with situs inversus and myocardial non-compaction were found. This seems to be the first case described in the literature,
showing that rare presentation. Conception and design of the research and Acquisition of data: Gonçalves LFG, Souto FMS, Faro FN, Mendonça
RC, Oliveira JLM, Sousa ACS; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Gonçalves LFG, Mendonça RC, Oliveira JLM, Sousa ACS; Writing of the
manuscript and Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Gonçalves LFG, Souto FMS, Faro FN, Mendonça RC, Sousa ACS,
Oliveira JLM. Potential Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Sources of Funding:
There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association: This study is not associated with any post-graduation program.
