Aortic dissections are characterized by cleavage of the aortic wall into two sheets along its longitudinal axis1, extending from a few
millimeters to the entire aorta. Cleavage occurs in the medial layer, almost always at its external third. Thus, rupture and death following
hemorrhage are common. However, some patients survive, with or without surgical treatment, having the disease a chronic evolution. In some
of the cases there are two dissections, including chronic and acute dissections2. Such dissections, however, have been reported in different
segments of the artery. We report three cases in which the wall of the false lumen of chronic dissection split, forming acute dissection and
creating three lumina in the aorta. At the Heart Institute, of almost 250 necropsies of patients with aortic dissections over more than 35
years, there were three with chronic and acute dissections in the same arterial segment (Figure 1). That aspect was evidenced on computed
tomography in one of the cases (Figure 2). All patients were middle-aged (age range, 48 to 62 years) and hypertensive; two were males. None
of the following conditions was identified in any of the three patients: bicuspid aortic valve; aortic coarctation; Marfan syndrome; or
other recognized genetic disorder. Rupture of the segment with acute dissection was observed in all patients, being their cause of death.
Cross section of the thoracic aorta with three lumina. Computed tomography showing aorta with three lumina. The demographic aspects of our
patients did not differ from those of most cases of aortic dissection. In a previous statistics of our institution3, which included one of
the cases here reported, 77.1% of the patients were men, 76.4% died between 40 and 76 years of age, 89.6% were hypertensive, and 57.5% of
those who underwent no operation died due to hemorrhage (that cause of death is less important because only cases with chronic dissection
were included). Although the pathogenesis of aortic dissection has not been totally clarified4, a weakness of the wall is probably present,
linked to alterations in the extracellular matrix, including a reduction in collagen5. That underlying condition is reinforced by the fact
that the artery might have more than one dissection. Dissection in aortas with aneurysms and more than one dissection in different zones of
the same aorta, including acute and chronic dissections, were previously recognized2 and are not uncommon. We report interesting cases, in
which acute dissections occurred in the same segment of the arterial wall with a previous dissection, causing the arterial lumen to split
into three. It is worth noting that such aspect can be seen on computed tomography and should be recognized to prevent misinterpretation.
Conception and design of the research, Analysis and interpretation of the data and Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual
content: Benvenuti LA, Mansur AJ, Gutierrez PS; Acquisition of data and Writing of the manuscript: Benvenuti LA, Kihara Filho EN, Mansur AJ,
Gutierrez PS. This study was approved by the Committee of Ethics for Analysis of Research Projects (CAPPesq) of the Hospital das Clínicas of
the Medical School of the Universidade de São Paulo. Professor Gutierrez received a productivity grant for research from the Conselho
Nacional de Desenvolvimento Científico e Tecnológico (CNPq). Potential Conflict of Interest: No potential conflict of interest relevant to
this article was reported. Sources of Funding: There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association: This study is not
associated with any post-graduation program.
