We herein discuss a patient who underwent simultaneous combined right nephrectomy and right lobectomy of the liver. A 64-year-old male was
diagnosed with a huge right renal cell carcinoma (RCC), 13 cm in diameter, which was invading directly into the right hepatic lobe. This
type of RCC has been rarely reported, and an anterior approach using the liver hanging maneuver was extremely useful during hepatic
parenchymal dissection. The liver parenchymal dissection was performed prior to mobilization of the liver, because the mobilization of the
right lobe of the liver was impossible. During the hepatic parenchymal resection, the liver was suspended with the tape and transected, and
thereafter, retroperitoneal dissection, nephrectomy and right lobectomy of the liver were completed. The patient was discharged from the
hospital on the 12th postoperative day with an uneventful clinical course. The anterior approach using the liver hanging maneuver during
hepatic parenchymal resection can be safe and feasible for huge RCC invading the right hepatic lobe. Simultaneous nephrectomy and major
hepatectomy is an uncommon surgical technique. The indications for this operation in previous reports were adrenocortical carcinoma, a germ
cell tumor, benign cysts, renal cell carcinoma (RCC) with liver metastasis and locally advanced RCC with direct extension into the adjacent
liver parenchyma . Among these indications, locally advanced RCC with direct extension into the right lobe of the liver was the most common
indication . During conventional right lobectomy of the liver, the right lobe of the liver is generally mobilized completely, with the right
hepatic vein controlled outside the liver prior to parenchymal transection , and this conventional approach is helpful in reducing the
amount of blood loss . However, mobilization of the right hepatic lobe cannot be performed in some cases when the tumor is huge. The
anterior approach is often adopted for patients requiring difficult major right hepatic resection for hepatocellular carcinoma . We herein
report the case of a patient who underwent combined nephrectomy and right hepatectomy by an anterior approach using Belghiti’s hanging
maneuver for a huge RCC invading the right hepatic lobe. We planned combined nephrectomy and right lobectomy of the liver for a 64-year-old
male whose underlying disease was right RCC invading the right lobe of the liver. The tumor was 13 cm in diameter, and almost the whole
right lobe was replaced by the invading tumor (Fig. 1).Fig. 1 a A transverse and b a coronal computed tomography image. Preoperative
computed tomography showed that there was a huge renal cell carcinoma (13 cm in diameter), invading the right lobe of the liver a A
transverse and b a coronal computed tomography image. Preoperative computed tomography showed that there was a huge renal cell carcinoma
(13 cm in diameter), invading the right lobe of the liver The operation was performed after neoadjuvant chemotherapy using Sunitinib which
was administered for advanced RCC. Exposure of the abdominal cavity was carried out through a reversed L incision from the skin to the
peritoneum. First, the posterior peritoneum was opened, and the right kidney was mobilized from the retroperitoneal space. The right renal
artery, vein and urethra were ligated and divided. Further dissection of the right adrenal gland and right kidney could not be done, because
the right lobe of the liver interrupted the exposure of the upper side of the kidney and right adrenal gland. Cholecystectomy was performed,
and then the right hepatic artery and first branch of the right portal vein were ligated and dissected. The mobilization of the right lobe
of the liver was impossible, so we performed the liver parenchymal transection prior to mobilization of the liver. The space between the
right and middle hepatic veins was dissected, and then a long clamp was gently inserted in a cephalad direction at the 10–11 o’clock
position, which was the dissected space between the right and middle hepatic veins. When the tip of the clamp reached the space between the
veins, two cotton tapes were clenched in the tips of the clamp. The clamp was pulled down through the entire length of the retrohepatic
inferior vena cava, placing the tape in the retrohepatic space. The liver parenchyma was suspended on the tape. The liver parenchymal was
then transected using a Cavitron Ultrasonic Surgical Aspirator (CUSA: Valleylab Inc., Boulder, CO, USA) along the demarcation line.
Intermittent vascular inflow occlusion (Pringle Maneuver) was applied twice for 15-min intervals. Intraoperative ultrasonography was
performed to assess the vascular and biliary anatomy, as well as the tumor distribution. Suspending the liver with the tape enabled us to
control the bleeding at the time of the liver parenchymal dissection (Fig. 2). After completion of the parenchymal dissection, the short
hepatic veins to the right lobe of the liver and right adrenal gland were ligated and divided. The right hepatic vein was divided with an
Echelon 45 Endopath stapler (Ethicon Inc., NJ, USA) after liver parenchymal dissection. Retroperitoneal dissection of the upper kidney and
resection of the right adrenal gland were done, and the combined nephrectomy and right hepatectomy were completed. The blood loss during
surgery was 1,925 ml, and the resected weight of the right kidney and right hepatic lobe was 1,970 g (Fig. 3a). The histological specimens
(Fig. 3b) indicated renal clear cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid changes and direct invasion to the liver. The patient’s postoperative course
was uneventful, and he was discharged from the hospital on the 12th day after the operation.Fig. 2Scheme: The liver hanging maneuver and
anterior approach during hepatic parenchymal dissection enabled a safe combined right nephrectomy and resection of the right lobe of the
liverFig. 3 a The resected specimens of the right kidney and right lobe of the liver. b Histological specimens of the tumor showed a
proliferation of carcinoma cells with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in a sheet-like pattern, with nests and focally fascicular
proliferation of spindle-shaped cells, together with massive necrosis, indicating renal clear cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid changes and
direct invasion into the liver Scheme: The liver hanging maneuver and anterior approach during hepatic parenchymal dissection enabled a safe
combined right nephrectomy and resection of the right lobe of the liver a The resected specimens of the right kidney and right lobe of the
liver. b Histological specimens of the tumor showed a proliferation of carcinoma cells with clear to eosinophilic cytoplasm arranged in a
sheet-like pattern, with nests and focally fascicular proliferation of spindle-shaped cells, together with massive necrosis, indicating
renal clear cell carcinoma with sarcomatoid changes and direct invasion into the liver In this report, we presented the case of a patient
who underwent combined nephrectomy and right hepatectomy using the anterior approach, because the tumor was too large to be mobilized and
rotated. Combined nephrectomy and major hepatectomy is an uncommon surgical technique. The anterior approach is a surgical procedure that
can be employed without rotation and mobilization of the liver before parenchymal transection. Lai employed the anterior approach for major
hepatectomy when rotation and mobilization of the liver was difficult. Belghiti developed an anterior approach using the liver hanging
maneuver technique. Using this technique, the liver is suspended with tape during the procedure, which enables control of the bleeding in
the deeper parenchymal plane and guides the direction of the anatomic parenchymal transection. A nasogastric tube, a soft silicon
multitubular drain, or a cotton tape is usually used as the tape for the liver hanging maneuver , and Belghiti originally recommended using
a soft silicon multitubular drain. We used two cotton tapes for the liver hanging maneuver, because the material was relatively handy, hard
to slip, and easy to fold when passed between the liver parenchyma and the IVC. Recently, Yezhelyev reviewed the cases of patients who
underwent simultaneous nephrectomy with major hepatectomy, and demonstrated that this procedure can be performed with acceptable mobility
and mortality. Among the 37 cases, 29 patients had RCC, and all of them had RCC in the right kidney. Among the 29 patients with RCC, 14
patients had direct invasion to the right lobe of the liver. In this type of RCC, the mobilization of the right lobe of the liver prior to
parenchymal dissection is usually difficult, because en bloc resection of right kidney and right lobe of the liver is necessary, and the
sizes of the right kidney and invaded right lobe of the liver are large. The anterior approach using the liver hanging maneuver is an
indispensable technique in such cases. It has been shown that a tumor invading the inferior vena cava (IVC) was a contraindication for the
liver hanging maneuver , and RCC rarely invades the IVC. Therefore, the liver hanging maneuver can be applied easily and is feasible.
Furthermore, advanced RCC and adrenocortical carcinoma tend to be accompanied by tumor thrombus in the IVC. Yezhelyev showed that in eight
of 18 patients with RCC, adrenocortical and germ cell carcinoma, the tumor was accompanied by IVC thrombus. The anterior approach using the
liver hanging maneuver would therefore be a good technique even in these patients. Previously published reports described twenty patients
who underwent combined nephrectomy and major hepatectomy for RCC directly invading into the right lobe of the liver, like the present case
(Table 1). This is the third case of a combination of the anterior approach and hanging maneuver for huge RCC in the literature, because
Yezhelyev reported two cases. We wanted to examine the clinicopathological findings of RCC like this case, but there were no descriptions in
the previous studies. In our institute, the anterior approach is indicated when rotation and mobilization of the right liver is considered
to be difficult, and the liver hanging maneuver is indicated when right hepatectomy is performed for hepatocellular carcinoma in patients
without contraindications, such as tumor infiltration into the retrohepatic avascular spaces or inferior vena cava and adhesions between the
inferior vena cava and liver. Therefore, the anterior approach using the liver hanging maneuver was indicated in this case.Table 1Published
reports of combined major hepatectomy and nephrectomy for right RCC directly extending into the right lobe of the liverAuthorYear N Sites of
metastasis or extensionAA + LHMBennett 19952• Direct liver extension–Fujisaki 19973• Direct liver extension and liver metastasis–Kawata
20002• Direct liver extension, IVC thrombus and left adrenal metastasis–• Direct liver extension and IVC thrombusJohnin 20012• Direct liver
extension–Alves 20032• Direct liver extension and liver metastasis (S2,3,4,5,6,7,8)–• Direct liver extension and liver metastasis
(S2,3,7,8)Wong 20061• Direct invasion into the liver, diaphragm, lung and adrenal gland–Dorado 20071• Direct liver extension–Yezhelyev
20087• Direct liver extension2• Two patients showed IVC thrombusCurrent20101• Direct liver extension1 AA + LHM anterior approach using liver
hanging maneuver Published reports of combined major hepatectomy and nephrectomy for right RCC directly extending into the right lobe of the
liver AA + LHM anterior approach using liver hanging maneuver In the previously reported cases (Table 1), two patients underwent an anterior
approach using the liver hanging maneuver to avoid tumor rupture. It might have been difficult to accomplish such operations without using
this approach, so these patients were also indicated for this unusual procedure. In terms of the other cases, there were four cases with
inferior vena cava tumor thrombus, but these reports did not describe any obvious tumor infiltration into the retrohepatic avascular spaces
or inferior vena cava. If there were no adhesions between the inferior vena cava and the liver, the anterior approach with the liver hanging
maneuver would be indicated for all cases to control bleeding at the deeper parenchymal plane and to guide the direction of the anatomical
parenchymal transection. In this case, the patient underwent neoadjuvant chemotherapy using Sunitinib before surgery. Some reports [11, 12]
have indicated that there are surgical morbidities associated with using the tyrosine kinase inhibitor, Sunitinib, as neoadjuvant
chemotherapy. Thomas reported that surgical resection of RCC after targeted therapy is feasible with low morbidity in most patients, but
that significant complications can occur, raising concerns about the possible compromise of tissue and/or vascular integrity, including a
significant risk of hemorrhage under a concomitant liver resection and wound complications. Harshman reported that there was no significant
increase in perioperative complications, however, he showed a significant increase in the development of intraoperative adhesions. In the
present case, there were no intraoperative or postoperative complications, such as severe hemorrhage, however, moderate adhesions were seen
between the omentum and peritoneum. This might have been due to the effects of neoadjuvant chemotherapy. Powles reported that 38 of 52
(73 %) patients obtained a clinical benefit from adjuvant therapy (by RECIST) before surgery. He reported a 6 % partial response rate, while
none of the patients became ineligible due to local progression. In the case of locally advanced RCC invading the liver, neoadjuvant
chemotherapy using Sunitinib, followed by combined nephrectomy and hepatectomy, could be a feasible and reasonable strategy. In conclusion,
a combination of nephrectomy and right hepatectomy by the anterior approach using Belghiti’s liver hanging maneuver appears to be safe and
feasible for patients with huge renal cell carcinoma directly invading the right lobe of the liver.
