We report a case of multinodular thyroid goiter in an 80-year-old man who successfully underwent tracheal stent placement for respiratory
distress caused by the thyroid goiter and following two radiofrequency (RF) ablation sessions performed for thyroid volume reduction. This
sequential treatment allowed elective stent removals four weeks after the second RF ablation session because the thyroid volume had been
progressively reduced. Combination therapy of temporary airway stenting and RF ablation for the treatment of thyroid goiter has two
advantages, i.e., immediate reliefs of dyspnea with airway stenting and reductions of the thyroid volume with RF ablation, and thus,
allowing symptom reliefs even after the stent removals. Progressive enlargement of a multinodular thyroid goiter can compress the trachea
and thus cause airway obstruction symptom (1). In numerous clinical reports (2-5), researchers have demonstrated their clinical experiences
with tracheal stent placements for the palliation of tracheal stenosis in patients with thyroid goiter. Tracheal stenting can provide
symptomatic relief of patients' respiratory problems, and can thus allow the medical staff to perform other therapeutic or palliative
curative measures such as thyroidectomy or laser treatments (2-4). However, complications such as stent migration, sputum retention or
granulation tissue formation through the stent meshes or at either ends of the stent limit the effectiveness for long-term placement of
airway stents (6, 7). Radiofrequency (RF) ablation is reported to be a valid and safe approach for the treatment of benign thyroid nodules
with pressure symptoms (8, 9). However, ablated thyroid nodules only slowly decrease in size after several months or years (9), and edema
and resulting volume increase can occur immediately following RF ablation (10, 11). We report the case of an elderly male who successfully
underwent tracheal stent placements for respiratory distresses, and then, subsequent RF ablation for thyroid volume reduction. This
sequential treatment then allowed elective stent removals for this patient with thyroid goiter with tracheal stenosis after the RF ablation.
An 80-year-old man was presented with acute onset of dyspnea associated with cough and sputum. He had suffered from a thyroid goiter for 50
years, although it was non-toxic and growing very slowly. Intermittent dyspnea had begun 10 years earlier and had worsened during the
previous week. The patient complained of dyspnea while resting when he was seen in our Emergency Department. He had not undergone previous
treatments for his thyroid goiter (Fig. 1A). CT scans (Fig. 1B) obtained on his first admission showed remarkable narrowing of the tracheal
lumen caused by enlarged bilateral thyroid glands. The narrowest diameter of the stenosis was 5.8 mm. To relieve his severe dyspnea, a self-
expandable stent was placed in the stenotic trachea (Fig. 1C, D). The normal diameter of the adjacent trachea was 18 mm and the stricture
length was 6 cm; therefore, we chose a stent with diameter of 18 mm and length of 8 cm. According to our specifications, the stent was
designed to be retrievable, self-expandable, and silicone-covered with barbed metallic (S&G Biotech, Seongnam, Korea). The metal used for
the stent was nitinol. The stent had a retrievable design for elective removals when it was no longer necessary or if there were stent-
related complications. Two RF ablation sessions were then performed one and six weeks following stent placement and for which we used an
18-gauge, 1-cm, active-tip, internally cooled electrode (VIVA, STARmed, Goyang, Korea). On the basis of our previous clinical experiences
(11, 12), an ultrasound-guided, trans isthmic approach was used to insert an electrode along the short axis of the nodule, and all nodules
were then managed by using the moving shot technique. With the moving shot technique, multiple, small, conceptual ablation units are ablated
unit-by-unit by moving the electrode (10-12). We began ablations with 30 W of RF power. If a transient hyperechoic zone did not form at the
electrode tip within 5-10 seconds, the RF power was increased in 10-W increments up to 80 W. The procedure was accepted by our patient, and
ablation was terminated when the planned imaginary units were changed to transient hyperechoic zones. We decided to remove the stent four
weeks after the second RF ablation session because the thyroid volume had progressively reduced externally according to follow-up on CT
scans (Fig. 1E-G); there was also a concern regarding possible complications, such as stent migration or granulation tissue formation around
the stent, resulting from a long-dwelling stent. The last follow-up CT scans (Fig. 1H) obtained five weeks following stent removal showed
stable maintenance of the reduced thyroid volume and an apparent narrow tracheal lumen which was, however, relatively wider than that seen
on the initial CT scans. The narrowest diameter measured 6.4 mm on the last follow-up CT scans. This report is recorded four months after
the stent removel and the patient was able to breathe normally. Placement of airway stents is safe and effective in patients with airway
obstructions caused by benigns or malignant thyroid diseases (2, 3). Although airway stenting can improve a patient's quality of life due to
the immediate reliefs of dyspnea, it is difficult to expect long-term stent durability as stent-related complications because stent
migrations or granulation tissue formations are common (6, 7). As the initial treatment, RF ablation for thyroid goiter with compressive
symptoms is not appropriate because acute symptom reliefs cannot be achieved. In fact, it has been reported that compressive symptoms can
worsen directly after the RF ablation as initial swelling of the thyroid nodule due to percutaneous laser ablation, and was probably caused
by thyroid tissue edema (13). Combination therapy consisting of temporary airway stenting and the RF ablation for thyroid goiter has not yet
been reported. It has two definite advantages, one being the immediate reliefs of dyspnea with airway stenting and the other being the
reduction of the thyroid volume with RF ablation which allows long-term symptom reliefs even following stent removal. Because the temporary
stenting could be combined with radiation/chemotherapy for esophageal or airway malignancy (14, 15), temporary airway stenting with
concurrent RF ablation may be an effective palliative treatment for thyroid goiters as resolutions of the dyspnea may be expected to delay
and prevent stent-related complications. RF ablation could thus become important for achieving long-term reliefs of compressive symptoms as
the thyroid volume could then be substantially reduced (8, 9, 11, 16). This kind of combination therapy is expected to be very useful in
patients presenting symptoms of definite dyspnea, however, it is difficult to predict the benefits of tracheal stenting in combination with
RF ablation when patients with thyroid goiters have no respiratory symptoms. We, therefore, assume that tracheal stent placements could be
delayed until the patient's symptoms actually surface. In our patient, the last follow-up CT scans obtained nine weeks after the second RF
ablation session, i.e., five weeks following elective stent removals, showed a slightly widened tracheal lumen as compared with that seen on
the initial CT scans obtained before the treatment. Although narrowing of the trachea was still observed, it seemed to be stable because the
patient experienced no dyspnea in his daily routine life, and further tracheal narrowing was not expected as the overall thyroid volume was
decreased. This type of combination therapy can also be used for patients with inoperable thyroid malignancy of airway obstructions. Because
the RF ablation can result in tumor volume reductions secondary to the destruction of thyroid cancer cells (17), long-term palliation is
expected with the use of a combination of airway stenting and RF ablation for inoperable thyroid malignancy. Tracheal stenting and
radiofrequency ablation for thyroid goiter. A. At time of patient's admission, photograph (A) shows diffuse swelling on neck. Axial CT scan
(B) shows stenotic tracheal lumen (arrows) caused by enlarged thyroid lobes with internal nodules and calcifications. C, D. Placement of
retrievable, self-expandable and silicone-covered with barbed metallic stent to relieve dyspnea. Radiograph (C) obtained after contrast
injection through 5 Fr catheter shows stenotic tracheal lumen (arrows). Radiograph (D) obtained immediately after stent placement shows
well-expanded stent. Two radiofrequency ablation sessions were performed one and six weeks, respectively, following stent placement (not
shown). E-G. CT scan (E) and photograph (F) obtained four weeks following second radiofrequency ablation session, shows reduction of thyroid
volume. Stent was removed by using retrievable hook (arrow) (G). H. Follow-up CT scan obtained five weeks following stent removal shows
stable maintenance of reduced thyroid volume and slightly widened tracheal lumen (arrows) as compared with initial CT scans obtained before
stent placement.
