A 35-year old man presented to the emergency room with sudden onset of fever, dyspnoea, bilateral pleuritic thoracalgy, and an exanthematous
vesicular rash. He was a smoker and his two year-old son had chickenpox two weeks earlier. The patient had no previous immunization or known
contact with the disease. On examination, he was febrile (39° C) with signs of respiratory distress (oxygen saturation of 88% on room air).
An extensive polymorphic pruritic rash with macular, vesicles, pustules and crusty lesions was noticed (Fig. 1). Laboratory studies showed
mild thrombocytopenia and elevation of liver enzymes (AST, ALT, GGT) and lactate dehydrogenese (LDH). Chest X-ray revealed multinodular
interstitial infiltrates in both lungs (Fig. 2). Arterial blood gases were consistent with hypoxemic respiratory failure (PaO2 of 51.8
mmHg). HIV testing was negative. The diagnosis of varicella pneumonia with mild liver involvement on an immunocompetent patient was made and
supportive treatment and intravenous acyclovir (10 mg/kg every 8 h) was promptly initiated. Excellent clinical and radiological evolution
was documented, as was analytical normalization. After one week of therapy, the patient was discharged fully recovered. Skin examination:
Polymorphic pruritic rash with macular, vesicles, pustules and crusty lesions. Chest radiographic: Bilateral multinodular interstitial
infiltrates. Varicella pneumonia has an approximate incidence of 1:400 cases, being the main cause of morbility and mortality reaching up to
50 per cent in patients requiring mechanical ventilation12. Male gender2 and tobacco use3 are know risk factors. Respiratory symptoms,
mainly dyspnoea and dry cough develop after a few days of rash onset, although pleuritic chest pain and haemoptysis can occur. Patients
usually demonstrate progressive hypoxemia and chest radiographs reveal diffuse bilateral infiltrates. Supportive care and acyclovir are the
mainstay of treatment. Mechanical ventilation, and probably steroids1 are reserved for life-threatening varicella pneumonia. The vast
majority of healthy adults exibhits complete recovery4.
