To the Editor: Hansen disease, or leprosy, in pregnancy is a rarely reported event in the United States. In 2009, a total of 213,036 new
cases of leprosy were detected throughout the world (1). Nine countries in Africa, Asia, and Latin America consider it a public health
problem, accounting for ≈75% of the global disease prevalence (1). We describe a case of leprosy in a 27-year-old woman with 1 previous
pregnancy and 1 live-born infant who had onset of subcutaneous nodules before she became pregnant. She appeared at her initial prenatal
visit at 24.1 weeks of gestation after recently emigrating from Mexico. The patient reported that subcutaneous nodules had developed on her
arms, legs, back, and abdomen ≈5 months before the visit, 2 weeks before her last menstrual period. A skin biopsy revealed acute and chronic
panniculitis with acid-fast bacilli, and the condition was confirmed by PCR to be lepratamatous leprosy. Treatment included rifampin,
Dapsone, clofazimine, and prednisone. The patient’s condition was monitored closely with ultrasounds at serial intervals; these showed
consistent fetal growth at the 50th percentile. At 37 weeks and 1 day, her membranes ruptured. She underwent a repeat cesarean delivery
because the method of leprosy transmission is not yet proven and to prevent possible vertical transmission to the infant. The patient
delivered a female infant weighing 6 lb, 8 oz, with Apgar scores of 8 and 9. On postoperative day 1, Dapsone treatment was restarted; she
was given Dapsone, 50 mg daily, and prednisone, 40 mg daily. She was discharged with the baby on postoperative day 3. Leprosy is a chronic
disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae. The disease mainly affects the skin and nerves and, if untreated, can cause permanent damage. It is
curable, however, and disability can be avoided. The World Health Organization recommends multidrug therapy consisting of Dapsone, rifampin,
and clofazimine (1). This combination has proven highly effective, and patients are no longer infectious after the first dose (1). Virtually
no relapses occur and antimicrobial drug resistance does not develop (1). Pregnancy causes a relative decrease in cellular immunity, which
allows M. leprae to proliferate (2). Careful management can prevent permanent nerve damage. Leporatamatous leprosy and relapse after
treatment are more commonly seen throughout pregnancy because of the pregnant woman’s immunodeficient state (2,3).,Infants are usually less
affected than mothers; nevertheless, selection of the mother's antimicrobial drug regimen must ensure adequate control of the bacteria while
avoiding teratogenicity and in utero adverse effects, such as low birthweight (3,4). The infant has a potentially high risk of contracting
leprosy from the mother by skin-to-skin contact or droplet transmission, particularly if she has not received treatment. Suggested citation
for this article: Gimovsky AC, Macri CJ. Leprosy in pregnant woman, United States . Emerg Infect Dis . 2013 Oct [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid1910.130463
