After entrainment pacing, the postpacing interval of a diastolic potential may be misinterpreted if the distal tip of the ablation catheter
captures a remote bystander pathway adjacent to the critical isthmus of a complex reentrant circuit in a structurally diseased heart. We
discuss this possible pitfall of entrainment mapping of reentrant ventricular tachycardia, observed after a healed myocardial infarction.
Entrainment mapping is a key maneuver used to locate the critical isthmus of a reentrant circuit during catheter ablation of a reentrant
ventricular tachycardia (VT). The postpacing interval (PPI) of the diastolic potential (DP), reflective of the activation in the zone of
slow conduction following entrainment pacing limited to the critical isthmus, is typically equal to the tachycardia cycle length (TCL) ,
whereas the PPI of a DP during entrainment pacing outside the critical isthmus is of electrophysiologic interest [2, 3]. We describe the
electrophysiologic behavior and significance of the PPI after entrainment pacing of a remote bystander pathway near the reentry circuit of
VT after a healed anteroseptal myocardial infarction, followed by autopsy of the heart. A 73-year-old man with a history of healed
anteroseptal myocardial infarction underwent radiofrequency (RF) catheter ablation of VT with right bundle branch block and undetermined QRS
axis morphology, refractory to drug therapy. The patient had undergone implantation of a cardioverter-defibrillator 2 years earlier. A left
ventriculography revealed the presence of anterior wall dyskinesia and a 20 % left ventricular ejection fraction. An area of low-amplitude
bipolar electrograms, defined as ≤ 0.6 mV , was present on a CARTO-X-P electroanatomic map (Biosense Webster, Diamond Bar, CA, USA) of the
anterior left ventricular endocardial surface, recorded during sinus rhythm (Fig. 4a). VT was reproducibly induced by programmed ventricular
stimulation from the right ventricular apex. Pacing during VT at the basal edge of the low-voltage zone, where a low-amplitude DP was
recorded, showed concealed entrainment, with a pacing stimulus-QRS equal to the DP-QRS interval, and a PPI of the DP equal to the TCL,
indicating that the pacing site was located on the critical isthmus of the reentrant circuit (Figs. 1, 4b). Further entrainment from the
same site, at a slightly longer paced cycle length and identical pacing output, caused constant fusion without pacing stimulus-QRS delay,
and a PPI of the DP nearly similar to the TCL (Figs. 2, 4b). The delivery of RF energy for 21 s at that site, using a 4-mm-tip, nonirrigated
catheter at a maximum power of 50 W and maximum temperature of 60 °C, terminated and eliminated the inducibility of VT (Fig. 3) [5, 6].Fig.
1Surface electrocardiograms and intracardiac recordings during entrainment pacing from electrode 1–2 of the ablation catheter (ABL), at a
cycle length of 360 ms. The QRS morphology during pacing was similar to that during VT, consistent with concealed entrainment. The 90-ms
interval (left bidirectional solid arrow) between pacing stimuli (S) and onset of QRS (left vertical dashed line) is equal to the 90-ms
interval (right solid bidirectional arrow) between diastolic potential (DP) (asterisk) and onset of QRS (right vertical dashed line). The
381-ms postpacing interval (PPI) of the DP (dashed bidirectional arrow) is nearly equal to the 380-ms tachycardia cycle length (TCL). The
interval between S and the ventricular electrogram (hash) recorded from ABL 3–4 was 158 ms. See text for further explanations. I, II, V1
surface electrocardiogram, ABL 3–4 to 1–2 proximal and distal bipoles of the ABL, RVA right ventricular apexFig. 2Surface electrocardiograms
and intracardiac recordings during entrainment pacing from electrode 1–2 of the ablation catheter (ABL) at a cycle length of 370 ms. During
pacing, the QRS complexes are fused, with absence of an S-QRS delay. The 40-ms interval between the pacing stimulus (S) and the ventricular
electrogram (hash), recorded from ABL 3–4, is shorter than in Fig. 1. The 78-ms interval between S and DP (asterisk) recorded from ABL 3–4
is the same as in Fig. 1. The 520-ms PPI of the local ventricular electrogram (true PPI) (bidirectional thin arrow) is longer than the
380-ms TCL, whereas the 375-ms PPI of the DP (false PPI) (bidirectional dashed arrow) is shorter than the 380-ms TCL. A 40-ms interval is
recorded from ABL 3–4 between S and the ventricular electrogram. See text for further explanations. Abbreviations as in Fig. 1 Fig. 3 a
Intracardiac electrograms at the site of successful ablation immediately before radiofrequency (RF) delivery (RF on). b Intracardiac
electrograms recorded during RF delivery, at the time of termination of the tachycardia. neither the DP nor the local ventricular
electrogram recorded during the application of RF at the site of successful ablation decreased significantly. Abbreviations as in Fig. 1
Surface electrocardiograms and intracardiac recordings during entrainment pacing from electrode 1–2 of the ablation catheter (ABL), at a
cycle length of 360 ms. The QRS morphology during pacing was similar to that during VT, consistent with concealed entrainment. The 90-ms
interval (left bidirectional solid arrow) between pacing stimuli (S) and onset of QRS (left vertical dashed line) is equal to the 90-ms
interval (right solid bidirectional arrow) between diastolic potential (DP) (asterisk) and onset of QRS (right vertical dashed line). The
381-ms postpacing interval (PPI) of the DP (dashed bidirectional arrow) is nearly equal to the 380-ms tachycardia cycle length (TCL). The
interval between S and the ventricular electrogram (hash) recorded from ABL 3–4 was 158 ms. See text for further explanations. I, II, V1
surface electrocardiogram, ABL 3–4 to 1–2 proximal and distal bipoles of the ABL, RVA right ventricular apex Surface electrocardiograms and
intracardiac recordings during entrainment pacing from electrode 1–2 of the ablation catheter (ABL) at a cycle length of 370 ms. During
pacing, the QRS complexes are fused, with absence of an S-QRS delay. The 40-ms interval between the pacing stimulus (S) and the ventricular
electrogram (hash), recorded from ABL 3–4, is shorter than in Fig. 1. The 78-ms interval between S and DP (asterisk) recorded from ABL 3–4
is the same as in Fig. 1. The 520-ms PPI of the local ventricular electrogram (true PPI) (bidirectional thin arrow) is longer than the
380-ms TCL, whereas the 375-ms PPI of the DP (false PPI) (bidirectional dashed arrow) is shorter than the 380-ms TCL. A 40-ms interval is
recorded from ABL 3–4 between S and the ventricular electrogram. See text for further explanations. Abbreviations as in Fig. 1 a
Intracardiac electrograms at the site of successful ablation immediately before radiofrequency (RF) delivery (RF on). b Intracardiac
electrograms recorded during RF delivery, at the time of termination of the tachycardia. neither the DP nor the local ventricular
electrogram recorded during the application of RF at the site of successful ablation decreased significantly. Abbreviations as in Fig. 1 The
patient died of incessant VT 1 year after the ablation procedure, and a postmortem examination of the heart was performed. The heart weighed
590 g. The left ventricle was open across the anterior aneurysm and the apex (Fig. 4c), along the same plane as the right oblique
fluoroscopic view shown in Fig. 4b, exposing the ablation region. On visual inspection the left ventricle was not dilated, although the
posterior and septal walls were hypertrophied, and a 6 cm × 5 cm × 2 mm anterior aneurysm was present, with a trabeculated and whitish
endocardial surface (Fig. 4c). The site of successful ablation was at the basal margin of the aneurysm (Fig. 4b, c). The aneurysm was
sectioned transmurally, perpendicular to the mitral annulus, stained with Masson trichrome, and processed for standard microscopic
examination (Fig. 4d), which revealed nontransmural fibrosis within two-thirds of the aneurysmal endomyocardium, corresponding to the
ablation lesion (Fig. 4e), and nonablated, surviving endomyocardium adjacent to the aneurysm (Fig. 4f).Fig. 4 a Electroanatomic map of the
left ventricle, including voltage map during sinus rhythm. Healthy tissue >0.6 mV is represented by the color purple, scar border (0.1–0.6
mV), blue/green/yellow, and scar (<0.1 mV), red. b Right oblique fluoroscopic view of the ablation catheter (ABL) with its tip located at
the site of successful ablation. c Macroscopic section of the left ventricle along the plane shown in a, with schematic representation of
the ablation catheter with its tip at the basal margin of the aneurysm. d Low-power light-microscopic view of the zone of anterior aneurysm
corresponding to the yellow rectangle shown in b; the red rectangles show the higher-power microscopic areas shown at the base (red
rectangle) and in the apical region of the aneurysm (green rectangle). e High-power microscopic section at the basal margin of the aneurysm;
f High-power microscopic section of the apical aneurysmal region (color figure online) a Electroanatomic map of the left ventricle,
including voltage map during sinus rhythm. Healthy tissue >0.6 mV is represented by the color purple, scar border (0.1–0.6 mV),
blue/green/yellow, and scar (<0.1 mV), red. b Right oblique fluoroscopic view of the ablation catheter (ABL) with its tip located at the
site of successful ablation. c Macroscopic section of the left ventricle along the plane shown in a, with schematic representation of the
ablation catheter with its tip at the basal margin of the aneurysm. d Low-power light-microscopic view of the zone of anterior aneurysm
corresponding to the yellow rectangle shown in b; the red rectangles show the higher-power microscopic areas shown at the base (red
rectangle) and in the apical region of the aneurysm (green rectangle). e High-power microscopic section at the basal margin of the aneurysm;
f High-power microscopic section of the apical aneurysmal region (color figure online) The morphology, amplitude, and timing of the local
ventricular electrograms and DP relative to the QRS complex recorded from the ablation catheter during VT are similar in Figs. 1 and 2,
confirming that the tip of the ablation catheter was in the same position relative to the critical isthmus during both episodes of
entrainment pacing. Since, as shown in Figs. 1 and 2, the 90-ms DP-QRS interval represents <30 % of the 380-ms TCL, the pacing site was
located near the exit of the critical isthmus (Fig. 5b) . However, in contrast to Fig. 1, no latency of the pacing stimulus-QRS complex
associated with a short, 40-ms interval between the pacing stimulus and the local ventricular electrogram is visible during entrainment
pacing in Fig. 2, suggesting that, unlike the capture limited to the critical isthmus in Fig. 1, pacing in Fig. 2 captured the ventricular
myocardium outside the zone of slow conduction. When entrainment pacing captured the ventricular myocardium outside the zone of slow
conduction, the orthodromic wavefront reached the recording site of the DP in the critical isthmus without colliding with the antidromic
wavefront (Fig. 5c). Therefore, in contrast to the PPI of the DP shown in Fig. 1, that shown in Fig. 2 is not a true PPI, generally defined
as the interval between the last pacing stimulus and the subsequent, directly captured electrogram . The true PPI in Fig. 2 corresponded to
the interval between the last pacing stimulus and the captured ventricular electrogram, obviously longer than the TCL, suggesting that
pacing in Fig. 2 captured a remote bystander pathway (Fig. 5c) . Consequently, the PPI of the DP in Fig. 2 corresponds to the interval
between the pacing site in the remote bystander pathway and the DP recorded in the critical isthmus (pseudo-PPI) (Fig. 5c). Furthermore,
that the PPI of the DP is nearly equal to the TCL in Fig. 2 does not mean that the pacing site was on the critical isthmus. Although the
interval between the pacing stimulus and the DP recorded at the proximal electrode of the ablation catheter during entrainment pacing was
similar in Figs. 1 and 2, it is not clear that pacing in Fig. 2 also captured the critical isthmus. Even in the presence of simultaneous
capture of the essential and remote bystander pathways, neither the orthodromic nor the antidromic wavefronts originating from pacing at the
critical isthmus would affect the orthodromic wavefront created by pacing at the remote bystander pathway, for the following reasons. When
entrainment pacing captures the critical isthmus and the remote bystander simultaneously (as illustrated in Fig. 5d), the Nth antidromic
wavefront originating from pacing at the remote bystander collides constantly, probably outside the critical isthmus, with the Nth
orthodromic wavefront created by pacing at the critical isthmus, representing atypical constant fusion (Fig. 5d). Furthermore, the Nth
antidromic wavefront originating from pacing at the critical isthmus collided within the critical isthmus, with the N − 1th orthodromic
wavefront created by pacing at the remote bystander (Fig. 5d). Finally, the Nth orthodromic wavefront created by pacing at the remote
bystander pathway reached the recording site of the DP in the critical isthmus, without colliding with the antidromic wavefront (Fig. 5c).
Consequently, the PPI corresponds to the interval between the pacing site in the remote bystander and the DP recording in the critical
isthmus (Fig. 5c).Fig. 5Schematic representation of the reentry circuit (a), tentative explanations of the PPI after the last capture in
Figs. 1 and 2 (b and c, respectively), and the impulse propagation during entrainment pacing in Fig. 2 (d). The critical isthmus across the
scar and outer loop outside the scar are represented. The tip of the multipolar ablation catheter positioned on the critical isthmus,
adjacent to the remote bystander, is illustrated in b and c. The dashed arrow in a shows the direction of activation in the reentry circuit,
corresponding to the wavefront propagation during tachycardia. The solid arrows in b and c, and the dashed arrow in c show the direction of
activation in the reentry circuit, corresponding to the wavefront of the true and pseudo-PPI, respectively. The solid and dashed arrows in d
show the respective propagations of the orthodromic and antidromic wavefronts. See text for further explanations Schematic representation of
the reentry circuit (a), tentative explanations of the PPI after the last capture in Figs. 1 and 2 (b and c, respectively), and the impulse
propagation during entrainment pacing in Fig. 2 (d). The critical isthmus across the scar and outer loop outside the scar are represented.
The tip of the multipolar ablation catheter positioned on the critical isthmus, adjacent to the remote bystander, is illustrated in b and c.
The dashed arrow in a shows the direction of activation in the reentry circuit, corresponding to the wavefront propagation during
tachycardia. The solid arrows in b and c, and the dashed arrow in c show the direction of activation in the reentry circuit, corresponding
to the wavefront of the true and pseudo-PPI, respectively. The solid and dashed arrows in d show the respective propagations of the
orthodromic and antidromic wavefronts. See text for further explanations This was probably due to simultaneous contact of the distal tip of
the ablation catheter with the critical isthmus and the neighboring remote bystander pathway, along with a slight change in the contact with
the endocardium associated with a minimal change in the paced cycle length, without a change in the pacing output/pulse width of 5 V/0.5 ms.
The pathologic-fluoroscopic correlation suggested that the critical isthmus and the bystander pathway were consistent with the ablated,
basal margin of an aneurysm and surviving endomyocardium adjacent to the aneurysm, respectively, both of which could be simultaneously in
contact with the tip of the ablation catheter (Fig. 4). In summary, entrainment pacing capturing the remote bystander pathway simultaneously
with a recording of the DP represented a pseudo-PPI of the DP. This phenomenon, which may be observed in complex reentrant circuits with a
critical isthmus located near the remote bystander, is not rare. The pseudo-PPI of the DP can be misinterpreted as the true PPI, especially
when constant fusion causing minimal QRS fusion and simultaneous recording of the DP is misidentified as concealed entrainment. When
entrainment pacing captures the remote bystander pathway simultaneously with a recording of a DP, causing constant fusion, the PPI of the DP
does not represent the true PPI. In some circumstances, the pseudo-PPI might be shorter than the tachycardia cycle length [2, 3]. The
absence of QRS fusion, i.e., concealed entrainment, must be confirmed during entrainment pacing to measure the true PPI of the DP. The
authors have no conflict of interest to disclose.
