Anginal chest pain is usually related to atherosclerotic coronary artery disease and its clinical presentation differs depending on the
pathological aspects of the lesions. Left subclavian artery stenosis (SAS) as a cause of angina pectoris (AP) is often reported in patients
with a history of coronary artery bypass grafting through left internal mammary artery (LMA) involved in the process of subclavian
stenosis1. Very often, this diagnosis may be overlooked especially when patients are asymptomatic and present ischemic abnormalities on
scintigraphy. Subclavian stenosis may also be associated with neurological symptoms by virtue of reversal of the flow through the vertebral
artery due to subclavian hypotension. This is the case of a patient who underwent coronary artery bypass grafting with LMA for anterior
descending artery (ADA) not involved in the subclavian stenosis and typical growing anginal pain related to physical exertion with the upper
limbs or predominant involvement of the limbs. Stent-assisted percutaneous correction of the ostial and subtotal subocclusion of the left
subclavian artery (LSA) made the patient asymptomatic. Male patient, 72 years old, taxi driver, type 2 diabetes, former smoker with a
history of coronary artery bypass surgery four years before. The patient was asymptomatic four months before. Then, anginal pain on exertion
that rushed or worsened when the patient used the upper limbs associated with frequent tiredness in the left arm. The anginal pain acquired
characteristics of instability over time, and the patient was sent to an emergent coronary angiography with angina at rest. The selective
injection of contrast into the left coronary artery opacified the left subclavian artery via retrograde flow of contrast through the
ipsilateral mammary artery and slow flow with slight distal opacification of the anterior descending branch after anastomosis. The injection
of contrast in the proximal third of the left subclavian artery or in the transverse aorta showed ulcerated and subtotal lesion of the LSA
ostium with slight flow (Figure 1). The absence of opacification of the left internal mammary artery was a source of concern. Aortography
with digital subtraction and selective angiography of left subclavian artery displaying subtotal and ostial stenosis of LSA, as well as
absence of opacification of LMA. After stenting in the LSA ostium, the flow of contrast was restored, as well as the anatomy of the segment
(Figure 2). Normal flow of contrast through the left internal mammary artery was observed, completely opacifying the distal bed of the
anterior descending artery. A new injection of contrast into the native left coronary trunk showed the absence of retrograde flow through
the LMA towards the LSA. Selective angiography with digital subtraction of LSA after successful stenting. Observe normal opacification of
LMA. SAS is relatively frequent and, in general, it is an atherosclerotic condition that is more common in diabetics, smokers and in those
suffering from peripheral arterial disease. The correlation of cerebral vascular accident and coronary artery disease with SAS has received
little attention2. However, Reivichi et al3 reported, in 1961, two patients with clinical signs of cerebrovascular insufficiency associated
with reversal of flow through the vertebral artery, secondary to subclavian obstruction. The term "subclavian steal syndrome" was introduced
by Fisher in 1962. Since then, a few cases have been reported in the literature4, because of its low incidence in the general population.
Another anatomic aspect that also characterizes a flow steal syndrome in these patients occurs when the intercostal branches of great
importance originate from the left mammary artery and do not suffer ligation during the coronary artery bypass surgery. Symptoms of SAS in
the arms are claudication, reported by the patient, digital cyanosis and, in severe cases, distal necrosis by embolism. However, the most
striking but rare symptoms are those affecting the brain and heart. Neurological symptoms in general characterize vertebrobasilar syndrome
and the most common condition is vertigo. Symptoms of myocardial ischemia are generally found in patients that underwent coronary artery
bypass grafting when there is involvement of the internal mammary artery in the SAS process. In our case, although no involvement of the
mammary artery was observed in the SAS, the distal coronary flow in the left anterior descending artery supplied by the mammary artery was
impaired due to diversion of blood flow to the left subclavian artery5,6. Thus, the increase in oxygen consumption determined by exertion in
the left upper limb stimulated retrograde flow through the mammary artery, thus reducing distal perfusion of the left anterior descending
artery. Hence the concomitant angina and claudication of the left arm. Regarding the SAS, the indirect measurement of blood pressure in both
arms is paramount and essential for the clinical suspicion. The difference in systolic blood pressure between the upper limbs above 15 mmHg
correlates well with positive angiography, the gold standard for diagnosing SAS. This is true even though the sensitivity is quite lower
than specificity. This fact is generally attributed to cases of bilateral involvement or non-significant unilateral stenosis5-7. Since most
patients with SAS are asymptomatic, the measurement of blood pressure with cuff on one arm only may incorrectly determine blood pressure,
not controlling a potential hypertension and failing to raise an important diagnostic suspicion. In this case, the finding of blood pressure
difference was only found after angiographic diagnosis given the urgency of the case. Our patient is a taxi driver, age 72, and was referred
for emergency coronary angiography with clinical picture of persistent angina at rest. As risk factors for SAS, the patient presented type
II diabetes mellitus using insulin, history of smoking for 50 years and dyslipidemia. Four years before, he had underwent coronary artery
bypass surgery with placement of two bypass grafts and anastomosis of the left internal mammary artery to the anterior descending artery in
the middle third. Four months before, the patient was asymptomatic, although with an irregular clinical control. In his clinical history,
there was onset or worsening of anginal chest pain at exertion involving the upper limbs, mainly the left ones. His left upper limbs were
easily fatigued. The selective injection of contrast into the left coronary trunk showed opacification of the left subclavian artery
retrogradely through the left internal mammary artery with reduced distal flow to the anterior descending artery. There was no common "flow
competition aspect" between the LMA and the proximal ADA. The injection of contrast into the proximal third of the LSA and the transverse
aorta revealed ostial subocclusion of that branch with almost no flow through it. No LMA opacification was attributed to the reverse flow.
The patient was immediately referred to successful and uneventful balloon angioplasty followed by stenting (6.0 x 12 mm Palmaz Genesis -
Cordis, USA) in the stenosed segment. During immediate eight-week follow-up, the patient remained asymptomatic even when subjected to
exertion involving the upper limbs, which are now with equalized blood pressure. Author contributions Conception and design of the research,
Acquisition of data, Analysis and interpretation of the data, Writing of the manuscript: Osterne EMC, Osterne ECV, Motta VP, Motta PAM,
Salame CK, Osterne TEC; Statistical analysis, Obtaining funding and Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content: Osterne
EMC, Osterne ECV, Osterne TEC. Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported.
Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study. Study Association This study is not associated with any post-
graduation program.
