Transdiaphragmatic intercostal hernia is uncommon and mostly related to blunt or penetrating trauma. We report three similar cases of cough-
induced transdiaphragmatic intercostal hernia, highlighting the anatomic findings obtained with different imaging modalities (radiography,
ultrasonography, CT, and magnetic resonance) in each of the cases. The occurrence of herniation of abdominal contents through the diaphragm
and intercostal muscles is an uncommon phenomenon, which can be related to blunt or penetrating trauma.( 1 - 4 ) The protective cough reflex
has been sporadically associated with the genesis of this entity.( 2 , 5 - 7 ) Failing to recognize transdiaphragmatic intercostal hernia
can be potentially fatal, because of possible complications, such as strangulation.( 8 ) We report the cases of three patients who developed
cough-induced herniation of intestinal loops through the diaphragm and intercostal space, associated with rib fracture, describing the
radiographic, ultrasonographic, CT, and magnetic resonance findings obtained in the cases. A 53-year old man presented to an outpatient
clinic reporting bulging of the right inferolateral region of the chest, as well as postprandial gastric fullness and "strange" noises in
the region. The patient associated the onset of the condition (more than 1 year prior) with a violent attack of coughing, followed by
severe, persistent pain in the right thoracoabdominal junction, worsened by exertion. He reported that, at the time, that episode had been
diagnosed as "pneumonia at the right lung base". Subsequently, an area of ecchymosis was noted along the right lateral thorax and abdomen.
The pain and the hematoma resolved over weeks, whereas the progressive bulging of the region, which worsened with the patient in the
orthostatic position, persisted. Physical examination revealed that his abdomen was globular, flaccid, and painless on palpation, and that
there was irreducible bulging of the right eighth intercostal space, which became more evident during a Valsalva maneuver. There was an
abnormal distance between the ribs of the aforementioned intercostal space, with signs of a previous separation of the costochondral
junction. A CT scan of the chest revealed fractures of the anterior portion of the eighth rib, widening of the eighth intercostal space, and
diaphragmatic discontinuity, through which loops of small intestine, as well as part of the colon and omentum, protruded into and occupied
the subcutaneous tissue of the chest wall. In view of the diagnosis of transdiaphragmatic intercostal hernia, the patient underwent surgery
via a right thoracotomy. The hernial sac was identified, the abdominal viscera were returned to the abdominal cavity, the hernial orifice
was closed with a double prolene mesh and several interrupted sutures, and the pleural cavity was drained. In closing the thoracotomy, the
widened intercostal space was reduced with the use of reinforcement with the same type of mesh, which was fixed to the lower and upper ribs.
The patient had a favorable postoperative course, being discharged from hospital on the sixth day, with no evidence of immediate
complications (Figure 1). Figure 1 In A, posteroanterior chest radiograph. The arrow demonstrates opacification at the base of the right
hemithorax, interspersed with some gas images. The arrowhead indicates soft tissue swelling in the periphery of the right lateral chest
wall, with some gas images similar to those observed at the base of the right hemithorax. In B, coronal reconstruction of a noncontrast CT
scan of the chest showing herniation of abdominal content into the base of the right hemithorax through the diaphragm (arrow), as well as
through the eighth intercostal space (asterisk), headed toward the subcutaneous tissue of the chest wall. Note the presence of thin loops in
the subcutaneous tissue of the chest wall (arrowhead). A 71-year-old man reported a 2-year history of bulging of the right thoracoabdominal
region, the onset of which occurred after an attack of coughing, associated with severe, stabbing pain in that region, worsened by coughing
and relieved with painkillers. In addition, an area of ecchymosis was noted along the lateral region of the abdomen after the onset of pain.
The pain gradually resolved, and there was progressive bulging of the region. Physical examination revealed that his abdomen was globular,
flaccid, and painless on palpation, and that there was reducible bulging of the eighth intercostal space, which became more evident during a
Valsalva maneuver. There was a 4-5 cm distance between the ribs of the aforementioned intercostal space, with signs of a previous separation
of the costochondral junction. A chest radiograph showed fractures of the anterior portion of the eighth rib and widening of the eighth
intercostal space. Ultrasound examination of the region with a high-frequency transducer demonstrated a formation with echotexture similar
to that of the liver, protruding through the aforementioned intercostal space into the subcutaneous region. A noncontrast CT scan confirmed
that it was transdiaphragmatic intercostal herniation of part of hepatic segment V. The patient underwent surgical correction via a
thoracotomy, and a diaphragmatic tear was identified near the chest wall. The diaphragm was reattached to the ribs, and the rib borders were
approximated with a nonabsorbable suture (Figure 2). Figure 2 In A, photograph showing visible bulging of the region of the right eighth
intercostal space, on examination of the chest wall. In B, surface ultrasound examination of the region demonstrating a formation with
echotexture similar to that of the liver, extending beyond the musculoskeletal boundaries of the chest wall and occupying the subcutaneous
region (arrows). In C and D, axial CT slices of the upper abdomen demonstrating that part of hepatic segment V protruded through the area of
muscle discontinuity, headed toward the adjacent subcutaneous region. A 64-year-old male former smoker (55 pack-years) who was being
noncompliant with COPD treatment had an episode of uncontrollable coughing that caused acute, intense pain in the right hypochondrium,
followed by the onset of ecchymosis, which was visible locally. He sought medical care and received symptomatic treatment only. He
experienced progressive worsening of dyspnea, and, after 4 months, dyspnea on minimal exertion became evident. At that point, the patient
sought a pulmonologist, who requested a chest radiograph, which revealed opacification of the right lung base and soft tissue swelling in
the right inferolateral chest wall, interspersed with gas images. The patient was tachypneic (RR, 26 breaths/min) and had decreased breath
sounds at the right base. In addition, an area of weakness of the ipsilateral chest wall was noted on palpation. A CT scan of the chest
demonstrated herniation of abdominal adipose tissue into the right lung base and chest wall, through discontinuities in the diaphragmatic
and intercostal muscles, associated with the presence of fractures of the last ribs on the right. Magnetic resonance confirmed the extensive
herniation of the abdominal content through the muscle discontinuities. The patient subsequently underwent surgical correction of changes,
with the presence of intestinal loops in the subcutaneous and intrathoracic regions being confirmed after a thoracotomy. On examination of
the cavity, it was of note that there was a rent in the anterolateral portion of the diaphragm, through which the abdominal content
protruded. After the structures were returned to their site of origin, the diaphragmatic defect was sutured, and reinforcement with a
polypropylene mesh was performed. The patient had a favorable postoperative course, being discharged on the sixth day, with decreased
dyspnea (Figure 3). Figure 3 In A, posteroanterior chest radiograph demonstrating opacification at the base of the right hemithorax,
superiorly displacing the lung parenchyma (white arrow). Note the widening of the eighth intercostal space and the presence of a structure
with gas density, similar to an intestinal loop, occupying the soft tissues of the adjacent chest wall (black arrow). In B, axial CT image
of the chest, where it is possible to observe the passage of epiploic fat into the base of the right hemithorax and subcutaneous tissue of
the chest wall (asterisk). Note the presence of a fracture of the ninth rib (white arrow). In C, coronal T1-weighted non-fat-saturated
magnetic resonance image demonstrating the presence of a large amount of abdominal fat herniated into the base of the right hemithorax. Note
the discontinuity of the intercostal muscles (black arrow), through which the content herniates into the subcutaneous tissue of the chest
wall. In D, photograph showing the main surgical finding: a rent in the anterolateral portion of the diaphragm. Intercostal hernia is mostly
caused by blunt or penetrating trauma to the thoracoabdominal region.( 9 ) The occurrence of "spontaneous" diaphragmatic rupture with
herniation of abdominal structures is uncommon.( 2 , 10 ) Intercostal hernia is mostly associated with factors leading to a sudden increase
in abdominal pressure, such as weight lifting, dancing, labor, vomiting, and cough, the last being the most common cause.( 10 , 11 )
Transdiaphragmatic intercostal hernia can be acute or can progress over time (even years) to be diagnosed.( 9 ) It occurs because of rupture
of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles, which is mostly associated with rib fracture. There are two sites that are most susceptible:
anteriorly, the costochondral junction to the sternum, because of lack of external intercostal muscles; and, posteriorly, the rib vertebral
angle, because of lack of internal intercostal muscles.( 9 ) When intercostal hernia is related to attacks of uncontrollable coughing, it is
mostly associated with rib fracture. The cough mechanism involves the opposing forces of the abdominal muscles and chest wall acting on the
ribs, leading to fractures and muscle tears.( 1 , 2 , 9 ) It presents clinically as reducible bulging of the affected intercostal space.( 9
) Our three patients reported the development of ecchymosis in the thoracoabdominal region, with progressive bulging. Chest radiograph can
demonstrate opacification at the affected lung base, with gas images suggestive of intestinal loops, which extend into the chest wall
through the widened intercostal space. The hernial content can be more accurately evaluated by ultrasound, especially when it comes to solid
organs, such as the liver. However, this method is not always able to define the hernial content, particularly when the interposition of
air-distended loops obstructs the acoustic window, with CT being superior in these cases.( 9 ) To the best of our knowledge, this is the
first case report to demonstrate the aspect of an transdiaphragmatic intercostal hernia as seen by magnetic resonance. Treatment in these
cases is surgery, which involves reducing the hernia, suturing the diaphragmatic defect, and approximating the ribs. Because of the
possibility of recurrence, reinforcement with a prosthetic mesh can be performed. Study carried out at the Hospital Israelita Albert
Einstein, São Paulo, Brazil. Financial support: None. Hérnias intercostais transdiafragmáticas são eventos raros e são geralmente
relacionadas a traumas abertos ou fechados, com risco de complicações. Relatamos três casos semelhantes, decorrentes de crises de tosse,
destacando o aspecto das alterações anatômicas nos exames de imagem obtidos em cada situação (radiografia, ultrassonografia, TC e
ressonância magnética) A ocorrência de herniação do conteúdo abdominal através do diafragma e da musculatura intercostal é um fenômeno raro,
que pode estar relacionado a traumas abertos ou fechados.( 1 - 4 ) O reflexo protetor de tosse tem sido associado, esporadicamente, à gênese
dessa entidade.( 2 , 5 - 7 ) A falha em reconhecer as hérnias intercostais transdiafragmáticas pode ser potencialmente fatal, em decorrência
de eventuais complicações, como o estrangulamento.( 8 ) Relatamos o caso de três pacientes que evoluíram com herniação de alças intestinais
através do diafragma e do espaço intercostal, associada à fratura de costelas, após crise de tosse. Serão apontados os achados de imagem em
radiografia, ultrassonografia, TC e ressonância magnética (RM) realizados nesses casos. Homem de 53 anos procurou atendimento médico
ambulatorial, relatando abaulamento na região torácica inferolateral direita, além de plenitude gástrica pós-prandial e ruídos "estranhos"
na região. O paciente associou o início do quadro (há mais de 1 ano) a uma crise intensa de tosse, seguida de dor persistente e de forte
intensidade na transição toracoabdominal direita, com piora aos esforços. Relatava que aquele episódio havia sido diagnosticado na ocasião
como "pneumonia na base direita". Subsequentemente, observou-se uma área de equimose em toda a região lateral direita do tórax e abdome.
Houve regressão da dor e do hematoma ao longo das semanas, persistindo o abaulamento progressivo da região, que piorava à posição
ortostática. Ao exame físico, apresentava abdome globoso, flácido, indolor à palpação, com abaulamento não redutível no oitavo espaço
intercostal direito, mais evidente à manobra de Valsalva. Havia um distanciamento anômalo entre os arcos do espaço citado, com sinais de
separação anterior na junção costocondral. A TC de tórax evidenciou fraturas na porção anterior do oitavo arco costal, alargamento do oitavo
espaço intercostal e descontinuidade diafragmática, por onde alças do intestino delgado, parte do cólon e epíplon se insinuavam até ocupar o
tecido subcutâneo da parede torácica. Frente ao diagnóstico de herniação intercostal transdiafragmática, o paciente foi submetido a cirurgia
através de toracotomia direita. Foi identificado o saco herniário, foram recolocadas as vísceras abdominais na cavidade e foi fechado o
orifício herniário com uma tela de prolene, com camada dupla e vários pontos separados, com drenagem da cavidade pleural. No fechamento da
toracotomia, para a aproximação do espaço intercostal alargado, também foi utilizado um reforço com a mesma tela, fixando-a nos arcos
costais inferior e superior. O paciente teve evolução pós-operatória favorável, com alta hospitalar no sexto dia, sem evidências de
complicações imediatas (Figura 1). Figura 1 Em A, radiografia de tórax em incidência posteroanterior. A seta demonstra opacificação da base
do hemitórax direito, com algumas imagens gasosas de permeio. A ponta de seta aponta para um abaulamento de partes moles na periferia da
parede torácica lateral direita, com algumas imagens gasosas semelhantes àquelas observadas na base do hemitórax direito. Em B, reconstrução
coronal de TC de tórax sem contraste, demonstrando herniação de conteúdo abdominal para a base do hemitórax direito através do diafragma
(seta), bem como através do oitavo espaço intercostal (asterisco), em direção ao tecido subcutâneo da parede torácica. Notar a presença de
alças delgadas no tecido subcutâneo da parede torácica (cabeça de seta). Homem de 71 anos relatava abaulamento na região toracoabdominal
direita há 2 anos, com início após uma crise de tosse, associada a dor em "pontada" de forte intensidade naquela região, com piora ao tossir
e melhora com analgésicos. Observou também uma área de equimose em toda a região lateral do abdome após o aparecimento da dor. A dor
regrediu progressivamente, surgindo um abaulamento da região com crescimento progressivo. Ao exame físico, apresentava abdome globoso,
flácido, indolor à palpação, com abaulamento redutível no oitavo espaço intercostal, mais evidente à manobra de Valsalva. Havia um
distanciamento de 4-5 cm entre os arcos do espaço citado, com sinais de separação anterior na sua junção costocondral. A radiografia de
tórax mostrava fraturas na porção posterior do oitavo arco costal e alargamento do oitavo espaço. A ultrassonografia direcionada da região
com transdutor de alta frequência demonstrou insinuação de uma formação com ecotextura semelhante à do fígado através do referido espaço
intercostal até a região subcutânea. A TC sem contraste confirmou tratar-se de uma herniação transdiafragmática e intercostal de parte do
segmento hepático V. Foi realizada a correção cirúrgica através de toracotomia, sendo identificado esgarçamento diafragmático junto à parede
torácica. Foi realizada a reinserção do diafragma aos arcos costais e a aproximação dos rebordos costais com fio inabsorvível (Figura 2).
Figura 2 Em A, fotografia demonstrando o abaulamento perceptível à inspeção da parede torácica na região do oitavo espaço intercostal
direito. Em B, ultrassonografia superficial dirigida demonstrando formação com ecotextura semelhante à hepática, ultrapassando os limites
osteomusculares da parede torácica e ocupando a loja subcutânea (setas). Em C e D, cortes axiais de TC no abdome superior, demonstrando
protrusão de parte do segmento hepático V através de área de descontinuidade do plano muscular, em direção à loja subcutânea adjacente.
Homem de 64 anos, ex-tabagista (55 anos-maço), fazia tratamento irregular para DPOC. Teve um episódio de tosse incoercível que provocou dor
aguda e intensa no hipocôndrio direito, seguida de surgimento de equimose extensa, visível localmente. Procurou assistência médica, sendo
tratado apenas com sintomáticos. Evoluiu com piora progressiva da dispneia, tornando-se evidente aos pequenos esforços após 4 meses. Naquele
momento, procurou um pneumologista, que solicitou radiografia de tórax, revelando opacificação da base pulmonar direita e aumento das partes
moles na parede torácica inferolateral direita, com imagens gasosas de permeio. O paciente estava taquidispneico (FR, 26 ciclos/min) e com
diminuição de murmúrios na base direita, notando-se à palpação uma área de fraqueza da parede torácica ipsilateral. A TC de tórax demonstrou
herniação de tecido gorduroso abdominal para a base pulmonar direita e parede torácica, através de descontinuidades dos planos musculares
diafragmático e intercostal, associada à presença de fraturas dos últimos arcos costais à direita. A RM confirmou a extensa herniação do
conteúdo abdominal através das descontinuidades musculares. Foi então submetido à correção cirúrgica das alterações, com confirmação da
presença de alças intestinais nas regiões subcutâneas e intratorácicas após a toracotomia. À inspeção da cavidade, destacava-se a laceração
da porção anterolateral do diafragma, por onde se insinuava o conteúdo abdominal. Após a redução das estruturas ao seu local de origem, foi
feita a sutura diafragmática reforçada com tela de polipropileno. O paciente apresentou boa evolução pós-operatória, recebendo alta no sexto
dia, com melhora da dispneia (Figura 3). Figura 3 Em A, radiografia de tórax em incidência posteroanterior demonstrando opacidade na base do
hemitórax direito, deslocando superiormente o parênquima pulmonar (seta branca). Notar o alargamento do oitavo espaço intercostal e a
presença de uma estrutura com densidade gasosa, semelhante a uma alça intestinal, ocupando as partes moles da parede torácica adjacente
(seta preta). Em B, imagem axial de TC de tórax, onde é possível se observar a passagem da gordura epiploica para a base do hemitórax
direito e tecido subcutâneo da parede torácica (asterisco). Notar a presença de uma fratura do nono arco costal (seta branca). Em C, imagem
coronal de ressonância magnética, ponderada em T1, sem saturação de gordura, demonstrando a presença de uma grande quantidade de gordura
abdominal herniada para a base do hemitórax direito. Notar a descontinuidade no plano muscular intercostal (seta preta), por onde o conteúdo
causa herniação para o tecido subcutâneo torácico. Em D, fotografia mostrando o achado cirúrgico principal: laceração anterolateral do
diafragma. As hérnias intercostais geralmente são causadas por um trauma na região toracoabdominal, seja contuso ou penetrante.( 9 ) A
ocorrência de ruptura diafragmática "espontânea" com herniação de estruturas abdominais é rara.( 2 , 10 ) Geralmente estão associadas a
fatores que levam ao aumento súbito da pressão abdominal, como levantamento de pesos, dança, parto, vômitos e tosse, sendo essa última a
causa mais frequente.( 10 , 11 ) A hérnia intercostal transdiafragmática pode ser aguda ou progredir ao longo do tempo, levando até alguns
anos para ser diagnosticada.( 9 ) Ocorre por ruptura do diafragma e dos músculos intercostais, geralmente associada à fratura de arcos
costais. Existem dois locais mais suscetíveis: a junção costocondral com o esterno anteriormente, pela ausência do músculo intercostal
externo, e o ângulo do arco costal com a vértebra posteriormente, pela ausência do músculo intercostal interno.( 9 ) Quando a hérnia
intercostal está relacionada a crises incoercíveis de tosse, geralmente é associada à fratura de costelas. Durante o mecanismo da tosse
estão presentes forças opostas da musculatura abdominal e da parede torácica sobre a costela, levando a fraturas e esgarçamento muscular.( 1
, 2 , 9 ) Apresenta-se clinicamente como abaulamento redutível na região do espaço intercostal acometido.( 9 ) Nossos três pacientes
relataram a formação de equimose na região toracoabdominal, com abaulamento progressivo. A radiografia de tórax pode demonstrar a
opacificação da base pulmonar acometida, com imagens gasosas sugestivas de alças intestinais, que se estendem para a parede torácica através
de espaço intercostal alargado. O conteúdo herniário pode ser mais bem avaliado através da ultrassonografia, principalmente quando se trata
de órgão sólido, como o fígado. Entretanto, esse método nem sempre consegue definir o conteúdo herniário, em especial quando a interposição
de alças distendidas com gás bloqueia a janela acústica, sendo então a TC superior nesses casos.( 9 ) Com base no melhor do nosso
conhecimento, esse parece ser o primeiro relato a demonstrar o aspecto de uma hérnia intercostal transdiafragmática à RM. O tratamento
desses casos é cirúrgico, envolvendo a redução da hérnia, sutura do defeito diafragmático e aproximação dos arcos costais. Em virtude da
possibilidade de recorrência, há a possibilidade de se realizar reforço com uma tela protética. Trabalho realizado no Hospital Israelita
Albert Einstein, São Paulo (SP) Brasil Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
