The female flea Tunga penetrans is responsible for a cutaneous parasitosis known as Tungiasis. We report the clinical case of a 12 year-old
Caucasian boy who sought treatment in a dermatological private office due to a painful lesion in the plantar area and whose dermoscopic
examination, without skin contact, allowed the visualization of parasite's movement inside the skin. The diagnosis of tungiasis is clinical,
but it can be aided by in vivo and ex vivo dermoscopic examination of the lesion. A fêmea da pulga Tunga penetrans é responsável pela
dermatose ectoparasitária denominada Tungíase. Relatamos o caso clínico de um adolescente branco de 12 anos de idade, o qual procurou
atendimento em consultório dermatológico devido à lesão dolorosa na planta e cujo exame dermatoscópico sem contato com a pele permitiu
visualizar o movimento do parasita dentro da pele. O diagnóstico da tungíase é clínico, porém pode ser auxiliado pelo exame dermatoscópico
in vivo e ex vivo da lesão. The female flea Tunga penetrans is responsible for a cutaneous parasitosis known as Tungiasis.1 This small; one-
millimeter long flea is endemic in countries of Latin America, Caribbean and sub-Saharan Africa.1,2 It may evolve with complications, such
as secondary infections, lymphedema, bone exposing ulcerations, gangrene and tetanus.1 The parasite lives in dry soil, so that it can,
especially during drought seasons, disperse in the ambient and penetrate the skin of the hosts (feline, swine and rodent), where it produces
thousands of eggs whilst feeding on blood.2,3 The diagnosis of tungiasis is clinical, but it can, however be aided by in vivo and ex vivo
dermoscopic examinations as described in the following case.3,4 A 12 year-old male patient reported since two weeks before, the presence of
a painful lesion on the left plantar area. There was a history of traveling to the rural area in the countryside of São Paulo State. The
clinical exam showed a 0.5 cm papule, yellowishwhite, with a black dot in its center (Figures 1A and 1B). With the aid of the dermatoscope
(DermLite DL3, 3Gen, EUA), and without any skin contact we could observe a white halo, with bluish-gray areas and one central orifice
containing a light-brown structure (Figures 1C and 1D). It was possible to observe movements on the bluish-gray areas inside the white halo
(see video). We proceeded with the saucerization of the lesion, followed by hemostasis by fulguration. A - Yellowish-white plantar papule
with a central black dot 1B: Figure 1A seen in greater detail. 1C: In vivo dermoscopy performed without skin contact showing a white halo
with a central orifice containing a light-brown structure (original augmentation 10x). 1D: Figure 1C seen in greater detail, showing bluish-
grey areas (likely corresponding to the parasite’s exoskeleton or his gut) (●), White halo (corresponding to the parasite’s dilated abdomen
containing the eggs) (❋) Light-brown structure appearing in the center of the orifice (posterior segment of the parasite) (◆) The specimen
was placed in a 4% formol solution and in the ex vivo observation it was possible to note the white ventral helical structures ("whitish
chains"), as described initially by Bakos (Figures 2A and 2B) 5-8 The material was sent to histopathological analysis (Figures 2C and 2D).
Aspect of the saucerized lesion, embed in formol, the external portion of the lesion is seen through the dermatoscope. 2B: Ventral portion
of the specimen, where oval structures corresponding to the eggs can be seen through the dermatoscope (❋) (original augmentation 10x). 2C:
Histopathological examination of the excised skin showing the parasite, the host’s skin exhibiting compact hyperkeratosis and just below the
epidermis, the parasite’s body involved by a chitin structure (HE, 100x). 2D: Figure 2C seen in greater detail where it can be observed: the
patient’s straighten epidermis (●), the parasite’s chitin exoskeleton (◆), the flea’s intestinal lumen (■) the eggs inside the abdomen (✝)
Work performed at Alergoskin Alergia e Dermatologia SS Ltda - São Paulo (SP), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
