Cutaneous metastasis is a phenomenon that results from a tumor spreading via lymphatic or vascular embolization, direct implant during
surgery or skin involvement by contiguity. The primary malignant tumor that most commonly metastasizes to the skin in women is breast
cancer, which can be manifested through papulonodular lesions, erysipeloid or sclerodermiform infiltration, en cuirasse. We report the case
of a female patient, 78 years old, with papular, scaly and confluent lesions in the right breast for one year, progressing to edema and skin
infiltration, reduction of breast volume and plaque en cuirasse, and similar lesions in the contralateral breast and abdomen for four
months. The pathological diagnosis was invasive ductal breast carcinoma with Paget-like foci, epidermal skin metastases and lymphatic
embolization. A metástase cutânea é conseqüente à disseminação do tumor por embolização linfática, vascular, implantação direta durante
cirurgias ou envolvimento da pele por contiguidade. Em mulheres, o tumor maligno primário que mais comumente metastatiza para a pele é o de
mama, que tanto pode se expressar por lesões tumorais papulonodulares, infiltração erisipelóide ou esclerodermiforme, em couraça. Relatamos
o caso de paciente do sexo feminino, 78 anos, apresentando lesões nodulares, descamativas e confluentes em mama direita, evoluindo com edema
e infiltração cutânea, com redução do volume mamário e placa endurecida ilimitada. Invasão da mama contralateral e abdome ocorreram 4 meses
após o início dos sinais. O diagnóstico histopatológico foi de adenocarcinoma ductal invasivo de mama com focos pagetóides epidérmicos e
embolização linfática. Carcinoma en cuirasse is an unusual skin metastasis of breast cancer with diffuse carcinomatous cutaneous and
subcutaneous infiltration that may affect the chest and abdomen, by extension. These metastases are often estimated at 0.7 to 9% and are the
initial signs of the disease in 37% of men and six percent of women. 1,2 Carcinomatous cells spread trough interstitial space, bloodstream
or lymphatic vessels and generally occur as local recurrence after mastectomy. 3 Carcinoma en cuirasse was first described by Velpeau in
1838, a description chosen because of its resemblance to the metal breastplate of a cuirassier. It has also been called scirrhous carcinoma,
pachydermia and Acarcine eburnee by various authors.4 About a year ago a 78-year-old black woman, housewife, born and resident in São
Vicente, SP, presented with papulonodular lesions, scaly and confluent in the right breast, progressing to edema and skin infiltration, with
marked reduction in breast volume, like a cuirasse (Figure 1). Four months ago she showed signs of contralateral breast and abdomen
involvement, with enlarged, hardened and palpable lumps in the left breast. There was also gradual weight loss of 10 kg in the previous
year, anterior cervical and axillary lymphoadenopathy, associated with lymphedema of the right arm. She denied any dermatological diseases
and her personal history was unremarkable (Figure 2). Reduction of breast volume under hardened plaque, en cuirasse, on the right breast.
Increase in left breast volume, associated with scaly and confluent papules Right axillary lymphadenopathy in cachectic patient, associated
with erythematous scaly plaque on the right breast infiltrated with abnormal volume Histological examination showed epidermis infiltration
with pagetoid neoplastic cells, some of them with clear cytoplasm and tumor emboli in lymphatic vessels (Figures 3,4 and 5). The diagnosis
was invasive ductal breast carcinoma with Paget-like foci, cutaneous metastases and lymphatic embolization. Pagetoid infiltration of
neoplastic cells, few of them with clear cytoplasm in the epidermis Tumor lymphatic embolization Tumor lymphatic embolization Breast
carcinoma is the most common malignant tumor that metastasizes to the skin: 69%, followed by the large intestine (9%), melanoma (5%),
ovaries (4%) and cervix (2%).1 Incidence among different cutaneous metastatic tumors correlates well with the frequency of their
occurrence.5 Cutaneous breast cancer metastasis can be expressed with variable morphology: papulonodular lesions, erysipeloid or
sclerodermiform infiltration. The interval between diagnosis of cancer and resultant metastasis is variable, but in general, when detected,
it occurs within the first three years.6 Even rarer, but not less important, is cutaneous metastasis en cuirasse located on thoracic and
abdominal walls characterized by infiltrated, hard and sclerodermiform plaque. 7,8 In this case, the patient was unaware of the seriousness
of her disease, which caused skin manifestations en cuirasse to be the initial complaint. Prognosis of patients with skin lesions depends on
the type and biological behavior of the primary tumor. Because breast carcinoma with skin metastasis is associated with advanced cancer,
their prognosis is generally reserved and therapy often ineffective. Cutaneous metastasis may be the first clinical internal unknown
malignancy manifestation or the first cancer metastasis sign allegedly treated. Carcinoma en cuirasse is a rare form of breast cancer
presentation, or even the initial presentation, therefore the primary responsibility of the dermatologist. Study carried out at the Fundação
Lusíada (UNILUS) - Santos (SP), Brasil. Financial Support: none Conflict of Interests: none
