Circumscribed palmoplantar hypokeratosis is a recently recognized dermatosis and rarely reported. It was first described in 2002 and is
characterized by localized loss of the horny layer in the palmoplantar area. This dermatosis is clinically presented with a sharply
circumscribed, reddish and asymptomatic plaque with slightly depressed surface localized on the palms or the soles. The clinical
differential diagnosis includes mainly porokeratosis and Bowen's disease. Its pathogenesis remains unknown, but studies have proposed a
human papillomavirus induced disease or a localized keratinization disorder in the palmoplantar area. We report herein two cases of patients
with lesions clinically and microscopically compatible with the diagnosis of circumscribed palmoplantar hypokeratosis. We also present a
brief literature review of the etiopathogenic hyphoteses of this dermatosis. A hipoqueratose palmar circunscrita é uma condição rara e pouco
conhecida que foi caracterizada apenas em 2002. Caracteriza-se por uma perda circunscrita e focal da camada córnea das regiões palmares ou
plantares. Clinicamente, observam-se lesões avermelhadas, circunscritas, arredondadas, discretamente deprimidas e assintomáticas, nas palmas
ou, mais raramente, nas plantas. A diagnose diferencial clínica é feita principalmente com a poroqueratose palmoplantar e com a disqueratose
de Bowen. Sua patogênese é desconhecida, havendo especulações sobre possível origem viral ou de alteração localizada da expressão de
citoqueratinas das regiões palmoplantares. Relatamos os casos clínicos de duas doentes femininas com lesões clínicas e alterações
histopatológicas características de hipoqueratose palmar circunscrita de evolução crônica, além de uma breve revisão da literatura sobre as
hipóteses etiopatogênicas desta dermatose. Circunscribed circumscribed palmoplantar hypokeratosis was initially described by Perez et al in
2002 and is characterized by a nummular, circumscribed, depressed, reddish and asymptomatic plaque, commonly located over the thenar and
hypothenar eminences of the palm.1It rarely occurs in the plantar region. It affects adults or elderly patients, with higher prevalence in
females. Histopathology shows sharp decrease in the stratum corneum without changing the dermis or the surrounding tissue and the absence of
local inflammation. While analyzed by electronic microscopy, it typically presents vacuolization of corneocytes. There are some
etiopathogenic hypotheses for the appearance of the lesions, as trauma, papilloma virus infection types 4 and 6, keratinizing disorder
localized to the granular and horny layers, reduction of keratin 9 and connexin 26 expression at the lesional epidermis and increase of
keratin 16 expression associated with reduction of keratin 2e expression.2-6 Palmoplantar hypokeratosis can clinically mimic palmoplantar
psoriasis, porokeratosis and Bowen's disease, but there's no report of malignant lesions. The disease course is chronic and there is no need
for treatment. Case 1: Female patient, 68 years old, white, had had lesions on the palms for 30 years. There was no history of trauma or
local infection. The dermatological exam showed two reddish plaques of approximately 5x5mm on the right palm and 5x10mm on the left palm.
The lesions were circumscribed, nummular, depressed and located symmetrically over the thenar regions (Figures 1 and 2). Her soles were not
involved. The general clinical examination was not significant. Direct mycological examination was performed with negative results, and
histopathological aspects of skin biopsy showed a focus of sharp decrease in the stratum corneum thickness, mild acanthosis and no change in
the basal layer (Figure 3). Circumscribed and reddish plaque located on the thenar eminences (Case1) Detail of the right palm lesion (Case
1) Histopathological aspects (Case 1) - Focus of sharp decrease in the stratum corneum thickness - HE The one year follow-up showed no
change of clinical lesions. Case 2: Female patient, 84 years old, white, had had a single lesion on the left palm for over 24 years. The
patient had no history of trauma or local infection. The physical examination revealed a reddish, nummular, depressed and circumscribed
patch, about 5 mm in diameter, located over the thenar eminence of the left palm (Figures 4 and 5). There were no lesions on contralateral
palm or on soles. Reddish, nummular and depressed lesion, located on the thenar eminence of the left palm (Case 2) Detail of the lesion
(Case 2) Direct mycological examination was performed with negative results. Histologically, it showed an abrupt, well-demarcated decrease
in the thickness of the stratum corneum and a diminished granular layer (Figure 6). Histopathological aspects (Case 2) - Abrupt decrease in
the stratum corneum thickness – HE The circumscribed palmoplantar hypokeratosis is a benign dermatosis first described by Perez et al. Thus
far, little more than 50 cases have been reported in the literature.1The cases reported in this study are probably the first reports of this
disease in Brazil. There is a predominance of cases among women (4:1), mean age 65 years. Clinically, lesions are typically nummular,
circumscribed, reddish and asymptomatic plaques, commonly located over the thenar and hypothenar eminences of the palms and the medial
portion of the plantar region. The main disorders considered in clinical differential diagnosis are palmoplantar psoriasis, Bowen's disease
and palmoplantar porokeratosis. We must also remember dermatophytoses and palmoplantar syphilids. Histopathologically, the palmar
hypokeratosis focus is characterized by abrupt reduction of the stratum corneum, forming a "step" between the lesion and the perilesional
normal skin. The decrease of the focal stratum corneum is responsible for the clinical aspect of the depressed lesion; the reddish color is
caused by visualization of dermal blood circulation in the area of injury due to corneal thinning. For this reason erythema shall not be
considered true, since there is no vasodilatation. The pathogenesis of palmoplantar hypokeratosis is unknown. Some authors argue that the
disease is caused by local trauma, being a "forme fruste" of epidermolysis bullosa, due to an alteration in keratinocytes
maturation.2However, only a minority of the previously reported cases had a history of local trauma. Some authors have detected within
palmoplantar hypokeratosis lesions the presence of the human papillomavirus (HPV) 4 and 6, arguing that the infection with these viruses may
be a (co) factor in the pathogenesis of this dermatosis.4However, in some other reports where immunohistochemical techniques and polymerase
chain reaction were used, there was no evidence of the presence of HPV in lesions.1,4,7,8 Urbina et al showed a reduction of hyaline
granules and decrease in number of these keratinocyte cells by electron microscopy, suggesting a primary disturbance of keratinization.9
Ishiko et al immunohistochemically demonstrated, in 2007, increased expression of keratin 16 and Ki-67 in skin lesions, speculating that the
circumscribed hypokeratosis may be a consequence of epidermal hyperproliferation associated with fragility of keratinocytes.6 In 2009,
Tanioka M et al proposed the existence of two subtypes of the disease. In the first subtype, the most common lesion is characterized by
palmar "erythema", with immunohistochemical reduction of keratin 6 and 16 and normal expression of keratin 9.5The second subtype is
typically found in the plantar region with little or no "erythema". In this subtype the expression of keratin 26 and connexin 9 was reduced.
There were also non-significant changes of keratins 6 and 16.5 Recently, Kanitakis et al showed abnormal expression of some antigens
associated with epidermal differentiation and proliferation of keratinocytes, as corneodesmosin, LEKTI (Lymphoepithelial Kazal type
inhibitor) and kallikrein 5, concluding that in this dermatosis there is an alteration of the regulation of the cutaneous desquamation
process.10 The circumscribed palmoplantar hypokeratosis does not require treatment and there is no description of malignancy in the
literature. Only one case was reported with the presence of alterations such as actinic keratosis limited to hypokeratosis lesions and that
may be a consequence of relevant sun exposure.10 Attempts to treat this disease were made with surgery, cryotherapy, photodynamic therapy
and topical therapy with calcipotriol, corticosteroids and retinoids, with poor results10. The two cases presented here are fairly typical
of circumscribed palmar hypokeratosis. They constitute the first report of this rare condition in Brazil. Familiarity with this illness is
relevant for dermatologists in order to properly distinguish it from other palmoplantar dermatosis avoiding unnecessary treatment. Study
carried out on the Department of Dermatology- University of São Paulo- São Paulo- Brasil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
