Childhood Granulomatous Periorificial Dermatitis is an acneiform facial rash that affects the periorificial area in children. The clinical
aspectare asymptomatic 1-3 mm papules of, monomorphic, erythematous or hypopigmented in periorificial areas - mouth, nose and eyes. It's a
benign and self-limited disease that heals spontaneously without scarring and specific therapy. Differential diagnoses include perioral
dermatitis, granulomatous-rosacea, sarcoidosis, and lupus miliaris disseminatus faciei. We present the case of a 4-year-old boy, presenting
papules in periorificials areas. Due to its low incidence and low number of publications we report the present case. A Dermatite
Periorificial Granulomatosa da Infância é erupção facial acneiforme que afeta área periorificial do segmento cefálico de pré-puberes.
Consiste em pápulas assintomáticas de 1 a 3 mm, monomorfas, eritematosas ou hipopigmentadas em áreas periorificiais - boca, nariz e olhos. A
doença é benigna e auto-limitada, curando sem deixar cicatriz e por regra sem terapia específica. Diagnósticos diferenciais incluem a
dermatite perioral, rosácea granulomatosa, sarcoidose e lúpus miliar da face. Relata-se paciente de 4 anos, masculino, com erupção papulosa
há 2 anos em áreas periorificais. Devido à sua baixa incidência e o reduzido número de publicações relata-se o presente caso. A 4-year-old
blackmale patient, who was born and raised in Santos - SP, presented with normochromic and asymptomatic papular eruption on the face for two
years. There was no personal or family history of other skin conditions including acne, atopic or contact dermatitis. He had not done
previously topical or systemic treatment. The morphology of the lesions was characterized by numerous monomorphic papules affecting the
perioral region predominantly and less commonly in peri-ocular e peri-nasal regions. (Figures 1 and 2) Patient with papular eruption
normochromic areas periorificial Detail of a papular eruption in the perioral region normochromic Histopathologic examination of a perioral
papule showed lymphohistiocytic inflammatory infiltrate affecting the superficial dermis and perifollicular areas with multinucleated giant
cells forming multiple granulomas without central caseous necrosis over the dermis extension. The special staining for fungi (Grocott) and
Mycobacteria were negative (Figure 3). lymphohistiocytic inflammatory infiltrate affecting peri-follicular, with multinucleated giant cells,
affecting the periphery of the follicle. HE x100 Initial therapy with topical clindamycin 1% associated with benzoyl peroxide 5% at night
for 4 months showed gradual improvement. It remains in service. The Childhood granulomatous periorificial dermatitis (CGPD) is a benign
acneiform facial rash that affects children and is clinically similar to rosacea and perioral dermatitis of childhood.1 The current
terminology originates in 1996 (Knautz and Lesher), although other nomenclatures have been proposed, such as Afro-Caribbean child facial
rash (FACE), reflecting its incidence in black children.2 It is more common in the cephalic segment of healthy prepuberal, through
asymptomatic papules affecting periorificial areas (mouth, nose and eyes), 1-3 mm, monomorphic, erythematous or hypopigmented, or even
yellow-red, and typical characteristic by absence of pustules. 3 The age range is between 3-12 years.4,5 It affects mostly black patients,
but there are reports of cases involving Caucasian patients.6 The absence of pustules and the presence of yellowish or erythematous papules
associated with an infiltration of perifollicular granulomas differentiates CGPD from perioral dermatitis. 7 The etiology is controversial
and in some cases the anamnesis presents use of topical medication and there are reports of reaction to bubble gum, formaldehyde, cosmetics
and antiseptic solutions for oral hygiene. 6,7 The use of topical corticosteroids may be responsible for the appearance of the lesions.7
Histopathologic examination shows perifollicular granulomas composed of epithelioid macrophages, lymphocytes and giant cells. In some
sections there is more diffuse lymphocytic infiltrate with wellformed noncaseating granulomas. The epidermis may show moderate spongiosis.
The results of special stains and cultures for mycobacteria and fungi are always negative.2 The CGPD must be clinically differentiated from
sarcoidosis ( few cases in children) and when present, there is systemic involvement and general symptoms (fever, malaise, cough and
dyspnea). Histologically, it is distinguished by the "naked granulomas" when there is an absence of inflammatory cells involving the
granuloma.4 Granulomatous rosacea affects the central area of the face and is characterized by erythema, telangiectasia, pustules, flushing
and edema. It is more common in women between 30-50 years-old.8 Disseminated lupus miliary of the face is characterized by chronic papular
eruption, occurs primarily in the central area of the face. The lesions are usually red or yellowish, acuminate, with a predilection for the
eyelid and is most common in adults. Histologically there are granulomas with central caseous necrosis, but there are some reported cases
without necrosis. The definitive diagnosis is by histology, clinical presentation and resolution with residual scarring, which does not
occur in CGPD.2 The treatment consists in suspension of any topical corticosteroids and there are reports of improvement with oral
tetracycline and metronidazole and topical erythromycin. It is important to explain the patient and his family that it is a benign disease
and has self-limited evolution, healing without scar.3 Work performed at the Hospital Guilherme Álvaro - Centro Universitário Lusíada (HGA-
Unilus) - Santos (SP), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
