Tattooing has been associated with a variety of complications including inflammatory and granulomatous reactions, transmission of
infections, and neoplasms. We report a case of a 24-year-old male who presented with a 2-month history of an erythematous nodule involving a
newly made tattoo on the right leg. An excisional biopsy was performed and the histopathological evaluation was consistent with
dermatofibroma. Only three cases of dermatofibroma associated with tatooing were reported in litetature. We report an additional case and
review the literature regarding cutaneous reactions to tattoos. Tatuagens têm sido associadas com uma variedade de complicações incluindo
reações inflamatórias e granulomatosas, transmissão de infecções e neoplasias. Relatamos um caso de homem com 24 anos de idade que
apresentava há dois meses nódulo eritematoso sob pigmento preto de uma tatuagem na coxa direita. A biópsia excisional foi realizada e a
avaliação histológica foi consistente com dermatofibroma. Apenas três casos da associação dermatofibroma e tatuagem foram relatados na
literatura. Nós reportamos um caso adicional e revisamos a literatura sobre reações cutâneas em tatuagens. Cases of skin reactions to
tattoos are being documented as tattoos become increasingly popular in today's society. The introduction of exogenous pigments into the
dermis during tattooing may trigger cutaneous reactions with various histological patterns, including inflammatory and granulomatous
reactions, transmission of infections and even neoplasms. Dermatofibroma (DF) is a common cutaneous fibrohistiocytic proliferation of
unknown etiology. We report one case of DF that developed within a black tattoo. To date, only three cases of DF after tattooing have been
reported.1,2 An otherwise healthy 24-year-old male presented with an erythematous nodule involving a tattoo on his right lower leg. The
eruption began two months after the placement of black ink within a previously existing tattoo. He denied similar changes in previous
tattoos. Clinical examination revealed an erythematous, freely movable nodule overlying a black pigment zone on the right lower leg, with
slight tenderness on pressure (Figure 1). Erythematous nodule overlying a black pigment zone Examination of the hematoxylin-eosin stained
histological sections of an excisional biopsy revealed nodular dermal proliferation of fibroblast-like cells embedded in a dense collagen
matrix. These cells displayed an irregular arrangement, but no cytological atypia. The overlying acanthotic epidermis showed basal
hyperpigmentation. In addition, extracellular deposits of coarse black pigment were observed, particularly above the spindlecell
proliferation (Figures 2, 3 and 4). Acanthotic epithelium with basilar hyperpigmentation over a dermal spindle cell proliferation and
extracellular deposits of black pigment material (HEx10) Collagen trapping by the dermal fibrohistiocytic infiltrate (HEx40) Extracellular
deposits of black pigment Tattoos applied for cosmetic purposes are very popular in worldwide modern society. The introduction of exogenous
pigments into the dermis during tattooing may trigger cutaneous reactions with various histological patterns including lichenoid,
granulomatous, pseudolymphomatous, pseudoepitheliomatous hyperplasia and eczematous.2,3 In addition, there have been reports of infectious
diseases such as leprosy, tuberculosis cutis, syphilis, hepatitis, mycobacteriosis and warts associated with inoculation during
tattooing.4Benign and malignant tumors, such as seborrheic keratosis, epidermal cysts, keratoacanthoma, melanoma, basal cell carcinoma and
squamous cell carcinoma may also arise in tattoos.5Red pigments are the most common cause of delayed tattoo reaction. Mercury in red
mercuric sulfide (cinnabar) has been well documented as the cause of allergic reactions. Less commonly, several reports have documented
reactions to other colors in tattoo pigments, including purple, green, yellow and black.6DF is a common cutaneous nodule of so far disputed
etiology that occurs more often in women, frequently developing on the extremities (mostly the lower legs). It usually presents with no
symptoms although pruritus and tenderness are not uncommon. The overlying epidermis is usually acanthotic and may show basal
hyperpigmentation. The tumor is centered in the mid dermis, presents no capsule, and blends peripherally with the surrounding tissue.
Whorling fascicles are formed by spindle cell proliferation with characteristic excessive collagen deposition. In the periphery, the spindle
cells characteristically wrap around normal collagen bundles. Positive immunohistochemical results with antibodies against factor XIIIa are
usually found. Transforming growth factor-beta (TGF-beta) signaling might be a trigger of the fibrosis seen in dermatofibromas.7
Historically attributed to some traumatic insult to the skin, the cause of DF is still unknown. Whether DF is a true neoplasm or a reactive
process induced by mechanical stimuli remains nuclear.7The arguments raised in support of a reactive process include the presence of
inflammatory cells, development of fibrosis in older lesions of DF and the association of DF with trauma recorded in 20% of all
cases.8Reports have been published on DF occurring after nipplepiercing, insect bite and on a vaccination scar.8,9Others believe that
dermatofibroma is a benign neoplastic process, with evidence of clonality in some DF found by cytogenetic studies.10 To date, only three
cases of DF have been reported after tattooing.1,2The link between DF and tattoos is supported by the chronology between tattooing and the
development of DF in all cases, as the skin was free of any lesion before tattooing and DF has been reported to occur after trauma.2,8It can
be hypothesized that the inflammation triggered by introducing exogenous pigments may have played a role in these cases of DF secondary to
tattooing.2 Tattooing is a traumatizing act and triggers a non-specific inflammatory reaction as soon as the needle starts puncturing the
skin. Moreover, tattoo pigments do not remain inert in the dermis: non-specific macrophage activation and discrete inflammatory changes are
observed years after tattooing as an attempt to degrade the foreign material. The lesion is assumed to start as a response to injury with
the initial granulation tissue eventually replaced by fibrosis and DF possibly represents a model of a local fibrotic process.7In summary,
we present one new case of association between DF and a tattoo. To our knowledge, this is the fourth report of this association. DF should
be considered in the clinical differential diagnosis of lesions occurring in tattoos. Further investigations are needed to clarify the
nature of this association. Study carried out at the Dermatology Service, Instituto de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal do Pará.
School of Medicine (UFPA) - Belém (PA), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
