Use of chemotherapy and radiotherapy in the adjuvant setting has improved survival for many patients with malignancy. Unfortunately
multimodality treatment can come at a price, in particular therapy-related malignancies. This has importance in that patients must be made
aware of this potential detriment from therapy and doctors must consider this diagnosis in those patients who are cancer survivors and
presenting with health problems. We present a case report and brief overview of the literature regarding chemotherapy-induced acute myeloid
leukaemia (AML) following therapy for early stage breast cancer. A 52 year old woman had a mastectomy and axillary node clearance for a T2
NO MO infiltrating ductal carcinoma of the left breast which was grade 2 and hormone receptor positive. Past medical history included
ulcerative colitis, she had no regular medications. Subsequently she received 4 cycles of adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of doxorubicin
(60mg/m2) and cyclophosphamide (600mg/m2), followed by a 5 week course of radiotherapy and 5 years of tamoxifen. Six years following her
surgery she was referred to the haematology clinic with thrombocytopenia, (Platelet count = 60×109/L (150–400). This coincided with the
introduction of mesalazine for a flare up of her normally quiescent colitis. An initial bone marrow biopsy was inconclusive and a
presumptive diagnosis of either Idiopathic Thrombocytopoenic Purpara (ITP) or drug-induced thrombocytopenia (DIT) was made. She was reviewed
6 months later by which time her platelet count was 30×109/L. She was lethargic and had a petechial rash. Repeat bone marrow biopsy showed
dysplastic features with 5% blasts in keeping with myelodysplasia (Refractory Anaemia with Excess Blasts-1) and she was placed on close
follow up. Following an episode of dental sepsis her peripheral blood film was examined and found to contain numerous myeloblast cells
(Figure 1) and the presence of mitotic figures (Figure 2). Fig 1.Peripheral blood film showing multiple myeloblasts. Fig 2.Mitotic figure
(arrowhead) indicating high turnover rate of blast replication. Peripheral blood film showing multiple myeloblasts. Mitotic figure
(arrowhead) indicating high turnover rate of blast replication. A further bone marrow biopsy confirmed AML with a background of
myelodyplasia (in keeping with therapy related AML) that was classified histologically as AML M2 (AML with maturation) in the French-
American-British (FAB) classification. There were no cytogenetic abnormalities identified. Unfortunately despite chemotherapy she had
unrelenting progression, became refractory to platelet transfusions and died in the hospice 9 months later, by which time her white cell
count (WCC) was 330×109/L. Her death occurred 8 years after adjuvant chemotherapy for breast cancer: there was no breast cancer evident on
radiological staging prior to her death. Breast cancer is the most common solid organ malignancy in females. Early detection with
mammography screening and improvement of therapeutic options has increased survival rates. It is treated with a range of chemotherapies,
radiotherapy, hormonal therapy and biological agents. Many patients receive these treatments in the adjuvant setting to decrease the risk of
systemic relapse but in the context of modest survival gains from therapy. These treatments have well recognised early acute complications
including neutropoenic sepsis, which is occasionally fatal. However long term complications from these therapeutic modalities, especially in
patients who have potentially been cured of their primary cancer, are becoming increasingly important with improved survival. Patients with
breast cancer often undergo chemotherapy with repetitive bone marrow suppression which unfortunately for some can result in myelosyplastic
and leukaemic syndromes. Therapy-related myeloid neoplasms (t-MN) represent a unique clinical entity in patients treated with chemotherapy
or radiotherapy and unfortunately carry a poorer prognosis than de novo disease.1 The incidence rate of therapy-related acute leukaemia in
this setting is in the order of 0.2-0.5%.1 A small but real increase in AML has been reported in several larger observational studies in
breast cancer follow up.2, 3, 4 In Northern Ireland an average of 1079 cases of breast cancer are diagnosed each year. Trends confirm that
the number of women diagnosed each year is increasing by an average of 23 cases per year.5 At least 300 patients per year receive adjuvant
chemotherapy, this could equate to one or two such cases of therapy-related AML each year, making it a potentially understated and
underemphasised clinical issue. Two main types of therapy related AML and MDS were recognised depending on the putative agent according to
the 2001 WHO classification of myeloid neoplasms. These were 1) those caused by radiation or by an alkylating agent (e.g. cyclophosphamide)
or 2) caused by a topoisomerase II inhibitor (e.g., doxorubicin, epirubicin). These two types have distinct phenotypes. Alkylating agent
related leukaemias have a long latency (4–7 years), pre-leukaemic phase and a worse prognosis. In contrast, those induced by topoisomerase
II inhibitors have a shorter latency (2–3 years median), no prodromal phase and a better prognosis6 (Table 1). In this case our patient
received a chemotherapy drug from both groups which is standard practice. On balance the prodromal phase and longer latency would tend to
indicate that cyclophosphamide was the more significant aetiological factor. Table 1.Key differences in therapy related AML by causative
chemotherapy.Alkylating Agents (eg cyclophosphamide)Topoisomerase II inhibitors (eg doxorubicin, epirubicin)OnsetLong latency (median time
4–7 years)Short latency (median time 2–3 years)FAB SubtypeM1/M2M4/M5Preleukaemic PhaseTwo thirds present with myelodysplasia, the remainde
have myelodysplastic features.No preceding myelodysplastic phaseCytogenetic AbormalityChromosomal abnormalities in chromosome 5 and
7Classically balanced translocations 11q23,21q22PrognosisWorse than de novo AMLSimilar to de novo disease with corresponding cytogenetics
Key differences in therapy related AML by causative chemotherapy. A population based study by the NCI analysed data for 420,000 women with
breast cancer and found younger age at diagnosis and node positive breast cancer appear to confer a greater risk of AML in breast cancer
survivors, potentially due to greater chemotherapy exposure or alternatively underlying genetic predisposition.7 Several other factors can
increase the risk of AML in this setting including: dose intensity of chemotherapy, use of adjuvant radiotherapy and the concomitant use of
granulocyte colony stimulating factor (GCSF). The use of GCSF is increasing prophylactically to reduce the risk of neutropoenic sepsis and
includes patients receiving docetaxel chemotherapy which is a current standard of care in node-positive breast disease.8 With the increased
incidence of breast cancer and the trend for more chemotherapeutic intervention in the adjuvant setting it will be of utmost importance that
patients are aware of the potential risks of secondary malignancy during the consent process. This is particularly significant for younger
cancer patients.9 It is important to add that the therapeutic benefit from adjuvant chemotherapy in early stage breast cancer is compelling,
and is of a different order of magnitude than the estimated risk of secondary leukaemia. The authors have no conflicts of interest.
