*These authors contributed equally to this work We report the case of a 12-year-old male who developed corneal arcus and multiple skin
lesions with a 10-year history of xanthomas. The lesions appeared over his fingers, hands, elbows, knees, buttocks and feet. Laboratory
studies showed a total serum cholesterol level of 752.1 mg/dL; a triglyceride level of 96.6 mg/dL; a low-density lipoprotein cholesterol
level of 661.3 mg/dL. Findings were consistent with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. To our knowledge, this is the first such case
to be reported from China. Familial hypercholesterolemia (FH), a genetic disorder caused by mutations within the low-density lipoprotein
(LDL) receptor gene, is characterized by an increase in plasma levels of LDL cholesterol. Homozygous FH is a rare variant, occurring with a
frequency of 1:1,000,000. We present a case of homozygote manifesting with corneal arcus and multiple xanthomas, which is the first reported
case from China. A 12-year-old male, whose father was a LDL receptor (LDL-R) mutation carrier, developed corneal arcus and multiple skin
lesions with a 10-year history of xanthomas. Both his parents had elevated levels of total serum cholesterol and LDL cholesterol. His elder
brother died of myocardial infarction secondary to FH at the age of 7 years. Physical examination showed the presence of subcutaneous yellow
nodules at the knuckles of his fingers [Fig. 1a], elbows [Fig. 1b], knees [Fig. 1c], and Achilles tendons [Fig. 1d]. They were up to 10 cm
in size and partly tended to coalesce. Some other yellow nodules of varying sizes under the skin erupted over the buttocks [Fig. 1e]. This
patient had no problems with his vision. Intraocular pressures were unremarkable. The ocular exam revealed a partial circumferential white-
grey deposit corresponding to corneal arcus [Fig. 2a and b]. Fundus examination was normal. B-scan revealed extensive plaques and enhanced
intima-media thickness of common carotid arterial wall. Laboratory studies disclosed the following values: Total serum cholesterol, 752.1
mg/dL (normal range, 110-220 mg/dL); triglyceride, 96.6 mg/dL (normal range, 50-150 mg/dL); LDL cholesterol, 661.3 mg/dL (normal range,
80-140 mg/dL). Findings were consistent with type IIa hyperlipoproteinemia. As is shown in the figure [Fig. 3], there are cytosine
(C)>thymine (T) heterozygous double peaks at 97 in the second exon of LDL-R gene, which is in GenBank as a known mutation of
NM_001195798.1:c. 97C>T. This mutation resulted in the change from C to T 33rd codon in E2 of LDL-R gene and, thus, glutamine became the
stop codon in the corresponding amino acid (NP_001182732.1:p.Gln33X). The result of genealogical analysis indicated that his father had a
similar gene mutation. A diagnosis of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia was made. Findings at presentation (a) Xanthomas over the
fingers (b) Xanthomas over both elbows(c) Xanthomas over both knees tending to coalesce (d) Xanthomas over the Achilles tendons (e)
Xanthomas of varying sizes under the skin erupted over the buttocks Findings at presentation. The ocular exam showed a partial
circumferential (from 2 O’clock to 4 O’clock) white-grey deposit corresponding to corneal arcus. (a) Right eye The ocular exam showed a
partial circumferential (from 2 O’clock to 4 O’clock) white-grey deposit corresponding to corneal arcus. (b) Left eye LDL-R nucleotide
sequences. There are C > T heterozygous double peaks at 97 in the second exon of LDL-R gene Homozygous FH is clinically characterized by
cutaneous xanthomas, enlarged Achilles tendons, atherosclerosis, and corneal arcus, usually developing from early childhood. Homozygotic
patients usually manifest corneal arcus before the age of 10 years. Although no significant correlations were obtained between corneal arcus
and patterns of hyperlipoproteinaemia in previous observations, a recent study of homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia series indicated
that patients with corneal arcus had higher cholesterol-year score and was correlated with calcific atherosclerosis. The exact biochemical
mechanisms of corneal arcus remain controversial. One explanation is the proximity to limbal vasculature that may increase endothelial
permeability to lipids via active scavenging mechanisms. Another is the temperature gradient that can alter lipid deposition as the
infiltrating particles pass from limbal blood vessel into the cornea. Finally, the collagen fiber gradient might filter the lipid-rich
particles. Early combination therapy with LDL apheresis, statins, and cholesterol absorption inhibitors are advised in children with
homozygous FH at the highest risk. Source of Support: Supported by National Natural Science Foundation (No. 81170793), China Beijing Natural
Science Foundation (No. 7092016), Beijing, China Program 215 of Beijing Municipal Health Bureau (No. 2009.3.345), Beijing, China. Conflict
of Interest: None declared.
