Self-inflicted eye injuries among psychiatric patients are rare but important group of ophthalmic conditions that require close cooperation
between different medical specialties to ensure optimum care of the severely disturbed patient. They have been associated with a variety of
disorders, including paranoid schizophrenia, drug-induced psychosis, obsessive-compulsive disorder, depression, mental retardation, and
ritualistic behavior. It has been described in both adults and children, but occurs most commonly in young adults with acute or chronic
psychoses. Self-mutilation, the deliberate destruction or alteration of body tissue without conscious suicidal intent, occurs in a variety
of psychiatric disorders. Management of self-inflicted eye injury requires close cooperation between ophthalmologists and psychiatrists to
prompt diagnosis and treatment of any injuries and treatment of the underlying behavior. We report a case of a 23-year-old male presented in
the eye out patient department (OPD) for removal of tailoring needles from both lids and adjoining area. He was apparently alright 2 months
back, then he developed headache. Headache was severe and throbbing in nature and present throughout the day. He took some local medications
but did not get relieved. Then he consulted a physician, who advised him for aqua-puncture. Then he inserted 10 simple tailoring needles
himself one in a day, four needles under the skin of middle of forehead, two under the skin of upper lid right eye, two under the skin of
upper lid left eye, and two under the skin of the lateral side of left eye. After that he got relieved completely. X-Ray of both Antero-
Posterior (AP) and Lateral view revealed multiples needles [Figs. 1 and 2]. The needle has been removed under general anesthesia by making
small incision near entry of all needles. X-Ray AP view showing multiple tailoring needles around both eyes X-Ray Lateral view showing
multiple tailoring needles around the eye Self-injury can be prevented by timely interventions, it almost always occurs during florid
psychosis. All patients will require long-term follow-up of their condition. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
