Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is a widely used chemical for production of plastics. However occupational asthma (OA) caused by PVC has been
reported only rarely. We report a 34-yr-old male wallpaper factory worker with OA due to PVC and nickel (Ni) whose job was mixing PVC with
plasticizers. He visited the emergency room due to an asthma attack with moderate airflow obstruction and markedly increased sputum
eosinophil numbers. A methacholine challenge test was positive (PC20 2.5 mg/mL). Bronchoprovocation tests with both PVC and Ni showed early
and late asthmatic responses, respectively. Moreover, the fractional concentration of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) was increased after
challenge with PVC. To our knowledge, this is the first case of OA in Korea induced by exposure to both PVC and Ni. We suggest that
eosinophilic inflammation may be involved in the pathogenesis of PVC-induced OA and that FeNO monitoring can be used for its diagnosis.
Occupational asthma (OA) is characterized by variable airway obstruction and bronchial hyperresponsiveness attributable to a particular work
environment. It accounts for up to 15% of all cases of adult-onset asthma (1). Isocyanate, reactive dyes, heavy metals including nickel
(Ni), chromium, cobalt and platinum, and grain dust are frequently reported agents of OA in Korea (2). Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) is a
polymerized form of vinyl chloride, which is extensively used in the plastics industry and in manufacture of synthetic leather, wallpapers,
floor coverings and electric cable sheaths (3). Several studies have reported that inhalation of vinyl chloride increases the risk of cancer
and pulmonary fibrosis (4, 5). Irritative respiratory symptoms and meat wrappers' asthma syndrome are generally thought to be related to PVC
decomposition products, such as hydrochloric acid and/or phosgene, but not to PVC itself. To date, a few cases of OA induced directly by PVC
dust exposure have been reported among workers in meat processing factories and those involved in manufacture of plastic seals (3, 6, 7).
The case presented here is, to our knowledge, the first case of OA confirmed by bronchoprovocation tests with both PVC and Ni, and increased
airway inflammation after challenge. A 34-yr-old male had been employed for 7 months at a wallpaper manufacturing factory immediately after
moving from the roller processing industry. He had suffered from a cough and chest tightness after engaging in mixing PVC dust into
plasticizers and pulverized stone powder for 4 months. When he visited the emergency room with dyspnea in October 2011, he was diagnosed
with an acute asthma attack based on wheezing, a forced expiratory volume in one second (FEV1) value that was 74% of the predicted value and
90% sputum eosinophils. He had no relevant medical history or family history of allergic diseases. Chest X-ray showed no abnormalities.
Blood tests revealed a WBC count of 8,200/µL (neutrophils 61.1%, lymphocytes 27.6%, eosinophils 4.4%) and a hemoglobin level of 14.2 g/dL.
The serum total IgE level was increased to 246 IU/L (reference range 0-114 IU/L), but skin prick tests with 55 common inhalant allergens
were negative. Intradermal tests with 0.1 mg/mL PVC elicited a positive reaction, with a wheal size of 13×10 mm and surrounding erythema of
dimensions 24×23 mm. A prick test using PVC gave a negative response. Patch tests with PVC, zinc oxide, Ni and chromium showed a positive
result for only Ni at 48 hr. The patient achieved well-controlled asthma with an inhaled corticosteroid and a long-acting beta agonist and
was then hospitalized for a specific inhalation challenge test. The methacholine challenge test was positive, with a PC20 value of 2.5
mg/mL. A bronchial challenge test with saline was negative. On the second day, a specific bronchial challenge test in which the patient
transferred PVC dust (about 200 mL) between two trays for 2 hr was performed. He complained of coughing and mild itching on his hands, but
no significant change in lung function was detected, even the fractional concentration of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) was increased. On the
third day, a 3-hr bronchoprovocation test with PVC dust was performed using the same procedure. The FEV1 value started to fall about 10 min
after exposure and reached a maximum decrease of 19.5% from baseline at 1 hr after exposure (Fig. 1). Several wheals developed on the
patient's extremities and abdomen and resolved spontaneously on the day after the exposure. An approximate twofold increase in FeNO (from 29
ppb at baseline to 55 ppb 4 hr after challenge) occurred after a bronchial provocation test with PVC. However, the patient did not
expectorate sputum at that time. On the fifth day, a bronchial provocation test with Ni was performed by nebulizing 10-3, 10-2, 10-1, 1, and
10 mg/mL Ni sulfate. A maximum reduction in FEV1 (23.2%) was noted about 17 hr after exposure (Fig. 2). The sputum eosinophil count
increased from 2% at baseline to 79% 15 hr after the provocation test. Based on these findings, the patient was diagnosed with OA caused by
both PVC and Ni. After the patient terminated his employment, he had no asthma symptoms and achieved normal pulmonary function through
continued inhaled corticosteroid treatment. We diagnosed OA due to exposure to PVC dust and Ni in a patient who had been employed in mixing
PVC dust and pulverizing stone at a wallpaper manufacturing factory for several months. Specific inhalation challenge tests with PVC and Ni
elicited early and late asthmatic responses, respectively. Furthermore, PVC and Ni skin-test results (positive intradermal test with PVC and
a positive response in the Ni patch test) corresponded to the inhalation challenge test results. The North American Contact Dermatitis Group
classified several occupational contact allergens, such as Ni, epoxy resin, formaldehyde, cobalt and chromium, as having established
associations with OA (8). The patient had been employed in the roller processing department and subsequently moved to the wallpaper factory,
where he handled stone powder. Therefore, he may have been exposed to Ni occupationally, resulting in positive responses to both the patch
and bronchial challenge tests with Ni. Moreover, the patient showed a late response to a specific bronchoprovocation test with Ni, a
previously identified mechanism of Ni-induced OA (9). In some previous cases, however, specific IgE antibodies to Ni salts conjugated to
human serum albumin were detected and showed an early asthmatic response in a specific inhalation test (9, 10). The pathogenic mechanism of
PVC-induced OA has not yet been established. OA associated with PVC exposure is classified as two types. The first is caused by
thermoactivated degradation products of PVC and has been reported in meat wrappers exposed to fumes while cutting PVC meat-wrap film using a
hot wire. Most of these cases showed respiratory symptoms within 30 min of exposure, but one exhibited a delayed response (7). The second
type of PVC-associated OA, of which the present case is an example, is caused by unheated PVC resin dust. While a significant decrease in
PEFR was observed beginning 9 hr after bronchial challenge in a previous report (6), the FEV1 in the present case began to decrease 10 min
post-exposure, reaching a maximal decrease 1 hr after exposure. Because other laboratory tests, such as skin tests with PVC and sputum
analysis, were not performed in the previous case, the pathogenic mechanism of unheated PVC dust was not determined. An early decrease in
FEV1 accompanied by a positive intradermal test and an increase in FeNO suggests an allergic sensitization in this case. The present case
suggests that workers can be concurrently exposed to several agents of OA in the same workplace. Cross-reactivity to common proteins or
metallic salts was regarded as the mechanism underlying sensitization to multiple agents in the food production or heavy metal industries
(11, 12). However, in our case, because no cross-reactivity between PVC and Ni was suspected, two forms of OA associated with different
agents may have developed either simultaneously or sequentially. To avoid further exposure of patients with OA to sensitizers,
identification of the causative agents in the working environment is necessary. Besides PVC dust and Ni, phthalates and other metals
including chromium, zinc, and copper were suspected as possible causes for the current case. Although it is the best to measure
environmental concentration of suspected causes in the workplace, we couldn't monitor working environment at that time. However, because
other metals except Ni showed negative responses on the patch test and the patient didn't handle pyrolysis products of phthalates which were
certain causes of phthalates-induced OA, we didn't perform provocation test with phthalates and other metals. Although specific inhalation
tests using every potential agent remain the standard method for confirmation of the diagnosis of OA, they are currently limited to
specialized institutions and there is no standardized protocol. Other methods, including immunologic tests, induced sputum analysis and non-
specific bronchoprovocation tests, play a supportive role in a proper diagnosis (13). In addition, the reliability of FeNO measurement in
the interpretation of specific bronchial challenge tests with allergens was reported recently. A 12% increase in post-challenge FeNO
compared to the baseline value had a high sensitivity and specificity for predicting a positive response in the specific inhalation test
(14). The 90% increase in FeNO level 4 hr post-exposure in our case supports the diagnosis of PVC-induced OA. In conclusion, this case of OA
associated with exposure to both PVC dust and Ni emphasizes the need for careful evaluation of agents such as PVC. In spite of whose
widespread use, their role in the incidence of OA has been underestimated. Considering also that multiple agents are able to cause
occupational sensitization in the same patient, the patient's medical history should be evaluated thoroughly, and specific inhalation tests
are essential for diagnosis. Results of specific bronchoprovocation tests involving exposure to PVC for 2 hr (□) and 3 hr (■). The
fractional concentration of exhaled nitric oxide (FeNO) was measured at baseline and 4 hr after the challenge tests (○2 hr and ●3 hr
exposure). Results of specific bronchoprovocation test with Ni (▴). The percent of sputum eosinophil (▵) was measured.
