An eighty-year-old male patient with a history of prior (19 years) coronary artery bypass graft surgery was admitted to the hospital with
non ST-segment elevation myocardial infarction (NSTEMI). During the hospital stay he was taking acetylsalicylic acid 100mg per day, a
loading dose of 600mg clopidogrel, and low molecular weight heparin 1mg/kg twice a day. Twenty-four hours later the patient underwent
coronary angiography, which showed a 90% obstruction in the mid portion of the saphenous vein graft to obtuse marginal with signs of
degeneration and local thrombus (Figure 1). Thrombus aspiration was performed with a 6-Fr Export™ catheter (Medtronic, Santa Rosa, CA, USA),
which removed small reddish colored fragments. They were fixed in 2,5% glutaraldehyde in a 0.1M sodium cacodilate buffer. The material was
processed following the GOTO protocol in which the fragments were washed with osmium tetroxide and titanic acid, after which they were dried
in a critical-point device and a golden bath. Scanning electron microscopy and high definition photos (3,000 to 27,221x magnification) were
obtained by the FEI Quanta™ FEG SEM device (FEI Company, Hillsboro, OR, USA). The images showed that the thrombus was rich in activated
platelets, with few erythrocytes or inflammatory cells. Many cholesterol crystals were observed (Figures 2 to 5). The fibrin networks were
sparse and thin, which is compatible with a short ischemic time and recent thrombus formation. The recent use of catheter aspiration in
STEMI patients allows in vivo study of thrombus composition as well as its architectural and dynamic formation. Acute coronary thrombosis is
caused by a rupture or erosion of an atherosclerotic plaque with subsequent aggregation of unstable platelets, fibrin networks with
entrapped erythrocytes and inflammatory cells. The dynamic process of thrombus formation seems to be related to ischemic time, to the
plaque's anatomical underlying substrate and to clinical variables(1). By scanning electron microscopy, Silvain et al. reported the
composition of intracoronary thrombi showing that ischemic time in patients with STEMI had a positive correlation with fibrin content and a
negative correlation with platelet content(2). In the present case, the first thus far to describe the composition of the thrombus aspirated
from a degenerated saphenous vein graft by scanning electron microscopy, the findings of great amounts of smalldimension cholesterol
crystals (<10μm) is remarkable, substantially differing from the thrombus composition in native coronary arteries(2,3) – in which the
finding of cholesterol crystals is rare. This finding may explain, at least in part, the higher prevalence and greater severity of distal
embolization phenomena found in percutaneous intervention in saphenous vein grafts.
