Primary hepatic lymphoma is a rare extranodal form of lymphoma. it may initially present as hepatic dysfunction resembling acute hepatitis,
and clinical diagnosis of the disease could be delayed and complicated, occasionally progressing to fulminant hepatic failure. Here we
report the featured radiologic findings of primary hepatic lymphoma on serial follow-up of ultrasonographic and computed tomography (CT)
examinations. A 57-year-old woman visited the emergency department at our hospital with generalized edema which developed a month
previously. Her clinical history did not include any specific disease, and her family history was unremarkable. On physical examination,
there was no abnormal finding except splenomegaly. The initial results of laboratory investigations were as follows: serum total bilirubin
level of 3.0 mg/dL (normal range: 0.2-1.2 mg/dL), direct bilirubin level of 1.5 mg/dL (normal range: 0-0.4 mg/dL), aspartate
aminotransferase (AST) of 54 U/L (normal range: 0-37 U/L), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) of 10 U/L (normal range: 0-40 U/L), gamma-glutamyl
transpeptidase (γGT) of 177 U/L (normal range: 11-43 U/L), alkaline phosphatase (ALP) of 240 U/L (normal range: 42-98 U/L), and lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH) by 842 U/L (normal range: 211-423 U/L). Prothrombin time (PT) and activated partial thrombin time (aPTT) were initially
within normal range. On peripheral blood cell count, all of the blood cell counts declined: red blood cell count of 3.12×106/mL (normal
range: 4.2-6.3×106/mL), white blood cell count of 1.5×103/mL (normal range: 4-10×103/mL), and platelet count of 80×103/mL (normal range:
130-400×103/mL). The test for peripheral blood cell morphology also showed normocytic, normochromic anemia, leukopenia and thrombocytopenia.
Serological tests for hepatitis A, B and C viruses, Ebstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were all negative. Initial abdominal CT
demonstrated hepatosplenomegaly, edematous wall thickening of the gallbladder, and effusion in the pleural and pericardial spaces. The
initial diagnosis was acute hepatopathy with unknown cause. There was no evidence of lymphadenopathy in the abdomen (Fig. 1A). On the
abdominal ultrasonography (US) performed 3 days after the CT study, the echogenicity of the liver parenchyma was mildly coarse, supporting
the CT diagnosis of parenchymal disease (Fig. 1B). On the 10th hospitalized day, the laboratory evaluation showed deteriorating hepatic
function: the international normalized ratio (INR) of PT was elongated to 1.81. The levels of total and direct bilirubin were also elevated
to 27 and 16 mg/dL, respectively. As the next step, US-guided liver biopsy was performed using an automatic biopsy gun (Tru-cut, TSK
laboratory, Japan). Two pieces of specimen were obtained, and histopathology showed numerous lymphocytes infiltrating into the periportal
space and hepatic sinusoid. On high-power field of microscopy, variably sized, hyperchromic nuclei with mitotic activity in the lymphocytes
were seen. The results of immunochemical profiles of this specimen revealed B cell lineage. The final pathologic diagnosis was diffuse large
B-cell type of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. The patient refused to receive any treatment for the lymphoma and expired 27 days after initially
being hospitalized due to hepatic failure. A 59-year-old man visited the gastroenterology department at our hospital with abdominal
bloating. His clinical history did not reveal any specific disease, and his family history was also unremarkable. On physical examination,
no abnormality was found, and the results of laboratory investigations were also normal. Initial abdominal US demonstrated mild coarseness
of the liver without any focal lesion (Fig. 2A). Five days after the initial abdominal US, he revisited the emergency department with newly
developed symptoms including high fever over 39.5℃, general weakness, cough and sputum. On physical examination performed on his second
visit, mild hepatomegaly and tenderness on the right upper quadrant were identified. There were no palpable lymph nodes. The laboratory
evaluation showed deteriorated hepatic function: AST of 200 U/L, ALT of 20 U/L, γGT of 223 U/L, ALP of 477 U/L, LDH of 1,060 U/L. The levels
of total and direct bilirubin were highly elevated to 27 and 16 mg/dL, respectively. On peripheral blood cell count, all of the blood cell
counts declined: red blood cell count of 3.31×106/mL, white blood cell count of 5.5×103/mL, and platelet count of 110×103/mL. Serological
tests for hepatitis A, B and C viruses, Ebstein-Barr virus and cytomegalovirus were all negative. Abdominopelvic CT scans taken at the
emergency department showed hepatosplenomegaly with collapsed gallbladder, suggestive of acute hepatitis. Follow-up abdominal US performed 9
days after the initial study revealed a further decrease in the background echogenicity of the hepatic parenchyma as well as hepatomegaly.
The gallbladder was collapsed and accompanied by diffuse wall thickening (Fig. 2B). Eight days later, the hepatic echogenicity had become
coarser and hepatosplenomegaly was markedly aggravated. Moreover, the gallbladder wall was more thickened and the amount of ascites was
increased (Fig. 2C, Fig. 2D). The changes observed on serial US and CT imaging resembled those observed in progressively worsening acute
hepatitis, leading to the diagnosis of idiopathic fulminant hepatopathy. As the next step, US-guided liver biopsy was performed using an
automatic biopsy gun. Two pieces of specimen were obtained, and the histopathology demonstated numerous lymphocytes mainly infiltrating into
the periportal space. On the high-power filed of microscopy, lymphocytes with nuclei of variable size and mitotic activity were seen. The
result of immunohistochemical profiles of this specimen revealed peripheral T-cell lymphoma. However, the special stain for γδ T-cell
receptor was negative, and the final pathologic diagnosis of peripheral T-cell lymphoma, was reached. The disease was not responsive to
chemotherapy using cyclophosphamide hydroxydoxorubicin, vincristine and prednisolone (CHOP), and rapidly progressed to multiple organ
failure with severe sepsis and pancytopenia. The patient eventually expired three weeks after admission. Hepatic involvement of non-
Hodgkin's lymphoma can be divided into primary hepatic lymphoma, secondary involvement of systemic lymphoma, and hepatosplenic T-cell
lymphoma. Secondary involvement is the most common form of lymphoma in the liver, appearing in 16-40% of non-Hodgkin's lymphoma. Primary
hepatic lymphoma is defined as a lymphoma that is limited to the liver, without extrahepatic involvement.1 Most primary hepatic lymphoma
originates from B cell lineage, with only few cases of T-cell lineage reported in the literature. Hepatosplenic T-cell lymphoma is a very
rare variant of mature T-cell lymphoma independently classified by the 2008 WHO classification.2 For the differential diagnosis, a liver
biopsy should be performed along with immunohistochemistry studies. Clinically, primary hepatic lymphoma is characterized by
hepatosplenomegaly without lymphadenopathy. Systemic (B-type) symptoms are also common. The predominant laboratory findings are abnormal
liver enzymes (elevation of AST, ALT, bilirubin, GGT, ALP, and LDH), especially, elevation of LDH and ALP and normal level of tumor markers
such as alpha-feto protein (AFP) and carcinoembryogenic antigen (CEA). Diagnosis of the disease may be difficult at times due to the
presence of misleading symptoms. There was a delay in the diagnosis in the cases reported herein because the clinical and laboratory
features were similar to acute hepatitis.3-5 The presence of fever, hepatomegaly, elevated liver parameters and pancytopenia led to the
false diagnosis of acute hepatitis or viral infection. Since the serologic tests were all negative, the possibility of viral infection could
be excluded. The patients underwent radiologic evaluation to search for supportive evidence of acute hepatitis. Abdominal sonography and CT
demonstrated features of hepatitis. Serial follow-up of US demonstrated a progressive course of the disease, which happens to be one of the
characteristic findings of hepatic lymphoma. Finally, the liver biopsy was performed to evaluate unexplained downhill courses of the
patients' status. Although the major role of US in hepatitis is to exclude biliary obstruction as the cause of liver disease, the
sonographic findings correlate fairly well with the clinical and histologic severity of disease in patients with hepatitis. In acute
hepatitis, the liver and spleen are frequently enlarged. When parenchymal damage is severe, the parenchymal echogenicity is decreased and
the portal venule walls are brighter than normal, making up a feature that has been named as the "starry night liver". However, these
typical findings were relatively uncommon.6 Mural thickening of the gallbladder and hepatomegaly are other nonspecific findings in patients
with hepatitis.7 In early hepatitis, the gallbladder is hypertonic, whereas in patients more than 9 days into the natural course of the
disease, the gallbladder is hypokinetic with a large volume and diminished response to fatty meals. CT findings in hepatitis are usually
nonspecific and the primary role of CT in patients with hepatitis is to exclude focal masses including hepatocellular carcinomas.
Hepatomegaly, thickening of the gallbladder wall and hepatic periportal lucency due to fluid and lymphedema surrounding the portal veins are
the major CT findings in patients with acute hepatitis. In conclusion, the characteristic radiologic findings of primary hepatic lymphoma
may be similar to acute parenchymal liver disease, but demonstrate more aggressive features on serial follow-up imaging while they progress.
Therefore, when the clinical and laboratory findings mimic those of hepatitis and the radiologic evaluation reveals acute liver parenchymal
disease with an aggressive course, primary hepatic lymphoma should be included as differential diagnosis, and liver biopsy should be
considered. Primary hepatic lymphoma is a rare manifestation of lymphoma. Clinical diagnosis of the disease could be delayed and complicated
since it may mimic acute hepatitis. The radiologic findings of primary hepatic lymphoma may be similar to those of acute parenchymal liver
disease although aggressive progression of the disease is usually observed on follow-up imaging. Therefore, primary hepatic lymphoma should
be included in the differential diagnosis of acute hepatopathy that demonstrates a severe and aggressive course. Liver biopsy should be
considered to confirm its diagnosis. The authors have no conflicts to disclose. alpha fetoprotein alkaline phosphatase alanine
aminotransferase activated partial prothrombin time aspartate aminotransferase carcinoembryogenic antigen computed tomography international
normalized ratio lactate dehydrogenase prothrombin time ultrasonography gamma-glutamyl transpeptidase A portal phase CT scan of a 57-year-
old woman shows hepatosplenomegaly and diffusely edematous wall thickening of the gall bladder (arrowheads). (A) There is no retroperitoneal
lymphadenopathy. (B) After 3 days, abdominal ultrasonogram shows mild coarseness of the hepatic parenchymal echogenecity. Initial hepatic
ultrasonography of a 59-year-old man shows normal parenchyma echogenicity of the liver (A). On the 9th day from the initial ultrasonography,
decreased background echogenicity of the hepatic parenchyma with diffuse periportal tracking (arrow) are noted (B). On the 17th day, ascites
is seen in the perihepatic space (arrow), and the parenchymal echogenicity is coarser than in the previous study (C). The thickened gall
bladder is completely collapsed (D).
