There is limited literature on the management of cataracts in juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG). A 2-month-old girl presented to us with
hyphema, secondary glaucoma OU and skin nodules suggestive of JXG. She developed bilateral cataracts during her follow-up and was treated
successfully with cataract surgery and aphakic rehabilitation. Cataracts have been reported in juvenile xanthogranuloma (JXG), but there is
limited experience with regards to management and long-term outcome. Early treatment is essential to prevent amblyopia. We report successful
management of bilateral cataracts in a patient with JXG. A 2-month-old girl was brought to us with haziness of both eyes for the past 20
days. She was a full-term baby delivered by cesarean section with a birth weight of 2.75 kg. Her antenatal period was uneventful. The
parents denied any history of trauma and the child was otherwise healthy. On examination (under general anesthesia), she was noted to have
conjunctival hyperemia, increased corneal diameter (13.5 mm OD, 11 mm OS), corneal haze with small blood clots in the anterior chamber of
both eyes. No iris nodules were evident [Fig. 1]. Intraocular pressure (IOP) was noted to be 20 mm Hg OD and 8 mm Hg OS by Perkin's
tonometer. A B-scan ultrasound of the posterior segment was normal OU. A few yellowish-orange skin nodules were noted on the forehead and
neck [Fig. 2], that progressively increased on follow-up. Remainder of her systemic and neurological examination was normal. Her hemogram
and coagulation profile were within the normal limits. Excision biopsy of a forehead skin lesion was performed under general anesthesia and
histopathological examination of the specimen showed non-langerhans histiocytic proliferation [Fig. 3]. Immunohistochemistry was negative
for CD1a and cytokeratin; positive for CD68. With the above clinical picture and laboratory finding, a diagnosis of JXG was made. From top
left, corneal edema right eye; top right: Hyphema after resolution of corneal edema left eye; bottom left: Development of cataract; bottom
right: After cataract extraction Resolution of skin lesion over the period of 1 year Histopathology of skin lesion. Low power (×100):
Structure of acanthotic skin with sub epidermal infiltration of xanthomatous cells (arrow) and inflammatory cells with encircling adnexal
structure and extending into subcutaneous zone. High power (×1000): Sheets of foamy histiocytes (arrow) with interspersed multinucleated
giant cells (block arrow) She was started on a topical antibiotic steroid combination, cycloplegic and dorzalamide OU. On her review visits,
she developed posterior synechiae and a few iris nodules in the left eye, which resolved with intensive topical steroids. Her IOP and fundus
examination were within the normal limits. The steroids were tapered off after 2 months. She maintained a steady central fixation throughout
her treatment and was also on regular review with a pediatrician. Four months after her first presentation, she developed bilateral anterior
subcapsular cataract, which gradually progressed. She underwent cataract surgery in the left eye under general anesthesia. Topical
prednisolone acetate 4 times a day was added to topical antibiotics a day before surgery. A superior bridle suture was placed. After
peritomy, the bleeders were cauterized and a limbal groove made with a blade breaker. The anterior chamber was entered by deepening the
groove and trypan blue was injected under an air bubble. Intracameral adrenaline was used to achieve pupillary dilatation and reduce
intraoperative bleeding. Subsequently, 2% hydroxypropyl methylcellulose was injected into the anterior chamber. Iridocapsular adhesions were
gently lysed by sweeping a cyclodialysis spatula under the iris. The anterior capsule was punctured by a bent 26 G needle and capsulorhexis
done with a Utrata forceps. The lens matter was aspirated by a Simcoe cannula. The bottle height was raised to increase pressure in the
anterior chamber and tamponade any bleeding. Subsequently, the posterior capsule was punctured by a bent 26 G needle in a sideways fashion
and capsulorhexis completed by an Utrata forceps. Sufficient anterior vitrectomy and a peripheral iridotomy were done by an automated
vitrector. An intraocular lens (IOL) was not implanted given the age of the patient (<1 year). Tight wound closure with 10-0 monofilament
nylon suture was ensured. After surgery, she was started on topical steroid antibiotic combination and cycloplegics, which were tapered over
6 weeks. The right eye cataract surgery was done 6 weeks after the left eye surgery and a similar procedure was followed. Her perioperative
period was uneventful. On her last follow-up, 1 year after surgery, the child was comfortable with aphakic correction and the visual axis
was clear. The IOP was monitored with Pulsair tonometer. The IOP was noted to be normal on all occasions and no antiglaucoma medications
were needed. The skin lesions appeared to be regressing. JXG is a rare benign disorder that presents with skin lesions during infancy. The
skin lesions are discrete yellow/orange nodules on the face and back. They resolve spontaneously and do not require any specific treatment.
Histopathologically it is characterized by a non-langerhans cell histiocytosis. A reactive granuloma with foreign body giant cells and
Touton giant cells is characteristic. Touton's giant cells were absent in our patient; however, she had features suggestive of a non-
langerhan's cell histiocytosis as suggested by the absence of a CD1a and cytokeratin. Positivity for CD68 suggested a histiocytic
proliferation. This in conjunction with typical clinical features led to the diagnosis of JXG. Ocular involvement in JXG is in the form of
diffuse or discrete vascular iris nodules, which may bleed, resulting in spontaneous hyphema and secondary glaucoma. The condition may also
involve the ciliary body, anterior choroid, cornea, lids, limbus, orbit, retina, optic nerve and optic nerve, but intraocular involvement is
rare (<1% of cases). Presentation is typically unilateral, though bilateral cases like ours have been reported. Indeed JXG should be
included in the differential diagnosis of spontaneous hyphema in this age group and one should make a careful evaluation to detect skin
nodules, which can be difficult to detect early in dark skinned individuals. The hyphema usually responds to conservative treatment.
Cataracts may develop and management can be difficult. It is believed that any ocular surgery in JXG may be complicated by hyphema. The
perioperative period was uneventful in our patient. This could be because patient was taken up for surgery once the iris nodules and hyphema
had resolved and patient was continued on topical steroids. It is likely that the use of intracameral adrenaline, raising the bottle height
and a tight wound closure reduced the risk of bleeding in our patient. In general, bimanual anterior limbal vitrectomy is preferred over a
pars plana vitrectomy after primary posterior capsulotomy in pediatric cataract surgery. This is because the technique is simpler and most
cataract surgeons are comfortable with an anterior approach. An IOL was not implanted in our patient considering the anterior segment
inflammation and the bilaterality. Furthermore, the safety and benefits of IOL implantation in infancy is not well-established. We could not
find any other reports detailing on cataract surgery in JXG. Management as detailed above may reduce the risk of bleeding and improve the
visual outcome. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
