Revision rates of total hip arthroplasty have decreased after introducing total hip arthroplasty (THA) using ceramic component, since
ceramic components could reduce components wear and osteolysis. The fracture of a ceramic component is a rare but potentially serious event.
Thus, ceramic on polyethylene articulation is gradually spotlighted to reduce ceramic component fracture. There are a few recent reports of
ceramic head fracture with polyethylene liner. Herein, we describe a case of a ceramic head component fracture with polyethylene liner. The
fractured ceramic head was 28 mm short neck with conventional polyethylene liner. We treated the patient by total revision arthroplasty
using 4th generation ceramic on ceramic components. Revision rates of total hip arthroplasty (THA) have decreased after introducing THA
using ceramic component, since ceramic components could reduce components wear and osteolysis owning to wear particles from metal or
polyethylene.1,2 Ceramic-on-ceramic articulation has the lowest wear rate among various articulation, and has been introduced as one of more
durable articulations in THA.1-3 However, ceramic head fracture has increased according to the increase of THA using ceramic-on-ceramic
articulation, and this bearing-related complication results in a serious problem such as difficult revision surgery.1,4,5 The fracture of a
ceramic component is a rare but potentially serious event. Thus, ceramic-on-polyethylene articulation is gradually spotlighted to reduce
impact force between hard ceramic materials, as well as lower wear rates of polyethylene liner than metal-on-polyethylene articulation.1,6
Recently, there are a few reports of ceramic head fracture with polyethylene liner.7,8 Herein, we report a case of ceramic head fracture 12
years after THA with polyethylene liner. A 72-year-old woman underwent THA for idiopathic osteonecrosis of left femoral head in February,
2000. In 2012, she visited our emergency room for left hip pain with clunk sounds after squatting position 3 days ago. She had no problems
in gait before the accident of squatting position. She has obese appearance; her height was 164 cm, weight was 90 kg, and bone mass index
was 33.5 kg/m2. There was no evidence of infection including redness or heating sensation around left hip. Plain radiographs showed ceramic
head fractures with multiple fragments around the joint. The former arthroplasties included the cementless cup (Trilogy速 acetabular system,
Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA), cementless stem (Versys速 hip system, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA), polyethylene liner (Trilogy速 acetabular system,
UHMWPE, Zimmer, Warsaw, IN, USA), and ceramic head (Versys速 hip system, 28 mm diameter, short neck length, zirconium oxide ceramic). The
inclination of acetabular cup was 43 degree, and anteversion was 10 degree, which were within acceptable range (Fig. 1).9 Revision operation
was done. Posterolateral approach was used, similar to previous operation. After capsulectomy thorough posterolateral approach, various
sizes of ceramic particles were observed. Intraoperatively, ceramic fragments were meticulously removed, and extensive capsulectomy was
performed. Inner surface of polyethylene liner and metal neck taper junction of the femoral components were severely scratched to retain
(Fig. 2). There were concerns about refracture of ceramic head and galvanic corrosion of metal head because of the scratched femoral neck.
Thus, femoral stem was removed. In addition, the acetabular cup that was loosened because of osteolysis was also removed. After the removal
of all components, massive irrigation and extensive synovectomy were done to remove microscopic ceramic fragments. For revision, new
cementless acetabular cup (Delta-PF Cup, Lima, Udine, Italy), full-coated modular cementless stem (Revision hip uncemented stem-Lima, Udine,
Italy) were used. And, the 4th generation ceramic liner (Neutral liner, 36 mm I.D., Biolox Delta, CeramTec, Plochingen, Germany) was
implanted for revision surgery. Full-coated modular cementless stem (Revision hip uncemented stem-diameter 16 mm, length 140 mm, Neck with
screw-height 60 mm, Lima, Udine, Italy) was inserted with allogenic bone graft around proximal femur. Finally, the 4th generation ceramic
head (Femoral head, 36 mm short taper 12/14, Biolox Delta, CeramTec, Plochingen, Germany) was applied. Intraoperative testing of the
stability of the revised implants was advisable. The cup position was checked with 42 degree of abduction, and 31 degree of anteversion in
postoperative plain radiographs (Fig. 3). At her 6 months follow-up, she could return to her previous level of activity, and had Harris hip
score of 82. In radiographs, the implant showed stable fixation without sign of osteolysis or loosening. Ceramic materials have been used
for THA with better clinical results, compared with conventional metal-on-polyethylene articulation.1,2,6 Ceramic on ceramic articulation
has the lowest wear rate among various articulations.1 However, there is a concern about ceramic head fracture, therefore, ceramic head with
polyethylene liner has been introduced. Several laboratory and clinical studies6,10 found that ceramic-on-polyethylene articulations have
lower wear rate than those of metal-on-polyethylene articulation. The fracture rate of ceramic head in ceramic-on-ceramic articulation has
been shown to range from 0.004% to 0.05%.5 It is very rare but catastrophic event which requires revision operation.4,5,11 To our best
knowledge, there are only a few reports on ceramic head fracture in ceramic-on-polyethylene THA.7,8 Revision arthroplasty should be
performed, because a fractured ceramic component carries a high risk of failure.2,8,11,12 The ceramic fragments are harder than metal.
Microscopically small ceramic particles are easy to remain and can lead to third-body wear of replaced new components in spite of meticulous
removal of ceramic fragment after revision THA.4,5 Thus, new ceramic-on-ceramic articulation should be considered as one of the possible
bearing options in revision THA.4,5 In the present case, the former acetabular cup was not stable due to acetabular osteolysis. Furthermore,
metal taper of the femoral component was badly scratched. Thus, all components were revised using 4th generation ceramic composition. The
fractured ceramic head was 28 mm short-neck taper in this patient. Callaway, et al.8 reported four cases of ceramic head fracture with
polyethylene liner in 1995. The diameter of femoral component was 28 mm and the neck length was short in all instances. Koo, et al.11 also
reported that the rate of ceramic head fracture associated with a 28 mm short-neck modular alumina femoral head was 1.4% (5 of 359). The
stress at the taper-bore interface is decreased with a 28 mm short-neck femoral head. Thus, 28 mm short-neck ceramic heads also might be at
a risk of fracture.11 The fatigue fracture in ceramic head with vulnerable design as well as obesity and squatting position during daily
activity could be responsible in this patient.13,14 In the present case, we were able to solve the ceramic head fracture with polyethylene
liner by performing total revision arthroplasty. Our finding suggests that ceramic head fracture could occur not only in ceramic-on-ceramic
articulation, but also in ceramic-on-polyethylene articulation, especially in not-contemporary ceramic materials with vulnerable design of
28 mm short-neck ceramic head. We recommend that surgeons should not implant 28 mm short-neck ceramic femoral head regardless of the
composition of acetabular liner. The authors have no financial conflicts of interest. Preoperative plain radiographs shows a ceramic head
fracture with polyethylene liner. In computed tomographs, numerous ceramic particles were found around the joint, and mild osteolytic
lesions were observed around proximal femur and lateral aspect of acetabular cup. Photograph shows fractured ceramic head on polyethylene
liner and scratched taper of the stem. Some particles are attached to anterior and posterior joint capsules. Black discoloration, which is
suspected of metallosis, is observed at proximal femur. Radiographs after total revision of a ceramic head fracture.
