This report describes the regular use of acupuncture treatments for a patient with hypertension who could not tolerate the side effects of
the antihypertensive agents. The patient received 60 acupuncture treatments in the course of 12 weeks, during which time his overall
wellbeing improved, his blood pressure reduced and the side effects of antihypertensive drugs were removed. Although acupuncture plus the
drug appeared to have a substantial synergistic effect that was weakened when the drug was discontinued, acupuncture may still play a role
in the management of hypertension, especially for patients who cannot tolerate the side effects of antihypertensive agents. We report a case
in which intensive blood pressure (BP) monitoring of a patient with hypertension seems to indicate a synergistic effect of antihypertensive
medication and an intensive course of acupuncture. Acupuncture may be a possible alternative when a patient cannot tolerate the side effects
of antihypertensive agents. A 56-year-old man (height 165 cm, weight 75 kg) was admitted to The First Affiliated Hospital of Tianjin
University of Traditional Chinese Medicine on 24 September 2012 with hypertension and side effects of antihypertensive drugs. He was
diagnosed with hypertension in 2007 and his usual BP was 160/100 mm Hg. He started taking levamlodipine 5 mg once daily in March 2011.
However, his BP remained the same and he reported side effects such as flushing and palpitations. He was switched to irbesartan 150 mg once
daily in July 2012. His BP remained at 140/85 mm Hg but he reported side effects of diarrhoea, fatigue and decreased sexual function, among
others. He denied a family history of alcoholism and cardiovascular disease and did not have a preference for a salty diet. He exercised
about 2 h a day. Investigations revealed mild hypocalcaemia (2.11 mmol/L) and reduced high density cholesterol (0.88 mmol/L). Transcranial
cerebral Doppler showed increased blood flow in the right intracranial internal carotid artery while the blood flow frequency spectrum in
the other cerebral vessels was normal. Carotid artery ultrasound revealed a plaque with a thickness of 2.0 mm in the left common carotid
artery wall, which accounted for 25.6% of the blood vessel. Cardiac colour ultrasound revealed no findings in left ventricular hypertrophy:
interventricular septum thickness at end-diastole (IVSTd)=10.9 mm, left ventricular posterior wall depth (LVPWd)=9.7 mm, E/A=0.87, left
ventricular mass index (LVMI)=112 g/m2, relative wall thickness (RWT)=0.39. In view of the side effects of his medication, the patient asked
for a course of acupuncture. He received a total of 60 sessions of acupuncture treatment over the course of 12 weeks (5–6 treatments per
week) from 24 September to 24 December 2012. Each acupuncture treatment session lasted 30 min. The acupuncture was stopped because he no
longer had side effects from the antihytertensive drugs and he decided to return to work. During the treatments, acupuncture points LI4,
LI11, ST36 and ST9 were used bilaterally for antihypertensive purposes. Needles were inserted 0.8–1.0 cun perpendicularly. Twirling with
tonifying or reducing manipulation was applied (tonifying or reducing manipulation is to inspire jing qi through proper acupuncture
technique). LI11, ST36 and ST9 were needled with tonifying manipulation for 1 min at a frequency of 120–160 twirls/min; LI4 was needled with
reducing manipulation for 1 min at a frequency of 40–60 twirls/min. CV4, CV6 and SP6 were also needled to treat adverse drug reactions (eg,
diarrhoea, fatigue). The acupuncturists who administered the treatment had at least 10 years of experience. Stainless steel needles (Suzhou,
China), 0.25×40 mm, were employed at corresponding points. Appropriate stimulation was applied in order to attain the de qi sensation, which
was associated with physiological changes1 that played an important role in the effects of acupuncture. The patient received individualised
acupuncture treatments for hypertension and for adverse drug reactions such as diarrhoea and fatigue. Frequently used antihypertensive
acupuncture points as described in systematic reviews are LR3, LI11, GB20, ST36 and ST40.2 In this case, the antihypertensive point
selection was based on Traditional Chinese Medicine meridian theory.3 In traditional concepts, points located on the Yangming meridian, such
as LI4, LI11 and ST36, can ‘reconcile qi and blood’. We also selected ST9 Renying, a meeting point of the Stomach and Gallbladder channels
that regulates qi and blood. Located next to the carotid sinus, ST9 is the pressure sensor of the human body that regulates BP. Based on TCM
theory, CV4, CV6 and SP6 were chosen to treat diarrhoea and fatigue. Office BP (OBP) was taken at each visit using an automated
sphygmomanometer while seated and repeated after a 5 min break. If the systolic BP (SBP) or diastolic BP (DBP) changed more than 5 mm Hg
within the 5 min period, a third measurement was taken. The average value was recorded. In addition to OBP taken with an automatic
sphygmomanometer, 24 h ambulatory BP monitoring (ABPM) was also applied to measure the daytime and night time BP. As an adjunct to OBP,
ambulatory measurements of BP can assist in identifying ‘white coat hypertension’ and predicting the risk of organ damage and cardiovascular
disease.4 5 After 6 weeks of acupuncture treatment there was a decrease in BP load (percentage of readings >140 mm Hg (systolic) and
>90 mm Hg (diastolic) recorded by ABPM: day SBP load from 85% to 12%; day DBP load from 95% to 32%; night SBP load from 100% to 50%; night
DBP load from 100% to 80% (figure 1A). Changes of 24h ambulatory blood pressure in different time points during the treatment period. With
the lowering of BP (from 150/99 mm Hg to 128/85 mm Hg), the patient also stopped taking antihypertensive medication on 10 December. After
about 14 days, BP values rebounded after 12 weeks of acupuncture treatment (to 146/95 mm Hg). The same trend was revealed in the 24 h BP
monitoring for both day and night BP, except that changes in DBP readings were small (figure 1B). Acupuncture in combination with the drug
appeared to have a substantial effect on treating hypertension. There may have been a synergistic effect between acupuncture and the
antihypertensive agent because the antihypertensive effect was weakened when the antihypertensive drug was discontinued. The immediate
effects of acupuncture on hypertension were evaluated by OBP (ie, the difference after and before treatment every 2 weeks). Over the course
of the 12-week treatment period the BP decreased in the first 3 weeks, increased in weeks 4–7 and then gradually fell to a satisfactory
level of 130/80 mm Hg (figure 2). Most importantly, the antihypertensive drug side effects such as diarrhoea, fatigue and impotence
completely disappeared. Changes of Office BP in different time points during the treatment period. Adverse reactions occurring during
acupuncture treatment were bleeding and haematoma. Haematoma occurred once at LI11, which resolved in 5 days after pressure using cold and
hot compresses. There were four episodes of bleeding at ST36 and three episodes of bleeding at LI4 which were resolved after pressure for
10–20 s. From January to March 2013 the patient monitored his BP at home. The average SBP was 125–135 mm Hg and the average DBP was
75–85 mm Hg. The highest reading was 140/95 mm Hg, but it was not common. What surprised us was that his cardiac function tested on 10 April
revealed a slight improvement (IVSTd=10.3 mm, LVPWd=10.3 mm, E/A=1.3, LVMI=109 g/m2, RWT=0.39), and transcranial cerebral Doppler showed a
normal blood flow in the right intracranial internal carotid artery after 12 weeks of acupuncture treatment. The patient monitored his BP at
home after March. From April to June the average BP was 140–145 mm Hg (systolic) and 80–90 mm Hg (diastolic). In July his BP rose to
160/95 mm Hg in the afternoon and he resumed taking antihypertensive medicine. Hypertension affects approximately one billion individuals
worldwide, which includes 200 million people in China.6 7 It is a high-risk factor for cardiac-cerebral vascular disease.8 Much attention
has been paid to the use of antihypertensive drugs. Calcium channel blockers are most frequently associated with adverse drug reactions,
followed by diuretics, β-blockers, angiotensin receptor blockers (ARBs) and ACE inhibitors.9 The usual measure taken for adverse drug
reactions is to add a low dose of a second agent with a different mode of action if one drug given alone does not sufficiently lower the BP.
For example, vasodilatory oedema is a common adverse effect of dihydropyridine calcium antagonist and could be alleviated when combined with
an ACE inhibitor or ARB.10 In this case, the patient stopped his antihypertensive medication after 46 acupuncture treatments and there was a
slight rebound in his BP 14 days later. Systematic reviews of acupuncture for hypertension showed that acupuncture only marginally reduced
DBP by 3 mm Hg (95% CI −6 to 0; p=0.05) but, when administered with antihypertensive medication, acupuncture could significantly reduce SBP
by 8 mm Hg and DBP by 4 mm Hg (both p<0.05).7 This case study opens up the possibility that acupuncture may serve as an alternative for
hypertensive patients, especially for those who cannot tolerate the side effects of antihypertensive drugs. However, the intensive treatment
course applied in this case might not be acceptable to all patients and requires intensive resources. There seems to be a contradiction in
the BP trend measured by 24 h ABPM and OBP: OBP showed that BP in week 12 was much lower than in week 6 while 24 h ABPM showed that BP in
week 12 was much higher than in week 6. These contradictory findings may be explained by different factors influencing the results of 24 h
ABPM. For example, the patient told us that he did not sleep well because of 24 h ABPM overnight, and other factors could be temperature,
food, mood and activities. His OBP was measured after a 5 min break at almost the same room temperature, so these factors would only have a
slight effect on OBP. This case report suggests that intensive acupuncture may have an effect on reducing BP, especially in synergy with
medication. It may also reduce the side effects of antihypertensive drugs and might provide an alternative for individual hypertensive
patients who cannot tolerate the side effects of antihypertensive drugs. We thank the patient for his patience and regular attendance during
this research. We are grateful to Dr Xiaonong Fan and Dr Chunhong Zhang for providing treatment and care to the patient in this study. We
also wish to thank Hilary Lai for English editorial assistance. Contributors: LZ measured the blood pressure, recorded the data and drafted
the article. PS and SW designed the therapeutic regimen and revised the manuscript. Funding: This research was supported by the China
National Foundation of Basic Research (2012CB518505). Competing interests: None. Patient consent: Obtained. Ethics approval: Ethics approval
was obtained from the Ethics Committee of the First Affiliated Hospital of Tianjin University of TCM (Trial registration: ChiCTR-
TRC-12002582). Provenance and peer review: Not commissioned; internally peer reviewed.
