A 65-year-old man presented in our hospital complaining of continuous chest discomfort and massive peripheral oedema. Past medical history
was negative for heart diseases. Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) revealed a septum apparently dividing the left atrium longitudinally
into two chambers connected by a small opening. An abnormal continuous flow, through the abnormal septum, crossing the whole atrium, was
directed towards the right pulmonary veins (Panel A; Supplementary data online, Video S1). The transoesophageal echocardiography (TEE)
confirmed the presence of a partition of the left atrium (Panel B), but no connections between pulmonary veins and the lateral chamber.
Coronary arteriography (Panel C; Supplementary data online, Video S2) and coronary computed tomography (CT) (Panel D) showed a complex
coronary malformation with cirsoid abnormal vessels and with a big aneurysm, merging with the left atrium, formed by the left circumflex
artery (LCx) and a superior abnormal branch of the right coronary artery (RCA). A cardiac CT scan showed a thick pericardium. Equal
diastolic pressures (19 mmHg) in the right and left chambers were found at catheterization indicating constriction. This was the reason for
the presenting symptoms of peripheral oedema. The patient was referred for pericardiectomy to the surgeon and went, throughout the
procedure, without any problem. The surgical procedure consisted in removal of the pericardium from phrenic to phrenic with a good immediate
result. Panel A. TTE: an abnormal continuous flow in the left atrium coming from a lateral chamber (LC) going towards the right pulmonary
veins. Panel B. TEE showing a chamber on the left part of the left atrium. A: coronary aneurysm. Panel C. Right coronary arteriography
demonstrating a cirsoid coronary artery with an abnormal superior branch. Panel D. Coronary CT: coronary computed tomography; RCA: right
coronary artery; AN: aneurysm formed by LCx and RCA. Supplementary data are available at European Heart Journal – Cardiovascular Imaging
online.
