Graft-versus-host disease is observed mainly in recipients of hematopoietic cell transplantation and is expressed by cutaneous or systemic
signals and symptoms. Graft-versus-host disease is clinically classified as acute or chronic. Chronic Graft-versus-host disease occurs in up
to 70% of hematopoietic cell transplanted patients and its clinical manifestations have important impact on morbidity and quality of life.
The authors report an expressive cutaneous, oral and adnexal involvement in a patient with chronic Graft-versus-host disease with multiple
lesions of lichenoid and atrophic pattern. Doença enxerto contra hospedeiro é observada principalmente em pacientes transplantados de
células de origem hematopoiéticas e se expressa por sinais e sintomas cutâneos ou sistêmicos. Clinicamente, a Doença enxerto contra
hospedeiro é classificada em aguda ou crônica. As do tipo crônico ocorrem em até 70% dos pacientes e suas manifestações têm impacto
importante na morbidade e na qualidade de vida. Os autores relatam caso com extenso comprometimento cutâneo, oral e de anexos cutâneos em
paciente com Doença enxerto contra hospedeiro crônica expressa por inúmeras lesões de padrão liquenóide e de atrofia cutânea. The graft-
versus-host disease (GVHD) is an immune-mediated syndrome expressed by cutaneous or cutaneous / systemic signals and symptoms, mainly in
recipients of allogeneic stem cells or bone marrow transplantation, but also following blood transfusion and solid organ transplantation.1-3
Graft-versushost disease is induced and maintained by mature donor T cells, which clonally expand in an antigenspecific manner after the
recognition of non-self HLA expressed on the surface of the host's nucleated cells, thus increasing HLA incompatibility between donor and
recipient.1-3 Graft-versus-host disease is clinically classified as acute or chronic. Acute GVHD (aGVHD) is historically defined as the
onset of signs and symptoms within 100 days of transplant, and chronic GVHD (cGVHD) will appear after that period.1 However, recent
transplant protocols, with less aggressive conditioning and new immune modulating strategies have altered the classification; therefore, the
aGVHD category includes the classic aGVHD occurring within 100 days after transplant and the persistent, recurrent or late aGVHD.4 Chronic
GVHD includes the classic cGVHD occurring any time after transplant and an overlap syndrome in which features of cGVHD and aGVHD appear
together.4 Chronic GVHD occurs in up to 70% of hematopoietic cell transplanted patients.2,3 Dermatologists and stomatologists must play an
active role in the management and treatment of patients with GVHD, as oral and cutaneous lesions have severe impact on morbidity and quality
of life. We report a clinical case of cGVHD with expressive cutaneous, oral and adnexal involvement occurring despite immunosuppressive
therapy, presenting with numerous lichenoid and atrophic lesions. A 52-year-old male patient presented with a history of an allogeneic bone-
marrow transplant (matched sibling donor) performed in a reference Hospital, due to acute myeloid leukemia one year before. A conditioning
regimen had been followed with oral busulfan and fludarabine phosphate and he was immunosuppressed from day 2 pre-transplant with
cyclosporine, initial dose of 3mg/kg and 7mg/kg after the 21th day post-transplant, sustained for 241 days plus tacrolimus and mycophenolate
mofetil for seven and 45 days respectively. The patient denied acute GVHD and his clinical follow-up was unremarkable until six months post-
transplant, when oral and skin lesions of chronic GVHD appeared. Since then the patient has been treated with prednisone up to 1mg/kg/day
with partial remission of the clinical picture. The initial skin lesions were described as erythematous and pruriginous papules, starting on
the trunk with progressive spreading and oral lesions similar to lichen planus, with ulcers on the lower lip causing restriction to mouth
opening. Examination showed diffuse spotted hyper and hypopigmented skin, multiple lichenoid and atrophic lesions plus almost complete
scarring alopecia, acral edema and erythema plus onychodistrophia of the 20 nails (Figures 1-4). Buccal examination showed shallow ulcers on
the buccal mucosa and tongue, periodontal disease, salivary gland hypofunction, depapillated tongue and decreased taste. No pulmonary,
gastrointestinal or renal involvement was detected. Histology of skin lesions showed discrete hyperkeratotic and atrophic epidermis with
vacuolar interface dermatitis and scattered apoptosis of keratinocytes plus superficial sclerosis, vascular proliferation and mild
lymphocytic infiltrate, suggestive of late evolution of lichenoid lesions (Figures 5 and 6). Graft-versus-host disease: spotted hyper and
hypopigmented skin on the face Graft-versus-host disease: more evident lichenoid and atrophic lesions on the back Graft-versus-host disease:
discrete hyperkeratotic and atrophic epidermis plus vascular proliferation and mild lymphocytic infiltrate on the papillary dermis Graft-
versus-host disease: high-power view shows hyperkeratotic and atrophic epidermis, vacuolar changes, apoptotic cell, discrete lymphocytic
infiltration and incontinent melanin in the papillary dermis Chronic GVHD is a major complication of allogeneic bone marrow and peripheral
blood stem cell transplantation. The main risk factors include previous aGVHD, advanced recipient age, female donor to male recipient,
transplant in patient with chronic myelogenous leukemia, previous splenectomy, second allogeneic transplant and a high degree of HLA
mismatching.3 Chronic GVHD has an important impact on the survival and quality of life of transplanted patients. The skin is the most
commonly involved organ, followed by the oral mucosa, liver, eye and GI tract, but virtually all organs or systems may be involved.3-6 Skin
lesions in cGVHD are initially subtle with xerosis, follicular hyperkeratosis or with a pityriasiform, psoriasiform and eczematous aspect.
Later on, more classic lesions of lichenoid or sclerodermoid pattern appear.1,5 Sclerotic skin changes are a prominent feature and a major
source of morbidity. Dermal fibrosis may involve all layers of the skin with loss of subcutaneous tissue and may include the fascia and
tendon.5 Our patient presents diffuse spotted hyperpigmentation and hypopigmentation associated with multiple lichenoid and small atrophic,
scaly and hypopigmented plaques with histopathological presentation of atrophic epidermis and discrete lichenoid pattern.5 Buccal lesions
manifest as gingivitis, mucositis, xerostomia and ulcers as observed. Involvement of oral mucosa is frequent and may be very relevant
affecting the health and quality of life of patients.2,6 Despite the expressive mucocutaneous and adnexal involvement, no evidence of
systemic disease has been detected in this particular patient so far, although this possibility cannot be ruled out during the patient's
follow-up . Systemic steroids are the appropriate first-line treatment for both acute and chronic GVHD, but if the patient is steroid
refractory an alternative is the association of extracorporeal photopheresis, prednisone and sirolimus, or prednisone, sirolimus plus
calcineurin inhibitors.3,7-9 Localized, cutaneous GVHD may respond well to topical steroids or, alternatively, to tacrolimus and
pimecrolimus.7 Although hematopoietic cell transplanted patients are counseled to avoid ultraviolet radiation due to possible GVHD flare or
increased risk of skin cancer, psoralens plus ultraviolet A light (PUVA) or narrow band-ultraviolet B phototherapy are the choice for the
treatment of sclerotic cGVHD lesions.7-9 It is also important to have in mind that these patients have increased risk of secondary
malignancies of the skin or mucosa including squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma, therefore dermatological screenings are recommended
throughout life.3,10 Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None * Work performed at the Department of Dermatology and Radiotherapy.
Botucatu Medical School, São Paulo State University "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" (FMB-UNESP) - Botucatu (SP), Brazil. Graft-versus-host
disease: scalp with alopecia and spotted hyper and hypopigmented skin plus lichenoid lesions Graft-versus-host disease: lichenoid lesions,
edema and erythema on the hands with associated onychodistrophia
