Ketron-Goodman disease was formerly considered a disseminated type of pagetoid reticulosis. However, according to the new classification
consensus, it should be regarded as aggressive epidermotropic CD8 T-cutaneous lymphoma, cutaneous gamma/delta T-lymphoma, or tumor-stage
mycosis fungoides, depending on the clinical-histological picture. This case highlights a rare and challenging presentation of Ketron-
Goodman disease with an indolent presentation and evolution and good response to a low-grade treatment regimen, not fitting well into the
new classification criteria. A doença de Ketron-Goodman foi inicialmente considerada uma forma disseminada de reticulose pagetóide. Mas, de
acordo com o atual sistema de classificação e dependendo do quadro clínico-patológico deve ser antes vista como um linfoma T CD8 agressivo
epidermotrópico, linfoma T gama/delta ou micose fungóide, estadio tumoral. Pretendemos realçar esta doença rara que pode suscitar dúvidas no
diagnóstico. Neste caso, a apresentação e evolução foram indolentes com boa resposta a um tratamento pouco agressivo, não se enquadrando bem
nas novas propostas de classificação da doença. A 53-year-old Caucasian male was referred to our Department due to an asymptomatic
erythematous plaque on the left buttock evolving for 5 months and with progressive increase. On physical examination, an erythematous-
brownish plaque was observed with a raised erythematous-red border and areas of erosion (Figure 1). There were no other signs or symptoms. A
biopsy showed hyperkeratosis, acanthosis and spongiosis, as well as epidermotropism of isolated and grouped large-sized atypical lymphocytes
with pale halos, also present in the upper dermis. Immunohistochemistry revealed positive staining of these cells for CD3 and CD8 (Figure 2)
without staining for CD4, CD30 and CD56, consistent with the diagnosis of pagetoid reticulosis (PR) - Woringer-Kolopp disease (WKD). The
microbiological examinations of the skin were negative. Three weeks later the patient developed several nummular erythematous lesions with a
scaling border scattered on the legs (Figure 3). We repeated the biopsy, which revealed identical findings plus positive staining for CD45
and a proliferative index of 90% (Ki67). Subsequently, these lesions increased in size, assuming the shape of the original plaque and a
diagnosis of Ketron-Goodman disease (KGD) was established. The patient started treatment once daily with betamethasone dipropionate ointment
and, simultaneously, was referred to the haematological outpatient department to exclude systemic involvement. All tests were normal,
including the peripheral blood immunophenotyping, the bone marrow biopsy and the thoracoabdomino-pelvic computed tomography scans. After 4
months of therapy with topical betamethasone dipropionate, all the lesions cleared, with the exception of a single lesion on the left foot,
which was submitted to radiotherapy and resolved in 4 months. In a follow-up over 2 years the patient has remained free of signs and
symptoms. Erythematous brownish plaque surrounded by a raised erythematous red border with some erosions A pathological infiltration of the
epidermis by large-sized cells, single or arranged in clusters and dermal fibrosis containing these cells on H&E 10x (a). Atypical large
cells displaying vacuolated, abundant cytoplasm and big, hyperchromatic, pleomorphic nuclei on H&E 40x (b). Immunohistochemistry with
positive staining for CD8 (c) and CD3 (d) Nummular erythematous lesions scattered on the legs (a) in close detail displaying a scaling
border (b) Pagetoid reticulosis is a low-grade rare malignant variant of mycosis fungoides (MF) characterized by the presence of localized
patches or plaques, but usually presents as a solitary lesion that is commonly localized on the extremities, with an intraepidermal
proliferation of neoplastic T cells that may have either a CD4+,CD8-or a CD4-,CD8+phenotype.1 KGD was initially described as a disseminated
type of PR.2 However, according to the most recent classification consensus for cutaneous lymphomas, KGD would currently be more likely to
be classified as aggressive epidermotropic CD8 T-cutaneous lymphoma, cutaneous gamma/delta T-lymphoma, or tumor-stage MF, depending on the
clinical-histological picture.1 The term PR should only be used for the localized type - WKD.1 Our case raises some issues in the light of
recent classification consensus.1 Our patient was initially diagnosed with localized PR - WKD, but then developed widespread lesions on the
legs which, together with the histopathology and immunophenotype (CD45+, CD56-) displaying an high proliferative index, led to a
reclassification for KGD.3 According to the classification consensus, this would be in line with a diagnosis of aggressive CD8 T-cutaneous
lymphoma.1 Nevertheless there were no signs of aggressive clinical behavior or necrotic keratinocytes in histopathology, which provided us
with the motive to continue with a low-grade treatment regimen. The preferred mode of treatment for PR is radiotherapy and, in some cases,
topical treatment with nitrogen mustard or steroids.1 Surgical excision was used in the past for few small lesions, but the excellent
response to topical and/or radiation therapy rendered surgical intervention obsolete.4,5 Localized PR has good prognosis without
extracutaneous dissemination or disease-related deaths.1 In contrast, the few published cases of KGD report fatal outcomes, systemic
involvement and interferon therapy, with an 8-month followup without relapse.5,6 In our case, a follow-up of 2 years without recurrences or
systemic involvement favors an indolent form of cutaneous T-lymphoma. Long-term observation is however necessary, considering that even if
the cutaneous lesions clear up this may not mean resolution of the disease, since the disease may recur as long as 10 years after therapy.5
Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None * Work performed at the Department of Dermatology and Venereology, Centro Hospitalar São
João, EPE - Porto, Portugal
