An uncommon skin manifestation of Dermatitis Herpetiformis is palmar and plantar purpura. Dermoscopic examination is useful for any skin
condition since it allows recognition of structures that are not discernible to the naked eye. A 22 year-old Caucasian man was admitted with
excoriated lesions and pruritus. Petechial lesions could be seen on volar aspect of the digits on the hands and feet. Dermoscopy examination
revealed erythematous and violaceous dots and erythematous and brown dots. Púrpura palmar e plantar é uma manifestação cutânea incomum da
Dermatite Herpetiforme. A dermatoscopia é útil para o exame dermatológico por permitir o reconhecimento de estruturas que ao olho nu não são
perceptíveis. Doente caucasiano masculino de 22 anos que queixava-se de lesões escoriadas e prurido. Observouse na face volar dos dedos dos
pés e das mãos lesões petequiais. O exame dermatoscópico revelou pontos eritematosos e violáceos, além de pontos eritematosos e marrons.
Dermatitis herpetiformis (DH) was initially described by Louis Duhring in 1884.1 DH most commonly presents as a symmetric, pruritic,
papulovesicular eruption on the extensor surfaces of children and adults.2,3 An uncommon skin manifestation of DH is palmar and plantar
purpura. The dominant hand often appears more involved, suggesting trauma as an etiologic factor.4 Dermoscopic examination is a useful tool
for visualization of any skin condition since it allows recognition of structures that are not discernible to the naked eye. We report a
clinical case where purpuric lesions on the hands of a patient with DH were examined under dermoscopy. A 22 year-old Caucasian man with one
and a half year history of generalized excoriated cutaneous lesions was admitted with intense pruritus. Numerous excoriated papules and
crusts were distributed on the scalp, neck, dorsum, extensor surface of the limbs, in addition to the lumbar and intergluteal areas.
Petechial lesions on the volar aspect of the digits of the hands and feet were visible (Figure 1). Dermoscopy examination (DermLite Photo;
3Gen) of the volar surface of the fingers revealed erythematous and violaceous dots (new petechial lesions) and erythematous and brown dots
(old petechial lesions) (Figure 2). The patient's medical history included hypothyroidism. He presented no gastrointestinal symptoms. He was
right-handed. Dermatitis Herpetiformis. Petechial lesions on the finger Dermatitis Herpetiformis. Under dermoscopy exam (DermLite Photo;
3Gen), erythematous and violaceous dots can be seen (New petechial lesions, thick arrows) and erythematous and brown dots (Old petechial
lesions, thin arrows) The vicinity of a purpuric lesion on the second finger of his right hand was biopsied. Hematoxilineosin stain revealed
a subepidermal vesicle with neutrophils infiltrate in the dermal papillae (Figure 3A). Direct immunofluorescence exam of the apparently
normal perilesional skin revealed granular IgA deposits on the upper dermis (Figure 3B). The serum level of anti-transglutaminase IgA
antibodies was 18U/ml (ELISA, normal range: under 10U/ml) and G6PD was normal. Dapsone 100mg per os was initiated. After 3 days, there was
no pruritus, and a glutenfree diet was accepted. On the 20th day of treatment, we saw only residual hyperpigmentated lesions. Dermatitis
Herpetiformis. A. (Hematoxylin and Eosin, 100x) subepidermal vesicle with neutrophilic infiltrate in the papillary dermis. B. (Direct
immunofluorescence): IgA deposit in a granular pattern in the upper dermis A Hungarian group presented a large series of children with DH
displaying hemorrhagic palmar lesions, with the right palm and index finger more involved. Mechanical factors were thought to exacerbate the
lesions, and the right-sided predominance could probably be ascribed to most patients being right-handed.5 The atypical palmar and plantar
purpura presentation of DH has been reported in the literature by many authors. However, description of the dermoscopy examination has never
been reported. Vazquez-Lopez et al recently revised the dermoscopic patterns of purpuric lesions, but did not describe lesions similar to
those cited above.6 Our case suggests that dermatologists need to perform a careful dermoscopy exam of the hands and feet in order to find
new clues in cases where DH is a possible diagnosis. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None * Work performed at the Dermatology
Division of the Hospital das Clínicas of the University of São Paulo School of Medicine (HC-FMUSP) - São Paulo (SP), Brazil.
