A 39-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a history of photorefractive keratectomy (PRK), performed two weeks prior; slit-lamp
examination revealed diffuse conjunctival congestion, corneal ulcer and stromal infiltration. After 5 days of antifungal and antibacteric
treatment, the infiltrate progressively increased so that a therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty was necessary. The microbiological analyses
revealed the presence of fungal filaments. Twenty days after surgery the patient had recurrent fungal infiltrate in the donor cornea with
wound dehiscence. We performed a second penetrating keratoplasty. With the matrix-assisted-laser-desorption-ionization-time-of-flight
analysis (MALDI-TOF) we identified a Fusarium solani. Intravenous amphothericine B, a combination of intracameral and intrastromal
voriconazole and intracameral amphotericine B were administered. After 6 months from the last surgery the infection was eradicated. The
management of fungal keratitis after PRK depends on many factors: In our experience, a prompt keratoplasty and the use of intracameral
antifungal medication proved to be very effective. Fusarium species are common organisms that are present in soil, water and plants. These
fungi are more frequent in tropical and temperate areas, and are the most well-known agents of fungal keratitis world-wide, causing up to
32% of reported infections; in USA Fusarium spp. are documented as the most common cause of keratitis. Most infections are often preceded by
trauma. Other risk factors include the use of antibiotics and corticosteroids, pre-existing eye diseases, foreign bodies’ surgery and the
use of contact lenses. Among Fusarium species, F. solani, F. oxysporum and F. moniliforme are the most frequently implicated in human
infections. A 39-year-old woman presented to our hospital with a history of photorefractive keratectomy (PRK), performed two weeks prior.
She complained severe visual loss, photophobia, redness and pain in right eye. The patient was receiving therapy with topical steroids and
antibiotic eye drops. The best corrected visual acuity (BCVA) of the affected eye was limited to hand motion. Slit lamp examinations
revealed diffuse conjunctival congestion and a corneal ulcer with stromal infiltration [Fig. 1a]. (a) Diffuse conjunctival congestion and
corneal ulcer with stromal infiltration, (b) large full thickness infiltrate with 1 mm hypopyon, (c) endothelial dusting, aqueous flare and
cells The ulcer bed and edges were scraped and were sent for bacteriological and mycological examination analysis. Treatment with
corticosteroid eye drops was suspended and the patient was started on the following drugs: Topical fortified 5% vancomicin, tobramicin 0.3%,
moxifloxacin 0.5%, amphotericin B 0.15% at 4 h intervals; systemic antifungal and antibacteric drugs consisted of oral itraconazole at a
dose of 200 mg daily with oral ciprofloxacin 1g daily, and intramuscolar ceftriaxone 1 g daily respectively. After two days the cornea
revealed a full thickness infiltrate with 1 mm hypopyon [Fig. 1b]. The infiltrate and the hypopyon progressively increased in size. After 5
days, the patient underwent a therapeutic penetrating keratoplasty with an 8-mm graft on a 7.75-mm bed using Barron Corneal Trephine. The
explanted cornea was sent to the microbiology laboratory for further testing. Post-surgery treatment consisted in topical norfloxacin 0.3%
(6 times per day) and amphotericin B (4 times per day); systemic ciprofloxacin 1 g daily, ceftriaxone 1 g daily, itraconazole 200 mg daily
and intramuscolar metilprednisolone 20 mg daily [Fig. 1]. After 8 days, the culture of corneal scraping revealed the presence of fungal
filaments. We decided in agreement with the infectious disease specialist, to add therapy with oral voriconazole, (800 mg per day on the
first day, followed by 400 mg per day on successive days) and topical amphothericin B eye drops 6 times per day. The donor cornea and
anterior chamber remained free from infiltrates until day 12, after keratoplasty, when the patient showed eye redness, pain, 1/50 of visual
acuity, endothelial dusting and aqueous flare and cells [Figs. 1c and 2a]. Oral voriconazole was changed to intravenous formulation, 8 mg/Kg
twice per day. (a) Eye redness, endothelial dusting, aqueous flare and cells, (b) fungal infiltrate in with wound dehiscence, (c)
eradication of infection Twenty days after surgery the patient had recurrent fungal infiltrate in the donor cornea with wound dehiscence
[Fig. 2b]. We decided to perform a second penetrating keratoplasty. Because of the high degree of homology in culture between Fusarium
solani or oxysporum, it has been difficult to rule out the two similar opportunistic pathogens from the biopsies performed for
microbiological analysis. In order to have a proven and rapid differential diagnosis we sent biopsy material to the Institute of
Microbiology of Bellinzona (Switzerland), where a matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-flight analysis (MALDI-TOF) has been
performed. The fungal isolate was identified as Fusarium solani, occurring in both the first and second explanted corneas. After specific
antifungal sensitivity testing, we decided to start the patient on the following agents: 3 mg/Kg twice a day of intravenous amphothericin
pB; netilmycin 0.3%, moxifloxacin 0.5%, voriconazole 1% (drops every 2 h) and diclofenac 0.1% (drops every 8 h). During the following days,
we performed a combination of intracameral/intrastromal voriconazole (50 μg/0.1 ml) in addition to intracameral amphothericine B (10
microg/0.1 mL), in three different administrations. After 6 m from the last surgery the infection was eradicated, the donor cornea was
clear, and the BCVA was 7/10 [Fig. 2c]. In this case report we describe the therapeutic management of fungal keratitis post PRK. The
incidence of infectious complications post PRK is relatively low and the pathogens primarily involved are Gram-positive organisms. To our
knowledge, only few cases of fungal keratitis are reported. The use of bandage contact lens (BCL) and topical steroid therapy, provided in
the postoperative course of the PRK together with the breakdown of the barrier function of the corneal epithelium, may cause a
predisposition to fungal corneal infection. A variety of factors can determine the course of a fungal keratitis such as early diagnosis,
sensitivity to drug therapy and virulence of the fungus. In our case, the natural history of the infection was influenced by appropriate
timing of intervention; in fact, the choice to perform a penetrating keratoplasty proved to be effective in containing the infection and
preventing corneal perforation. Our patient had a recurrence of the infection that can be explained by the delay in starting the specific
therapy with voriconazole, [due to the time required for microbial culture (8 days)] and the need to perform the MALDI-TOF in order to
identify the species of Fusarium. The long use of topical steroid after PRK might be another cause of fungal infection recurrence after the
first PRK, as reported in the literature. The presence of hypopyon before surgery has also been reported as a risk factor for recurrent
fungal infection after PK. The management of fungal keratitis after PRK depends on many factors: In our experience, the decision of
performing a prompt keratoplasty was aimed at reducing the corneal infection in the first occurrence, and to solve it in the second
manifestation. Finally the use of intracameral antifungal medication proved to be very effective in avoiding the recurrence of infection.
Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of Interest: None declared.
