The clinical presentation of Gaucher disease (GD), an inherited lysosomal storage disorder caused by the deficient activity of the lysosomal
enzyme glucocerebrosidase, is highly variable, and three clinical types are distinguished based upon the presence of neurologic symptoms.
Thrombocytopenia, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, and bone manifestations are the most typical signs of GD type 1 (GD1). We present the case of
an unsplenectomized man suffering from heterozygous GD1 with mutations of c.1226A>G (N370S) and RecNci I (L444P, A456P, and V460V) in the
GBA1 gene, who developed recurrent pulmonary aspergillosis caused by Aspergillus fumigatus and a mycobacterial infection caused by
Mycobacterium avium. Despite long-lasting therapy of both aspergillosis (including antifungal drugs and surgery), and the mycobacterial
infection (triple therapy with rifampicin, ethambutol, and clarithromycin), recurrent positivity for M. avium and A. fumigatus was detected.
Symptomatic lung involvement and an increased susceptibility to pulmonary infections are uncommon in GD and, if present, are often
associated with more severe disease manifestations. To our knowledge, this is the first published report on the association of GD and
pulmonary aspergillosis and mycobacterial infection. It illustrates the increased susceptibility of untreated GD patients to opportunistic
pulmonary infections and ineffective eradication of these infections despite adequate therapy. Gaucher disease (GD) is an autosomal
recessive disorder, resulting from a deficient activity of the lysosomal enzyme glucocerebrosidase (GBA), which causes an accumulation of
the sphingolipid glucosylceramide in the cells of the reticulo-endothelial system (1). There are approximately 300 known mutations in the
GBA1 gene, located on the long arm of chromosome 1 (1q21) that can cause GD (2). However, it is difficult to simply define a correlation
between phenotype and genotype, and GD is well recognized for its striking but unexplained phenotypic diversity. The clinical presentation
of GD is variable. Decreased GBA activity leads to excess storage of glucosylceramide in the cells of the monocyte-macrophage system
throughout the body (1). Three clinical types of GD are distinguished based upon the absence (type 1) or presence (types 2 and 3) of
neurologic symptoms as well as the dynamics of the development of clinical signs. Thrombocytopenia, anemia, hepatosplenomegaly, and bone
manifestations are the most typical signs of GD type 1 (GD1), which is the most prevalent form of GD (1-3). Pulmonary involvement is
considered rare in GD1 (4-7). In the European Union, there are two treatment options available for patients with GD: enzyme replacement
therapy (ERT) with macrophage-targeted recombinant glucocerebrosidase (Cerezyme®, Genzyme Corporation, Cambridge, MA, USA, or VPRIV®, Shire
HGT, Lexington, MA, USA), and substrate reduction therapy (SRT) with miglustat (N-butyldeoxynojirimycin, Zavesca®, Actelion Pharmaceuticals,
Allschwil, Switzerland) (1,3,8-10). Here, we present the case of an adult man suffering from heterozygous untreated GD1, who developed
pulmonary fibrosis complicated by recurrent pulmonary aspergillosis caused by Aspergillus fumigatus and a pulmonary mycobacterial infection
caused by Mycobacterium avium. Informed consent has been provided by the patient. A 65-year-old man, originating from northern Greece but
living in Sweden for over 30 years, had been referred to the Hematology Center Karolinska for a consultation concerning suspected Gaucher
disease. His past medical history was significant for several co-morbidities (Table I). Because of splenomegaly (18 cm) and mild
thrombocytopenia, a bone marrow (BM) examination was performed at the age of 51, disclosing the presence of foamy macrophages classified as
Gaucher cells (GCs). However, further investigations aimed at the confirmation of GD diagnosis were not performed at that time. Some
clinical characteristics of the patient. B-Hb = whole blood hemoglobin concentration; B-PLT = whole blood platelet count; B-WBC = whole
blood white blood cells count; P-Chito = activity of plasma chitotriosidase; P-CRP = C-reactive protein concentration in plasma; S-Ferritin
= serum ferritin concentration; S-IL = serum interleukin concentration; S-TNF = serum tumor necrosis factor concentration. At the age of 54
years, he developed malaise and a chronic cough. He was a smoker for 25 years but quit at the age of 50. Radiological examination disclosed
mild pulmonary fibrosis and aspergillosis in the right lung. The microbiological examination of secretions from a bronchoalveolar lavage
(BAL) showed growth of Aspergillus fumigatus and mycobacteria other than tuberculosis (MOTT). Antifungal therapy with itraconazole (100 mg 2
× 2 p.o.) was administered for 6 weeks, but the MOTT infection was not treated. Of note, several weeks after therapy onset, the patient's
clinical course was complicated by pulmonary bleeding (the coagulation work-up was normal apart from moderate thrombocytopenia). The fungal
infection did not fully respond to therapy, and 2 years after diagnosis the patient underwent a partial resection of the right lung due to
an aspergilloma (Figure 1). After surgery, his general status improved rapidly. Upper part: overview of the right lung resectate showing (A)
emphysema, (B) tumor-forming fungal growth (i.e. mycetoma) in the bronchial lumen, (C) fibrosis of the lung parenchyma (H&E, magnification ×
50). Lower part: Right lung resectate showing mild interstitial lymphocytic inflammatory infiltrate; intra-alveolar aggregate of
inflammatory cells including foamy macrophages (Gaucher cells) (H&E, magnification × 200). At age of 59, the patient developed shortness of
breath and cough. Echocardiography showed septal left ventricular hypertrophy, normal systolic function of the left ventricle (EF of
50%–60%), signs of diastolic dysfunction, mild insufficiency of both aortic and pulmonary valves, and a slightly elevated pressure in the
pulmonary artery (PA) of 42 mmHg. Repeated microbiological examination of the BAL secretions revealed a growth of Aspergillus fumigatus and
Aspergillus nidulans, but was negative for MOTT. HIV serology was negative, excluding acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS).
Voriconazole was administered for aspergillosis periodically for 2 years (at the age 61–62 years). Afterwards, the patient's symptoms
regressed, and control spirometry showed only moderately decreased results (VC 3.72 L, 82%; FEV1 3.04 L, 84%; FEV1/SVC 82%; FVC 3.72 L,
82%). Chest X-ray did not show any active pathological lesions. However, computed tomography imaging (CT) revealed pronounced fibrosis of
lung parenchyma. At the time of hematologic consultation (at the age of 65), thrombocytopenia and hyperferritinemia were noted. The final
diagnosis of GD1 was confirmed by the absence of glucocerebrosidase activity in peripheral blood leukocytes and an increased activity of
plasma chitotriosidase. Further direct DNA sequencing of the GBA1 gene revealed heterozygous mutations in the GBA1 gene (Table I). The
patient's status consisting of splenomegaly, thrombocytopenia, and an increased susceptibility to pulmonary infections, which was probably
due to lung involvement in the course of GD, was assessed as an indication for commencing treatment of GD. The patient was started on
miglustat, which was considered the first line of GD1 treatment at that time due to the worldwide supply shortage of Cerezyme® during
2009–2010 (9). He received the commercially available miglustat capsules at a dose of 100 mg three times a day orally. Interestingly, the
patient experienced an unusually rapid improvement of the whole blood platelet count (PLT), which normalized already after 2 months of
miglustat therapy. Unfortunately, the patient developed malaise, diarrhea, poor appetite, weight loss (10 kg, 16% of his baseline body
weight), and mild tremor for which miglustat was deemed accountable. During this time, the patient also developed cough, and a
microbiological examination of the BAL secretions revealed growth of Aspergillus fumigatus (sensitive to voriconazole) and Mycobacterium
avium. Inflammatory activation was observed at that time as presented in Table I. The patient discontinued miglustat after 4 months of
treatment due to the adverse events and the above-mentioned pulmonary infections. Voriconazole was administered, and after 10 days his cough
decreased but, after some days, returned, alongside malaise and night sweats. CT of the chest disclosed a new infiltrate in the lower lobe
of the right lung, despite antifungal therapy (Figure 2). Treatment with rifampicin, ethambutol, and clarithromycin for Mycobacterium avium
was initiated. After 4 months of therapy, the patient was stronger, his cough and night sweats were clearly reduced, and he had regained 10
kg of body weight. Chest CT scans at the time of aspergillosis relapse and diagnosis of M. avium infection. New infiltrates located dorsally
in the right lower lobe and in the left lower lobe. After the Cerezyme® supply shortage had ceased, the patient was offered to start ERT.
Unfortunately, he strongly refused administration of ERT despite our recommendations. Now, almost 2.5 years after the initiation of the
triple therapy, and with intermittent periods of negativity, the patient is recurrently positive for Mycobacterium avium in his sputum,
despite 8 months of triple therapy administered during the preceding year. During the periods of deterioration in his general condition, he
was also positive for Aspergillus fumigatus in sputum. Symptomatic lung involvement is rarely present in GD1 and usually is not the major
manifestation of the disease (3-7). Sporadic reports, mostly concerning children, have demonstrated the occurrence of pulmonary
hypertension, bilateral interstitial lung disease, hypoxia due to intrapulmonary arterio-venous shunts (most often as a complication of
long-standing, severe liver disease, i.e. hepatopulmonary syndrome), or increased susceptibility to pulmonary infections (5-7). Pulmonary
involvement may be a direct result of infiltration with GCs or may be secondary, due to extensive hepatic disease or to mechanical
compression caused by hepatosplenomegaly. Pulmonary lesions in GD have been described as diffuse, reticulonodular infiltrates or lesions of
a miliary pattern on chest X-rays (7). Moreover, pulmonary involvement correlates more often with severe GD manifestations, including the
neuronopathic forms of GD (types 2 and 3) (4). In patients with the Norrbottnian type of GD, gibbous malformations due to rib-cage and
thorax deformities additionally compromise lung function. On the other hand, an autopsy study by Lee and Yousem disclosed that as much as
30% of GD patients showed ‘significant’ lung involvement (11). Although significance criteria were not defined by the authors, they
recognized three histological patterns of lung abnormalities in GD: 1) interstitial infiltration by GCs invading the peribronchial,
perivascular, and septal regions with associated fibrosis; 2) GCs occluding pulmonary capillaries with secondary pulmonary hypertension; and
3) alveolar infiltration by GCs. Patients with GD1 may have an increased susceptibility to infections due to alterations in their immune
system, which could be the result of impaired splenic function or splenectomy, abnormalities in macrophage function, lymphopenia,
neutropenia due to marked hypersplenism, abnormalities of humoral immunity (e.g. hypogammaglobulinemia), impaired superoxide production by
monocytes, or impaired response to some mitogens (12-15). Impaired host defenses against microbial infections that are benign to healthy
individuals can cause significant morbidity in GD patients (16,17). Although the exact mechanisms that lead to increased susceptibility to
infections in GD have not yet been elucidated, impaired chemotaxis of granulocytes and defective monocyte function in GD patients have been
described (13,15,18). Macrophages loaded with excessive amounts of glucocerebroside may not be able to respond to microbiological pathogens
as effectively as normal cells, resulting in an attenuated anti-bacterial response (13,14). The activity of chitotriosidase, a macrophage
enzyme that is believed to play a role in protection against fungal infection, is significantly elevated in untreated GD (3). Berger et al.
found that a GD patient with invasive Candida albicans infection displayed decreased, although still high, activity of plasma
chitotriosidase (17). The authors speculated that this decrease may have caused a susceptibility to fungal infection. According to published
data, at least in some patients with GD1, administration of ERT has a potential to influence positively the course of pulmonary involvement
(19). Since ERT effectively decreases plasma glucocerebroside, which could ameliorate the adverse effects of stored glucocerebroside on
proper macrophage activity, ERT should be considered as ancillary therapy in patients with GD associated with recurrent or chronic
infections (14,20). Of note, increased susceptibility to severe opportunistic infections in GD such as invasive aspergillosis and
mycobacterial infections has never been reported before. The present case indicates that pulmonary involvement documented as lung fibrosis
can result in both an increased susceptibility to opportunistic infections as well as subsequent ineffective eradication of Aspergillus
fumigatus and Mycobacterium avium from the lungs of the patients with untreated GD1. An intriguing question arises from the present case
about the impact of malfunctioning macrophages and whether ERT could play a role in the restoration of their function. Unfortunately, the
patient has refused ERT (or any other form of GD therapy). Interestingly, numerous large macrophages with a striated cytoplasm resembling
Gaucher cells (so-called pseudo-Gaucher cells) have been described in patients with mycobacterial infections, often with M. avium (21). In
the light of the present case, it is important to keep in mind in such cases a possibility of undiagnosed Gaucher disease associated with
pulmonary infection. To the best of our knowledge, this paper is the first published report on the association of GD1 with pulmonary
aspergillosis and mycobacterial infection. Our case indicates the importance of careful differential diagnostics in patients with recurrent
pulmonary aspergillosis as well as mycobacterial infections, since it could be reasonable to exclude GD in subjects in whom macrophages
resembling GCs can be identified and/or those who do not respond adequately to antimicrobial therapy. Declaration of interest: The authors
report no conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.
