Metastatic pancreatic cancer is rare, accounting for approximately 2% of all pancreatic malignancies, and most cases arise from renal cell
carcinoma. We report the case of a 63-year-old woman, who presented with a pancreatic tumor detected during her annual health examination.
She had undergone left nephrectomy 13 years previously for renal cell carcinoma. Computed tomography (CT) revealed two tumors in the head
and body of the pancreas, a hypervascular tumor and a hypovascular tumor with an enhanced rim, respectively. She underwent pylorus-
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy, and metastatic pancreatic tumors arising from the kidney with clustered clear cell carcinoma
immunohistochemically positive for CD10 were diagnosed. This report presents the different enhancement features of different lesions on CT
scans. Because the enhancement features of lesions have been reported to vary according to the size of the metastatic tumor, a knowledge of
the history of renal cell carcinoma is crucial for diagnosis. Isolated metastasis to the pancreas is rare, ranging in incidence from 2% to
5% in clinical studies . Renal cell carcinoma (RCC), melanoma, lung cancer, colorectal cancer and breast cancer are known to metastasize to
the pancreas . Most patients with pancreatic metastases are asymptomatic, whereas some exhibit jaundice or abdominal pain . RCC has an
annual incidence of more than 30,000 a year in the United States, and localized disease is treated via nephrectomy. Of patients with
pancreatic metastases, 12% present with synchronous extrapancreatic metastasis, and they have a poor prognosis . However, surgical treatment
for isolated metachronous pancreatic metastases from RCC has been reported in recent years to improve prognosis . In this study, we report a
case of pancreatic metastases from RCC with different radiographic patterns for each lesion and review the radiographic patterns of
pancreatic metastases using computed tomography (CT) and fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG)-positron emission tomography (PET). A 63-year-old woman
had undergone left nephrectomy for RCC at our hospital 13 years previously. After 5 consecutive years of follow-up, she underwent an annual
medical examination. Abdominal ultrasonography (US) revealed an abnormal mass in the body of the pancreas. CT revealed two lesions: a low-
density mass (15 mm in diameter) in the pancreatic body that displayed rim enhancement and a homogeneously enhanced mass (8 mm in diameter)
in the head (Figure 1). Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) did not show enhancement in either lesion. FDG-PET did not show any abnormal
metabolic activity in the pancreas. To allow a pathological diagnosis, endoscopic ultrasonography (EUS)-guided fine-needle aspiration biopsy
was performed, but only necrotic tissue was obtained from the specimen. Although the radiographic features of the lesions were different,
pancreatic metastases from RCC were strongly suspected because of the patient’s history of RCC. We noted the following from the laboratory
findings: DUPAN-2, <25 U/ml (normal, <25 U/ml); Span-1, 2.3 U/ml (normal, <30 U/ml); carcinoembryonic antigen, 1.7 ng/ml (normal, <5.0
ng/ml); carbohydrate antigen 19-9, 2.6 U/ml (normal, <37 U/ml) and gastrin, 480 pg/ml (normal, <200 pg/ml). The patient underwent pylorus-
preserving pancreaticoduodenectomy using the Imanaga method . For the R0 resection, an extended pancreaticoduodenectomy was required rather
than a classical resection. Intraoperative US revealed a low echoic mass with a bright halo and peripherally enriched blood flow in the body
and a low echoic mass with homogeneously enriched blood flow in the head. Gross pathological examination revealed a 15 mm × 13 mm tumor
occupying the body of the pancreas and another 8-mm tumor in the uncinate process of the pancreas. The head lesion was soft, whereas the
body lesion was firm in consistency. The cut surface of the head lesion was yellow, whereas that of the lesion in the pancreatic body was
grayish-white. Metastatic tumor cells homogeneously occupied the tumor in the head of the pancreas, and the firm lesion in the body of the
pancreas showed a necrotic change in the center, which was surrounded by viable tumor cells and a fibrous capsule, identified as a low-
density area on a CT scan (Figure 2). Immunohistochemically, the tumors were positive for CD10 and negative for chromogranin A and
synaptophysin (Figure 2). Microscopic examination revealed large epithelial cells with clear cytoplasm and eosinophilic nuclei arranged in
alveolar structures with abundant vascularity (Figure 3a). In addition, histological examination revealed another 1-mm occult
micrometastatic lesion in the head of the pancreas (Figure 3b). The harvested lymph nodes and surgical margins were free of malignancy.
Taken together, the pathological findings indicated that the lesions were metastases from RCC, and the thick enhanced rim of the body lesion
was believed to be composed of viable RCC cells with high vascularity. The postoperative course was uneventful, and to date the patient has
survived for 6 months without any evidence of recurrence or metastasis. CT findings of the pancreatic metastases (arrows). a. Homogenous
hypervascular head lesion. b. body lesion with central necrosis and enhanced rim. Loupe images of resected specimen. The head lesion (a.c.)
consist of tumor cells, whereas the body with necreotic change in the center. a.c. Head lesion with hypervascular attenuation (a; H.E.
stain, c; CD10). b.d. Body lesion with central hypodense (b; H.E. stain, d; CD10). Microscopic findings revealed clear cell carcinoma in all
metastatic lesions including head, body and occult tumor. a. Magnification of Head tumor with haematoxylin and eosin (H.E.) stain x100. b.
metastatic tumor found occasionally in the head of the pancreas (1 mm) x40. RCC accounts for approximately 2% of all adult malignances.
Among kidney-limited diseases, RCC has a high overall survival rate (up to 95%) . However, 20% to 30% of patients have metastases at
presentation, and the 5-year survival rate is less than 10% once metastases spread . In studies of resected specimens, RCC was the most
common primary tumor leading to isolated pancreatic metastases . RCC recurrence is classified as early or late recurrence. Late recurrence
after nephrectomy is not common: recurrence is seen in 10% of patients after more than 10 years after surgery . In most studies, the
development of pancreatic metastasis was observed after a disease-free period after nephrectomy exceeding 10 years (maximum, 32.7 years) .
The relation between the metastatic location of the pancreas and the primary RCC is controversial and can be either hematogeneous or via
lymphatics . Hematogeneous spread may occur along the draining collateral vein of a hypervascular renal tumor, and the spread through
lymphatics may occur by retrograde lymph flow secondary to tumor infiltration of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes . The symptoms of
pancreatic metastasis are often nonspecific. Sellner et al. reported in a review of 236 cases that 35% of patients were asymptomatic,
whereas other patients had abdominal pain (20%), gastrointestinal tract bleeding (20%), obstructive jaundice (9%), weight loss (9%),
pancreatitis (3%) or diabetes mellitus (3%). The diameter of the metastatic lesion was reported to have some association with patient
symptoms. Bassi et al. reported that the median tumor diameter in asymptomatic patients was 25 mm, compared to 45 mm in symptomatic
patients. Conversely, Reddy et al. reported that 93% (42/45) of patients had symptoms such as abdominal pain, jaundice or weight loss. In
general, the preoperative diagnosis of pancreatic metastases begins with a suspicion based on the patient’s history . Imaging modalities
such as CT, MRI, FDG-PET and EUS support the diagnosis. Muranaka et al. reviewed the CT findings of pancreatic metastases from 28 metastatic
carcinomas and classified these into 3 types according to their configuration: (1) a single localized metastasis (50% to 73%) ; (2) a
diffuse enlargement with homogeneous attenuation of the pancreas (15% to 44%) and (3) multifocal metastases (5% to 10%) . Metastases from
RCC are usually hypervascular and consequently display homogeneous contrast medium enhancement in the arterial phase of CT. Hyperenhancement
of pancreatic metastases from RCC plays an important role in both the detection of tumor locations and the distinction of metastases from
primary adenocarcinoma of the pancreas . When hypervascular pancreatic tumors are identified on enhanced CT scans, differentiation from
primary pancreatic endocrine tumors, intrapancreatic accessory spleens and vascular lesions is difficult. Palmowski et al. observed two
types of enhancement on CT scans of pancreatic metastases, namely lesions with either a homogeneous enhancement or a highlighted rim and
nonenhancing internal components, depending on the size. In lesions greater than 15 mm in size, rim enhancement with hypodense central areas
of necrosis has been observed on CT scans . This hypodense aspect is associated with colonic metastases, hyperdense attenuation with RCC, or
breast cancer . We reviewed the radiological features of pancreatic metastases from RCC shown by dynamic CT scans (Table 1). Of 66 patients,
45 (68%) had homogeneous hypervascular enhancement features, whereas 21 (32%) had central hypovascularity with rim enhancement. Of these, 31
patients had a metastatic configuration, 5 patients had multifocal metastases to the pancreas and 26 patients had solitary tumors. No
patients with pancreatic metastasis from RCC developed diffuse enlargement of the pancreas. In the present review, the size of pancreatic
metastases from RCC has no particular relation with the presence of central hypodense areas because even tumors > 5 cm in size displayed
hypervascular attenuation. The present case was classified as one with multifocal metastases in terms of the metastatic location. To our
knowledge, this is the first case of concomitant multifocal metastases featuring two different enhancement characteristics, hypodense areas
and homogenous hypervascularity. Radiologic features of pancreatic metastases from renal cell carcinoma shown by computed tomography NA, not
available. FDG-PET has not been established for the diagnosis of metastatic RCC. Ramdave et al. reported that FDG-PET was useful for
identifying distant metastases from RCC in all six of the patients in the study. Majhail et al. calculated the sensitivity and specificity
of FDG-PET for identifying distant metastases from RCC. They revealed that the sensitivity of the procedure was linked to the size of the
metastases (83% for lesions larger than 15 mm; 93% for those larger than 20 mm). In the present patient with 15- and 8-mm lesions, FDG did
not indicate any abnormal metabolic activity in either lesion. Surgical resection of the pancreas is associated with substantial morbidity
after surgery, and the survival benefit of surgery for metastatic lesions of the pancreas remains questionable since randomized control
trials have not been conducted. However, surgical resection of metastatic deposits of RCC remains the most effective treatment because
chemotherapy, immunotherapy and radiotherapy have generally proved to be ineffective for metastatic RCC . We reviewed studies published from
1998 to 2013 that focused on surgical resection of the pancreas for metastases from RCC. The survival rates and features are listed in
Table 2. The median 5-year overall survival rate after metastasectomy was reported to be 75% to 88%, compared to 0% to 50% without
metastasectomy . In a review, Masetti et al. analyzed data for 159 patients who underwent metastasectomy of the pancreas for RCC: the median
survival and 5-year survival rate were 5.8 years and 63.5%, respectively. Tanis et al. reviewed 170 articles, and data for a total of 411
patients who underwent resection of pancreatic metastases were analyzed. They reported a pancreatic recurrence rate of 4.0% after a median
of 42 months and an extrapancreatic recurrence rate of 17.1%. The 5-year survival rate was 72.6%. The surgical mortality rate after
pancreaticoduodenectomy for pancreatic metastases was reported to be 2.6% . Sellner et al. compared the 5-year overall survival rate of
patients with a solitary metastasis with those with multiple metastases (solitary metastasis, 64%; multiple metastases, 78%). Combining the
findings outlined in several reports , radical surgery for multifocal metastases from RCC in the pancreas appears to be as justified as that
for a solitary metastasis. Radical surgery with the R0 resection is the only curative option for patients with pancreatic metastases.
Therefore, surgical resection for pancreatic metastases should be considered under individualized conditions including the management of
comorbidities. Literature review of surgical treatment for pancreatic metastases from RCC NA: not available. aStudies that included less
than four patients were excluded. Multifocality of pancreatic metastasis has been reported to be in the range 20% to 45% . In one report, a
preoperative multifocality detection of 17.4% increased up to 34.8% on pathological examination of resected specimens . Here, we report a
rare case of pancreatic metastases with micrometastasis, which was not detected preoperatively, in the resected pancreas specimen on
pathological examination. Moreover, pancreatic metastases from RCC can show both hypervascular attenuation and are central hypodense on CT
scans although they are generally hypervascular tumors. Careful examination with multiple modalities for the diagnosis of the metastatic
configuration and follow-up are recommended after surgery. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CT:
Computed tomography; EUS: Endoscopic ultrasonography; FDG: Fluorodeoxyglucose; HE: Hematoxylin and eosin; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging;
PET: Positron emission tomography; RCC: Renal cell carcinoma; US: Ultrasonography. The authors declare that they have no competing
interests. YH performed the majority of this study and drafted the manuscript. YK, HI, YM, and TT surveyed the literature. JF and MK
critically revised the manuscript. HS, KK, and YO participated in the design and interpretation of this study under supervision. All authors
read and approved the final manuscript. We are grateful to Nobuhiro Nishizawa for his dedicated work in the patient management.
