Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome, MPS VI, OMIM 253200) is caused by mutations in the gene coding for
N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (4-sulfatase, arylsulfatase B, ARSB, EC 3.1.6.12), a lysosomal enzyme involved in the degradation of
dermatan sulfate (DS). The clinical presentation of MPS VI varies greatly with respect to age of onset and rate of disease progression. This
report focuses on the attenuated form of MPS VI, which can go unrecognized for years and often presents with atypical signs or symptoms. We
described a cohort of MPS VI patients (n = 4) heterozygous for the p.Y210C mutation who had a significant osteoarticular involvement at the
onset of their disease and who were diagnosed years or even decades later. We have also reviewed the literature (n = 36). Two types of
attenuated MPS VI phenotypes could be distinguished: osteoarticular and cardiac. The majority of MPS VI patients reported so far as
relatively attenuated presented with an essentially osteoarticular phenotype associated with the p.Y210C mutation. Patients homozygous for
the p.R152W mutation presented with a cardiac phenotype, which, despite fulfilling the generally used criteria for attenuated phenotype, may
lead to fast disease progression and abrupt death. The knowledge of natural history and genotype–phenotype correlation may help in
developing a tailored therapy potentially using enzyme replacement therapy with substrate reduction therapy or chaperones.
Mucopolysaccharidosis type VI (Maroteaux–Lamy syndrome, MPS VI, OMIM 253200) is an inherited metabolic disease caused by a deficient
activity of N-acetylgalactosamine-4-sulfatase (4-sulfatase, arylsulfatase B, ARSB, EC 3.1.6.12), a lysosomal enzyme involved in the
degradation of dermatan sulfate (DS) [1, 2]. The clinical presentation of MPS VI varies greatly with respect to age of onset and rate of
disease progression. Descriptive classification systems have described patients’ phenotypes as severe (with early onset of symptoms and fast
progression), attenuated (with later onset, slower disease progression, and variable clinical presentation), and intermediate [1, 3].
Especially in attenuated phenotypes, a definite diagnosis may be delayed for years because early symptoms are difficult to recognize for
physicians not familiar with the disease, since the disease progresses silently over decades. The incidence rates for this rare disease vary
in the literature between 0.05 and 2.3 diagnosed MPS VI patients per 100,000 live births. Allele frequencies of the different mutations are
very low, and most mutations are unique to individual families, except for a high prevalence of p.R152W mutation in Eastern European
population . This report focuses on the less severe form of MPS VI. The objective of this article is to show the existence of significant
differences between so-called attenuated patients and to highlight the need of close cooperation of different specialties in order to
recognize the disease early. The knowledge of natural history and genotype–phenotype correlation may also help in developing a tailored
therapy. The lists of diagnosed MPS VI patients were provided by seven diagnostic centers for MPS VI in Central and Eastern Europe (Warsaw,
Prague, Vilnius, Minsk, Riga), Russia (Moscow), and Kazakhstan (Almaty). Out of these patients, only patients with the less severe form of
MPS VI were included in our study. All patients were naïve to enzyme replacement therapy (ERT) at the time of the study. The protocol was
approved by the Human Subjects Institutional Review Board at the Children’s Memorial Health Institute. Written informed consent had to be
provided by the parents or legal guardians. All patients and/or their families provided written consents about using their photos. The main
demographic and clinical characteristics of all patients in our series are shown in Table 1. All of the patients were Caucasian, and no sex
predominance was seen. No consanguinity between parents was recorded.Table 1Clinical, biochemical, and molecular data of MPS VI patients
heterozygous for p.Y210C mutationCase number (country, current age)Age at onset of symptoms/age at diagnosis (years)Symptoms at onsetOther
symptoms before MPS VI diagnosisMisdiagnosis/initial diagnosisExtraskeletal involvement during the disease courseARSB activitya Genotypeb 1
(Czech Republic, 47)10/45DW, HP, JS, RRCFF, GR, SKHip dysplasia, Perthes diseaseCH, IH, M, SCC, UH, HC10.8p.R160X/p.Y210C2 (Russia,
40)8/38JSDW, HP, HC, SCCChondrodysplasia, osteochondrosisCFF, HC, SCC7.4p.Y210C/p.C521Y3 (Belarus, 36)8/9JSNoHip dysplasiaCFF, DW, HP, CFF,
RR9.8p.T92K/p.Y210C4 (Russia, 20)5/10JS, RR, IHNoNoCFF, HC9.8p.N262Kfs*14/p.Y210C DW difficulty in walking, CFF coarse facial features, CH
claw hands, GR growth retardation, HC hydrocephalus, HP hip pain, IH impaired hearing, JS joint stiffness, M myelopathy, RR recurrent
rhinitis, SCC spinal cord compression, SK skeletal abnormalities, UH umbilical hernia aARSB activity in the patients’ leukocytes was
referred to the mean value of several controls analyzed in the same experiment bNCBI reference sequence: NM_000046.3 (cDNA considering A of
the ATG translation initiation codon as nucleotide +1); NP_000037 Clinical, biochemical, and molecular data of MPS VI patients heterozygous
for p.Y210C mutation DW difficulty in walking, CFF coarse facial features, CH claw hands, GR growth retardation, HC hydrocephalus, HP hip
pain, IH impaired hearing, JS joint stiffness, M myelopathy, RR recurrent rhinitis, SCC spinal cord compression, SK skeletal abnormalities,
UH umbilical hernia aARSB activity in the patients’ leukocytes was referred to the mean value of several controls analyzed in the same
experiment bNCBI reference sequence: NM_000046.3 (cDNA considering A of the ATG translation initiation codon as nucleotide +1); NP_000037
For all four patients, the age of first symptom onset ranged from 5 to 8 years (median 8 years). The most common first sign to appear was
decreased joint range of motion of large joints of the upper and/or lower limbs. The most commonly affected joints were hips, which resulted
in hip pain with difficulty in walking and stair climbing. The first misdiagnoses in these patients were Perthes disease, hip dysplasia or
osteochondrosis. In addition to the joint problems, some of the patient cohort reported features such as recurrent rhinitis, impaired
hearing, hydrocephalus, and in the case of older patients, spinal cord compression. Within the disease course, the patients developed other
disease manifestations such as skeletal abnormalities (Figs. 1 and 2), growth retardation, and spinal cord compression.Fig. 1 a, b
Radiographs of a patient heterozygous for the p.Y210C mutation. Lateral radiographs of cervical spine: (1) reduction of cervical lordosis,
(2) narrowing of L3 vertebral body and dislocation of L4 vertebral body (arrows), and (3) thickening of the skull bonesFig. 2Pictures of MPS
VI patients heterozygous for the p.Y210C mutation a, b Radiographs of a patient heterozygous for the p.Y210C mutation. Lateral radiographs
of cervical spine: (1) reduction of cervical lordosis, (2) narrowing of L3 vertebral body and dislocation of L4 vertebral body (arrows), and
(3) thickening of the skull bones Pictures of MPS VI patients heterozygous for the p.Y210C mutation Joint stiffness was reported in all
patients. It was located mainly in the shoulder and hip joints or other large joints of the upper and/or lower limbs. It was intense and
significantly impaired the quality of the patient’s life leading to consultations by orthopedic surgeons. Typical for MPS contractures of
fingers (so-called claw hands) were also observed decreasing the function, efficiency, and skills of the hands. At the time of the study,
the eldest patients were 45 and 40 years of age. Following the onset of signs and symptoms, MPS VI diagnosis occurred after 9 years of age
(range 9–45 years, median 24 years) with median delays 17.5 years. The results of the literature review are presented in Table 2, which
includes only reports with clinical data (n = 36). The review of the literature allowed distinguishing two types of attenuated MPS VI
phenotypes: osteoarticular and cardiac.Table 2Literature review of patients with an attenuated phenotype of mucopolysaccharidosis type
VICase number (country)Age at onset of symptoms/age at diagnosis (years)Symptoms at onsetClinical manifestations during disease
courseMisdiagnosis/initial diagnosisGenotypeRef.1nd HP CC, SK, VDPerthes diseasendMcKusick 2 (Germany)7/40 SK, TS (mild)CC, CFF, CM, JS, SK,
VDPerthes diseasendPilz et al. 3 (Germany)10/38 JD CC, CFF, CM, JS, SK, VDndndPilz et al. 4 (New Zealand)nd/13 FP CC, IH, SK, VDndndPaterson
et al. 5 (New Zealand)nd/16ndCC, GR, IH, JS, SK, VDndndPaterson et al. 6 (Denmark)6/27 HP, WG HD, RMndndTonnesen et al. 7 (New
Zealand?)4/9GR, CCCFFndC192R/C192RIsbrandt et al. 8 (nd)nd/11ndCC, CFF, GR, IH, JSndY210C/-Litjens et al. 9 (nd)nd/13ndGR, IH, SK,
VDndR95Q/Y210CLitjens et al. 10 (nd)nd/16ndndndR95Q/Y210CLitjens et al. 11 (nd)nd/15ndCC, GR, H, JS, SKndY210C/-Litjens et al. 12
(nd)nd/17ndndH393P/-Litjens et al. 13 (nd)nd/35ndndT92M/L498PLitjens et al. 14 (Denmark)nd/44ndHA, PP, DL, H, IH, JSndP313A/P481LBrooks et
al. 15 (Italy)7/35 SK, JP, JS CC, CFF, CTS, GR, JS, SK, VDCarpal tunnel syndromeY210C/G302RScarpa et al. 16 (Italy)nd/38 HD, CH, RRCC, CFF,
JS, SK, VDSuspected endocrine/rheumatologic disorderY210C/G302RScarpa et al. 17 (Ireland)2/16 BP, HP JPndY210C/Y210CGottwald et al. 18
(Germany)11/29 SK, CC, GR, RIRA, VD, JP, SK, SCC, CC, GR, CM, IVndR152W/Q104HThümler et al. 19 (Germany)14/25 SK, HCCC, JC, VD, RA, RM,
SKndR152W/R152W20 (Germany)10/25RI, IHJC, VD, JP, RM, SCCndR160X/Y210C21 (Germany)12/22 HP, BP, SK VD, CTS, RM, SCC, SKndR160X/Y210C22
(Turkey)6/19 HD/JP, RM, SK, CCIV, VA, CCO, RA, CC, SCC, SKndC192R/C192R23 (Germany)11/24 WG, HD, SK SK, JP, CC, CTS, VD, CCO,
SKndY210C/W146X24 (Germany)20/28 HD, JC, CH, RI, RHCFF, RM, CC, VD, SK, JSndY210C/?25 (Germany)12/20 HD, JC, CH, RICFF, CC, VD, SK,
JSndY210C/?26 (Germany)18/25 HD, JC, CH, RI, VDCFF, CC, VD, SK, JSndY210C/?27 (Poland)21/37 VD, JS (mild)CC, CFF, GR, JS, SKRheumatic heart
diseaseR152W/R152WJurecka et al. 28 (Lithuania)7/30 VD, GR (mild)CFF, GR, HC, IH, MC, JS, SCC, SKRheumatic heart diseaseR152W/R152W29
(Belarus)15/22 VD, GR (mild), CC (mild)CC, CTS, GR, H, JS, SKChronic cardiac insufficiencyR152W/R152W30 (Belarus)15/22 VD, JS (mild), GR
(mild), CC (mild)CC, CFF, CTS, GR, H, JS, SKChronic cardiac insufficiencyR152W/R152W31 (Russia)17/26 VD, AGS (mild)CFF, JS, GR, MC, SCC,
SKChronic cardiac insufficiencyR152W/R152W32 (Russia)18/20 VD, HI, JS (mild)CFF, GR, MC, SKChronic cardiac insufficiencyR152W/R152W33
(Lithuania)15/23 VD, GR (mild)CFF, GR, IH, MC, JS, SKRheumatic heart diseaseR152W/R152W34 (Russia)5/24 VD, HI, CC (mild), GRGR, CC, HS, JS,
SKChronic cardiac insufficiencyR152W/R152W35 (Lithuania)6/15 VD, AGS (mild), JS (mild)CFF, GR, HC, JS, MC, SKndR152W/R152W36 (Belarus)5/13
VD, AGS (mild)CTS, GR, JS, MC, RR, SKndR152W/R152W nd no data, BP back pain, CC corneal clouding, CCO cardiac complications, CH claw hands,
CFF coarse facial features, CM cervical myelopathy, CTS carpal tunnel syndrome, DL dyslexia, FP foot pain, AGS abnormal gait stereotype, GR
growth retardation, H hepatomegaly, HA halitosis, HC hydrocephalus, HD hip dysplasia, HI inguinal hernia, HP hip pain, HS
hepatosplenomegaly, IH impaired hearing, IV impaired vision, MC macrocephaly, JC joint contractures, JD joint dysfunction, JS joint
stiffness, JP joint pain, PP photophobia, RA respiratory abnormalities, RH recurrent hernia, RI recurrent infections, RM reduced mobility,
RR recurrent rhinitis, SCC spinal cord compression, SK skeletal abnormalities, TS tetraspasticity, VD valve disease, WG waddling gait
Literature review of patients with an attenuated phenotype of mucopolysaccharidosis type VI nd no data, BP back pain, CC corneal clouding,
CCO cardiac complications, CH claw hands, CFF coarse facial features, CM cervical myelopathy, CTS carpal tunnel syndrome, DL dyslexia, FP
foot pain, AGS abnormal gait stereotype, GR growth retardation, H hepatomegaly, HA halitosis, HC hydrocephalus, HD hip dysplasia, HI
inguinal hernia, HP hip pain, HS hepatosplenomegaly, IH impaired hearing, IV impaired vision, MC macrocephaly, JC joint contractures, JD
joint dysfunction, JS joint stiffness, JP joint pain, PP photophobia, RA respiratory abnormalities, RH recurrent hernia, RI recurrent
infections, RM reduced mobility, RR recurrent rhinitis, SCC spinal cord compression, SK skeletal abnormalities, TS tetraspasticity, VD valve
disease, WG waddling gait In a majority of reported patients, a relatively attenuated phenotype meant an essentially osteoarticular
phenotype. These patients initially presented with bone and joint symptoms, especially pain and stiffness in the joints, joint contractures,
and hip and back pain. At some point, most of these patients developed serious manifestations of the disease including joint degeneration,
sleep apnea, a decrease in pulmonary function, reduced endurance, cardiac valve disease, and skeletal complications including carpal tunnel
syndrome and hip disease. Unlike the majority of reviewed patients, patients homozygous for p.R152W mutation showed a significantly
different clinical phenotype with predominance of cardiovascular manifestations [7, 8]. Mutations associated with an attenuated MPS VI
phenotype are presented in Table 3.Table 3Characteristics of the changes in the ARSB gene associated with an attenuated MPS VI
phenotypeLocationChange at DNA levela Predicted effect on amino acid sequence of the proteinType of mutationReferenceEx.
1c.247G>Cp.D83YMissenseKarageorgos et al. Ex. 2c.454C>Tp.R152WMissenseVoskoboeva et al. Ex. 3c.574T>Cp.C192RMissenseIsbrandt et al.
c.629A>Gp.Y210CMissenseLitjens et al. Ex. 7c.1214G>Ap.C405YMissenseKarageorgos et al. c.1301G>Tp.R434IMissenseKarageorgos et al. Ex exon
aNCBI reference sequence: NM_000046.3 (cDNA considering A of the ATG translation initiation codon as nucleotide +1) Characteristics of the
changes in the ARSB gene associated with an attenuated MPS VI phenotype Ex exon aNCBI reference sequence: NM_000046.3 (cDNA considering A of
the ATG translation initiation codon as nucleotide +1) Apart from the p.R152W and p.Y210C mutations, other mutations have been reported as
associated with attenuated disease progression: p.C192R when present in homozygous state and p.D83Y , p.C405Y , and p.R434I when present in
compound heterozygous states. Osteoarticular attenuated phenotype is predominantly associated with a missense mutation p.Y210C, while
cardiac with p.R152W in homozygosity. So far, only one patient homozygous for p.Y210C mutation has been described in the literature, while
in the majority of patients, this mutation is present with other mis- or nonsense mutation . One of the first descriptions of
mucopolysaccharidosis type VI was probably by the neurologist Nonne . After several investigators indicated heterogeneity of MPS VI based on
radiological findings, the patients’ size, and longevity [13, 14], McKusick suggested separating a severe form (mucopolysaccharidosis type
VIA) from a mild variant (type VIB) . Based on McKusick’s classification, the longevity, size, lack of cardiac insufficiency in association
with mild cardiac murmurs, lack of abnormality of sella turcica, and the absence of umbilical or inguinal hernia, marked hepatosplenomegaly,
and marked corneal opacities warranted the diagnosis of the mild B variant of MPS VI . Apart from severe and attenuated phenotypes,
descriptive classification systems have also described an intermediate disease form. Other authors suggested other classification systems
based on height and urinary glycosaminoglycan (uGAG) levels, the age at the onset of symptoms, patient’s height, and the age of death [16,
17]. In reality, there are no fixed parameters to ascribe a particular patient to a single category, and the decision is subjective
depending on physician’s experience and knowledge. The relatively attenuated disease form is generally characterized by later onset of
symptoms which may not at first appear in a recognized pattern, but when apparent, the milder symptoms may be observed by an alert physician
and lead ultimately to diagnosis usually after 5 years of age, but it may be delayed until the second or third decades. Results from our
study and review of the literature allow for distinguishing two types of attenuated MPS VI phenotypes: osteoarticular and cardiac. It is
likely that patients with osteoarticular symptoms will be found in either rheumatology or orthopedic clinics. The similarity of attenuated
MPS VI to the more commonly seen rheumatological conditions means that patients are often misdiagnosed and there is a delay before the
patient’s symptoms are attributed to MPS. Patients with a cardiac variant of MPS VI are much more probable to be found in cardiology clinics
[18, 19]. In these patients, cardiac disease progresses silently and ultimately leading to heart failure and does not correspond with the
other typical MPS features which are very mild or absent . An advanced valve defect is an indication for valve surgery, which may be
beneficial in these patients at an earlier stage of the disease. In both phenotypes, the pathological process seems to be restricted at
first to one system only, either osteoarticular or cardiovascular. In the cardiac phenotype, however, it tends to have more serious
complications leading to fast disease progression and abrupt death . Despite the utility of communicating with these descriptive categories,
it is important to recognize that the symptoms of the disease manifested along a continuum. Using a descriptive classification is very
helpful for clinicians; however, it is important to bear in mind its implications. The term attenuated (or used by some slowly progressing)
implies a slower disease progression, and it may be perceived that these patients do not require treatment as urgently as severe patients.
The truth is that these patients may remain asymptomatic for years with silently (but not necessarily slowly) progressing disease and be
recognized in an advanced disease stage when it is too late for any intervention . For this reason, we previously suggested using a term
cardiac MPS VI variant to add a sense of urgency as these patients require treatment to be administered prior to the onset of valve disease
. The awareness among cardiologists and rheumatologists should be raised so they can play an important role, not only in the management but
also in the diagnosis of these patients . The extent of cardiac involvement may be underestimated in patients with mucopolysaccharidosis
because of restrictive pulmonary disease and skeletal abnormalities that limit patients’ activities . We have previously presented a
diagnostic algorithm, suggesting uGAG analysis in any patient with valve disease even in the presence of very mild or untypical disease
symptoms . In cases with a high index of suspicion such as those with a positive family history or those with other characteristic features
of MPS VI, enzymatic activity should be determined even if uGAG excretion is low. As attenuated patients may still be very difficult to
recognize, the delay in diagnosis may make it difficult to influence valve disease with available treatment. Apart from this, we have to
bear in mind that the usefulness of enzyme replacement therapy is limited due to the fact that a given enzyme preparation does not have
beneficial effects on all aspects of a disorder in the same degree. The effect of ERT alone on cardiac structure and function in MPS
patients has been documented in only a few studies and larger studies with longer follow-up are still needed. Additionally, clinical studies
have shown that many symptoms of mucopolysaccharidoses even after long-term treatment are not anymore reversible. It seems probable that in
the future, a tailored combination therapy using ERT with novel therapeutic options such as application of small molecules that either
inhibit a key enzyme which is responsible for substrate synthesis (substrate deprivation) or act as a chaperone to increase the residual
activity of the lysosomal enzyme (enzyme-enhancing therapy) will be the most effective . By identifying patient’s genotype, it may be
possible to predict the course of the disease and establish more tailored treatment plan. Patients with the p.Y210C mutation should be
covered by a special care team of orthopedists, physiotherapists, and rheumatologists with a plan of rehabilitation, proper early use of
orthoses and other support devices, the best determination of time for bone and joint surgery, and application of drug treatments. Patients
with the p.R152W should be referred to a cardiologist before the appearance of symptoms from the circulatory system. The mechanism why the
p.R152W mutation seems to have a special affinity for the heart valves remains unknown. Perhaps this stems from the specific structure of
the valves, and each of these mutations causes different residual enzyme activity. Detecting these differences would explain the process of
affecting different organs dependent on the flow dynamics of the substrate. Based on the literature review, two types of attenuated MPS VI
phenotypes can be distinguished: osteoarticular and cardiac, both with a clear genotype–phenotype correlation. The majority of MPS VI
patients reported so far as relatively attenuated presented with an essentially osteoarticular phenotype associated with p.Y210C mutation in
heterozygosity. The term attenuated should be used with caution as it may imply the slow disease progression and the lack of urgency to
treat these patients. Based on the literature review, two types of attenuated MPS VI phenotypes can be distinguished: osteoarticular and
cardiac, both with a clear genotype–phenotype correlation. The majority of MPS VI patients reported so far as relatively attenuated
presented with an essentially osteoarticular phenotype associated with p.Y210C mutation in heterozygosity. The term attenuated should be
used with caution as it may imply the slow disease progression and the lack of urgency to treat these patients. The authors thank the Polish
MPS Society (“Stowarzyszenie Chorych na Mukopolisacharydozę i Choroby Rzadkie”) and, in particular, its president, Teresa Matulka, for
inviting Lithuanian and Belarusian patients to the society’s annual meeting, which allowed us to collect the data and examine the patients.
We would also like to express our gratitude to Prof. Węgrzyn and Dr. Ewa Piotrowska (University of Gdańsk, Poland) as well as Dr. Opoka-
Winiarska (Medical University of Lublin, Poland) for their critical reading of the manuscript. The authors would like to thank Prof. Nina
Gusina (Institute for Hereditary Diseases, Minsk, Belarus) for providing clinical information about her patient. None.
