One of the most daunting complications of cardiac catheterization is a cerebrovascular event (CVE). We aimed to assess the real‐life
incidence, etiology, and risk factors of cardiac catheterization‐related acute CVEs in a large cohort of patients treated in a single
center. We undertook a retrospective analysis of 43 350 coronary procedures performed on 30 907 procedure days over the period 1992‐2011 and
compared patient and procedural characteristics of procedures complicated by CVEs with the remaining cohort. CVEs occurred in 47 cases: 43
were ischemic, 3 intracerebral hemorrhages, and 1 undetermined. The overall CVE rate was 0.15%, with percutaneous coronary intervention
(PCI) and diagnostic coronary angiography rates 0.23% and 0.09%, respectively. Using a forward stepwise multivariate logistic regression
model including patient demographic and procedural characteristics, a total of 5 significant predictors were defined: prior stroke
(OR=15.09, 95% CI [8.11 to 28.08], P<0.0001), presence of coronary arterial thrombus (OR=2.79, 95% CI [1.25 to 6.22], P=0.012), age >75
years (OR=3.33, 95% CI [1.79 to 6.19], P<0.0001), triple vessel disease (OR=2.24, 95% CI [1.20 to 4.18], P=0.011), and performance of
intervention (OR=2.21, 95% CI [1.12 to 4.33], P=0.021). An additional analysis excluded any temporal change of CVE rates but demonstrated a
significant increase of all high‐risk patient features. In a single‐center, retrospective assessment over nearly 20 years, cardiac
catheterization‐related CVEs were very rare and nearly exclusively ischemic. The independent predictors for these events were found to be
the performance of an intervention and those associated with increased atherosclerotic burden, specifically older age, triple vessel
disease, and prior stroke. The presence of intracoronary thrombus appears also to raise the risk of procedure‐related CVE. One of the most
daunting complications of cardiac catheterization is a cerebrovascular event (CVE). CVEs can include ischemic and hemorrhagic stroke and
transient ischemic attacks.1 Stroke after cardiac catheterization procedures occurs mostly in older patients with vascular comorbidities,
undergoing complicated invasive procedures.2–3 The incidence of stroke following percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI) has been variably
reported between 0.3% and 0.4%.4–6 The aim of our study was to assess the real‐life incidence, etiology, risk factors, and temporal trends
of cardiac catheterization‐related acute CVEs (ischemic stroke; transient ischemic attack; intracerebral hemorrhage) in a large cohort of
patients treated in a single center. All authors take responsibility for all aspects of the reliability and freedom from bias of the data
presented and their discussed interpretation. The study population consists of all patients undergoing coronary angiography and/or a
coronary intervention over the period 1992–2011 at the Shaare Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. All noncoronary procedures were
excluded, particularly peripheral interventions (including carotid), structural heart procedures, and right heart catheterizations. The data
were derived from the electronic medical record of the cardiology department, based on Clicks software (Roshtov Software Industries Ltd).
This record contains data including demographics, diagnoses, risk factors, angiographic and procedural details, medications, hospitalization
course, ancillary tests, and outpatient follow‐up for all patients undergoing cardiac catheterization. Data collection was performed using
computerized queries, retrieving all angiographic and procedural details and discharge summaries. These were then transferred to an
electronic spreadsheet. CVE patients were identified by searching for any of the terms “Cerebrovascular Accident” or “C.V.A.” or “T.I.A.” or
“Stroke” or “Intracranial Hemorrhage” in the diagnoses of discharge summaries and in the complications recorded in the angiographic
summaries. In addition hospitalization courses after the procedure were searched for keywords such as “neurologic consultation,” “CT
referral,” “weakness or paralysis of one side of the body,” “speech problems,” etc. All files with one of these diagnoses or keywords were
reviewed by an experienced neurologist (IL‐K), including computed tomography (CT) scans. Final clinical neurological diagnosis was evaluated
blinded to patients' clinical and procedural characteristics. Events with an onset time within 24 hours from procedure completion were
included and defined as CVE group. Due to the specific local health fund system, readmissions of patients discharged in less than 24 hours
from the index procedure would be detected by interrogation of the database. The study was approved by the Ethics Committee of the Shaare
Zedek Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel. Diagnostic and interventional catheterization procedures were included. As the considered risk
period was 24 hours, the assessment unit used was procedural days. If a patient underwent both a diagnostic and an interventional procedure
within the same 24‐hour period, this was considered an interventional procedural day. Stroke was diagnosed according to World Health
Organization criteria, which defines a stroke as a focal deficit that lasts for more than 24 hours.7 Transient ischemic attack (TIA) was
defined as focal neurological signs lasting fewer than 24 hours. Ischemic strokes (IS) and intracerebral hemorrhages (ICH) were
differentiated by the findings on brain CT, performed between day 1 and day 2 after the onset of the stroke. Contrast reactions were
determined by brain imaging and were not considered as CVEs. Anatomical localization of stroke was performed based upon clinical subtypes of
ischemic stroke using the Oxfordshire Community Stroke Project classification.8 Stroke was classified as undetermined when a brain CT was
not performed. Onset time was defined as the first appearance of abnormal signs that were noticed by the treating team during the cardiac
catheterization or after, while hospitalized in the cardiology department. The principal outcome of this study was periprocedural CVE (CVE
that occurred within 24 hours of the procedure). The following explanatory variables were assessed: (1) patient demographics: gender,
ethnicity, and age; (2) clinical characteristics and risk factors: hypertension, diabetes mellitus, smoker, hyperlipidemia, prior myocardial
infarction (MI), prior coronary arteries bypass surgery (CABG), prior stroke, renal disease, peripheral vascular disease (PVD), previously
diagnosed carotid artery disease, atrial fibrillation (AF), and acute coronary syndrome (ACS); (3) procedural characteristics and findings:
puncture site, performance of ventriculography, percutaneous coronary intervention (PCI), stent implantation, drug eluting stent (DES),
number of catheters, use of eptifibatide or bivalirudin, vessel treated, triple vessel disease, bifurcation lesion, chronic lesion, and
coronary artery thrombus. Patient characteristics were described by percentages, means±SD, and medians with interquartile ranges.
Categorical variables were compared using chi‐square test or Fisher exact test and continuous variables using unpaired Student t test. A
multivariate forward, stepwise logistic regression analysis was performed to determine independent predictors for periprocedural stroke. The
criterion for entrance into the model was a univariate probability value of P<0.05 and P>0.10 for removal from the model. The discriminatory
power of the model was examined using c statistics, whereas c value ranges from 0.5 (the model's predictions are not better than chance) to
1.0 (the model always assigns higher probabilities to correct cases than to incorrect cases). C values of 0.7 to 0.8 are considered to show
acceptable discrimination, values of 0.8 to 0.9 to indicate excellent discrimination, and values of ≥0.9 to show outstanding
discrimination.8 Odds ratios (OR) with 95% confidence intervals (CIs) were reported. The statistical tests were 2 sided. A P value <0.05 was
considered as statistically significant. Analyses were carried out using SPSS version 15.0 statistical package (SPSS, Inc). Over the study
period 43 350 procedures were performed on 30 907 procedure days. On these days, 17 150 diagnostic and 13 757 interventional procedures
(comprising 1314 interventional only and 12 443 combined procedures) were performed. From this total cohort, 110 patient admission files
were individually assessed based upon the predetermined keywords in the search. Fifty in‐hospital CVEs were identified. Of these, 1 occurred
prior to the index catheterization and 2 others appeared to not be related to the index procedure and were beyond the predetermined 24‐hour
window. Forty‐seven (0.15%) procedure‐related CVEs were identified with 37 ischemic strokes (IS), 6 TIAs, 3 ICH intracerebral hemorrhages,
and 1 undetermined stroke (CT not performed) (Figure 1). Incidence of procedure‐related CVEs and their subtypes expressed in absolute
numbers. CVE indicates cerebrovascular event; ICH, intracerebral hemorrhage; TIA, transient ischemic attack. Twenty‐seven ischemic strokes
were located in the anterior circulation (right hemisphere 15; left hemisphere 12) while 10 strokes were within the posterior circulation.
Of the 47 CVEs occurring in the entire cohort, 31 occurred related to a PCI and 16 related to a diagnostic coronary angiogram. The CVE rate
for the entire cohort was 0.15%, while the rates for PCI and diagnostic coronary angiography were 0.23% and 0.09%, respectively. Baseline
patient and procedural characteristics of the patients undergoing CVE and those of the remaining population are presented in Table 1. When
compared with patients not suffering a CVE, those experiencing CVEs were older (71.3±11.3 years versus 63.3±11.8 years, P<0.0001), more
likely to suffer from hypertension (74% versus 51%, P=0.008), had prediagnosed carotid artery disease (6% versus 1%, P=0.002), had suffered
a previous stroke (51% versus 5%, P<0.0001), had prior or current AF (15% versus 6%, P=0.021), were admitted with ACS (55% versus 35%,
P=0.014), were non‐smokers (81% versus 62%, P=0.003), and were undergoing an intervention (66% versus 44% P=0.003). There was a trend to
increased risk for a CVE in patients with known PVD (0.34% with PVD versus 0.15% without PVD, P=0.08). No increased risk for CVEs was
associated with female gender, ethnicity, presence of diabetes mellitus, hyperlipidemia, obesity, previous MI, prior CABG, congestive heart
failure, left ventricular dysfunction, or use of intraortic balloon pump. Patients' Baseline and Procedural Characteristics ACS indicates
acute coronary syndrome; AF, atrial fibrillation; CABG, coronary artery bypass graft surgery; CVE, cerebrovascular event; CX, circumflex;
LAD, left anterior descending; LIMA, left internal mammary artery; LM, left main; MI, myocardial infarction; PVD, peripheral vascular
disease; RCA, right coronary artery; SVG, saphenous vein graft. Multiple procedural characteristics were assessed for relationships with
CVEs (Table 1). These included, but were not limited to, access site, performance of ventriculography, the number of catheters used, extent
of coronary disease (single, double, or triple vessel), presence of a coronary artery thrombus, intervened vessel, chronic or bifurcation
lesions, and treatment with eptifibatide or bivalirudin. At univariate analysis, the presence of coronary artery thrombus and triple vessel
disease were the only procedural variables found to be significant and a trend to increased risk was found in patients treated with
eptifibatide or bivalirudin. Forward, stepwise logistic regression analysis was used to assess associations of all background demographics,
risk factors, and procedural characteristics with catheterization‐related CVE adjusted for other significant risk factors. A total of 5
significant predictors were thus defined: prior stroke (OR=15.09, 95% CI [8.11 to 28.08], P<0.0001), the presence of coronary arterial
thrombus (OR=2.79, 95% CI [1.25 to 6.22], P=0.012), age greater than 75 years (OR=3.33, 95% CI [1.79 to 6.19], P<0.0001), triple vessel
disease (OR=2.24, 95% CI [1.20 to 4.18], P=0.011), and the performance of an intervention (OR=2.21, 95% CI [1.12 to 4.33], P=0.021). The C
statistic was 0.865, suggesting an excellent discriminatory power of the model. This logistic regression is presented in Table 2 model A.
Predictors for CVE After Cardiac Catheterization: Multiple Logistic Regression CI indicates confidence interval; CVE, cerebrovascular event;
OR, odds ratio; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; TVD, triple vessel disease. Although in the first half of the study period the rate
of CVE was 0.08% and rose to 0.22% over the next 10 years, this did not achieve statistical significance. This is despite the numerical
increase of strokes noted since 2005 (chi‐square analysis P=0.264) (Figure 2). Procedure‐related CVE rates over the study period expressed
as percentages of cases. CVE indicates cerebrovascular event; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention. Temporal analyses of patients' and
procedural characteristics revealed significant increase rates of almost all variables found to be independent risk factors. Rates of prior
stroke increased from 2% to 7%, presence of thrombus rose from 4% to 10%, percent of elderly population (age over 75 years) undergoing
procedure increased from 10% to 24% and finally percent of interventional procedures performed over the study period changed from 14% in
1992 to over 50% since 2005 (P<0.0001 for all) (Figure 3). Temporal variation of procedure‐related CVE risk factors over the study period.
In order to assess its impact as a possible cofounder, the year of procedure was forced into the model developed from the previous stepwise
method as an additional step and referred to as model B. This further step did not reduce the strength nor the statistical significance of
the independent stroke predictors that were identified in model A (Table 2, model B)‬.‬‬ The c statistic was 0.866, still indicating an
excellent discriminatory power of the model. There were a total of 3 ICHs. All 3 cases occurred related to PCI and additional,
anticoagulation/antiplatelet therapy. All were treated with aspirin, clopidogrel, and heparin, with 2 patients treated with additional
eptifibatide and 1 with bivalirudin. The first case was a 78‐year‐old male that presented with an acute anterior wall myocardial infarction.
He was transferred for primary PCI. He had no known coronary disease but had a history of paroxysmal AF treated with amiodarone and had
suffered an ischemic stroke 4 months prior. At catheterization he was found to have triple vessel disease. He was treated with IV heparin
and eptifibatide and underwent stent implantation to the mid‐left anterior descending (LAD) artery. At the completion of the procedure, he
became nonresponsive and urgent CT revealed severe left occipital intraparenchymal and subarachnoid bleeding with mass effect on the left
lateral ventricle. He died 5 days later. The second patient was a 48‐year‐old male that presented with an acute anterior wall MI. He had a
past history of ischemic heart disease, hypertension, smoking, and hyperlipidemia. Diagnostic angiography revealed single vessel disease in
the proximal LAD. He was pretreated with aspirin, clopidogrel, and heparin and received intravenous (IV) eptifibitide following the
diagnostic study. He underwent successful primary PCI to the proximal LAD. Six hours following the procedure, he became noncommunicative and
was found to have a right hemiplegia with facial palsy. The IV eptifibitide was then ceased. Urgent CT scan demonstrated a left parieto
temporo hemorrhage with mass effect on the left lateral ventricle intraparenchymal and subarachnoid. Twelve hours later he became
bradycardic and repeat CT revealed intraventricular extension of the bleed. He was transferred to neurosurgery. After rehabilitation there
was some improvement but he remained hemiplegic and dysphatic. The third patient was a 55‐year‐old woman with no significant past history
that presented with an acute anterior wall MI. She underwent successful primary PCI to LAD while being treated periprocedurally with
aspirin, clopidogrel, and bivalirudin. Intraprocedurally she complained of vision disturbance. The next day she further complained of
headaches and a right hemianopia was diagnosed. CT scan revealed a left occipital ICH. Supportive therapy only was instituted and at 6‐month
follow‐up her vision had returned to normal. Over the past 2 decades interventional cardiology has made enormous strides in progressing from
balloon angioplasty to relatively simple lesions through early stenting with anticoagulants and subsequently antiplatelets through to drug
eluting stents and multiple ancillary devices with powerful intravenous antiplatelet agents. With the progression of interventional hardware
and escalation of the interventionalist's capabilities leading to a reduction in intraprocedural and improved long‐term outcomes, a
concomitant change has occurred in the patient profile being treated. Whereas in the initial period, relatively simple patients were
treated, the lesion and patient complexity has developed such that primary PCI in many centers can reach 30% of their patient load,
multivessel disease and intervention is a matter of course as well as the routine treatment of octogenarians with diffuse atherosclerosis.
Our findings of low CVE rate (0.15%) have been relatively stable over the entire study period with the benefits of improved hardware and
techniques being offset by a far more challenging population as demonstrated by our temporal analysis. Our principal findings demonstrate,
similar to previously reported analyses, that age greater than 75 years, prior stroke and triple vessel disease all are strongly associated
with a procedure‐related CVE. Most of these features appear to be related to the burden of atherosclerotic disease. The increased risk in
this population has been attributed in part to the increased incidence of aortic plaques, particularly if mobile, that are present in this
population. This has been further substantiated by the finding of atherosclerotic debris derived from the aorta in catheter aspirates.
Interestingly in our study we failed to find a correlation with the number of catheters used or previous CABG, both of which would have
increased the amount of aortic passages and intra‐aortic manipulations, likely increasing stroke risk if this was the predominant mechanism.
The additional 2 independent predictors that we found (undergoing an intervention and the presence of coronary artery thrombus) suggest that
an alternative source for embolic material is present. In distinction to previously published analyses we have shown that the presence of an
intra‐coronary thrombus is independently associated with a periprocedural CVE. Hoffman et al6 found at univariate analysis that
intracoronary thrombus was more frequent in the post PCI CVEs, however this remained only as a trend (P=0.0734) when introduced into the
multivariate model. In a most recent study demonstration of significantly higher rates (1.3%) of intervention‐related CVEs in a primary PCI
population that by definition must have an elevated thrombus burden supports our findings of the role of thrombus in intervention‐related
CVEs.10 It would be extremely interesting to attempt to determine the mechanism of action of this association, particularly if the thrombus
is a marker for a prothrombotic state or whether itself is the source of the subsequent embolus. Unfortunately, as our assessable end point
(a clinically manifest neurological event) may be delayed by several hours, making temporal association analyses potentially misleading. The
final independent predictor was the performance of an intervention. The most recent studies assessing periprocedural CVEs have limited
themselves to PCIs only.6,11–12 Although it is clear that intervention represents a higher risk there were 2 specific reasons that we
analyzed diagnostic studies in conjunction with the interventions. The first was that in the current environment of ad hoc intervention, the
staff and patient facing a procedure should be aware of the potential CVE risk with a diagnostic study alone as well as that of a follow‐on
intervention. Second, following controlling for all other variables including, atherosclerotic burden as manifested by multiple features
such as previously diagnosed carotid artery disease, PVD, and triple vessel disease, the intervention introduces the possibility of
extraction of embolic material either associated with aspiration devices, on balloons or stent platforms. Based on the OR of 2.35 related to
an intervention, this appears to represent a very significant mechanism of PCI‐related stroke. This is supported by multiple reports13–15 of
thrombi or other filling defects having been displaced to more proximal branches or other coronary arteries following withdrawal of
intracoronary devices such as aspiration catheters, balloons, and atherectomy devices. Interestingly the use of eptifibatide or bivalirudin
was not protective, possibly due to the intracoronary extraction mechanism not being dependent on thrombus alone as well as the ability of
these agents intraprocedurally to only partially reduce the load of thrombus, often with a significant residual thrombus burden. Another
important issue is the temporal impact of anticoagulant and antiplatelet administration. Unfortunately, due to the retrospective nature of
this study we were unable to reliably dissect out the exact timing of administration in the total cohort severely limiting our ability to
elucidate a relationship with CVEs. Encouragingly, despite the broad adoption of these powerful intravenous antiplatelet agents that were
progressively introduced over the study period, the incidence of intracerebral hemorrhage has remained remarkably low. Two of the 3 episodes
were associated with the use of eptifibatide or bivalirudin, with devastating outcomes. In the third instance bivalirudin was used with a
much less dramatic presentation and better outcome. When compared to publications assessing stroke incidence postcoronary intervention in
the United States such as the single center experience from the Washington Hospital Center (0.38%)4 and more recently the Mayo Clinic
(0.37%),6 including data from the 1990s, the CVE rate of 0.23% in our study, seems relatively low. We conjecture that this may be due to the
relatively early transfer from 8 and 7 French guiding catheters to a 6 French system that occurred in our center several years prior to the
United States. The report from the National Cardiovascular Data Registry that studied stroke incidence in enrolling centers between the
years 2004‐2007 found an incidence (0.22%) similar to that in our center over the entire study period.11 Due to the relatively small number
of large catheters used we were unable to distinguish the impact of catheters greater than 6F. We found no impact of catheters smaller than
6F when compared with 6F, however it should be noted that the majority of 5F guiding catheters were used in conjunction with the radial
approach presenting a confounding influence. Previous studies4–6 have assessed procedure‐related CVEs over longer periods predominantly with
in‐hospital follow‐up. We chose to limit the CVEs to those occurring with 24 hours of the procedure. This increases specificity but reduces
sensitivity to some degree. To account for this we assessed all in‐hospital CVEs in patients undergoing catheterizations and found an
additional 3 CVEs in the entire population, one prior to the procedure and clearly not related. The additional 2 were postprocedure and also
could not be clearly related to the procedure, although this cannot be excluded. In spite of this, the impact of these 2 additional cases on
our results would be negligible and so an additional analysis was not performed. This study is a single‐center, retrospective analysis of
clinically evident CVEs occurring within 24 hours of a coronary cardiac catheterization. In spite of this, due to the advantage of having
access to all the patients' complete records, we assessed all in in‐hospital events. No procedure‐related events that occurred beyond the
24‐hour period were included. Furthermore, the access to a large number of procedural characteristics not available in large multicenter
registries may offset to some degree the limitation of a single‐center analysis. The retrospective analysis of a large number of relatively
standard procedures (cardiac catheterization) precludes the inclusion of clinically silent CVEs that would provide stronger statistical
power to elucidate risk factors and potential mechanisms of action. Nonetheless, the principal concern of physicians and their patients are
those events that are clinically evident. The relatively small number of CVEs limits the ability to adequately assess subgroups with any
statistical power. It further can be assumed that many subclinical or very minor events were not identified. Their identification would
improve the ability to further define the “at‐risk” subgroups although in themselves may be of questionable clinical relevance. In all but
one instance, urgent brain imaging was performed. Imaging was limited to CT scanning. This has been the standard over the study period and
in spite of the increasing use worldwide of MRI scanning it is not routinely performed for stroke assessment in Israel.9,16 Moreover recent
reports state that the sensitivity of DWI for the diagnosis of ischemic stroke is now estimated to be only 80% to 90%.17–18 CT is very
sensitive for the diagnosis of acute symptomatic ICH.19 In a single‐center retrospective assessment over nearly 20 years, CVEs post‐cardiac
catheterization were very rare and nearly exclusively ischemic. The independent predictors for these events were found to be, not
surprisingly, the performance of an intervention and those associated with increased atherosclerotic burden, specifically older age, triple
vessel disease and prior stroke. Our findings however, identified an additional high‐risk group with more acute coronary disease as manifest
by the presence of coronary artery thrombus. None.
