Funding sources: Part of this work was supported by an award from the Efficacy and Mechanism Evaluation (EME) programme* and is funded by
the Medical Research Council (MRC) and managed by the National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) on behalf of the MRC-NIHR partnership.
Lyn S. Chitty is partially funded by the Great Ormond Street Hospital Children's Charity and the NIHR Biomedical Research Centre at Great
Ormond Street Hospital. The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the NHS, the NIHR or
the Department of Health. *The EME Programme is funded by the MRC and NIHR, with contributions from the CSO in Scotland and NISCHR in Wales
and the HSC R&D Division, Public Health Agency in Northern Ireland. It is managed by the NIHR Evaluation, Trials and Studies Coordinating
Centre (NETSCC) based at the University of Southampton. Conflicts of interest: None declared The copyright line in this article was changed
on 22 August 2014 after online publication. The utility of array comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) testing in prenatal diagnosis has
been recently described1,2 with potential advantages, including improved detection of pathogenic chromosomal rearrangements following rapid
analysis of uncultured chorionic villi or amniocytes. Whilst some of the technical difficulties encountered in the prenatal setting, such as
DNA extraction for rapid results and interpretation of calls, have already been discussed, others, such as confined placental mosaicism
(CPM) are yet to be evaluated. Confined placental mosaicism for aneuploidies, and whole chromosome arm rearrangements, is a well-established
phenomenon in chorionic villus samples (CVS), with a reported incidence of 1–2%.3 However, so far as we are aware, CPM for submicroscopic
changes found by microarray testing has not been previously reported. Here, we report a case of CPM involving a deletion of exons 7–10 of
the STS gene detected following analysis of array CGH results obtained from uncultured chorionic villi. The mosaic deletion was confirmed by
an independent method [Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification (MLPA)]. The STS deletion was not subsequently detected by analysis
of cultured chorionic villus cells (CVS-CC) or neonatal blood obtained after delivery at term, confirming CPM. Chorionic villus sampling was
performed following sonographic detection at 12-week gestation of an increased nuchal translucency of 4.2 mm, absent nasal bone, fixed
flexed knees and abnormal lower extremities. The CVS was carefully prepared by microscopic dissection, and the villi were then finely
macerated and mixed. The macerated villi were used to establish cell cultures for karyotyping and to extract DNA for quantitative
fluorescent polymerase chain reaction (QF-PCR) aneuploidy testing (glass bead extraction method4 and in-house developed QF-PCR method5 as
described previously) and for microarray analysis [extraction using the QIAcube instrument (Qiagen, Germany)]. Parental blood samples were
also obtained, and DNA was extracted using the FLEX STAR instrument (AutoGen, USA). After completion of karyotyping, cells were further
cultured, and DNA was extracted using the iGENatal extraction kit (iGEN, Spain) and stored. Neonatal blood was obtained, and DNA was
extracted using the QIAsymphony instrument (QIAGEN, Germany). Microarray testing was performed on DNA from direct CVS, CVS-CC, neonatal
blood, maternal blood and paternal blood. All microarray testing was performed using sex-matched control DNA and the NimbleGen CGH
12 × 135 K WGT v3.0 whole genome array platform at a resolution of approximately 0.2 Mb in the HG19 build. Results were confirmed using the
SALSA MLPA P160 STS kit (MRC-Holland, the Netherlands), which contains probes for each exon (1–10) of the STS gene, as well as other control
probes on the X chromosome. MLPA data were analysed using the GeneMarker v1.91 software and intra-sample normalisation was performed. The
QF-PCR result was consistent with disomy 13, 18 and 21 and a male (XY) fetus. The karyotype result was normal male, 46, XY. The direct CVS
microarray result indicated a 332 kb loss for the short arm of chromosome X with breakpoints within Xp22.31 [arr
Xp22.31(7,223,740–7,555,450)×0] (log2 ratio: −1.52). This loss disrupted the STS (steroid sulphatase, OMIM #300747) gene, indicating a
deletion of exons 8, 9 and 10, as well as possible deletion of exon 7 (Figure 1A). This deletion predicts a likely STS deficiency syndrome
(X-linked ichthyosis, OMIM #308100) phenotype in a male fetus.6 Parental follow-up using microarray indicated no evidence of copy number
change in this region in either parent, suggesting the de novo origin of this copy number loss in the fetus (Figure 1A). In view of the
likely pathogenic nature of this deletion, the result was reported following discussion with our clinical review panel. Given the small size
of the loss on chromosome X, there were no BAC (bacterial artificial chromosome) clones available within the deleted region, and therefore,
confirmatory FISH (fluorescence in situ hybridization) testing was not performed. (A) Array CGH results. Magnification of the STS gene and
copy number loss on the X chromosome at Xp22.31. The deletion region is highlighted in red. The STS gene is shown as a red block at the
bottom left. Exons are shown as black lines within the STS gene box. A copy number loss disrupting the STS gene is identified in the direct
chorionic villus sample (CVS). This loss included exons 8, 9 and 10 of the STS gene. Exon 7 is located adjacent to the call, but before the
next normal probe, thus it could also be deleted. The results from DNA from CVS-CC (CC), neonatal (Blood), maternal (Mother) and paternal
(Father) blood samples indicate no evidence of this copy number loss. Therefore, the deletion is de novo and confined to the placenta. (B)
Multiplex Ligation-dependent Probe Amplification results for the STS locus. Only proband direct CVS (CVS), CVS-CC (CC) and neonatal blood
(Blood) are shown here and are compared with a normal male sample and a sample with a known standard STS deletion. An intensity ratio
between 0.8 and 1.2 corresponds to a normal copy number (i.e. 1 copy in males). Males carrying the deletion will show no amplification and
an intensity ratio of 0 (0 copies). It is clear that exons 7–10 of the STS gene are deleted in a mosaic state in the direct CVS sample The
pregnancy continued and at birth the neonate had no sign of ichthyosis and subsequent microarray testing on DNA from neonatal blood failed
to confirm the deletion disrupting the STS locus. Stored DNA from CVS-CC was also tested by microarray, and there was again no evidence of
the deletion (Figure 1A). All array results met internal quality control standards. The array results from the direct CVS, CVS-CC and
neonatal blood all share the same eight regions of copy number variation, as well as two rare variants of unknown significance, both of
which were maternally inherited, thereby eliminating the possibility of a sample mix-up. Because the detection of mosaicism by array CGH can
be problematic,7 we compared our results in this patient with positive controls from our own laboratory database. Four previous unrelated
male probands with validated STS copy number losses detected postnatally were examined and showed an average log2 ratio of −2.5 (ranging
from −2.25 to −2.8). The log2 ratio of the atypical partial STS deletion in the direct CVS presented in this report was −1.52, indicating
that the copy number loss was mosaic in the direct CVS preparation, consistent with the admixture of two distinct cell lineage populations.
MLPA analysis of the direct CVS, CVS-CC, neonatal blood and parental blood DNA, using the same direct approach, confirmed that the STS copy
number loss seen by array CGH was not a technical artefact, involved exons 7–10 and was confined to the placenta in a mosaic state
(Figure 1B). To our knowledge, this is the first report of a potentially clinically significant copy number loss confined to the placenta
and limited to the cytotrophoblast cell lineage detected by array CGH and subsequently confirmed by MLPA in a prenatal setting. DNA
extracted from direct CVS contains a mixture of two cell populations derived from the cytotrophoblast and mesenchymal core. Mesenchymal
cells, that grow in culture and are more likely to be representative of the fetal genotype, are estimated to contribute up to 40–50% to the
DNA extracted from mid-trimester intermediate villi.8 Our microarray results suggest that the microdeletion on chromosome X arose during
placentation and was confined to the cytotrophoblast. Microarrays have only recently been introduced into clinical service for prenatal
diagnosis, and so the frequency of discrepant results obtained by analysis of uncultured CVS and other sources of genetic material are as
yet unknown. Our report highlights the possibility of CPM for submicroscopic rearrangements and suggests that precautions should be taken to
minimise this risk. We would suggest that this case demonstrates the need for DNA extraction from a larger portion of the whole villi to
maximise representation of the whole sample and to minimise discrepant results. Previous experience suggests that particular care is
required to ensure that the mesenchymal core DNA fraction is sufficiently well represented to avoid such results.9 Although this protocol
was followed in the case reported here, we still encountered discrepant results. Therefore, microarray results obtained from DNA extracted
from uncultured CVS in the absence of clearly identified clinical findings (e.g. relevant prenatal sonographic findings) should be
interpreted with caution. We suggest that, in the absence of such supporting evidence, follow-up and confirmation of potentially clinically
significant copy number changes identified in DNA obtained from uncultured CVS should be performed on CVS-CC or amniotic fluid prior to
reporting. In cases where CPM is suspected on microarray, FISH would be the preferred method for confirmation, as long as cultured cells and
appropriate FISH probes are available. In addition, given the selective growth of the mesenchymal core cells in culture, the use of CVS-CC
as the preferred tissue for microarray testing would minimise the incidence of CPM and false-positive findings. However, in a clinical
diagnostic service, the use of CVS-CC instead of CVS would result in a delay in reporting of the urgent prenatal results. Moreover, cultural
artefacts may arise that would not represent the true fetal genotype.10 The incidence of such artefacts would increase with prolonged
culturing. In diagnostic laboratories, good practice would be to include in reports a standard rider stating that CPM cannot be excluded.
Use of microarray for prenatal diagnosis increases the detection of pathogenic chromosomal rearrangements. CPM is a well-established
phenomenon occurring in 1–2% of CVS. Use of microarray for prenatal diagnosis increases the detection of pathogenic chromosomal
rearrangements. CPM is a well-established phenomenon occurring in 1–2% of CVS. CPM can occur for submicroscopic copy number changes detected
by array CGH in DNA from uncultured CVS. In order to minimise the risk of false-positive results in these cases, detected copy number
changes should be confirmed in a different source of material, such as cultured cells. CPM can occur for submicroscopic copy number changes
detected by array CGH in DNA from uncultured CVS. In order to minimise the risk of false-positive results in these cases, detected copy
number changes should be confirmed in a different source of material, such as cultured cells. The authors would like to thank Dr John Crolla
for critical reading and comments on the manuscript and our colleagues Drew Ellershaw for advice regarding the MLPA analysis and Remben
Talaban, Elaine Holgado and Emma Wilcock for their advice regarding technical procedures.
