Carcinoembryonic antigen glypican-3 (GPC3) is expressed by >40% of ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC) and is a promising immunotherapeutic
target. We previously reported the safety of and immunological and clinical responses to a GPC3-derived peptide vaccine in a phase I
clinical trial of patients with advanced hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Although the efficacy of the GPC3-derived peptide vaccine against
HCC patients was evaluated, other GPC3-positive cancer patients have not yet been investigated. Therefore, we conducted a phase II trial to
evaluate the clinical outcome of ovarian CCC patients treated with a GPC3-derived peptide vaccine. The GPC3 peptide was administered at a
dose of 3 mg per body. Patients received an intradermal injection of the GPC3 peptide emulsified with incomplete Freund’s adjuvant.
Vaccinations were performed biweekly from the first until the 6th injection and were then repeated at 6-week intervals after the 7th
injection. Treatment continued until disease progression. We herein present two patients with chemotherapy-refractory ovarian CCC who
achieved a significant clinical response in an ongoing trial of a GPC3 peptide vaccine. Case 1, a 42-year-old patient with advanced
recurrent ovarian CCC with liver and retroperitoneal lymph node metastases, received the HLA-A24-restricted GPC3 peptide vaccine. Contrast-
enhanced CT at week 10 revealed a partial response (PR) using RECIST criteria. Case 2 was a 67-year-old female with multiple lymph node
metastases. She was injected with the HLA-A2-restricted GPC3 peptide vaccine. According to RECIST, PR was achieved at week 37. The
stabilization of their diseases over one year provided us with the first clinical evidence to demonstrate that GPC3 peptide-based
immunotherapy may significantly prolong the overall survival of patients with refractory ovarian CCC. Epithelial ovarian carcinoma (EOC) is
the leading cause of death from gynecological malignancy. Ovarian clear cell carcinoma (CCC) accounts for 5–25% of all EOC, depending on the
geographic location. It accounts for <10% of all EOC diagnosed in the USA.1 In contrast, the incidence of CCC is reportedly >15% of EOC in
Japan.2 Compared with other EOC subtypes, CCC is associated with a poorer prognosis and increased chemoresistance.2,3 In particular, the
response rate of recurrent CCC to salvage chemotherapy was reported to be less than 10%.4 Progression-free survival was also less than 6 mo,
even in patients who achieved a response when treated with conventional anti-cancer cytotoxic agents.5 The long-term clinical outcome of
patients with recurrent CCC is extremely poor.6 Therefore, new treatment modalities are urgently required for patients with CCC refractory
to chemotherapy. Immunotherapy is a potentially attractive option for EOC. Glypican-3 (GPC3) is useful not only as a novel tumor marker, but
also as an oncofetal antigen for immunotherapy. It is specifically overexpressed in hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).7 Previous studies
demonstrated that GPC3 was also overexpressed in several malignant tumors, including ovarian CCC.8-12 We previously identified the
HLA-A24-restricted GPC3298–306 (EYILSLEEL) and HLA-A2-restricted GPC3144–152 (FVGEFFTDV) peptides, both of which can induce GPC3-reactive
cytotoxic T cells (CTLs).13 We recently reported the safety of and immunological and clinical responses to a GPC3-derived peptide vaccine in
a phase I trial for advanced HCC patients.14 We are currently conducting a phase II trial with a GPC3-derived peptide vaccine in ovarian CCC
patients (UMIN-CTR: 000003696). This study presents, for the first time, two patients with refractory ovarian CCC who achieved a significant
clinical response in an ongoing trial of a GPC3 peptide vaccine. This study describes two patients from our GPC3 peptide vaccination trial.
This clinical trial was approved and monitored by the Institutional Review Board at Nagoya University School of Medicine. Patients with
progressive metastatic ovarian CCC were enrolled after providing written, informed consent. The following eligibility criteria were used:
diagnosis of ovarian CCC on the basis of histological examinations; no expectation of a response to other therapies; an Eastern Cooperative
Oncology Group performance status of 0–2; age between 20 and 80 y; HLA-A24- or HLA-A2-positive status as determined using commercially
available genomic DNA typing tests; and adequate organ function (white blood cell count ≥2000/mm3, platelets ≥50 000/mm3, serum creatinine
≤2.1 mg/dl, total bilirubin ≤3.6 mg/dl, aspartate aminotransferase ≤165 IU/L, alkaline phosphatase ≤1795 IU/L). The following exclusion
criteria were applied: other active malignancies; clinically serious infection; active gastrointestinal bleeding; severe cardiac
insufficiency; severe interstitial pneumonitis; massive ascites and/or hydrothorax; concurrent treatment with steroids or immunosuppressive
agents; and unsuitability for the trial based on a clinical judgment. Surgical specimens were stained with hematoxylin and eosin or
monoclonal antibodies against GPC3 (clone 1G12; dilution 1:300; BioMosaics), CD8 (clone 1A5; dilution 1:80; Novocastra), and HLA class I
(clone EMR8/5; dilution 1:1000; Hokudo), according to the manufacturers’ directions. An ex vivo IFN-γ enzyme-linked immunospot (ELISPOT)
assay was conducted to measure the antigen-specific CTL response, as described previously.14 Non-cultured PBMCs were added to plates in the
presence of peptide antigens (10 μg/mL) and incubated for 20 h at 37 °C in 5% CO2. The numbers of PBMCs plated per well for case 1 and case
2 were 5 × 105 and 2.5 × 105, respectively. Double-determinant (sandwich) ELISA of GPC3 was performed as described previously.14 The serum-
soluble protein GPC3 was detected by indirect ELISA using an anti-human GPC3 monoclonal antibody (clone 1G12), anti-human GPC3 sheep
polyclonal antibody (R&D Systems), and recombinant human GPC3 (R&D Systems). A 42-y-old nulligravid Japanese female was referred to us in
November 2011. She had been diagnosed with an ovarian tumor when she presented with bilateral lower extremity deep vein thrombosis. She had
undergone laparotomy including total abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and sampling of the pelvic lymph nodes at a
nearby hospital in August 2010. There were residual tumors of peritoneal dissemination and enlarged retroperitoneal lymph nodes.
Histopathology revealed ovarian CCC and the presence of pelvic lymph node metastases. Therefore, her initial clinical stage was IIIC. She
was treated postoperatively with six cycles of paclitaxel and carboplatin (TC) chemotherapy. After TC chemotherapy, she once again underwent
laparotomy including omentectomy and pelvic and para-aortic systemic lymphadenectomy in March 2011, and a complete response was achieved.
The histology of the resected tumor revealed retroperitoneal lymph node metastases, and no pathological chemotherapeutic effects were
observed. Thus, she received four cycles of postoperative chemotherapy with irinotecan and cisplatin. CT scans revealed the enlargement of
the retroperitoneal lymph nodes and calyx of the right kidney in August 2011. The multiple metastases rapidly progressed, and oral opioids
were administered to relieve back pain. After confirming her HLA type as HLA- A*24:02, she was enrolled in a phase II trial of the GPC3
peptide vaccination. She began receiving intradermal injections of 3 mg of HLA-A24-restricted GPC3298–306 GMP grade peptide emulsified with
incomplete Freund’s adjuvant in November 2011. Vaccinations were performed biweekly from the first until the 6th injection and were repeated
at 6-wk intervals after the 7th injection according to the trial schedule. Pretreatment tumor markers were as follows: CA125, 405.4 U/ml and
CA72-4, 264.1 U/ml. The serum levels of these tumor markers decreased after the initiation of treatment (Fig. 1A). The pretreatment serum
GPC3 protein (17.3 ng/ml) was detectable, but changes in the serum levels of GPC3 unlike other tumor markers had been broadly flat while
there was an increase or decrease (data not shown). Liver and para-aortic lymph node metastases grew during the first few weeks before tumor
regression. According to RECIST, PR was achieved at week 10. Oral opioids were discontinued. Right hydronephrosis, pleural effusion, and
ascites disappeared. Liver and para-aortic lymph node metastases were no longer visible on contrast-enhanced CT after 23 wk of exposure to
the vaccine (Fig. 1B). However, we observed the slow growth of the bilateral inguinal lymph nodes during the same period. Therefore, right
inguinal lymph node resection biopsy was performed at week 25. A histological examination of the biopsied specimen revealed the metastasis
of CCC. Immunohistochemical staining was performed with monoclonal antibodies against GPC3, HLA class I, and CD8. Immunohistochemical
staining revealed the expression of GPC3 and HLA class I in the cytoplasm and membranes of carcinoma cells and a few CD8-positive T cells in
the primary ovarian CCC tissue (Fig. 1C), whereas most CCC cells in the resected right inguinal lymph node metastasis appeared to lack GPC3
expression, showed a reduction in the expression of HLA class I, and there was little infiltration of CD8-positive T cells (Fig. 1D).
Figure 1. (A) Clinical course from the beginning of the GPC3 peptide vaccination. Serum levels of CA125 and CA72–4 decreased after the
initiation of therapy. Black arrows indicate vaccinations. The asterisk indicates right inguinal lymph node resection biopsy. The double
asterisk indicates bilateral inguinal lymphadenectomy. (B) Contrast-enhanced CT scan showing liver (white, red, blue, and orange arrows) and
paraaortic lymph node (yellow arrows) metastases. The size of metastases increased immediately following the initiation of the GPC3 peptide
vaccination; however, tumor sizes decreased markedly within three months. (C, D) Pathological findings of primary ovarian carcinoma (C) and
right inguinal lymph node biopsy specimens (D). A microscopy image of a hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained section shows CCC (a, i).
Immunohistochemical staining for GPC3 and HLA class I showed positivity in the primary ovarian carcinoma, respectively (b, c). Most CCC
cells in the resected right inguinal lymph node metastasis appeared to lack GPC3 expression and a reduction in the expression of HLA class I
(ii, iii). Immunohistochemical analysis showed a few CD8-positive T cells in the primary ovarian CCC tissue (d), whereas there was little
infiltration of CD8-positive T cells in the resected right inguinal lymph node metastasis (iv). Original magnification, x200. Because the
metastases that had disappeared remained absent, followed by stable disease, we continued to administer the vaccine. The treatment was
eventually discontinued due to the development of lower abdominal subcutaneous metastases and progressive disease after the 14th
vaccination. A 67-y-old parous Japanese female was referred to our hospital in March 2012. She had undergone laparotomy including total
abdominal hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, omentectomy, and sampling of the retroperitoneal lymph nodes in September 2010.
Residual enlarged right common iliac and para-aortic lymph nodes were noted. A histological examination showed ovarian CCC. Her initial
clinical stage was IIIC due to retroperitoneal lymph node metastases. She was treated postoperatively with nine cycles of weekly TC
chemotherapy. Pelvic and para-aortic lymph nodes persisted following weekly TC chemotherapy and increased in size. Two subsequent regimens
yielded no response: three cycles of second-line chemotherapy with irinotecan and nedaplatin, and one cycle with gemcitabine and docetaxel
as third-line chemotherapy. She had the HLA-A*02:01 genotype, and began receiving 3 mg of the HLA-A2-restricted GPC3144-152 peptide vaccine
in April 2012. Pretreatment tumor markers were as follows: CA19-9, 241 U/ml and CA125, 9.8 U/ml. The serum levels of these tumor markers
decreased after the 7th vaccination. CA19-9 levels had decreased to within the normal range by week 43 (Fig. 2A). The serum GPC3 protein was
undetectable. Figure 2. (A) Clinical course from the beginning of the GPC3 peptide vaccination. Serum levels of CA19–9 and CA125 decreased
after the 7th vaccination. The CA19–9 level decreased to within the normal range. Black arrows indicate vaccinations. (B) Plain CT and
18F-FDG PET/CT scans showing retroperitoneal lymph node (white, red, blue and orange arrows) and Virchow's node (yellow arrows) metastases.
These metastases were negative on 18F-FDG PET/CT at week 49. (C) Pathological findings of primary ovarian carcinoma. A microscopy image of a
hematoxylin and eosin (H&E)-stained section shows CCC (a). Immunohistochemical staining was performed for GPC3, HLA class I, and CD8. (b, c,
d). The expression of HLA class I was positive, while that of GPC3 was not, and there was no infiltration of CD8-positive T cells. Original
magnification, x200. She achieved stable disease except for Virchow's node by week 24. However, she showed PR at week 37 (Fig. 2B). The
response resulted in almost the complete resolution of all measurable lesions on plain CT. Unfortunately, she had a past history of
allergies to CT contrast media; therefore, we performed 18F-FDG PET/CT to improve the diagnostic accuracy of residual tumors at week 49.
18F-FDG PET/CT showed mild positive FDG uptake in four masses (smaller than 1 cm in size) in the right common iliac lymph node and
intraperitoneal dissemination. Although 18F-FDG PET did not always reflect malignancy or detect metastatic lesions, the presence of residual
tumors was still suspected. Because she remained progression free at week 74, she is still receiving the trial treatment. The expression of
HLA class I was positive, while that of GPC3 was not positive in the primary ovarian CCC tissue, and there was no infiltration of
CD8-positive T cells (Fig. 2C). No adverse effects of the vaccination were observed in either case, except for a local inflammatory response
with erythema at the injection site and low-grade fever. Most gynecological oncologists are aware that recurrent or persistent ovarian CCC
has a chemoresistant phenotype. Although the different histological types of EOC may represent different diseases with unique clinical and
molecular characteristics, ovarian CCC is still currently being treated in the same manner as other EOCs because of its low rate of
incidence among EOCs in western countries. Novel treatment approaches should be adopted for ovarian CCC, especially in cases that are
recurrent or refractory to previous therapies. Between 5 and 10% of all currently open clinical trials for ovarian cancer patients evaluate
approaches using immune-based therapies. Although most immunotherapeutic strategies for ovarian cancer treatment investigated so far are
capable of inducing antigen-specific immunity, the unequivocal clinical benefit for these patients has not yet been demonstrated.15 To date,
we have confirmed that a HLA-A2-restricted GPC3144–152 peptide-specific CTL clone can recognize and kill HLA-A2-positive and GPC3-positive
ovarian CCC cell lines.16 Based on these conditions, we conducted a trial to assess the clinical outcome of ovarian CCC patients treated
with a GPC3-derived peptide vaccine. In the ongoing clinical trial, 20 refractory patients were enrolled until the end of August 2013. Ten
of these patients were vaccinated at least six times, and a significant clinical response was achieved in two patients (2/10, 20%) who
received the HLA-A24 or A2-restricted GPC3 peptide vaccine. In spite of resistance to multiple chemotherapeutic drugs, the stabilization of
their diseases over one year suggests the efficacy of the GPC3 peptide vaccination. Two patterns of responses, fast and slow, after the
initial increase in the total tumor burden were observed in this study. In case 1, a fast response was preceded by an apparent early
enlargement in liver and para-aortic lymph node metastases. Metastases were stable for several months in case 2 after beginning the
vaccination treatment, except for Virchow’s node, which showed radiographical progression; however, all radiographically measurable
metastases thereafter almost completely regressed. We hypothesize that the immune response elicited during the first several weeks of
vaccination, similarly to ipilimumab,17 may be mistaken for progressive disease: CTL infiltration and immune-mediated inflammation may not
be radiographically distinguishable from a growing tumor. The initial tumor enlargement was suspected to be caused by inflammation.
Meanwhile, bilateral inguinal lymph node metastases grew without reductions within the same patient in case 1. Disease progression may occur
as part of a “mixed response”, i.e., the regression of some lesions and apparent progression of others. The difference in effectiveness may
have been caused by the heterogeneity associated with immune-escape mechanisms, including the downregulation of cancer-specific antigens
and/or HLA class I in tumor cells. The intratumor heterogeneity of GPC3 expression was observed at different levels in our preliminary study
depending on the locations and timing of biopsies. Although no correlation was observed between the degree of GPC3 expression and
GPC3298–306 peptide-specific CTL response, GPC3 expression in bilateral inguinal lymph node metastasis in case 1 may be associated with the
clinical benefits of GPC3 peptide vaccine therapy. On the other hand, we were unable to perform biopsies of retroperitoneal lymph node
metastases in case 2. Therefore, further pathological analysis was limited. Although GPC3 immunohistological expression was negative in part
of the primary ovarian CCC tissue, its expression may be positive in other parts of the tumor. It may be difficult to predict the clinical
response against metastatic tumors based on the strength of GPC3 expression in the primary tumor. In a phase I trial of GPC3-derived peptide
vaccination, while GPC3 immunohistological expression was detected in more than 80% of advanced HCC patients, pretreatment serum GPC3
protein was detectable in only approximately half of those patients. Unlike case 1, the serum GPC3 protein in case 2 was undetectable by
ELISA using a monoclonal antibody (clone 1G12) and sheep polyclonal antibody. Delayed clinical response may have been due to lower
expression of GPC3 than the detection limit of assays using clone 1G12 in metastatic sites. Ex vivo IFN-γ ELISPOT analysis in these two
cases revealed vaccine-induced immune reactivity against the GPC3 peptide (data not shown). Although we were unable to discuss whether there
were any differences in the quantity or quality of the responses between the two cases because the number of PBMCs plated per well did not
correspond, there were more GPC3 peptide-specific CTL spots and less non-specific background spots in case 2 than in case 1. It is difficult
to confirm whether tumor regression was actually induced by peptide-specific CTLs or other mechanisms. As one of several possibilities,
antigen spreading may have occurred following the GPC3 peptide-specific CTL response after the vaccination and contributed decisively to
tumor regression. Although many clinical trials have been conducted with cancer peptide vaccines, none of these have succeeded in Phase 3.
The development of a biomarker to select potential responders would contribute significantly to potential success in a Phase 3 trial. In an
effort to identify such biomarkers, we consider it possible to predict a response based on HLA class I/peptide complex expression on the
cell surface in prevaccine biopsy specimens. Thus, we have attempted to prepare monoclonal antibodies against the HLA-A24/GPC3298-306
peptide complex and HLA-A2/GPC3144-152 peptide complex. Further analyses are needed in the future. These results provide the first clinical
evidence to demonstrate that GPC3 peptide-based immunotherapy is a promising treatment for patients with ovarian CCC. The complexity of the
immune response and impact of each individual patient’s status on the immune system create challenges for predicting the time course of the
response. Ongoing and future trials will yield information on the best clinical use of this vaccine and the most appropriate method for
assessing the response. No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed. human leukocyte antigen University Hospital Medical Information
Network Clinical Trials Registry computed tomography Good Manufacturing Practice Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors partial
response Fluorine-18-fluorodeoxyglucose positron emission tomography interferon-γ peripheral blood mononuclear cell 10.4161/hv.27217
