Pulmonary sequestration is an uncommon disease, accounting for only approximately 1.5% of all congenital pulmonary malformations. In most
cases, the diagnosis is a result of accidental radiological findings; it is rarely accompanied by clinical symptoms, and is more commonly
associated with other congenital malformations. Herein, we reported a case of pulmonary sequestration presented as massive left hemothorax
and associated with primary lung sarcoma. A pneumonectomy via thoracotomy was attended with complete resection of sequestration and of
sarcoma. The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11. Pulmonary sequestration is an
uncommon disease, accounting for only approximately 1.5% of all congenital pulmonary malformations . In most cases, the diagnosis is a
result of accidental radiological findings; it is rarely accompanied by clinical symptoms, and is more commonly associated with other
congenital malformations. In the present case pulmonary sequestration presented as massive left hemothorax was associated with primary lung
sarcoma. A pneumonectomy via thoracotomy was attended with complete resection of sequestration and of sarcoma. A 35 years-old woman was
admitted to local hospital complained of dyspnea, cough and hemoptosis. A Chest X-ray showed the presence of massive left pleural effusion.
Thus, she referred to our unit for the treatment. A chest computed tomography (CT) scan confirmed the presence of pleural effusion
accompanied by an area of consolidation. Pleural puncture undoubtedly revealed hemothorax. A tube thoracostomy yielded hemothorax to the
amount of 1100 ml. The clinical condition of patients was stable and all laboratory values were within normal. A repeated CT scan performed
three days after the procedure, confirmed the presence of area of consolidation in lower left lobe and the presence of an hilar nodule (size
3 mm) not been reported before (Figure 1). Bronchoscopy showed no endoluminal lesion and the pathological results from bronchoalveolar
lavage showed the presence of inflammatory cells in absence of malignant cells . Then a fine needle biopsy CT-guided was attended but the
results was inconclusive for a definitive diagnosis. Arteriography diagnosed the mass located in lower lobe to be a sequestration. Thus, our
strategy was to attend an exploratory thoracotomy. The sequestration was successfully resected with partial resection of the diaphragm. Then
the nodule was biopsied and the intraoperative diagnosis was positive for malignancy, possibly a sarcoma, whereas a conclusive diagnosis on
frozen sections specimen was not possible. The tumor invaded the main trunk of left pulmonary artery, thus contraindicated a bronchoplastic
procedure. A pneumonectomy was attended in a standard manner. A chest drainage was left in the chest, and removed two days after. For
postoperative pain control, a patient controlled analgesia was used for the first two days . Pathologic examinations revealed the
sequestration to be an infarcted extralobar sequestration (ELS). Small elastic arteries were identified within the sequestration. The final
diagnosis of the tumor was primary fibrosarcoma of the lung according to the pathological and immunostaining results as reported in Figures
2. And 3. The postoperative course was unremarkable, and the patient was discharged on postoperative day 11. Histological features of the
primary pulmonary fibrosarcoma showing a momorphous population of small and undifferentiated spindle cells (Haematoxylin Eosin 430X).
Immunohistochemical features of the primary pulmonary fibrosarcoma showing diffuse positivity for Vimentin (APAAP 430X). Pulmonary
sequestration is defined as a mass of nonfunctioning lung tissue that receives blood supply from an anomalous systemic artery and does not
communicate with the normal bronchial tree, being divided into two forms: intralobar sequestration (ILS) and extralobar sequestration (ELS)
Whereas ELS is enclosed within its own pleural membrane, ILS shares the pleural membrane of the normal lung. Considered a congenital
disease, ELS results from an accessory lung bud that, in some cases, maintains the original connection with the intestine, allowing
communication between the sequestration and the gastrointestinal tract. The arterial blood supply to the sequestered lung by aberrant
elastic arteries mostly originates from the thoracic or abdominal aorta in most cases with EPS. These arteries may arise above or below the
diaphragm, and are usually small and variable . The left hemithorax is the most commonly affected (in 65% of cases), and the primary site of
ELS is the region between the lower lung lobe and the diaphragm (in 63%), as in the present case. In more than 60% of all cases of ELS,
other congenital anomalies coexist, the most common of which is diaphragmatic hernia (in 16%). In approximately 25% of the cases, another
pulmonary abnormality, such as pulmonary hypoplasia, cystic adenomatoid malformation or congenital lobar emphysema, is also present . The
treatment for pulmonary sequestration is surgery. In the case of ELS, sequestrectomy should be performed. The identification and control of
the aberrant artery branch, above or below the diaphragm, are essential for preventing hemorrhage. Postoperative results are typically
excellent . Among the previous reports detected by PubMed using key words for symptomatic EPS such as hemothorax, infarction or torsion,
only few cases with symptomatic EPS were cited. The symptoms of these cases were ipsilateral chest pain and respiratory failure with sudden
onset caused by hemothorax and infarction. The location of the EPS was the left costovertebral angle adjacent to the inferior ligament in
all patients. Based on these previous reports and our experience, symptomatic EPS may be related to infarction caused by torsion under
exposure to drastic pleural cavity movement or by infection associated with bacteremia . Conversely, we did not find in literature any paper
in which the concomitant presence of pulmonary sequestration and primary lung sarcoma was described. Primary sarcoma of the lung is a rare
tumor . In general, sarcomas disseminate by the hematogenous route; consequently, metastases are found frequently in the lungs. Therefore,
in any case of pulmonary sarcoma, a total body survey is necessary to exclude a primary tumor elsewhere. That because primary pulmonary
sarcomas must be distinguished from the more frequent occurrence of sarcoma metastatic to the lung, primary pulmonary sarcomatoid carcinoma,
and diffuse malignant mesothelioma involving the lung. Diagnosis of primary pulmonary sarcoma is not easy without thoracotomy. There are no
specific presenting symptoms, and roentgenologic manifestations were not characteristic. It is difficult, if not impossible, to get a
correct diagnosis of a malignant mesenchymal tumor from cytologic examination of a (needle) aspirate. Tumor biopsy is necessary to get a
diagnosis, and tumor tissue was obtained only before thoracotomy in case of endoluminal growth of a tumor. During the operation, the
malignant mesenchymal nature of the tumor may not become clear on macroscopic appearance . It may be helpful to take a biopsy specimen for
histologic examination of a frozen section specimen. Once the diagnose has been established (during operation) radical resection appears to
be the only treatment with good prognosis. Sometimes, the final diagnosis is obtained postoperative after complete resection of the tumor as
in the present case. That because the availability of multiple cytokeratin antibody tests has improved the identification of sarcomatoid
carcinomas and diffuse malignant mesothelioma. The introduction of CD34 has facilitated the recognition of both benign and malignant
intrathoracic, fibrous tumors . Finally, we reported an exceptional case of ELS associated with primary sarcoma of the lung, not been
reported in literature before. Both lesions were successfully removed with a left penumonectomy. In case of hemothorax and the presence of
multiple lesions (as the present case), a surgical exploration via thoracotomy is required in order to remove all lesions and obtain a
definitive diagnosis. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. Funding for publication of the article has come from the:
POMPEANGAS Via S. Sebastiano n. 16, ANGRI (SA) Italia. P.IVA 02600816055. This article has been published as part of BMC Surgery Volume 13
Supplement 2, 2013: Proceedings from the 26th National Congress of the Italian Society of Geriatric Surgery. The full contents of the
supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcsurg/supplements/13/S2
