Although glufosinate ammonium herbicides are considered safe when used properly, ingestion of the undiluted form can cause grave outcomes.
Recently, we treated a 34-yr-old man who ingested glufosinate ammonium herbicide. In the course of treatment, the patient developed apnea,
mental deterioration, and sixth cranial nerve palsy; he has since been discharged with full recovery after intensive care. This case report
describes the clinical features of glufosinate intoxication with a focus on sixth cranial nerve palsy. Our observation suggests that
neurologic manifestations after ingestion of a "low-grade toxicity herbicide" are variable and more complex than that was previously
considered. Glufosinate ammonium is one of the most widely used herbicides, which acts by inhibiting the synthesis of glutamine in plants
(1). Given the differences in biochemical pathways and metabolism between plants and mammals, glufosinate ammonium formulations have been
regarded as minimally toxic to humans and as safe products in agronomy, as long as they are handled according to the manufacturer's
instructions (2). However, ingestion of undiluted glufosinate ammonium herbicide results in grave clinical outcomes (3). In severe cases,
patients either die or suffer severe toxic reactions (3), such as shock, respiratory arrest (apnea), unconsciousness, convulsions (4), and
amnesia (5). To our knowledge, no study has shown sixth cranial nerve palsy as a neurologic manifestation in acute glufosinate ammonium
intoxication. Recently, we encountered a case of sixth cranial nerve palsy in a patient after acute glufosinate ammonium herbicide
intoxication. Here we describe the clinical features of glufosinate intoxication, while focusing on sixth cranial nerve palsy. A 34-yr-old
man ingested 150 mL of glufosinate ammonium herbicide on November 06, 2012. Formulation of the herbicide is as follows: glufosinate
ammonium, 18%; alcohol (C12-14), ethoxylated monoether with sulfuric acid, sodium salts (CAS No. 68909-66-0) as surfactants, 28.5%;
antifoaming agent and coloring agent, 0.5%; and water, 53%. One hour after ingestion, gastric lavage was performed at the primary care
clinic. At 5 hr after ingestion, the patient underwent hemodialysis for 2 hr (Fig. 1). Eight hours after ingestion, the patient complained
of diplopia. Eleven hours after ingestion, the patient exhibited a stuporous mental state and was transferred to the toxicology center in
our hospital. Physical examination showed a blood pressure of 100/70 mmHg and pulse rate of 76 beats/min. Chest radiography and
electrocardiography showed no abnormalities. Initial laboratory findings, including complete blood cell count, liver function test, urea
nitrogen, creatinine, and electrolytes, were within normal limits. About 1 hr after arrival at our emergency room, bronchial secretion
increased and respiration become shallow with hypoxia (arterial oxygen tension , <70 mmHg) and CO2 retention (arterial carbon dioxide
tension >50 mmHg). Tracheal intubation was performed and mechanical ventilation was initiated. According to the protocol for the management
of large amounts of herbicide ingestion, a loading dose of an intravenous lipid emulsion (ILE) was administered, and subsequently, the
patient was maintained on lipid emulsion infusion. On the second day of the hospital stay, the patient exhibited drowsiness. In the
intensive care unit, the patient was treated with hemoperfusion for extracorporeal elimination of toxic ingredients of the herbicide, and
was put on mechanical ventilation for apnea. The patient developed tonic-type convulsions, for which he received lorazepam injection. On the
fifth day of the hospital stay, the patient underwent successful weaning trials and was extubated, after which he complained of double
vision. Ophthalmologic examination showed that he had esotropia (10 prism diopters), and the angle increased while gazing to the right and
left. The Lancaster red-green test (6) showed incomitant uncrossed diplopia at 9 different positions of gaze, and the deviation increased
for both the right and left gaze (Fig. 2). These results suggest that the patient had bilateral sixth cranial nerve palsy. A second test
performed 1 day later showed an improvement in the esodeviation with symptomatic relief. On the seventh hospital day, brain magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) was performed to rule out organic disease. No structural abnormality was found, especially in the intracisternal,
intracavernous, and intraorbital portions through which the sixth cranial nerve passes. In addition, diplopia and nystagmus intensity began
to subside. On the ninth hospital day, diplopia disappeared and the nystagmus intensity decreased further. The patient was discharged on the
eleventh day without any ophthalmologic abnormality or abnormal blood chemistry results. The neurologic manifestations seen in the present
case include mental change from stupor to drowsy, convulsions, respiratory arrest (apnea), memory deficit, and sixth cranial nerve palsy
associated with nystagmus. The patient recovered completely from all manifestations except memory deficit by the eleventh day of hospital
stay. Anatomically, the sixth cranial nerve comprises intracisternal, intracavernous, and intraorbital parts. Because of its long
intracranial course, the sixth cranial nerve could be involved in microangiopathy, cerebral trauma, tumor, inflammation, and thrombosis in
the sinus. Systemic inflammations, such as herpes zoster (7, 8) and infections caused by the Epstein-Barr virus (9), cytomegalovirus (10),
and Mycoplasma pneumoniae (11), and immunization with attenuated live vaccines (12, 13), have been implicated in the development of sixth
cranial nerve palsy. In the present case, the ocular symptom appeared and remitted similar to the other neurological manifestations.
Moreover, no specific abnormality along the pathway of the sixth nerve was observed in the brain MRI. Taken together, these findings
strongly suggest that sixth nerve palsy is one of the neurologic manifestations associated with acute glufosinate ammonium herbicide
intoxication. To our knowledge, this is the first description of sixth cranial nerve palsy caused by glufosinate poisoning. We cannot
explain the precise mechanism of glufosinate ammonium herbicide-induced neuropathy. Although there is no direct evidence in the literature,
many consider the toxic effects of surfactants used in herbicidal formulations as a possible cause (14-16). We have also shown that
surfactants in herbicides are more cytotoxic than the chief ingredient glyphosate (17). Furthermore, the toxic effects of surfactants and
glyphosate are synergistic (18, 19). Thus, we propose that the surfactants (alcohol, ethoxylated mono ether with sulfuric acid, sodium
salts) used in the formulation of glufosinate ammonium herbicide are responsible for the neurologic manifestations, similar to those caused
by the surfactants in glyphosate herbicides. Despite this, the association between vulnerability of the nervous system and the suspected
chemical remains unclear. In the present case, the skeletal muscles, liver, kidney, and heart were intact throughout the observation period.
Further studies are required to confirm this tissue-specific toxicity of the surfactant in glufosinate ammonium herbicide. In this case, the
patient was treated with ILE. Originally developed as a parenteral nutrition support agent, ILE has received attention as a novel antidote
for systemic toxicity caused by numerous drugs and toxic materials that are highly lipid-soluble, such as local anesthetics, calcium channel
blockers, beta-adrenergic blockers, anti-arrhythmics, and herbicides (20). The underlying mechanisms ascribed to ILE include drug
sequestration ("lipid sink") and suppression of mitochondrial permeability transition, a key step in apoptosis (20). Since most commercial
herbicide products are manufactured in combination with a surfactant that has a lipophilic nature, ILE treatment could be an effective
therapeutic modality in patients with acute herbicide intoxication (20). The recommended protocol for its use is an initial bolus of 20% ILE
(1.5 mL/kg of lean body mass) followed by a maintenance infusion of 0.25-0.5 mL/kg/min (20). In conclusion, clinicians should give attention
to apnea, mental deterioration, and neurologic manifestations in patients with acute intoxication of surfactant-containing glufosinate
ammonium herbicide. This work was carried out with the support of "the Cooperative Research Program for Agriculture Science & Technology
Development (Project No. PJ008246)", Rural Development Administration, Republic of Korea. The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interest. Summary of the clinical course of the patient and treatment. Sequential measurement of Lancaster red-green test on 6th (A), 7th
(B), and 11th (C) day. Note the incomitant uncrossed diplopia at 9 different positions of gaze and the increased deviation at the right and
left gaze suggesting sixth cranial nerve palsy; improvement was observed during subsequent follow-up examinations.
