Fibrosarcoma (FS) accounts for about 3% of all soft tissue sarcomas. It may arise in any area of the body, but it is relative rare in the
head and neck district. Fine-needle cytology (FNC) is widely used in the diagnosis of neoplastic and non-neoplastic lesions of soft tissue.
This article describes a case of FS of the neck diagnosed by FNC. FNC was performed in a sub-fascial supraclavicular mass of an elderly
patient under ultrasound (US) control. FNC was used to prepare cytological smears that were conventionally and immunocytochemically (ICC)
stained. Smears showed a monomorphous spindle cell population and were positive at ICC for Vimentin and negative for CKAE1AE3, Actin, S-100,
CD68, CT and PAX-8. The cytological diagnosis was confirmed by histological diagnosis. The patient underwent surgical resection and
subsequent radiotherapy. FNC diagnosis of FS is reliable and accurate and may be conveniently used in the scheduling of surgical procedures,
when needed, avoiding the treatment of benign nodules. Old age is characterized by increased incidence of degenerative and neoplastic
diseases. Oxidative stress mechanisms, occurring in response to chemicals, pollutants, and high-caloric diet have been implicated . The
World Health Organization (2002) defined fibrosarcoma (FS) as a malignant tumor, composed of fibroblasts with variable collagen and, in
classical cases, a herringbone architecture . Conventional FS accounts for only 1 to 3% of sarcomas arising from soft tissues and falls into
two main groups, the adult and infantile types, both very uncommon. Adult FS usually appears in the fourth to sixth decades of life as a
painful, deep-seated mass. The extremities (mainly thighs and forearms) and the trunk are the most favored sites with a male predominance .
These malignancies do not require an extensive vasculature to grow and spread towards distant organs, so that it is unlikely that FS
patients display the elevation in the frequency of endothelial progenitor cells that has been reported in highly angiogenic tumors . A
preoperative pathological diagnosis of soft tissue tumors is very important to assess the therapeutic strategy, especially when FS is
located in the head and neck, posing a great diagnostic and therapeutic challenge . The clinical appearance of thyroid cancer is that of a
nodules, some time representing a challenging diagnostic dilemma with thyroid or unusual extrathyroidal masses . Fine-needle cytology (FNC)
has an established role in the diagnosis of various neoplastic and non-neoplastic lesions in different anatomical districts and can be used
as an useful alternative to excisional biopsy in the diagnosis of soft tissue tumors . FNC is widely used in the diagnosis of thyroid
nodules , lymph nodes , and salivary glands . Moreover, the application of molecular techniques to FNC has dramatically increased its
sensitivity and accuracy . Since the head and neck region is characterized by a significant heterogeneity and a variety of organs and
pathologies, FNC can provide specific information to define the organ or tissue involved, the specific pathologies and being also useful to
the differential diagnosis . The aim of this study is to present one case of conventional FS in an elderly patient in which FNC pre-surgical
diagnosis contributed to a correct and differentiated treatment. A 73-year-old man came to our attention at the outpatient clinic of
Cytopathology, Azienda Ospedaliera Universitaria, University of Napoli "Federico II", with a swelling in the right supraclavicular region,
which was first noticed two months earlier and doubled in size in a few months. The patient reported a history of long-standing multinodular
goiter, but the last ultrasound examination, performed two years before, did not show the mass. At the physical examination, the mass was
painful and hard at the touch, with ill-defined edges. Computed tomography (CT) showed a 45 mm sub-fascial mass with indistinct borders,
compressing the neurovascular bundle from the right lobe of the thyroid. The US-guided FNC of the mass and on-site evaluation (ROSE) was
performed by a cytopathologist ; the diagnostic procedure and its related risks were explained to the patient and an informed consent was
obtained. The technical procedure has been previously reported . Three passes were performed: smears obtained from the first pass were used
to prepare standard cytological smears, which were alcohol-fixed and Papanicolaou stained, and air dried and Diff-Quik stained respectively.
Being this latter satisfactory for cellularity at ROSE, two additional passes were used to prepare alcohol-fixed smears for
immunocytochemistry (ICC) using a Ventana Benchmark (Ventana Tuxon, AZ). Prediluted monoclonal antibodies used for ICC were the following:
Cytokeratin (AE1AE3), Vimentin (VIM), Actin, S-100, CD68, Calcitonin (CT) and PAX-8. Technical procedures have been previously reported . US
evaluation of the neck at the time of the FNC showed an homogeneous hypoechoic mass with ill-defined edges that showed a close relationship
with the right thyroid lobe. The smears were very cellular and consisted of a relatively monomorphic cell population scattered or aggregated
in loose cellular groups (Figure 1). The cells were spindle-shaped and showed hyperchromatic, fusiform, and tapering nuclei with scanty,
elongated and poorly delimited cytoplasm (Figure 2). These cells showed minimal pleomorphism and an inconspicuous mitotic index. ICC showed
positivity for VIM (Figure 3) and negativity for CKAE1AE3, Actin, S-100, TG, CT and PAX-8. On the basis of the clinical and instrumental
presentation and the cytological features, a differential diagnosis with other spindle cell lesions of the neck was pointed out. Namely, the
differential diagnosis included mesenchymal neoplasms and pseudotumors such as nodular fasciitis , possible primary thyroid tumors such as
the anaplastic carcinoma or medullary carcinoma , as well as other lesions located in the neck with a spindle cellular component, such as
the ectopic thymoma . On the basis of morphological and phenotypic features, a diagnosis of differentiated, mesenchymal spindle cell tumors,
possibly a FS, was formulated. On the basis of the cytological diagnosis, the mass was excised without removing the thyroid and other
anatomical structures. The histological examination confirmed the FNC diagnosis of conventional FS. The patient underwent radiotherapy and,
after one year, is alive without signs of disease. Aspiration smear shows monomorphic cell population scattered or aggregated in loose
cellular groups (Papanicolaou stain 106X). Spindle-shaped cells with hyperchromatic, fusiform, tapering nuclei and elongated, pale, poorly
delimited cytoplasm (Papanicolaou stain 430X). Spindle cells positive for Vimentin (Immunostain 430X). Adult FS is essentially a diagnosis
of exclusion from other spindle cell mesenchymal tumors; by definition, it is negative at the immunocytochemistry (IHH) stains for
epithelial, myogenous and neural markers, as well as for CD34, CD99, bcl-2 and nuclear beta-catenin . There is no reported hint of the
remodeling of its Ca2+ signaling machinery, which has conversely been described in other types of solid tumors . The incidence of
conventional FS is greatly diminished with comparison to the past, probably due to the use of IHH that allowed a reclassification of soft
tissue tumors with a FS-like morphology, and identified specific variants of FS (Low-grade Fibromyxoid Sarcoma and Sclerosing Epithelioid
FS) or FS areas in other pathological entities (Dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans) . With reference to soft tissue lesions, head and neck
sarcomas are rare and heterogeneous . FS has also been reported in the head and neck areas and, as in other districts, it has to be
differentiated form other benign, locally aggressive and malignant spindle cell tumors. Moreover, in this specific district, FS has to be
differentiated from spindle cell tumors of different histogenesis including some thyroidal, salivary glands and lymph-nodes tumors . Today,
the treatment of head and neck soft tissue sarcomas is multidisciplinary, and the surgical approach with an accurate evaluation of the
surgical extension remains the main therapeutic procedure , thus a pre-operative diagnosis should be obtained before any treatment . FNC
smears, coupled with ancillary techniques, is a recognized technique for the diagnosis of benign and malignant lesions of the soft tissues .
Indeed, the material aspirated through FNC can be used not only for the morphological assessment, but also for ancillary techniques which
include ICC, as well as flow cytometry, hybridization techniques, and molecular biology techniques . Nonetheless, the diagnosis of soft
tissue tumors on cytological samples is complex and extreme caution is required in the exact classification of spindle-cell tumors by FNC,
as this may have a major impact on patient management . Despite the variety of possible mesenchymal and non mesenchymal lesions with a
spindle cell cytological pattern, conventional smears allow the evaluation of relative few parameters such as cellularity, cell features,
patterns and background; therefore, conventional techniques have to be coupled with ICC, and require a precise clinical history and accurate
imaging. In this case, the differential diagnosis includes a broad spectrum of spindle cells lesions and US and CT could not exclude a
possible thyroidal origin of the mass. Therefore, among thyroidal neoplasms, the anaplastic thyroid carcinoma and the spindle cell variant
of medullary carcinoma were considered . The first was excluded because of the minimal nuclear atypia, the lack of necrotic and neutrophilic
inflammatory components in the smears and the negativity for PAX-8 at the ICC . The negativity for calcitonin at ICC, and not in the serum,
ruled out a medullary carcinoma . E1 type ectopic thymoma, an epithelial spindle cell tumor located in the deeper tissues of the neck, was
also considered in the differential diagnosis . This possibility was also excluded because of the negativity for epithelial antigens
(AE1/AE3) at ICC. Finally, other mesenchymal neoplasms that can arise in the neck, such as the Malignant fibrous histiocytoma (MFH) or the
schwannoma, were excluded on the basis of the cytological and ICC characteristics . Namely, MFH is characterized by an evident nuclear
pleomorphism which was not detected in this case. Schwannoma generally shows a fibrilar matrix with spindle cells and nuclear palisading,
which were not observed . With reference to the phenotype, the cellular population showed a clear positivity for Vimentin only, being S100
and CD68 negative, which excluded the schwannoma and the MFH, respectively . In conclusion, FNC, combined with clinical and imaging data, is
a useful procedure for a timely cytological diagnosis of soft tissue tumors, including FS. FNC, together with an adequate ICC, is a feasible
and accurate tool, allowing a proper pre-surgery management. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. IC: conception and
design, interpretation of data, given final approval of the version to be published; AC, MV, VDS, CC, AG, MPC: acquisition of data, drafting
the manuscript, given final approval of the version to be published; IC, MV: critical revision, given final approval of the version to be
published. IC = Assistant of Pathology at University of Naples "Federico II" AC = Assistant of Pathology at University of Salerno VDC =
Aggregate Professor of Thoracic Surgery at University of Salerno MC = Aggregate Professor of Anatomy, University of Naples "Federico II" CC
= Aggregate Professor of Oncology, University of Naples "Federico II" AG = Aggregate Professor of Pediatric Surgery at University of Salerno
MV = Associate Professor of Endocrinology at University of Salerno Funding of this supplement came from personal funds. This article has
been published as part of BMC Surgery Volume 13 Supplement 2, 2013: Proceedings from the 26th National Congress of the Italian Society of
Geriatric Surgery. The full contents of the supplement are available online at http://www.biomedcentral.com/bmcsurg/supplements/13/S2
