Tacrolimus is an immunosuppressive drug used to prevent acute rejection following organ transplantation and to treat autoimmune disease.
Tacrolimus is usually prescribed in such situation at a dose of 3.0 mg/day. Pneumocystis pneumonia induced by this dose of tacrolimus has
been reported in many cases; however, we encountered a rare case of Pneumocystis pneumonia induced by low-dose tacrolimus and
methylprednisolone. We herein report the case of an 82-year-old Asian Japanese female with rheumatoid arthritis and Pneumocystis pneumonia
who was being treated with low-dose tacrolimus and low-dose methylprednisolone therapy. She was diagnosed with rheumatoid arthritis at
52 years of age and was administered oral low-dose methylprednisolone and salazosulfapyridine. Her condition had been stable under this
treatment for 30 years. However, her arthralgia worsened three months before admission. The salazosulfapyridine was changed to tacrolimus
(0.5 mg/day) by her physician, and her arthralgia almost completely disappeared. She was admitted to our hospital for Pseudomonas pneumonia,
and her symptoms improved almost completely with intravenous ceftazidime therapy. However, on the 14th day of admission, she developed acute
respiratory failure due to Pneumocystis pneumonia and died on the 17th day of admission in spite of adequate treatment. Our report
highlights the importance of providing prompt prevention, diagnosis and treatment of Pneumocystis pneumonia in rheumatoid arthritis patients
under tacrolimus and low-dose methylprednisolone therapy. Tacrolimus is an immunosuppressive drug often administered to prevent acute
rejection following organ transplantation and to treat autoimmune diseases (e.g., rheumatoid arthritis (RA), polymyositis/dermatomyositis
and ulcerative colitis (UC)) and atopic dermatitis. Tacrolimus is usually administered at a dose of 3.0 mg/day for these diseases. This dose
of tacrolimus can potentially generate an immunocompromised status, leading to opportunistic infections (e.g., fungal infection,
Pneumocystis pneumonia (PCP) and cytomegalovirus infection). Our case of PCP was induced by low-dose tacrolimus (0.5 mg/day) and low-dose
methylprednisolone (mPSL; 4.0 mg/day) administered in a RA patient. We herein report the first case of PCP caused by low-dose tacrolimus. An
82-year-old Asian Japanese female presented to our hospital with shortness of breath and was admitted for pneumonia. She had felt ill and
had a cough for one week before admission. Her dyspnea had worsened and her cough had progressed with the development of hemosputum three
days prior to presentation. Her past medical history was significant for RA and five prior admissions for pneumonia and bronchiectasis. She
had been diagnosed with RA at 52 years of age and had been administered oral low-dose mPSL and salazosulfapyridine. Her general condition
had been stable under this same treatment for 30 years; however, her arthralgia worsened three months before admission. The
salazosulfapyridine was changed to low-dose tacrolimus (0.5 mg/day) by her physician, and her arthralgia almost completely disappeared. Her
initial vital signs were as follows: body temperature, 38.0°C; blood pressure, 132/74 mmHg; heart rate 96 beats/minute; respiratory rate, 22
breaths/minute; and oxygen saturation (SpO2) on room air, 82%. A physical examination revealed stridor and bilateral basal expiratory
wheezes. The laboratory test values were as follows: white blood cells, 8,400/μL with a left shift; lymphocytes, 740/μL; serum lactate
dehydrogenase (LDH), 337 IU/L (normal, 130–220 IU/L); and serum C-reactive protein (CRP), 17.58 mg/dL (normal, < 0.3 mg/dL). A chest X-ray
film (Figure 1) showed consolidation in the left middle lung field. A sputum Gram stain revealed many Gram-negative organisms, and the
sputum culture grew Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Treatment with intravenous ceftazidime (2.0 g/day for nine days) was initiated, and the
patient’s symptoms improved almost completely. On the ninth day of admission, the CRP level decreased from 17.58 to 4.00 mg/dL. On the 14th
day of admission, the patient presented with severe dyspnea, and a physical examination was remarkable for an SpO2 of 82% on room air. The
arterial blood gas values obtained on 5 L/min of oxygen delivered via nasal cannula were as follows: pH: 7.51, PaO2: 52 torr, PaCO2: 46 torr
and bicarbonate: 27 mg/dL. A chest X-ray film (Figure 2) showed areas of ground-glass opacity (GGO) bilaterally in almost all lung fields. A
chest computed tomography (CT) scan (Figure 3A,B) revealed areas of nonsegmental GGO and subpleural curvilinear shadows with predominance in
the upper lobes in both lungs. The laboratory test values on the 14th day of admission were as follows: white blood cells, 5270/μL with a
left shift; lymphocytes, 210/μL; serum LDH, 315 IU/L; serum CRP, 25.8 mg/dL; Krebs von den Lungen-6 (KL-6) level, 457 IU/L (normal, <
500 IU/L); surfactant protein-D (SP-D), 358 ng/mL (normal, < 110 ng/mL); plasma (1 → 3) beta-D-glucan level, 716 pg/dL (normal, < 11 pg/mL),
which was high compared with the data obtained before this admission (17 pg/mL). Assays for latex-agglutination-Candida antigens and
Aspergillus galactomannan antigens in the serum were both negative. The sputum, urine and blood cultures grew no organisms. The patient’s
sputum was positive for Pneumocystis jirovecii according to polymerase chain reaction (PCR). She was immediately treated with
sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim (ST) at a dose of 10 mg/kg per day and high-dose mPSL (1 g/day for 3 days) with empirical antibiotic therapy
(ciprofloxacin). However, her respiratory status rapidly deteriorated and she died on the 16th day of admission. Chest X-ray obtained on
admission showed consolidation in the left middle and lower lung fields. Chest X-ray obtained after the diagnosis of pneumocystis pneumonia
showed areas of ground-glass opacity bilaterally in almost all lung fields. A chest computed tomography scan obtained after the diagnosis of
pneumocystis pneumonia (upper lung field: 3A, lower lung field: 3B) showed areas of nonsegmental ground-glass opacity and subpleural
curvilinear shadows bilaterally in all lobes. To our knowledge, this is the first case report of PCP induced by low-dose tacrolimus and
steroid therapy for RA. Tacrolimus is an immunosuppressive drug that was discovered in Japan. Tacrolimus prevents the dephosphorylation of
calcineurin and suppresses the production of inflammatory cytokines (i.e., interleukin (IL)-2, IL-3, IL-4, interferon-gamma and tumor
necrosis factor (TNF)-alpha from T-cells). It is used to prevent acute rejection following organ transplantation and to treat autoimmune
disease. In Japan, approximately 12,000 patients with RA have been treated with tacrolimus since 2005. The efficacy of tacrolimus has been
demonstrated by many researchers, and the potential toxicity of this drug has also been reported. The major side effects of tacrolimus
include renal dysfunction, interstitial pneumonia, dyspnea, infectious diseases, hyperglycemia, skin rashes and gastric dysfunction (e.g.,
nausea and abdominal pain). Regarding RA patients with interstitial pneumonitis, tacrolimus has been reported to be associated with either
improvement or acute exacerbation of interstitial pneumonia. Ando, et al. reported a case of progressive interstitial pneumonia associated
with amyopathic dermatomyositis refractory to cyclosporine that was successfully treated with tacrolimus . Miwa, et al. reported a case of
tacrolimus-induced lung injury in an RA patient with interstitial pneumonia . In addition, Koike, et al. reported 27 cases of tacrolimus-
induced lung injury . However, to the best of our knowledge, even among these cases, there has so far been no report of lung injury caused
by PCP related to low-dose tacrolimus therapy, while there have only been a few reports of PCP in RA patients under tacrolimus and low-dose
mPSL therapy. With diseases other than RA, PCP during tacrolimus therapy has been reported in a patient after transplantation, and also two
patients with UC . In the setting of organ transplantation, the incidence of PCP is 4.8 cases per 1,000 person-transplant years . No
significant risk of PCP was reported in patients under tacrolimus therapy. However, combined treatment with tacrolimus and sirolimus carries
a significantly higher risk of PCP than other types of combination therapy. Among the UC cases, one patient was medicated with high-dose
tacrolimus (0.5 mg/kg/day) and mPSL, while the other was treated with tacrolimus (applied dose: not described) and 6-mercaptopurine. Both
patients died from acute respiratory failure. Patients with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and autoimmune disease under the
administration of high-dose steroids and immunosuppressants are likely to develop PCP. The administration of methotrexate or TNF-alpha
inhibitors for autoimmune disease is associated with a higher risk of PCP than other treatments. In normal situations, the dose of
tacrolimus is 3.0 mg/day; however, our patient was treated with low-dose tacrolimus and mPSL. To the best of our knowledge, there are no
previous reports describing PCP induced by such a low dose of tacrolimus in the literature. We diagnosed the patient with PCP due to the
high level of beta-D-glucan and positive findings for Pneumocystis jirovecii in the sputum on PCR testing. Tasaka, et al. suggested that a
diagnosis of PCP should be made based on a beta-D-glucan level above 31.1 mg/dL and positive findings for Pneumocystis jirovecii in
bronchial alveolar lavage fluid (BALF) on PCR testing . However, we were unable to perform bronchoscopy in our case due to the patient’s
severe acute progression of respiratory failure. Therefore, we substituted findings of Pneumocystis jirovecii in the sputum on PCR testing
for those in BALF. Tokuda, et al. reported that RA-related PCP exhibits both diffuse homogenous GGO with sharp demarcation in the
interlobular septa and homogenous or inhomogeneous GGO with sharp demarcation in the intralobular septa on chest CT . The chest CT findings
observed in our case revealed non-homogenous GGO without interlobular septal boundaries in accordance with RA-related PCP. We administered
steroid pulse therapy with ST because the rapid progression of respiratory failure did not allow us to sufficiently examine and
differentiate the etiology of the disease in this case. Our patient was diagnosed with and treated for Pseudomonas pneumonia before diagnose
of PCP was made. John, et al. reported that blood CD4+ lymphocyte counts in PCP patients with HIV were lower than 200/μL . Enomoto, et al.
reported that average lymphocyte counts in 17 RA patients complicated with PCP were 890/μL at the time of PCP diagnosis . In our case, blood
lymphocyte count was 1700/μL at the time of diagnosis of Pseudomonas pneumonia, however, that was 210/μL at the time of PCP diagnosis. The
decreased lymphocyte count was considered to be due to the Pseudomonas pneumonia. Therefore, it was considered that some of the changes that
occur in the immune response due to the effects of Pseudomonas pneumonia have the potential to trigger PCP. RA-related PCP has a higher
mortality rate than HIV-related PCP . It is assumed that providing diagnosis and treatment in the early stage of development of PCP achieves
prognostic improvements in RA patients. Our patient rapidly developed respiratory failure following diagnosis and treatment. In conclusion,
we herein reported the first case of PCP induced by low-dose tacrolimus and steroid treatment for RA. Clinicians should be careful to watch
for the development of PCP following the administration of tacrolimus even in small doses in elderly patients and patients with a history of
lung disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s next-of-kin for publication of this case report and any accompanying
images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. RA: Rheumatoid arthritis; mPSL:
Methylprednisolone; PCP: Pneumocystis pneumonia; SpO2: Oxygen saturation; LDH: Lactate dehydrogenase; CRP: C-reactive protein; CT: Computed
tomography; GGO: Ground-glass opacity; KL-6: Krebs von den Lungen-6; SP-D: Surfactant protein-D; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; ST:
Sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim; IL: Interleukin; TNF: Tumor necrosis factor; UC: Ulcerative colitis; HIV: Human immunodeficiency virus; BALF:
Bronchial alveolar lavage fluid. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MK and KT reviewed the clinical data and were
major contributors in writing the manuscript. YF, KS, HI, and KT were involved with patient management. HT performed the radiological
examination of the chest x-ray and CT. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
