Esophageal duplication cyst (EDC) is a congenital malformation of the posterior primitive foregut, which mainly occurs in the thoracic
esophagus. Here, we describe a 3-year-old Han Chinese boy afflicted with intermittent fever of acute onset and dry cough. Thoracic computed
tomography revealed an 10 cm × 5.4 cm × 5.8 cm oval-shaped, cyst-like tumor located in the extrapleural space, extending along the right
paravertebral gutter and compressing the trachea forward. An additional small-sized, oval-shaped cyst was identified in the posterior
mediastinum, between the esophagus and the spinal column, at the T1 level. During open thoracotomy, under general anesthesia, an opaque,
thick-walled, esophageal cyst was revealed not to be in communication with the esophageal lumen or the trachea. This cyst was subsequently
resected in an en bloc manner. The small (1-cm) esophageal cyst was left untreated based on a “wait-and-see” policy. Histological analysis
showed that the resected cyst was walled by hyperplastic, fibrous tissues and locally lined with gastric mucosa inherent glands. This
finding was consistent with a diagnosis of EDC, with ectopic gastric mucosa. The respiratory tract symptoms resolved immediately after the
operation. Computed tomography obtained at the 6-month follow-up showed that no disease, residual or recurrence, was present after the
resection of the large-sized cyst, and the small-sized cyst remained unchanged in size. Gastrointestinal (GI) tract duplication, or GI
duplication cyst, is a rare congenital malformation of the GI tract. The etiology of GI tract duplication is not fully understood; however,
an initial developmental abnormality during the gastrulation stage is thought to be the most likely cause . Based on autopsy reports, it is
estimated that GI tract duplication affects 1 in every 4,500 individuals. It predominantly occurs during childhood , exhibiting a highly
variable clinical presentation, depending on its location and size. Exploratory imaging studies may help identify the duplication cyst in
some cases; however, these cannot differentiate its pathology from Meckel diverticulum or other GI cyst-like diseases . Therefore,
definitively diagnosing GI tract duplication remains a challenge to clinicians. GI tract duplication mainly occurs in the ileum of the small
intestine, which accounts for over 40% of cases . Esophageal duplication cysts (EDCs) are much rarer, comprising 4% of all cases and 10-15%
of all foregut duplication cysts . EDC was initially characterized by Blasius in 1711 and was previously categorized as a type of esophageal
cyst, due to the duplication of the submucosal and muscular portions of the esophagus. EDC may communicate with the native lumen of the
esophagus. EDC is also the second most common benign posterior mediastinal lesion in children, following bronchogenic cyst. The incidence
rate of EDC is 1 in 8,200, with a two-fold male prevalence over women . While EDC may occur in the cervical and abdominal segments of the
esophagus, it mainly occurs in the thoracic segment . The pathogenic mechanisms of EDC are unknown; however, it is thought to be associated
with abnormal esophageal development occurring in the fifth to eighth week of gestation, when the posterior primitive foregut coalesces to
form a single esophageal lumen. EDC is relatively common in children presenting with mediastinal masses, accounting for 30% of all pediatric
posterior mediastinal masses . Esophageal duplication cysts may contain ectopic gastric mucosa and pancreatic components . Ectopic GI mucosa
of the esophagus is thought to result from the reduced replacement of simple column epithelium by stratified squamous epithelium during
esophageal embryogenesis. This condition is usually incidentally detected by endoscopy or biopsy and manifests at the gastric mucosal inlet.
Ectopic GI mucosa can complicate the symptoms of GI tract duplication, especially those involving the ileum, by mimicking Meckel
diverticulum . Patients may display symptoms of gastrointestinal bleeding, obstruction, diverticulitis, and umbilical abnormalities.
However, few studies in the literature have addressed EDC with ectopic gastric mucosa. In this case study, we described a boy afflicted with
intermittent fever of acute onset and dry cough, and diagnosed as having double EDCs containing ectopic gastric mucosa. The larger cyst was
resected via thoracotomy, whereas the smaller cyst was left untreated, based on a “wait-and-see” policy. A previously healthy 3-year-old Han
Chinese boy, who presented with intermittent fever of acute onset and dry cough, but without dysphagia, was referred to our Department of
Pediatric Respiratory Medicine. He showed no clinically significant abnormalities on physical examination, except for feebleness and pyrexia
(39.0°C). Chest radiography and computed tomography (CT) scans at the initial visit revealed a mediastinal tumor with complicating
pneumonia. He was subsequently referred to our pediatric thoracic surgery service. Three-dimensional CT reconstruction demonstrated that two
oval-shaped cystic masses were located in the posterior mediastinum, which displayed well-defined margins and were fluid-filled, yet free of
any air-fluid levels. The larger cyst was 10 cm × 5.4 cm × 5.8 cm in size. It was attached to the middle and lower portions of the esophagus
in the extrapleural space and extended along the right paravertebral gutter. The cyst compressed the forelying trachea, the right main
bronchus, and the right inferior lobe anteriorly (Figure 1A, B). The smaller cyst was located between the posterior wall of the lower
cervical esophagus, and the spinal column (level T1), at a size of 1.0 cm × 0.8 cm (Figure 1C). Bilateral bronchopneumonia was evident on
chest radiography and CT scan, however, no lymph node enlargements were observed. Contrast-enhanced CT did not reveal any obvious
enhancement of either cyst. Diatrizoate meglumine and diatrizoate sodium esophagography excluded the possibility of esophageal stenosis,
atresia, or tracheoesophageal fistula (Figure 2). Therefore, the patient was diagnosed with esophageal cyst with complicating
bronchopneumonia. Computed tomography scan of esophageal duplication cysts. (A) Transverse and (B) sagittal views of the large-sized cyst;
and (C) transverse view of the small-sized cyst (white arrow). Esophagography excluded the possibility of esophageal stenosis, atresia, or
tracheoesophageal fistula. Because the cysts were symptomatic and one of them was oversized, elective open thoracotomy was undertaken. A
double-lumen endotracheal tube was used to deflate the right lung, and a right-sided thoracotomy was made along the sixth intercostal space.
A 10 cm × 5.4 cm × 5.8 cm cyst originating from the right lateral wall of the esophagus at the level of the carina was identified
(Figure 3). The cyst wall was approximately 0.3 cm in thickness and moderately adherent to the membranous part of the right main bronchus
and the dorsal segment of the right lower lobe; however, it was not in communication with the esophageal lumen or the bronchopulmonary tree.
The cyst was punctured and deflated using an 18-gauge needle. Roughly 200 ml of brownish, viscous fluid, suggestive of intracystic
hemorrhage, was drained away. The thoracic duct, esophageal mucosa, and vagus nerve were all well-preserved, and the cyst was mobilized and
removed in an en bloc manner. The small esophageal cyst was left untreated based on a “wait-and-see” policy. This cyst was located at the
thoracic entrance (the junction between the cervical portion and the thoracic portion of the esophagus) and was not easily accessible
through the sixth intercostal space incision. Intraoperative findings of the large-sized esophageal duplication cyst. (A) A cystic mass was
located in the right-sided posterior mediastinum; and (B) gross pathology of the resection specimen containing brownish cystic fluid. Gross
pathology of the resected specimen showed a grayish cystic mass, with a 0.3-cm-thick wall, lined with brownish, rough epithelial-like
tissue. Histological analysis of the resected esophageal cyst revealed that the cyst wall was composed of hyperplastic fibers and lined with
stratified squamous epithelium, containing gastric mucosal simple columnar epithelium (Figure 4). The disease was then histologically
diagnosed as EDC with ectopic gastric mucosa. Pathology of the resected large-sized esophageal duplication cyst. Histology revealed
esophageal duplication cyst with ectopic gastric mucosa (hematoxylin-eosin, 400×). The respiratory tract symptoms resolved immediately after
operation. The patient underwent an uneventful recovery. A chest CT scan revealed no residue of the resected cyst on postoperative day (POD)
5. The patient was discharged from hospital on POD 7, and treatment was continued at the outpatient clinic. At the follow-up visit at
6 months, the patient appeared asymptomatic and generally in good health. A follow-up chest CT scan showed that no disease, residual or
recurrent, was present after the resection of the large-sized cyst, and the small-sized cyst remained unchanged in dimension (Figure 5).
Follow-up chest computed tomography scan. No disease, residual or recurrent, was found for the resected large-sized cyst (A) and no growth
of the small-sized cyst was observed (B) (white arrow). EDC is the second most common GI duplication cyst, after ileal duplication cyst.
Nevertheless, fewer than 100 cases of EDC are currently documented. EDC usually occurs in isolation; however, two cases of multiple (two)
EDCs have been reported . The present patient appears to be the third case of multiple EDCs ever to be reported. Most EDCs do not present
with debilitating symptoms. Affected children may complain of nonspecific esophagus-related or respiratory tract symptoms, depending on the
size and the presence or absence of complicating hemorrhage, infection, rupture, or respiratory tract involvement . EDCs may be asymptomatic
and incidentally found thoracotomy for other surgical conditions. Our patient exhibited obstructive pneumonia-associated symptoms caused by
the large-sized EDC compression on the tracheobronchial tree, which were not different from those caused by common pediatric mediastinal
tumors. Radiographic manifestations of EDC are generally nonspecific and similar to those of other common mediastinal non-neoplastic or
neoplastic diseases. Non-contrast and contrast-enhanced CT scan can demonstrate esophageal cysts and the neighboring esophagus and
tracheobronchial tree . If the CT scan produces an equivocal result, a magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan and transesophageal endoscopic
ultrasonography (EUS) can be used for the preoperative assessment and prenatal diagnosis of EDC . A T1-weighted MRI scan can accurately
visualize an esophageal cyst, even in the presence of complicating bleeding and infection . EUS is considered to be an effective adjuvant to
the radiographic and MR evaluation of EDC, and often shows EDCs as anechoic or hypoechoic cysts . EUS-guided fine needle aspiration biopsy
can offer a pathology-based diagnosis, differentiating EDC from other mediastinal tumors . EDCs may occur concomitantly with esophageal
stenosis/atresia , tracheoesophageal fistula , and other tracheoesophageal/pulmonary malformations . Preoperative esophagography and EUS can
help exclude coexisting malformations and outline the operative plan. In our patient, chest radiography and CT scan clearly revealed the two
EDCs and tracheal involvement, whereas esophagography excluded the possibility of concomitant tracheobronchial malformations. Histology
offers the best diagnostic tool of EDC. The pathological criteria of EDC are as follows : the cyst is attached to the esophageal wall, is
communicating with the epithelia originating from the GI tract, and is underlain by two layers of muscularis propria. EDC can be lined by
pseudostratified columnar epithelium, gastric mucosal epithelium, and squamous epithelium. The cyst wall may also contain cartilaginous
tissue. Ectopic GI mucosa can occur independently of or concurrently with EDC, in the upper and/or middle parts of the esophagus. Presence
of gastric mucosa in the lower part of the esophagus is more commonly known as Barrett esophagus . These ectopic gastric mucosae normally
manifest as small patches of columnar epithelium containing gastric glands, which vary in size from millimeters to centimeters on endoscopy
and are detectable by technetium-99 m pertechnetate scan . Only one case of EDC with ectopic gastric mucosa in an infant presenting with
hemoptysis has been reported ; respiratory tract bleeding in this patient may have resulted from the corrosive effect of gastric acid
secreted by the ectopic gastric mucosa. Ectopic pancreatic tissue was also reported to occur concurrently with EDC . Similar to native
gastric mucosa, ectopic counterparts are still subject to the risk of malignant transformation . Surgical excision is the mainstay treatment
for symptomatic EDC. This procedure can be performed via thoracotomy or thoracoscopy for removing thoracic EDC. Complete removal of EDC is
required to minimize the risk of disease recurrence. Thoracoscopic resection is believed to be as effective as the conventional open
procedure, and offers additional minimal invasiveness and expedited postoperative recovery . In our patient, the cyst was relatively large
(~10 cm) and there was a complicating infection; therefore, thoracotomy rather than thoracoscopy was used to resect the large-sized EDC.
Complete or partial endoscopic resection after EUS has also been reported to be an effective and safe treatment for small-sized,
pedunculated, and superficially layered EDCs. The small-sized, asymptomatic EDC in our patient was left untreated, based on a “wait-and-see”
policy for the treatment of small-sized benign GI cysts that cannot be accessed though a single thoracic incision. A previous study showed
that an EDC associated with mild upper GI symptoms remained unchanged on EUS for over 13 years . If necessary, small-sized EDC can be
ablated using endoscopic or percutaneous anhydrous ethanol injection . EDC is an uncommon differential diagnosis in children presenting with
posterior-mediastinal cystic masses. The use of a combination of multiple medical imaging techniques, such as esophagography, CT scan, MRI,
and EUS, can help characterize EDC in relation to its neighboring anatomy and exclude possible concomitant tracheoesophageal malformations.
Ectopic gastric mucosa can be retrospectively detected in EDC resection specimens. Large-sized and/or symptomatic EDCs should be surgically
treated, while small-sized and/or asymptomatic EDCs should be closely followed up, especially if the cyst is located in proximity to the
superior thoracic aperture or tracheal carina. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s guardian for the publication of this
case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available from the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CT: Computed
tomography; EDC: Esophageal duplication cyst; EUS: Endoscopic ultrasonography; GI: Gastrointestinal; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; POD:
Postoperative day. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YBC, study concept and design; ZFZ and FJ, drafting and
finalization of the manuscript, preparation of the figures, acquisition of data, and analysis and interpretation of data; HW and SLT,
critical revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content and material support; ZT, preparation of the figures, and technical
and material support. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Dr. Youbin Cui, Superintendent of the Institution, surgeon;
Zhefeng Zhang, master’s degree, surgical trainee; Feng Jin, master’s degree, research student; Hao Wu, master’s degree, research student;
Shulian Tan, master’s degree, research student; Zhuang Tian, master’s degree, technician. We thank our colleagues in the Department of
Thoracic Surgery and Department of Pathology, The First Hospital of Jilin University, Changchun, PR China, for their consultation during the
preparation of this manuscript.
