These authors contributed equally to the manuscript. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4A) is a member of the nuclear receptor family of
ligand-activated transcription factors. HNF4A mutations cause hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia in early life and maturity-onset diabetes of
the young. Regular screening of HNF4A mutation carriers using the oral glucose tolerance test has been recommended to diagnose diabetes
mellitus at an early stage. Glucagon-like peptide-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide are incretin hormones, responsible for
up to 70% of the secreted insulin after a meal in healthy individuals. We describe, for the first time, gradual alteration of glucose
homeostasis in a patient with HNF4A mutation after resolution of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, on serial oral glucose tolerance testing.
We also measured the incretin response to a mixed meal in our patient. Our patient was born with macrosomia and developed hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia in the neonatal period. Molecular genetic analysis confirmed HNF4A mutation (p.M116I, c.317G>A) as an underlying cause of
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. Serial oral glucose tolerance testing, after the resolution of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, confirmed
the diagnosis of maturity-onset diabetes of the young at the age of 10 years. Interestingly, the intravenous glucose tolerance test revealed
normal glucose disappearance rate and first-phase insulin secretion. Incretin hormones showed a suboptimal rise in response to the mixed
meal, potentially explaining the discrepancy between the oral glucose tolerance test and the intravenous glucose tolerance test. Maturity-
onset diabetes of the young can develop as early as the first decade of life in persons with an HNF4A mutation. Impaired incretin response
might be contributory in the early stages of HNF4A maturity-onset diabetes of the young. Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4α (HNF4A) is a member of
the steroid/thyroid hormone receptor superfamily and is most highly expressed in the liver, kidney, pancreatic islets and intestine . HNF4A
is a major activator of hepatocyte nuclear factor 1α (HNF1A), which in turn activates the expression of a large number of liver-specific
genes, including those involved in glucose, cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism . Specifically in the pancreatic islets, HNF4A has been
shown to control the expression of genes involved in glucose-stimulated insulin secretion . HNF4A mutations cause hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia and maturity-onset diabetes of the young (MODY) . Annual screening of HNF4A-mutation carriers with oral glucose tolerance
testing was recommended to diagnose diabetes mellitus at an early stage . Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide are incretin hormones, which augment the magnitude of meal-stimulated insulin secretion from islet β-cells in a
glucose-dependent manner . We describe, for the first time, the gradual alteration in glucose homeostasis and development of MODY in the
HNF4A-mutation carrier after resolution of hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, on prospective follow-up with an annual oral glucose tolerance
test. We also report the GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide response to the mixed-meal test at the onset of diabetes
mellitus. This study reports the first patient with an HNF4A mutation to have been serially monitored from the diagnosis of
hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia to maturity-onset diabetes of the young. We describe, for the first time, incretin response in a patient
with HNF4A maturity-onset diabetes of the young, which has the potential to influence the management of these patients. Genomic DNA was
extracted from peripheral leukocytes using standard procedures, and the coding exons and intron/exon boundaries of the ABCC8,KCNJ11 and
HNF4A genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction (PCR). HNF4A analysis included the coding exons 1d–10 and the P2 pancreatic
promoter. PCR products were sequenced using standard methods on an ABI 3730 sequencer (Applied Biosystems, Warrington, UK) and were compared
with the published sequence NM_000457.3 (exons 2–10) and AY680697 (exon 1d only) using Mutation Surveyor v3.2 (SoftGenetics, State College,
PA, USA) . An oral glucose tolerance test (glucose load 1.75 g/kg) was performed in accordance with standard recommendations and the results
were interpreted according to published World Health Organization (WHO) diagnostic criteria . After an overnight fast of 12 h, 0.5 g/kg of
glucose as a 20% solution was infused within 2 min through an intravenous catheter in the antecubital region. Blood samples were obtained at
–10, –5, 0, 1, 3, 5, 10, 15, 20, 30, 45 and 60 min through a second intravenous catheter for estimation of blood glucose and serum insulin.
The glucose disappearance rate K (%/min) was calculated according to 0.693 × 100/t1/2 (in min), where t1/2 was the time span (min) required
for glucose to fall by 50% from its level at 10 min . The first-phase insulin release was calculated by the area under the insulin
stimulation curve between 0 and 10 min . The mixed-meal tolerance test was performed after an overnight fast of 12 h. A standardized
breakfast was ingested over 10 min, calculated by a dietician based on the total caloric needs of the patient (25–30% of their daily caloric
intake; 50% of the calories as carbohydrates, 33% lipids and 17% proteins). Blood samples were collected at 0, 15, 30, 45 and 60 min for
estimation of blood glucose, serum insulin, total glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and active GLP-1. The area under curve was
estimated by the linear trapezoidal method from the concentration time curve. Blood was collected in chilled EDTA-treated tubes containing
DPP-4 inhibitor (10 μl/ml blood: Millipore, Watford, UK) and aprotonin (trasylol 5000 KIU/ml blood: Bayer, Newbury, UK). Blood was processed
according to the manufacturers’ instructions for the measurement of hormones using commercially available assays. Total glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide and active GLP-1 were determined using commercially available human ELISA kits according to the manufacturer's
guidelines (Millipore). All samples were performed in duplicate. We describe a male Caucasian patient, who was born with macrosomia
[birthweight 4060 g at 39 weeks of gestation; +1.44 standard deviation score (SDS)] and who developed neonatal hypoglycaemia requiring a
high glucose infusion rate (18.5 mg kg–1 min–1) to maintain normoglycaemia. There was no family history of diabetes mellitus. Investigations
revealed inappropriately elevated serum insulin and inappropriately low β-hydroxybutyrate and non-esterified fatty acids during an episode
of hypoglycaemia on three occasions, confirming hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia. Serum cortisol, lactate, ammonia, plasma aminoacids,
carnitine profile and urine organic acids were normal. Molecular genetic testing for mutation in ABCC8/KCNJ11 was negative.
Hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia was successfully managed with diazoxide. A 24-h blood glucose profile and controlled fasting studies were
carried out at regular intervals until the age of 18 months, at which age his hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia resolved. At the age of
5 years, after HNF4A mutations were first reported as a cause of macrosomia and neonatal hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia, he underwent
molecular genetic testing and was identified to have a de novo heterozygous HNF4A mutation (p.M116I, c.317G>A) . Annual monitoring with an
oral glucose tolerance test revealed impaired glucose tolerance and development of diabetes mellitus according to WHO diagnostic criteria
(Table 1) . At the diagnosis of diabetes mellitus, he was prepubertal with a bilateral testicular volume of 2 ml. His HbA1c was 40 mmol/mmol
(5.8%) and autoantibodies (GAD 65 and islet-cell) were negative. His serial BMI and BMI SDS were normal (Table 1). Oral glucose tolerance
test An intravenous glucose tolerance test (Fig. 1) revealed normal glucose disappearance rate (1.38% per min; normal response > 1.2% per
min) and first-phase insulin secretion (2.7 nmol l−1 min−1 normal 1.4–5.3 nmol l–1 min–1), which were not indicative of insulin secretion
defect . Intravenous glucose tolerance test. To understand the reasons for the discrepancy between diabetic oral glucose tolerance test
response and normal intravenous glucose tolerance test response, we measured the incretin hormones in response to the mixed-meal tolerance
test (Fig. 2). The 30-min areas under the curve for active GLP-1 and total glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide were 350.9 and
740.2 pmol/l, respectively, which are lower than the sparse data on these hormones in the literature in this age group. Total glucose-
dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and active glucagon-like peptide 1 (GLP-1) response to the mixed-meal tolerance test. MODY is a
genetically heterogeneous monogenic form of diabetes mellitus, characterized by early onset, usually before 25 years of age and often in
adolescence or childhood, and by autosomal dominant inheritance . Heterozygous mutations in the genes encoding the glycolytic enzyme
glucokinase and the transcription factors, HNF-1α, HNF-4α and HNF1β have been shown to cause MODY. Clinical studies have shown normal
insulin sensitivity, but reduced glucose-stimulated insulin secretion in subjects with pre-diabetes with HNF-4A MODY, suggesting that
pancreatic β-cell dysfunction rather than insulin resistance is the primary defect in this disorder . Recently, HNF4A mutations have been
shown to cause macrosomia and hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia (transient and persistent) in early life . Hence, in HNF4A mutation carriers,
there would need to be a switch from increased insulin secretion in utero and neonatal life to decreased glucose-stimulated insulin
secretion in later life. The molecular basis for the differential aspects of HNF-4α deficiency on β-cell function and insulin secretion in
neonates and later in life and the exact timing of the switch from hyperinsulinaemia to hypoinsulinaemia are unknown. We describe the first
patient with an HNF4A mutation to have been serially monitored with oral glucose tolerance testing through to MODY from hyperinsulinaemic
hypoglycaemia. The patient was macrosomic at birth and exhibited hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia in the neonatal period and infancy. Annual
oral glucose tolerance test monitoring highlighted gradually worsening glucose tolerance (impaired oral glucose tolerance test). At age
10 years, he fulfilled the WHO oral glucose tolerance test criteria for diabetes mellitus . Surprisingly, intravenous glucose tolerance
testing demonstrated a normal glucose disappearance rate (K) and first-phase insulin secretion, contradictory to what one would expect in
MODY (K 1.38% per min; normal response > 1.2%, first-phase insulin secretion 2.7 nmol l–1 min–1; normal 1.4–5.3 nmol l–1 min–1). Similar to
our results, when assessed by intravenous glucose tolerance test, Herman et al. did not find any significant difference in insulin secretion
in HNF4A mutation carriers without diabetes as compared with control subjects either. As our patient has been diagnosed at a very early
stage of MODY, it is possible that his insulin secretion as assessed by intravenous glucose tolerance test is still preserved. As our
patient had a diabetic response to the oral glucose tolerance test and a relatively normal response to the intravenous glucose tolerance
test, we hypothesized a suboptimal glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and GLP-1 rise in response to oral glucose/meal in HNF4A
mutation carriers. Glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide and GLP-1 are peptide hormones, responsible for up to 70% of the secreted
insulin after a meal in healthy individuals . In response to a mixed-meal tolerance test, the 30-min areas under the curve for GLP-1 and
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide were 350.9 and 740.2 pmol/l, respectively. Rask et al. reported a 30-min area under the curve
for GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide after oral glucose as 460 ± 60 and 1491 ± 136 pmol/l, respectively, in subjects
with impaired glucose tolerance . Huml et al. measured GLP-1 and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide in healthy children, but at a
single time point of 90 min after the standardized breakfast . Unfortunately, there are no normative data on GLP-1 and glucose-dependent
insulinotropic polypeptide in healthy control children. Comparing the results, it does seem that our patient mounted a lower GLP-1 and
glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide response to the mixed-meal tolerance test, potentially explaining the discrepancy for responses
to the oral glucose tolerance test and intravenous glucose tolerance test. However, there are limitations to comparing our results with
adult subjects with impaired glucose tolerance from another cause. From our data, it is plausible that incretin response might be impaired
and contributory to glucose intolerance in the preclinical stages in some patients with HNF4A MODY. Once glucose intolerance sets in,
chronic exposure to supraphysiologic concentrations of glucose over several months can lead to gradual loss of insulin gene expression . In
conclusion, we report the first patient with HNF4A hyperinsulinaemic hypoglycaemia to have switched to maturity-onset diabetes of the young
on serial oral glucose tolerance testing. Impaired glucose tolerance can develop within the first decade of life in these patients. Our
findings suggest a possibility of impaired incretin response and this is an exciting area to be explored in HNF4A maturity-onset diabetes of
the young. More HNF4A-positive subjects with pre-diabetes and diabetes need to be studied to understand the impact of the HNF4A mutation on
incretin effect. The genetic testing was funded by a Medical Council Grant award. None declared. The authors would like to acknowledge the
family. The genetic testing was funded by a Medical Council Grant award to KH and SE. SE is a Wellcome Trust Senior Investigator. KH is the
guarantor for the manuscript.
