An 85-year-old Korean female presented with continuous weight loss. A physical examination revealed a soft, flat abdomen without a palpable
mass or tenderness, and no enlargement of the superficial lymph nodes was detected. Her medical history was notable for diabetes. Routine
laboratory tests and tumor markers including cancer antigen 19-9 (17.25 U/mL; normal range, < 34 U/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA)
(2.86 ng/mL; normal range, < 6.0 ng/mL) were within the normal ranges. Abdominal computed tomography (CT) demonstrated a 3.7-cm cystic mass
with calcification in the head of the pancreas (Fig. 1A). In addition, there was a 3.4-cm lobulating solid mass with necrosis above the
cystic mass that was located along the hepatic hilum. A 2.9-cm solid mass and a 1.4-cm cystic mass were observed at the right side of the
liver and appeared to be metastatic tumors of the pancreas (Fig. 1). An ultrasound-guided biopsy was taken from the solid mass at the liver
dome. Tumor cells near the portal area were relatively uniform, with light pink foamy cytoplasm (Fig. 2A). The possibility of adenocarcinoma
from the pancreatic duct was excluded by negative CEA and mucin-1 staining. Neuroendocrine markers were positive for synaptophysin and
negative for chromogranin. β-Catenin and CD10 immunochemical staining, which are known markers of most solid pseudopapillary neoplasms, were
positive (Fig. 2B). The final diagnosis was a malignant solid pseudopapillary tumor (SPT) of the pancreas with metastasis to the liver. SPTs
are quite rare tumors usually observed in young females. This case was a malignant SPT in an elderly female patient that was confirmed by
histological and immunohistochemical studies but was initially suspected to be a pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma. No potential conflict of
interest relevant to this article is reported. Contrast enhanced abdominal computed tomography scans. (A) An axial scan shows a 3.7-cm sized
cystic mass with peripheral curvilinear calcification in the head of pancreas (long arrow) and a 1.4-cm sized cystic mass with focal solid
component that seems to be cystic metastasis in the liver segment 5 (short arrow). (B) A coronal scan shows a 3.4-cm sized lobulating solid
mass with necrosis above the cystic mass which occupied along the hepatic hilum (long arrow) and a 2.9-cm sized solid mass that seems to be
metastasis in the liver dome (short arrow). (A) Light microscopy showing relatively uniform cells with light pink foamy cytoplasm and
coordinated with pseudorosettes (H&E, × 100). (B) The tumor cells were stained with β-catenin which is known as the markers of most of solid
psedopapillary neoplasm (× 100).
