Spontaneous pneumomediastinum is an uncommon event, the clinical picture of which includes retrosternal chest pain, subcutaneous emphysema,
dyspnea, and dysphonia. The pathophysiological mechanism involved is the emergence of a pressure gradient between the alveoli and
surrounding structures, causing alveolar rupture with subsequent dissection of the peribronchovascular sheath and infiltration of the
mediastinum and subcutaneous tissue with air. Known triggers include acute exacerbations of asthma and situations that require the Valsalva
maneuver. We described and documented with HRCT scans the occurrence of pneumomediastinum after a patient with bleomycin-induced
interstitial lung disease underwent pulmonary function testing. Although uncommon, the association between pulmonary function testing and
air leak syndromes has been increasingly reported in the literature, and lung diseases, such as interstitial lung diseases, include
structural changes that facilitate the occurrence of this complication. Spontaneous pneumomediastinum is an uncommon event that primarily
affects young males. It is classified as primary or secondary on the basis of the presence or absence of underlying lung disease
predisposing to the event. Its clinical picture includes retrosternal chest pain (most common symptom), subcutaneous emphysema, dyspnea,
dysphagia, dysphonia, asthenia, and the classical sign of Hamman's crunch (a crepitant sound that varies with the heartbeat on auscultation
of the precordium).( 1 , 2 ) In most cases, it is possible to identify a triggering event, such as acute exacerbations of asthma. Other
known triggers include those related to the Valsalva maneuver, such as strenuous exercise, weight lifting, inhalation of illicit drugs,
cough, forced evacuation, and labor, as well as vomiting, respiratory infections, foreign body aspiration, and barotrauma.( 1 - 5 ) The
disease usually follows a benign, self-limiting course.( 1 , 2 ) Treatment is supportive, consisting of using painkillers, resting, and
avoiding maneuvers that generate an increase in transpulmonary pressure, such as the Valsalva maneuver and spirometry.( 6 ) A 50-year-old
male patient underwent orchiectomy for testicular swelling and an increased alpha-fetoprotein level. The anatomopathological diagnosis was
testicular embryonal carcinoma. In the staging evaluation, chest CT showed lung metastases. The patient was started on chemotherapy with
cisplatin, etoposide, and bleomycin (cumulative dose at the end of the course, 300 IU). During treatment, the patient had an episode of
febrile neutropenia and received granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF) at that time. Three months after the start of chemotherapy,
the patient had a medical visit in which he complained of rapidly progressive dyspnea, presenting with hypoxemia (SpO2 = 87%) and crackles
at both lung bases. An HRCT scan (Figure 1) showed diffuse, relatively symmetric, reticular lung opacities in a peripheral and sometimes
peribronchovascular distribution, predominantly at the lung bases, associated with irregular interlobular septal thickening, in addition to
some foci of consolidation and areas of ground-glass opacity, bilaterally distributed, predominantly in the subpleural regions. A
presumptive diagnosis of bleomycin-induced interstitial pneumonitis was made, and corticosteroid treatment was started. The patient
underwent pulmonary function testing (PFT), which revealed severe restrictive lung disease and markedly reduced DLCO. Figure 1 In A, axial
HRCT scan showing reticular opacities (dashed arrow) associated with irregular interlobular septal thickening (solid arrow), as well as foci
of consolidation and areas of ground-glass opacity (arrowhead), bilaterally distributed, predominantly in the subpleural regions. In B,
coronal HRCT scan showing the distribution of those changes along the longitudinal axis of both lungs, with a slight basal predominance. Two
days after undergoing PFT, the patient presented to the emergency room with significantly worsened dyspnea. Physical examination revealed
tachycardia (HR, 110 bpm), tachypnea (RR, 28 breaths/min), and hypoxemia (SpO2 = 75%), as well as subcutaneous emphysema in the right
cervical region. Lung auscultation revealed decreased breath sounds in the lower thirds and crackles at both lung bases. Laboratory tests
revealed leukocytosis (17,040 cells/mm3) with a shift to myelocytes, thrombocytopenia, an elevated level of nitrogenous compounds, and an
increased level of C-reactive protein (43.9 mg/dL). A chest X-ray (Figure 2) allowed the visualization of pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous
emphysema, with a small pneumothorax and an increase in ground-glass opacities. The same changes were seen on HRCT (Figure 3), which showed
extensive pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema, as well as a significant increase in reticular opacities and areas of ground-glass
opacity, compared with the initial examination. The patient was started on treatment for an infectious etiology (piperacillin/tazobactam)
and progression of interstitial disease (methylprednisolone, 1 mg/kg). The patient continued to have fever despite further antibiotic
therapy (vancomycin and sulfamethoxazole/trimethoprim were added) and developed respiratory failure requiring orotracheal intubation,
mechanical ventilation, and chest tube drainage. His acute renal failure worsened, and he could not tolerate dialysis. The patient died from
septic shock seven days admission. Figure 2 (Front view) chest X-ray showing an air-density band around the mediastinum (arrows),
characterizing pneumomediastinum, which extends to the cervical region and chest wall, dissecting along the fibers of the pectoral muscles
(dashed arrow). Note the extensive involvement of the lungs by areas of consolidation and reticular opacities, distributed in the lung
periphery, especially on the right side, where one can also see a small pneumothorax (arrowheads). Figure 3 In A, oblique sagittal
reformatted HRCT scan showing air dissecting within the lung interstitium along the right inferior pulmonary vein (arrow) and entering the
mediastinum. In B, curved coronal reformatted HRCT scan showing the upward path of the air around the right inferior pulmonary vein (arrow)
into the pneumomediastinum (arrowheads). Note the integration between the pneumomediastinum and the cervical emphysema (dashed arrows). In
C, curved coronal reformatted HRCT scan showing the large amount of air that dissects along the mediastinal fat planes and pneumomediastinum
(arrowheads). In D, axial HRCT scan showing pneumomediastinum (arrowheads) associated with chest wall emphysema (asterisk, also found in A).
Note also a small right pneumothorax (arrow), as well as reticular lung opacities and areas of groundglass opacity (dashed arrow). The
pathophysiological mechanism involved in the genesis of pneumomediastinum is the emergence of a pressure gradient between the alveoli and
surrounding structures that, upon reaching a critical level, causes alveolar rupture with an air leak into the interstitium, causing
interstitial emphysema. The air dissects along the bronchovascular bundle (Figures 3A and 3B) and, since the pressure is always lower in the
mediastinum than in the lung parenchyma, the air tends to move toward the hilum and spread through the mediastinum (Figure 3C). Because of
the contiguity between the fasciae, the air can reach the subcutaneous cellular tissue (Figures 3A and 3D) and the peritoneum. When
mediastinal pressure rises abruptly and decompression by alternative pathways is insufficient to relieve pressure, there can be rupture of
the mediastinal pleura and the development of pneumothorax (Figure 3D).( 2 ) The Brazilian Journal of Pulmonology has recently published a
letter to the editor( 7 ) describing a case of spontaneous pneumomediastinum and reporting, among other findings, pneumorrhachis, which is
extremely rare. However, in that case, no imaging findings of dissection of air along the bronchovascular bundle were found. In a case
report of pneumomediastinum in a bone marrow transplant recipient, some HRCT findings were similar to those of the present case, although
they were of lesser magnitude and there was no pneumothorax.( 8 ) This chain of events was described by Macklin & Macklin in the 1940s.( 3 )
Those authors demonstrated that most air leak syndromes did not result from rupture of subpleural bullae, but rather from alveolar rupture.
In addition, they introduced the concept that the presence of positive pressure within the alveoli is not necessary for rupture to occur.
What is essential is the pressure gradient between the alveolus and the perivascular sheath of the adjacent septum. A very negative pressure
in the interstitial space could therefore lead to alveolar rupture even without the occurrence of extreme positive alveolar pressures. For
this reason, intense respiratory efforts, adjacent atelectasis, and low intravascular pressure could be involved in the development of these
syndromes.( 3 ) There have been reports of pneumomediastinum related to PFT.( 4 , 9 - 11 ) In 1973, the first of such reports described a
previously healthy 23-year-old medical student who developed extensive pneumomediastinum and subcutaneous emphysema after undergoing PFT.( 4
) In spirometry, the patient is instructed to inhale up to total lung capacity, hold his or her breath, and exhale vigorously.( 10 ) When
the patient inhales, there is a decrease in intrathoracic pressure, an increase in alveolar air volume, and an increase in venous return,
resulting in increased pulmonary vein diameter. Therefore, there is no pressure gradient in the interstitial space, since all compartments
elongate and increase in diameter symmetrically. However, when the patient "holds his or her breath", there is venous stasis, resulting in
decreased pulmonary venous filling and vessel lumen reduction, allowing the emergence of the pressure gradient necessary to cause alveolar
rupture.( 3 ) Subsequent reports have documented pneumomediastinum as a complication of PFT associated with extremely different underlying
lung diseases, such as rheumatic diseases with interstitial lung involvement.( 11 ) In these situations, there is a summation of the
aforementioned pressure changes induced during the test, the existence of inflammation combined with increased elastic recoil as seen with
fibrosis, and a collapse of adjacent regions, making the lung vulnerable to segmental hyperdistension and to the emergence of a pressure
gradient.( 3 ) We believe that this is the mechanism also applies in the present case. When reporting the case of a healthy medical student
who developed pneumomediastinum after use of marijuana, one group of authors understood that the event was caused by the fact that the young
man performed various Valsalva-like maneuvers (holding his breath at maximal inhalation against a partially closed or fully closed glottis)
to prolong the effect of the drug.( 12 ) The Valsalva maneuver is a factor classically related to air leak syndromes because it generates
increased intrapulmonary pressure.( 3 , 4 , 12 ) Therefore, labor and forced evacuation are associated with reports of pneumomediastinum.( 3
) As mentioned previously, pneumomediastinum usually follows a benign, self-limiting course. However, this apparent benignity should be
regarded with caution, since, in patients with underlying lung diseases, the existence of air leak syndromes is associated with greater
severity. It is known that this syndrome can be associated with the spread of infections and the release of inflammatory mediators. In
addition, it can result in the feared air-block syndrome (a condition in which the presence of air in the interstitium and mediastinum does
not find a way out, culminating in the generation of large pressures on the mediastinum, which affects circulation by compressing the
vessels and the heart and prevents lung inflation and deflation).( 2 ) In the present case, it is possible that the pneumomediastinum acted
as a contributing factor to the fatal outcome because it facilitated the spread of infection and the perpetuation of inflammation, but
without acting as a determinant of death, which was related to the interstitial lung disease and the severe, superimposed infectious
process. In addition, it is of note that, in the present case, there was no indication for specific treatment for pneumomediastinum, such as
mediastinotomy. This type of procedure would only be beneficial in cases of hypertensive pneumomediastinum, which are rare.( 13 ) Because
PFT is often performed in patients with acute chronic respiratory disease, its association with air leak syndromes should be studied and
reported. The most common form of pulmonary toxicity associated with bleomycin is subacute progressive pulmonary fibrosis. Other less common
lesions include organizing pneumonia, hypersensitivity pneumonia, and acute chest pain syndrome. It occurs more frequently in elderly
subjects, with higher cumulative doses of the medication, renal failure, use of oxygen (especially when high FiO2 is used), combination of
other chemotherapeutic agents (such as cisplatin and gemcitabine), thoracic radiation therapy, and use of G-CSF.( 14 ) Bleomycin-induced
interstitial pneumonitis is understood as a causative factor for the occurrence of pneumomediastinum in the current literature, on the basis
of two studies that reported three cases in which this association occurred.( 15 , 16 ) Curiously, in at least two of those cases, PFT was
performed before the development of pneumomediastinum; however, those authors did not infer a causal relationship between PFT and the
occurrence of the complication.( 16 ) It is evident that interstitial pneumonitis includes previously mentioned factors, such as local
inflammation and alveolar collapse, that facilitate the development of pneumomediastinum. Under these conditions, there can be
hyperinflation of adjacent regions, increased elastic recoil, and reduced lung compliance, predisposing to the emergence of an increased
pressure gradient, but it seems pertinent to investigate what role PFT might also have played in those reports. In the present case, because
of the strong temporal correlation between the patient having undergone PFT and the occurrence of pneumomediastinum, in addition to the
pathophysiological rationale, we consider that the "trigger" for the occurrence of air leak was the patient having undergone the test,
although it is undeniable that the presence of bleomycin-induced interstitial pneumonitis created a predisposition to the event. The present
report and a review of cases in the literature suggest the need for caution and proper orientation of patients with bleomycin-induced
interstitial pneumonitis who perform PFT maneuvers. Study carried out in the Department of Pulmonology, Heart Institute, University of São
Paulo School of Medicine Hospital das Clínicas, and in the São Paulo Cancer Institute, São Paulo, Brazil. Financial support: None. O
pneumomediastino espontâneo é um evento incomum, cujo quadro clínico inclui dor pleurítica retroesternal, enfisema subcutâneo, dispneia e
disfonia. O mecanismo fisiopatológico implicado é o surgimento de uma diferença de pressão entre os alvéolos e estruturas adjacentes,
ocasionando ruptura alveolar com posterior dissecção da bainha peribroncovascular e infiltração do mediastino e do tecido subcutâneo pelo
ar. Desencadeantes conhecidos incluem exacerbação aguda de asma e situações que exigem a realização de manobra de Valsava. Descrevemos e
documentamos por imagens tomográficas a ocorrência de pneumomediastino após a realização de prova de função pulmonar em um paciente com
pneumopatia intersticial induzida por bleomicina. Apesar de incomum, a associação entre provas de função pulmonar e síndromes de vazamento
de ar tem sido relatada cada vez mais na literatura, e doenças pulmonares, como as pneumopatias intersticiais, contemplam alterações
estruturais que facilitam a ocorrência da complicação. O pneumomediastino espontâneo é um evento incomum que acomete preferencialmente
jovens do sexo masculino. É classificado como primário ou secundário de acordo com a ausência ou presença de doença pulmonar de base
predispondo ao evento. O quadro clínico inclui dor pleurítica retroesternal (sintoma mais frequente), enfisema subcutâneo, dispneia,
disfagia, disfonia, astenia e o clássico sinal de Hamman (crepitação síncrona com os batimentos cardíacos, audível no precórdio).( 1 , 2 )
Na maioria dos casos, é possível identificar um evento desencadeador, como a exacerbação aguda de asma. Outros desencadeantes conhecidos são
aqueles relacionados à realização da manobra de Valsalva, como exercício físico extenuante, levantamento de peso, inalação de drogas
ilícitas, tosse, esforço vigoroso de evacuação e trabalho de parto, além de vômitos, infecções respiratórias, aspiração de corpo estranho e
barotrauma.( 1 - 5 ) A evolução geralmente é benigna e autolimitada.( 1 , 2 ) O tratamento é de suporte, tendo por base o uso de analgésicos
e o repouso, além de evitar manobras que aumentam a pressão transpulmonar, como, por exemplo, a manobra de Valsalva e a espirometria.( 6 )
Paciente masculino de 50 anos, submetido à orquiectomia por aumento de volume testicular e elevação de alfa-fetoproteína. O diagnóstico
anatomopatológico foi de carcinoma embrionário de testículo. No estadiamento, foram evidenciadas metástases pulmonares na TC de tórax. Foi
iniciada quimioterapia com cisplatina, etoposídeo e bleomicina (dose acumulada ao final dos ciclos, 300 UI). Durante o tratamento, o
paciente apresentou um episódio de neutropenia febril e fez uso de granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF, fator estimulador de
crescimento de colônias de granulócitos) nessa ocasião. Três meses após o início da quimioterapia, o paciente compareceu a consulta médica
queixando-se de dispneia rapidamente progressiva, apresentando hipoxemia (SpO2 = 87%) e com estertores crepitantes bibasais. A TCAR (Figura
1) evidenciou opacidades pulmonares reticulares difusas, relativamente simétricas, com distribuição periférica e, por vezes,
peribroncovascular, com predominância nas regiões basais, associadas a um espessamento irregular dos septos interlobulares, além de alguns
focos de consolidação e áreas de vidro fosco, distribuídos bilateralmente, predominando nas regiões subpleurais. Foi feita a hipótese
diagnóstica de pneumopatia intersticial por bleomicina e foi iniciado o tratamento com corticosteroides. Foi realizada a prova de função
pulmonar (PFP), que mostrou distúrbio ventilatório restritivo acentuado e redução acentuada na DLCO. Figura 1 Em A, imagem axial de TCAR
demonstrando opacidades reticulares (seta descontínua), associadas a espessamento irregular dos septos interlobulares (seta contínua), além
de alguns focos de consolidação e áreas de vidro fosco (cabeça de seta), distribuídas bilateralmente, predominando nas regiões subpleurais.
Em B, imagem coronal de TCAR demonstrando a distribuição dessas alterações ao longo do eixo longitudinal de ambos os pulmões, com leve
predomínio nas bases. Dois dias após a realização da PFP, o paciente procurou o pronto-socorro por piora intensa da dispneia. Ao exame
físico, encontrava-se taquicárdico (FC, 110 bpm), taquidispneico (FR, 28 ciclos/min) e hipoxêmico (SpO2 = 75%), com presença de enfisema
subcutâneo em região cervical direita e ausculta pulmonar com murmúrio vesicular reduzido em terços inferiores e estertores crepitantes
bibasais. Os exames laboratoriais mostraram leucocitose (17.040 células/mm3) com desvio até mielócitos, plaquetopenia, elevação de escórias
nitrogenadas e aumento de proteína C reativa (43,9 mg/dL). A radiografia de tórax (Figura 2) permitiu a visualização de pneumomediastino e
enfisema subcutâneo, com pequeno pneumotórax e aumento de opacidades em vidro fosco. As mesmas alterações foram observadas à TCAR (Figura
3), que evidenciou grande extensão de pneumomediastino e enfisema subcutâneo, bem como um aumento significativo das opacidades reticulares e
áreas de vidro fosco, comparativamente ao exame inicial. Foi instituído um tratamento contemplando uma etiologia infecciosa
(piperacilina/tazobactam) e progressão de doença intersticial (metilprednisolona, 1 mg/kg). O paciente continuou apresentando febre a
despeito do escalonamento da terapia antibiótica (foram acrescentados vancomicina e sulfametoxazol/trimetoprima) e evoluiu com insuficiência
respiratória, sendo submetido a intubação orotraqueal, ventilação mecânica e drenagem torácica. Houve piora da insuficiência renal aguda e a
diálise não foi tolerada. O paciente evoluiu a óbito por choque séptico sete dias após a admissão. Figura 2 Radiografia de tórax (frente)
demonstrando faixa com densidade de ar contornando o mediastino (setas), configurando pneumomediastino, que se estende para a região
cervical e para a parede torácica, dissecando as fibras musculares peitorais (setas descontínuas). Notar o extenso acometimento pulmonar por
áreas de consolidação e opacidades reticulares, distribuídas na periferia pulmonar, especialmente à direita, onde também se delimita um
pequeno pneumotórax (cabeças de seta). Figura 3 Em A, reformatação sagital oblíqua de TCAR, que demonstra ar dissecando o interstício
pulmonar ao longo da veia pulmonar inferior direita (seta), até atingir o mediastino. Em B, reformatação coronal curva de TCAR mostrando o
trajeto ascendente do ar ao redor da veia pulmonar inferior direita (seta), continuando-se com o pneumomediastino (cabeças de seta). Notar a
continuidade do pneumomediastino com o enfisema cervical (setas descontínuas). Em C, reformatação coronal curva de TCAR demonstrando a
grande quantidade de ar que disseca os planos gordurosos mediastinais e pneumomediastino (cabeças de seta). Em D, imagem axial de TCAR
demonstrando o pneumomediastino (cabeças de seta) associado ao enfisema da parede torácica (asterisco, também observado em A). Notar também
um pequeno pneumotóraxà direita (seta) e as opacidades pulmonares reticulares e áreas de vidro fosco (seta descontínua). O mecanismo
fisiopatológico implicado na gênese do pneumomediastino é o surgimento de uma diferença de pressão entre os alvéolos e estruturas adjacentes
que, ao atingir um nível crítico, ocasiona ruptura alveolar, com extravasamento de ar para o interstício, ocasionando enfisema intersticial.
O ar disseca o feixe broncovascular (Figuras 3A e 3B) e, como a pressão no mediastino é sempre menor do que no parênquima pulmonar, o ar
tende a se mover na direção do hilo e se espalhar pelo mediastino (Figura 3C). Devido à contiguidade entre as fáscias, o ar pode atingir o
tecido celular subcutâneo (Figuras 3A e 3D) e o peritônio. Quando a pressão mediastinal se eleva abruptamente e a descompressão por vias
alternativas não é suficiente para aliviar a pressão, pode haver ruptura da pleura mediastinal e o surgimento de pneumotórax (Figura 3D).( 2
) Recentemente, foi publicada no Jornal Brasileiro de Pneumologia uma carta ao editor( 7 ) descrevendo um caso de pneumomediastino
espontâneo e mostrando, entre outros achados, o raríssimo pneumorraque; porém, naquele caso, a imagem de dissecção do feixe broncovascular
não foi caracterizada. Em um relato de pneumomediastino em um paciente receptor de transplante de medula óssea, foi observada uma imagem
tomográfica semelhante à do presente caso; porém, de menor magnitude e sem a presença de pneumotórax.( 8 ) A descrição dessa cadeia de
eventos foi feita por Macklin & Macklin na década de 40.( 3 ) Os autores demonstraram que a maioria das síndromes de vazamento de ar não era
resultante da ruptura de bolhas subpleurais, mas decorrente de ruptura alveolar. Além disso, apresentaram o conceito de que não é necessária
a presença de pressão positiva dentro dos alvéolos para a ocorrência da ruptura. O fundamental é a diferença de pressão entre o alvéolo e a
bainha perivascular do septo adjacente. Uma pressão muito negativa no espaço intersticial poderia, portanto, levar a rotura alveolar mesmo
sem a ocorrência de pressões positivas extremas no alvéolo. Dessa maneira, esforços inspiratórios intensos, atelectasias adjacentes e baixa
pressão intravascular poderiam estar implicados no surgimento dessas síndromes.( 3 ) Existem descrições de pneumomediastino relacionado a
PFP.( 4 , 9 - 11 ) Em 1973, o primeiro relato dessa natureza descreveu o caso de um estudante de medicina de 23 anos, previamente hígido,
que evoluiu com extenso pneumomediastino e enfisema subcutâneo após realizar uma PFP.( 4 ) Em uma espirometria, o paciente é instruído a
realizar uma inspiração máxima até a capacidade pulmonar total, prender a respiração e expirar vigorosamente.( 10 ) No momento em que o
indivíduo inspira, ocorre uma redução da pressão intratorácica, aumento do volume de ar nos alvéolos e aumento do retorno venoso, com
consequente aumento do diâmetro das veias pulmonares. Por isso, não ocorre diferença de pressão no espaço intersticial, já que todos os
compartimentos se alongam e aumentam de diâmetro de maneira simétrica. No entanto, quando o indivíduo "prende a respiração", há estase
venosa, com consequente redução do enchimento venoso pulmonar e redução do lúmen dos vasos, possibilitando o surgimento da diferença de
pressão necessária à ruptura alveolar.( 3 ) Relatos que se seguiram notaram o pneumomediastino como uma complicação da PFP associada a
doenças pulmonares subjacentes extremamente diversas, como, por exemplo, doenças reumatológicas com acometimento intersticial pulmonar.( 11
) Nessas situações, somam-se as já citadas alterações de pressão induzidas na realização do exame, a existência de inflamação combinada com
aumento do recolhimento elástico da fibrose e o colapso de áreas adjacentes que tornam o pulmão vulnerável a hiperdistensão segmentar e ao
surgimento de gradiente de pressão.( 3 ) Esse é o mecanismo que acreditamos aplicar-se também no presente caso. Ao relatar o caso de um
estudante saudável que desenvolveu pneumomediastino após o uso de maconha, um grupo de autores entendeu que o mesmo foi causado pelo fato de
o jovem ter realizado diversas manobras do tipo Valsalva (prendendo a respiração após inspiração máxima contra a glote parcial ou totalmente
fechada) com o intuito de prolongar o efeito da droga.( 12 ) A manobra de Valsalva é um fator clássico relacionado às síndromes de vazamento
de ar por gerar um aumento de pressão intrapulmonar.( 3 , 4 , 12 ) Por esse motivo, o trabalho de parto e esforços de evacuação vigorosos
estão associados a relatos de pneumomediastino.( 3 ) Conforme já anteriormente citado, o pneumomediastino costuma ter uma evolução benigna e
autolimitada. Entretanto, devemos olhar com cautela essa aparente benignidade, já que, em pacientes com doenças pulmonares subjacentes, a
existência de síndromes de vazamento de ar está associada a maior gravidade. Sabemos que essa síndrome pode associar-se a disseminação de
infecções e liberação de mediadores inflamatórios. Além disso, pode resultar na temida síndrome airblock (condição em que a presença de ar
no interstício e no mediastino não encontra uma rota de saída, culminando na geração de grandes pressões sobre o mediastino, que interfere
na circulação por compressão dos vasos e do coração e impede a insuflação e desinsuflação pulmonar).( 2 ) No presente caso, é possível que o
pneumomediastino tenha atuado como um fator contribuinte para o desfecho fatal por facilitar a disseminação da infecção e a perpetuação de
inflamação; porém, sem atuar como o determinante do óbito, sendo esse relacionado à intersticiopatia e ao grave processo infeccioso
sobreposto. Vale ainda ressaltar que, no presente caso, não existia a indicação de tratamento específico para o pneumomediastino como, por
exemplo, mediastinotomia. Esse tipo de procedimento só seria benéfico nos raros casos de pneumomediastino hipertensivo.( 13 ) Como as PFP
são frequentemente realizadas em portadores de doença respiratória aguda e crônica, sua associação com síndromes de vazamento de ar deve ser
estudada e relatada. A principal forma de toxicidade pulmonar associada à bleomicina é a fibrose pulmonar progressiva subaguda. Outras
lesões menos comuns são a pneumonia em organização, a pneumonia de hipersensibilidade e a síndrome da dor torácica aguda. Ocorre mais
frequentemente em idosos, com maior dose acumulada da medicação, insuficiência renal, uso de oxigênio (principalmente quando em altas
frações), associação de outros quimioterápicos, como cisplatina e gemcitabina, radioterapia torácica e uso de G-CSF.( 14 ) A pneumopatia
intersticial induzida por bleomicina é entendida na literatura atual como um fator causal para a ocorrência de pneumomediastino baseado em
dois estudos que relataram três casos nos quais essa associação ocorreu.( 15 , 16 ) Curiosamente, em pelo menos dois desses casos, a PFP foi
realizada previamente ao surgimento do pneumomediastino; porém, os autores não inferiram nexo causal entre a PFP e a ocorrência da
complicação.( 16 ) Evidentemente que a pneumopatia intersticial contempla fatores já mencionados, como inflamação local e colapso alveolar,
que facilitam o surgimento de pneumomediastino. Nessas condições, pode ocorrer hiperinsuflação de áreas adjacentes, aumento do recolhimento
elástico e redução da complacência pulmonar, predispondo ao surgimento de gradiente de pressão aumentado, mas nos parece pertinente
investigar qual papel a PFP pode ter desempenhado também naqueles relatos. No presente caso, devido à forte correlação temporal entre a
realização da PFP e a ocorrência do pneumomediastino, além do racional fisiopatológico, consideramos que o "gatilho" para a ocorrência do
vazamento de ar foi a realização do exame, embora seja inegável a predisposição para o evento gerada pela presença de pneumopatia
intersticial induzida por bleomicina. O presente relato e a revisão de casos na literatura sugerem a necessidade de cautela e orientação
adequada de pacientes com pneumopatia intersticial induzida por bleomicina que realizam manobras de PFP. Trabalho realizado na Divisão de
Pneumologia, Instituto do Coração, Hospital das Clínicas, Faculdade de Medicina, Universidade de São Paulo e no Instituto do Câncer do
Estado de São Paulo, São Paulo (SP) Brasil. Apoio financeiro: Nenhum.
