Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT) is a heterogeneous disorder of the peripheral nervous system. So far, mutations in hydroxyacyl-CoA
dehydrogenase/3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase/enoyl-CoA hydratase (trifunctional protein), beta subunit (HADHB) gene exhibit three distinctive
phenotypes: severe neonatal presentation with cardiomyopathy, hepatic form with recurrent hypoketotic hypoglycemia, and later-onset axonal
sensory neuropathy with episodic myoglobinuria. To identify the causative and characterize clinical features of a Korean family with motor
and sensory neuropathies, whole exome study (WES), histopathologic study of distal sural nerve, and lower limb MRIs were performed. WES
revealed that a compound heterozygous mutation in HADHB is the causative of the present patients. The patients exhibited an early-onset
axonal sensorimotor neuropathy without episodic myoglobinuria, and showed typical clinical and electrophysiological features of CMT
including predominant distal muscle weakness and atrophy. Histopathologic findings of sural nerve were compatible with an axonal CMT
neuropathy. Furthermore, they didn’t exhibit any other symptoms of the previously reported HADHB patients. These data implicate that
mutation in HADHB gene can also cause early-onset axonal CMT instead of typical manifestations in mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP)
deficiency. Therefore, this study is the first report of a new subtype of autosomal recessive axonal CMT by a compound heterozygous mutation
in HADHB, and will expand the clinical and genetic spectrum of HADHB. Charcot-Marie-Tooth disease (CMT), also called hereditary motor and
sensory neuropathy, is a clinically and genetically heterogeneous disorder of the peripheral nervous system . CMT is conventionally divided
into the demyelinating form (CMT1) and the axonal form (CMT2). Of them, CMT2 has been divided into many subtypes (from CMT2A to CMT2P)
according to their distinct clinical symptoms and genetic causes . So far, more than 60 causative genes or loci have been reported to be
associated with the CMT development (http://www.molgen.ua.ac.be/CMTMutations/Home/Default.cfm). However, large number of CMT patients is
waiting for uncovering their specific genetic underlying causes. Thus efficient analysis tools such as whole exome sequencing (WES) are
required to accelerate the identification of the underlying genetic causes. Applications of WES to CMT have been proved as to be powerful to
identify rare genetic causes from small-sized pedigrees . Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP), a constituent of inner membrane of
mitochondria, exerts a significant catalytic activity for beta-oxidation cycle, which metabolizes long-chain fatty acyl-CoA . MTP consists
of heterooctamer (α4β4) possessing three different enzyme activities: long-chain enoyl-CoA hydrolase (LCEH) and long-chain 3-hydroxy-acyl-
CoA dehydrogenase (LCHAD) activities harbored by the α-subunit (HADHA), while β-subunit (HADHB) encode long-chain 3-ketoacyl-CoA thiolase
(LCKT) . Deficiency of MTP is an autosomal recessive disorder that exhibits characteristic features of cardiomyopathy, hypoketotic
hypoglycemia, metabolic acidosis, sudden infant death, metabolic encephalopathy, liver dysfunction, axonal sensory neuropathy and pigmentary
retinopathy . Here, we report clinical and pathological features of an autosomal recessive CMT family harboring a novel compound
heterozygous HADHB mutation, which is identified by WES. We enrolled a total of 6 members of a Korean demyelinating CMT family (family ID:
FC354) with 2 affected individuals. The CMT phenotype of this family was seemed to be inherited with autosomal recessive mode, since two of
three siblings were affected while both parents were unaffected. No CMT patient was identified from close relatives of the family. This
study also recruited 500 Korean healthy controls with no familial history of neuromuscular disorders (10-60 years old). All samples were
collected from 2011 to 2012. Informed consent was obtained from all participants and from parents of participants younger than 18 years of
age according to the protocol approved by the Institutional Review Board for Ewha Womans University, Mokdong Hospital (ECT 11-58-37).
Patients were evaluated by taking a detailed history including motor and sensory impairments, deep tendon reflexes, and muscle atrophy
undertaken by two independent neurologists. Muscle strengths of flexor and extensor muscles were assessed manually using the medical
research council (MRC) scale. In order to determine physical disability, we used three scales, a functional disability scale (FDS) , and a
CMT neuropathy score (CMTNS) . Sensory impairments were assessed in terms of the level and severity of pain, temperature, vibration and
position. Nerve conduction studies (NCSs) were carried out with a surface electrode in median, ulnar, peroneal, tibial, and sural nerves as
previously described . Two patients (II-1 and -2) with HADHB mutation were studied with MRI of the brain, hip, thigh and lower leg using a
1.5-T system (Siemens Vision, Siemens, Germany). Whole brains were scanned using a slice thickness of 7 mm and a 2-mm interslice gap, to
produce 16 axial images. The imaging protocol consisted of T2-weighted spin echo (TR/TE = 4,700/120 ms), T1-weighted spin echo
(TR/TE = 550/12 ms), and fluid-attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) (TR/TE = 9,000/119 ms, inversion time 2,609 ms) images. Lower leg
imaging was carried out in axial [field of view (FOV) 24-32 cm, slice thickness 10 mm, and slice gap 0.5-1.0 mm] and coronal planes (FOV
38-40 cm, slice thickness 4-5 mm, slice gap 0.5-1.0 mm). Histopathological analysis of the distal sural nerve was performed in a patient
(II-2). The density of myelinated fibers (MFs), axonal diameter, and myelin thickness were determined directly from the semi-thin transverse
sections using a computer-assisted image analyzer (AnalySIS, Soft Imaging System, Germany). Ultrathin cut samples (60 ~ 65 nm) are
contrasted with uranyl acetate and lead citrate for ultrastructural study (H-7650, Hitachi, Japan). Total DNA was purified from peripheral
blood using QIAamp blood DNA purification kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany). DNAs were prescreened for duplication of 17p12 (PMP22) and
mutations in the coding exons of GJB1, MPZ, NEFL and MFN2 as previously described . Exome sequencing and subsequent filtering was performed
as previously described . Total mRNA was purified from proband’s fibroblast using RNeasy minikit (QIAGEN). Then cDNA was synthesized using
Superscript reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). For amplification of wildtype and mutant HADHB, following primers are used:
HADHB forward, 5′-ACG TCA GCC AAG ATT CCA GA-3′, and HADHB reverse, 5′-GCA CAG AAA CTT CAG GTC ACT TC-3′. Sequencing was performed to
determine cDNA sequence of each amplified mutant allele. Amplified cDNAs were cloned into pCR2.1-TOPO vector (Invitrogen) and subsequently
moved into expression vector, pCMV-myc (Clontech, Mountain View, CA). HEK293 cells (2 × 105) were transfected with control vector, pCMV-myc,
and cloned HADHB cDNAs using FuGene transfection reagent (Promega, Madison, WI). For determination of half-life of HADHB, cyclohexamide
(100 μM) was treated after 20 hr of transfection. Protein expression in fibroblast and HEK293 cells were determined by standard Western
blotting. Anti-HADHB Ab (Santa Cruz Biotechnology, Santa Cruz, CA), anti-myc Ab (Abcam, Cambridge, UK), anti-actin Ab, anti-mouse secondary
Ab, anti-rabbit secondary Ab (Sigma, St. Louis, MO), and ECL plus Western blotting substrate (Thermo Scientific, Rockford, IL) were used for
detection of protein. To identify the underlying genetic cause of this family, WES was performed for five members (I-1, I-2, II-1, II-2, and
II-4). Total sequencing yields was 10.11Gbp/sample, and mappable reads were 93.1%. Total number of variants (SNPs and indels) was 80,301
single nucleotide variants (SNVs)/sample, of which 20,430 SNVs were coding variants (Additional file 1: Table S1). Several functionally
significant variants were identified in the CMT-relevant genes; however, no variant was fitted for autosomal recessive inheritance of the
family (Additional file 1: Table S2). Moreover, most of them were also observed in controls. From the unreported or rare functionally
significant SNVs reported in dbSNP135 and 1000 Genome project database, we could identify two pairs of compound heterozygous mutations
transmitted from each of the parents: [c.210-1G > C] + [c.686G > T] in HADHB (NM_000183) and + in Cyclin-dependent kinase-like 4 (CDKL4,
NM_001009565). Since the CDKL4 compound mutations were found in Korean healthy controls, the HADHB compound heterozygous mutation was
finally considered as the underlying cause of the axonal CMT (Figures 1A and B). The p.Arg229Leu mutation site locating in the thiolase N
domain is highly conserved between different species (Figure 1C) and is predicted to affect the functional integrity by in silico analysis
(SIFT and PolyPhen2). The other mutation, c.210-1G > C, is predicted and experimentally proved to result in the loss of exon 5 by improper
splicing (Figure 1D). Pedigree and HADHB mutations in FC354. (A) Alleles of two HADHB mutations were indicated. Open symbols, unaffected;
filled symbols, affected; arrow, proband; asterisks, individuals underwent WES. (B) Sequencing chromatograms of c.686G > T and c.210-1G > C
mutation. Vertical arrows indicate the mutation site. (C) Conservation analysis of amino acid sequences among species. Complete conserved
amino acids, red; partial conserved amino acids, blue. (D) Deletion of exon5 in c.210-1G > C allele was confirmed by cDNA sequencing. (E)
Expression level of HADHB in the proband’s fibroblast. Ctr1, normal control fibroblast; and Ctr2-7, fibroblast from CMT patients with
mutation in other than HADHB gene. Western blotting revealed that expression level of HADHB from the proband’s fibroblast is quite lower
than those from controls (Figure 1E). Additionally, Western blotting revealed that the mutant proteins expressed in HEK293 cells are more
unstable than wild-type (Additional file 2: Figure S1). Cyclohexamide treatment demonstrated that the half-life of wild-type HADHB is quite
short (less than 2 hr). Thus these results are consistent with the lowered level of HADHB in patients. The proband (Figure 1A, II-2) was
born from non-consanguineous Korean parents. He noticed lower leg weakness, which resulted in bilateral foot drop and gait disturbance at
5 years. At 12 years old, he used a walker due to progressively impaired gait. Neurologic examination at 34 years of age revealed that
muscle weakness and atrophy began and the distal part of the lower limbs was prominently involved. Toe and heel gait defects were found.
Vibration and position senses were more severely disturbed than pain and temperature senses. Deep tendon reflexes were absent in all
extremities, but pathologic reflexes were not found. An echocardiogram showed normal and there was no evidence of intermittent
rhabdomyolysis or retinal dysfunction. Ophthalmological examination including dilated fundus examination was done in both patients, but
pigmentary retinopathy was not observed. Laboratory findings showed a total carnitine level of 33.4 μmol/L (reference interval:
45-91 μmol/L), a free carnitine level of 24.5 μmol/L (reference interval: 36-74 μmol/L), and acylcarnitine level of 10.9 μmol/L (reference
interval: 36-74 μmol/L). His 37-year-old elder sister (II-1) began with distal limb weakness and gait disability from 6 years old and became
to use a walker from 15 years old. At 23 years, she underwent an operation of bilateral feet due to walking difficulties. When we examined
her at 37 years, she also revealed muscle weakness and atrophies of bilateral distal muscles of the upper and lower limbs. Loss of sensory
and tendon reflexes were similar to the proband. The other family members were proven normal by careful clinical and electrophysiological
examination. The nerve conduction studies (NCSs) revealed that motor nerve conduction velocities (MNCVs) of median, ulnar, peroneal and
tibial nerves in both patients were abnormal (Table 1). Except median nerve of II-1, all compound muscle action potentials (CMAPs) were
below the normal range. Sensory nerve action potentials (SNAPs) of all tested nerves were lost. Needle electromyography (EMG) was compatible
with neuropathy with fibrillation potentials and neurogenic motor unit action potentials (MUAPs). Electrophysiological features of patients
with mutations in HADHB gene Bold character indicates abnormal values. A, absent potentials; TL, terminal latency; CMAP, compound muscle
action potential; MNCV, motor nerve conduction velocity; SNAP, sensory nerve action potential; SNCV, sensory nerve conduction velocity; NP,
no potential. Histopathological analysis of the distal sural nerve was performed in the proband at 34 years of age. Semi-thin transverse
sections with toluidine blue stain showed absence of large myelinated fibers (MFs) with remaining medium and small-sized MFs, and
occasionally noted regenerating axonal clusters (Figure 2A). Thin MFs were frequently noted and remaining MFs (4,366/mm2) were less than
control (45-year-old male: 7,300/mm2). The average of diameter of MFs and MF% area were also quite lower than control (Figure 2B). Electron
microscopic examination revealed MFs with pseudo-onion bulb formation, occasionally noted regenerating clusters, and rarely noted
demyelinated axon and thin MFs (Figures 2C and D). Several myelinated and unmyelinated axons showed swelling or vacuolization of axoplasm,
swollen or abnormal mitochondria, and abnormal membranous structures. Histopathological findings of distal sural nerve biopsy in II-2. (A)
Toluidine blue-stained semi-thin transverse section revealed absence of large MFs and remaining medium and small-sized MFs with frequently
noted thin MFs (arrows) and occasionally noted axonal clusters (curved arrow). (B) Histogram showed unimodal distribution pattern of MF
diameter. (C and D) Electron micrographs revealed MFs with pseudo-onion bulb formation and a thin MF compatible with remyelination. Original
magnifications: A, x400; C, x3000; and D, x10000. Brain and pelvic MRIs showed normal findings (data not shown), but lower limb MRIs of both
patients revealed hyperintense signal abnormalities (Figure 3). T1-weighted images demonstrated selective muscle atrophies with signal
changes, which were more prominent in lower leg muscles than thigh or pelvic muscles, thereby being consistent with the hypothesis of
length-dependent axonal neuropathy. At the thigh level, there were severe involvements of the semitendinosus, sartorius and gracilis
muscles, but a sparing of vastus group and adductor muscles. The lower leg MRI revealed marked involvement of tibialis anterior, peronei,
extensor digitorum and halluces longus muscles; however, soleus muscles were sparing. Thigh and lower leg MRIs in II-1 (A and C) and II-2 (B
and D). (A and B) At the thigh level, MRIs demonstrated severe muscle atrophied with signal changes of semitendinous muscles of posterior
compartment, gracilis muscle of medial compartment, and sartorius muscle of anterior compartment. (C and D) The lower leg MRIs revealed
selective severe muscle atrophy with signal change of anterior (arrow; tibialis anterior, extensor digitorum and halluces longus muscles)
and lateral (arrowhead; peronei muscles) compartments. However, posterior compartment muscles (soleus and tibialis posterior muscles) were
sparing in the later stages. Mitochondrial trifunctional protein (MTP) exerts a significant catalytic activity for last three steps of long
chain acyl-CoA fatty acids and consists of heterooctamer of α-subunit (HADHA) and β-subunit (HADHB) . To date, 33 mutation sites in HADHB
gene have been reported and these mutation-associated phenotypes exhibit clinical heterogeneity, which can be mainly subdivided into three
distinctive groups: severe neonatal presentation with cardiomyopathy, hepatic form with recurrent hypoketotic hypoglycemia, and later-onset
axonal sensory neuropathy with episodic myoglobinuria . Several research groups have attempted to elucidate the underlying genotype-
phenotype correlation of the HADHB gene. Spiekerkoetter et al. analyzed mutations from 15 patients and linked clinical phenotype with the
location of the mutation . They postulated that mutations in the outer loop were present only in milder forms. In addition, they suggested
that the degree of reduction of cross-reactive immunological material (CRIM) is also correlated with the severity of clinical presentation.
Purevsuren et al. also demonstrated the positive correlations between residual enzymatic activity and phenotypic severity using in vitro
functional study . Collectively, although MTP deficiency is recessive and highly heterogeneous, there are strong correlations between
phenotypic severity and residual enzymatic activity or CRIM amounts of mutant proteins. According to the crystal structure of HADHB, present
mutation, Arg229Leu, locates in the outer loop . This implicates that Arg229Leu mutation might mildly affect LCKT activity, while splicing
variant of C.210-1G > C, which results in deletion of 15 amino acids, was predicted to have severely affected LCKT activity. In contrast to
these predictions, however, overexpression of these mutants revealed that mutant proteins primarily possess lower stability than wild type.
These results might come from the conformation changes of their structures, thereby translated misfolded proteins are subsequently degraded
by proteases. Therefore, the loss of the enzymatic activity by the mutations might be greater than predicted. To unveil the effect of HADHB
deficiency on peripheral nerve, we first analyzed the expression of HADHB in distal sural nerve. Transcriptome analysis from 14 control
samples confirmed the expression of HADHB in the distal sural nerve (data not shown). In addition, we tried to demonstrate the effect of
HADHB deficiency on peripheral nerve; however, the effects of HADHB knockdown on the responses to oxidative stress and cell proliferation of
mouse motor neuron were not within statistically significant ranges (data not shown). Therefore, further analyses are needed to elucidate
the pathophysiological mechanism of HADHB mutation-mediated peripheral neuropathy. Clinical and histopathological features of the present
patients were consistent with an early-onset axonal sensorimotor CMT neuropathy. Both patients revealed the age at onset below 10 years old,
and showed typical clinical phenotypes of CMT including predominant distal muscle weakness and atrophy, pes cavus, and steppage gait
(Additional file 3: Figure S2). Nerve conduction studies in both of them were compatible with motor and sensory neuropathies. However, they
did not have any other previously reported symptoms of HADHB patients, such as a rhabdomyolysis, cardiomyopathy, hypoketotic hypoglycemia,
metabolic encephalopathy, liver dysfunction, nor pigmentary retinopathy . Moreover, distal sural nerve biopsy in II-2 patient revealed
typical axonal neuropathy. It is noteworthy that swollen or abnormal mitochondria were noted in several MFs and unmyelinated axons, of which
significance was uncertain. Previously loss of MFs with features of Wallerian degeneration and axonal and myelin degeneration were reported
in HADHB patients. MRI analysis indicated a muscular involvement in the present patients with HADHB mutation. In addition, lower limb MRI
findings revealed severe muscle atrophy with hyperintense signal changes in the lower leg muscles than those in the thigh or hip muscles,
which was compatible with the typical features of the length-dependent axonal degeneration. In conclusion, we first report that a
heterozygous mutation in HADHB causes early-onset axonal CMT without any typical clinical symptom of MTP based on the data from WES, MRI,
and histopathological and electrophysiological analysis. Thus our findings suggest that HADHB gene can be also filed as a causative of CMT,
which expands the clinical spectrum of both HADHB related disease and hereditary motor and sensory neuropathy. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. Study concept and design: CKW, and CB-O. Acquisition of data: HYB, LJH, PJ-M, CY-R, HYS, YBR, YJH, and KH.
Analysis and interpretation of data: HYB, YJH, KH, PJ-M, CS-C, CKW, and CB-O. Drafting of the manuscript: HYB, CKW, and CB-O. Critical
revision of the manuscript for important intellectual content: JS-C. Obtained funding: CKW, and CB-O. Administrative, technical, and
material support: LJH, CY-R, HYS, YBR, and PJ-M. Study supervision: CKW and CB-O. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The
pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2350/14/125/prepub Summary of exome
sequencing data for 5 samples. Table S2. Polymorphic functionally significant variants in CMT-relevant genes. Click here for file (A)
Western blotting of wild-type (WT), c.686G > T and c.210-1G > C mutants expressed in HEK293 cells. Cyclohexamide (CHX) was treated for
indicated time. First lane, cells transfected with pCMV-myc control vector. (B) Western blotting of proband’s fibroblast after treatment of
CHX. Ctr5-7, fibroblast from CMT patients with mutation in other than HADHB gene. Click here for file Leg pictures of the patient (II-2).
The patient showed prominent distal muscle atrophies of both lower extremities and revealed typical CMT phenotypes of pes cavus, and
steppage gait. Click here for file This study was supported by the Korean Health Technology R&D Project, Ministry of Health & Welfare,
Republic of Korea (A120182).
