The administration of anesthetics determines depression of the central nervous system and general anesthesia by inhalation may cause an
environmental pollution of the operating rooms. It may therefore conceive a possible occupational etiology of Parkinson's Disease (PD). In a
Caucasian male aged 59 years, PD was diagnosed by brain scans with a presynaptic radioactive tracer of the dopaminergic system. Family
history was negative for Parkinson’s disease or essential tremor. He was a smoker, a moderate consumer of coffee and alcohol, and never
exposed to pesticides/metals. For 30 years (since the age of 29 until today), he worked as an anesthesiologist in private clinics in the
Veneto (Northern Italy), exposed to anesthetic gases. The time elapsed from first exposure to onset of disease is 22 years, fulfilling the
requirement of the induction/latency period. A literature search demonstrated unacceptable levels of anesthetic gases in public hospitals of
the Veneto region from 1990 to 1999. This exposure was presumably high also in private hospitals of the region until at least 2007, when an
overexposure to sevoflurane was repeatedly measured in this patient. The association between occupational exposure to anesthetic gases and
risk of Parkinson’s disease was supported by a case-control study (reporting a two-fold increase in the risk of PD associated with a
clinical history of general anesthesia) and a cohort study comparing mortality from PD between US anesthesiologists and internists (showing
a statistically significant excess (p=0.01) in anesthesiologists compared to internists). Numerous recent mechanistic studies (in vitro
essays and in vivo short-term studies) strengthened the association between exposure to anesthetic gases (nitrous oxide, halothane,
isoflurane, levoflurane) and PD. In view of the limited evidence of human studies and the sufficient evidence of experimental studies, the
high exposure to anesthetic gases could have induced PD in the subject under study. The main structures involved in the development of
Parkinson’s Disease (PD) are the Substantia Nigra Pars Compacta and Striate Nucleus of the central nervous system (CNS), in which dopamine
is the neuro-transmitter molecule. The administration of anesthetics determines their distribution to the CNS and other tissues of the body.
The desired effect is the depression of the CNS that is obtained in relation to the concentration achieved in this tissue. It is believed
that general anesthesia by inhalation may cause an environmental pollution of the operating rooms and create problems of occupational
exposure in operators. It may therefore conceive a possible occupational etiology of PD. A case of Parkinson’s disease occurring in an
anesthesiologist came recently to our attention. In order to evidence an association between occupational exposure to the agent and the
disease, we made an extensive search of the literature. First, the patient was visited to confirm the diagnosis of PD and investigate the
occupational exposure to volatile anesthetics. The patient (male, Caucasian, aged 59 years) worked for 30 years as a free lance
anesthesiologist in surgical rooms of private clinics in the Veneto (North Eastern Italy), exposed to different anesthetic gases: nitrous
oxide (N2O) for 22 years (until 2005); halothane, isoflurane, levoflurane and other halogenated aliphatic hydrocarbons for seven years
(1983-1990); and sevoflurane for 23 years (from 1990 until now). In his post-shift urine, hexafluoroisopropanol (metabolite of sevoflurane)
was 483.4 μg/liter (above the threshold of 465 μg/liter) in May 2007 and 535.6 μg/liter in a separate working day one week later. The
patient was born from a spontaneous delivery (his mother was 28) and always had regular habits. In particular, he reported the consumption
of 5-6 cigarettes/day, half a liter/day of wine, 3 cups/day of coffee and tap water only. He always carried out sport (football, tennis,
skiing). He denied environmental exposure to pesticides or heavy metals (iron, copper, manganese, lead) and disclaimed past health problems
such as high blood pressure or vascular disorders, asthma, nor mood disorders, trauma or surgical interventions. He experienced a knee
injury with lesion of cruciate ligaments (treated with ibuprofen/piroxicam and several arthrocentesis). In 2006, following recurrent left
lumbosciatalgia he underwent nuclear magnetic resonance that demonstrated medium grade spondylolisthesis. Neurological symptoms of PD first
appeared in 2005 and became progressively worse, leading to neurology consultations and imaging examinations. Brain magnetic resonance
imaging was negative. The single-photon emission computed tomography (SPECT), with a radioactive presynaptic tracer of the dopaminergic
system (123I DatSCAN), showed “reduced concentration of the tracer in the basal ganglia on the right and in the lenticular basal ganglia on
the right and left, supporting the clinical suspicion of PD”. The subsequent treatment with dopaminergic drugs reduced symptoms. The search
of “occupational exposure”, “anesthetic gases” and “Veneto” in PubMed and Scopus returned three citations . Available exposure data,
collected with personal sampling in anesthesiologists in Veneto public hospitals from 1990 to 1999, are shown in Table 1: means and standard
deviations as well as percentage of exceedance with respect to a threshold of 50 ppm for nitrous oxide and 2 ppm for forane. Exposure over
time decreased for N2O but not for forane. Compliance with exposure threshold values was assessed with the “one-sided tolerance limits”
(OTL) test, which places the statistic OTL (y-axis) against number of samples taken (x-axis) . As shown in Figure 1, all measures were
plotted in the unacceptable area. Anesthetist exposure to anesthetic gases (nitrous oxide and isoflurane) measured in the operating rooms of
the Veneto Region, 1990-2002, by personal sampling: survey year, number of samples, mean and standard deviation (in parts per million, ppm),
percentage of measurement exceeding the standard (Exceedance %), and references *environmental concentration values recalculated from the
urine concentration. Compliance of exposures to anesthetic gases with exposure threshold values, assessed with the “one-sided tolerance
limits” (OTL) test: OTL on y-axis and number of samples on x-axis of the OTL diagram. Different combinations of “anesthesiologist”,
“anesthetic gases”, “nitrous oxide”, “halothane”, “isofluorane”, “sevofluorane”, “Parkinson’s disease”, “dopamine”, “dopaminergic neurons”,
“substantia nigra”, “striatum”, “vitamin B12”, “cobalamine”, “αβ–amyloid” were searched in PubMed and Scopus. An association between
exposure to anesthetic gases and PD was suggested for the first time by a case–control study conducted in Italy (136 patients diagnosed with
PD by a neurologist and 272 controls matched by age and sex), in which the risk of PD was evaluated with odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence
interval (CI) estimated with logistic regression analysis. Smoking adjusted ORs were: 41.7 (CI: 12.2–142.5; p <0.0001) for family history of
PD; 10.8 (2.6–43.7; p<0.0001) for family history of essential tremors; 2.6 (1.4–3.7; p < 0.0013) for advanced maternal age at the time of
childbirth; 7.7 (1.4–44.1; p<0.0212) for employment in agriculture; 2.0 (1.1–3.6; p < 0.0308) for the use of well water; and 2.2 (1.3–3.8;
p<0.0024) for general anesthesia . A cohort study compared mortality from PD between two large groups of US male doctors (33,040
anesthesiologists and 33,044 internists) that were followed up from 1979 to 1995 . The standardized mortality ratio (SMR) was estimated
separately in anesthesiologists and internists in two follow up periods (≤10 e >10 years) and, in each follow-up period, a risk ratio (RR)
(ratio of SMR anesthesiologists / SMR internists) was obtained. Table 2 shows that in each group of doctors, mortality was lesser with
respect to that in the US population. When the two groups were directly compared, RR becomes 3.47 (1.37–9.43) in the second period, a
statistically significant excess (p = 0.01) indicating that PD risk was higher in anesthesiologists compared to internists . Mortality for
Parkinsons disease as the underlying cause of death in two groups of specialized doctors (anesthetists e internists) from 1979 to 1995 The
mechanistic studies linking exposure to anesthetic gases to PD are reported below. According to Brodsky nitrous oxide inactivates vitamin
B12, which is the essential cofactor for the enzyme methionine synthetase. The latter favors the conversion of homocysteine (HC) in
methionine, which is the precursor of S-adenosyl-methionine, a universal methyl-group donor involved in the regulation of DNA epigenetic
processes . The advent of sensitive diagnostic tests, including HC assays, has revealed a surprisingly high prevalence of a more subclinical
form of B12 deficiency (without anemia), particularly in operating theatre staff exposed to high level of N2O . Metabolic evidence of B12
deficiency was reported in association with several neurodegenerative disorders, including Parkinson’s disease . Furthermore, in a murine
model, deprivation of vitamin B12 produced apoptosis of neurons in Substantia Nigra of adult rats and appearance of a parkinsonian-like
phenotype . Isoflurane is metabolized by cytochrome P450 2E1 (CYP2E1); on the other hand CYP2E1 has been detected in Substantia Nigra Pars
Compacta and Striate Nucleus. Animal studies and in vitro essays on neuronal tissues suggested that administration of isoflurane increased
the production of reactive oxygen species (ROS), through enzyme induction of CYP2E1, implicated in the pathogenesis of PD . Isoflurane
anesthesia enhanced extracellular dopamine concentration through inhibition of dopamine active transporter (DAT), placed on dopaminergic
pre-synapses . The lesser recovery of dopamine from synaptic spaces involved an increase in: dopamine uptake, dopamine intracellular
overload and ROS production at cytosolic level . Isoflurane can induce neuro-inflammation, as shown by different studies that found an
increase of tumor necrosis factor (TNF–alfa) and interleukins (IL–6 e IL–1beta) in the cerebral tissues of rodents . Isoflurane reduced (by
facilitating endocytosis) synaptic receptors n–methyl–d–aspartate in an experiment in vitro where neurons from healthy mice were exposed to
isoflurane 2% for six hours. There were ensuing changes in excitability of nigrostriatal and corticostriatal neurons that greatly reduced
cognitive performance and played a role in the onset of PD . Sevoflurane was found to increase TNF-alfa and production of beta-amyloid
through activation of caspases and apoptotic cascade , which are major characteristics of PD . Halothane and isoflurane increased
cytotoxicity in pheochromocytoma cells in vitro, by increasing oligomerization of beta-amyloid. The same mechanism presents itself at the
nigro-striate level producing dopaminergic neurotoxicity . Halothane has been shown to be capable of binding tubulin, altering its
polymerization and destroying the polymerized microtubules ; in addition, a recent study has shown an interaction between the halothane
molecule and the microtubular elements of the neuronal cytoskeleton . High dose of anesthetics cause an alteration in the structure of
tubulin, which in turn impedes the polymerization of the microtubules, thus determining a lack in macrotubule formation . This evidence
suggests a role of anesthetics in the exacerbation of neurodegenerative illnesses such as PD . The diagnosis of PD in this patient is quite
certain since it is based on a brain SPECT demonstrating a reduced concentration of a presynaptic radioactive tracer of the dopaminergic
system in the basal ganglia on the right and in the lenticular basal ganglia on the right and left. Pollution from anesthetic gases at
unacceptable levels was widespread in public hospitals in the Veneto from 1990 to 1999 (Table 1 and Figure 1) as well as in private
hospitals in the Veneto until at least 2007, as it can be inferred by overexposure to sevoflurane assessed in the patient while working in
one of these private structures. The time elapsed from first exposure to anesthetic gases (1983) to onset of PD symptoms (2005) was
22 years, fulfilling the induction/latency period of >10 years that was observed in the US study comparing anesthesiologists and internists
. The hypothesis of association between exposure to anesthetic gases and PD is recent and PD is relatively rare; both facts explain the few
number of epidemiological studies on the topic. However, the hypothesis of association between exposure to anesthetic gases and risk of PD
was strengthened by several recent mechanistic studies (in vivo short-term studies and in vitro essays) that linked exposure to anesthetic
gases (nitrous oxide, halothane, isoflurane, lovoflurane) with PD risk. In the reported case, moreover, a non-occupational disease is
unlikely because of the absence of: family history for PD or essential tremor and personal history of mood disorders ; bronchial asthma
constipation and arterial hypertension (or treatment with beta blockers or calcium channel blockers) ; general anesthesia . There was no
exposure to pesticides, residency in rural areas or use of well water contaminated by pesticides . The patient is a smoker and a moderate
consumer of coffee and alcohol though these habits are protective factors against PD . In view of the limited evidence of human studies and
the sufficient evidence of experimental studies, the high exposure to anesthetic gases could have induced PD in the subject under study.
Although additional studies are warranted, this evidence could enable Health Authorities to appropriately answer the claims of workers
exposed to anesthetic gases, taking into account scientific evidence and social expectations. Written informed consent was obtained from the
patient for publication of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal.
Authors declare that they do not have any financial and non-financial competing interests, such as: ● receiving any reimbursements, fees,
funding or salary in the past five years from an organization that may in any way gain or lose financially from the publication of this
manuscript; ● holding any stocks or shares in an organization that may in any way gain or lose financially from the publication of this
manuscript; ● currently applying for any patents relating to the content of the manuscript; ● having political, personal, religious,
ideological, academic, intellectual, commercial or any other in relation to this manuscript. GM conceived the study, participated in its
design and coordination, and helped to draft the manuscript. VC searched the literature and helped to draft the manuscript. MdA critically
revised the manuscript for important intellectual content. EZ participated in the design of the study, helped to draft the manuscript, and
performed the statistical analysis. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. GM is Associate Professor in Occupational Medicine,
Responsible of Laboratory of Occupational Epidemiology at Department of Molecular Medicine, University of Padova (Italy); author of 172
papers in peer-reviewed journals (1655 citations; H index = 24; overall IF = 294.061); associate editor and reviewer for many scientific
journals. VC is a post-graduate student in Occupational Medicine at University of Padova (Italy). MdA is a post-graduate student in Forensic
Medicine at La Sapienza University, Rome (Italy). EZ is a post-graduate student in Occupational Medicine at University of Padova (Italy).
The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/13/194/prepub The authors thank Luca
Cegolon and Emanuela Fadda for general supervision of the research.
