Cardiac myxomas are one of the most common types of primary cardiac tumors and are associated with embolization, angina, and sudden death.
Most cardiac myxomas arise from the fossa ovalis, while those that arise from the mitral valve are exceedingly rare and those that arise
from the chordae are even rarer. We report the case of a 28-year-old Caucasian woman who suffered from a brain infarction. A duplex
ultrasound showed no cerebrovascular stenosis or occlusion, but an echocardiogram revealed a left ventricle pedunculated mobile mass (5 mm
in diameter) that was attached to the mitral valve chordae tendineae. We elected cardiac surgery to resect the cardiac tumor and to avoid
further embolic events. The traditional surgical strategy—mitral valve replacement through full sternotomy—has many disadvantages,
particularly for young women. Therefore we desided to use the Premeasured Gore-Tex chordal loop method followed by annuloplasty using a
minimally invasive video-assisted approach. Exploration of the mitral valve showed a globular tumor involving the anterior mitral leaflet
chordae tendineae, which was removed along with the involved chordae tendineae. Histopathological examination of the tissue revealed a
benign polypoid myxoma. The patient had an uneventful recovery and has remained symptom-free. Echocardiography one week after surgery showed
satisfactory valve function. We believe our surgical treatment was the most appropriate option for this case and it resulted in an excellent
medical outcome and improved the quality of life, including only a small lateral scar without the need for teratogenic anticoagulants.
Cardiac myxomas are one of the most common types of primary cardiac tumors and are thought to develop from primitive endothelial or
subendocardial cells or from multipotential mesenchymal cells and can occur within any of the cardiac chambers. However they have a
predilection to occur in the atria, particularly the left atria. Myxomas that arise from the mitral valve are exceedingly rare and those
from the chordae are still rarer . Yuan reported that of the 64 mitral myxomas described in publications (42 articles) from 2006 to June
2011, only one arose from the chordate . A 28-year old Caucasian woman without significant risk factors for atherosclerosis presented with
headache, right hemiplegia, and right visual impairment. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed a fresh left posterior brain infarction. A
duplex ultrasound showed no cerebrovascular stenosis or occlusion, but an echocardiogram revealed a left ventricle pedunculated mobile mass
(5 mm in diameter) that was attached to the mitral valve chordae tendineae (Figure 1). Left and right ventricular functions were normal, and
mitral valve regurgitation was mild. Because the patient did not exhibit findings indicative of having an embolic source, we elected cardiac
surgery to resect the cardiac tumor and to avoid further embolic events. Transthoracic echocardiography showing a tumor (5 × 6 mm) on the
chordae of anterior leaflet of mitral valve. A CPB was instituted via the femoral arterial and venous cannulation through a 3 cm transverse
incision in the right groin. The tip of the venous cannula was positioned under transesophageal echocardiographic guidance in the superior
vena cava. The temperature of the patient was cooled to 34°C, and vacuum-assisted CPB was used throughout the procedure. A right lateral
mini-thoracotomy (length, 5 cm) was performed via the 4th intercostal space, and the incision was placed in the submammary crease. A video
camera was inserted through a 10 mm port in the right 3rd intercostal space and a transthoracic aortic cross-clamp was inserted through the
3rd intercostal space. Antegrade cold blood cardioplegia was administered directly into the aortic root and repeated every 20 min.
throughout the procedure, the surgical field was flooded with carbon dioxide via the camera-port. The left atrium was opened posterior to
the interatrial groove. Exploration of the mitral valve showed a globular tumor involving the anterior mitral leaflet chordae tendineae
(Figure 2), which was removed along with the involved chordae tendineae. Neochordae were implanted using the loop technique. The required
length of the loop was determined by measuring the distance between the correct plane of apposition on an adjacent nonprolapsing segment and
the respective papillary muscle. A premeasured Gore-Tex loop (22 mm) was fixed to the body of the papillary muscle, and the four free loops
from this suture were secured to the resected portion (A2,3) of the anterior leaflet at the coaptation line. The sealing-test with a saline
solution showed incompetence, because of the short mitral leaflet and too small coaptation. Therefore, we removed the 22 mm Gore-Tex loop
and implanted an 18 mm Gore-Tex loop with the same maneuver (Figure 3). Additionally, an annuloplasty with a 28-mm CE-Physio-ring (Edwards
Lifesciences, Irvine, CA) was performed. Myxoma on the chordae of anterior leaflet of mitral valve (A2, 3). A premeasured Gore-Tex loop
(18 mm) was fixed to the body of the papillary muscle and the four free loops from this suture are secured to the anterior leaflet (A2, 3)
at the line of coaptation. Histopathological examination of the tissue revealed a benign polypoid myxoma. The patient had an uneventful
postoperative course and was discharged on the 7th postoperative day. An echocardiography one week after surgery showed satisfactory valve
function with slight central regurgitation. Cardiac myxomas are primary cardiac tumors that are thought to develop from primitive
endothelial or subendocardial cells or from multipotential mesenchymal cells and can occur within any of the cardiac chambers. However they
have a predilection to occur in the atria, particularly the left atria. Myxomas that arise from the mitral valve are exceedingly rare and
those from the chordae are still rarer . Yuan reported that of the 64 mitral myxomas described in publications (42 articles) from 2006 to
June 2011, only one arose from the chordate . Thus, our case represents an extremely rare example of such a myxoma. Cardiac myxomas are
associated with embolization, angina, and sudden death . When they arise from the left ventricular chamber, the risk of sudden death due to
embolization may increase because of the high mobility and pressure in the ventricle. Therefore, a prompt surgical management of these
tumors is necessary if no major contraindications are present. In addition, myxoma recurrence has been reported to occur at different rates
in surgically-treated patients and at the site of initial localization . Currently, radical resection is the gold standard for preventing
myxoma recurrence. However, sometimes radical resection may handicap the patient, particularly when a heart valve is replaced. In the young
woman of our study, who could become pregnant in the future, the myxoma involved the anterior mitral leaflet chordae tendineae,
necessitating complete resection of the involved chordae. The traditional surgical strategy—mitral valve replacement through full
sternotomy—has many disadvantages, particularly for young women. Anticoagulants are necessary after valve replacement with a mechanical
valve, which is contraindicated in pregnancy. Thus, replacement with a biological valve is the gold standard for young women who may become
pregnant in future. However, the durability of a biological valve is worth than a mechanical valve. We have used the “Premeasured Gore-Tex
chordal loop method” using a minimally invasive video-assisted approach, reported by von Oppell and Mohr and is now a standard procedure
used for mitral valve prolapse. Several additional repair techniques for prolapse of anterior mitral leaflet such as triangular leaflet
resection, edge to edge repair and others have been developed. However, these techniques may require smaller ring size than chordae
replacement for annuloplasty in cases with short mitral leaflets. Since the introduction of ePTFE as a chordal substitute, low frequency of
MR recurrence after chordal replacement has been reported. Moreover, as Pfannmüller et al. have described that the premeasured loop
technique is a highly reproducible method for chordal replacement and can be successfully performed using a minimally invasive approach .
Accordingly we use the premeasured Gore-Tex loop technique in almost all cases with mitral valve prolapse. In this case, an annuloplasty was
performed because of the short mitral leaflet and small coaptation, but we consider that the annuloplasty was not necessary if the mitral
valve showed an enough coaptation after chordae replacement. An echocardiography after surgery showed slight central regurgitation but it
was very small and not hemodynamic relevant. New devices such as “adjustable length mitral valve chordae” are introduced and clinical trials
are running at present . Such technologies may improve the technical feasibility of chordal repair in the future. We believe our surgical
treatment was the most appropriate option for this case and it resulted in an excellent medical outcome and improved the quality of life,
including only a small lateral scar without the need for teratogenic anticoagulants. We report an extremely rare case of a myxoma that arose
from the mitral valve chordae tendineae. We successfully performed a minimally invasive surgery, tumor resection and replacement of only the
involved parts of the chordae tendineae through a ateral mini-thoracotomy. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this case report and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of
this journal. CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass; MR: Mitral regurgitation. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MH
conceived, designed and drafted the manuscript, assisted in the operation. JG was the principal operating cardiac surgeon. JB and KH were
primarily involved in the clinical and scientific discussion of the case. All four authors revised the manuscript and made intellectual
contributions. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
