We report a rare case of trichilemmal cyst involving the bulbar conjunctiva. A 55-year-old female presented with a history of a painless,
progressive swelling in the left bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the nasal limbus of 3 years duration. Wide excision biopsy was performed.
Histopathologic examination findings were consistent with those of trichilemmal cyst. Trichilemmal cyst should be considered as differential
diagnosis in a case of limbal nodule. Atrichilemmal cyst also known as pilar cyst is a common cyst that forms from a hair follicle. The
cysts are smooth filled with keratin, a protein component found in hair, nails, and skin. Occasionally, trichilemmal cysts can become
malignant. To the best of our knowledge, trichilemmal cysts involving the bulbar conjunctiva have not been reported so far. We report a rare
case of trichilemmal cyst involving the bulbar conjunctiva. A 55-year-old female from South India of Dravidian race presented with a history
of gradually progressive, painless swelling in the left bulbar conjunctiva adjacent to the nasal limbus of 3 years duration. It was not
associated with redness, discharge or blurring of vision. There was no history of trauma or history of any surgery performed in the past.
There was no significant family history. On clinical examination, there was a nodular mass adjacent to the nasal limbus of left eye
measuring 5 mm × 5 mm, fixed to the underlying tissue, non-tender, lying within the pterygium [Figures 1a and b]. The transillumination test
was negative. Examination of the rest of the anterior and posterior segment was unremarkable. The right eye was unremarkable. A fold of
subconjunctival tissue extending from the swelling to the caruncle was observed during wide excision biopsy of the lesion. The specimen was
sent for histopathological examination. (a and b) Nodular mass at the limbus Histopathology indicated the presence of sebaceous material.
Microscopic examination showed a cyst lined by stratified squamous epithelium with the absence of granular cell layer, focal basal cell
hyperplasia, and flakes of keratin within the cyst [Figures 2a–c]. A diagnosis of a conjunctival trichilemmal cyst was made based on the
histopathological findings. Histopathology of the lesion from Figure 1. Cyst cavity filled with keratin lacking a granular cell layer in its
wall (H and E, ×400) Focal Basal cell hyperplasia in the cyst wall Absence of granular cell layer in the cyst wall A limbal nodule often
presents a difficult clinical, histopathologic, and therapeutic challenge. It poses a diagnostic challenge because most lesions are
transitions between inflammation, inflammatory hypertrophies, and true neoplasms. A trichilemmal cyst, also known as wen, pilar cyst or
isthmus-catagen cyst forms from a hair follicle. Though most often found on the scalp, they can also occur on other parts of the body such
as the upper lip, palpebral conjunctiva, caruncle, and pulp of the index finger. The rare location of bulbar conjunctiva in this case could
be explained as originating from the caruncle and being pushed toward the nasal limbus. These cysts are similar to epidermal cysts, both
being keratinous cysts. However histologically trichilemmal cysts lack a granular cell layer. Approximately, 20% of the epithelial cysts are
trichilemmal cysts and other 80% are epidermoid. Very rarely, trichilemmal cysts can undergo malignant transformation. In our case, the cyst
showed basal cell hyperplasia without cell atypia or mitosis. There are a few reported cases of trichilemmal cyst and malignant trichilemmal
tumor of the eyelid. However to the best of our knowledge, no cases of trichilemmal cysts involving the bulbar conjunctiva have been
reported. This case report highlights the need for considering trichilemmal cyst as differential diagnosis of the limbal nodule. The authors
would like to acknowledge the editorial assistance and constant encouragement of Dr. Asha Achar, Senior Resident, Dr. Ajay Kudva, Associate
professor, Dr. Vandana Serrao Assistant Professor, Department of Ophthalmology, A. J. Institute of medical sciences, Mangalore, India.
Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
