Sir, Fast imaging employing steady state acquisition (FIESTA) is a modern magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) sequence, which is a type of
steady state free precession (SSFP) sequence. SSFP sequences are gradient echo sequences with a small flip angle and short relaxation times
in which a steady state develops between the pulse repetitions. It gives strong signal from fluid tissues while suppressing background
tissue signal, improving contrast, and anatomic detail of small structures. SSFP sequences are being increasingly used for evaluating the
cisternal segments of cranial nerves due to their high resolution, submillimetric thickness, and the improved contrast between cranial
nerves and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), with the cranial nerves seen as dark signals against an extremely bright background provided by the
CSF. We demonstrate its role as a problem solving modality in a child with Duane's retraction syndrome who was only diagnosed with the aid
of FIESTA imaging. A two-and-a-half-year-old girl presented with a history of acquired esotropia at one year of age. Clinical examination
revealed a left lateral rectus palsy and subtle left sided face turn. MRI was performed in view of the history of acquired lateral rectus
palsy. The MRI showed normal bulk and signal intensity in all extraocular muscles including the left lateral rectus [Figure 1]. The brain
parenchyma including brainstem was also unremarkable. FIESTA images were then taken, which showed aplasia of the abducens nerve on the left
side [Figure 2]. The right abducens nerve was well visualized and showed normal signal intensity. The rest of the cranial nerves were also
normal. Subsequent clinical examination picked up mild retraction on adduction with subtle widening on abduction suggesting unilateral
Duane's retraction syndrome type I, which was not forthcoming in the first examination, probably due to lack of cooperation by the child.
MRI Axial T1-weighted, coronal T1-weighted and postcontrast axial T1-weighted images in a two-and-a-half-year-old girl with history of
acquired left lateral rectus palsy show preservation of normal bulk and signal intensity in the bilateral lateral rectii. Postcontrast
images show no abnormal enhancement in the muscles. The bilateral abducens nerves are not identifiable on these routine MRI sequences MRI
Axial fast imaging employing steady state acquisition (FIESTA) images in the same child show the right abducens nerve (arrow) traversing the
prepontine cistern to enter the Dorello canal. The anterior inferior cerebellar artery is also seen (arrowhead) arising from the basilar
artery. Note the absence of a similar abducens nerve on the left side, suggesting aplasia of the nerve. This aplasia would not have been
identified without the higher contrast, resolution, and submillimetric slice thickness of the FIESTA sequences. Demonstration of the
abducens nerve aplasia prompted repeat clinical examination, which picked up subtle abnormality in abduction and adduction, helping to make
the diagnosis of Duane's retraction syndrome Duane's retraction syndrome is a congenital syndrome, sometimes described as a congenital
miswiring of the recti muscles, which presents with impaired eye movements in adduction and abduction along with globe retraction and
palpebral fissure narrowing. The condition is usually unilateral or rarely bilateral. Associated abducens nerve hypoplasia or aplasia and
aberrant oculomotor nerve supply to lateral rectus muscle have all been variously described as part of their imaging spectrum. FIESTA
imaging can be employed to differentiate between lateral rectus palsy and Duane's syndrome especially when history suggests an acquired
onset and the characteristic clinical signs are not obvious during the early phase. Most cases of Duane's syndrome are diagnosed clinically
by the age of 10 years. Neuroimaging is important in suspected acquired lateral rectus palsy to rule out an intracranial space occupying
lesion. Routine MRI sequences will demonstrate the absence of a tumor but may not be able to demonstrate abducens nerve aplasia or
hypoplasia in such a case as they may not visualize the nerve even in normal subjects. Recent studies have even reported visualization rates
for abducens nerve to be as low as 43% on routine sequences, increasing to almost 100% employing FIESTA. Awareness among ophthalmologists of
this modern sequence will help them to specifically request FIESTA in similar cases, which may otherwise cause diagnostic difficulties.
