Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis is a genodermatosis characterized by susceptibility to infection by specific HPV types (HPV 3/10 and beta-
HPVs). It is considered to be the first model in human carcinogenesis induced by HPV. In this report we present a rare case of
Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis associated with vertical transmission of HIV. Although most patients with HIV present infections by HPV
virus, the frequency of Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis is no greater in patients with HIV because in EV there is a deficiency of specific
cellular immunity to infection by some types of HPV, called HPV-related Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis. A Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme é
uma genodermatose que se caracteriza pela susceptibilidade à infecção por tipos específicos de HPV (HPVs 3 e 10 e os beta-HPVs) e é
considerada o primeiro modelo no homem de carcinogênese induzida pelo HPV. Neste artigo apresenta-se um caso raro de Epidermodisplasia
Verruciforme em um paciente com HIV desde o nascimento. Apesar dos doentes com HIV apresentarem mais infecções pelos vírus HPVs, existem
poucos relatos na literatura de Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme no doente com HIV. Isso se explica, pois a Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme é
consequência de uma deficiência celular específica à infecção por alguns tipos distintos de HPVs, ditos HPVs relacionados a
Epidermodisplasia Verruciforme. Epidermodysplasia Verruciformis (EV) is a rare affection of recessive autosomal transmission as described by
Lutz and Lewandowski in 1922, although there are reports of a possible recessive heritage connected to the X.1,2,3 EV can be both familial
and sporadic. Androphy et al consider the sporadic form more common. 4,5 EV is characterized by a susceptibility to chronic infections by
different types of Human Papiloma Virus (HPV).3 The specific HPVs involved in the EV pathogenesis are 3 and/or 10 types (associated to flat
verruca), and the beta-HPVs 5, 8, 9, 12, 14, 15, 17, 19-25, 36-38, 47 and 50 types. The clinical picture begins in childhood and adolescence
(5-11 years). It is expressed by flat verruca-type lesions, maculae and isolated or confluent papule, erythematous and/or hypochromic, and
can present desquamation. The lesions generally begin on the face and in the cervical region, with later generalization, but sparing the
scalp and mucosa. Itching and ardor appear occasionally, normally associated with sun exposure.1,2,3 The clinical lesions can resemble a
flat verruca, versicolor pityriasis, psoriasis and seborrheic keratoses. 1,2,3 EV diagnosis must be suspected when persistent verrucas are
present in large body areas and are thus difficult to treat.6 EV patients possess specific cellular immunity against certain kinds of HPV.
Consequently, flat wart lesions are distributed generally, and on account of the oncogenic action of the virus, actinic keratosis and
carcinomas can develop, mainly in photo-exposed areas. Lesions can become malignant in approximately 30% of cases, more commonly in the
third and fourth decades of life, and spinocellular carcinoma, the most frequent type, can be aggressive and even present metastasis.2
Histologically, the lesions present stereotypical keratinocytes enlarged on the upper epidermis with a grey-blue cytoplasm and pyknotic
nucleus.1,2,3,6 The present case report refers to a patient with EV and vertical infection by HIV. 22-year-old male reporting non-
pruriginous lesions which appeared in the pre-adolescent period, initially on the neck, with later dissemination. He denied relatives with a
similar condition and consanguinity between his parents. HIV was present since birth, and the patient was under non-regular treatment with
antiretroviral drugs. Dermatological examination showed isolated flat and some confluent, erythematous papulae, discreetly desquamative on
the neck, trunk, and limbs. (Figures 1-3) Isolated and confluent erythematous papulae forming verruca-type plaques on the upper chest
Erythematous and hypochromic desquamative plaques on the back Laboratory examinations showed positive anti-HIV, CD4: 84; Viral Load: 4.188.
The histopathological examination revealed wide grayish-blue keratinocytes with pyknotic nucleus on the upper third of the epiderm. These
findings were compatible with EV. (Figures 4 and 5) Transition from the normal epidermis and the compromised area Stereotypical grayish-blue
cytoplasm and keratinocytes with pyknotic nucleus on the upper epiderm The in situ hybridization was negative to the
6-1116-18-31-33-35-39-45-51-52-56-58-59-68 HPVs. These were not present in the EV, thus allowing an accurate diagnosis to be made. Treatment
with oral acitretine was proposed but the patient missed follow-up at our dermatology clinic. EV is a genodermatosis characterized by
susceptibility to the infection by specific types of HPVs (3 and 10 HPVs and beta-HPVs). It is considered to be the first model of
carcinogenesis in men induced by HPV. The clinical picture of EV may present only flat verruca associated to non-oncogenic 3 and/or 10 HPVs,
called the "benign form", or expressed in a polymorphic way tending to malignancy associated with multiple HPVs, the major ones being: 5, 8,
14 and 47, called the "malignant form". The initial presence of flat verrucas followed by the onset of a polymorphism characteristic of the
malignant form defines the "mixed form".1 This patient was considered to carry EV in its benign form, since dissemination consisted only of
similar flat wart lesions. Moreover, the hystopathological examination showed the cytopatic effect of the virus only on the upper part of
the epidermis, typical of the benign form, while the malignant form involves the entire epidermis (Figure 5). The condition is not
specifically related to gender or race. Reports suggest that around 10% of EV carriers are the product of a consanguineous marriage. Our
patient's parents did not however report consanguinity. We considered the case as sporadic given that the patient denied having relatives
with a similar disease. Infection by the HPV virus in HIV carriers is common, but fewer than 20 cases of EV have been reported in patients
infected with HIV.6 A possible explanation might be that EV poses immunological changes of specific cellular immunity against different
types of HPVs: beta-HPVs and the 3 and 10 HPVs. Such immunological deficiency would appear to be local and exclusive, determining the
inappropriate presentation of specific antigens to HPV defense cells.1 There are even fewer such cases described in the EV literature on HIV
vertically infected patients, as in this particular case.7 No definitive treatment exists for EV, but photo-protection is recommended from
childhood onwards. Treatment of EV with oral retinoids has been described as producing a number of benefical effects including their
antiviral and antineoplasmatic actions. The use of systemic or intra-injury Alpha-2a Interferon alfa-2a has also been described, with
immunomodulator, antiviral and antiproliferous actions. Silva et al have reported a case treated with oral 0.75 mg/kg/day Acitretine and
Alpha-2a Interferon 3.000.000 UI via SC, 3 times a week, with almost complete regression of the lesions and few collateral effects.2 Work
performed at the Padre Bento de Guarulhos Hospital Complex- Guarulhos (SP), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
Erythematous and hypochromic verrucous papulae on the backs of the forearms
