Acne fulminans is a rare and severe form of acne that may evolve from acne vulgaris, especially in male adolescents, or occur as an adverse
effect of oral isotretinoin. Arthritis is a serious clinical manifestation when the musculoskeletal system is compromised by AF and has been
reported as a rare adverse effect of isotretinoin. Involvement of the sacroiliac joints occurs in 21% of acne fulminans cases. We present
the case of a 18-year-old male patient in whom acne fulminans evolved from acne vulgaris grade IV and after inflammation resolution started
treatment with oral isotretinoin. Within a 30-day period of retinoid treatment he presented with back pain followed by rapid, progressive
inability to deambulate. Acne fulminans é uma forma grave e rara de acne que pode ser evolução da acne vulgar, principalmente em
adolescentes do sexo masculino, ou ser precipitada durante o tratamento com isotretinoína oral. A artrite pode ocorrer como grave
complicação na acne fulminans e já foi relatada como efeito adverso raro da isotretinoína. O acometimento das articulações sacroilíacas
ocorre em 21% das artrites associadas à acne fulminans. Relatase caso de paciente masculino, 18 anos, que desenvolveu acne fulminans a
partir de acne vulgar grau IV/conglobata e após resolução do quadro inflamatório, foi iniciado tratamento da acne com isotretinoína. Com 30
dias de uso do retinóide, o paciente iniciou dor lombar com piora rápida, progressiva que o incapacitou de deambular. Isotretinoin is a safe
and effective drug that has been used for over thirty years in the treatment of acne. The more frequent adverse effects are related to skin
and mucous membranes.1Arthralgias, and more rarely sacroiliitis and polyneuropathy, signal musculoskeletal system involvement.2 Likewise,
the acne fulminans (AF) described by Plewig and Kligman in 1975 is characterized by sudden onset of ulcerous/crusted acne and systemic
symptoms, including fever and weight loss, osteoarticular signs and laboratory tests alterations. It can also be triggered by isotretinoin
and has sacroiliitis as a clinical manifestation.1,2,3This is the report of a case of an adolescent who developed acne fulminans from grade
IV acne vulgaris, and after resolution of the inflammatory process, while initiating treatment with oral isotretinoin, presented with
bilateral sacroiliitis after 30 days of treatment. The association of the retinoid with the clinical picture developed is discussed in this
report. An 18-year-old male patient had the onset of acne 3 years ago, with worsening in the 40 days that preceded the examination at the
outpatient clinic. He presented fever and arthralgias for 7 days, more intense on the sternal region and left shoulder, associated with
pustules and confluent nodules which formed crusted erythematous plaques in the malar region, with formation of fistulous tracts in the
bilateral mandibular region, extending to the preauricular area with purulent secretion (Figure 1). However, there were no thorax nor dorsum
lesions. Laboratory exams showed leucocytosis 22,640/mm3 with 78.8% neutrophils, without hepatic or lipid profile alterations. The drugs in
use (topic betamethasone, gentamicin and benzoyl peroxide) were suspended and dapsone 100mg/day and minocycline 100mg/day prescribed for 21
days. With the clinical improvement and normalization of the hemogram, oral isotretinoin, 40mg/day (0.67mg/Kg/day) was prescribed. After 30
days there was significant improvement of cutaneous lesions, with pustules more concentrated on the perioral region, in addition to papules
and erythema in the malar and mandibular region, which already showed healing of the fistulous tracts (Figure 2). At the same time, the
patient reported intense lumbar pain of quick progression, which prevented ambulation, resulting in hospitalization, suspension of
isotretinoin and use of analgesics and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory. The lumbar spine radiography and MRI, performed during
hospitalization, did not show alterations that could explain the clinical condition. After hospital discharge, the patient returned to the
outpatient clinic using a wheelchair, and an orthopedic evaluation was requested. The non-steroidal anti-inflammatory was continued and a
bone scintigraphy was requested. Bone scintigraphy, done after hospitalization, when the patient was already walking with the aid of
crutches, detected the radiopharmaceutical trapped in the sacroiliac articulations, which was conclusive for light bilateral sacroiliitis
(Figure 3). The HLA-B27 antigen was negative. The patient maintained improvement of the articular condition, with progressive recovery of
ambulation after the use of orthesis and physical therapy. The acne condition presented excellent results with the use of oral isotretinoin
for 30 days and after its suspension, benzoyl peroxide 5% associated with adapalene 0.1% and intermittent oral antibiotic therapy, showing
few inflammatory lesions and residual erythema (Figure 4). Presence of pustules, nodules and crusts on face, predominantly in the malar
region Improvement of condition 30 days after use of oral isotretinoin. A) presence of pustules, erythema and papules; B) Pustules, erythema
and fistulous tract Bone scintigraphy showing light bilateral sacroiliitis (arrows) Patient under maintenance acne treatment with
improvement of clinical condition. A e B: presence of multiple scars Acne vulgaris, in all its clinical variables, involves 80% of young
people and has in acne fulminans, which affects 1% of this population, its most severe form. It predominates in men between 13 and 22 years
of age and is characterized by abscesses, crusted hemorrhagic ulcerative lesions and purulent areas that invariably involve the trunk with
less intense facial involvement, associated with sudden systemic manifestations like high fever, weight loss, asthenia, adenopathies and
osteoarticular involvement that affects mainly big articulations.4,5Clinically, it differs from grade IV or conglobata acne, for even of the
latter presents nodule-cystical eruptive lesions, there is no systemic symptomatology. Laboratory exams show that with acne fulminans there
is evident leucocytosis, with left deviation and increased erythrocyte sedimentation speed.4Despite the absence of extra-facial involvement
in the reported patient, the presence of signs and systemic symptoms of sudden onset accompanied by expressive leucocytosis, besides the
worsening and characteristics of the facial cutaneous lesions, supported the diagnosis of acne fulminans. As previously mentioned, acne
fulminans can involve the musculoskeletal system and more commonly causes bone pain, arthralgias and arthritis. When accompanied by
arthritis, the sacroiliac articulations are involved in 21% of the cases reported on the literature.5,6There are reports of acne fulminans
caused by isotretinoin, however in none of them it is related to the antigen HLA-B27.7,8 Oral isotretinoin is a drug largely employed in
dermatology. This oral retinoid is indicated for the treatment of grade III/nodular acne and grade IV/conglobata or fulminans and presents
as the most common adverse effect drying of skin and mucous membranes.1Rare situations like polyneuropathy and seronegative sacroiliitis can
occur, as in the described case.2,7,8As a pathogenic mechanism, it was suggested that isotretinoin could induce solubilization of the
liposomal membrane and consequently cytopathic destruction of the synovium, causing arthritis as an adverse effect.9Ekisioglu and others
(2007) suggested that the positivity of antigen HLA-B27 renders the patient susceptible to the development of sacroiliitis; however, the
other cases described in the literature do not corroborate this statement.7,8,10 In the case presented, bilateral sacroiliitis occurred only
after the introduction of oral isotretinoin, when the acne fulminans condition was resolved, with normalized hemogram and clinical absence
of inflammation. Based on the chronology of events and expressive improvement of arthritis after suspension of oral isotretinoin, in the
described case the sacroiliitis was associated with the retinoid. However, it is known that this type of clinical manifestation can occur
late when associated with acne fulminans and it is not possible to exclude this possibility. Whatever the case, the investigation of
rheumatological associations and careful follow-up of patients that show osteoarticular involvement are indispensable, especially in
sacroiliitis, an arthritis that involves the axial skeleton and is thus considered severe. Work performed at Dermatology and Venereology
Foundation Alfredo da Matta (FUAM) - Manaus (AM), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial Support: None
