Hepatitis C is an inflammatory disease of the liver caused by a single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Hepacivirus genus in the
Flaviviridae family, called the hepatitis C virus. After initial infection, 70% to 85% of the patients develop chronic hepatitis C with
hepatic fibrosis. In addition to specific liver changes, various extrahepatic manifestations have been associated with the hepatitis C virus
infection or with medications used to treat the condition. We report the case of a patient with chronic hepatitis C who presented with the
signs and symptoms of borderline tuberculoid leprosy and type 1 reaction four months after the start of treatment with a pegylated
interferon/ribavirin combination. A hepatite C é uma doença inflamatória fígado causada por um vírus RNA de fita simples, pertencente ao
gênero Hepacivirus e à família Flaviviridae, denominado de vírus da hepatite C. Após infecção inicial 70 a 85% dos pacientes infectados
evoluem para hepatite C crônica, com fibrose progressiva. Além das alterações hepáticas específicas, várias manifestações extra-hepáticas
têm sido relacionadas à infecção pelo vírus da hepatite C ou às medicações utilizadas no seu tratamento. Nesse trabalho, apresenta-se caso
de paciente portador de hepatite C crônica, que manifestou um quadro hanseníase boderline tuberculóide e reação hansênica do tipo I, quatro
meses após início do tratamento com interferon peguilado associado à ribavirina. Hepatitis C is an inflammatory disease of the liver caused
by a single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Hepacivirus genus in the Flaviviridae family, called the hepatitis C virus. After initial
infection, only 15% to 30% of hepatitis C patients recover spontaneously, while 70% to 85% develop chronic hepatitis C, which is defined as
HCV persisting for more than six months after infection.1 The main consequence of chronic hepatitis C is progressive hepatic fibrosis, which
can lead to cirrhosis, liver failure and hepatocellular carcinoma. In addition to specific liver changes, various extrahepatic
manifestations have been associated with HCV infection.2 Dermatologic changes constitute a significant part of the spectrum of extrahepatic
manifestations in hepatitis C and can be divided into those associated with the presence of HCV itself and those caused by medications used
to treat the condition.3 Among the manifestations commonly associated with HCV, the most notable are cryoglobulinemia, porphyria cutanea
tarda, leukocytoclastic vasculitis and livedo reticularis. Hepatitis C is normally treated with a pegylated interferon/ribavirin combination
to prevent it from progressing to the chronic form.4 Despite the undeniable benefits of this combination, when used in clinical practice it
can lead to a range of adverse effects, including dermatologic complications, many of which are the result of the immunomodulatory effects
of interferon. These effects may also include the exacerbation of existing cutaneous diseases.5 A 57-year-old male with hepatitis C using
pegylated interferon and ribavirin for treatment of hepatitis C. Four months after the start of the treatment, disseminated cutaneous
lesions appeared, as well as intense pain along the course of the cubital and fibular nerves. Dermatologic examination revealed small and
large, highly infiltrated erythematous plaques on his back, arms and legs (Figure 1). Physical examination revealed thickened cubital and
fibular nerves that were highly painful to palpation. The patient reported that he had developed a small erythematous plaque on his back two
years previously, which had been treated unsuccessfully as dermatophytosis. In light of the clinical history and the results of the
dermatological examination, a hypothesis of borderline tuberculoid leprosy with type I reaction was put forward and an incisional biopsy was
performed. A histological exam revealed granulomatous inflammatory infiltrate in the upper dermis and around blood vessels and hair
follicles, but Wade staining and bacteriological examination were negative (Figure 2). The Mitsuda reaction was positive. As the diagnosis
was confirmed, six months of multidrug therapy for paucibacillary (PB) leprosy was started, together with an initial 80 mg/day dose of
prednisolone, which was then gradually reduced. After the case was discussed with the hepatology team, the decision was taken to interrupt
the interferon and ribavirin treatment until the treatment for PB leprosy was completed. There was a clinical improvement in the patient's
leprosy reaction (Figure 3), and he was discharged as cured after completing MDT for PB leprosy (Figure 4). Six months ago, the patient
again began treatment for hepatitis C with interferon and ribavirin, but obtained no sustained virological response and awaiting this
release for use of pegylated interferon and ribavirin associated with protease inhibitor (telaprevir or boceprevir). At the time of writing,
the patient is undergoing follow-up at the dermatology and hepatology services and has not presented with any clinical manifestations of
leprosy reaction. Erythematous plaques with dense infiltrate on the trunk and arms Histological examination revealed granulomatous
inflammatory infiltrate in the dermis made up of lymphocytes, epithelioid cells and multinucleated giant cells. The infiltrate touches the
epidermis in several places, surrounds vessels and hair follicles and does not have a halo of lymphocytes Reduced plaque infiltration after
treatment with oral corticosteroids was started Lesions were clinically cured six months after the end of the multidrug therapy (MDT) for
paucibacillary (PB) leprosy Leprosy is a chronic granulomatous condition caused by Mycobacterium leprae, which affects the skin, peripheral
nervous system and, sometimes, other organs and systems. During the natural course of the disease, manifestations related to exacerbation of
cellular immunity or the formation of immunocomplexes (known, respectively, as type 1 and type 2 leprosy reactions) may occur.6 Type 1
reaction or reversal reaction is an acute inflammatory episode in the skin and peripheral nerves that is found in up to 30% of leprosy
patients and commonly causes physical disabilities. Multidrug chemotherapy and viral infections (such as the hepatitis B or C viruses and
HIV) are associated risk factors. It generally manifests in borderline forms, with a clinical picture characterized by signs of acute
inflammation, such as pain, redness, infiltration and swelling of preexisting lesions. New lesions may also appear. Neural involvement is
also common and can lead to deformities if not diagnosed and treated early.7 The nerves most frequently affected are the cubital, radial,
median, tibial and fibular nerves. The whole reversal reaction is associated with a sudden increase in cell-mediated immunity and is an
example of a delayed hypersensitivity reaction.8 In type 1 leprosy reaction, there is participation of T lymphocytes with production of
TH1-type cytokines, especially IL-2 and IFN-γ. Although type 1 leprosy reaction can be triggered by the viral infection itself, in the case
under discussion, it is more likely that the reaction was caused by the use of interferon, as the patient believed that he had been infected
with HCV for at least ten years, but had not had similar episodes previously. In addition, there are reports in the literature of autoimmune
events, such as thyroiditis and vitiligo, being precipitated by interferon therapy as a result of the T helper 1 response induced.9
Interferons are natural proteins modifying immunobiological response, effective antiviral, antiproliferative and immunomodulator. The
immunomodulatory effect of the product includes various actions on elements of the immune system, such as stimulation activities lytic
natural killer cells, cytotoxic T lymphocytes and macrophages on infected tumor cells, modification of the production of antibodies by B
cells, regulation of expression of MHC antigens in the cell membrane and stimulating the production of interferon alpha10 In the case
described here, the patient probably already had undiagnosed leprosy, as he had reported having an erythematous plaque on his back, and the
use of pegylated interferon may have triggered the reversal reaction as this is an immune-mediated reaction. In this paper, we report the
case of a patient with chronic hepatitis C who presented with the signs and symptoms of borderline tuberculoid leprosy and type 1 reaction
four months after starting treatment with a pegylated interferon/ribavirin combination. Multidisciplinary follow-up allowed reversal
reaction to be diagnosed and early treatment to be started, thus avoiding any potential disabilities. * Work performed at the Doutor Heitor
Vieira Dourado Tropical Medicine of Amazonas Foundation (FMT-HVD) - Manaus (AM), Brasil. Conflict of interest: None Financial Support: None
