Livedoid vasculopathy (LV) is a chronic and recurrent disease consisting of livedo reticularis and symmetric ulcerations, primarily located
on the lower extremities, which heal slowly and leave an atrophic white scar ("atrophie blanche"). Neurological involvment is rare and
presumed to be secondary to the ischemia from vascular thrombosis of the vasa nervorum. Laboratory evaluation is needed to exclude secondary
causes such as hyper-coagulable states, autoimmune disorders and neoplasms. We present two patients with a rare association of peripheral
neuropathy and LV, thereby highlighting the importance of a multidisciplinary approach to reach the correct diagnosis. Vasculopatia
livedoide é uma doença crônica e recorrente caracterizada por livedo reticular e úlceras simétricas nos membros inferiores, que cicatrizam e
deixam uma cicatriz branca atrófica ("atrophie blanche"). Envolvimento neurológico é raro e está provavelmente associado a isquemia pela
trombose dos vasa nervorum. Avaliação laboratorial é indicada com o intuito de excluir causas secundárias como estados de
hipercoagulabilidade, doenças autoimunes e neoplasias. Apresentamos dois pacientes com uma rara associação de vasculopatia livedoide com
neuropatia periférica, enfatizando a importância de uma abordagem multidisciplinar na busca do diagnóstico correto. Livedoid vasculopathy
(LV) is a chronic and recurrent disease, usually restricted to the skin, and characterized by livedo and ulcerations in the lower
extremities.1,2 Pain is a common feature and may be secondary to mononeuritis.2 In this report we describe two cases of LV associated with
peripheral neuropa thy, a rare association with few previous reports. Case 1: A 58-year-old woman, hypertensive, presented with a 6-month
history of painful ulcers in the lower extremities, associated with paresthesia and hypoesthesia in the feet. A biopsy specimen, with
representation of the dermo-hypodermic junction, was compatible with LV. Laboratory evaluations revealed a positive anticardiolipin IgG
antibody. Nerve biopsy (sural nerve) showed axonal degenerative alterations, consistent with chronic axonal neuropathy (Figure 1).
Electromyography (EMG) demonstrated an axonal polyneuropathy with a sensory predominance. Histology of nerve biopsy revealing degenerative
alterations and predominantly perivascular inflammatory infiltrate, consistent with chronic neuropathy (H&E, x100) Case 2: A 46-year-old
woman, previously healthy, presented with an episode of syncope, paresis and paresthesia of the extremities. Examination revealed livedo on
the distal lower limbs and an ulcer of the medial left malleolus (Figure 2). A deep biopsy specimen revealed thrombotic vasculopathy,
suggesting LV (Figure 3). Laboratorial evaluation was normal. EMG demonstrated sensitive and motor axonal neuropathy, with an asymmetric
distribution, consistent with mononeuropathy multiplex. Reticulated erythematous-violaceous patches on the left foot and an ulcer in the
left medial malleolus Thrombotic vasculopathy with extravasation and secondary inflammatory alterations (H&E, x400) LV is a rare disease,
commonly affecting young to middle-aged women, with a female-male ratio of 3:1.3. The disorder is believed to be a vasculopathy mediated by
a dysfunction of coagulation or fibrinolysis.3The main predisposing factors to thrombosis are endothelial damage, changes in the blood flow
and blood disorders leading to hypercoagulability.2There are two forms of the disease: the primary (idiopathic) and the secondary LV, which
is associated with hypercoagulable states, autoimmune disorders or neoplasms1,2,4,5 The clinical presentation consists of painful purpuric
eruptions and symmetric ulcerations, primarily located on the lower extremities, and overall on the malleoli.3,6After a slow healing process
of 3 to 4 months, the lesions leave an atrophic white scar ("atrophie blanche"), which is characteristic, but not pathognomonic, of
LV.1-3,5,6Livedo racemosa, defined by the presence of a violaceous netlike pattern of the skin, is commonly present.2,6LV usually has a
chronic course, with outbreaks of varying intensity.1,3 Neurological involvement in LV is rare, sparsely reported in the literature.1,4,6,7
Sensory symptoms, such as paresthesia or signs such as hyperesthesia usually indicate the presence of mononeuritis multiplex.2 The
neurological manifestations are presumed to be secondary to the ischemia from vascular thrombosis of the vasa nervorum.2,4,6 The nerve
conduction studies show decreased amplitudes of the motor and sensory nerve action potentials with slight reduction of nerve conduction
velocities7, pointing to an axonal neuropathy of asymmetrical distribution consistent with mononeuritis multiplex.8 Nerve biopsy usually
reveals endoneurial capillary ectasia and congestion with hemorrhage, with extensive infarct of the peripheral nerve and Schwann cells,
resulting in axonal loss without evidence of significant inflammation.4,7 The typical histopathologic findings of the skin biopsy are
endothelial proliferation, hyaline degeneration and thrombosis of dermal vessels.1,4,5Absence of inflammation of the vessel wall
differentiates LV from true vasculitis.2,4-6 Direct immunoflourescence usually shows deposition of immunoglobulin, fibrin and complement;
however, these findings are not specific for LV.2,5 Once the presence of LV is confirmed, a laboratory evaluation is needed in order to
exclude secondary causes.2 Differential diagnosis is especially made with other causes of leg ulcers, such as chronic venous stasis,
leukocytoclastic vasculitis and pyoderma gangrenosum.1,2,5Cutaneous polyarteritis nodosa (PAN) can also produce an identical clinical
picture and occasionally cause neurological symptoms. In order to perform a correct differential diagnosis it is necessary to obtain an
adequate skin sample, with representation from the epidermis to the dermo-hypodermic junction.2,8Vascular involvement in LV usually occurs
in the mid and superficial dermis, whereas in PAN histological examination reveals a necrotizing medium-sized vasculitis affecting the
reticular dermis and the subcutaneous fat which can cause secondary changes in the superficial dermal vessels. This demonstrates the
importance of obtaining a deep skin biopsy.2,8Therefore, Mimiouni et al suggest that after performing a 6-mm punch biopsy, a 4-mm punch
should be introduced through the surgical defect in order to reach deeper subcutaneous tissue. Both cylinders are then sent for pathological
evaluation.8 The treatment of LV is challenging and the therapeutic options are based on case series. The current approach is based on drugs
that stimulate endogenous fibrinolytic activity, inhibit thrombus formation or cause vasodilatation.9 This report presents two patients with
a rare association of neuropathy and LV, highlighting the importance of a multidisciplinary approach to reach the correct diagnosis. Work
performed at the Hospital de Clínicas de Porto Alegre - Federal University of Rio Grande do Sul (HCPA-UFRGS) - Porto Alegre (RS), Brazil.
Conflict of interest: None Financial Support: None
