Here, we describe an atypical case of systemic sclerosis in its diffuse cutaneous form with acute and rapid progression of the cutaneous
condition, without any systemic manifestations and the infrequent formation of bullae, showing the importance of diagnosis and early
treatment in such cases. This case also shows that special measures should be taken for bullous cutaneous lesions and ulcerations resulting
from serious sclerosis, which are entry points and increase morbidity and risk of death. Other prognostic factors include age, ESR and renal
and pulmonary involvement. Capillaroscopies can be useful predictors of greater severity of systemic scleroderma, revealing a greater link
with systemic, rather than cutaneous, involvement. Descrevemos um caso atípico de esclerose sistêmica em sua forma cutânea difusa com
instalação aguda e rápida progressão do quadro cutâneo sem qualquer acometimento sistêmico e a infrequente formação de bolhas, demostrando a
importância do diagnóstico e tratamento precoce frente a casos semelhantes e mostrando, com a experiência deste caso, que cuidados especiais
devem ser tomados com as lesões cutâneas bolhosas e as ulcerações decorrentes da grave esclerose que são portas de entrada e aumentam a
morbidade e risco de morte. Outros fatores prognósticos descritos são idade, VHS e envolvimento pulmonar e renal. A capilaroscopia pode ser
preditor de maior gravidade da esclerodermia sistêmica, guardando maior relação com o envolvimento sistêmico do que cutâneo. Systemic
sclerosis, in its diffuse cutaneous form, is characterized by an initial edematous phase, giving rise to cutaneous thickening of centrifugal
evolution, often without any vasospastic phenomena. This form of the disease typically spares the nipples and manifests with diffuse
hyperpigmentation, bearing a similar color to that found in adrenal insufficiency. 1,2 In most cases, it manifests with esophageal,
pulmonary, renal or cardiac, involvement. Almost no predilection by sex has been noted. Male, aged 61, presenting cutaneous sclerosis
involving acute onset, progressive evolution, of centrifugal character, for 3 months, associated with functional limitation of joint
movements and oral opening. The dermatological exam revealed hyperpigmentation and diffuse cutaneous thickening, sparing the nipples, an
increase in hand volume without any vasospastic phenomena or sclerodactyly, and tense bullous lesions in the lower limbs (Figures 1,2 and
3). He did not present comorbidity, was a smoker and social drinker, and worked as a general assistant. He presented no exposure to chemical
products like vinyl chloride, silica, etc. Additional tests did not reveal abnormalities, except for elevated ESR and ANA 1:320 with fine
speckled cytoplasmatic pattern, negative results for rheumatoid factor, anti-topoisomerase, anti-centromere and anti-RNP. Capillaroscopy of
the nail bed with hairpin-shaped capillary loops, without pathological megacapillaries, ramifications or intersections, corresponding to
discrete microcirculatory changes of nonspecific character. The histopathological analysis showed an area of intense subepidermal edema,
forming multiocular bullae, moderate perivascular mononuclear infiltrate, collagen compression, incarceration of annexes and
lymphangiectasias (Figures 4 and 5). Colloidal iron staining was weakly positive for mucin in the dermis. Given the rapid evolution of the
disease, treatment was started using cyclophosphamide 1g/kg/month and prednisone. In outpatient follow-up, after 5 cycles, there was partial
improvement in the cutaneous sclerosis, without any specific organic involvement. Hyperpigmentation and diffuse cutaneous thickening,
sparing the nipples Increase in hand volume without thickening or sclerodactyly - characteristic of diffuse cutaneous systemic sclerosis
Tense bullous lesions and exculcerations, predominantly in the lower limbs Subepidermal edema forming multiocular bullae, collagen
compression and incarceration of annexes Lymphangiectasia Here, we describe an atypical case of systemic sclerosis in its diffuse form, an
exuberant, acute, serious cutaneous condition involving rapid progression, with formation of bullae, an infrequent finding, without
presenting any specific systemic changes. It is not clear why the patient developed such a disproportion between the cutaneous and systemic
condition but we believe that the continuing preservation of organs during the evolution of the patient can be explained by the early
therapeutic intervention. Initially, other diagnostic hypotheses were considered for the exceptional nature of the case, like
scleromyxedema, discarded following the histopathological analysis and other scleroderma syndromes through occupational exposure (chemical
agents such as vinyl chloride, bleomycin, silica), discarded due to the lack of an epidemiological context of exposure. The formation of
bullae has been described in all types of scleroderma and it is a rare finding. In this case, the bullae resulted from the subepidermal
edema brought about by lymphangiectasias, secondary to fibrosis and lymphatic obstruction.3,4 The ANA fine speckled cytoplasmic pattern
found can be associated with the antibody anti-histidyl t RNA synthetase (Jo-1), an antibody indicating polymyositis in adults and rarely
reported in dermatomyositis.5 However, due to a lack of clinical data reinforcing this association in the exam of the patient in question,
such as proximal muscle weakness, cutaneous lesions that are typical or indicative of muscular lesions, we consider this hypothesis
unlikely. In most cases, the clinical relevance of the (recently reported) ANA cytoplasmic pattern is not defined, and other anti-tRNA
synthetase antibodies can generate the same pattern. Drawing on the clinical situation described, the expected ANA pattern would be the
nucleolar speckled one, associated with the antibody anti-RNA polymerase I, which corresponds to the diffuse form of systemic sclerosis. The
mucin finding in this case should not lead us to regard the mucinosis as primary but rather, as secondary to the exacerbated inflammatory
process the patient developed, with the stimulation of mucin production by the fibroblasts. It is an extremely rare finding in scleroderma
and is more common in systemic erythematosus lupus and dermatomyositis.6,7 Treatment for cases of extensive cutaneous conditions that
progress rapidly can be carried out with cyclophosphamide, with or without another immunosuppressive agent, including mycophenolate mofetil
or azathioprine. Another treatment option is the administering of rituximab.8 After 5 cyclophosphamide pulses, the patient experienced
partial improvement in the cutaneous sclerosis, multiple hospitalizations due to infection, still without the specific systemic
manifestations of the disease, perhaps on account of the early and aggressive treatment. Prognosis is linked to affected organs in cases of
systemic disease and some laboratorial markers. The presence of renal involvement (progressive loss of renal function or proteinuria over
3.5g/day or cellular cylinders in urine), cardiac involvement (cardiac insufficiency, pericarditis or electrocardiographic changes) and
pulmonary involvement (pleurisy, pulmonary hypertension, fibrosis or reduced diffusion capacity), at the time of diagnosis, are indications
of worse prognosis. Esophageal, intestinal, muscular and joint involvement; the presence of the Raynald phenomenon; hypertension;
hypergammaglobulinemia (as shown in this case); and positive rheumatoid factor, are not linked to bad prognosis. In males who are over 50
and experience an increase in ESR, as in the case of the patient in question, it is associated with lower survival rates.9 A periungual
capillaroscopy showing the presence of devascularization can be a predictor of greater severity of the systemic scleroderma, entailing a
greater link with visceral (rather than cutaneous) involvement10 In the case described, the capillaroscopy showed hairpin-shaped capillary
loops, without any signs of devascularization, reaffirming the fact that, to date, there has been no systemic involvement. * Work carried
out at the Pedro Ernesto University Hospital - State University of Rio de Janeiro (HUPE-UERJ) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Conflict of
interest: None Financial funding: None
