Psoriasis is a relatively frequent inflammatory dermatosis. Scarring alopecia due to scalp psoriasis was first reported in 1972, but few
reports have been written since then, showing that this is a very rare complication of a common disorder. We report a young Brazilian woman
with longstanding scalp psoriasis, which progressed to scaring alopecia. A psoríase é uma dermatose inflamatória que atinge com relativa
frequência o couro cabeludo. Alopecia cicatricial devido à psoríase do couro cabeludo foi publicada pela primeira vez em 1972, mas poucos
relatos foram escritos desde então. Aqui nós relatamos uma jovem brasileira com psoríase do couro cabeludo de longa data, que evoluiu para
alopecia cicatricial. Psoriasis is a chronic, recurrent and relatively frequent inflammatory dermatosis. Between 50% and 80% of patients
present scalp involvement alone or in conjunction with lesions on other parts of the body. Typical scalp psoriasis shows well-demarcated
erythematous plaques covered by silver-colored scales affecting various percentages of the scalp.1,2 Hair loss is a common complaint in
psoriatic patients with scalp involvement, but telogen effluvium due to the inflammatory process and trauma, caused by scratching of itchy
lesions, are believed to be the cause in most of these cases.3 Few reports of scarring alopecia due to psoriasis have been published. Here
we report a young Brazilian woman with longstanding scalp psoriasis which evolved to scaring alopecia. A 42-year-old Caucasian woman with a
22-year history of severe scalp psoriasis presented to our outpatient clinic complaining of itchy scalp and diffuse hair loss for the last
five years. Increased hair shedding was associated with episodes of greater inflammation and pruritus. Nail and articular psoriasis were
absent. Psoriatic lesions had always been confined to her scalp. Topical clobetasol, oral cyclosporine, methotrexate, UVB-NB phototherapy
and antibiotics had been used as treatment with only temporary relief. On physical examination, diffuse erythema, infiltration, scales and
crusts were present all over the scalp. Decreased hair density in the fronto-parietal area was observed. The right parietal side was the
most severely affected, so both dermoscopy and skin biopsies were performed in this area (Figures 1 and 2). Fungal assessment, from both
scalp scales and hair shafts, were negative. Erythema and scales in a area with decrease density of hairs Changes in clinical findings are
more visible on the right side Dermoscopy showed interfollicular twisted red loops characteristic of scalp psoriasis and lack of follicular
openings (Figure 3). No pustules or tufted hairs were observed. Dermoscopy. Area of interfollicular twisted red loops Horizontal sectioning
of the biopsy specimen showed follicular drop-out with only one follicle at the subcutaneous level and 3 vellus follicles at the dermis
level (Figures 4 and 5). Sebaceous glands were not visualized at all, but isolated pili erector muscles were present and fibrosis could also
be observed (Figure 4). No signs of androgenic alopecia were detected. Horizontal section. Follicular drop-out with only one follicle (FP)
at subcutaneous level, fibrosis (f) and isolated pili erector muscles (arrows). HE 40X Horizontal section. Three vellus follicles at
superficial dermis (arrows). HE 40X Vertical analysis showed epidermal changes compatible with psoriasis and a moderate chronic inflammatory
infiltrate around vessels and eccrine glands, associated with fibrous tracts (Figure 6). No interface changes were observed at the dermal-
epidermal level or affecting the follicular epithelium. Vertical section. Hiperkeratosis, regular acathosis, fusion of epidermal cones
(psoriatic changes) associated with chronic inflammatory infiltrate around vessels and eccrine glands and fibrosis (arrows). HE 40X Direct
immunofluorescence was negative for IgG, IgM, IgA and complement. Findings were consistent with scarring alopecia associated with
psoriasiform epidermal changes. Scalp involvement in patients with psoriasis is one of the most frequent manifestations over the course of
the disease.4,5 Hair loss due to scalp psoriasis is common, but alopecia is almost always non-cicatricial and complete regrowth is observed
after inflammation ceases.3,6,7 Scarring alopecia due to psoriasis was described for the first time in 1972, when Shuster4 described
"destructive alopecia" as the least frequent type of hair loss complications associated with psoriasis. Years later, Wright and Messenger
described 3 cases of psoriatic scarring alopecia and for the first time the histopathology was studied and showed adnexotropic
lymphohistiocytic infiltrate which destroyed the follicular epithelium.7 Complete destruction of the follicular epithelium would free
keratinized hair shafts directly into the dermis, leading to a granulomatous reaction. Atrophic or absent sebaceous glands were observed.
Van de Kerkhof and Chang described an 18 year-old female with a 6-year history of hair loss and a well-demarcated area of scarring alopecia
on the scalp.6 The biopsy showed characteristics of scarring alopecia and psoriasis in the interfollicular epidermis. The largest series of
cases was described by Runne and Kroneisen-Wiersma, who studied 47 patients with acute and chronic hair loss in scalp psoriasis.3 Most cases
presented complete hair regrowth after local antipsoriatic therapy, but 5 patients presented with scar formation, which showed similar
histological findings as the previously described cases. Four patients with scarring alopecia in scalp psoriasis were reported by Bardazzi
et al, where pathology revealed typical aspects of psoriasis in the interfollicular epidermis and reduction in the number of follicular
units, which were replaced by fibrous tracts.8 It is a common observation that long duration and higher severity of scalp psoriasis are the
factors most frequently associated with psoriatic scarring alopecia.6,7 One exception was published by Schön et al in 2000 in which a HIV-
positive 35-year-old patient developed scalp psoriasis with scarring alopecia within only five weeks of overt inflammation.9 Our patient
presented with a long history of severe scalp psoriasis. Scratching and secondary infections are supposed to present the main drivers of the
cicatricial process. Scalp pathology showed concomitant findings of psoriasis and cicatricial alopecia, as described in psoriatic scarring
alopecia. Other causes of primary and secondary alopecias, such as lichen planus pilaris, lupus erythematosus, folliculitis decal-vans and
infectious disorders, were excluded. Psoriasis can be a cause of secondary cicatricial alopecia. The true incidence of this complication is
not known, but appropriate control of psoriasis inflammation is important in order to avoid progression to scarring alopecia. * Work
performed at the Trichology Outpatient Clinic of the Hospital das Clinicas, Faculty of Medicine, University of São Paulo (HC-FMUSP) - São
Paulo (SP), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
