Lucio's phenomenon represents a serious cutaneous necrotizing reaction, which can occur with Lucio's leprosy and also in other forms of
lepromatous leprosy. The authors discuss the case of a 63-year-old male patient presenting with ulcers and necrotic cutaneous lesions on the
limbs, torso and face, associated with recurring sinusitis, hoarseness and a weight loss of 25 kilos over the last year. Bacilloscopy of
intradermal scrapings showed a bacilloscopic index of 5 and the histopathological findings were compatible with the diagnosis of Lucio's
phenomenon. The chosen treatment was exclusively multibacillary multidrug therapy, resulting in important dermatological improvement after
one month of therapy. The authors present an impressive case of Lucio's phenomenon with an exceptional response to treatment exclusively
with multibacillary multidrug therapy. O fenômeno de Lúcio representa uma reação cutânea necrosante grave que pode ocorrer na hanseníase de
Lúcio e em outras formas de hanseníase virchowiana. Os autores relatam o caso de um paciente masculino de 63 anos de idade apresentando há
um ano lesões ulceronecróticas nos membros, lóbulos auriculares e tronco, associadas a sinusite de repetição, rouquidão e perda ponderal de
25 kg. A baciloscopia de raspado intradérmico mostrou índice baciloscópico de 5 e o exame histopatologico foi compatível com fenômeno de
Lúcio. O tratamento instituído foi exclusivamente com poliquimioterapia multibacilar (PQT-MB), havendo melhora importante do quadro cutâneo
após um mês de tratamento. Os autores apresentam um caso exuberante de fenômeno de Lúcio que obteve excelente resposta ao tratamento somente
com PQT-MB. Hansen's disease or leprosy is a chronic infec-trum of leprosy is linked to variations on the patient's tious illness that is
considered endemic in Brazil. It is immune responses to the infection. Therefore, leprocaused by the Mycobacterium leprae (M leprae), matous
leprosy occurs in subjects that present with a which is transmitted via respiratory route, after a deficiency in the cellular immunity
response to M leplengthy and intimate contact with an untreated bacil-rae, while tuberculoid leprosy is linked to a higher liferous
patient.1 Depending on the patient's immune resistance to the bacillus. Intermediate leprosy presensystem, the infection may evolve to cure
or to one of tations, including borderline tuberculoid, borderline-its clinical presentations: indeterminate, tuberculoid, borderline and
borderline lepromatous are unstable borderline or lepromatous.2 The wide clinical spec-forms of the disease. Leprous reactions are acute and
frequent manifestations that disrupt the indolent chronic course of the disease and reflect the immunological instability of the patient.
According to the clinical and histopathological manifestations, reaction cases may be classified as: type 1 or reversal reaction, and type 2
including erythema nodosum leprosum, erythema polymorphe and Lucio's phenomenon. Some authors recognize the latter condition as a reaction
type 3. A sixty-three year old male patient informed the gradual appearance of painless hemorrhagic blisters on limbs, earlobes and torso
one year ago. These lesions later regressed spontaneously, leaving only atrophic scars on their previous sites. He also reported several
bouts of recurring sinusitis, hoarseness and progressive worsening of the cutaneous lesions. This patient had a previous history of Chronic
Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD), hyperuricemia and high blood pressure treated with an irregular use of nifedipine. He denied smoking,
drinking or the use of illicit drugs and he also had no family history of dermatologic diseases similar to his own. During admission, the
patient status was cachectic; he was dehydrated, asthenic, dyspneic and afebrile (Figure 1). Physical examination showed an infiltrated
face, with madarosis, besides ulceronecrotic geometrically shaped lesions affecting the limbs, torso and face. In some segments, these
lesions would converge; leaving large denuded areas (Figure 2). Neurologic examination demonstrated bilaterally thickened fibular nerves,
which were painless to palpation. Laboratory exams revealed anemia (hemoglobin: 9.5 g/dL; hematocrit: 29.9%; MVC: 76.5 fL), bandemia (10%),
hypoproteinemia (5.1g/dL), and elevated levels of C reactive protein (CRP) and erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) (27.4 mg/L and 82 mm/h
respectively); Anti-HIV, VDRL, Antinuclear Factor (ANF), Anti-DNA e anti-cardiolipin antibodies (ACA) were all negative. Skin smear
bacilloscopy demonstrated a bacilloscopic level of 5 (i.e. the presence of an average of 100 to 1,000 bacilli per examined field). The
results of a biopsy on a forearm opened lesion showed an ulcerated epidermis, accompanied by a dense histiocitary infiltrate with peri-
adnexal and interstitial distribution; the presence of vascular fibrinoid necrosis with neutrophilic infiltrate and associated edema; also
the presence of numerous granular bacilli by the Fite-Faraco stain, often arranged in a cluster-like formation (Figure 3). The
histopathological findings were compatible with the diagnosis of Virchowian hanseniasis, exhibiting Lucio's phenomenon reaction.
Radiographies of the hands showed bone resorption on the right fifth digit; rhinoscopy visualized a nasal septal perforation; a decrease of
diameter in the glottic region was detected by the videolaringoscopy; and the Mitsuda test was negative. The treatment of choice was
exclusively with multibacillary multidrug therapy leading to a marked improvement in the cutaneous signs and symptoms after one month of use
(Figure 4). Crusted ulcerated lesions mainly in the oral and nasal cavities and presence of madarosis Converging of lesions, leaving large
denuded areas Presence of innumerous granular bacilli by the Fite-Faraco stain Impressive recovery after one month of treatment Lucio's
phenomenon (FL) represents a severe cutaneous necrosis reaction that may occur in Lucio's leprosy and also in other forms of Virchowian
hanseniasis.2 This is a rare syndrome, almost exclusively limited to patients with leprosy from Mexico and Central America, although it is
rarely reported in Cuba, South America, United States, India, Polynesia, South Africa and Southeast Asia. FL occurs 3 to 4 years into the
course of the disease and it is most common in patients that are either untreated or inadequately treated.3 This reaction is characterized
by bouts of slightly infiltrated erythematous macules, which evolve with central necrosis and subsequent ulceration. These lesions affect
mainly the extremities and usually regress in a period of two to four weeks, leaving atrophic star-like scars.4,5 The presence of dark,
flaccid blisters may be observed.6 Many Virchowian hanseniasis' characteristics are often described, such as: thickening of the facial skin,
alopecia in the eyebrows and eyelashes, paresthesia on the extremities and rhinitis.7 FL's pathophysiology is still unknown, however, it is
a consensus that this is a thrombo-occlusive process. The main hypothesis is that bacterial liposaccharides would stimulate macrophages to
release TNF and interleukin1 (IL-1). Those products would act on the endothelial cells facilitating the production of prostaglandins,
interleukin-6 (IL-6) and coagulation factor III, thus causing the formation of thrombi inside the vessels and also promoting tissue necrosis
on predisposed patients.6 Histologic examination demonstrates: a decrease in the vascular lumen due to endothelial cellular proliferation;
capillary thrombosis on the superior and medium dermis resulting in an ulcerated epidermis; inflammatory infiltrate with foamy histiocytes
and innumerous bacilli, even inside the vascular walls.8 There are few reports of leukocytoclastic vasculitis in early lesions. All these
findings may be observed both in the clinically altered skin as well as in the apparently healthy one. Among several differential diagnosis,
one must consider the erythema nodosum leprosum (a neutrophilic vasculitis, mediated by immunocomplexes, with variable involvement of the
panniculus), easily distinguished by the presence of painful nodules that rarely ulcerate, small quantity of bacilli and general symptoms
like fever, adenomegaly, apathy, possibly arthrites, neurites, iridocyclites and the fact that it affects more frequently those patients on
the first six months of treatment. Multibacillary multidrug therapy (PQT-MB) is the treatment of choice for FL. What supports this theory is
the massive replication of M leprae, a triggering event for FL that must be arrested in order to stop the leprosy reaction. The role of
corticosteroids is still controversial. In the clinical case described above, we did not include corticoids due to the risk of severe
infection. The progressive improvement of the patient, in a matter of few days, ratified our choice. Thalidomide and clofazimine are less
effective to treat erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL). Prognosis is variable, and may result in death by sepsis or coagulation disorders.6 The
authors discussed the case of a patient with exuberant FL manifestations, which presented an excellent response to treatment with only PQT-
MB. * Work performed at Marcílio Dias Naval Hospital (HNMD) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding:
None
