Twenty-five year old male patient presenting with asymptomatic brown spots, on cervical, axillary, inguinal and popliteal regions, for the
last nine months. Pathological examination showed hydropic degeneration of the basal layer, pigmentary incontinence and moderate
inflammatory lymphocytic infiltrate in the dermis. Lichen planus pigmentosus inversus is a rare subtype of lichen planus characterized by
hyperchromic, asymptomatic or mildly pruritic macules, measuring from millimeters to centimeters in diameter, with defined borders,
affecting intertriginous areas, most commonly in the axillae and groin of Caucasian patients. It presents unique lichenoid histology. We
report a case with typical clinical features, histology and evolution. Homem, 25 anos, com manchas acastanhadas, assintomáticas, nas regiões
cervicais, axilares, inguinais e poplíteas há nove meses. Anatomopatológico com degeneração hidrópica da basal, incontinência pigmentar e
infiltrado inflamatório linfocitário moderado na derme. O líquen plano pigmentoso invertido é um subtipo raro de líquen plano, caracterizado
por máculas hipercrômicas, assintomáticas ou discretamente pruriginosas, de milímetros a centímetros de diâmetro, com limites nítidos, nas
áreas intertriginosas, sendo mais comum nas flexuras axilares e inguinais de indivíduos de pele clara. Apresenta histologia liquenóide
peculiar. Relata-se um caso com clínica, histologia e evolução típicas. Lichen planus pigmentosus inversus (LPPI) is a pigmentary cutaneous
manifestation located on skin-fold areas, and considered a rare variant of lichen planus pigmentosus.1-5 Approximately 20 cases are reported
in the medical literature worldwide. The etiology is unknown, without any causal relation to medications or sun exposure. The pathogenesis
appears to be related to a T lymphocyte-mediated, cytotoxic activity against basal keratinocytes.1,3 From the clinical standpoint, this
disease is characterized by asymptomatic hyperchromic macules, millimeters to centimeters in diameter, with well-delimited edges, smooth
surface and on occasion Wickham striae; located on intertriginous areas, particularly axillae and groins of Caucasian, European-descendant
patients. Usually, mucosae, scalp, and palmoplantar areas are not affected by the disease.2-4,6 Histologically there is a pattern compatible
with lichen planus in regression, with minor or absent hyperkeratosis and hypergranulosis, and even, in some cases, atrophic epidermis.1,3-5
A twenty-five year old male patient, brown-skinned, informed that for the past 9 months he had noticed the appearance of asymptomatic brown
spots, on the cervical region, axillary, inguinal and popliteal folds. He denied the appearance of other cutaneous lesions, pruritus,
systemic symptoms, previous diseases or the use of illicit drugs or medications. On examination, we observed hyperchromic, smooth-surfaced
macules, with well-delimited edges, measuring from millimeters to centimeters in diameter and often of an oval shape (Figures 1 to 3). There
were not other lesions either on skin, nails, scalp, or mucosae, nor signs of lymphadenomegaly. Extensive and confluent hyperchromic
macules, with smooth surface and well-marked edges, on the right and left axillae Hyperchromic confluent macules on the popliteal area Over
the affected skin areas, the direct exams and cultures for fungi and bacteria were all negative. Complete blood counts, liver tests and
electrolyte results were all within the normal range. Hepatitis C serology was negative. Anatomopathological exams of the lesions were
performed from distinct samples (right and left axilla), and repeated on a three-month interval with identical characteristics: discreet
rectification of epithelial cones in the epidermis, irregular hydropic degeneration on the basal layer, marked pigmentary incontinence with
the presence of melanophages on the superficial dermis and light to moderate inflammatory lymphocytic infiltrate surrounding the capillary
vessels of the papillary and reticular dermises (Figures 4 and 5). Epidermis with hyperkeratotic foci and light perivascular inflammatory
mononuclear infiltrate (HE, 200x) Discreet degeneration on the basal layer and pigmentary incontinence (HE, 400x) Based on the clinical and
histopathological features we reached the diagnosis of lichen planus pigmentosus inversus. Afterwards, we initiated treatment with systemic
corticoid using prednisone 20mg/day for 30 days, without any therapeutic response. After four months, without any further treatment, the
patient presented with a discreet improvement on the cervical and popliteal regions, whilst axillary lesions remained unaltered. The term
lichen planus pigmentosus inversus (LPPI) was proposed by Pock et al in 2001, after the report of 7 cases of lichen planus pigmentosus
located predominantly on intertriginous areas.3 Gaertner and Elstein, in 2012, considered the clinical and histological manifestations of
LPPI as distinct from other similar entities, such as lichen planus pigmentosus and erythema dyschromicum perstans (dermatosis ceniciento or
ashy dermatosis).1 LPPI is a chronic inflammatory affection, occurring in the intertriginous areas of individuals with fair skin. Cases
affecting Asian patients have been more frequently reported and until the present there were not any cases reported on the indexed national
medical literature.1,3-5 In a recent review of 18 cases, eight were men (44%) and ten were women (56%), with a mean age of 58.8 years (25 to
84 years). As to ethnic descent, 11 were white (61%) and seven were Asians (39%). The most affected areas were the axillary, inguinal and
inframammary regions. In seven cases (39%), a light pruritus was present, without any other associated symptoms. There was an absence of
lesions on scalp, mucosae and nails in all cases reported.5 The patient described here is a young adult male (25 years-old), of brown skin,
with extensive non-pruriginous clinical features, affecting several areas (axillary, cervical, inguinal and popliteal). Also of notice is
the absence of other dermatological and systemic abnormalities. These data are in accordance with the previously reported cases. The
literature shows that the characteristic manifestations of LPPI are hyperchromic macules, usually small, lenticular, with discreet to absent
pruritus, affecting intertriginous areas, mainly axillae (affected in 90% of the reported cases), and also cervical, inguinal and popliteal
areas. Larger lesions tend to have a linear or angular configuration, with the longitudinal axis following the cleavage lines. Wickham
striae have also been reported.1,3-5 In a minority of patients, additional lesions with features of lichen planus or lichen planus
pigmentosus may be found outside of the flexor surfaces, but they are scarce, accounting for about 10% of all the area affected.3 The
association between LPPI and malignant neoplasms remains unconfirmed.1-5 The main differential diagnoses are erythema dyschromicum perstans,
post-inflammatory hyperpigmentation, figurate erythema, fixed drug eruption and lichen planus pigmentosus. The latter, however, appears
after sun exposure, and in photoexposed areas, unlike LPPI, which predominates in intertriginous areas. The most difficult differential
diagnosis is with ashy dermatosis, this, however, affects brown skinned patients, with a tropism for the torso and limbs (and not for
intertriginous areas) and with erythematous borders on the edges of active lesions.1,3,5-8 Microscopically, one can observe a lichen planus
in regression. There is epidermic atrophy with irregular hydropic degeneration on the basal layer and an absence of epidermic hyperplasia
(usually present on lichen planus). In the superior dermis, there is exuberant pigmentary incontinence, with melanophages and a lichenoid
inflammatory infiltrate containing lymphocytes and histiocytes, in a variable pattern, according to the clinical stage of lichenoid
regression. Histopathology, as in the case reported here, revealed marked pigmentary incontinence and discreet lichenoid infiltrate.1,3-5
According to Pock et al in 2001, the lichenoid reaction seems to occur within a short period of time and with marked hydropic degeneration
of the basal keratinocytes. Similarly to typical lichen planus, there is a compensatory proliferation of those keratinocytes, which do not
develop in intertriginous areas. This disease evolves with a variable clinical course; in general there is a rapid appearance of hyper-
chromic macules, those being the most frequently found lesions and not the traditional papules3-9 Some cases will resolve in some weeks
without therapy, while others may persist for years.1-5,7,9 Topical treatments with tacrolimus and high-potency corticoids had variable
success (such as a decline in pigmentation), in isolated cases.1,7-9 In the case reported here, there was a spontaneous partial involution
(lightening of lesions) after four months of follow-up; initially there was no clinical improvement, even with corticoid therapy. * Work
performed at the dermatology clinic at Guilherme Álvaro Hospital - Santos (SP), Brazil. Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
Hyperchromic confluent macules on the posterior cervical region
