Allopurinol, a widely prescribed urate lowering agent is responsible for various adverse drug reactions, including erythroderma. A 45-year-
old male patient was admitted with the complaints of fever, redness and scaling all over the body after 3-4 weeks of allopurinol treatment
for asymptomatic hyperuricemia. Elevated liver enzymes were detected in his blood analysis. Skin biopsy was consistent with drug induced
erythroderma. Allopurinol was stopped and steroids were started. Patient improved over a period of 2 weeks. Allopurinol, a xanthine oxidase
inhibitor is an effective and widely prescribed urate lowering agent. It is safe in most of the patients, but intolerance is estimated to
occur in up to 10% of treated patients. Severe or life-threatening allopurinol adverse reactions occur less frequently. Cutaneous adverse
reactions to allopurinol are common affecting 2% of patients prescribed. Here, we report a case of erythroderma due to allopurinol. A
45-years-old male patient was admitted with complains of fever, redness and scaling all over the body for last 20 days. His recent drug
history revealed that he was on oral allopurinol 200 mg daily for last 1½ month. He told that allopurinol was given by his general
practitioner for increased uric acid level only. However when serum uric acid were repeated at our hospital the levels were normal. On
further probing, he gave a history of generalized erythematous maculopapular rash along with a fever after 3 weeks of starting allopurinol,
but he continued the medication. Later, there was the development of extensive erythema along with the scaling over the whole body within 4
days. On examination, diffuse erythema with fine scaling was observed all over the body. Erythema and scaling were more pronounced over the
trunk [Figure 1]. No significant lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly was observed. A skin biopsy done from back showed epidermal
hyperplasia, foci of parakeratosis, spongiosis and a few necrotic keratinocytes. Dermis showed sparse superficial perivascular infiltrates
consisting of lymphocytes and a few eosinophils. Laboratory investigations revealed raised liver enzymes (aspartate aminotransferase-114,
alanine aminotransferase-112), but bilirubin was normal. Total blood counts including eosinophil count, renal function tests and serum
electrolytes were within the normal limits. The causality was assessed using the Naranjo's adverse drug reaction probability scale. The
association was “probable” as per the Naranjo's scale; hence, a diagnosis of allopurinol induced erythroderma was made. Allopurinol was
stopped. Oral antihistamines and oral prednisolone 40 mg/day were started along with a supportive therapy. Patient improved over a period of
2 weeks [Figure 2 showing improvement after 1week of treatment] and steroids were tapered and eventually stopped. Erythema and scaling over
back After 1 week of treatment Erythroderma is the term applied to any inflammatory skin disease that affects more than 90% of the body
surface. Clinically, it is characterized by erythema and scaling involving more than 90% of the body surface area. The main causes of
erythroderma in adults are preexisting eczema of various types, psoriasis, drugs, lymphoma and leukemia etc. A wide-range of drugs can cause
erythroderma. Among the more commonly implicated are pyrazolone derivatives such as phenylbutazone, hydantoin derivatives, carbamazepine,
cimetidine, gold salts and lithium. Exposure to the causative drug may last for 2 weeks to several months before the reaction emerges. In
the present case, the patient presented after receiving 1½ months of allopurinol treatment with fever, erythema and scaling involving more
than 90% of the body surface area alongwith raised liver enzymes. No significant lymphadenopathy or hepatosplenomegaly was observed. Hence,
a diagnosis of allopurinol induced erythroderma was made. Prompt resolution of the lesions after withdrawal of the allopurinol and start of
oral steroid further supported the diagnosis. Drug induced erythroderma has the best prognosis of all the causes of erythroderma often
resolving in 2-6 weeks. However, it is important to remember that the cutaneous manifestations of drug hypersensitivity may be accompanied
by involvement of other organs, for example hematological abnormalities, hepatitis or nephritis. An example is the syndrome known as drug
reaction with eosinophilia and systemic symptoms (DRESS) syndrome. Hence drug use must be investigated in patients with the complaints of
fever, jaundice, generalized rash, acute renal failure and acute liver failure in order to rule out the possibility of DRESS syndrome. The
exact pathogenesis of these hypersensitivity events due to allopurinol, whether immune-mediated and/or toxic in nature, is unclear.
Accumulation of oxypurinol (principal metabolite of allopurinol) due to renal impairment or co-administration of thiazide diuretics, genetic
factors, abnormal T lymphocyte–mediated immune responses to oxypurinol, and to a lesser extent, allopurinol and formation of immune
complexes have been implicated. A recent study suggests that in vitro allopurinol-induced release of interferon-γ from peripheral blood T
lymphocytes may be a useful test in the diagnosis of Stevens-Johnson syndrome and other sensitivity reactions to allopurinol. Skin testing
with either allopurinol or oxypurinol is less specific and has yielded conflicting results. Allopurinol is the first line drug for serum
lowering therapy in gout and is approved by the US Food and Drug Administration. Urate lowering drugs are widely used in people with
asymptomatic hyperuricemia. About 5% of the population and a quarter of hospital patients are hyperuricemic. Most are asymptomatic and do
not develop gout. Treating asymptomatic hyperuricemia does not have clear benefits and our report shows the potential harm of this practice.
Alternative treatments are now emerging for the treatment of gout, including rasburicase and febuxostat. With this case report, we aim to
create awareness about rare, but potentially fatal drug reaction like erythroderma that can occur with allopurinol, a commonly prescribed
urate lowering agent used. A judicious use of allopurinol may decrease the incidence and morbidity caused by the drug reaction. Source of
Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
