The granuloma faciale is a rare and benign skin disease of unknown etiology, characterized by chronic leukocitoclastic vasculitis. It is
characterized by skin lesions predominantly facial whose course is chronic and slowly progressive. The diagnosis is based on clinical
features, histopathology and, more recently, in dermoscopy. We describe the case of a male patient, 40 years old, with a sarcoid lesion on
the malar site, whose histopathological examination revealed a mixed inflammatory infiltrate with presence of Grenz zone. Dermoscopy
revealed a pink background with white striations. The definitive diagnosis is made by histopathologic evaluation, and dermatoscopy can be
helpful. It is known to be resistant to therapy, oral medications, intralesional and surgical procedures are options. O granuloma facial é
doença cutânea rara e benigna, de etiologia desconhecida, caracterizado por vasculite leucocitoclástica crônica. Caracteriza-se por lesões
cutâneas predominantemente faciais, tem curso crônico e lentamente progressivo. O diagnóstico é baseado na clínica, histopatologia e, mais
recentemente, na dermatoscopia. Relatamos o quadro de um paciente masculino, 40 anos de idade, com lesão sarcoídea na face malar, cujo exame
histopatológico revelou infiltrado inflamatório misto com presença de zona de Grenz. A dermatoscopia revelou um fundo rosado com estrias
brancas. O diagnóstico definitivo é feito pela avaliação histopatológica, sendo que a dermatoscopia pode ser útil. É conhecida por ser
resistente à terapêutica, sendo propostas medicações orais, intralesionais e procedimentos cirúrgicos. Granuloma faciale (GF) is a rare and
benign skin disease characterized by chronic leukocytoclastic vasculitis with dense infiltration of polimorfonucleares.1,2 It is most common
in males, typically in middle-aged white individuals.1 Of unknown origin, it is characterized by predominantly facial skin lesions whose
course is chronic and slowly progressive.3 Diagnosis is based on clinical features, histopathology and, more recently, dermatoscopy.1
Multiple modalities of medical and surgical treatment have been suggested, but none has proved to be consistently effective.4 The following
report shows the importance of including GF in the differential diagnosis of face sarcoid lesions and analyses its dermoscopic features.
Male patient, 40 years old, referred an erythematous-edematous asymptomatic lesion in the right malar region for 4 years. He denied other
skin lesions, systemic symptoms and comorbidities. He was using topical steroids (betamethasone dipropionate 0.05% cream) and prednisone 60
mg / day for 2 months. Physical examination showed erythematous plaque, infiltrated, on the right malar region, with prominent follicular
orifices, assuming a "peau d'orange" appearance. (Figure 1). Pretreatment. Erythematous plaque, infiltrated, on the right malar region, with
prominent follicular orifices, with a "peau d'orange" aspect The dermoscopic examination showed a pink background, with some areas
blackened, white striations in different directions and prominent follicular orifices (Figure 2). Dermoscopy. Pink background with some
areas blackened, white striations in different directions and prominent follicular orifices Histopathological examination showed intense
mixed inflammatory infiltrate of micronodular aspect, composed of lymphocytes, histiocytes, neutrophils and numerous eosinophils. The
described infiltration had not reached the subepidermal region (Grenz zone) and there was no evidence of vasculitis (Figure 3).
Immunohistochemistry suggested polyclonality (CD3 +, CD4 +, CD8 +, CD30 +). Histopathology. Intense mixed inflammatory infiltrate of
micronodular aspect, preserving the subepidermal region (Grenz zone) GF was diagnosed based on clinical examination, dermoscopy and
histopathological aspects. Laboratory tests were within normal limits, and ANA (antinuclear factor), VDRL (Venereal Disease Research
Laboratory) and smear lymph, negatives. Dapsone was prescribed 100 mg / day. Intralesional corticosteroid and prednisone were suspended. The
patient returned after nine months of treatment with partial improvement (Figure 4). Post treatment. Partial improvement on clinical aspect
after nine months of treatment The term GF was originally described by Wigley in 1945 as eosinophilic granuloma of the skin, and was further
defined by Lever and Leeper Pinkus a few years later.4 Granuloma faciale has an unknown etiology, but possible predisposing factors include
actinic exposure, radiation, trauma, allergy, or an Arthus-like reaction.5 It prevails between the third and fifth decade, with chronic
course and exacerbation with sun and heat exposure.2 Clinically, GF manifests as papules, plaques or nodules, solitary or multiple, with no
tendency to ulceration, whose color varies from red to violet.2,6 Superficial telangiectasias and follicular accentuation can often be
observed, although normally its surface is smooth.1,4 Our case showed the typical "peau d'orange" appearance, exemplifying the follicular
accentuation. The typical lesion is a solitary plaque on the face, as presented by our patient. The favored sites are the sides of the nose
(30%), tip of the nose (7%), preauricular area (22%), cheeks (22%), forehead (15%), and helix of the ear (4%).6 Extrafacial involvement is
rare and has been reported to involve the back, arms, chest, shoulders, and thigh.6 The lesions are generally asymptomatic, but some
patients report associated burning and itching.4 GF is not associated with systemic involvement. The only extracutaneous lesion, whose
association was described with facial granuloma, is eosinophilic angiocentric fibrosis, which affects the mouth and upper airways.3 The main
clinical differential diagnoses include erythema elevatum diutinum, sarcoidosis, cutaneous lymphomas, lymphocytoma cutis, discoid lupus,
basal cell carcinoma, lymphocytic infiltrate of Jessner, fixed drug eruption, lupus vulgaris, fungal and mycobacterial infections.1,2,4,6
Despite the appearance of the skin, GF rarely causes difficulties in the histopathological differentiation of mycosis fungoides or other
types of lymphomas due to the lack of involvement of the epidermis and the polyclonal infiltrate, as shown in our case.1 The only report of
GF dermoscopy revealed translucent whitish-grayish structureless areas, intermingled with orthogonal whitish streaks and the presence of
focused and elongated telangiectasias, similar to streaks identified in dermoscopy of the described case; the pink background, with
follicular accentuation of the case, does match with the clinical appearance of "peau d'orange".1 The patient described above was elderly
(72 years) and already had telangiectasias on the face. Clinically, GF may mimic cutaneous sarcoidosis, discoid lupus erythematosus and
lupus vulgaris.1 Dermoscopy of these diseases shows similarities in some aspects (Chart 1).1,7-10 Definitive diagnosis is made by
histological examination of the lesion. Dermoscopic aspect of GF and its differential diagnoses Histopathologically, GF is characterized by
the presence of an unaltered epidermis, which is separated from a zone of dermal inflammation by a grenz zone of uninvolved upper dermis.1,5
There is an intense infiltration of polymorph below the Grenz zone consisting of neutrophils, lymphocytes, histiocytes, eosinophils and
histiocytes.1,5 The adnexal structures of the skin are spared.1 Vascular inflammation, including perivascular inflammation with nuclear
dust, and damage in the vessel wall, are frequently observed, although it was not present in this case. Erythrocyte extravasation and
hemosiderin deposition were found, which may have contributed to the color of the lesion.1 The laboratory evaluation was normal except for
occasional mild blood eosinophilia.3 The disease is known to be notoriously resistant to therapy, although in some cases it can resolve
spontaneously.4 Proposed treatment schemes include colchicine, dapsone, antimalarials, gold injections, isoniazid, clofazimine, associated
with psoralen ultraviolet radiation (PUVA), topical and intralesional corticosteroids and, more recently, topical tacrolimus.4 A variety of
surgical procedures such as surgical excision with or without grafting, dermabrasion, laser argon, carbon dioxide laser, pulsed dye laser,
electrosurgery and cryotherapy have also been used in the management of GF with varying results.4,6 The use of topical tacrolimus has
recently been demonstrated as a safe and effective option. This immunomodulatory agent inactivates calcineurin leading to blockage of T cell
activation and inhibition of interferon secretion.1 Among the treatments available, we chose dapsone and intralesional corticosteroids.
Therapeutic response was partial improvement, consistent with the data found in the literature. This case demonstrates the importance of
including GF between the clinical differential diagnosis of sarcoid lesions of the face and describes the usefulness of dermoscopy as a
further tool for identification and differentiation. Work performed at the Federal University of Goiás (UFG) - Goiânia (GO), Brazil.
Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interests: None.
