Situs inversus totalis (SIT) denotes complete right-left inversion of the thoracic and abdominal viscera. Diagnosis and surgical procedures
for abdominal pathology in patients with SIT are technically more complicated because of mirror-image transposition of the visceral organs.
Moreover, SIT is commonly associated with cardiovascular and hepatobiliary malformations, which make hepatobiliary-pancreatic surgery
difficult. Two cases of pancreaticoduodenectomy for biliary tract carcinoma in patients with SIT are presented. Both patients had an anomaly
of the hepatic artery. Advanced diagnostic imaging techniques were very important for careful preoperative planning and to prevent
misunderstanding of the arrangement of the abdominal viscera. This facilitated the surgical team’s adaptation to the mirror image of the
standard procedure and helped avoid intraoperative complications due to cardiovascular and hepatobiliary malformations associated with SIT.
Pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SIT can be performed successfully with detailed preoperative assessment, use of effective
techniques by the surgeon, and appropriate support by assistants. Situs inversus totalis (SIT) is characterized by a left-to-right reversal
of the abdominal viscera with dextrocardia. This is in contrast with situs inversus viscerum (also termed situs inversus, SI), which means a
complete mirror-image transposition of the abdominal visceral organs with normal orientation of the thoracic organs. Situs inversus totalis
is found in 1/8000 to 1/25,000 of the normal population . Generally, this rare anomaly is discovered or diagnosed incidentally during
thoracic and abdominal imaging. Although the exact etiology of SIT remains unknown, SIT is thought to result from chromosomal abnormalities
that lead to a reversal of right-left polarity . Diseases associated with SIT include bronchiectasis and chronic sinusitis with ciliary
immotility (Kartagener syndrome) . Patients with SIT have an increased risk of cardiac, splenic, and hepatobiliary malformations . These
abnormalities are not considered to be premalignant, and SIT in itself does not seem to affect health or life expectancy. Diagnosis and
surgical procedures for abdominal pathology in patients with SIT are technically more difficult because the anatomical positioning of the
visceral organs is arranged differently . Previous authors have reported performing pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SI or SIT .
They reported that the surgical procedures were difficult because of the anatomical abnormalities and that special attention should be paid
to diagnosis and preoperative staging. Therefore, on the basis of these reports, more detailed and advanced information is required for
surgeons. Taking into account experience with past cases of successful pancreaticoduodenectomy for biliary tract carcinoma with SIT, this
report focuses on the difficulties and technical notes of pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SIT. Pylorus-preserving
pancreaticoduodenectomy with modified Child’s reconstruction is our standard procedure. The key parts of the common surgical procedures in
patients with SIT in these two cases were as follows: 1. Detailed preoperative assessment with advanced imaging studies was helpful to
detect anatomical abnormalities associated with SIT and prepare the plan for the procedure. 2. The right-handed surgeon stood on the right
side of the patient, as usual. 3. To smoothly perform the Kocher maneuver from left to right, the surgeon provided countertraction, and the
first assistant mobilized the duodenum and the head of the pancreas. 4. Each surgical procedure was performed while encircling the major
vessels (the superior mesenteric vein (SMV), portal vein (PV), common hepatic artery (CHA), gastroduodenal artery (GDA), proper hepatic
artery (PHA), and the right and left hepatic arteries) with tapes. The major vessels were identified as landmarks to avoid any errors, and
the operation was performed in the same order as the standard procedure. 5. The procedures around the superior mesenteric artery (SMA)
plexus and the inferior pancreaticoduodenal artery (IPDA) were difficult. The surgeon changed his position to achieve adequate
countertraction between the uncinate process of the pancreas and the SMA-plexus. 6. To adequately suture the pancreatic duct to the jejunal
mucosa for the pancreaticojejunostomy, the surgeon changed his position or used double-armed sutures. Hepaticojejunostomy (end-to-side) and
duodenojejunostomy with Braun’s anastomosis were performed as usual. 7. Two closed-system drainages were placed in the foramen of Winslow
and around the pancreaticojejunal anastomosis, as in the standard procedure. A 74-year-old man with SIT was referred to our hospital for
investigation and treatment of distal bile duct carcinoma. His past medical history included hypertension and cerebral hemorrhage. A chest
X-ray showed dextrocardia. Enhanced computed tomography (CT) revealed a right-sided spleen and that the inferior vena cava (IVC) lay to the
left of the aorta (Figure 1A). The head of the pancreas was to the left of the midline. Distal bile duct stenosis and upstream dilation of
the bile duct were shown on coronal images of multidetector-row CT (MD-CT) and endoscopic retrograde cholangiography (Figure 1B,C). Biopsies
of the distal bile duct identified an adenocarcinoma. Intraductal ultrasonography of the distal bile duct showed that the carcinoma had
invaded the head of the pancreas. Enhanced CT did not show any distant metastases. Three-dimensional angiography with MD-CT showed that the
right hepatic artery, which was the left-sided hepatic artery in this case, ran along the ventral side of the bile duct (Figure 1B,D).
Preoperative imaging of patient 1. (A) Contrast-enhanced CT scan and (B) coronal image of multidetector-row CT reveal a dilated bile duct.
(C) Endoscopic retrograde cholangiography shows distal bile duct stenosis (arrows) and upstream dilation of the bile duct. (D) Three-
dimensional angiography with multidetector-row CT shows a left-to-right reversal of the vascular arrangement, but does not show vascular
malformation. Ao, aorta; BD, bile duct; CA, celiac artery; CHA, common hepatic artery; ERBD tube, endoscopic retrograde bile duct drainage
tube; GB, gallbladder; GDA, gastroduodenal artery; IVC, inferior vena cava; Panc, pancreas; PHA, proper hepatic artery; PV, portal vein;
SMA, superior mesenteric artery; SPA, splenic artery. The patient underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy (Figure 2A). After dividing the neck of
the pancreas, the positions of the SMV and the PV were taken as major landmarks to perform the procedure. The anomaly of the right hepatic
artery had no significant impact on the surgical procedure because the operative procedure was planned based on the preoperative imaging
studies. Photographs of patient 1. (A) Intraoperative photograph prior to reconstruction. (B) Macroscopic view of the resected specimen
shows adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct (arrows) infiltrating the head of the pancreas. CHA, common hepatic artery; Panc, pancreas; PV,
portal vein; RHA, right hepatic artery. The surgeon stood on the left side of the patient during excision of the SMA-plexus and the duct-to-
mucosal anastomosis of the anterior row in the pancreaticojejunostomy. The procedures around the SMA plexus and the IPDA were performed with
the following three steps: 1. The surgeon retracted the SMV and the PV with the left hand, and resected the pancreatic nerve plexuses from
the caudal side. 2. The surgeon changed his position and obtained countertraction between the uncinate process of the pancreas and the SMA
plexus with the left hand. He resected the pancreatic nerve plexuses from the cranial side. 3. After the jejunum was transected and the
jejunal mesentery near the ligament of Treitz was divided, the head of the pancreas was passed underneath the SMV over to the right side of
the abdomen. The pancreatoduodenum was retracted by the left hand, and the neural plexus connecting around to the SMA and the IPDA were
divided. The operation time was 564 min, and the intraoperative blood loss was 600 ml. Histopathological findings of the resected specimen
confirmed the diagnosis of a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct infiltrating the head of the pancreas, with three
metastatic lymph nodes (Figure 2B). The biliary, pancreatic, duodenal, and retroperitoneal margins were free of tumor. The tumor was stage
IIB with T3N1M0 according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for International Cancer Control (AJCC/UICC) TNM staging system .
The patient’s postoperative course was complicated by a pancreatic fistula (grade B according to the International Study Group of Pancreatic
Fistula (ISGPF) definition) without any serious symptoms of infection. The patient was discharged after the leakage was ameliorated with
drainage. A 67-year-old man with no previous illnesses was referred to our hospital for investigation and treatment of bile duct carcinoma.
Situs inversus totalis was first discovered at the referring hospital. Enhanced CT confirmed the transposition of viscera as follows:
dextrocardia, right-sided stomach and spleen, left-sided liver, and IVC to the left of the aorta (Figure 3A). Computed tomography also
revealed a dilation of the intrahepatic bile ducts, and a tumor from the proximal to the distal portion of the bile duct (Figure 3A and B).
Distant metastases were not detected. Magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography confirmed a tapered stricture of the bile duct with
upstream dilation of the bile duct. Preoperative imaging study of patient 2. (A) Contrast-enhanced computed tomography scan and (B) coronal
image of multidetector-row CT show the tumor from the proximal to the distal portion of the bile duct (arrows). (C,D) Three-dimensional
angiography with multidetector-row CT shows a left-to-right reversal of the vascular arrangement and that the common hepatic artery arises
from the SMA and runs behind the SMV. Ao, aorta; CA, celiac artery; CHA, common hepatic artery; ERBD tube, endoscopic retrograde bile duct
drainage tube; GB, gallbladder; PV, portal vein; SMA, superior mesenteric artery; SMV, superior mesenteric vein; St, stomach. Three-
dimensional angiography with MD-CT showed vascular anomalies. The entire hepatic artery did not arise from the celiac artery, but arose from
the SMA. The hepatic artery ran behind the SMV. The artery ran along the ventral side of the pancreas and gave rise to the left and right
hepatic arteries (Figure 3C,D). This type of arterial anomaly belongs to type VI of Adachi’s classification and type IX of Michels’
classification . There was no evidence of any other anatomical anomalies. The patient underwent pancreaticoduodenectomy. The procedure was
completed using the schematic diagram reconstructed from the preoperative three-dimensional CT imaging (Figure 3C,D). Before dividing the
neck of the pancreas, the surgeon identified and skeletonized the CHA, to investigate whether the CHA was affected by tumor invasion. The
CHA was absent from the cranial side of the pancreas. The artery was encircled behind the SMV and in the hepatoduodenal ligament. The
aberrant hepatic artery was not invaded by the tumor, and it was carefully preserved while the right gastroepiploic artery and the
pancreatic branches were ligated and divided (Figure 4A). After these anatomical variations of the vessels were clearly delineated, the
other procedures were performed using the major vessels as landmarks, as in Case 1. Photographs of patient 2. (A) Intraoperative photograph
prior to reconstruction. (B) Macroscopic view of the resected specimen shows adenocarcinoma of the common bile duct (arrows). CHA, common
hepatic artery; Panc, pancreas; PV, portal vein; SMA, superior mesenteric artery; SMV, superior mesenteric vein; SPV, splenic vein. The
procedures around the SMA-plexus and the IPDA were performed after the jejunum was transected and the jejunal mesentery near the ligament of
Treitz was divided. The jejunum was passed underneath the SMV over to the left side of the abdomen. The surgeon retracted the SMV and PV
with the left hand, and he resected the neural plexus connecting around to the SMA and divided the IPDA from the caudal side with support
from the assistants. The surgeon used double-armed sutures during the duct-to-mucosal anastomosis of the anterior row in the
pancreaticojejunostomy. He stood on the right side of the patient in all surgical procedures. The operation time was 659 min, and the
intraoperative blood loss was 350 ml. Histopathological examination of the tumor revealed a well-differentiated adenocarcinoma of the bile
duct that was classified as T1N0M0 stage IA according to the AJCC/UICC TNM staging system (Figure 4B). The biliary, pancreatic, duodenal,
and retroperitoneal margins were free of tumor. The patient’s postoperative course was complicated by a pancreatic fistula (ISGPF-grade-B)
without any symptoms of infection. The patient was discharged after the leakage was ameliorated with drainage. Situs inversus totalis
denotes complete right-left inversion of thoracic and abdominal viscera. Predisposition to SIT is a rare congenital anomaly . Although there
are some case reports of SIT with various types of cancer, the pathogenic mechanisms of SIT, and the association between SIT and neoplasia
have not been well elucidated. Situs inversus totalis occurs frequently with Kartagener syndrome, anomalies of the hepatobiliary system ,
and cardiovascular malformations . In a study by Mayo and Rice , 7 of 76 patients with SI were found to have abnormalities of the biliary
tract or gallbladder. Variations in the hepatic artery have also been reported. Uemura et al. reported variations in the hepatic artery in
three of six patients with SI who underwent hepatectomy. For hepatobiliary-pancreatic surgery, advanced diagnostic imaging techniques, such
as three-dimensional CT, are highly recommended whenever available . In the present cases of pancreaticoduodenectomy, three-dimensional
reconstructed imaging by MD-CT data, especially non-invasive angiography, enabled understanding of the regional anatomy and allowed
meticulous preoperative planning. Each surgical procedure was performed while checking the positions of the major vessels one by one and
taking extreme care with every approach. This allowed the patients to undergo pancreaticoduodenectomy safely and effectively. Both patients
had an anomaly of the hepatic artery. In Case 2, the CHA arose from the SMA and ran through behind the SMV. This anomaly of the hepatic
artery belonged to type VI of Adachi’s classification and type IX of Michels’ classification . This type of anomaly is found in 4.5% of all
individuals . Particularly in Case 2, the preoperative imaging of the vascular arrangement helped avoid intraoperative injuries and
postoperative complications associated with the unusual arrangement of the hepatic artery. Several malformations of transposed organs and
vascular anatomical variations associated with SIT complicate surgical management. Previous authors have reported performing
pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SI (Table 1) . Almost all authors have suggested that detailed preoperative imaging studies are
needed to identify the presence or absence of associated anatomic abnormalities and to perform the surgical procedure safely. However, few
reports, other than ours, have described operative blood loss and operative duration (Table 1). Furthermore, this is the first report of
pancreaticoduodenectomy in the patients with SIT describing detailed surgical procedure and techniques. Previous reports of
pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with situs inversus (totalis) NA, not available. There was some confusion about the location of the
abdominal viscera in the early phases of the operation, but we adapted to the mirror image of the standard procedure during the operation
because the operative procedure was planned based on the preoperative imaging studies. During most of the surgery in the present cases, the
operator positioned himself on the right side of the patient, as usual. Two reports described the surgeon’s position during
pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SIT . The authors reported that the surgeon stood on the right side of the patient during the
operation, as in the present cases. In the present Case 1, the surgeon stood on the left side of the patient in only two situations, during
excision of the SMA-plexus and during pancreaticojejunostomy. Depending on various situations, the surgeon should change position to ensure
an adequate surgical procedure. Furthermore, the assistants should support the operation appropriately because the surgeon is required to
'reverse’ the handling technique. Table 2 shows difficulties and technical issues in pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SIT (Table 2).
Difficulties and technical issues in pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with situs inversus (totalis) In conclusion, advanced diagnostic
imaging techniques are very important for careful preoperative planning and to prevent misunderstanding of the arrangement of the abdominal
viscera. These techniques facilitate adaptation to the mirror image of the standard procedure and help avoid intraoperative complications
due to the cardiovascular and hepatobiliary malformations associated with SIT. Pancreaticoduodenectomy in patients with SIT can be performed
successfully with detailed preoperative assessment, use of effective techniques by the surgeon, and appropriate support by assistants.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patients for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the editor-in-chief of this journal. AJCC/UICC: American Joint Committee on Cancer/Union for
International Cancer Control; BD: Bile duct; CHA: Common hepatic artery; CT: Computed tomography; GDA: Gastroduodenal artery; IPDA: Inferior
pancreaticoduodenal artery; ISGPF: International Study Group of Pancreatic Fistula; IVC: Inferior vena cava; MD-CT: Multidetector-row CT;
PHA: Proper hepatic artery; PV: Portal vein; SI: Situs inversus; SIT: Situs inversus totalis; SMA: Superior mesenteric artery; SMV: Superior
mesenteric vein. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YK and MI (Imamura M) performed the operation. DK, MU, MI (Ishii
M), MM, MK, TM, and KH participated in the operation, designed the study and helped to collect data. DK, KY and KH wrote the paper together.
All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
