We present a rare case of glomus tumor of Hoffa's fat pad in a 42-year-old woman. Magnetic resonance imaging findings along with the
characteristic clinical picture led us to suspect a glomus tumor as the possible etiology. An ischemia test was found to be positive and
this further substantiated our diagnosis. An arthroscopic excision was performed and the histology confirmed the diagnosis of glomus tumor
of Hoffa's fat pad. The patient responded well to the excision with immediate complete resolution of pain and she remains asymptomatic at
the last follow-up after 15 months. To our knowledge, this is the second reported case of glomus tumor of Hoffa's fat pad and the first ever
to be managed by simple arthroscopic excision. The tumor poses a great challenge to an orthopedic surgeon. However, knowledge of its
characteristic clinical presentation and the recognition of such a rare entity can help achieve an early diagnosis and timely management. A
glomus tumor is a rare benign hamartoma arising from a neuromyoarterial glomus body.1) Glomus tumors account for only 1.6% of soft tissue
tumors occurring in the extremities.2) These tumors are typically found in the subungual region, but several case reports of glomus tumors
around the knee have been published.3) These tumors have been reported in subcutaneous tissue,4) the patellar ligament5) and beneath the
plica synovialis in the knee.3) There is only one previous case report describing a glomus tumor in Hoffa's fat pad,6) which was managed by
open excision. These ectopic locations are difficult to diagnose, especially when the lesion is situated in a deep anatomic structure.
Despite the patient's presentation with dramatic pain, lack of awareness of these tumors results in a delay in diagnosis and treatment.4) We
present a case of a glomus tumor of Hoffa's fat pad in a 42-year-old woman, managed by arthroscopic excision. A 42-year-old woman presented
to us with a history of pain in her right knee for the past one year. The trigger spot for the pain was located just medial to the
ligamentum patellae at the level of the joint line. The pain was sharp and shooting in nature and was precipitated by pressure over the
trigger spot. The patient was very apprehensive and would not allow repeated examination due to the fear of precipitating the severe pain.
The patient was also unable to squat or sit cross legged since deep knee bending would also precipitate the pain. There was no history of
aggravation of pain with change in the temperature. She had visited numerous local physicians for the past one year, but despite the
dramatic presentation, no diagnosis had been made in the patient till then. Her inflammatory parameters (cell counts, 7,800; erythrocyte
sedimentation rate , 10 mm 1st hour) were normal. A radiograph of the knee was normal. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the knee revealed
a 1 × 1 cm nodule at the inferior aspect of the patella in Hoffa's fat pad. This nodule was hyperintense on T2-weighted images and
hypointense on T1-weighted images (Fig. 1). A characteristic clinical picture along with supportive MRI findings led us to suspect glomus
tumor as a possible diagnosis. An ischemia test was done at this stage and was found to be positive, and it substantiated our diagnosis. Due
to the intraarticular nature of the nodule, no attempt was made to infiltrate it with local anaesthetic. The patient was taken up for
arthroscopy of the right knee under a tourniquet. Standard anterolateral and anteromedial portals were used. Intraoperatively, a
pedunculated 0.8 × 0.5 cm reddish brown nodule arising from Hoffa's fat pad was seen. A 70° scope was also used to inspect the fat pad. The
reddish brown color of the nodule made it easy to differentiate from the surrounding yellow fat pad (Fig. 2). The fat around the
pedunculated nodule was carefully shaved to reveal the base. The nodule was excised from the base and the tissue sent for histopathological
examination. No separate incision or portal was required to remove the nodule. The fat pad was inspected again and parts of the surrounding
synovium were removed to ensure complete removal and decrease the chances of recurrence. The histological evaluation confirmed the diagnosis
of glomus tumor. H&E staining (Fig. 3) revealed a well-circumscribed, encapsulated lesion composed of hyalinized variably sized blood
vessels lined by flattened endothelium with the perivascular region showing a solid proliferation of monomorphic round to oval cells with
fine chromatin, inconspicuous nucleoli and moderate cytoplasm. A further confirmation was made using immunohistochemisty for smooth muscle
actin which showed diffuse cytoplasmic positivity (Fig. 4). Postoperatively the patient had dramatic total relief from pain and she remains
asymptomatic at the last follow-up after 15 months. Glomus tumors are generally accepted to be uncommon benign soft tissue tumors accounting
for 1.6% of all soft tissue tumors occurring in the extremities.2) The normal glomus is an arterio-venous anastomosis which has a role in
cutaneous temperature regulation. The first description of a glomus tumor was made in 1872 by Wood.7) However it was Masson 8) in 1924 who
described glomus tumor as a benign tumor arising from the neuromyoarterial canal system called the Sucquet-Hoyer canals of the glomus body
in the skin. These tumors are typically found in the subungual region, but several case reports of glomus tumors around the knee have been
published.3) When the glomus tumor is in a subcutaneous location, it causes a characteristic reddish-blue discolouration of the skin.4) The
tumor has high contact and temperature sensitivity, but in deep and ectopic locations, this temperature sensitivity is not exhibited.6) In
our case, the patient did not exhibit temperature sensitivity. The size of the glomus tumor is small, usually less than 10 mm6) although
larger sizes of up to 6 cm in ectopic locations have been reported.9) In our case, the size of the tumor was 8 mm as assessed
intraoperatively under a tourniquet. The MRI image suggested a slightly larger size (approximately 1 cm) which makes us believe that these
tumors possibly shrink a little once the vascular supply gets cut off. The quality of the pain and the ability to pinpoint the site are
strong indicators of the diagnosis. However, there is frequently a delay in diagnosing tumors in deep and ectopic locations. This may be due
to a low index of suspicion. In our case, the patient was not diagnosed for over a year despite presenting with characteristic symptoms.
Clark et al.4) described local infiltration of the glomus tumor, which resulted in relief from pain for a few hours. In our patient, due to
the intra-articular nature of the tumor, no such infiltrations were given. An ischemia test however can be done even in intraarticular
locations.10) The ischemia test (Hildreth sign) is the disappearance of pain after a tourniquet is placed on the extremity proximal to the
lesion. The pain resolves probably because of the vascular nature of the tumor. The positivity of an ischemia test, as in our case, further
supports the diagnosis of glomus tumor. The use of an MRI has been described as the investigation of choice.4) However it does not yield a
detailed image of the tumor and remains an adjunct to allow more accurate localization of the tumor.4) Nevertheless the well-circumscribed
nature of the lesion and its exact localization, as seen on the MRI, helps rule out other conditions like prepatellar or infrapatellar
bursitis, Hoffa's fat pad inflammation, pigmented villonodular synovitis and synovial osteochondromatosis which could all be potential
differential diagnoses after clinical assessment in such cases. The treatment of glomus tumor is complete surgical excision. Dramatic
resolution of symptoms occurs. There is only one previous case report describing a glomus tumor in Hoffa's fat pad,5) which was managed by
open excision. To our knowledge, ours is the only case in which complete arthroscopic excision of a glomus tumor of Hoffa's fat pad has been
carried out with complete resolution of the symptoms. To conclude, an intraarticular glomus tumor poses a great challenge to an orthopedic
surgeon. However, knowledge of its characteristic clinical presentation and the recognition of such a rare entity can help achieve early
diagnosis and timely management. No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Magnetic resonance imaging of the
right knee showing a subcentimeter nodule at the inferior aspect of patella in the Hoffa's fat pad. The nodule was hypointense on
T1-weighted images (A) and hyperintense on T2-weighted images (B). (C) Axial image confirmed location in the substance of fat pad. (A)
Intraoperative arthroscopic view showing a pedunculated reddish brown nodule arising from Hoffa's fat pad. (B) The base of the nodule was
revealed after careful shaving of part of fat pad. Photomicrograph (H&E, ×40) showing blood vessels (big arrow) surrounded by solid
proliferation of round to cuboidal epitheloid cells with perfectly round nuclei and acidophilic cytoplasm (small arrow) characteristic of
glomus tumor. Immunohistochemistry for smooth muscle actin showing diffuse cytoplasmic positivity (×20).
