The authors describe a case of a female patient with Acral Pseudolymphomatous Angiokeratoma of Children, known as APACHE. It is a rare
benign cutaneous disease, of unknown etiology, characterized by multiple, asymptomatic erythematous-violaceous papules and nodules, usually
located unilaterally with acral distribution. Today, this denomination is questionable, since there are published reports of this disease in
adults and in different locations. Clinically, it is similar to an angiokeratoma, whereas hystologically, it corresponds to a distinct type
of pseudolymphoma. The immunohistochemical study is required to distinguish APACHE from cutaneous lymphoma. Relata-se o caso de uma paciente
com diagnóstico de angioqueratoma pseudolinfomatoso acral, conhecido por sua sigla em inglês APACHE - Acral Pseudolymphomatous Angiokeratoma
of Children. É uma doença cutânea benigna, rara, de etiologia desconhecida, caracterizada por múltiplas pápulas e nódulos eritêmato-
violáceos assintomáticos, de localização geralmente unilateral e acral. Atualmente, questiona-se esta denominação, já que há relatos na
literatura do quadro em adultos e em outras localizações. Clinicamente, é similar a um angioqueratoma, porém, histologicamente, corresponde
a um tipo distinto de pseudolinfoma. O estudo imuno-histoquímico é necessário para diferenciação dos linfomas cutâneos. Acral
pseudolymphomatous angiokeratoma is a rare benign, cutaneous disease, mostly affecting children aged between 2 and 13. It is characterized
by multiple asymptomatic erythematous-violaceous papules and nodules, usually located unilaterally with acral distribution. 1-6 Initially
considered a vascular malformation, today it is classed as a distinct type of pseudolymphoma. 3,4 It is known by the acronym APACHE (Acral
Pseudolymphomatous Angiokeratoma of Children) and was described for the first time by Ramsay in 1988.6 Currently, this denomination is under
debate, as there are reported cases in the literature of adults with the condition, located in other parts of the integument. 1-6 Its
etiology remains unknown. Histopathological exams reveal preserved epidermis and dense lymphocytic infiltrate in the dermis, permeating
structures of the conjunctive tissue, affecting (or not) the cutaneous annexes. The immunohistochemical study is necessary in order to
distinguish the cutaneous lymphomas.1-7 The elective therapeutic choice is total excision of lesions but intralesional corticotherapy,
cryotherapy and radiotherapy are also described, though they entail recurrence.2 White, female patient, aged 11, complaining of "small lumps
on the left wrist since the age of two". The dermatological exam revealed erythematous-violaceous papules on the left wrist, which appeared
fainter during the vitropression test (Figure 1). The condition had been evolving for 9 years, without any changes in clinical
characteristics, local symptomatology or previous trauma. The histopathological exam revealed an integral epidermis without atypia; and, in
the dermis, inflammatory infiltrate of superficial and deep, perivascular location, around the pilo-erector muscles, hair follicles, eccrine
glands and nerves (Figures 2 and 3A). The infiltrate was made up of lymphocytes, some histiocytes, a moderate number of plasmocytes and
small basophilic granulations in the cytoplasmas of the histiocytic cells. Infiltration was noticed in the hypodermal lobules. The search
for alcohol-acid resistant bacilli using the Ziehl-Neelsen staining procedure culminated in a negative result. In regard to the inflammatory
infiltrate, abundant in plasmocytes, a clinical and laboratory investigation was conducted to rule out leishmaniasis and syphilis, with the
following findings: non-reactive VDRL and FTA-Abs results (Figure 3B). Surveys for micobacteria, treponema and leishmania, by
immunohistochemistry, produced negative results. In addition: hemogram, hepatic and renal function, ESR, dosage of immunoglobulins and
protein electrophoresis, without changes. Left wrist - grouped erythematous-violaceous papules Dense lymphomononuclear infiltrate of
plexiform pattern (HE, 40x) A. Infiltrate occupying the deep dermis (HE, 100x); B. Infiltrate composed of plasmocytes (HE, 400x) Thus, total
excision of the lesions was initiated, to diagnostic and therapeutic ends. The histopathological exam revealed the same histopatholoogical
pattern as before. The immunohistochemical study of the biopsy material revealed histological characteristics of dermal lymphoid
proliferation of small, perivascular and adnexal, T and B lymphocytes, with a low proliferative index (Figure 4 and Chart 1).
Immunohistochemical panel: A. Anti-CD20 (400x). B. Anti-CD8 (400x) Immunohistochemical panel The patient is undergoing outpatient follow-up,
with no signs of recurrence at present. Acral pseudolymphomatous angiokeratoma, known by the acronym APACHE (Acral Pseudolymphomatous
Angiokeratoma of Children), is a rare entity, first described by Ramsay et al in 1988. Since then, approximately 25 cases have been
described in the literature.7 Initially considered a vascular malformation, today it is classed as a distinct type of pseudolymphoma.
Immunohistochemical studies of cell markers and gene receptors using Southern blotting analysis have shown the poyclonal nature of the
cellular infiltrate.7 Its etiology remains unknown. Many authors consider that terms such as "papular angiolymphoid hyperplasia", "acral
angiokeratoma-like pseudolymphoma" and "pseudolymphomatous angiokeratoma", are more appropriate given that there have been cases involving
dif ferent locations and age groups.2,6 Clinically, it is characterized by asymptomatic, grouped erythematous-violaceous papules and
nodules, of angiomatous character and a keratotic surface, located mainly in the extremities of children aged between 2 and 13.1-6 In a
recent review of reported APACHE cases, Tokuda et al found that 77% of patients were female, 52% of lesions were acral and 70% of the
affected individuals were made up of children and adolescents.7 Histologically, it presents with dense inflammatory infiltrate made up of
lymphocytes, histiocytes, plasmocytes, multinucleated giant cells and a varying number of eosinophils (Chart 2).5-6The infiltrate may (or
not) affect annexes. Histological changes can affect the epidermis, revealing variable inflammatory changes such as exocytosis, vacuolar
changes, spongiosis and eosinophilic bodies, though the meaning of these histological changes is still unknown.7 Histopathological findings
of the studies cited An immunohistochemical study is needed to rule out cutaneous lymphomas.2It reveals B and T lymphocytes (CD4 and CD8)
staining.4-5 Some reports indicate a predominance of T cells over B cells in the adult population, while the reverse is reported among the
pediatric population.6Studies with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) showed the polyclonality of the inflammatory infiltrate, thus suggesting
the reactional process of this entity.4,5-6 Tokuda et al., through an immunostaining study of the lesion's vessels, obtained positive
results for specific markers of the endothelium of the lymphatic vessels (podoplanin) and blood vessels (CD 34). Linking these findings to
the epidemiology of the disease, they again considered the hypothesis that the histogenesis of APACHE could be a type of vascular
malformation or hemangioma.7 The elective therapeutic choice is total excision of the lesion, but intralesional corticotherapy, cryotherapy
and radiotherapy are also described, though they entail recurrence.2 * Study undertaken at the University Hospital of Taubaté - University
of Taubaté (HUT-UNITAU) - Taubaté (SP), Brazil. Financial Support: None Conflict of Interest: None
