Pyoderma gangrenosum is a rare, inflammatory, chronic and recurrent disease of unknown etiology, characterized by noninfectious, necrotizing
and painful cutaneous ulcers. Usually it affects adults aged between 25 and 54 years old and rarely children (less than 4%), in which it
mainly affects the head, face, buttocks, genital and perianal region. The disease presents a quick response to systemic corticosteroids. We
report a case of a newborn with hemorrhagic and necrotic ulcers, distributed in the abdomen, buttocks and genital region with rapid and
effective response to oral prednisone. O Pioderma gangrenoso é uma doença inflamatória rara, crônica e recorrente, de etiopatogenia
desconhecida, caracterizada por uma ulceração não-infecciosa, necrotizante e dolorosa da pele. Geralmente, afeta adultos na faixa de 25 a 54
anos e raramente crianças (menos de 4%), nestes acomete preferencialmente cabeça e face, nádegas, região perianal e genital. Apresenta
rápida resposta à corticoterapia sistêmica. Relata-se um caso de recém-nascida com lesões ulceradas de pioderma gangrenoso de fundo
hemorrágico e necrótico distribuídas em abdômen, região genital e glútea com resposta rápida e efetiva à prednisona oral. Pyoderma
gangrenosum (PG) is a rare, chronic and recurring condition, characterized by necrotizing, painful non-infectious skin ulcerations.1,2,3 PG
was first described in the XX century by Brocq. Later, in 1930, it was name by Brunsting et al.,who believed that streptococcal infection
was a significant component of the disease, causing secondary cutaneous gangrene and therefore they named it pyoderma gangrenosum, a name
nowadays recognized as erroneous.1,4,5 It is a neutrophilic dermatosis, with an unknown pathogenesis, that may however, in over 50% of the
cases, be associated to systemic illnesses, such as Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, polyarthritis, diabetes mellitus, myelodysplastic
syndromes or myeloid leukemia, monoclonal gammopathy and systemic lupus erythematosus.2,6,7 This disease may occur at any age, without a
gender preference, but usually it affects adults from 25 to 54 years old and very rarely, children (less the 4% of the cases).1,2,7,8 From
the clinical standpoint it is characterized by an erythematous nodule or hemorrhagic pustule that evolves progressively with necrosis and
formation of a painful ulcer, with irregular, violet and undermined edges, involved in an erythematous halo. Lesions might be unique or in
multiples and typically, they exhibit a cribriform cicatrization pattern.5 There are 4 clinical variants described for PG: ulcerative,
pustular, bullous and vegetative type, of which ulcerative is the most common form.4,6 The most commonly affected areas are the extremities,
especially the lower limbs, but it can also affect head, face, arms, hands, torso, and periorbital and periorificial regions, including
mucocutaneous zones.8 In children, the disease is located on the head and face, buttocks, perianal and perigenital regions, with a
prevalence of pustular lesions.2,9 Differential diagnoses include ecthyma gangrenosum, infection by atypical mycobacteria, deep mycosis,
nodular vasculitis and Sweet syndrome.1,6 The most prescribed treatment for children is systemic corticoid therapy, which is generally
effective. Alternative therapies include dapsone, sulphapyridine, cyclosporine, methotrexate, clofazimine, minocycline and colchicine.1,2 A
twenty-three days old, female patient, born and living in Primavera (Pará State), was admitted to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU)
presenting with "wounds" on the abdomen, genital area and buttocks for the last 10 days. The mother informed that the problem started with a
"swelling" and blisters that ruptured, originating the "wounds" on the aforementioned areas. Dermatological examination showed ulcerated
lesions, some with a granular hemorrhagic base others with purulent and necrotic ones; with irregular and excavated borders, located on the
torso and genital-inguinal-crural areas, extending to the buttocks (Figures 1 and 2). The anatomopathological examination of the biopsy
specimen showed an epidermis with parakeratosis, without other significant associated alterations. The dermis presented with a vascular
ectasia and a perivascular, interstitial inflammatory infiltrate of a lymphohistiocytic nature, scattered with eosinophils and rare
neutrophils. No histological marker of vasculitis was observed. The infiltrate extended to the subcutaneous interstice, both in the lobular
and septal sectors, giving the diagnoses of sub-acute superficial and deep inflammatory processes. We performed cultures for bacteria on the
ulcers' secretion, with a negative result. The patient was treated with wide-spectrum antibiotics, cephalosporin and imipenem, for seven
days without response, at which point a dermatologic consultation was solicited, leading to the diagnosis of pyoderma gangrenosum. Systemic
corticoid therapy (prednisone 0.5 mg/kg/day) was then initiated with marked improvement of the lesions after ten days. The patient was
rapidly discharged and sent to the outpatient clinic for corticosteroid weaning. Presently she has only atrophic scars. (Figure 3) Ulcerated
lesions, some with a hemorrhagic granular base, others with a necrotic, purulent base, and excavated irregular borders, scattered on torso,
genital- inguinal-crural areas and extending to the buttocks Details of the abdominal lesions Atrophic scarring after systemic corticoid
therapy Pyoderma gangrenosum is a rare inflammatory chronic and destructive disease of unknown etiopathogenesis. It is characterized,
initially, by painful nodules and pustules, that increase in a centrifugal and serpiginous pattern until they form purulent-based
ulcerations with erythemato-violet, shallow, excavated and irregular borders.1,7 The most affected areas are the extremities, buttocks,
abdomen and face; however, in children the involvement of head and neck is usual, and in those under one year of age, the genital and
perianal areas1 , as reported in this case. Antecedents of trauma are reported as triggers in many newborns, thus explaining the predominant
involvement of diaper-covered areas, similarly to our patient. Likewise, pathergy is another such traumatic event reported as causing PG
lesions, same as wound debridement, intradermic injections, vaccinations or surgical scaring.2,5 PG is associated to systemic illnesses in
about 50% of the adult cases, however, it is important to highlight that newborns rarely present with systemic diseases, as was the case
with our patient, which was healthy.2,7 The diagnosis is based on clinical evaluation, after the exclusion of other specific ulcerative
processes.7 Histopathological exam may be performed, with results ranging from a dense inflammatory infiltrate, predominantly formed by
polymorphonuclear leucocytes associated to fibrinoid necrosis of the vascular walls to samples with ulceration and fibrosis, with the
addition of a granulation tissue permeated by a mixed inflammatory infiltrate, containing plasma cells and eosinophils.3 The
histopathological distinction between PG and other ulcerative processes that share dermic neutrophilia is challenging and sometimes
unattainable. The massive neutrophilic infiltration on the absence of vasculitis and granulomatous formation speaks in favor of PG.4 In
2004, Su et al proposed the diagnostic criteria for PG, listed below: 1. Rapid progression of a painful, necrotic cutaneous ulcer with an
irregular violaceous and undermined border. 2. Other causes of cutaneous ulceration have been excluded. 1. History suggestive of pathergy or
clinical finding of cribriform scarring. 2. Systemic diseases associated with PG. 3. Histopathological findings of sterile dermal
neutrophilia and/or mixed inflammatory infiltrate and/or lymphocytic vasculitis. 4. Rapid response to systemic corticosteroid therapy The
presence of one minor and two major criteria would establish the diagnosis of PG; therefore, our patient satisfied the diagnostic principles
for this disease.10 Systemic corticoid therapy is the treatment of choice, as it is effective in treating the acute, rapid, and progressive
forms of the disease; and accordingly, this was the drug administered to our patient, who presented an excellent response. Oral corticoid as
well as pulse therapy may equally be used.4 This dramatic response to treatment is important, because, together with negative bacterial
culture it can help differentiate PG from other causes of perianal abscess in children, like chronic granulomatous diseases.9 * Work
performed at the dermatology service at Pará State University (UEPA) - Belém (PA), Brazil Conflict of interest: None Financial Support: None
