Agminated nevus is a cluster group of melanocytic nevi confined to a localized area of the body. There are many pigmented lesions described
in the literature as agminated, such as blue nevi, multiple lentigines and Spitz nevi, but only a few cases of congenital agminated
melanocytic nevi have been described. We report a case of a male child who presented with congenital agminated nevi, emphasizing the
importance of physical examination, dermoscopy, histopathological evaluation, differential diagnosis and follow up to rule out the
possibility of dysplastic or malignant changes. Nevo agminado é um conjunto de lesões melanocíticas confinadas a uma área do corpo. Existem
muitas lesões descritas na literatura como agminada s, como nevos azuis, lentigos múltiplos, nevo de Spitz, mas existem poucos casos de
nevos melanocíticos agminados congênitos descritos. Relatamos o caso de um paciente do sexo masculino que se apresentou com um nevo agminado
congênito, enfatizando a importância do exame físico, dermatoscopia, avaliação histológica, diagnóstico diferencial e seguimento para
descartar a possibilidade de alterações displásicas ou malignas. Agminated nevi are infrequent pigmented lesions. 'Agminated' is derived
from the Latin word 'agmen', meaning 'aggregation' and refers to a clustered or circumscribed grouping of lesions confined to a localized
area of the body. It should be distinguished from other forms of segmental distribution lacking a definite clustering.1 Pigmented lesions
that have been described in the literature as agminated include blue nevi, multiple lentigines, Spitz nevi, congenital melanocytic nevi,
acquired melanocytic nevi, and lesions within nevi spili.2-5 No hyperpigmented lesions described as agminated include xanthogranuloma,
angiofibromas and neurilemomas.6 Most cases reported in the literature corresponded to Spitz or blue nevi, with only few descriptions of
melanocytic congenital agminated nevi. Only a few cases of congenital agminated melanocytic nevi have been described in literature.4,7 One
of these cases presented with a "blaschkoid" pattern following Blaschko lines on the abdomen.8 The main differential diagnosis is nevus
spilus. This nevus commonly appears during late infancy or early childhood, leading to the belief that they are a type of congenital
nevus.3,6 A tan lentiginous background patch on which more darkly pigmented macules and papules are distributed characterizes the lesion.
The nevus spillus usually presents as lentigo simplex on the histological analysis whereas agminated nevus generally shows a junctional or
compound melanocytic nevus.9 The association of melanoma with agminated nevus was initially described by Marghoob et al, in a patient with
atypical mole syndrome, a pre-existent melanoma and a dysplastic agminated nevus on the arm that first appeared during puberty.6 Later were
described two cases of melanoma arising directly from agminated melanocytic lesions. The first one, published by Corradin et al, described
the development of an invasive melanoma in an acquired agminated nevus that appeared after thermal and solar burn.9 Most recently Rezze et
al reported the case of a patient affected by atypical mole syndrome and with personal history of melanoma who presented an agminated nevus
on the anterior chest since puberty.10 Some nevi within the agminated lesion presented clinical and dermoscopic criteria of atypic nevus.
The whole lesion was excised and the histopathological analysis showed an in situ melanoma, some areas of severe dysplasia and other areas
corresponding to junctional, intradermal and compound nevi. A nine-year-old male patient, phototype V, student, was referred to the
dermatology clinic for evaluation of multiple pigmented lesions on his left thigh. He was accompanied by his father, who informed that the
child had had a cluster of melanocytic lesions since birth. The cluster increased in size following the growth of the patient and the minor
lesions became somewhat closer together over the years. The family background of skin cancer was negative. The father has a history of
congenital nevi on the face and left lumbar region. The patient presented epilepsy and was in treatment with carbamazepine, imipramine and
risperidone. On physical examination, the patient had a cluster of approximately 20 maculopapular, lightly palpable blackened lesions of
different sizes on the anterior part of his left thigh, forming a cluster of nevi (Figures 1 and 2). The diameter of the total lesion was
9.2cm x 7.6cm. The largest isolated lesion measured 2.6 cm x 1.3cm. Dermoscopy revealed predominantly homogeneous pattern with diffuse
brownish areas, regular network at the periphery and numerous regularly distributed small dots (Figure 3). No background pigmentation was
noted on clinical or dermoscopic examination between lesions. Multiple pigmented lesions on the left thigh Detail of the melanocytic lesions
within the area of biopsy Dermoscopy revealed predominantly homogeneous pattern with diffuse brownish areas, regular network at the
periphery and numerous regularly distributed small dots A single lesion was excised for histological evaluation with a 2 mm border of normal
skin. The histopathological findings revealed an intradermal melanocytic nevus without histological melanocytic hyperplasia or
hyperpigmentation in clinically normal peripheral skin (Figures 4 and 5). Histopathology revealed intradermal melanocytic nevus without
melanocytic hyperplasia in the peripheral skin between the nevi A higher magnification reveals nevus cell nests along the papillary dermis
Considering the clinical and histopathological diagnosis of the lesion and treatment limitations due to the size of the total lesion, it was
decided to keep dermoscopic monitoring of the patient every 4 months. It has enhanced to the family the importance of sun protection and
guidance for the observation of changes such as modification of color, palpation (such as nodularity), shape and rapid growth. Agminated
nevus is a rare lesion and its incidence is unknown. In this case the patient has a congenital agminated nevus, a rare condition. The
patient presented a cluster of melanocytic lesions in the anterior part of the left thigh. There were no dysplastic or malignant changes on
clinical examination, dermoscopy or histology. It can be differentiated from nevus Spillus by the absence of brown macular background in the
clinical examination and histopathology. The association between epilepsy and agminated melanocytic nevus is to the best of our knowledge
not found in the literature. There is an established relationship between big and giant congenital melanocytic nevi with neurocutaneous
melanosis, in which the occurrence of epilepsy is common. In this case there was no suspicion of indication for investigation for cutaneous
melanosis. The decision to follow or excise this particular and rare presentation of compound nevus should be individualized. We decided to
monitor the patient since the lesion was large and without atypical clinical, dermoscopic and histological findings. Long-term follow-up is
recommended due to the possibility of malignant transformation, even if this probability is at the moment not exactly defined. * Work
performed at the Dermatology Service of the Health Sciences Federal University of Porto Alegre (UFCSPA) - Porto Alegre (RS), Brazil.
Conflict of interest: None Financial funding: None
