Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: ED RC JT.
Performed the experiments: PDG MN LN AB IA MM MPH MGF. Analyzed the data: PDG MN LN AB IA MM MPH MGF. Wrote the manuscript: ED RC JT.
Diagnosis of the proband and her relatives and clinical data collection: MAL RMR LTS JJJ. We functionally analyzed a frameshift mutation in
the SCN5A gene encoding cardiac Na+ channels (Nav1.5) found in a proband with repeated episodes of ventricular fibrillation who presented
bradycardia and paroxysmal atrial fibrillation. Seven relatives also carry the mutation and showed a Brugada syndrome with an incomplete and
variable expression. The mutation (p.D1816VfsX7) resulted in a severe truncation (201 residues) of the Nav1.5 C-terminus. Wild-type (WT) and
mutated Nav1.5 channels together with hNavβ1 were expressed in CHO cells and currents were recorded at room temperature using the whole-cell
patch-clamp. Expression of p.D1816VfsX7 alone resulted in a marked reduction (≈90%) in peak Na+ current density compared with WT channels.
Peak current density generated by p.D1816VfsX7+WT was ≈50% of that generated by WT channels. p.D1816VfsX7 positively shifted activation and
inactivation curves, leading to a significant reduction of the window current. The mutation accelerated current activation and reactivation
kinetics and increased the fraction of channels developing slow inactivation with prolonged depolarizations. However, late INa was not
modified by the mutation. p.D1816VfsX7 produced a marked reduction of channel trafficking toward the membrane that was not restored by
decreasing incubation temperature during cell culture or by incubation with 300 μM mexiletine and 5 mM 4-phenylbutirate. Despite a severe
truncation of the C-terminus, the resulting mutated channels generate currents, albeit with reduced amplitude and altered biophysical
properties, confirming the key role of the C-terminal domain in the expression and function of the cardiac Na+ channel. SCN5A gene encodes
the α-subunit of cardiac voltage-gated Na+ channels (Nav1.5), which generate the inward sodium current (INa) that is critical for the
genesis and propagation of action potentials and, in turn, determines cardiac excitability and conduction velocity of the electrical impulse
within the heart . Nav1.5 comprises 4 homologous domains, DI to DIV, each of which contains 6 transmembrane helices (S1 to S6) with
intracellular N- and C-terminal domains . Mutations in SCN5A have been associated with several arrhythmogenic diseases. Gain-of-function
mutations leading to an increased late INa (INa,L) cause long QT syndrome type 3 (LQT3), whereas loss-of-function mutations resulting in a
decreased peak INa may cause a variety of arrhythmogenic syndromes such as Brugada syndrome [characterized by the elevation of the ST
segment in the right precordial leads of the ECG (BrS)], progressive cardiac conduction disease, sick sinus syndrome, atrial fibrillation
(AF) , and sudden infant death syndrome . Furthermore, loss-of-function Nav1.5 mutations have been described in patients with idiopathic
ventricular fibrillation (IVF), an uncommon and lethal condition which presents itself as syncope or sudden cardiac death in young people
with normal hearts and without electrophysiological manifestations of inherited arrhythmogenic syndromes . Therefore, Nav1.5 mutations can
render a broad spectrum of inherited cardiac arrhythmias. Furthermore, some SCN5A mutations can lead to complex diseases associating
different phenotypic traits such as, for instance, bradycardia, conduction disease, LQT3, and BrS, i.e., the so-called overlap syndromes .
C-terminus of Nav1.5 channels which comprises 243 residues plays an important role in regulating both channel gating and membrane
expression. The predicted structure of the first half of the C-terminal domain consists of six helices (H1-H6) while the second half is not
structured. It has been proposed that C-terminus helices participate in the control of inactivation through stabilization of the closed gate
. Furthermore, C-terminal domain bears several regions critical for protein-protein interaction, particularly the PDZ binding domain, which,
in turn, are critical for channel trafficking and surface expression. A huge amount of disease-causing mutations have been identified in
transmembrane segments of Nav1.5. However, mutations in the C-terminal domain are less frequent and only a few of them have been studied
functionally . Here we report a novel heterozygous frameshift mutation in SCN5A that results in a severe truncation of the C-terminal domain
found in a proband with repeated episodes of ventricular fibrillation who presented bradycardia and paroxysmal AF. Heterologous expression
of the mutation resulted in a marked decrease of peak INa density mainly caused by a reduced channel trafficking toward the plasma membrane
and in severe alterations in channel activation and inactivation. Interestingly, unlike other C-terminal domain truncating mutations , the
mutation here presented did not modify INa,L suggesting that deletions of different lengths can differentially affect gating properties of
the variants. This fact is important since these differences contribute to determining the phenotype of the carriers. Furthermore, our
results suggest that this SCN5A mutation can result in multiple rhythm disturbances within the same family, presenting with extensive
variability in type and severity of symptoms, including BrS, conduction disease, and AF. The study was approved by the Investigation
Committee of the Hospital Universitario Virgen de las Nieves and conforms to the principles outlined in the Declaration of Helsinki. Written
informed consent was obtained for the genetic screening test of the proband and all the relatives studied. Genomic DNA was isolated from
white blood cells by conventional methods . The whole codifying sequence and the flanking intronic regions of KCNQ1, KCNH2, KCNJ2, SCN5A,
KCNE1, and KCNE2 genes were amplified by polymerase chain reaction and directly sequenced. SCN5A (hH1 clone) mutation was introduced using
the QuikChange Site-Directed Mutagenesis kit (Stratagene, USA) and confirmed by direct DNA sequencing . Wild-type (WT) and mutated Nav1.5
channels (0.8 µg) together with the ancillary subunit hNavβ1 (0.8 µg) were transiently transfected in CHO cells by using Fugene 6 (Roche
Diagnostics, Switzerland). Currents were recorded at room temperature using the whole-cell patch-clamp configuration following previously
described methods . Recording pipettes were pulled from 1.0 mm o.d. borosilicate capillary tubes (GD1, Narishige Co., Ltd, Japan) using a
programmable patch micropipette puller (Model P-2000 Brown-Flaming, Sutter Instruments Co., USA) and were heat-polished with a microforge
(Model MF-830, Narishige). Micropipette resistance ranged from 0.5 to 1.5 MΩ when filled with the internal solution and immersed in the
external solution. In all experiments, series resistance was compensated manually by using the series resistance compensation unit of the
Axopatch-200B amplifier, and usually ≥80% compensation was achieved. Mean peak maximum Nav1.5 current (INav1.5) amplitude, uncompensated
access resistance, and capacitance averaged 3.0±0.4 nA, 1.6±0.2 MΩ, and 7.8±0.7 pF (n=69), respectively. Thus, under our experimental
conditions no significant voltage errors (<5 mV) due to series resistance were expected with the micropipettes used. Currents were filtered
at half the sampling frequency and stored on the hard disk of a computer for subsequent analysis by using p.CLAMP9 software (Molecular
Devices, USA). When WT and mutant Nav1.5 channels were coexpressed, a 0.5:0.5 ratio was used. To minimize the influence of the expression
variability of transiently transfected mammalian cell lines, each construct was tested in a large number of cells obtained from at least
three different transfection batches. Cells were perfused with an external solution containing (mM): NaCl 136, KCl 4, CaCl2 1.8, MgCl2 1,
HEPES 10, and glucose 10 (pH 7.4 with NaOH). The internal solution contained (mM): NaF 10, CsF 110, CsCl 20, HEPES 10, and EGTA 10 (pH 7.35
with CsOH). In a separate group of experiments, INav1.5 currents generated by WT and mutant channels were recorded in the absence of F- as
previously described by Ruan et al . In this group of experiments the composition of the external solution was (mM): NaCl 130, CaCl2 2, CsCl
5, MgCl2 1.2, HEPES 10, and glucose 5 (pH=7.4 with CsOH), while that of the internal solution was (mM): aspartic acid 50, CsCl 60, Na2-ATP
5, EGTA 11, HEPES 10, CaCl2 1, and MgCl2 1 (pH=7.4 with CsOH). The protocol to obtain INav1.5-voltage (I-V) curves consisted of 50 ms pulses
in 5 mV increments from –120 mV to potentials between −80 and +50 mV. To minimize the contribution of time-dependent shifts of channel
availability, all data were collected 20 min after establishing the whole-cell configuration. Activation curves were constructed plotting
the normalized peak conductance as a function of the membrane potential. The conductance was estimated by the equation , where G is the
conductance at the test potential Vm, I represents the peak maximum current at Vm, and Erev is the reversal potential. To determine the
Erev, the current density-voltage relationships were fitted to a function of the form , where I is the peak current elicited at the test
potential Vm, Gmax is the maximum conductance, and k is the slope factor. To obtain the inactivation curves, a two-step protocol was used.
The first 500-ms conditioning pulse from –120 mV to potentials between –140 and –20 mV was followed by a 20-ms test pulse to –20 mV.
Inactivation curves were constructed by plotting the current amplitude obtained with the test pulse normalized to the largest peak current,
as a function of the voltage command of the conditioning pulse. The fit of a Boltzmann function to the data yielded the midpoint (Vh) and
the slope (k) of the activation and inactivation curves. We also analyzed the effect of the mutation on the Nav1.5 window current. The
overlap of steady-state activation and steady-state inactivation curves of Na+ channels identifies a range of voltages (i.e., window) where
the channels have a small probability of being partially but not fully inactivated . The probability of being within this window was
calculated from the product of activation and steady-state inactivation parameters through the following equation: Probability = (1/{1 +
exp[(Vhact − V)/kact]} × ((1 − C)/{1 + exp[(V − Vhinact)/kinact]} + C) as previously described . To identify trafficking defects induced by
the mutation, Na+ channels (hH1 clone) conjugated to green fluorescent protein (GFP) were localized by confocal microscopy . In this
construct, GFP was inserted to the C-terminal domain of the Nav1.5 channel as previously described . CHO cells were transfected with the
constructs and collected 48 h after transfection following the procedures described above. In a group of experiments, density, and voltage-
dependence of activation and inactivation of the currents generated by Nav1.5 WT channels conjugated or not with GFP were compared. Currents
were recorded as described above. For confocal microscopy experiments, cells were seeded on fibronectine-coated coverslips and allowed to
attach for 30 min. Afterwards, they were washed with phosphate buffered saline (PBS) and fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 10 min. Then,
they were washed again and incubated for 10 min with a wheat germ agglutinin Alexa Fluor 647 conjugate (Invitrogen, UK), a fluorescent
plasma membrane dye. Finally, the coverslips were washed three times with PBS and mounted using the Prolong (Invitrogen) antifading mounting
medium. Confocal microscopy was performed with a Leica TCS-SP5 AOBS confocal microscope (Mannheim, Germany) with 20x and 63x oil immersion
optics. Laser lines at 488 nm and 633 nm for excitation of GFP and Alexa Fluor were provided by an Argon laser and a Helio-Neon laser,
respectively. Detection ranges were set to eliminate crosstalk between fluorophores. The XY frame was set to 512×512 pixels, and laser
intensity was set to 6% power. The z axis was changed in ≈0.50 μm increments by computer control through the entire volume of the cell.
Colocalization of channels and membrane marker was quantified using BioImageXD software for calculation of the percentage of colocalized
voxels. Results are expressed as mean±SEM. Unpaired t-test or one-way ANOVA followed by Newman-Keuls test were used to assess statistical
significance where appropriate. A value of P<0.05 was considered significant. The proband, a 53-year old woman with no family history of
cardiac disease or sudden death, was asymptomatic until she was admitted to the hospital after a syncopal episode. Electrocardiographic
monitoring showed the presence of polymorphic ventricular tachycardia with spontaneous cessation and frequent monomorphic premature
ventricular complexes with left bundle branch block and left superior axis morphology and short coupling intervals, which triggered repeated
episodes of ventricular fibrillation (Figure 1A). These episodes were resistant to treatment with β-blockers, amiodarone, procainamide, and
isoproterenol, requiring 20 defibrillations over a period of 72 h . Afterwards, an internal cardioverter defibrillator was implanted and
since then she has been under regular follow up with no more subsequent arrhythmic events up to now. A. ECG of the proband at hospital
admission with an episode of ventricular fibrillation initiated by a premature ventricular contraction (paper speed 25 mm/s). Reprinted from
under a CC BY license, with permission from Elsevier original copyright (2011). B. 12-Lead ECG of the proband after flecainide continuous
infusion at 2 mg/kg for 10 min (paper speed 25 mm/s). C. Pedigree of the affected family. Circles and squares represent female and male
subjects, respectively. White and black symbols represent unaffected and affected individuals, respectively. The arrow denotes the proband.
Diagonal lines indicate deceased subjects. The asterisk denotes proband`s relatives subjected to genetic and electrophysiological analyses
(including flecainide test). Patient named in the figure as III.4 was excluded from the pharmacological test and ECG analysis because she
had suffered Tetrallogy of Fallot that had been corrected in childhood, although she is a mutation carrier. δ denotes proband`s relatives
who displayed type 1 BrS pattern after flecainide challenge. D. ECG of the proband´s son (top) and sister (bottom) after flecainide
challenge. Interestingly, the proband presented sinus bradycardia (45-50 bpm) on basal status and under flecainide (Figure 1B) and also
paroxysmal AF. Structural heart disease and other possible cardiac conditions were excluded by echocardiograghy, cardiac magnetic resonance
imaging, and coronary arteriography. Drug challenge with flecainide (Figure 1B) and epinephrine QT stress test were negative. Proband`s
genetic analysis identified a frameshift mutation consisting in a T insertion at position 98747 of SCN5A (exon 28) (Figure 2C) resulting in
the substitution of the aspartic acid at position 1816 by a valine followed by 6 miscoded residues prior to a termination codon
(p.D1816VfsX7) (Figure 2A and 2B). Thus, the mutation leads to the deletion of C-terminal 201 aminoacids of Nav1.5 protein. As shown in
Figure 2B, this region which includes the D1816 residue, is highly conserved among human Nav1.x clones and Nav1.5 channels of different
species. Importantly, the mutation was not observed in more than 200 control subjects. Moreover, sequence analysis of all other exons of
SCN5A did not reveal any other mutation and screening for mutations in the other genes tested was also negative. D1816VfsX7 mutation has not
been described either in the 1000 Genomes project or in the NHLBI Exome Sequencing Project. Values are the mean±SEM of 8 non carriers and 8
carriers in each case. * P<0.05 vs non carriers. A. Topological diagram of Nav1.5 showing the location of D1816 residue. H1 to H6: each of
the six α-helices present in the proximal half of the C-terminus. IQ: IQ motif which constitutes a calmodulin binding site. PY: PY motif
which constitutes a binding site for E3 ubiquitin-protein ligases. PDZ: PDZ motif which constitutes a binding site for SAP97, PTPH1, and
syntrophins. B. Sequence alignments of a segment of the C-terminus of SCN5A homologs in 7 different species and SCNXA family sodium channel
expressed in human tissues. The sequence of p.D1816VfsX7 mutation is also shown. The respective accession numbers are NP_001159435.1,
NP_001035232.1, NP_001075145.1, NP_000325.4, NP_000326.2, NP_002967.2, NP_001171455.1, and NP_002968.1 for SCN1-5/7-9, and for the different
species are: XP_001171891.2 (Pan troglodytes), NP_001240789.1 (Mus musculus), NP_001153634.1 (Rattus norvegicus), NP_776883.1 (Bos taurus),
NP_001157367.1 (Equus caballus), and XP_001232818.2 (Gallus gallus). “*” means that the residues in that column are identical in all the
sequences in the alignment. “:”indicates conservation between groups of strongly similar properties. “.”indicates conservation between
groups of weakly similar properties. C. DNA sequence chromatograms of the proband depicting the heterozigous insertion in exon 28 of SCN5A.
Genetic screening of fifteen family members revealed that seven of them also carried the mutation (Figure 1C). Electrocardiogram (ECG)
recording, echocardiogram and flecainide tests were also performed on all the relatives studied. As can be observed in Table 1, PR and QRS
intervals, but not QTc intervals, were significantly prolonged in the mutation carriers compared with non-carriers. Interestingly, the
family screening detected an abnormal basal ECG in a son (24 years old; III:1) and a sister (59 years old; II:4) of the proband carrying the
SCN5A mutation, with slightly widened QRS in V1-V3 and positive response with development of type 1 BrS pattern after flecainide continuous
infusion at 2 mg/kg for 10 min (Figure 1D and Table 2). Another proband’s sister exhibited permanent AF (II:8). Moreover, another relative
carrying the mutation (III:6) has presented a syncopal episode in the past (Table 2). The remaining relatives were all asymptomatic at the
present time. BrS: Brugada Syndrome. ECG: Electrocardiogram, F: female, M: male. Figure 3A shows INav1.5 traces recorded by applying 50 ms
pulses from -120 mV to potentials between -80 and +50 mV in cells expressing WT and p.D1816VfsX7 channels. Recent experimental evidence
points to the existence of some kind of interaction between Nav1.5 subunits to form functional channels, in such a way that some trafficking
deficient mutations produced dominant negative effects on WT channels . Therefore, to mimic the heterozygous state of the patient and to
determine whether the p.D1816VfsX7 mutation produced a dominant negative effect on WT channels, WT and p.D1816VfsX7 channels were
cotransfected using a 0.5:0.5 ratio (p.D1816VfsX7+WT). Cells were always cotransfected with the gene encoding hNavβ1 subunit (1:1 ratio).
Peak current density generated by p.D1816VfsX7 (-69.8±24.7 pA/pF) was dramatically smaller than that generated by WT channels (-691±105
pA/pF) (n>12; P<0.01) (Figures 3A-C). Peak current density generated by p.D1816VfsX7+WT channels (-350±119 pA/pF) was approximately 50% of
the WT value (Figures 3A-C), a result which is consistent with haploinsuficiency without producing dominant negative effects. Interestingly,
p.D1816VfsX7 peak current occurred at more positive potentials than that of WT channels (Figure 3B), suggesting that the mutation altered
voltage dependence of activation. Indeed, as can be observed in Figure 4A and Table 3, p.D1816VfsX7 shifted ~18 mV positively the activation
curve obtained by plotting the normalized peak conductance as a function of the membrane potential. Co-expression of WT with p.D1816VfsX7
mutation partially reversed this gating defect produced by the mutation (Figure 4A and Table 3). The effects of the mutation on the
activation kinetics were assessed by measuring the time to peak. Interestingly, p.D1816VfsX7 significantly accelerated the time course of
current activation, an effect that was completely abrogated when the mutant channel was cotransfected with WT (Table 3). Voltage dependence
of steady-state inactivation was tested by applying 500 ms conditioning pulses from -120 to potentials between -140 and -20 mV followed by a
test pulse to -20 mV. p.D1816VfsX7 mutation alone or in combination with WT channels shifted the midpoint of the inactivation curve to more
positive potentials, without modifying the slope factor curve (Figure 4B and Table 3). Overall, these results suggested that p.D1816VfsX7
mutation profoundly affected the voltage dependence of Nav1.5 channels activation and inactivation. To rule out that these effects can be
secondary to the presence of F- ion in the intracellular solution, currents generated by WT and p.D1816VfsX7 channels were recorded in the
absence of this ion. Importantly, the changes produced by the mutation were quantitatively and qualitatively identical when the currents
were recorded in the absence of F- in the intracellular solution (Table 4). Vh and k: midpoint and slope values of the activation and
inactivation curves. τf and τs: fast and slow time constants of inactivation or reactivation Values are mean±SEM of >10 experiments. *
P<0.01 vs WT. # P<0.01 vs p.D1816VfsX7 Vh and k, midpoint and slope of the activation and inactivation curves. τf and τs, fast and slow time
constants of inactivation. Values are the mean±SEM of 10 experiments in each group. ** P<0.01 vs WT. A. Current traces obtained by applying
the protocol shown at the top in cells transfected with WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT. B. Current-density voltage relationships for
WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT channels. C. Peak current density generated by each construct tested. Each point/bar represents
mean±SEM of >10 experiments. In B and C, *P<0.01 vs WT, and # P<0.01 vs p.D1816VfsX7. (A and B) Normalized steady-state activation (A) and
inactivation curves (B) of WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT constructs. Solid lines represent the Boltzmann fit to data point. Each
point represents the mean±SEM of >10 experiments. We also determined the effects of the mutation on the window current. The overlap of the
activation and steady-state inactivation of Na+ channels identifies a range of voltages (i.e., window) where the channels have a small
probability of being partially but not fully inactivated. The plot of the probability of being within the window calculated from the product
of the fitted activation and steady-state inactivation parameters (Figure 5A) demonstrated that p.D1816VfsX7 decreased the amplitude of the
window current and shifted its peak to more depolarized potentials (from 0.29±0.1% at -60 mV for WT channels to 0.12±0.04% at -40 mV for
p.D1816VfsX7 channels; P<0.05). A. Effects of p.D1816VfsX7 mutation on the window current. The probability of being within this window for
WT and p.D1816VfsX7 channels is plotted. B. Effects of the mutation on the INaL. Bar graphs show the density of the current generated by WT,
p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT constructs measured at the end of 500-ms pulse to -20 mV from a holding potential of -120 mV. Each bar
represents the mean±SEM of >12 experiments. To determine putative modifications on the kinetics of the fast inactivation process, a
biexponential function was fitted to the decay of the peak current traces elicited by each construct. Interestingly, both fast and slow time
constants of inactivation of p.D1816VfsX7 were indistinguishable from those of WT channels (Table 3), demonstrating that the mutation did
not modify fast inactivation kinetics. Furthermore, the mutation did not modify the current density after 500 ms pulses to -20 mV,
indicating that the density of the INaL was not changed by the mutation (Figure 5B). Recovery from fast inactivation was analyzed by
applying two test pulses to -20 mV with increasing coupling intervals (Figure 6A). The holding and the potential between pulses were -120
mV. Recovery time course was depicted by biexponential functions yielding the fast and slow time constants reported in Table 3.
Interestingly, recovery from fast inactivation of p.D1816VfsX7 channels was significantly faster than those of WT and p.D1816VfsX7+WT
channels (Figure 6A and Table 3). We next analyzed the development of slow inactivation by applying a pre-pulse to -20 mV of progressively
increasing duration followed by a test pulse also to -20 mV. p.D1816VfsX7 mutation significantly increased the fraction of channels that
developed slow inactivation with prolonged depolarizations (Figure 6B). Co-expression of p.D1816VfsX7 with WT channels partially reversed
this alteration. A. Recovery from fast inactivation of WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT constructs assessed by applying two 500 ms
pulses from -120 to -20 mV (P1 and P2) at increasing coupling intervals (0.1–500ms). Solid lines represent the fit of a biexponential
function to the data points. B. Development of slow inactivation of WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT constructs assessed with the
double-pulse protocol shown at the top. Solid lines represent the fit of a monoexponential function to the data points. Each point (ratio of
the peak current amplitude generated by P2 and P1 pulses) represents the mean±SEM of >10 experiments and * P<0.05 vs WT. In the next group
of experiments, the effects of p.D1816VfsX7 mutation on Nav1.5 trafficking using channels conjugated with GFP were analyzed by using
confocal microscopy. Additionally, we performed a group of experiments where we compared the currents generated by Nav1.5 WT channels
conjugated or not with GFP. As is shown in Table 5, under our experimental conditions, current density, time-dependent kinetics and voltage
dependence of activation and inactivation were not significantly different, confirming that the presence of GFP does not interfere with the
electrophysiological properties of the channel. On the other hand, the confocal microscopy results obtained demonstrated that WT channels
were distributed uniformly throughout the cell including the cell membrane as demonstrated by the colocalization of the GFP signal with that
of the membrane marker wheat germ agglutinin Alexa Fluor 647 (Figure 7A upper panel). On the contrary, cells expressing p.D1816VfsX7
channels did not clearly exhibit fluorescence in the membrane as the GFP signal was mainly localized in the cytoplasm and, thus,
colocalization was significantly decreased compared with WT channels (Figure 7A middle panel and 7B). Membrane fluorescence significantly
increased when p.D1816VfsX7 channels were coexpressed with WT channels (Figure 7A and B). Vh and k, midpoint and slope of the activation and
inactivation curves. τf and τs, fast and slow time constants of inactivation. Values are the mean±SEM of 10 experiments in each group. A.
Representative single fluorescent confocal images from the center of CHO cells transfected with GFP-tagged-Nav1.5 WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and
p.D1816VfsX7+WT constructs. Columns: GFP-tagged-Nav1.5 channel staining (left), wheat germ agglutinin Alexa Fluor 647 (a fluorescent
membrane dye) staining (middle), and colocalization of both (right). B. Percentage of colocalized voxels measured in cells transfected with
WT, p.D1816VfsX7, and p.D1816VfsX7+WT. C. Comparison of peak current-density recorded in cells expressing p.D1816VfsX7 incubated or not at
25°C, or in the presence of 5 mM 4-phenylbutirate (4-PB) or 300 μM mexiletine (mexi) with WT. Bars represent the mean±SEM of >6 cells. *
P<0.05 vs WT and # P<0.05 vs p.D1816VfsX7. Previous data have demonstrated that trafficking of Nav1.5 mutant channels can be restored by
decreasing incubation temperature during cell culture or by incubation with compounds or drugs (Class I antiarrhythmic drugs) that improve
channel trafficking . Reducing the incubation temperature during cell culture to 25°C or incubation of the p.D1816VfsX7 transfected cells
with 5 mM 4-phenylbutirate or 300 μM mexiletine for 48 h did not modify current density compared to that recorded under control conditions
(Figure 7C). In the present study, we describe the functional consequences of a frameshift mutation (p.D1816VfsX7) found in a patient with
repeated episodes of ventricular fibrillation who lacks typical ECG features of BrS or long QT syndrome both under basal conditions and
after flecainide and epinephrine challenges. There are previous reports demonstrating that loss-of-function SCN5A mutations could result in
syncope, ventricular fibrillation, and sudden cardiac death in patients with normal structural hearts who do not exhibit any
electrocardiographic manifestations of inherited arrhythmogenic syndromes . However, it is important to note that the proband presented
sinus bradycardia on basal status and under flecainide, which could be attributed to the p.D1816VfsX7 mutation. This hypothesis could seem
counterintuitive since pacemaker activity in sinus nodal cells is mainly regulated by Ca2+ and K+ channels. However, bradyarrhythmic
complications have been associated with other Nav1.5 loss-of-function mutations . Indeed, it has been described that Nav1.5 channels are
distributed in the periphery of the sinus node , and thus, it is possible that a functional defect of Nav1.5 channel activity would lead to
reduced impulse propagation from the sinoatrial node to the surrounding atrial muscle and, thus, to a decrease in heart rhythm . Genetic
screening of several family members revealed that seven of them also carry the mutation. Among them other cardiac electrical abnormalities
were detected. As mentioned, the proband and one of her sisters exhibit paroxysmal and permanent AF, respectively. A son and a sister of the
proband displayed type 1 BrS pattern after flecainide challenge. Moreover, another relative carrying the mutation had suffered an episode of
syncope in the past. Additionally, PR and QRS intervals were significantly prolonged in the mutation carriers. Although the conduction delay
is mild the concomitant presence of both PR and QRS prolongation suggests a hampered conduction in different cardiac compartments. Our
hypothesis is that impairment of intracardiac conduction exhibited by mutant carriers and the BrS exhibited by two of them, could be
attributed to the marked INa decrease produced by the mutation. Furthermore, Nav1.5 loss-of-function mutations have been associated with
atrial arrhythmias including AF . In fact, prevalence of AF and atrial flutter in patients with BrS is very high (approximately 20%) .
Moreover, it has been suggested that some patients with drug-induced BrS ECG may develop atrial arrhythmias prior to developing ventricular
fibrillation . Therefore, we propose that this severe loss-of-function mutation is associated with incomplete penetrance and variable
expressivity giving rise to a complex phenotype which includes ventricular fibrillation, bradycardia, intracardiac conduction delay, AF, and
BrS. The association of a single SCN5A mutation with a wide spectrum of disease phenotypes has been described previously . Unfortunately,
the reasons underlying the marked heterogenity in phenotype remain unknown. Gender and age may constitute clinical determinants of disease
expressivity. However, in our family three sisters of similar age clearly differ in their phenotype, i.e., ventricular fibrillation
associated with bradycardia and paroxysmal AF (the proband) vs. permanent AF (II:8), and BrS (II:4). Moreover, epigenetic or genetic factors
including genetic variability due to the presence of polymorphisms, may contribute to disease expressivity and mixed phenotypes in Nav1.5
loss-of-function overlap syndromes . Therefore, unknown genetic or environmental factors may probably account for the variable and
incomplete disease expressivity in this family. p.D1816VfsX7 mutation produces a 201-residue truncation of the C-terminal domain of the
channel that markedly affected channel expression and gating. Indeed, the most important alteration of Na+ channel function produced by the
mutation was a dramatic reduction (≈90%) in peak current density as a consequence of a significant decrease of channel trafficking toward
the membrane. Furthermore, impaired channel trafficking was not restored by incubating transfected cells at low temperature or with chemical
chaperones such as mexiletine or 4-phenylbutirate. Trafficking defects of mutant Na+ channel proteins can be due to endoplasmic reticulum
retention, degradation of folding-deficient proteins or absence of a motif essential for trafficking . The C-terminal domain of Nav1.5
channels, comprising residues 1773 to 2016, contains several protein-protein interaction motifs including a calmodulin-binding IQ motif
(residue 1908), a PY motif (residue 1974) and a PDZ binding domain motif (3 last residues) (Figure 2). It has been described that
interaction of calmodulin, ubiquitin protein ligases and PDZ domain-bearing proteins with these domains is needed for proper expression of
the channel . Especially important is the interaction of Nav1.5 with PDZ domain-bearing proteins such as the protein tyrosine phosphatase
(PTPH1), the membrane associated guanylate kinase scaffolding protein (SAP97), and syntrophin-dystrophin complex. These proteins recognize
the C-terminal Ser-Ile-Val (SIV) sequence of Nav1.5 and subsequently increase channel expression in the membrane . p.D1816VfsX7 mutant
channel lacks all these protein-protein interaction motifs, a fact that provides a plausible mechanism to explain its trafficking defect. It
is interesting to note that despite the severe truncation of the C-terminus of Nav1.5, p.D1816VfsX7 channels generated measurable but
abnormal currents. The mutation induced alterations in channel gating leading to a mixed loss- and gain-of-function phenotype. Indeed, it
produced a positive shift in the voltage dependence of activation and an increase in the fraction of channels entering the slow inactivated
state, effects that would reduce peak INav1.5. On the contrary, it positively shifted the voltage dependence of fast inactivation and
accelerated activation and recovery from fast inactivation kinetics, effects that would contribute to an increase in channel availability.
Interestingly, the mutation markedly reduced and shifted the peak of the window current. The window current determines a range of membrane
potentials where Na+ channels can be activated but not inactivated. p.D1816VfsX7 mutation would lead to channel opening at more depolarized
potentials and, thus, to a further decrease in cell excitability. However, the mutation did not modify INaL which correlates with the lack
of QT prolongation in any of the mutant carriers. Other frameshift mutations leading to the truncation of the C-terminus have been described
(p.L1786EfsX2, p.F1808IfsX3, p.E1823Hfs10, and p.R1860KfsX13 associated with BrS and p.L1821fsX10 associated with sick sinus syndrome,
cardiac conduction disease and ventricular tachycardia) . Among these mutations only p.L1821fsX10 was functionally studied and its
expression in HEK-293 cells demonstrated that the mutation also generated currents, albeit dramatically reduced . Conversely, complete
truncation of the C-terminal domain leads to non detectable currents . Thus, to our knowledge, p.D1816VfsX7 produces the greater disruption
of Nav1.5 protein sequence for a disease causing mutation that still generates measurable currents. Some of the effects of p.L1821fsX10 on
channel gating (shift of the activation curve to more positive potentials, enhanced slow inactivation) were similar to those produced by
p.D1816VfsX7 . However, other effects of the p.L1821fsX10 mutation (shift of the inactivation curve to negative potentials and increased
INaL density) were not shared by p.D1816VfsX7 mutation. It has been described that the C-terminal cytoplasmic domain, is important for
setting the properties of fast inactivation . Thus, it can be somewhat surprising that two frameshift mutations p.D1816VfsX7 and
p.L1821fsX10 that lead to similar deletions of the C-terminus (201 and 195 residues, respectively) can differentially affect voltage
dependence of fast inactivation or INaL. The proximal half of the C-terminus contains six helical structures (H1-H6) (Figure 8) that are
critical for establishing interhelical contacts as well as intramolecular interactions with domain III and IV linker that stabilize the
inactivated state . Interestingly, p.L1821fsX10 truncation removes H3 to H6 but leaves H1 and H2 completely unaltered. However, p.D1816VfsX7
that also truncated H2 (Figure 8), may impair some other interactions different from those disrupted by p.L1821fsX10. Therefore, our results
confirm that C-terminal regions of Na+ channel mutants may contribute to differences in gating properties of the variants. Furthermore, our
results confirm the important role of the C-terminus for Nav1.5 channel expression and function and demonstrate that the length of the
truncated C-terminus segment may have important implications for Na+ channel function. H1 to H6 helical structures as well as the location
of D1816 have been highlighted. H1 (blue); H2 (pink); H3 (orange); H4 (red); H5 (light blue); H6 (yellow); D1816 (deep purple). We are
grateful to Drs. C. Bezzina (University of Amsterdam, The Netherlands) and C. Antzelevitch for kindly providing SCN5A and SCN1B constructs
and GFP-tagged-Nav1.5 channels, respectively. We also thank Sandra Sacristán and Paloma Vaquero for their invaluable technical assistance.
