Scientific Advisory Boards: NONE NONE Gifts: NONE NONE Funding for Travel or Speaker Honoraria: NONE NONE Editorial Boards: NONE NONE
Patents: NONE NONE Publishing Royalties: NONE NONE Employment, Commercial Entity: NONE NONE Consultancies: NONE NONE Speakers' Bureaus: NONE
NONE Other Activities: NONE NONE Clinical Procedures or Imaging Studies: NONE NONE Research Support, Commercial Entities: NONE NONE Research
Support, Government Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Academic Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Foundations and Societies: (1)
Oxfordshire Health Services Research Committee (OHSRC/BRC/ NOHF/OUCAGS Junior Research Fellowship Grant Ref:U) (1) Oxfordshire Health
Services Research Committee (OHSRC/BRC/ NOHF/OUCAGS Junior Research Fellowship Grant Ref:U) Stock/Stock Options/Board of Directors
Compensation: NONE NONE License Fee Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Royalty Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE
Stock/Stock Options, Research Sponsor: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Medical Equipment & Materials: NONE NONE Legal Proceedings: NONE NONE
Scientific Advisory Boards: NONE NONE Gifts: NONE NONE Funding for Travel or Speaker Honoraria: NONE NONE Editorial Boards: NONE NONE
Patents: NONE NONE Publishing Royalties: NONE NONE Employment, Commercial Entity: NONE NONE Consultancies: NONE NONE Speakers' Bureaus: NONE
NONE Other Activities: NONE NONE Clinical Procedures or Imaging Studies: NONE NONE Research Support, Commercial Entities: NONE NONE Research
Support, Government Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Academic Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Foundations and Societies: NONE
NONE Stock/Stock Options/Board of Directors Compensation: NONE NONE License Fee Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Royalty
Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Research Sponsor: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Medical Equipment &
Materials: NONE NONE Legal Proceedings: NONE NONE Scientific Advisory Boards: NONE NONE Gifts: NONE NONE Funding for Travel or Speaker
Honoraria: NONE NONE Editorial Boards: Frontiers in Neuropsychiatric Imaging and Stimulation, Review Editor, 2013 Frontiers in
Neuropsychiatric Imaging and Stimulation, Review Editor, 2013 Patents: NONE NONE Publishing Royalties: NONE NONE Employment, Commercial
Entity: NONE NONE Consultancies: NONE NONE Speakers' Bureaus: NONE NONE Other Activities: NONE NONE Clinical Procedures or Imaging Studies:
NONE NONE Research Support, Commercial Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Government Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Academic
Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Foundations and Societies: 1) Parkinsonï¿½s UK (Monument Discovery award), 2) Thames Valley DeNDRoN
(Dementias and Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Network) (Research Capability Funding) 1) Parkinsonï¿½s UK (Monument Discovery award), 2)
Thames Valley DeNDRoN (Dementias and Neurodegenerative Diseases Research Network) (Research Capability Funding) Stock/Stock Options/Board of
Directors Compensation: NONE NONE License Fee Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Royalty Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE
NONE Stock/Stock Options, Research Sponsor: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Medical Equipment & Materials: NONE NONE Legal Proceedings: NONE
NONE Scientific Advisory Boards: Agenzia di Ricerca per la Sclerosi Laterale Amiotrofica (AriSLA), 2009-2012 Agenzia di Ricerca per la
Sclerosi Laterale Amiotrofica (AriSLA), 2009-2012 Gifts: NONE NONE Funding for Travel or Speaker Honoraria: NONE NONE Editorial Boards: (1)
Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, Editorial Board; (2) Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, Editorial Board (1)
Neuropathology and Applied Neurobiology, Editorial Board; (2) Journal of Neurology, Neurosurgery and Psychiatry, Editorial Board Patents:
NONE NONE Publishing Royalties: (1) Medicine at a Glance (Blackwell Science, 2002-present); (2) Motor Neuron Disaese: The Facts (Oxford
University Press, 2009-present); (3) Oxford Care Manual of Motor Neuron Disease (Oxford University Press, 2010-present) (1) Medicine at a
Glance (Blackwell Science, 2002-present); (2) Motor Neuron Disaese: The Facts (Oxford University Press, 2009-present); (3) Oxford Care
Manual of Motor Neuron Disease (Oxford University Press, 2010-present) Employment, Commercial Entity: NONE NONE Consultancies: Avanir
Pharmaceuticals 2011-13 UCB Pharma 2012 Avanir Pharmaceuticals 2011-13 UCB Pharma 2012 Speakers' Bureaus: NONE NONE Other Activities: NONE
NONE Clinical Procedures or Imaging Studies: NONE NONE Research Support, Commercial Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Government
Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Academic Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Foundations and Societies: Motor Neuron Disease
Association (UK) Spinal Muscular Atrophy Europe Patrick Berthould Charitable Trust Parkinson's UK Association Francaise Contre les
Myopathies (AFM) Motor Neuron Disease Association (UK) Spinal Muscular Atrophy Europe Patrick Berthould Charitable Trust Parkinson's UK
Association Francaise Contre les Myopathies (AFM) Stock/Stock Options/Board of Directors Compensation: NONE NONE License Fee Payments,
Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Royalty Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Research Sponsor: NONE NONE
Stock/Stock Options, Medical Equipment & Materials: NONE NONE Legal Proceedings: NONE NONE Scientific Advisory Boards: NONE NONE Gifts: NONE
NONE Funding for Travel or Speaker Honoraria: NONE NONE Editorial Boards: NONE NONE Patents: NONE NONE Publishing Royalties: NONE NONE
Employment, Commercial Entity: NONE NONE Consultancies: NONE NONE Speakers' Bureaus: NONE NONE Other Activities: NONE NONE Clinical
Procedures or Imaging Studies: NONE NONE Research Support, Commercial Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Government Entities: NONE NONE
Research Support, Academic Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Foundations and Societies: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options/Board of Directors
Compensation: NONE NONE License Fee Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Royalty Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE
Stock/Stock Options, Research Sponsor: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Medical Equipment & Materials: NONE NONE Legal Proceedings: NONE NONE
Scientific Advisory Boards: (1) Non-profit entity. Serve on the Biomedical Research Advisory Panel to the Motor Neurone Disease Association
UK (2) Non-profit entity. Serve as scientific advisor to Ontario Brain Institute (1) Non-profit entity. Serve on the Biomedical Research
Advisory Panel to the Motor Neurone Disease Association UK (2) Non-profit entity. Serve as scientific advisor to Ontario Brain Institute
Gifts: NONE NONE Funding for Travel or Speaker Honoraria: (1) Charity. Motor Neurone Disease Association UK paid economy flight and
accommodation to attend 22nd International Symposium on ALS in Sydney as plenary speaker. Costs ∼ï¿½2000. (2) Commercial entity. Accepted
hotel accommodation from Sanofi-Aventis for presentation on ALS biomarkers to Brisbane neurologists Nov 2011. Costs ∼AUD200. (3) Charity.
ALS Association paid economy flight and accommodation to attend Drug Discovery Workshop on ALS in Washington as speaker. Costs ∼ï¿½2000. (4)
Charity. North-East ALS Consortium. Economy flight and accommodation to speak at annual meeting in Tampa, Florida. Costs ∼ï¿½1500. (5)
Charity. Association of British Neurologists paid economy flight and accommodation to speak at Sri Lankan Neurologists' Association meeting
in Colombo. Costs ∼ï¿½1500. (6) Commercial entity. Cytokinetics Inc. Economy train fare and accommodation to attend CY4026 Investigators'
meeting in Paris, France. Costs ∼ï¿½500. (7) Charity. ALS Association. Economy flight and accommodation to speak at Cold Spring Harbor
laboratory meeting on ALS. Costs ∼ï¿½1000. (8) Non-profit entity. University of Ontario. Economy flight and accommodation to speak at ALS-
FTD meeting. Costs ∼ï¿½1500. (9) Non-profit entity. University of Hannover. Economy flight and accommodation to speak on ALS at Neurological
Institute. (1) Charity. Motor Neurone Disease Association UK paid economy flight and accommodation to attend 22nd International Symposium on
ALS in Sydney as plenary speaker. Costs ∼ï¿½2000. (2) Commercial entity. Accepted hotel accommodation from Sanofi-Aventis for presentation
on ALS biomarkers to Brisbane neurologists Nov 2011. Costs ∼AUD200. (3) Charity. ALS Association paid economy flight and accommodation to
attend Drug Discovery Workshop on ALS in Washington as speaker. Costs ∼ï¿½2000. (4) Charity. North-East ALS Consortium. Economy flight and
accommodation to speak at annual meeting in Tampa, Florida. Costs ∼ï¿½1500. (5) Charity. Association of British Neurologists paid economy
flight and accommodation to speak at Sri Lankan Neurologists' Association meeting in Colombo. Costs ∼ï¿½1500. (6) Commercial entity.
Cytokinetics Inc. Economy train fare and accommodation to attend CY4026 Investigators' meeting in Paris, France. Costs ∼ï¿½500. (7) Charity.
ALS Association. Economy flight and accommodation to speak at Cold Spring Harbor laboratory meeting on ALS. Costs ∼ï¿½1000. (8) Non-profit
entity. University of Ontario. Economy flight and accommodation to speak at ALS-FTD meeting. Costs ∼ï¿½1500. (9) Non-profit entity.
University of Hannover. Economy flight and accommodation to speak on ALS at Neurological Institute. Editorial Boards: NONE NONE Patents:
NONE NONE Publishing Royalties: (1) The Brain - A Beginner's Guide, Oneworld, 2008 (2) Motor Neuron Disease - A Care Manual, Oxford
University Press, 2010 (1) The Brain - A Beginner's Guide, Oneworld, 2008 (2) Motor Neuron Disease - A Care Manual, Oxford University Press,
2010 Employment, Commercial Entity: (1) Non-profit entity. Medical Research Council Clinician Scientist Fellowship 2008-2013, G0701923,
ï¿½966,732 (1) Non-profit entity. Medical Research Council Clinician Scientist Fellowship 2008-2013, G0701923, ï¿½966,732 Consultancies: (1)
Commercial. Biogen Idec on ALS staging. ï¿½3000 (2) Non-profit. University of Michigan. Grant review. ï¿½300 (3) Non-profit. University of
Ontario. Grant review. ï¿½300 (1) Commercial. Biogen Idec on ALS staging. ï¿½3000 (2) Non-profit. University of Michigan. Grant review.
ï¿½300 (3) Non-profit. University of Ontario. Grant review. ï¿½300 Speakers' Bureaus: NONE NONE Other Activities: NONE NONE Clinical
Procedures or Imaging Studies: NONE NONE Research Support, Commercial Entities: NONE NONE Research Support, Government Entities: NONE NONE
Research Support, Academic Entities: (1) Non-profit entity. Medical Research Council/EU Joint Programme in Neurodegenerative Disease
Research 2012-15, MR/K000780/1, ï¿½73,102 (2) Non-profit entity. Thierry Latran Foundation Grant Award 2012-14, ï¿½100,100 (1) Non-profit
entity. Medical Research Council/EU Joint Programme in Neurodegenerative Disease Research 2012-15, MR/K000780/1, ï¿½73,102 (2) Non-profit
entity. Thierry Latran Foundation Grant Award 2012-14, ï¿½100,100 Research Support, Foundations and Societies: NONE NONE Stock/Stock
Options/Board of Directors Compensation: NONE NONE License Fee Payments, Technology or Inventions: NONE NONE Royalty Payments, Technology or
Inventions: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Research Sponsor: NONE NONE Stock/Stock Options, Medical Equipment & Materials: NONE NONE Legal
Proceedings: NONE NONE The onset of motor symptoms in amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is strikingly focal. In three-quarters of cases,
weakness emerges unilaterally in one limb, typically spreading contiguously over months to become bilateral.1 An extremely rare clinical
syndrome of upper motor neuron–predominant, progressive hemiparesis was first described by American neurologist Charles Karsner Mills
(1845–1930).2 More typical ALS shares a common histopathologic signature with frontotemporal dementia (FTD), consisting of ubiquitinated
neuronal and glial inclusions containing the DNA and RNA binding protein, TDP-43. Cognitive impairment may be detected in at least one-third
of ALS cases and involves mainly deficits in language, executive function, and fluency, with variable levels of behavioral impairments that
all have overlap with the purer FTD syndromes. Frank FTD is seen in up to 15% of patients with ALS, in whom it typically occurs before or
soon after the development of motor symptoms, and is associated with a more rapid disease progression.3 The onset of motor symptoms in
amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) is strikingly focal. In three-quarters of cases, weakness emerges unilaterally in one limb, typically
spreading contiguously over months to become bilateral.1 An extremely rare clinical syndrome of upper motor neuron–predominant, progressive
hemiparesis was first described by American neurologist Charles Karsner Mills (1845–1930).2 More typical ALS shares a common histopathologic
signature with frontotemporal dementia (FTD), consisting of ubiquitinated neuronal and glial inclusions containing the DNA and RNA binding
protein TDP-43. Cognitive impairment may be detected in at least one-third of ALS cases and involves mainly deficits in language, executive
function, and fluency, with variable levels of behavioral impairments that all have overlap with the purer FTD syndromes. Frank FTD is seen
in up to 15% of patients with ALS, in whom it typically occurs before or soon after the development of motor symptoms and is associated with
a more rapid disease progression.3 A 72-year-old right-handed man reported a 1-year history of progressively worsening speech difficulties
and right-sided limb weakness. Bedside examination revealed adequate comprehension but a profound inability to generate speech (in the
absence of obvious corticobulbar signs or apraxia), accompanied by a spastic right-sided hemiparesis affecting leg, arm, and face. MRI
revealed marked atrophy of the left temporal lobe (figure, A). Over the subsequent months, he developed additional severe bulbar dysfunction
with visible tongue wasting, and he died within 1 year of respiratory failure. Postmortem examination (tissue donated to the Thomas Willis
Oxford Brain Collection) revealed striking left hemisphere atrophy involving the primary motor cortex and the frontal and particularly the
left temporal lobe, accompanied by neuronal loss, gliosis, and TDP-43-positive neuronal and glial cytoplasmic inclusions. Bunina bodies,
eosinophilic neuronal inclusions pathognomonic for ALS, were present in the medulla. The predominant right-sided hemiparesis was mirrored at
the level of the spinal cord by asymmetric pallor of the corresponding crossed lateral corticospinal tract (figure, B), with marked
microglial activation in both the crossed left hemisphere lateral corticospinal tract and the uncrossed anterior corticospinal tract
(figure, D). (A) A 3D-rendered volumetric T1-weighted MRI of the brain (underside shown) demonstrates marked left temporal lobe (arrowhead)
atrophy. (B) Luxol fast blue/Cresyl violet staining of the spinal cord section demonstrates greater pallor in the right (crossed) lateral
corticospinal tract (arrow). (C) Reconstruction, using diffusion tensor tractography, of the temporal lobe white matter projection tracts,
using each hippocampus as the seed-base. This demonstrates reduced left-sided (blue) compared to right-sided (red) connectivity (tracts
shown within superior oblique cut-out brain section viewed from left). (D) CD68 immunohistochemistry of the spinal cord section shows
intense microglial activation of the right (crossed) corticospinal tract (full arrow) but also the uncrossed anterior corticospinal tract
(arrowhead only). Scale bars = 700 µm. The Mills phenotype is extremely uncommon and typically more slowly progressive than this case,4
which was more in keeping with aggressive forms of classical, generalized ALS. Slow progression and aphasia, isolated for several years
before the onset of more generalized frontotemporal dementia, has been long recognized.5 Progressive hemiparesis has also been noted in the
setting of frontal lobe degeneration.6 Cases of ALS with progressive aphasia7 and semantic dementia8 have been reported, but are
exceptional. The effortful speech pattern of our patient was in keeping with nonfluent progressive aphasia, while the pattern of temporal
lobe atrophy is usually associated with the fluent, semantic variant. While semantic deficits may well have been present in our patient, the
profound temporal atrophy might reflect more complex and widespread disruption of left hemisphere perisylvian networks manifest in the
striking asymmetry of the corticospinal tract degeneration observed. Reconstruction of the temporal lobe white matter tract projections
using diffusion tensor tractography confirmed reduced connectivity on the left (figure, C; imaging carried out with informed consent as part
of The Oxford Study for Biomarkers in MND, approved by the South Central Oxford Research Ethics Committee—08/H0605/85). A PET study in 2
patients with lateralized motor cortical degeneration syndromes (1 with Mills syndrome) demonstrated strikingly lateralized microglial
activation in the hemisphere contralateral to the weakness.9 In our case, CD68 staining for microglia was the most sensitive marker of
axonal loss in the main crossed lateral corticospinal tract but also the anterior corticospinal tract carrying uncrossed descending fibers
from the cortex to the cervical and thoracic spinal cord. The involvement of the anterior corticospinal tract in ALS has not been
systematically studied or specifically highlighted before, and this clear demonstration of its pathologic involvement appears to support the
wider concept of cortical dying-forward in contrast to the dogma of solely peripheral neuromuscular dying-back neurodegeneration. The co-
occurrence of aphasia and progressive right hemiparesis in ALS is exceedingly rare. This case further underscores the need to understand the
fundamental basis for the marked clinical heterogeneity of ALS. There was no obvious abnormality of the corpus callosum in our case to
explain the striking hemisphere bias to the phenotype. Nonetheless, we speculate that there are specific architectural properties of the
interconnected motor and frontotemporal cerebral networks, and possibly their glial milieu, which influence both variable phenotype and
speed of progression in ALS. Author contributions: D.B. conceptualized the study, analyzed and interpreted data, and drafted the manuscript.
R.B. interpreted the data and edited the manuscript. R.A.L.M. analyzed and interpreted data and edited the manuscript. K.T. interpreted data
and edited the manuscript. M.H. analyzed and interpreted data and edited the manuscript. M.R.T. conceptualized the study, analyzed and
interpreted data, and drafted the manuscript. Study funding: No targeted funding reported. Disclosures: D. Bäumer is funded by an
OHSRC/BRC/NOHF Fellowship Grant. R. Butterworth and R. Menke report no disclosures. K. Talbot is Director of The Oxford Motor Neuron Disease
Care & Research Centre, which receives funding from the Motor Neurone Disease Association UK Care Centre Program. M. Hofer reports no
disclosures. M. Turner is funded by the Medical Research Council/Motor Neurone Disease Association Lady Edith Wolfson Fellowship, and is Co-
Director of The Oxford Motor Neuron Disease Care & Research Centre, which receives funding from the Motor Neurone Disease Association UK
Care Centre Program. Go to Neurology.org for full disclosures.
