To the Editor: Hepatitis E virus (HEV) is the only virus in the genus Hepevirus, which is the only member of the family Hepeviridae. HEV is
the causative agent of acute hepatitis E, a moderately severe enteric disease with death rates <4% in the general population and ≈30% in
pregnant woman (1). The virus is transmitted primarily by the fecal-oral route associated with consumption of contaminated drinking water
(2). HEV infection is of public health concern because it causes large epidemics and endemic waterborne outbreaks in Asia, Africa, and Latin
America (2,3). During the past decade, an increasing number of locally acquired cases have been reported in industrialized and previously
non–HEV-endemic countries, where evidence of zoonotic transmission has been discovered (4,5). Human HEV sequences are classified into
genotypes 1–4, which are subdivided into subtypes. Genotype 1 was isolated in Asian and African countries and from Cuba and Venezuela in
Latin America. Genotype 2 was described in Mexico and Africa. These genotypes have been isolated from human samples and are mostly
associated with large epidemics and outbreaks of HEV. Genotype 3 is distributed worldwide, and genotype 4 is found in Asia and central
Europe. Genotypes 3 and 4 have been isolated from humans and animal reservoirs, mainly pigs and wild boars, and are commonly found in
persons with sporadic acute hepatitis cases (6). Thus, zoonotic transmission of HEV also poses a danger to public health Several countries
in South America, including Argentina, Brazil, Bolivia, Venezuela, and Uruguay, have reported the detection and characterization of HEV
strains. In these studies, 2 Venezuelan strains were classified within genotype 1; the remaining 70 published strains were indigenous
isolates belonging to genotype 3 (7). However, little data regarding molecular epidemiology of HEV infection in South America exists. Here,
we report the identification and molecular characterization of a genotype 1 strain detected in Uruguay, isolated from a person with locally
acquired HEV infection. The patient was a male, 26 years of age, and a member of the National Army Force, who had symptoms and paraclinical
findings compatible with acute hepatitis: malaise, fever, choluria, jaundice, and elevated levels of bilirubin and liver enzymes. Syphilis,
leptospirosis, hepatitis A–C, cytomegalovirus, Epstein-Barr virus, and HIV infection were ruled out by laboratory testing. No risk factor
for HEV infection arose from the formal questionnaire, including travel out of Uruguay during the 40 days before the onset of the symptoms.
Dietary habits of the patient were also investigated. Shellfish intake and water consumption from potentially contaminated supplies were not
reported. A blood specimen was tested for IgM and IgG against HEV by using Line immunoassay (recomLine HEV IgG/IgM, Mikrogen Diagnostics,
Germany); results were positive. To confirm the presence of HEV, RNA was extracted from 140 μL serum and fecal suspension by using QIAamp
Viral RNA Kit (QIAGEN, Hilden, Germany), then retrotranscribed with Superscript II (Life Technologies, Grand island, NY, USA). HEV infection
was confirmed by using nested PCR amplification of a conserved sequence within the HEV open reading frame (ORF) 2–3 overlapping region (8).
For genotyping and phylogenetic analysis, a nested PCR was then performed for the ORF1 RNA dependent RNA polymerase (RdRp) region (9). PCR
products obtained from serum and fecal samples were cloned into pJET Vector (Thermo Scientific); 3 positive clones for each sample were
sequenced. Sequences from 6 clones of both specimens were identical. The isolate, He_Uy 16, was deposited into GenBank under accession no.
KF680001. Phylogenetic reconstruction of the ORF2–3 overlapping region showed that the HEV isolated in Uruguay clustered in genotype 1 with
high bootstrap values (Figure, panel A). The same was observed from the phylogenetic reconstruction of the ORF1 RdRp region (Figure, panel
B). Furthermore, these analyses revealed a very close relationship of this strain isolated in Uruguay to a strain isolated in India, Yam 67
(99.5% nucleotide identity). Additionally, within the ORF1, the strain shares a high percentage of nucleotide identity (99%–100%) with the
genotype 1 strains isolated in Cuba (Cub 11 and 13) and Venezuela (VNZ792), the 2 countries in Latin America in which genotype 1 has been
reported to be associated with autochthonous cases. This relationship between these strains from South America and the Yam 67 strain from
India warrants further investigation. In Uruguay, we have recently reported the full molecular characterization of a set of HEV strains
isolated from patients with 9 sporadic cases in a 2-year period; all strains were genotype 3 (10). Here, we describe the detection and
phylogenetic analysis of a locally-acquired indigenous case of HEV infection associated with genotype 1 in Uruguay. Although the detection
of genotype 1 in 1/10 cases might have occurred by chance, this result supports an endemic circulation of HEV in Uruguay. Data presented
here, together with recent advancements in molecular epidemiology of HEV infection in South America, reveal an epidemiologic picture more
complex than we initially assumed. Phylogenetic tree of the Hepatitis E virus constructed on the basis of A) the partial 137-nt open reading
frame (ORF) 2–3 overlapping region and B) the 244-nt sequence of the RNA dependent RNA polymerase within ORF1. Trees were generated by using
the neighbor-joining method with the Kimura 2-parameter as the substitution model. The robustness of the trees was determined by bootstrap
for 1,000 replicates. Values ≥70% are shown. Strains isolated in Uruguay are shown in boldface. The isolate of genotype 1 detected in this
study (He_Uy 16) clustered (98% bootstrap value) with genotype 1 strains from India and Latin America (Cub 11 and 13 and VNZ792). Scale bars
indicate nucleotide substitutions per site. Suggested citation for this article: Mirazo S, Mainardi V, Ramos N, Gerona S, Rocca A, Arbiza J.
Indigenous hepatitis E virus genotype 1 infection, Uruguay . Emerg Infect Dis. 2014 Jan [date cited].
http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2001.131471 We thank María del Carmen Viñoly and Programa de Desarrollo de las Ciencias Básicas for
administrative support. This work was partially supported by a PhD fellowship from Agencia Nacional de Innovación e Investigación (to S.M.).
