TNFα blockers have drastically improved rheumatoid arthritis prognosis by preventing joint destruction in DMARD resistant patients. Altering
cytokine balance in immune diseases may expose to paradoxical adverse events. We present the case of a 40-year-old woman, with a confirmed
erosive and seropositive RA, successfully treated by TNFα blocker (etanercept) for seven years, and who developed a severe neurosarcoidosis.
She had lymphocytic meningitis, bilateral peripheral facial paralysis and anosmia, associated with bilateral hilar lymph nodes,
papilloedema, anterior uveitis and elevated serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level. Magnetic resonance imaging showed a bilateral
thickening of the Gasser’s ganglia walls and enhanced signal of the vestibulocochlear, the facial and the proximal portion of trijeminal
nerves. This case raised the issue of the imputability of etanercept in the development of neurosarcoidosis. Neurological symptoms onset in
patients on TNFα blockers should lead to exclude infections, induced lupus but also paradoxical neurosarcoidosis. Tumor necrosis factor
alpha (TNFα) blockers have drastically improved the prognosis of rheumatoid arthritis by preventing joint destruction in DMARD resistant
patients. We present the case of a RA patient on etanercept who suddenly developed neurosarcoidosis. A 40-year-old woman suffered from
severe erosive rheumatoid arthritis with positive rheumatoid factor (251 UI/ml [normal <25 UI/ml]) and positive anti-cyclic citrullinated
antibodies (64UA/ml [normal <2.9 UA/mL]). In 2004, etanercept was added to methotrexate to control her disease. In 2008, because of hepatic
cytolysis, methotrexate was stopped but etanercept monotherapy maintained the remission. In 2012, she suddenly presented an isolated left
peripheral facial palsy. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a contrast-enhancement of the facial nerve. Rapidly, her clinical status
worsened with bilateral facial palsy, anosmia, weight loss, dyspnea, eyesight deficiency, eye and mouth dryness. Ophthalmological
examination revealed bilateral Bell’s phenomenon and left papilloedema with anterior uveitis. Biological analysis revealed elevated serum
calcium level (2.56 mmol/L), hyperproteinemia (90 g/L), cytolysis (1.5 N) and cholestasis (4N). Cerebral MRI showed an enhanced signal of
cranial nerves on the post enhanced T1-weighted sequences (Figure 1A, B). C-reactive protein was normal. Serologies for Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV), hepatitis B, C, syphilis and Lyme were negative. Cerebral fluid analysis showed a lymphocytic meningitis
(hyperproteinorachia 0,62g/L and normoglycorrhachia) without oligoclonal band. Polymerase chain reactions of human herpes virus and
enterovirus were negative. Chest CT-scan found bilateral hilar and mediastinal lymph nodes. The bronchoalveolar lavage brought a lymphocytic
alveolitis (53%) with a high CD4/CD8 lymphocytic ratio of 4.65. Quantiferon® assay and mycobacterium culture remained negative. The
18F-fluoride PET-CT supported the diagnosis of sarcoidosis showing a fixation of hilar lymph nodes, parotid and submandibulary glands
without hepatic or other abnormal fixations. Normal serum complement and absence of anti-nuclear antibodies ruled out TNFα induced
neurological lupus. Etanercept was stopped and intravenous steroid boluses were initiated (15 mg/kg per day for 3 days) followed by oral
prednisolone (1 mg/kg per day). For technical reason, transbronchial lung biopsy was delayed after 1 month of steroid and remained not
contributive. Nevertheless, diagnosis of neurosarcoidosis was further supported by an increased level of angiotensin-converting enzyme in
serum (77 UI/L [normal value < 68 UI/L]). After 3 months, thanks to a normalization of the liver function, methotrexate (25 mg/week) was
added to treat both RA and neurosarcoidosis without another secondary hepatic cytolisys. One year later, she remained on methotrexate and
prednisone 20 mg/day: eyesight has completely recovered but not the facial paralysis. Brain MRI showed normalization. Axial MRI images of
the brain. Post gadolinium enhanced T1 weighted sequence on initial exam shows (A) bilateral focal enhancement of the proximal portion of
both trijeminal nerves (arrowheads), (B) bilateral enhancement of the vestibulocochlear and facial nerves, more pronounced on the right side
(arrow) and bilateral thickening of the Gasser’s ganglia walls (*). Paradoxical neurosarcoidosis appeared as the RA was in complete
remission on etanercept monotherapy for several years. Since we did not obtain histological confirmation, this case is not a definite
neurosarcoidosis according to Zajicek’s criteria . The delay of one month to perform biopsy while already on steroids may be the reason for
non contributive histology. Nevertheless, we eliminated other neurological diseases and the diagnosis was supported by neurological
impairment (lymphocytic meningitis, bilateral peripheral facial paralysis, anosmia, eyesight deficiency, papilloedema) associated with
anterior uveitis, eye and mouth dryness, weight loss, hypercalcemia and hyperproteinemia. The presence of evidences for systemic sarcoidosis
criteria with bilateral hilar lymph nodes, lymphocytic alveolitis, and elevated serum angiotensin-converting enzyme level classified this
case as probable . More recently, chest radiograph and angiotensin-converting enzyme of Zajicek’s criteria have been shown to be of
insufficient diagnostic value by Marangoni and replaced by chest high resolution computed tomography and broncheoalveolar lavage, with a
CD4/CD8 lymphocytic ratio higher than 3.5, of better positive predictive value . According to these revised criteria, our case is still
considered as probable . TNFα blockers have already been associated in some cases with “paradoxical” systemic sarcoidosis but only two cases
of neurosarcoidosis have been reported and none with etanercept. One occurred in another RA female patient treated by infliximab and
methotrexate . The second one refers to a man on adalimumab for an ankylosing spondylitis, who developed seizures . These three cases raise
the issue of TNFα blockers imputability on the onset of neurosarcoidosis. Interestingly, some TNFα-blocker-induced sarcoidosis patients did
not relapse after rechallenging . However, there are biological arguments to support imputability of TNFα blockers to sarcoidosis onset as a
“class effect” rather than a drug specific phenomen regarding sarcoid-like granulomatous disease occurring during all three anti-TNF
therapies. About 40 cases of sarcoid-like granuloma development during anti-TNF therapy have been actually reported in the literature.
First, the key pathophysiological feature of sarcoidosis is granuloma. It aims at isolating pathogens and restricting inflammation. As
sarcoidosis preferentially involves skin, lungs and eyes, one mechanism relies on the direct exposure to environmental antigens . Thus the
induced immunosuppressive condition may favor development of microorganisms involved in sarcoidosis development (Propionibacterium acnes or
granulosum). A second mechanism in sarcoidosis is that granulomas are characterized by local proinflammatory activated CD4 + T lymphocytes
with Th1 profile (IFNγ, IL2) stimulating TNFα production by macrophages. Sarcoidotic patients have simultaneously systemic anergy due to the
suppressive abilities of regulatory CD4 + CD25 + FoxP3 T lymphocytes partly triggered by TNFα. Thus TNFα blockade, independently to its
anti-inflammatory effect, may be able to stimulate Th17 pathway (IL17, IL23) and to alter T-reg lymphocyte subpopulations . By contrast some
studies reported refractory sarcoidosis cases successfully treated by TNFα blockers especially adalimumab and infliximab . Indeed,
monoclonal TNFα blockers antibodies are considered to be more effective to block granuloma formation rather than etanercept which partially
preserves the mechanisms leading to granuloma formation. This could explain a lack of efficacy of etanercept in granulomatous diseases (e.g.
refractory sarcoidosis, crohn’s disease). In addition to paradoxical neurosarcoidosis, other neurological adverse events have been reported
with the use of TNFα blockers such as multiple sclerosis , polycranial neuritis, chronic inflammatory demyelinating polyradiculoneuropathy
and multifocal motor neuropathy . TNFα blockers may trigger the demyelinating process which can evolve independently afterwards . Thus
physician should pay a particular attention to patients on TNFα blocker therapy who present any new neurological symptoms. In conclusion,
this case of paradoxical neurosarcoidosis induced by TNFα blockade in a RA patient underlines the risk to destabilize autoimmune profile
when using targeted therapies and promote unexpected immune disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. The
authors declare that they have no competing of interests. EF, CAD, JBP, EB, RDC and CBC diagnosed and treated the patient, contributing
equally to writing and revising the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this
paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2377/13/212/prepub
