Bile and spilled gallstones can act as a septic focus and cause complications years later. Delayed diagnosis with unnecessary investigations
can have negative economic consequences for these patients. Bile and gallstones are spilled during 13% to 40% of all laparoscopic
cholecystectomies. They can act as a septic focus and cause complications. We present 2 cases of perihepatic abscess formation due to
dropped gallstones presenting some years later. Delayed diagnosis resulted in unnecessary investigations and had negative economic
consequences. In 1 patient a posterolateral cutaneous fistula had developed that was initially biopsied by cardiothoracic surgeons before
computed tomography showed the cause. The other patient presented with recurrent Pyrexia of unknown origin (PUO) causing repeated absence
from work and was diagnosed only after 18 months of medical investigation. Both patients were treated with laparoscopic drainage of the
abscess and successful retrieval of all stones. Radiologic and open drainage and retrieval of stones have been well described in these
cases. We suggest that a laparoscopic approach is superior because the cavity can be clearly identified and stones visualized and removed
under direct vision. The need for a formal laparotomy is avoided. We also highlight the economic burden to both patient and health care
professional of delayed diagnosis, as shown in these 2 cases. Spilled gallstones are a recognized complication of laparoscopic
cholecystectomy. All stones should be actively sought and removed to avoid complications. Laparoscopic drainage is preferable to open or
radiologic drainage. Dropped gallstones should be considered a possible diagnosis in patients who have had a previous cholecystectomy and
present with unusual symptoms. Laparoscopic cholecystectomy (LC) is the gold standard for the treatment of symptomatic gallstones. The
incidence of common bile duct injury during LC has decreased over time as experience and technologies have improved. The incidence of
gallstone spillage, however, remains unchanged. Woodfield et al.1 described the incidence of gallbladder perforation at 18.6%. It has been
estimated that gallstones are spilled in approximately 40% of these cases.1,2 The incidence of “lost” gallstones (i.e., unretrieved spilled
gallstones) has been estimated at 16% to 50%.3–5 Lost gallstones act as a septic focus and can cause a number of complications. Over 100
case reports and studies document complications after gallstone spillage after LC, and > 40 different presentations are described in the
literature.6 We present 2 cases of complicated lost gallstones after LC with clinical and socioeconomic consequences. Both cases were
treated by laparoscopic drainage of the chronic abscess and successful retrieval of the lost stones, and both patients made a complete
recovery. A 61-year-old man presented to the general surgical outpatient department 3 years after a difficult LC with stone spillage. He
gave a 12-month history of persistent right upper quadrant pain, 8-kg weight loss, loss of appetite, night sweats, and an intermittent
pyrexial illness. He was absent from work for a number of days with this illness. Computed tomography scan showed an abscess with 2 retained
stones (Figure 1). The patient underwent laparoscopy, during which the abscess was localized (Figure 2) and the stones were located (Figure
3) and retrieved (Figure 4). All his symptoms resolved after the procedure. Computed tomography scan showing abscess cavity containing
gallstones in case 1. Arrow - Abscess cavity containing gallstones. Localization of subhepatic abscess in case 1. Removal of gallstone from
abscess cavity in case 1. Retrieval of gallstones in case 1. An 86-year-old man presented to the general surgical outpatient department 5
years after a difficult LC with stone spillage. He gave a 12-month history of a chronically discharging fistula on the right side of his
back (Figure 5). He was initially referred to respiratory physicians, who performed a bronchoscopy and pleural biopsy because the condition
was thought to be due to underlying lung pathology. This was subsequently ruled out after normal results. He went on to have a computed
tomography scan, which showed a subphrenic abscess containing several “lost gallstones” and an obvious fistulous tract to the skin (Figure
6). He underwent laparoscopy and adhesiolysis (Figures 7 and 8). The abscess was localized and drained (Figure 9), and the stones were
retrieved (Figure 10). He made a full recovery with complete healing of his fistula. Location of external fistula in case 2. Arrow -
external fistula opening. Computed tomography scan showing abscess cavity with several stones (with incidental renal cyst noted) in case 2.
Arrow - abscess cavity containing gall stones. Dense adhesions around abscess in case 2. Dense adhesions around abscess in case 2.
Localization of abscess in case 2. View of stones before retrieval in case 2. Although lost gallstones were initially thought of as
innocuous, it is now recognized that they are a small but significant cause of morbidity in patients who have had complicated LC. Patients
can present up to 10 years after the initial operation with unusual symptoms, and the diagnosis of lost gallstones needs to be borne in
mind. Primary physicians as well as surgeons need to be aware of this phenomenon because it can often be left untreated for a considerable
period, leading to personal as well as health issues for the patient, as shown in case 1. Often, expensive investigations are also performed
with little diagnostic value (case 2). It is important for the surgeon to document clearly whether the gall bladder was perforated and
whether stones were spilled during the initial LC. It is also important to make every effort to retrieve all spilled stones. Radiologic5,7,8
and open drainage of the abscess cavity has been well described in these situations. Chronic sepsis is due to the presence of these stones,
and definitive treatment requires identification and removal of the lost gallstones. This is difficult by radiologic means, and abscesses
may recur.7–9 Open drainage is associated with the added morbidity of a larger wound. Access and identification of the stones may be
difficult, and some stones may be inadvertently left behind.5,8 We believe that the laparoscopic approach is optimal, as shown by the 2
cases presented. The cavity can be easily identified and visualized. The abscess can be drained with minimal contamination, and the stones
can be clearly identified and retrieved. The added morbidity of an open operation is avoided. Spilled gallstones are a recognized
complication of LC. All spilled stones should be actively sought to avoid future complications. Laparoscopic drainage of chronic abscess
after stone spillage and retrieval of stones are feasible and safe in experienced hands and are preferable to open and radiologic methods.
