Malignant lymphomas of the breast are rare and primary breast lymphoma comprises <0.5 % of breast malignancies, within which T-cell
lymphomas are an even rarer subset. We report a case of primary breast peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS).
Histology of the biopsied specimen revealed CD2(+), CD3(+), CD4(+), CD5(−), CD7(+), CD8(−), CD20(−), CD25(−), CD30(+), CD56(−), bcl-2(−),
EBV-ISH(−), TIA-I(−), and ATLA negative. The patient was treated with six cycles of the CHOP regimen and died 17 months after the diagnosis
was made, despite complete remission after conventional chemotherapy. To our knowledge, only 18 cases of primary peripheral T-cell lymphoma
of the breast and just one previous case of primary PTCL-NOS of the breast have been reported in Japan. Primary breast lymphomas (PBLs)
account for only 0.04–0.5 % of breast malignancies. The most frequent PBLs are of the B-cell type, whereas the T-cell type is especially
rare. We report a case of primary breast peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified (PTCL-NOS) and compare its features with those
of the 17 cases of PBL reported in Japan. Low-grade lymphomas should be managed with excision biopsy and/or local radiation therapy, whereas
high-grade lymphomas are generally managed with a systemic chemotherapy regimen combined with radiation therapy. Radical surgery is not
recommended for breast PBL patients, as they are usually suffering from systemic disease . This case report describes a patient with T-cell
lymphoma involving the breast parenchyma. A 77-year-old woman presented to a city hospital with the chief complaint of a painless, palpable
mass in the right breast; however, the results of fine needle aspiration cytology were inconclusive. One month later, computer tomography
(CT) showed bilateral pleural effusions and she was moved to our university hospital. Routine physical examination revealed a 1.5-cm
diameter, round mass in the upper outer quadrant of her right breast. A heterogenic mass was seen on ultrasonography (Fig. 1b), but nothing
was seen on a diagnostic mammogram (Fig. 1a). Her medical history included a 15-year history of hypertension, well controlled with
medication. Results of a staging chest X-ray film, a complete blood count, and liver function tests were normal, except for a high IL-2R of
1803 U/ml. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed a 2.2-cm diameter mass in the right breast, showing a malignant imaging pattern in
dynamic study, but no metastasis in the bilateral axillary lymph nodes (Fig. 2). Scintigraphy also showed increased gallium uptake in the
left submandibular gland. Subsequent ultrasound-guided biopsy demonstrated atypical lymphocytes containing medium to large round nucleoli.
Histologic analysis of the biopsy specimen was consistent with a peripheral T-cell lymphoma not otherwise specified and microscopic
pathology revealed atypical lymphocytes containing medium to large round nucleoli and irregular nuclear shapes (Fig. 3a).
Immunohistochemistry revealed CD2(+), CD3(+) (Fig. 3b), CD4(+), CD5(−), CD7(+), CD8(−), CD20(−) (Fig. 3c), CD25(−), CD30(+), CD56(−),
bcl-2(−), EBV-ISH(−), TIA-I(−), and ATLA negative. Simultaneously, a 2.5-cm diameter mass was found in the left mandibular area. Fine needle
aspiration was performed by an otolaryngologist and cytological examination revealed a malignant lymphoma with the features of PTCL-NOS.
Although there was no evidence of metastasis in specimens of bone marrow biopsy, the cytology of the pleural effusion had shown the same
involvement of malignant lymphoma. Even without associated lymph node involvement, we diagnosed Stage IV PTCL-NOS with three extralymphatic
organs; namely the breast, mandibular gland, and pleural effusion, prior to the chemotherapy. On re-evaluating her initial breast MRI, the
CT scan had shown the breast mass progressing rapidly with a significant increase in tumor size and in the pleural effusions (Fig. 4a)
before treatment.Fig. 1 a Mammogram findings. The craniocaudal and mediolateral oblique (MLO) view revealed no mass lesion or other
abnormality in the bilateral breasts. b Ultrasonography findings. An irregular, round and solid hypoechoic nodule in the 11:00 o’clock
position corresponds to a nodule palpated on clinical examinationFig. 2Magnetic resonance imaging findings. A 3 × 2 × 2 cm mass in the upper
right breast showed a malignant imaging pattern on dynamic studyFig. 3 a Microscopic examination revealed neoplastic infiltrates composed of
medium to large cells with round nuclei (HE, original magnification ×400). b Immunohistochemical stain of CD3 revealed a strongly positive
reaction within the tumor tissue (original magnification ×400). c Immunohistochemical stain of CD20 revealed a negative reaction within the
tumor tissue (original magnification ×100)Fig. 4 a Computed tomography showed a round mass, 4.8 × 2.6 × 5 cm, in the outer upper quadrant of
the right breast with pleural effusions in both lungs before treatment. b The mass in the right breast and bilateral pleural effusions
disappeared with nearly complete response after 6 cycles of CHOP chemotherapy a Mammogram findings. The craniocaudal and mediolateral
oblique (MLO) view revealed no mass lesion or other abnormality in the bilateral breasts. b Ultrasonography findings. An irregular, round
and solid hypoechoic nodule in the 11:00 o’clock position corresponds to a nodule palpated on clinical examination Magnetic resonance
imaging findings. A 3 × 2 × 2 cm mass in the upper right breast showed a malignant imaging pattern on dynamic study a Microscopic
examination revealed neoplastic infiltrates composed of medium to large cells with round nuclei (HE, original magnification ×400). b
Immunohistochemical stain of CD3 revealed a strongly positive reaction within the tumor tissue (original magnification ×400). c
Immunohistochemical stain of CD20 revealed a negative reaction within the tumor tissue (original magnification ×100) a Computed tomography
showed a round mass, 4.8 × 2.6 × 5 cm, in the outer upper quadrant of the right breast with pleural effusions in both lungs before
treatment. b The mass in the right breast and bilateral pleural effusions disappeared with nearly complete response after 6 cycles of CHOP
chemotherapy Based on the National Comprehensive Cancer Network (NCCN) guidelines, the patient was given systemic chemotherapy using the
standard CHOP regimen (cyclophosphamide: 750 mg/m2; doxorubicin: 50 mg/m2; vincristine: 1.4 mg/m2; prednisone: 40 mg/m2) instead of surgical
treatment. Six cycles of CHOP were administered at 21-day intervals over 4 months by the hematologist as follows: cyclophosphamide,
doxorubicin and vincristine were given intravenously on day 1, with prednisone given orally 30 min prior to chemotherapy on day 1, then
every 24 h on days 2–5. CT scan showed a significant remission of the breast mass and pleural effusion in nearly complete response
(Fig. 4b). However, the patient suffered some serious adverse effects during the chemotherapy, including grade 2 nausea, vomiting, and
constipation, grade 3 neutropenia, and grade 2 heart disorder with palpitations and shortness of breath. Despite a dramatic response being
achieved 6 months after beginning the CHOP therapy, it was discontinued because of heart failure, as recommended by the cardiologist. The
disease relapsed in the third month after interrupting the CHOP, with a significant increase in the white blood cell count; however, no
breast lump was detected at her last visit to the hospital. The patient did not wish to undergo any further aggressive therapy. She received
palliative care until she died 17 months after the diagnosis. PBL represents 0.2–1.5 % of breast malignancies , while T-cell lymphomas
represent <15 % of all non-Hodgkin’s lymphomas (NHLs) . Breast T-cell lymphomas are extremely rare and reported mainly as isolated cases. In
fact, we found that only 17 cases were documented in Japan between 1983 and 2010. The typical clinical symptom is one or multiple painless
masses, similar to breast B-cell lymphoma and breast carcinoma. Enlarged ipsilateral axillary lymph nodes are reported in 13–50 % of PBL
cases , although our patient did not present with this symptom. Interestingly, most cases of breast lymphoma have unexplained right side
predominance, as in the present case. There are no pathognomonic mammographic features for breast lymphoma in general, and sometimes these
lesions are only detected by ultrasound . Although a palpable mass in the left submandibular gland was found simultaneously in our patient,
the gastrointestinal tract and nasopharyngeal topography are the most frequent sites of involvement. When breast involvement is the
presenting manifestation, it usually occurs in the context of other systemic disease. Involvement of the breast by precursor T-lymphoblastic
lymphoma/leukemia presents as a mass or as bilateral diffuse involvement . Nevertheless, the subtype of adult T-cell lymphoma/leukemia
(ATLL) is most frequent in Japan, whereas PTCL-NOS is the most common type in North America and Europe, and natural killer/T-cell lymphoma
(NKTCL) and ATLL are common in Asia. Moreover, several reports document cases of T-cell breast lymphoma associated with a breast implant ,
with anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) being the most common lymphoma found proximal to the implant . The pathogenesis of T-cell
lymphoma in the breast is poorly understood because of its rarity. As shown in Table 1, histopathological analysis of the 17 cases of PBL
revealed 5 cases of ATLL, 1 of PTCL-NOS, and the 12 remaining cases were difficult to classify or reclassify according to the criteria
proposed by the World Health Organization classification of tumors of hematopoietic and lymphoid tissue. PTCL-NOSs are mainly nodal
lymphomas, accounting for more than 50 % of all T-cell lymphomas in adults, whereas the present case was exceptionally unusual in that it
was an extranodal, extracutaneous T-cell lymphoma with a well-defined mass, occurring in a setting of leukemic disease. To the best of our
knowledge, this represents only the second case of primary PTCL-NOS of the breast in Japan. From several years ago, scientific societies
have proposed guidelines to standardize therapeutic strategies. The NCCN offers different solutions based on histology and clinical stage
according to the Ann Arbor Classification [1, 18, 19]. Resective biopsy and conservative surgery is sufficient for pathologic evaluation. In
fact, the role of surgery for PBL should be limited to assisting in establishing a definitive diagnosis . Our patient received only systemic
chemotherapy without surgical resection, unlike in other reported cases. Little is documented about the progress of primary T-cell lymphoma
of breast, and the clinical outcome of these patients is variable although most had an aggressive disease course. Uesato et al. found that
tumor diameter and lymphomatous dissemination to the axillary lymph nodes was associated with a poor prognosis, with only 10 % (1/10) 5-year
overall survival (OS). In contrast, PTCL-NOS is usually aggressive and relapses are common . Both clinical stage and the international
prognostic index (IPI) score used for other non-Hodgkin lymphomas (NHLs) have demonstrated the correlation of the overall survival of these
patients . Patients with PTCL generally have a worse prognosis than patients with B cell NHL . Accordingly, our patient also suffered
relapse and survived for only 17 months after her diagnosis. New strategies for refractory PBL are warranted.Table 1Comparison of the cases
of primary breast peripheral T-cell lymphoma in JapanNoCasesYearAge/SexSiteCell surface markersTreatmentFollow-up1our case61/FLeftCD2(+),
CD3(+), CD4(+), CD5(−), CD7(+), CD8(−), CD20(−), CD25(−), CD30(+), CD56(−), bcl-2(−), EBV-ISH(−), TIA-I(−), ATLA(−)CHOPDOD
17 months2Toyoizumi199045/FUNUN*ModifiedUN3Kamakura199069/FLeftUNModifiedUN4Yamamiya199145/FLeftCD45(+), CD45RO(+), CD20cy(−),
pankeratin(−)UNUN5Yamahigashi199244/FUNUNModified + CHOP, VP16, MTXDOD 2 months6Kosaka199269/FLeftATLA(+)Patey + CHOPAWD
18 months7Tanaka199364/FBothCD20cy(−), CD43(+), CD45RO(+), CD45RA(−)Modified + BEMP, PROSTETINDOD
14 months8Tujimoto199358/FRightUNModified + CDDP, CBDCA, VP-16 + radiationAWD 10 months9Saeki199442/FLeftCD(−), CD3(+), CD4(−), CD5(+),
CD8(−), CD19(−), CD20(−), CD22(−), CD25(−)Mastectomy + chemotherapyUN10Sakota199784/FLeftCD20cy(−), CD45(+), CD45RO(+),AE1/AE3(−),
keratin(−), ATLA(+)LumpectomyDOD 15 months11Mukaigawa199868/FRightCD20cy(−), CD43(+), CD45RO(+), ATLA(−)Auchincloss + CHOP, CPA**AWD
6 months12Masatsuka199841/FLeftUNMastectomyDOD 22 months13Shiiki199945/FUNATLA(+)Modified + CHOP, Endoxan, ADRDOD
19 months14Morozumi199945/FLeftCD20(−), CD45(+), CD45RO(+), AE1/AE3(+), ATLA(+)Modified + CHOP, BleoDOD
19 months15Hasegawa200048/FLeftUNbreast-conserving surgeryDOD 72 months16Nomizu2002UN/FUNPTCLUNUN17Tanaka200449/FLeftCD20(−),
CD45RO(+)Modified + VEPA, VP16, CPADOD 32 months18Fujita200445/FLeftCD20cy(−), CD45RO(+), ATLA(+)Breast-conserving surgery + CHOP, VP16DOD
39 months19Murakami200775/FRightCD3(+), CD45RO(+), ATLA(−)Mastectomy + Epi-COP, G-IDEADOD 50 months UN unknown, * modified modified radical
mastectomy, CHOP cyclopholphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone, VP16 etposide, MTX methotrexate, BEMP bleomycin, endoxan,
methotrexate, prednisolone, ADR adriamycin, Bleo bleomycin, VEPA vincristine, cyclopholphamide, doxorubicin, prednisolone, CPA
cyclopholphamide, Epi-COP epirubicin-based combination chemotherapy, G-IDEA G-CSF, ifosfamide, dexamethasone, etposide, cytarabine, DOD dead
of disease, AWD alive with disease Comparison of the cases of primary breast peripheral T-cell lymphoma in Japan UN unknown, * modified
modified radical mastectomy, CHOP cyclopholphamide, doxorubicin, vincristine, prednisolone, VP16 etposide, MTX methotrexate, BEMP bleomycin,
endoxan, methotrexate, prednisolone, ADR adriamycin, Bleo bleomycin, VEPA vincristine, cyclopholphamide, doxorubicin, prednisolone, CPA
cyclopholphamide, Epi-COP epirubicin-based combination chemotherapy, G-IDEA G-CSF, ifosfamide, dexamethasone, etposide, cytarabine, DOD dead
of disease, AWD alive with disease Regarding the clinical approaches to primary peripheral T-cell lymphoma of the breast, women presenting
with a breast mass should undergo a fine needle aspiration (FNA) or core needle biopsy (CNB). Moreover, women with abnormal imaging findings
alone, such as abnormal calcification, should undergo biopsy guided by mammography, ultrasound, or breast MRI. Primary breast lymphoma,
including PTCL-NOS, is a heterogeneous category and essentially a diagnosis of exclusion. In fact, the diagnostic agreement rate among
expert pathologists is only about 75 % . Although FNA is useful for distinguishing reactive B cell hyperplasias from clonal mature B cell
neoplasms as an initial screening test , only an excisional biopsy of an intact node consistently obtains sufficient tissue for histologic,
immunologic, molecular biologic assessment, and classification by experienced pathologists . An accurate diagnosis of lymphoma based on FNA
is not possible , which is probably why our patient came to our hospital without a definitive diagnosis. In conclusion, we believe that
patients with breast disease should undergo not only FNA, but also image-guided core biopsies to provide sufficient tissue for diagnosis.
Complete evaluation, using an adequate tissue sample for accurate diagnosis, is most important to predict prognosis and design treatment for
patients with primary peripheral T-cell lymphoma of the breast, including PTCL-NOS. We thank Professor Kouichi Ohshima for his outstanding
advice and pathologic technical assistance. The authors have no conflict of interest.
