The authors suggest that patients with atypical presenting features of hernia undergo a transabdominal approach to groin hernia repair
because of greater diagnostic potential, rather than an extraperitoneal technique. A wide range of diagnoses can present as inguinal hernia.
Laparoscopic techniques are being increasingly used in the repair of inguinal hernias and offer the potential benefit of identifying
additional pathology. The authors present the first reported case of a hydrocele of the canal of Nuck diagnosed laparoscopically. We review
the incidence of identifying additional pathology through laparoscopy for inguinal hernia repair. We suggest that in patients with atypical
presenting features of a hernia, the transabdominal preperitoneal, rather than a totally extraperitoneal, approach to groin hernia repair
should be considered because of its greater diagnostic potential. A wide range of diagnoses can present as inguinal hernia, and there are
published reviews summarizing these findings at open hernia repair.1–3 Laparoscopic techniques are being increasingly used in the repair of
inguinal hernia. Aside from confirming the primary hernia and finding additional unsuspected hernias,4 laparoscopy offers the potential
advantage of identifying other pathologies. Not only can pathology masquerading as a hernia be identified, but incidental problems unrelated
to the presenting hernia may be recognized, although this has not been widely reported to date. We review the literature on unusual findings
at laparoscopy for hernia repair and present the first reported laparoscopic identification of a hydrocele of the canal of Nuck, initially
thought to represent a simple inguinal hernia. A 42-year-old woman presented to the outpatient department with a 1-month history of a
painless groin swelling. It was more prominent during activity, improving at rest, and disappeared with the patient lying supine. She had a
history of laparoscopic cholecystectomy but no other significant medical history. Her examination revealed a reducible, nontender, left
groin swelling that was more prominent while standing and also demonstrated a positive cough reflex. Clinical diagnosis of a left inguinal
hernia was made, and she was later admitted for elective laparoscopic hernia repair because of the risk of strangulation and because in
women a femoral hernia must be excluded. The patient was scheduled for a routine laparoscopic hernia repair via the transabdominal
preperitoneal (TAPP) approach. At surgery, a cystic swelling was found at the left deep inguinal ring (Figure 1). No therapeutic procedure
was performed. The patient underwent an ultrasound scan the following day, which demonstrated a fluid-filled cavity extending from the labia
majora externally through to the pelvis. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan of the area showed a cystic structure with a 7-cm component
in the left iliac fossa extending through the inguinal canal to a second collection anterior to the left inferior pubic ramus, confirming
the diagnosis of a large hydrocele of the canal of Nuck (Figure 2). The combination of both preperitoneal and subcutaneous components may be
considered as indicative of the presence of a hernia. Repair is indicated via laparoscopic or open approach. This patient was offered, but
declined, further surgery on the basis of minimal ongoing symptoms and a low risk of strangulation. Laparoscopic view of cystic swelling at
the left deep inguinal ring. Magnetic resonance images of hydrocele of the canal of Nuck demonstrating a large intra-abdominal portion
communicating through the inguinal canal with an external portion in the groin. Previously, diagnoses such as diverticular abscess, Meckel's
diverticulum, perforated appendix, pancreatic pseudocyst, scrotal lipoma, and liposarcoma of the cord, among others, have been made at
operation for inguinal hernia repair.1–5 These have all been identified through open surgery. The open groin approach with laparoscopic
assessment of the peritoneum (hernioscopy) has twice been used to successfully diagnose peritoneal metastatic disease.6,7 The laparoscopic
approach to the preperitoneal space, and particularly transperitoneal laparoscopy, expands the range findings when operating for a suspected
hernia. In addition to the presenting hernia, concurrent hernias on the ipsilateral side may be identified and are said to be present in
15.4% and 18% of patients with inguinal hernias when assessed by open groin dissection or laparoscopy (TAPP), respectively.8,9 Concurrent
contralateral hernias are identified by laparoscopy (TAPP) in 13% of patients with a suspected unilateral hernia.4 Incidental findings
unrelated to the hernia may be made, although they have not yet been reported in the literature. Alternatively, a groin lump thought to be a
hernia may represent a different problem. We described the case of a hydrocele of the canal of Nuck masquerading as a left inguinal hernia
in a middle-aged woman. This is a common way for such a problem to present10–13 but is rare in women of this age-group.11 A review of 17
cases of hydrocele of the canal of Nuck confirms that clinical diagnosis is difficult because of the condition's rarity and similar
presentation to inguinal hernias.13 The diagnosis was only made preoperatively in 12% of cases. The finding of a cough impulse or apparent
reducibility cannot be relied on to distinguish a hernia from a hydrocele. The most important differential diagnostic procedure was
transillumination, but this is difficult when the hydrocele is small. A coexisting inguinal hernia was present in 41% of cases.
Historically, treatment has been surgical and involves excision of the cyst with repair of any coexisting hernia. Although hydrocele of the
canal of Nuck is by definition congenital and has been reported frequently in children, in 1 series the average age at presentation was 37
years.13 The condition can therefore be asymptomatic for many years. Where the diagnosis has been confirmed with imaging and a coexisting
hernia has been ruled out, the decision to offer surgery must be made on the basis of symptoms rather than any potential to cause harm. In
this particular case, the transabdominal approach enabled the lesion to be identified before dissection in the retroperitoneal plane. This
avoided disrupting the hydrocele capsule and enabled further diagnostic tests to be performed and treatment options to be discussed. In this
case, if the totally extraperitoneal technique had been used, it may have risked rupturing the hydrocele, thereby complicating further
diagnostic tests and treatment. In hindsight, there were atypical features in the presentation such as minimal discomfort despite prominent
clinical findings that could have indicated that the diagnosis of a straightforward inguinal hernia was uncertain. Laparoscopic approaches
to hernia repair offer the opportunity to confirm the diagnosis of suspected hernias and identify additional hernias (ipsilateral and
contralateral), and they can demonstrate other causes of a lump and allow the possibility of incidental findings. We suggest that in
patients with atypical presenting features of a hernia, the TAPP rather than the totally extraperitoneal approach to groin hernia repair be
considered because of its greater diagnostic potential.
