To gain biological insights into lung metastases from hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), we compared the whole-genome sequencing profiles of
primary HCC and paired lung metastases. We used whole-genome sequencing at 33X-43X coverage to profile somatic mutations in primary HCC
(HBV+) and metachronous lung metastases (> 2 years interval). In total, 5,027-13,961 and 5,275-12,624 somatic single-nucleotide variants
(SNVs) were detected in primary HCC and lung metastases, respectively. Generally, 38.88-78.49% of SNVs detected in metastases were present
in primary tumors. We identified 65–221 structural variations (SVs) in primary tumors and 60–232 SVs in metastases. Comparison of these SVs
shows very similar and largely overlapped mutated segments between primary and metastatic tumors. Copy number alterations between primary
and metastatic pairs were also found to be closely related. Together, these preservations in genomic profiles from liver primary tumors to
metachronous lung metastases indicate that the genomic features during tumorigenesis may be retained during metastasis. We found very
similar genomic alterations between primary and metastatic tumors, with a few mutations found specifically in lung metastases, which may
explain the clinical observation that both primary and metastatic tumors are usually sensitive or resistant to the same systemic treatments.
Hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is one of the most common cancers worldwide with an estimated 500,000-1,000,000 new cases per year . It is
also one of the few cancers with an increased incidence rate . Although curative resection or liver transplant is widely adopted as
treatment for HCC , a majority of HCC patients are not amenable to surgical resection due to the extensive intrahepatic tumor burden or
limited donor resources. In nature, HCC is an invasive tumor and is metastasized hematogenously and lymphogenously to other organs, even
after its local recurrence. The most common organs of distant metastases include lungs, lymph nodes, bone, and brain, in particular, with
the lung metastasis occurring in 18-60% of HCC cases . While extrahepatic metastases are known to occur in HCC patients with an advanced
intrahepatic tumor stage , the prognosis in patients with extrahepatic metastases is extremely poor. To improve the prognosis for HCC
metastases, we aim to investigate the genetic signatures of HCC through unbiased next-generation sequencing (NGS) in this whole genome-scale
systematic study. Recently, whole genome sequencing of metastatic acral melanomas and matched primary tumor and adjacent normal tissues
showed high similarity of global gene copy number alterations, loss of heterozygosity and single nucleotide variation in primary and
metastasis tissues . Meanwhile, de novo nonsynonymous coding single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) were identified in metastatic lesions from
acral melanomas . In addition, recent studies that identified the clonal populations by sequencing the genomes of 7 pancreatic cancer
metastases helped elucidate the mechanisms of distant metastases . Herein, we sequenced the whole genomes of 4 paired samples (primary
tumor, metachronous lung metastases) obtained from HCC patients. These selected patients were treatment naïve at the time of primary HCC
surgery and were later diagnosed with lung metastatic nodules more than 2 years after the first surgery. We compared the genetic landscape
between primary liver and metastatic lung tumor tissues and performed an in-depth investigation of the genetic alterations to uncover
potential biomarkers for tumor progression and metastasis. Four patients who were pathologically diagnosed of HCC and lung metastases were
included in this study. A 50-year old man presented with a 9-cm sized mass at right hepatic lobe. The patient was a HBV carrier and his
liver function was of Child-Pugh classification of A. The patient underwent right liver lobectomy when freshly frozen tissue of primary
tumor and blood DNA was collected. The pathologic review of the surgical specimen revealed Edmonson grade II, tumor necrosis of 10%,
microvascular tumor emboli and chronic active hepatitis with bridging fibrosis in background liver. Three years later, the patient developed
a 2-cm sized single metastatic nodule in posterior basal segment of right lower lobe. The patient underwent right lower lobectomy and the
pathologic diagnosis was metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma. Currently, the patient is in remission without recurrence since lung
metastatectomy for more than 5 years. A 46 year-old man presented with a 5.2 × 4.4 cm massive HCC involving S6 and S7. The patient was a
hepatitis B carrier. The patient underwent right hemi-hepatectomy (tissue procurement of primary tumor). The pathologic features were as
follows, Edmonson grade II, 0% necrosis, intrahepatic metastasis, segmental portal vein microinvasion and negative resection margin. Three
months later, the patient developed small recurrent tumor in left lateral segment of left lobe of liver and underwent radiofrequency
ablation and 6 cycles of transcatheter arterial chemoembolization (TACE) thereafter. Shortly after the 6th TACE, two nodules were detected
in right lung. The patient underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery wedge resection of right upper apical segment, posterior segment
and RLL lobectomy. The pathologic diagnosis was metastatic hepatocellular carcinoma. Fresh frozen tissues were collected during the surgery
at this time. Seven months later the patient developed another 2 cm lung metastatic nodule in right middle lobe and underwent
metastatectomy. The patient is currently in remission for 4 years. A 43-year old male presented with an 11-cm sized HCC-B (hepatitis B) and
underwent right hepatectomy. The pathologic examination revealed Edmonson grade II HCC with 10% necrosis, no portal vein invasion with mild
portoperiportal inflammation in background liver due to chronic hepatitis B. Four months following the surgical resection, a newly developed
enhancing nodule in S3 of liver was detected which was subsequently treated with 5 cycles of TACE. Two years from the initial hepatic
resection, a 1 cm nodule in left upper lobe was detected which was surgically removed with wedge resection. The tumor specimen was confirmed
of metastatic HCC in lung and freshly frozen tissue was collected at this time. The patient underwent repeated multiple pulmonary
metastatectomies for recurrent metastatases. The patient still has slowly progressive, multiple lung metastases which were refractory to
sorafenib and sunitinib. The patient died of disease ten months later after failing to treatment due to disease progression. A 51-year old
male had a 6.6 c m sized liver mass and was diagnosed of HCC-B. The patient underwent S6 segmentectomy and the pathologic examination
revealed Edmondson grade II, 60% necrosis, no microvessel or portal vein invasion and no intrahepatic metastasis. Two years later, a 14 cm
solitary lung nodule was detected in left lower lobe superior segment which was surgically resected. Thirty months later, the patient
developed multiple HCC nodules and received ten 10 cycles of TACE. The patient is still undergoing periodic TACE for multiple HCCs at the
time of this writing. The core information is marked with specific notes (Additional file 1: Table S1 and Additional file 2: Figure S1).
Using the paired-end sequencing strategy, we simultaneously generated 98.90Gb-129.65Gb sequence data from normal liver tissues, primary HCC
tumors, and lung metastases of the 4 patients described above, with the corresponding haploid genome coverage of 33–43 fold at high coverage
>99% (Additional file 1: Table S2A). The widespread somatic alterations were identified throughout the genome, from somatic single
nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions or deletions (indels) to structural variations (SVs) (Figure 1 and Additional file 1: Table
S2F). We next depicted the whole-genome alterations as Circos plots, which give visual demonstrations of metastasis-specific genetic
alterations (Figure 1). Subsequently, we performed an in-depth analysis of the mutations, copy number alterations, and structure variations.
Circos plots for the 4 primary tumors and their matched metastases. Outer panels represent somatic SNVs with nonsynonymous and splice
mutations in red, others are in black. Somatic copy number alterations are shown in inner panels (orange histogram, duplications; blue
histogram, deletions). Structural variations are depicted as links in the interior of the plots. Blue link, inter-chromosomal
translocations; red link, intra-chromosomal translocations; purple link, insertions; green link, deletions. Plots of A to H show the
variants of primary tumor and metastasis from each of the 4 cases 441, D430, D473 and DD59 with “P” for primary and “M” for metastasis.
Alignments to the reference genome with opened gaps were performed using BWA (http://bio-bwa.sourceforge.net/bwa.shtml), and SOAPsnv was
used to query SNVs from tumors against matched normal tissues. 3.40-8.63% of total SNVs were detected in dbSNP (dbSNP132). These known
germline SNPs were excluded from downstream analysis. The SNVs were annotated to RefGene and summarized according to their genetic features
(Table 1). In total, 5,027-13,961 somatic SNVs were detected in HCC primary tumors and 5,275-12,624 were in lung metastatic tumors. In
addition, most SNVs detected in lung metastases were also present in primary tumors, ranging from 38.88% to 78.49% across 4 individuals,
suggesting that the major genetic characteristics of tumors might be preserved during metastasis (Figure 2). Summary of somatic SNVs The
number of somatic mutations detected in primary tumors and metastases. The percentage of mutations shared by metastases and primary tumors
was calculated, and the mutations are summarized into 3 groups: primary tumors, metastases, and shared mutations. An overview of the
mutation spectrum shows that the C:G > T:A transition rates within the coding regions were the highest, i.e. 28.96% in primary tumors and
32.10% in metastases (Figure 3A and Additional file 1: Table S2D), both of which were higher than those observed at the whole-genome level
(21.71% vs. 22.22%; Figure 3B). In addition, the second highest mutation type was C:G > A:T transversion (19.40% vs. 18.27%) which was
consistent with the notion that C:G > A:T transversion is associated with HBV-positive HCC . Throughout the genetic regions, less mutations
of C nucleotides to other nucleotides were located in the CpG islands, whereas more C:G > T:A mutations were found in the non-CpG island
regions (Additional file 1: Table S2B and S2C), which may be explained by the fact that cytimidines outside of the CpG islands are easily
methylated and mutated. In total, the transversion rate was significantly higher in metastases than in primary tumors (52.65% vs. 54.70%;
P = 0.0003531) (Additional file 1: Table S2E). Among 6 classes of transition and transversion mutations, we observed an average of 2.39% and
4.87% increases in T:A > G:C (P = 8.46e-16) and C:G > G:C (P < 2.2e-16) transversion, respectively, in metastasis-specific mutations
(Figure 3B and Additional file 1: Table S2E), which may be caused by microenvironment seeding or effects of chemotherapy . Comparison of
mutational classes between primary tumors and metastasis samples. (A) The transition and transversion categories of coding mutations are
classified from primary tumor and metastasis-specific groups. (B) Fraction of overall mutations spanning the transition and transversion
categories are concluded in primary tumor and metastasis-specific groups. Red boxes represent primary tumor and blue boxes represent
metastasis. Asterisks represent significant difference between primary tumor and metastasis (*, 1e-3<P ≤ 5e-2; **, 1e-10<P ≤ 1e-3; ***,
P ≤ 1e-10). To delineate possible genetic evolution during metastasis, we carried out an in-depth examination of the mutations of paired
primary and metastasis samples. While a large portion of SNVs were shared by both stages, significant differences were observed between the
allele frequency of nonsynonymous and splicing-site SNVs in cancer related genes (i.e. the genes in cancer census gene database (Figure 4;
Fisher’s exact test). For instance, a nonsense mutation (E304*) in TP53, which regulates TAT binding, was found in both primary tumors and
metastases of case D473 (Figure 4C and Additional file 1: Table S3), whereas a deleterious missense mutation in the DNA-binding domain of
TP53 (N131D) was only detected in metastases of case 441 (Figure 4A and Additional file 1: Table S3). In addition, we found the similar SNV
frequency in a set of oncogenes and tumor suppressors, such as CBL and MYC, between primary tumors and metastases. Non-silent mutations of
BRCA1, PRF1, and other cancer genes were detected solely in the metastasis stage (Figure 4 and Additional file 1: Table S4). Moreover, we
found 9 mutations with significantly different allele frequency between in primary tumor and in metastasis. The 8 mutations are located in
genes KIAA1377, SESN3, MYH4, ZNF613, C5, SPEN, MYO9A and DNM3. Of which, MHY4 is involved in tight junction pathway, SESN3 plays a role in
p53 signaling pathway, SPEN is involved in Notch signaling pathway which regulates transcription. Intriguingly, multiple mutations of zinc
finger proteins (ZNF) were detected in the metastasis samples; among these, metastasis-specific genetic mutations of ZNF257 and ZNF682 have
been reported to be upregulated in metastatic cell lines (lung and bone), relative to the parental line of breast adenocarcinoma . Overall,
mutations in genes that are involved in the cell cycle, apoptosis, DNA repair, and transcription regulations were enriched in the metastasis
stage (Additional file 1: Table S10B). On the basis of the allele frequency distributions, we can focus on the metastasis-specific genetic
alterations to further investigate its underlying mechanisms of lung metastases in HCC. Dissection of the somatic mutations in primary
tumors and metastases shows that the affected genes are involved in the focal adhesion and gap junction pathways (Additional file 1: Tables
S3, S10A and S10B). In the future, high-depth sequencing based on our candidate list may help explore the subclones or key drivers in
metastasis. The 66 somatic mutations were genotyped by Sanger sequencing, and 60 mutations were validated (6 failed to be validated)
(Additional file 1: Table S11). Comparison of nonsynonymous and splice mutation frequency between primary tumors and metastases. Each point
represents a somatic single-nucleotide variant (SNV). Allele frequency enrichment was tested using the Fishers’ exact test. Gray dot, shared
mutations; orange, significantly enriched mutations in primary tumors; green, significantly enriched mutations in metastases; purple,
primary tumor-specific mutations; blue, metastasis-specific mutations. SNVs in cancer genes or genes located in cancer-related pathways are
labeled with the corresponding gene names. SNVs in each of the 4 cases show in plots A to D separately. In addition to the mutation
frequency, we examined whether metastasis-derived mutations occur at certain genomic regions. However, we did not find any obvious
hypermutation region in any of the 4 trio samples (Additional file 2: Figure S4). To further investigate the inter-somatic mutation
distance, we compared the inter-somatic mutation distances to the simulated null distributions. The results show that the observed somatic
mutation distances (<100 kb) were spaced more closely rather than randomly spotted (Additional file 2: Figures S2 and S3) and that the
mutation events occurred in a similar manner in both primary and metastatic tumors (Additional file 2: Figure S5). We also analyzed the
inter-somatic mutation distances across different cancer types, of which data was derived from public databases (Materials and methods),
such as liver cancer, lung adenocarcinoma, and prostate cancer. Interestingly, we found that a specific tumor type may develop its own
intrinsic mutation distance (Additional file 2: Figure S5). Together, our findings suggest that the scattered small regions with dense
mutations are present in the cancer genomes and that specific cancer types are associated with their own mutation distance. We predicted
2,514-4,925 and 4,366-7,968 indels in primary tumors and metastases, respectively, including a total of 25/34 (primary tumor/metastasis)
events affecting protein coding (18/24 frameshift and 7/10 in-frame) in 42 genes (Additional file 1: Table S2F). Specifically, a frameshift
insertion in the tumor suppressor RB1 was detected in both primary tumors and the matched metastases, whereas a metastasis-specific
frameshift deletion was detected in the oncogene TFEB. In addition, a frameshift insertion in WNT5A and an in-frame deletion in DAAM2 were
only detected in metastases; both WNT5A and DAAM2 are involved in the Wnt signaling pathway (Additional file 1: Table S10C). Copy number
alterations (CNAs) in primary tumors and metastases of 4 cases were detected by comparing with their respective matched normal samples. From
primary tumors to metastases, the lengths of CNAs were changed, but the total sizes of CNAs were not significantly different (Additional
file 1: Table S2G). As indicated by the CNA plots, primary tumors and their matched lung metastases generated similar global CNA patterns
across 4 pairs (Additional file 2: Figure S6). The copy numbers across the genomes between primary tumors and metastases were found to be
positively correlated with each other with correlation coefficient >0.5 for all 4 cases (Additional file 2: Figure S7), consistent with the
conclusion that the genetic characteristics of metastases mostly originate from primary tumors. The copy numbers of CNA events were altered
from primary tumors to metastases, and these CNAs were annotated to corresponding genes (Additional file 1: Table S7). Specifically, many
CNAs with common regions but different copy number between primary tumor and metastasis are abserved in cases DD59 and D473. Such a pattern
corresponds to the low percentage of somatic SNVs preserved in metastases (Figure 2). We found 26 CNA regions (26 deletions and no
amplification) in primary tumors and 235 CNA regions (173 deletions and 62 amplifications) in metastases. Notably, 11 of the 26 deletions
observed in primary tumors overlapped with 11 deletions in metastases (Additional file 2: Figure S7 and Additional file 1: Table S2H). The
deletions detected in both primary tumors and metastases were mainly located in 1p, 4q, 8p, 9p, 9q, 16p, and 21q (Additional file 1: Table
S7). By categorizing tumor-specific CNA regions in metastases, we found that alterations of oncogenes and tumor suppressors, for instance,
tumor suppressor PMS2 and oncogenes TFPT, ZNF331, and others, may be linked to metastatic progression (Additional file 2: Figure S7 and
Additional file 1: Table S7). In addition, frequent somatic copy number loss in the region spanning the tumor suppressor genes, CDKN2A and
CDKN2B, was also observed across metastasis samples (Additional file 1: Table S7) . We used CREST to detect structural variants (SV) in
sequencing data . We identified 65–221 and 60–232 SVs in primary tumors and metastases, respectively. Indeed, the large portion of SVs in
primary and metastatic tumors overlapped with each other (Figure 1). We identified 30 translocations that were only in metastases, 8
translocations that were only in primary tumors, as well as 30 overlapped translocations (Additional file 1: Table S2I). Some of the
oncogenes and tumor suppressors, such as TPM3 and ZNF331, which were located in the breakpoints of somatic SVs, were detected in our study
(Additional file 1: Table S6). Specific mutated genes that were identified in tumorigenesis pathways are summarized in Additional file 1:
Table S10. Specifically, distinct mutated genes in metastasis, CNTNAP2 and PDCD1LG2, are the components of the cell adhesion pathway. The
overexpression of CDH13 and AKAP13A, both of which were found to be truncated in our study, have been reported to correlate with a higher
risk of late recurrence of hepatocellular carcinoma . In addition, the CDH13 and PDCD1LG2 genes located at the breakpoints of an inter-
chromosome translocation may cause the CDH13-PDCD1LG2 fusion. To identify genes as “driver” somatic mutations in either primary
tumorigenesis or metastasis process, the genes with significant higher nonsynonymous mutation rates against a background were estimated .
Tumor suppressors PRF1 and BRCA1, as well as oncogene TFEB, all of which may play an important role in cancer cell survival during the
progress of metastasis, were predicted as driver genes only in metastases. WNT5A, PLCB3, and DAAM2, which can activate or inhibit canonical
Wnt signaling, were predicted as metastasis-specific driver genes (Additional file 1: Table S10F). TP53, a tumor suppressor that was
previously reported to be associated with liver cancer , was also weighted as a driver gene and is recurrently mutant in metastases
(Additional file 2: Figure S2). In addition, we identified that shared mutations between primary tumors and metastases were significantly
enriched in the pathways of bladder cancer, pancreatic cancer, non-small cell lung cancer, thyroid cancer, and melanoma, which implies that
the general progress of different tumor types may be driven by several same mutations. The mTOR signaling pathway and some others were
identified to be significant only in primary tumors (Additional file 1: Table S9A). By integrating altered genes in primary tumor and
specifically altered genes in metastasis from four cases, we concluded several cancer and cell migration relevant pathways. Altered pathways
in primary tumor were Wnt, JAK-STAT, cell cycle and focal adhesion pathways (Figure 5), which function in tumor initiation and development.
On the other hand, metastasis-altered pathways included tight junction, focal adhesion and ErbB/MAPK pathways (Figure 6). Tumor cells in
metastasis carried alterations enabling migration and circulation and derived additional alterations, which may endowi their ability to
clonalize in distant organ and grow as primary tumor cells . Significantly altered pathway in primary tumor. Pathway analysis for primary
tumor mutant genes identified significant genomic alteration in several cancer pathways, including (A) Wnt, (B) focal adhesion, (C) JAK-STAT
and (D) cell cycle pathways. Alterations included somatic SNVs, Indels, CNAs and SVs. Alteration recurrence was referred as number of cases
harboring a mutant gene. Alteration types were represented by different colours. Significantly altered pathway in metastasis. Pathway
analysis for metastasis-specific mutant genes identified significant genomic alteration in multiple cancer/cell migration relevant pathways,
including (A) tight junction, (B) ErbB/MAPK and (C) focal adhesion pathway. Alterations included somatic SNVs, Indels, CNAs and SVs.
Alteration recurrence was referred as number of cases harboring a mutant gene. Alteration types were represented by different colours. In
summary, genetic alteration patterns are very similar between primary tumor and metastasis of 4 cases (Figure 1, Additional file 2: Figure
S2 and Table 2). For somatic SNVs, we concluded that 38.88-78.49% mutations detected in primary tumors were preserved in matched metastases
(Figure 2). Also copy number along tumor genomes are very close correlated between primary tumors and matched metastases, with correlation
coefficients range of 0.51-0.82 (Pearson correlation coefficient) for 4 cases (Additional file 2: Figure S7). In addition to SNVs and CNAs,
SVs have the similar pattern across 4 pairs with 30.21-74.07% SVs detected in primary tumors preserved in metastases. From all above, we can
approximately conclude that genetic feature in primary tumor and metastasis of case 441 are the most similar, and case D430 ranks the second
most similar and then case D473 and case DD59. Specifically on clinical features, case 441 had been performed simple treatment with only
liver lobectomy and without any recurrence during primary tumor developing to metastasis. Case D430 also underwent simple segmentectomy,
however, developed recurrence after metastasis detected. Both cases of D473 and DD59 underwent TACE before metastases were detected, which
may cause point mutations , consistent with that percentages of common point mutations between primary tumor and metastasis are low for
these two cases (Figure 2). Similarity of genetic alterations in primary tumors and matched metastases HCC is the fifth most common cancer
and the third most common cause of cancer-related deaths worldwide. It has a high prevalence in Asia, including Korea, due to endemic
hepatitis B virus infection. numerous clinical trials using cytotoxic chemotherapy or targeted agents have failed, except sorafenib . While
intrahepatic recurrence is most common, lung metastases are the most common extrahepatic spread and account for up to 40% of metastatic HCC
. survival of patients with metastatic HCC is usually less than 1 year . Recently, prolonged median survival durations have been reported
from 6.4 months to 40.7 months following metastasectomies . However, despite advances in therapeutic strategies, extrahepatic metastasis is
still a major impediment to better prognosis in HCC patients. In this study, we employed whole-genome sequencing to profile somatic
mutations and structural variations in primary HCC (HBV+) and their matched metachronous lung metastases. Several recent studies on HCCs of
different etiologies (HBV, HCV, and alcohol) using whole-genome and exome sequencing have not only confirmed previously known mutations of
β-catenin and TP53 but also identified novel genetic alterations in genes that are involved in epigenetic regulation, such as ARID1A,
ARID1B, ARID2, MLL, and MLL3 . Wnt/β-catenin, p53 signaling, cell cycle, and chromatin remodeling have recently emerged as dominant cancer
pathways in primary HCC . To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to examine the genomic profiles of matched pairs of primary
and metastatic HCC by whole-genome sequencing. In summary, comparison of structural variations between primary and metastatic tumors shows
very similar and largely overlapped mutated segments (Figure 1). In addition, CNVs in primary and metastatic pairs were found to be closely
related, and 38.88-78.49% of SNVs detected in primary HCC tumors were also detected in lung metastases. These preservations in genomic
profiles from liver primary tumors to metachronous lung metastases indicate that the genomic features during tumorigenesis may be retained
during metastasis. Despite similarities between primary and metastatic pairs, a few somatic mutations were detected only in metastatic
tumors. Multiple mutations of zinc finger (ZNF) genes were detected in the metastasis samples, and mutated genes that are involved in
apoptosis and transcription regulations were enriched in metastases (Additional file 1: Table S10B). The ZNF family represents a large group
of proteins involved in various aspects of transcriptional regulation . It has been reported that there were almost twice as many ZNF
mutated genes in the HBV-positive hepatitis . In our study, a total of 5 ZNF, namely ZNF257, ZNF682, ZNF404, ZNF514, and ZNF142, were
mutated in lung metastases from HCC (Additional file 1: Table S10B). Among these, ZNF257 and ZNF682 were previously reported to be
upregulated in lung and bone metastases, relative to the primary breast adenocarcinoma, and were speculated to be putative metastasis genes
. In addition, ZNF mutations were found in head and neck squamous cell carcinoma (HNSCC); therefore, the genetic changes to these
transcriptional regulators have been implicated in the development of HNSCC . Nevertheless, the functional role of ZNFs in HCC tumorigenesis
is yet to be defined. In addition, mutations in known cancer gene suppressor TP53 were also detected in our study samples, including a
nonsense mutation (E343*) in the regulator of TAT binding and a missense mutation (N131D) in the DNA-binding domain, both were previously
reported by COSMIC (http://cancer.sanger.ac.uk/cancergenome/projects/cosmic/) (Additional file 1: Table S3). Notably, a frameshift insertion
in WNT5A and an in-frame deletion in DAAM2 were detected only in lung metastases; both WNT5A and DAAM2 are involved in the Wnt signaling
pathway. Recent genome sequencing studies have revealed that the WNT signaling pathway is the most frequently altered oncogenic pathway in
primary HCC . In addition to the high prevalence of CTNNB1 mutations, genetic alterations of other components, such AXIN1, AXIN2, and APC
genes that encode proteins containing the destruction box, also occur at a lower frequency. Wnt5a, which is up-regulated in poorly
differentiated and highly motile mesenchymal-like HCC cells, has been suggested to play a role in tumor progression by inducing epithelial
mesenchymal transition . In line with this, Wnt5a up-regulation was significantly shown to enhance migration, proliferation, and
invasiveness in pancreatic cancer cells in vitro. Importantly, Wnt signaling has been implicated in the activation of HCC-initiating cells .
While Wnt5a has been described as a tumor promoter in melanoma, gastric, pancreatic, and prostate cancers, it was suggested to be a tumor
suppressor in HCC, neuroblastoma, leukemia, colon, and thyroid cancers . The functional significance of Wnt5 aberrations in tumorigenesis of
lung metastases from HCC primary tumors should be evaluated in subsequent studies. Synthetically, primary tumor harbored more alterations
located in Wnt, cell cycle, JAK-STAT pathways (Figure 5), which plays an important role in encoding protein molecular emphasizing the cell
proliferation, apoptosis and inflammation, as well as focal adhesion pathway. Focal adhesion pathway has been implicated in the cell
migration and initiated metastasis . For metastasis, specific alterations arose in tight junction and focal adhesion pathways (Figure 6),
which enhanced the cell migration mechanism. In this study, for the first time, the whole-genome sequencing profiles of primary HCC and
paired lung metastases were compared. We found similar genomic alterations between them, with a few mutations that were found specifically
in lung metastases, which may explain the clinical observation that both primary and metastatic tumors are usually sensitive or resistant to
the same systemic treatments. A total of 4 pairs of fresh frozen tumors and adjacent non-tumor liver tissues containing no necrosis or
hemorrhage were collected from primary HCC patients treated with curative hepatectomy at the Samsung Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. Lung
tumor specimens were collected at the time of lung metastasectomy. This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board of Samsung
Medical Center, Seoul, Korea. Genomic DNA was extracted from sliced tissue specimens using the QIAamp DNA Mini Kit (Qiagen, Hilden,
Germany), respectively. Qualified genomic DNA samples were randomly fragmented by Covaris. After ligation of sequencing adapters to both
ends of resulting fragments, successfully adapter-ligated DNA fragments were purified, and those with an insert size of approximately 500 bp
were selected by electrophoresis. Insert fragments with correct sizes were harvested and prepared for cluster amplification by cBot (Hiseq
2000). The qualified DNA library was then loaded on Hiseq2000 for high-throughput sequencing, to meet required sequencing depth with 90-bp
paired-end reads. Raw image files were read by the Illumina’s base calling software with default parameters, and raw data were collected.
Sequencing reads from primary and metastatic tumors, as well as matched normal tissues, were gap-aligned to the hg19 reference genome by BWA
program, followed by removal of PCR duplicates. Somatic variants in primary and metastatic tumors were detected by comparing tumor reads to
those of matched normal samples. Somatic mutations in tumors were predicted by SOAPsnv (http://soap.genomics.org.cn/index.html) using a
sensitive score threshold. Next, p values were calculated using Fisher’s exact test for all putative mutation sites, based on the
distribution of read support with high stringent specificity and sensitivity . For mutations present in dbSNP (which are usually germline
mutations), we removed potential germline mutations existing in database of dbSNP132 for the downstream analysis. Subsequently, we annotated
potential somatic SNVs by mapping them to RefGene (http://refgene.com/) using an in-house annotation program. Indels in tumors were examined
through gapped alignment not allowing gap located 5 bp to either end of the mapped reads . From the indel pool, somatic indels were detected
by filtering SNV which was also detected in adjacent normal samples. Somatic indels with ≤5 supporting reads were filtered for high
confidence. We used in-house software based on the read-depth method to infer copy number variation in primary and metastatic tumors. Copy
number variants were called when the copy number in tumors was ≤0.75- or ≥1.25-fold of that in corresponding normal samples. To infer
recurrently amplified or deleted genomic regions, we detected the focal copy number segments (≤1Mbp) by re-implementing the GISTIC algorithm
using copy numbers in 1-kb windows, instead of SNP array probes as markers. G-scores were calculated for genomic and gene-coding regions,
based on the frequency and amplitude of amplification and deletion affecting each gene, respectively. A significant CNV region was defined
as having an amplification G-score >0.08 or a deletion G-score <0.09, corresponding to a p-value threshold of 0.05 from the permutation-
derived null distribution . We further applied CREST to whole-genome DNA sequence data obtained from primary and metastatic tumors to
identify candidate structural variants (SV) at base-pair resolution. Driver genes were predicted using in-house software by re-implementing
the algorithm in which driver genes are the genes with a significant higher non-silent mutation (nonsynonymous/splice/coding indel) rate
against a background mutation rate estimated from collected silent mutations . Similarly, driver pathways were predicted by computing the
significance of enrichment of non-silent mutations in a certain pathway against background. Pathway enrichment analyses of genes harboring
somatic SNV, small coding indel, CNV, or SV were performed using the Gene Set Enrichment Analysis . We computed the inter-somatic mutation
distance within individuals by defining the inter-somatic mutation distance as the distance from a somatic mutation to the very next one. We
computed null distributions by randomly sampling positions from the genome (excluding assembly gaps), while maintaining the number of
somatic mutations per chromosome . Using the Kolmogorov–Smirnov test, we calculated the differences between real distributions and
corresponding null distributions and found that inter-somatic mutation distances were significantly smaller than expected (p < 0.05). The
distribution of inter-somatic mutation distance in primary and metastatic tumors of sample D473 were compared to the distributions of inter-
somatic mutation distances in HCC and other types of tumors, using published data downloaded from ICGC
(ftp://data.dcc.icgc.org/version_11/). We used 2 lung adenocarcinoma samples, TCGA-05-4382-01A-01D-1265-08 and TCGA-05-4424-01A-22D-1855-08,
from TCGA (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/), 2 prostate cancers, CPCG_0099_Pr_P_P1 and CPCG_0184_Pr_P_P4, from OICR (http://oicr.on.ca/), 2
liver cancers, HCC122T and RK020_C01, from NCC (http://www.ncc.go.jp/en/), and 1 liver cancer sample (sample 180) sample, sample180, from a
collaboration HCC project of which some results have been published . Sequencing data for this publication has been deposited in NCBI Short
Reads Archive and is accessible through accession number SRA076160. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient (who was not
deceased at the time of writing or waived by the IRB if deceased) for the publication of this report and any accompanying images. HCC:
Hepatocellular carcinoma; SNVs: Single-nucleotide variants; SVs: Structural variations; CNAs: Copy number alterations; SSMs: Somatic SNV
mutations; NGS: Next-generation sequencing; TACE: Transcatheter arterial chemoembolization; COSMIC: Catalogue of somatic mutations in
cancer; ICGC: International cancer genome consortium; TCGA: The cancer genome atlas; OICR: Ontario institute for cancer research; NCC:
National cancer center. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. JL, HL, JGK, CKP initially designed this study. LO, YZ
performed research and analyzed data. LO, JL, CKP, JGK, HL, MM, YS, ZG and HZ designed the research and reviewed the manuscript. LO, JL,
JGK, HL, CKP, MM, YS, ZG wrote the paper. All authors read and approved the final version of the manuscript for publication. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1755-8794/7/2/prepub Contains tables of summaries of
variants, variant lists, gene lists and pathway lists. Click here for file Contains figures of clinical images and variants. Click here for
file This study was supported by a grant from the Korea Healthcare Technology R&D Project, Ministry for Health & Welfare Affairs, Republic
of Korea (HI09C06580000).
