Bisphosphonates have a widespread indication for osteoporosis and are also applied in cancer patients with skeletal-related conditions.
Bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw (BRONJ) is a feared side effect which is hard to treat and often affects patient´s
quality of life in an extensive manner. Adalimumab (Humira®), a fully human recombinant antibody specific for tumor necrosis factor- α, is
approved for treatment in patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease like ulcerative colitis or Crohn’s disease. In March 2013, a 36-year-old
female presented with right-sided perimandibular swelling, recurrent facial pain and exposed necrotic bone after previous extraction of
tooth 47. She had the medical history of Crohn’s disease for more than one decade with chronic active enterocolitis, fistula disease as well
as previous oral manifestation and was currently treated with Adalimumab since September 2008. Due to steroid-induced osteoporosis,
diagnosed in 2004, she received oral Bisphosphonates (Risedronate) from 2004 until 2007 followed by two infusions of Zoledronic acid in 2008
and 2009. This patient with a medical history of Crohn’s disease and gastrointestinal remission under Adalimumab therapy presented with
osteonecrosis of the jaw after suspended oral and intravenous Bisphosphonate therapy implicating that the biologic therapy with an anti-
TNF-α antibody might promote the manifestation of osteonecrosis and compromise oral healing capacity. Bisphosphonates are primarily applied
in patients with skeletal complications associated with osteoporosis as well as malignancy . Bisphosphonate–associated osteonecrosis of the
jaw (BRONJ), first described in 2003, poses a serious complication in patients currently or previously treated with Bisphosphonates and is
associated with exposed bone in the maxillofacial region for at least 8 weeks without any radiotherapy of the jaw in the past . The
occurrence of BRONJ not only depends on the duration of the BP therapy but also varies between oral and intravenous application with far
more cases reported after intravenous infusions with a cumulative incidence of 0,8%- 12% . Although the pathomechanism is not yet completely
understood, there are local risk factors like extraction of teeth, placement of dental implants, periapical surgery or dental abscesses
going along with an increased incidence of osteonecrosis . Beyond this, genetic and drug- related factors influence the appearance of BRONJ
. Clinically BRONJ presents as non-vital, exposed bone that might go along with inflammatory reactions due to secondary infection and
therefore the gingival or mucosal tissue is usually sensitive to palpation. This process can aggravate to bone sequestration going along
with acute osteomyelitis resulting in spreading and increased mobility of additional teeth . Presumably, BRONJ is associated with infection
and therefore immune-modulating drugs, as applied in patients with Crohn’s disease or rheumatoid arthritis, might be an important risk
factor in the development of necrotic lesions in the jaw . We already know that not only Bisphosphonates but also Denosumab or other
biologicals are under suspicion to promote or even cause necrotic lesions in the jaw . To our knowledge there is currently no published case
of BRONJ in a patient with Crohn’s disease also affecting the oral cavity and treated with Adalimumab. A 36-year-old female presented in
March 2013 with right-sided perimandibular swelling, cervical lymphadenopathy on the right side, dysphagia and pain on the lower face. In
January 2013, tooth 47 was removed by the family dentist followed by episodes of recurrent pain during the following two months. On clinical
investigation exposed bone surrounded by gingival inflammatory reaction was observed in the region of former tooth 47 (Figure 1). Panoramic
radiograph revealed a persistent extraction socket of 47 (Figure 2a). Intraoperative situation with exposed necrotic bone lingual and
crestal in the region of former tooth 47 (white arrow). Inflammatory reaction within the necrotic region is also leading to local
sugillations and bleedings as mucosal integrity seems to be disturbed. Crowned tooth 46 was removed within the operation. Pre- and
postoperative panoramic radiographs. Preoperative radiograph (a) is showing a persistent extraction socket and hypersclerosis of the
mandibular bone in the region 46/47 after extraction of 47 in January 2013. Postoperative panoramic radiograph (b) revealing a reduction of
the mandibular bone height after repeated osteotomy and adequate ossification of the former extraction sockets. Her medical history revealed
Crohn’s disease diagnosed in March 2000 affecting the colon, small intestine and stomach as well as aphthous oral lesions in the vestibulum
in the years 2000 and 2001, fistula disease and extraintestinal manifestation with arthralgia. The patient was treated with varying doses of
steroids together with 5-aminosalicylic (5-ASA) between 2000 and 2008 (Figure 3). In 2004 steroid-induced osteoporosis was diagnosed and
associated with sintering fractures in the lower lumbar spine. Since then Calcium 500 mg and Cholecalciferol 1000 I.E. with concomitant oral
Risedronate (Actonel®) 35 mg/week was applied until 2007 followed by two single 4 mg infusions of Zoledronic acid (Alcasta®) in 2008 and
2009. In September 2008, prednisolon and 5-ASA therapy was replaced by Adalimumab (Humira®) 40 mg/ 2 weeks for 3 years and later on monthly
(cumulative dose approximately 3,6 g) leading to a total gastrointestinal remission regarding Crohn’s symptoms at the end of 2009 confirmed
by endoscopy, histology and clinical disease activity in 2012. Between 2008 and 2013 recurrent events of psoriatic-like lesions, lupus-like
erythrodermia and conjunctivitis were observed and treated with topically applied medication. She reported to be allergic to metals (gold,
silver, nickel) and had no family history of Crohn’s disease. Drug regime since Crohn’s disease was diagnosed in 2000. In March 2013, the
patient was treated after previous MR-imaging revealed increased signalling in the jaw in the area of teeth 44 until 48 and additionally
confirmed prominent lymph nodes on both sides of the submandibular region (Figure 4). Due to the fact that the mandibular bone was already
exposed more than 8 weeks with no medical history of radiotherapy, BRONJ was diagnosed according to the AAOMS guidelines . Surgical
treatment consisted of osteotomy until healthy bone with bleeding from the surfaces was visible. Biopsies of bone were sent for pathological
examination. Additionally, sharp edges of bone that can potentially traumatise the surrounding were removed. A mucoperiosteal flap was
raised and primary wound closure was carried out without tension on the mucoperiosteal flap after incision of the periosteum with resorbable
suture material (Vicryl 5–0, Ethicon, Norderstedt, Germany) . Furthermore tooth 46 had to be removed because the necrotic bone affected the
roots. Antibiotic therapy consisting of ampicillin/sulbactam (Ampicillin + Sulbactam-ratiopharm®, Ratiopharm, Ulm, Germany) 3 g/day and
metronidazol (Metronidazol B. Braun®, B. Braun, Meisingen, Germany) 1,5 g/day and was administered intravenously for 8 days. Oral food
intake was not allowed for 10 days and antiseptic mouth rinses (Hexetidin, 5-Amino-1,3-bis(2- ethylhexal) hexahydro-5-methylpyrimidin,
Pfizer Pharma GmbH, Karlsruhe, Germany) was performed three times a day. Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI), t2 weighted, showing increased
signalling in the jaw within the region of teeth 44 until 47 as well as in the ipsi- and contralateral lymph nodes (left side with white
arrow). Additionally, perimandibular soft tissue swelling is detectable on the affected side. Histological examination showed a
granulomatous inflammatory reaction with necrotic, avital bone and actinomyces colonisation but no growth of mycobacteria or fungus and no
multinucleated giant cells. Humira® therapy was stopped in March 2013 after consultation with the department of gastroenterology and due to
the patient’s wish suffering from recurrent psoriatic-like lesions, lupus- like erythrodermia and conjunctivitis. 10 days after discharge
the patient presented with adequate wound healing and mild clinical symptoms. During removal of the stitches bone got re-exposed again
indicating a compromised mucosal healing. The patient was followed up weekly and received a second operative intervention at the beginning
of April 2013 which improved the clinical situation (Figures 2b and 5). Postoperative situation in October 2013 showing recovery of the
affected side after extraction of tooth 46 and repeated osteotomy. Aminobisphosphonates are well established in the therapy of osteoporosis
and metastatic cancer disease. Although BRONJ is a serious adverse event especially after intravenous administration, Aminobisphosphonates
improve cancer control and increase long-term survival. This case report presents an extraordinary course of osteonecrosis of the jaw after
mainly oral Bisphosphonate therapy and application of Adalimumab in a Crohn’s disease patient affecting almost the whole gastrointestinal
tract. Bisphosphonates can cause gastrointestinal mucosal injuries and reduce bone remodelling by predominantly inhibiting osteoclasts via
RANKL. Furthermore these drugs seem to have anti-angiogenic effects contributing to impaired wound-healing for example after tooth
extraction . Adalimumab, representing a fully humanised anti-TNF-α antibody, is an established biologic agent in the treatment of Crohn’s
disease with proven clinical benefits . Unfortunately there are already some reports about serious adverse effects like new-onset of
multiple sclerosis, psoriasiform lesions, lupus like syndrome and infectious complications including sepsis in patients treated with the
agent . Cases of osteonecrosis in extracranial bones like the femur or the talus in patients with Inflammatory Bowel Disease and long
lasting corticoid therapies have already been published . Some even maintain that avascular osteonecrosis might be an extraintestinal
manifestation of Inflammatory Bowel Disease although in some cases the interval between steroid treatment and avascular bone necrosis was
quite extended . However, in this report we present the first case of osteonecrosis in the jaw with the underlying history of Crohn’s
disease being currently treated with Adalimumab (Humira®) which can be seen in a certain correlation to other cases demonstrating patients
with osteonecrosis of the jaw and biological anti-TNF-α therapy with Infliximab . The EXTEND trial revealed improved mucosal healing of
gastrointestinal tissue under anti-TNF-α therapy , despite this it is still unclear whether anti-TNF-α treatment affects the oral mucosa
and/or interferes with bone physiology, bone turnover, local immunity and wound repair on the long run. Pathomechanistically one could
speculate at this stage that an inhibitory effect of Adalimumab on bone turnover might be mediated by a reduction of RANKL which could
already be shown in patients with rheumatoid arthritis and anti-TNF-α therapy . Interestingly osteonecrotic lesions in the jaw have also
been reported within treatment regimes including Denosumab in cancer patients assuming that a blockade of receptor activator of nuclear
factor-kappa-B (RANK) and receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa-B- ligand (RANKL) interaction affects monocytic migration as well as
osteoclast function comparable to Bisphosphonates . We already know that Adalimumab induces apoptosis of activated human monocytes . While
apoptosis of disease-specific or reactive monocytes may be beneficial in idiopathic Inflammatory Bowel Disease, apoptosis of monocytes
activated by infectious agents still present within the oral cavity may worsen wound healing, mucosal repair and bone repair of the jaw
after necrosis. However, it still has to be investigated how bone metabolism and local infections surveillance in patients with Inflammatory
Bowel Disease is influenced in the long run and how therapeutic strategies including biological substances lead to avascular bone necrosis
in the jaw. Especially when considering already observed infectious complications due to immunosuppression associated with Adalimumab
application it has to be investigated if osteonecrotic lesions might also occur because of spreading ongoing infections and/or have to be
seen within the context of a certain innate immune dysfunction lacking defensin expression . Regarding this case, on-going oral Crohn’s
disease might be a confounder in terms of mucosal healing. Although the patient had no gastrointestinal symptoms including aphthous lesions
in the oral cavity during Adalimumab- therapy, general oral mucosal healing capacities might be compromised. Patients with Inflammatory
Bowel Disease and planned treatment with biological drugs like Adalimumab and a history of Bisphosphonate therapy should be also clinically
investigated by a dentist before prescription of biologicals. Furthermore they should be monitored carefully with regard to osteonecrotic
lesions of the jaw especially after dental procedures or within periodontal disease. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. 5-ASA: 5-aminosalicylic; BONJ: Bisphosphonate-associated osteonecrosis of the jaw; RANK: Receptor activator of nuclear factor-
kappa-B; RANKL: Receptor activator of nuclear factor-kappa-B- ligand. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. RP, TE, PS,
FW examined and treated the patient and collected the data. RP, TE, MR, FWN discussed the case and data. RP, FW, MR, FWN and PS wrote the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-230X/14/6/prepub We acknowledge support by Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft and Friedrich-Alexander-
Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg within the funding programme Open Access Publishing.
