Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most commonly occurring type of soft tissue tumor in children. However, it is rare in adults, and therefore,
very little is known about the most appropriate treatment strategy for adult RMS patients. We performed genomic analysis of RMS cells
derived from a 27-year-old male patient whose disease was refractory to treatment. A peritoneal seeding nodule from the primary tumor,
pleural metastases, malignant pleural effusion, and ascites obtained during disease progression, were analyzed. Whole exome sequencing
revealed 23 candidate variants, and 10 of 23 mutations were validated by Sanger sequencing. Three of 10 mutations were present in both
primary and metastatic tumors, and 3 mutations were detected only in metastatic specimens. Comparative genomic hybridization array analysis
revealed prominent amplification in the 12q13–14 region, and more specifically, the CDK4 proto-oncogene was highly amplified. ALK
overexpression was observed at both protein and RNA levels. However, an ALK fusion assay using NanoString technology failed to show any ALK
rearrangements. Little genetic heterogeneity was observed between primary and metastatic RMS cells. We propose that CDK4, located at 12q14,
is a potential target for drug development for RMS treatment. Rhabdomyosarcoma (RMS) is the most commonly occurring type of soft tissue
tumor in children1, but it is less common in adults, accounting for only 2–5% of all soft tissue sarcomas2. Given the rarity of this
disease, very little information is available on the most appropriate treatment strategy for adult RMS patients. Patients with unresectable
or metastatic RMS have an extremely low cure rate and a poor prognosis34. A substantial improvement in survival has been achieved with the
introduction of intensive chemotherapy regimens, which are usually based on pediatric oncology clinical trials on RMS56789. However,
survival rates for patients with metastatic disease remain disappointing, and the prognosis is dismal in patients with a poor response to
salvage chemotherapy310. Thus, identification of novel therapeutic targets in RMS is urgently needed in order to improve treatment outcomes
for this aggressive type of tumor. Major histologic subtypes of RMS include embryonal RMS (ERMS) and alveolar RMS (ARMS)11. Despite advances
in therapy, patients with the ARMS histological variant of RMS have a 5-year survival of less than 30%. ARMS presents with distinctive
chromosomal translocations that result in specific fusion gene products, the most prevalent of which are PAX3–FOXO1 (55%) and PAX7–FOXO1
(22%)12. Reciprocal translocation of chromosomes 2 and 13 results in a PAX3-FKHR fusion gene in ARMS, which fuses the region of the gene
encoding the DNA-binding domain of the transcription factor PAX3 with that encoding the transactivation domain of the transcription factor
FKHR in-frame (3, 4). However, at least 25% of ARMS cases lack such translocations, suggesting that ARMS is not a single disease, but a
heterogeneous group of conditions with a common phenotype. Moreover, studies on the gene expression profile of RMS have proposed new
molecular classifications13 and have revealed that a specific gene expression signature potentially determines tumor behavior as well as
treatment outcome141516. ALK is one of the targets of interest, given that ALK alterations are relatively common in RMS, although the
function of its gene product remains unknown17. Here, we report the clinical application of genomic profiling in identifying potential novel
genetic mutations in patients with relapsed and chemotherapy-refractory alveolar RMS. A 27-year-old man presented with a complaint of left
upper quadrant abdominal pain that had lasted for 3 years. Computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography (PET) scans showed
multiple malignant masses, involving the pancreas and left upper abdominal wall, and pleural seeding was also noted (Fig. 1A). Pathological
examination of the abdominal wall mass showed thin fibrous septae lined by small round blue cells in an alveolar growth or solid pattern;
the cells appeared to lack cohesion and had hyperchromatic nuclei and scant cytoplasm. The tumor cells were diffusely positive for CD99,
desmin, and WT1 and showed scattered focal positivity for cytokeratin. Ki-67 staining revealed high proliferative activity of the tumor
cells. The FKHR break-apart fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) showed separate green and red signals, confirming FKHR rearrangement
(Supplementary Fig. S1). Based on the histology, immunohistochemistry (IHC), and FISH results, ARMS was diagnosed, and alternating cycles of
vincristine, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide (VDC) and ifosfamide and etoposide (IE) were administered every 3 weeks. After completing a
1-year course of cytotoxic chemotherapy, the patient achieved near complete remission, with disappearance of the multiple masses and pleural
seeding (Fig. 1B). On the basis of a tumor board discussion involving a multi-modality team for sarcoma, the residual peritoneal seeding
nodules were surgically resected. At the time of surgery, the resected seeding nodules were snap frozen and immediately stored at −80°C for
molecular analysis. The pathologic examination of the resected peritoneal seeding nodules verified the diagnosis of ARMS. Postoperative
follow-up abdominal pelvis CT and chest CT demonstrated no evidence of malignancy. However, 3 months after surgical resection, the patient
was found to have developed a chest wall mass of approximately 2 cm in size. Salvage etoposide, ifosfamide, and cisplatin (VIP) chemotherapy
was administered and initially elicited a partially positive response. However, soon afterward, the patient developed rapidly progressive
disease with a massive amount of left pleural effusion after the 5th cycle of VIP (Fig. 1C). Because dyspnea was caused by rapidly
increasing pleural effusion, talc pleurodesis and pleural biopsy were performed through video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery (VATS). At this
time, the patient agreed to full genetic testing using the tissue specimens to identify potential molecular targets (sample #2). In
addition, malignant cells from the pleural effusion were cultured and stored at −80°C for molecular analysis and in vitro drug sensitivity
tests (sample #3). However, the patient developed malignant ascites (sample #4) immediately after pleurodesis, and 4 cycles of paclitaxel
and ifosfamide were administered. The patient developed cord compression with paraplegia, experienced continued disease progression, and
died several weeks later. DNA from the primary tumor (sample #1) was sequenced, revealing 23 candidate variants: SCN1B, PPP1R3A, GRID2,
APBA2, ZNF142, ZYG11A, RBFOX1, TCF7L1, NARF, KIAA0182, TEX13B, MUC2, LRRC3, GRHL3, MUC16, TTR, UBA1, FEN1, ELAC2, NBEAL1, DSCAML1, PCDHA4,
and POLR3C (Table 1). Only the MUC16 mutation was detected in blood, with 3.4% allele frequency. Amino acid substitutions were predicted to
arise from some of the point mutations in each gene, and these in turn were predicted to have a substantial phenotypic effect based on the
SIFT score (a SIFT score of 0 indicates a deleterious effect, a score ≤ 0.05 indicates a damaging effect, and a score > 0.05 suggests that
the substitution can be tolerated). These protein mutations were also predicted to have considerable functional impact based on the FI score
as determined by Mutation Assessor (http://mutationassessor.org) (an FI score ≤ 0.8 is considered neutral; 0.8 < FI score ≤ 1.9 indicates
low impact; 1.9 < FI score ≤ 3.5 indicates medium impact; and FI score > 3.5 indicates high impact). Among the variants detected in exome
sequencing from the tumor specimen, those in SCN1B, PPP1R3A, GRID2, APBA2, ZNF142, ZYG11A, RBFOX1, TCF7L1, TEX13B, and DSCAML1 were
validated by Sanger sequencing, and the details of these 10 candidate genes are provided in Table 2. The primary tumor (sample #1), pleural
metastases (sample #2), and malignant cells from ascites (sample #4) were all found to carry point mutations in SCN1B, PPP1R3A, and ZYG11A.
However, APBA2, ZNF142, and RBFOX1 mutations, although not present in the primary tumor, were detected in both metastatic (chemotherapy
refractory) specimens. TCF7L1, TEX13B, and DSCAML1 mutations, which were detected during exome sequencing, were not confirmed in subsequent
Sanger sequencing of the primary tumor or any metastatic specimens. Although the mutation in GRID2 was not seen in the primary tumor due to
failure of the sequencing reactions, the mutation was confirmed in both metastatic samples. Although several chromosomal regions showed
evidence of copy number variations (CNVs; Supplementary Table S1), the 12q13.3–q14.1 region demonstrated the highest level of chromosomal
amplification (Fig. 2A). As this region contains multiple genes, we analyzed the amplification of each gene (Table 3). Within this region,
the CDK4 proto-oncogene was highly amplified, and several other genes in the amplicon also showed various degrees of amplification,
including NACA, HSD17B6, SDR9C7, RDH16, GPR182, ZBTB39, TAC3, MYO1A, NAB2, STAT6, and LRP1. The overexpression of CDK4 at the protein level
was also confirmed by IHC (Fig. 2B). As ALK overexpression has been reported in refractory RMS1819, we assessed the level of ALK protein
expression using IHC. As shown in Fig. 3A-1, ALK IHC was strongly positive in most of the tumor cells. Given the high level of ALK protein
expression, ALK RNA overexpression was also detected in the pleural metastasis specimen (sample #2), as expected (Fig. 3B). Two lung cancer
cell lines, NCIH3122 and NCIH2228, were used as positive controls for EML4–ALK fusion and A549 cells were used as the negative control. ALK-
fusion lung cancer only overexpresses the 3′-ALK mRNA (NCIH3122 and NCIH2228), whereas sarcoma overexpresses the full-length mRNA. The mean
of 3′-ALK expression of ALK+ lung tumor is approximately 500, whereas this reached approximately 3000 in the sarcoma. Despite ALK
overexpression at the protein and RNA levels, ALK amplification was not observed in the tumor cells of this patient. Next, we screened for
the presence of ALK fusion partners using a NanoString assay; however, the ALK fusion assay failed to show any ALK rearrangements (Fig. 3C).
ALK rearrangement was also not detected by FISH (Fig. 3A-3). Patients with recurrent RMS usually present with a rapidly deteriorating
condition and have markedly limited options in terms of chemotherapy920. In this study, we found that the majority of somatic mutations
found during exome sequencing of primary tumor tissue were also observed in metastatic tumor tissue and metastatic cells in ascites samples,
although Sanger sequencing revealed genetic alterations involving several genes, such as APBA2, ZNF1142, and RBFOX1, only in the metastatic
samples. These results led to 2 important conclusions: First, there is little genetic heterogeneity between primary and metastatic RMS cells
at least in terms of mutational spectra, reflecting relatively little genetic evolution during the course of metastasis. This is consistent
with the results of recent similar studies on melanoma21, breast22, and pancreatic cancers23, in which genomic profiling for both primary
and metastatic sites was performed. Second, we confirmed that malignant cells isolated from body fluid can be used for genomic profiling, as
their genome is nearly identical to that of the resected tumor specimen. This may be especially important in clinical practice because body
fluid can be obtained relatively easily using a bedside procedure. Of the 23 candidate genes found during exome sequencing, we selected 9
mutated genes (APBA2, RBFOX1, TCF7L1, MUC16, UBA1, FEN1, NBEAL1, DSCAML1, and PCDHA4) for which substantial functional impact was predicted
(medium or high functional impact; FI score > 1.9), with or without damaging/deleterious phenotypic effects based on the SIFT score (≤0.05),
and assessed their clinical relevance to RMS. However, we could not find any pre-existing evidence that these genetic alterations contribute
to RMS development. The aCGH array used in this study revealed prominent amplification in the 12q13 and 12q14 regions. Although we found
that many genes within this chromosome 12 region were amplified, CDK4 amplification was of particular interest because it is known to play a
pivotal role in the oncogenic process24, and perhaps more importantly, the corresponding proteins are potential drug targets25. Its
overexpression is frequently observed in well-differentiated and dedifferentiated liposarcomas262728; consequently, a clinical trial of the
CDK4 inhibitor (PD0332991) for CDK4-amplified tumors has been conducted. In both phase I and phase II trials, the CDK4 inhibitor has proven
effective in C, and a randomized phase 3 trial is being considered by researchers29. Amplification of 12q13–q14 and CDK4 in RMS has been
reported previously3031, as has amplification of MYCN, and both of these genes are known to be involved in RMS tumorigenesis32. However,
these genes are associated with distinct expression profiles and clinical parameters. MYCN overexpression occurs more frequently in cases in
which 2p24 amplification is present, whereas CDK4 overexpression is associated with 12q13–14 amplification33. In addition, 12q13–14
amplification was significantly associated with poor clinical outcomes, such as short failure-free and overall survival, compared to that
seen in cases with 2q24 amplification33. In the RMS case studied here, we confirmed the presence of a 12q13–14 amplification and showed that
CDK4 is one of the genes overexpressed in this chromosomal region. A study provided in vitro evidence for the successful pharmacologic
inhibition of CDK4/CDK6 activity in myoblasts and RMS-derived cells34; in this study, most ARMS-and ERMS-derived cell lines and tumor
samples expressed CDK4 and CDK6, and exposure of these cells to a CDK4 inhibitor caused G1 cell cycle arrest, which is closely associated
with myogenic differentiation. Given that defective cell cycle control, which leads to failure of myogenic differentiation, is one of the
notable characteristics of RMS-derived cells, it was not surprising that CDK4 inhibition with PD0332991 ultimately facilitated skeletal
muscle differentiation. This finding suggests that CDK4 inhibition is a potential therapeutic strategy for RMS. However, there is a scarcity
of data on the use of a CDK4 inhibitor in patients with RMS. Although it is therefore difficult to draw firm conclusions regarding the
potential efficacy of this inhibitor, the need for novel therapeutics arising from the dismal prognosis in refractory RMS, together with the
genetic profiling data presented here, warrant clinical trials on a CDK4 inhibitor in chemotherapy-refractory RMS patients. In agreement
with previous reports1819, we found that ALK was overexpressed in the RMS tumor in the current case. Although ALK overexpression is
frequently detected in RMS, the mechanisms underlying this phenomenon are yet to be defined. However, a high-affinity binding site for the
PAX3 and FOXO1 transcription factors in the intron of ALK has been reported to mediate high levels of ALK transcription35, and increases in
ALK copy number have also been described1718, although this did not always correlate with elevated ALK protein expression. A recent
extensive cohort study on ALK aberration in RMS17 revealed that approximately 90% of ARMS patients and 50% of ERMS patients exhibited ALK
copy number gains, whereas only 4% of RMS patients showed true amplification of ALK. In our study, ALK amplification was not observed,
although ALK was overexpressed. The results of our study indicate that the overexpression of wild-type ALK alone may not be sufficient to
drive tumor growth and that ALK may therefore not be an effective drug target in RMS. Currently, clinical trial NCT # 01121588
(clinicaltrials.gov) on crizotinib therapy for ALK-positive solid tumor types is ongoing. Since our study is limited to one case only,
further studies are required to elucidate the antitumor efficacy of crizotinib and the CDK4 inhibitor in sarcomas in the context of clinical
trials. In summary, our study revealed that there was little genetic heterogeneity between primary and metastatic RMS cells and suggested
that malignant cells from body fluid can be used for genomic profiling of RMS patients. The RMS tumor in this case overexpressed ALK, but
this was not associated with the amplification or translocation of this gene. Prominent amplification of the 12q13–14 region was also
observed, and we propose that CDK4, located in 12q14, is a potential target for drugs in RMS. This study was approved by the SMC
Institutional Review Board and was conducted in accordance with the 1996 Declaration of Helsinki. Written informed consent was obtained from
the patient before genomic analyses were performed for research purposes. Five-micrometer-thick tissue sections were deparaffinized in
xylene, rehydrated, and heated to 100°C in citrate buffer (pH 6.0) for 5 min for non-enzymatic antigen retrieval. The sections were
incubated with monoclonal mouse anti-human desmin antibodies (1:100 dilution; RLM30; Novocastra, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK) for 60 min at room
temperature, followed by incubation with a 1:1000 dilution of biotinylated goat anti-mouse IgG (Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, CA, USA)
for 1 h at room temperature. The sections were stained with diaminobenzidine chromogen for 5–10 min and were then counterstained with
hematoxylin for 5 min. FISH was performed using commercially available ALK (Vysis LSI ALK Dual Color, Break Apart Rearrangement Probe;
Abbott Molecular, Abbott Park, IL) and FKHR (Vysis LSI FKHR Dual Color, Break Apart Rearrangement Probe; Abbott Molecular) probes according
to the manufacturer's instructions. One hundred cells were analyzed in each case. FISH was considered positive when more than 15% of the
tumor cells showed distinct red and green signals and/or a single red (residual 3′) signal; alternatively, the specimen was classified as
FISH negative. Excised tumor tissues were divided into 2 pieces. One piece was embedded in optimal cutting temperature compound and used to
prepare hematoxylin and eosin-stained frozen section slides. The other pieces of tissue were snap frozen in liquid nitrogen and stored at
−80°C. The tumor cell populations on the frozen section slide accounted for more than 60% of the total cell population; less than 10% were
necrotic. Genomic DNA was extracted from snap frozen tissue and peripheral blood using the QIAmp DNA Mini kit (Qiagen GmbH, Hilden Germany)
according to the manufacturer's instructions. DNA integrity was evaluated using 1% agarose gel electrophoresis. Tumor and normal DNA
concentrations were measured using PicoGreen dsDNA Quantitation Reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA). A minimum DNA concentration of 20 ng/μl
was required for aCGH. Genomic DNA was extracted from the blood and primary tumor (abdomen) of the RMS patient. Exon capture was performed
using Agilent SureSelectXT Human All Exon (50 M), which includes all exons annotated in the consensus CDS (CCDS) database, as well as 10 bp
of flanking sequence for each targeted region (http://www.genomics.agilent.com). The captured DNA fragments were sequenced with Illumine
Hiseq2000, generating 100 bp × 2 paired-end reads. The clean reads were aligned against the human reference genome (hg19/GRCh37) using the
Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (BWA). The alignment results were further processed sequentially using local realignment, duplicate read marking,
and base quality recalibration by using the Picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net) and GATK (http://www.broadinstitute.org/gatk/) pipeline
software. Variant and germline calling were performed using JointSNVMix (http://code.google.com/p/joint-snv-mix/), and the somatic mutations
observed in tumor tissue were annotated using ANNOVAR (http://www.openbioinformatics.org/annovar/). In the first quality control step,
Cutadapt v.1.0 removed adapter sequences from the input fastq sequence. After adapter trimming, Fastx v.0.0.13 filtered low-quality reads,
such that base quality was more than 20 and the proportion of good-quality bases in each read was more than 50%. Finally, cmpFastq
classified paired-end reads and single-end reads. Classified fastq sequences were aligned to the human reference sequence (hg19) using the
Burrow-Wheeler Aligner v.0.5.9 (BWA) , and were then merged to a BAM file. Subsequently, sequential cleanup processes, consisting of the
addition or replacement of read groups, marking and removing duplicates, and fixing mate information were performed using Picard Tools
v.1.69 . The cleaned bam file was then sorted using Samtools v.0.1.18 and the local realignment and base quality score recalibration were
processed using the Genome Analysis Toolkit v.1.6–7 (GATK) . Somatic mutations were designated into 3 categories: single nucleotide
polymorphisms (SNPs), indels, and CNVs. We began by applying the joint_snv_mix_one model in JointSNVMix v.0.7.5 in order to find point
mutations, and used Annovar , Mutation Assessor , and SIFT for annotation. Annovar performed filter-based annotation indicating mutations
that are present in 1000 genome projects or dbSNP (snp135). It also performed gene-based annotation using Mutation Assessor and SIFT to
identify whether protein-coding changes caused by SNPs or CNVs are deleterious. We selected genes that were annotated as “medium or high
functional impact” by Mutation Assessor and were predicted as “damaging” by SIFT. Indels were detected by the SomaticIndelDetector in GATK,
following which Annovar gene-based annotation was used to describe the functional impact of somatic indels. CNVs were detected using
ExomeCNV (R package) from the coverage file prepared using DepthOfCoverage in GATK. We used default parameters, except for the
aforementioned software. Genomic DNA was extracted from the cells cultured from the primary tumor of the patient. aCGH was performed using
the Agilent Human Genome CGH Microarray Kit 8 × 60 K, which contains approximately 45,000 probes. nCounter assays were performed in
duplicate, according to the manufacturer's instructions (NanoString Technologies, Inc, Seattle, WA, USA). Briefly, 500 ng of total RNA was
hybridized to nCounter probe sets for 16 h at 65°C. Samples were processed using an automated nCounter Sample Prep Station (NanoString
Technologies, Inc). Cartridges containing immobilized and aligned reporter complexes were subsequently imaged on the nCounter Digital
Analyzer (NanoString Technologies, Inc), set at 1155 fields of view. Reporter counts were collected using the nSolver analysis software
version 1 in NanoString, normalized, and analyzed as described below. A detailed description of the assay is given elsewhere36. J.L. and
Y.C. conceived the idea and designed the study. S.P. and J.L. collected and analyzed data, and S.P. and I.D. wrote the main manuscript text.
Y.C., I.D. and M.M. prepared Figures 2 and 3. J.J., K.R., S.A., L.M., S.K., K.K., M.M., J.K., E.O. and Y.K. contributed by providing study
material. All authors reviewed the manuscript. Supplementary Information This work was supported by a grant from the Korea Healthcare
Technology R&D project, Ministry for Health & Welfare Affairs, Republic of Korea (A092255). (A). Abdominal wall mass (yellow) and pancreas
mass (green) at the time of initial diagnosis. (B). After 1st-line chemotherapy, the disease virtually disappeared. (C). A massive amount of
left pleural effusion was seen after salvage chemotherapy. (A). aCGH of the primary tumor: the 12q13.3–q14.1 region demonstrated the highest
level of chromosomal amplification. (B-1). CDK4 immunohistochemistry of the primary tumor confirmed overexpression of CDK4 protein; CDK4 is
located within the 12q13.3-q14.1 region. (B-2). Negative control for CDK4 immunohistochemistry. (A). ALK immunohistochemistry (2A-1,
positive in the present case, 2A-2, negative control) and ALK FISH (2A-3) of the primary tumor: ALK protein overexpression was confirmed,
but ALK rearrangement was not detected. (B). ALK RNA expression in tumor cells from pleural metastasis (sample#2): ALK RNA overexpression
was detected. The ALK expression has been normalized to that of 4 housekeeping genes. Lung cancer cell lines (NCIH3122, NCIH2228, and A549)
were used as controls for ALK RNA expression and EML-ALK fusion detection. (C). ALK fusion assay using NanoString: no EML4-ALK RNA was
detected in the sarcoma specimen. Ch, chromosome; ref, reference; var, variant; vac, variant allele count; tr, total read; vrf, variant read
frequency; D, damaging; T, tolerated; SIFT, Sorting Tolerant From Intolerant (Nucleic Acids Res 2003;31:3812). Nos. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8,
11, and 21: somatic mutations that were validated by Sanger sequencing (Table 2). No. not mentioned above: somatic mutations that were not
validated by Sanger sequencing. Bold: genes that were detected also in exome copy number variation (CNV).
