Although invasive thymoma commonly infiltrates neighbouring mediastinal structures, its extension into the superior vena cava (SVC) and
consequent SVC occlusion are rare. In such cases, the urgent removal of the thymoma and radical resection of the infiltrated SVC
representreasonable options, since induction therapy is time-consuming and useless for symptom resolution. A case of invasive thymoma
extending into the SVC and right atrium (RA) with SVC syndrome is reported. The patient underwent a combined resection of the invasive tumor
and SVC under cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB), and the SVC and bilateral brachiocephalic vein (BCV) were reconstructed with an autologous
pericardial ‘Y’ conduit. After 40 months of follow-up, the patient showed a patent graft and no tumor recurrence. Although invasive thymoma
commonly infiltrates neighbouring mediastinal structures, its extension into the superior vena cava (SVC) and consequent SVC occlusion are
rare. In such cases, the urgent removal of the thymoma and radical resection of the infiltrated SVC representreasonable options, since
induction therapy is time-consuming and useless for symptom resolution. A case of invasive thymoma extending into the SVC and right atrium
(RA) with SVC syndrome is reported. A 75-year-old male patient presented to the Department of Cardio-Thoracic Surgery (Wuhan General
Hospital of Guangzhou Military Command, Hubei, China)with signs and symptoms of SVC syndrome. During examination, an important jugular vein
engorgement, edema of the face, neck, and anterior chest wall, and shortness of breath were found. A chest computed tomographic (CT) scan
revealed a mass in the middle mediastinum, extending to the SVC and RA (Figure 1). Transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) examination
demonstrated a hyperechogenic softtissue density mass in the RA, and no blood flow signal was found in the SVC or anonymous veins. Computed
tomographicscan revealed a large, well-defined, round softtissue density mass in the left brachiocephalic vein, superior vena cava, and
right atrium. Due to its extensive nature and the potential risks associated with the location of the mass, the decision was made to take
the patient to the operating room immediately without any preoperative chemotherapy or radiation therapy, to avoid neoplastic embolization
and to resolve the SVC syndrome. The patient underwent median sternotomy, and it was observed that the thymoma had invaded the SVC and
anonymous veins. A patch of pericardium was excised laterally to the left and right phrenic nerves. A radical thymectomy was performed.
Cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) was instituted after cannulation of the inferior vena cava (IVC) and the ascending aorta. The RA was then
opened. A large mass (measuring 8 cm × 6 cm × 5 cm) was seen in the RA with its tail in the atrial septum (Figure 2). The intracardiac
portion of the mass was resected. The SVC and brachiocephalic vein (BCV) were then opened. The tumor was firmly adherent to the vascular
wall. The involved parts of the SVC and left BCV were removed. The pericardium was divided into a large square and a relatively smaller
rectangle. The former was sutured to a 10 cm long conduit with 2 cm in diameter. The latter was sutured into a shorter conduit and
anastomosed to the 10 cm conduit in an end-to-side way to complete the construction of the autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit. The bilateral
BCV was then bypassed by anastomosing the autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit to the right atrial appendage. The left BCV was first cross-
clamped and then the venousgraft anastomosis was made in an end-to-end way. The left BCV was then bypassed by anastomosing the autologous
pericardial ‘Y’ conduit to the right atrial appendage. After the left-sided venous drainage had been reestablished, the right BCV was
anastomosed to an autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit in the same way (Figure 3). All the anastomoses were made with continuous 5–0
prolenesutures (Ethicon, Inc, Somerville, NJ, USA). The patient was weaned off the CPB uneventfully. A large mass measuring
8 cm × 6 cm × 5 cm in the right atrium. The superior vena cava and bilateral brachiocephalic vein were reconstructed with an autologous
pericardial ‘Y’ conduit. Pathologic examination revealed a type B3 thymoma (Figure 4), which had directly invaded the left BCV, the SVC, and
the RA. The patient was discharged home on postoperative day 14 without symptoms, and further management through outpatient chemotherapy was
pursued. After the operation, the patient was anticoagulated with warfarin for 3 months, and then took aspirin instead of warfarin for
anticoagulation. To date, 40 months after the surgical procedure, the patient is still alive and free of disease. In July 2013, a review of
the chest CT showed that the autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit was patent, and the patient was free from any signs and symptoms indicative
of SVC syndrome. Pathologic examination revealed a type B3 thymoma. Invasive thymomas frequently invade neighbouring organs including the
lung, heart, and large vessels, and in rare cases cause SVC syndrome. Invasive thymoma extending into the SVC and RA is rare. The results of
surgical treatment for invasive thymoma extending into the SVC and RA have been reported by various institutions . The goal of surgery in
such cases is to restore the blood flow from the BCV to the RA and to completely resect the tumor. This can be performed either by cleaning
the SVC and RA from the tumor bulk or through extra-anatomical grafts. Both biologic and synthetic materials, such as the autologous vein,
autologousor bovine pericardium, and expanded polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE) have been used in the venous system. However, the problem of
flexion and kinking are prominent with long conduits. We used an autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit for reconstruction of the BCV and SVC.
After 40 months of follow-up, the patient showed a patent graft. Although chemotherapy, radiation therapy, or both are effective, complete
en bloc resection is indispensable for improving the outcome of patients. Combined venous and atrial wall resections are usually necessary
because of the invasive growth pattern of this tumor. We report a rare case with invasive thymoma to the SVC and RA that underwent en bloc
excision of the tumor with SVC being bypassed using an autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit with an excellent 40 months of patency. Use of an
autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit in the venous system is most probably safe and at times may even be lifesaving. Reconstruction of the
blood flow from the BCV to the RA, and complete en bloc resection obviously improve the outcome of these patients who suffer from invasive
thymoma extending into the SVC and RA. Here, we report a rare case of a patient with invasive thymoma to the SVC and RA that underwent en
bloc excision of the tumor with SVC being bypassed using an autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit with an excellent 40 months of patency. Use
of an autologous pericardial ‘Y’ conduit in the venous system is most probably safe and at times may even be lifesaving. Reconstruction of
the blood flow from the BCV to the RA and complete en bloc resection obviously improve the outcome of patients who suffer from invasive
thymoma extending into the SVC and RA. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. BCV: Brachiocephalic
vein; CPB: Cardiopulmonary bypass; CT: Computed tomographic; IVC: Inferior vena cava; RA: Right atrium; SVC: Superior vena cava; TTE:
Transthoracic echocardiography. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YQD and JSL wrote the main manuscript, GLY, XMZ
and JHX performed the operation, SBZ and TJ revised the manuscript for important intellectual content, and all authors gave final approval
for the version to be submitted for publication. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
