Chylothorax is a rare complication of neck dissection, and bilateral chylothorax is even rarer. However, both are potentially serious and
sometimes life-threatening, especially those that are associated with left neck dissection for head and neck neoplasms. We report one case
of bilateral chylothorax following left supraclavicular dissection for breast cancer. This case was treated successfully with a new
conservative management approach. Isolated regional nodal recurrences after curative treatment of breast cancer are rare, especially in
supraclavicular nodes. Clinical outcomes are similar for patients with ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node metastases at first
presentation and for patients with recurrent ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node metastases. Per the last accepted staging system for
breast cancer, ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node metastases is classified as regional disease (stage IIIC); but the survival rate was
lower in patients with ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node metastases than in patients with lower axillary or subclavian nodal
involvement. Nevertheless, patients with ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node metastases who were treated with surgery or radiotherapy and
achieved good neck control were reported to achieve better survival than those for whom surgical treatment or irradiation did not result in
good local control. Thus, neck dissection is sometimes necessary for breast cancer patients with ipsilateral supraclavicular lymph node
metastases. Chylous leakage is a common complication following neck dissection. However, postoperative chylothorax is uncommon, and
bilateral chylothorax is even rarer. This condition may cause severe respiratory, metabolic, and immunologic dysfunctions and can even be
fatal. Currently, there are no reported cases of bilateral chylothorax following neck dissection for breast cancer in the literature.
Herein, we report a case of bilateral chylothorax following left supraclavicular dissection for breast cancer, which was treated
successfully using a novel conservative management strategy. A 43-year-old woman presented with a 3-year history of a left-sided palpable
breast mass. Physical examination revealed a 15 cm × 15 cm lump, fixed, invading the skin, accompanied with left supraclavicular
lymphadenectasis. Results of chest X-ray, ventral ultrasonography, radioisotope bony scanning, and nuclear magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
of the head did not show distant metastasis. The pathologic diagnosis via core biopsy was adenocarcinoma, and clinical stage was IIIC
(T4N3M0). The patient underwent 4 cycles of neoadjuvant chemotherapy, and therefore the mass was reduced to 25% of its original size
(partial response). Radical mastectomy and left supraclavicular lymph node dissection were then performed. Chylous fluid output in the neck
drainage tube was approximately 500 mL on the first day postoperation, but increased to 1,600 mL on the second day. An emergency operation
was performed to ligate the fistula, and the leakage was ceased. Nevertheless, on the fourth day postoperation, the patient experienced
dyspnea and chest discomfort. Physical examination revealed no neck edema or swelling, but bilateral breath sounds were diminished on
auscultation. Chest X-ray, which did not show obvious abnormalities preoperatively (Figure 1A), revealed medium, bilateral pleural effusions
(Figure 1B). Diagnostic thoracentesis was performed and milky fluid was aspirated from both sides. Biochemical analysis confirmed bilateral
chylothorax. We implemented a conservative management approach, which involved insertion of bilateral pigtail catheters into the thoracic
cavity, total parenteral nutrition with total enteric rest, and administration of somatostatin (250 µg/h) by continuous intravenous drip on
the basis of the review of literature. On the 12th day postoperation, the patient achieved complete remission of dyspnea and chest
discomfort; 970 mL of chyle-like liquid was aspirated intermittently from bilateral pleural spaces. A repeated chest X-ray showed no
evidence of residual effusions (Figure 1C). Thus, the drainage tubes were removed, and the patient was started on a low fat and protein diet
for 3 days before resuming a regular diet. On the 15th day post-operation, the patient had recovered completely. A, no obvious abnormalities
are present on the preoperative chest X-ray. B, on the fourth day postoperation, chest X-ray shows medium, bilateral pleural effusions,
accompanied with dyspnea and chest discomfort. Bilateral breath sounds were diminished upon auscultation. C, after conservative management,
a repeated chest X-ray shows no evidence of residual effusions. These results suggest that conservative treatment of chylous leakage is
effective. Bilateral chylothorax is a rare complication that results from injury to the thoracic duct or one of its branches following neck
dissection. We searched the English-language literature through PubMed and found 26 cases of bilateral chylothorax reported between 1951 and
2011. We analyzed the primary diseases, treatment, and prognosis of bilateral chylothorax. The results showed that the majority of bilateral
chylothorax cases followed neck dissection associated with head and neck cancers, such as thyroid cancer, laryngocarcinoma, and tongue
cancer (Table 1). However, none of the reported cases described breast cancer as a cause for bilateral chylothorax. The majority of injuries
to the thoracic duct cause merely chylous leakage; chylothorax, especially bilateral, is rare. Milky fluid suggests a chylous effusion, but
the absence of a milky appearance does not preclude chylothorax, especially if the patient is fasting or on a low-fat diet. Biochemical
analysis of the fluid should be the initial diagnostic test, with a triglyceride concentration greater than 1,100 mg/L confirming the
diagnosis. When the triglyceride level is between 550 and 1,100 mg/L, a lipoprotein analysis is indicated to detect chylomicrons, whereas a
triglyceride level less than 500 mg/L has no more than a 5% chance of being chylous. Clinically, low-output chylothorax (<500 mL/day) could
be treated using a conservative approach, such as drainage and a low-fat diet. High-output chylothorax (>500 mL/day) could cause a fluid and
electrolyte imbalance and a loss of nutrients, and it can even be fatal. Thus, high-output chylothorax requires surgical intervention.
However, from the literature we reviewed, only 2 cases were treated with surgery, whereas the remaining 24 cases were treated conservatively
and recovered at length. In this case, we performed an emergency operation to ligate the fistula on the second day postoperation, when the
chylous leakage reached 1,600 mL in volume. Based on our clinical experience, postoperative adhesions develop by 3 days postoperation,
making surgical intervention for chylous leakage a challenge. Although the surgery ceased the neck leakage, bilateral chylothorax was
confirmed 4 days after operation. To treat this condition, we prefer to follow a conservative management plan rather than perform additional
surgeries, unless the conservative approach is insufficient. Here, we chose nonsurgical treatments for the patient, including drainage,
total parenteral nutrition with total enteric rest, continuous intravenous infusion of somatostatin (250 µg/h), and intermittent
thoracocentesis for aspirating effusion, and the patient was cured. Our report also supports that the use of somatostatin may be a new
conservative therapeutic approach. The exact mechanism of action of this neurohormonal and panacrine agent remains unknown. It may reduce
gastrointestinal chyle production by decreasing splanchnic blood flow and decreasing gastric, biliary, pancreatic, and intestinal
secretions. Taken together, our results and the results described in the previous literature suggest that conservative management is an
effective treatment for bilateral chylothorax following neck dissection. Our report shows that the use of somatostatin may be a new
conservative therapeutic approach.
