amnionless body condition score complete blood count cubilin intrinsic factor Imerslund‐Gräsbeck syndrome reference interval Cobalamin is an
essential cofactor for enzyme systems, and adequate amounts are required for nucleic acid synthesis and hematopoiesis.1 The 2 most important
reactions involving cobalamin are the conversion of methylmalonyl‐coenzyme A to succinyl‐coenzyme A and the remethylation of homocysteine.
Cobalamin deficiency leads to decreased activity of these enzyme systems, resulting in increased concentrations of urinary methylmalonic
acid and total plasma homocysteine. Dogs are unable to synthesize cobalamin and rely on uptake of dietary cobalamin, which is bound in the
small intestine to the secreted protein, intrinsic factor (IF). The cobalamin‐IF complex binds to the membrane‐bound cubam receptor, which
mediates endocytosis. Cubam consists of 2 separate protein subunits, amnionless (AMN) and cubilin (CUBN).1 In infants, mutations in either
the AMN or CUBN genes lead to Imerslund‐Gräsbeck syndrome (IGS).2 This is a rare autosomal recessive disorder which, if left untreated,
results in failure to thrive, megaloblastic anemia, proteinuria, and neurological damage.2 In dogs, primary cobalamin malabsorption, which
is analogous to IGS in humans, has been reported in young Australian Shepherds,3 a Beagle,4 Border Collies,5, 6, 7 and Giant Schnauzers.8
The genetic defects in affected Border Collies and Beagles recently have been identified as 2 independent mutations in the CUBN gene.9, 10
Similar to human patients, dogs typically present at a young age with inappetence, weakness, and failure to thrive.4, 5, 6, 8, 11 Although
liver disease is recognized in cobalamin‐deficient farm animals, especially lambs,12, 13 it has not been reported in dogs suffering from
hereditary cobalamin malabsorption. The aim of the present case series was to describe the clinical and histopathologic findings of liver
disease in 2 client‐owned beagles suffering from genetically confirmed cobalamin malabsorption. Analogous to the recent identification of
the causative mutation in cobalamin‐deficient border collies,9 a whole genome resequencing approach was used in the described beagles.
Stored blood samples (EDTA) from case 1 and a paraffin‐embedded formalin‐fixed liver sample from case 2 were used to isolate genomic DNA.
Both cases were retrospectively confirmed to carry the CUBN:c.786delC mutation in a homozygous state using the recently described genotyping
method.10 Histopathology samples were examined and graded by a board‐certified pathologist (MR).1 A 12‐month‐old, intact, female Beagle was
referred for anorexia and cachexia. Inappetence was first noted when the dog was 5 months old. A biochemistry profile performed by the
referring veterinarian disclosed mildly increased alanine aminotransferase activity (ALT 185 IU/L; reference interval , 8–75 IU/L). Serum
thyroxine, canine thyroid‐stimulating hormone, and canine trypsin‐like immunoreactivity (cTLI) concentrations were within reference
intervals. One week before presentation, a computerized tomography (CT) scan of the brain (to rule out hydrocephalus) and gastroduodenoscopy
were performed at a private clinic. The CT scan images, and gastric and duodenal biopsies were considered unremarkable by a board‐certified
radiologist and a board‐certified pathologist (MR), respectively. On presentation, the dog weighed 4.0 kg with a body condition score (BCS)
of 2/9. The dog seemed lethargic, but a neurologic examination was unremarkable. A complete blood count (CBC) and serum biochemistry profile
identified marked neutropenia (1,680/μL; RI, 2,496–7,437/μL), mild hyperbilirubinemia (0.37 mg/dL; RI, 0–0.20 mg/dL), moderately decreased
urea nitrogen concentration (BUN, 3.9 mg/dL; RI, 10.6–26.3 mg/dL), mild hypoproteinemia (4.7 g/dL; RI, 5.6–7.1 g/dL), and mildly increased
serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP, 199 IU/L; RI, 20–98 IU/L). Results of an ammonia tolerance test and of coagulation times (PT, aPTT,
thrombin time) were within reference intervals. Urinalysis disclosed mild proteinuria (urine protein‐to‐creatinine ratio , 0.86; RI, 0–0.3).
Glucocorticoid deficiency was ruled out by appropriate results of an ACTH stimulation test. Thoracic radiographs and abdominal ultrasound
examination were unremarkable with the exception of mild peritoneal effusion. Analysis of abdominal fluid was consistent with a pure
transudate (total protein, <1.0 g/dL; nucleated cell count, 50/μL). Histopathologic examination of ultrasound‐guided liver biopsy samples
(16 G) disclosed multifocal groups of markedly swollen hepatocytes with either foamy cytoplasm and glossy‐appearing nuclei or small clearly
demarcated vacuoles (Fig 1). Small lipofuscin deposits were visible in some hepatocytes and Kupffer cells. Multifocal areas of single‐cell
necrosis and mild periportal lymphoplasmacytic infiltration were present. A modified Gömöri2 stain identified a fine panlobular sinusoidal
reticulin fiber network (Fig 2). The interpretation was marked hepatocellular degeneration with secondary mild lymphoplasmacytic hepatitis.
Photomicrograph of hematoxylin‐eosin–stained liver sections of a Beagle with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption (Case 1) showing markedly
swollen hepatocytes with foamy cytoplasm (glycogen storage, asterisks); the nuclei of the hepatocytes are often round and swollen with a
glossy appearance secondary to glycogen deposition (slender arrow). Fine granular pigment (lipofuscin, broad open arrows) is visible in a
few hepatocytes. Photomicrograph of a Gömöri‐silver–stained liver section of a dog with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption (Case 1) showing
increased numbers of reticulin fibers around the central vein (broad arrow), radiating into the sinusoids of the liver lobules. Because
similar clinical signs were described previously in a cobalamin‐deficient Beagle,4 serum was submitted for cobalamin and folate
concentrations, identifying a cobalamin concentration below the measurement limit (<150 ng/L; RI, 261–1,001 ng/L). The subsequent finding of
marked methylmalonic aciduria (5,460 mmol/mol creatinine; RI, <2 mmol/mol) and hyperhomocysteinemia (69.9 μmol/L; RI, 4.3–18.4 μmol/L) was
supportive of a cobalamin‐depleted state.7 The dog was treated for cobalamin deficiency with cyanocobalamin3 (50 μg/kg IM q7d) and for the
concurrent liver disease with prednisolone4 (5 mg [1.25 mg/kg] PO q24h) and S‐adenosylmethionine5 (90 mg PO q24h) and discharged from the
hospital. The dog's clinical condition and appetite improved rapidly. On day 32, the dog weighed 5.3 kg (weight gain of 1.3 kg), was alert
and active. Serum cobalamin concentration (4 days postinjection) was within reference intervals (591 ng/L; RI, 261–1,001 ng/L). On day 134,
the dog weighed 6.5 kg (weight gain of 2.5 kg). A CBC and serum biochemistry profile disclosed mildly decreased BUN concentration
(6.7 mg/dL; RI, 10.6–26.3 mg/dL) and mildly increased ALT (141 IU/L; RI, 20–93 IU/L). The dosage of prednisolone was tapered over 1 week and
discontinued. Weekly cobalamin injections were continued. Thirty‐six months after initial presentation, the owner requested re‐evaluation.
At this time, the dog weighed 7.65 kg with a BCS of 5/9 and physical examination was unremarkable. A serum biochemistry profile, pre‐ and
postprandial bile acid concentrations, ammonia tolerance testing, and a coagulation profile were within reference intervals. Urinalysis
disclosed mild proteinuria (UPC, 0.51; RI, 0–0.3). On abdominal radiographs and ultrasound examination, the liver appeared small but
otherwise unremarkable. Histopathologic evaluation of ultrasound‐guided liver biopsy samples (16 G) identified mild fibrocytic
proliferations and interlobular radiating reticulin fibers. The sinusoidal reticulin fiber network was no longer apparent (Fig 3). Small
foci of hepatocytes displayed mild foamy cytoplasmic vacuolation (Fig 4). The interpretation was mild hepatic fibrosis. Serum cobalamin
(350 ng/L; RI, 261–1,001 ng/L) and plasma homocysteine (6 μmol/L; RI, 4.3–18.4 μmol/L) levels were within reference intervals, and urine
methylmalonic acid was undetectable. Weekly cobalamin supplementation (50 μg/kg IM) was continued. The owner reported the dog to be in good
health at the time of writing (5.5 years after initial presentation). Photomicrograph of a silver‐stained hepatic section of a Beagle (Case
1) with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption 1 year after diagnosis and treatment showing mildly increased interlobular reticulin fibers, but
markedly reduced sinusoidal fiber deposition than before treatment. Photomicrograph of a hematoxylin‐eosin–stained liver section of a Beagle
(Case 1) with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption 1 year after diagnosis and treatment showing mild proliferations of fibrocytes and
reticulin fibers radiating between some liver lobules (slender arrows). The medical records and biopsies of a full sibling of the dog
described above were examined and are described here. A 6‐month‐old, male, intact Beagle was presented to a private referral clinic for
progressive lethargy, anorexia, vomiting, and failure to gain weight. At presentation, the dog weighed 6.4 kg with a BCS of 4/9. Physical
examination disclosed marked lethargy. A CBC identified marked neutropenia (770/μL; RI, 2,496–7,437/μL). A serum biochemistry profile, bile
acid concentrations and cTLI were unremarkable. Urinalysis disclosed proteinuria (UPC, 0.59). No parasites were detected on fecal
examination. Gastroduodenoscopy did not identify any gross abnormalities. Histopathologic evaluation of endoscopic gastric and duodenal
biopsies was unremarkable with rare Helicobacter sp. organisms on the gastric mucosa. After initial treatment with amoxicillin,
metronidazole, and ranitidine, the dog's general condition and appetite improved. However, anorexia recurred on day 27 and prednisolone4
(1.5 mg/kg PO q24h) was added to the treatment regimen. The dog's appetite improved, and by day 75, prednisolone was tapered over a week and
discontinued. On day 128, the dog was presented again for anorexia and an enlarged abdomen. A CBC and biochemistry profile identified marked
neutropenia (1,120 μL; RI, 2,496–7,437/μL), macrocytosis (MCV, 78 fL; RI, 64–73 fL), mild hypoproteinemia (4.6 g/dL; RI, 5.2–8.2 g/dL), mild
hypoalbuminemia (2.0 g/dL; RI, 2.3–4.0 g/dL), moderate hypocholesterolemia (62 mg/dL; RI, 110–320 mg/dL), markedly increased ALP activity
(857 IU/L; RI, 23–212 IU/L), and markedly decreased BUN concentration (2.0 mg/dL; RI, 7.0–27.0 mg/dL). Analysis of abdominal fluid was
consistent with a pure transudate (total protein, <1.0 g/dL; nucleated cell count, 65 cells/μL). The serum cobalamin concentration was below
the detection limit (<150 ng/L; RI, 261–1,001 ng/L). However, this result was interpreted as being indicative of bacterial overgrowth or
small intestinal damage. An exploratory laparotomy identified ascites and a small liver with adequate portal vasculature. Approximately
1.5 L of peritoneal fluid was removed, and hepatic and duodenal biopsy samples were harvested. Histopathologic examination identified mild
edema and mildly increased numbers of eosinophils in the duodenal mucosa.6 A panlobular distribution of small foci of swollen hepatocytes
with either foamy cytoplasm and glossy nuclei or small clearly demarcated vacuoles was noted on hepatic sections (Fig 5). Fine lipofuscin
deposition was observed in some hepatocytes and Kupffer cells. Occasional hepatocellular necrosis and mild lymphoplasmacellular and
neutrophilic infiltration were observed. Immunohistochemistry7 identified a few sinusoidal myofibroblast–like cells expressing smooth muscle
actin (Fig 6). Gömöri staining2 disclosed mild proliferation of sinusoidal reticulin fibers (Fig 7). The interpretation was moderate liver
cell degeneration with single‐cell necrosis, mild fibrosis, and secondary mild chronic lymphoplasmacytic and neutrophilic hepatitis. Despite
continued supportive treatment, the dog's general condition deteriorated, only repeated drainage of reaccumulating ascites ameliorated
clinical signs, and it was euthanized at the owner's request on day 150. Photomicrograph of a hematoxylin‐eosin–stained liver section in a
Beagle (Case 2) with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption showing panlobular small foci of swollen hepatocytes with foamy cytoplasm (glycogen
storage, asterisks). The nuclei of the hepatocytes are often round and swollen and show a glossy appearance (glycogen deposition caused by
degeneration, slender arrows). Fine, slightly granular pigment (lipofuscin, broad open arrows) is visible in a few hepatocytes and Kupffer
cells. Photomicrograph of a liver section stained with anti–smooth‐muscle actin (SMA) antibody in a Beagle (Case 2) with hereditary
cobalamin malabsorption showing increased numbers of SMA‐positive myofibroblast‐like cells within the hepatic sinusoids. Photomicrograph of
a Gömöri‐silver–stained liver section in a Beagle (Case 2) with hereditary cobalamin malabsorption showing increased numbers of reticulin
fibers around the central veins, radiating into the hepatic sinusoids (broad arrow). We describe 2 Beagle siblings with genetically
confirmed hereditary cobalamin malabsorption that developed degenerative liver disease. Both dogs had a chronic history of lethargy,
anorexia, and failure to gain weight. Neutropenia had been noted in both dogs and, mild macrocytosis in the absence of anemia was detected
in 1 dog at some point. These are typical findings described in children with congenital cobalamin deficiency.2, 14 Neutropenia was also
reported in the only previously published case of a cobalamin‐deficient Beagle.4 Because cubilin is required for renal tubular reabsorption
of some proteins, persistent proteinuria is also a typical finding in children with IGS15 and was detected in 1 dog in this report.
Hypocobalaminemia was recognized in Case 1, and the dog experienced a full clinical recovery despite mild residual hepatic lesions. In
contrast, cobalamin supplementation was not given to the other dog, in which the disorder was progressive. Degenerative hepatic disease has
not thus far been described in association with cobalamin malabsorption in dogs, although laboratory evidence of hepatic dysfunction was
evident in previously reported cases in Giant Schnauzers, a Beagle, and Border Collies.4, 6, 8, 11 The cause of hepatic dysfunction was not
further investigated, presumably because of rapid clinical response to cobalamin supplementation. It is possible that the Beagles described
in this report were affected by a hepatopathy independent of cobalamin deficiency. This, however, is unlikely based on sustained
clinicopathologic and histologic improvement after cobalamin supplementation and withdrawal of other medications in Case 1 despite the
negative prognostic factor of ascites,16 and the fact that Beagles are not known to suffer from juvenile chronic liver disease. Hepatic
disease in these dogs may have been caused by hyperhomocysteinemia, which develops because cobalamin is a coenzyme in the remethylation of
homocysteine to methionine. Homocysteine has been suggested to cause hepatic damage in mice by oxidative stress, endoplasmatic reticulum
stress, and activation of proinflammatory factors.17, 18 Furthermore, hyperhomocysteinemia promotes hepatic inflammation and fibrosis in
rats.19 Stellate cells produce collagen types I, III, and IV, which are deposited as a delicate reticulin network in the space of Disse
during chronic hepatic injury.20 These cells eventually transform into smooth muscle actin–expressing myofibroblast‐like cells,20 which may
explain the progression of liver pathology in Case 1. In both cases, minimal inflammation was apparent in biopsy specimens. This finding may
also be linked to hyperhomocysteinemia secondary to cobalamin deficiency, because it has been shown experimentally that hyperhomocysteinemia
induces expression and synthesis of monocyte chemoattractant protein‐1 and other mediators of inflammation such as nuclear factor kappa B,
interleukin (IL)‐1b, IL‐6, and IL‐8 in liver tissue homogenates, suggesting that homocysteine may contribute to chronic inflammation in the
liver.17, 21 Degenerative liver disease is well described in lambs and goats with decreased cobalt intake and hypocobalaminemia.12, 13, 22
Features of ovine white liver disease are fatty changes, hepatocellular degeneration around central veins, and lipofuscin accumulation in
hepatocytes and Kupffer cells.12, 22 Formation of lipofuscin suggests a role for lipid peroxidation, which has also been shown to be
initiated by increased concentrations of homocysteine.23 Abdominal effusion with a pure transudate and normal or mildly decreased serum
albumin concentration, observed in both dogs, suggests presinusoidal portal hypertension. This may be caused by changes in the extracellular
matrix of the space of Disse and proliferation of myofibroblast‐like cells expressing actin filaments as clearly seen in Case 2 (Fig 6). The
changes may convert hepatic sinusoids from fenestrated channels to those of higher resistance with limited solute exchange.20 Treatment with
corticosteroids in Case 1 was prescribed because of the mild inflammatory infiltrate in the liver biopsies. At this time, a possible link
between hepatic pathology and cobalamin deficiency was not recognized. In retrospect, treatment with corticosteroids may have been
unnecessary, but additional cases are needed to better characterize the prognosis and ideal treatment recommendations for this condition. In
conclusion, we describe the clinical findings in Beagle siblings with genetically confirmed cobalamin malabsorption that developed extensive
degenerative liver disease. Clinicopathologic findings included transient macrocytosis, neutropenia, and evidence of liver dysfunction.
Clinical signs and hepatic lesions improved with cobalamin supplementation in the treated Beagle. Clinicians should consider hereditary
cobalamin malabsorption as a differential diagnosis in young dogs with failure to thrive, and evidence of liver disease. This study was not
supported by a grant or otherwise. Conflict of Interest Declaration: Authors disclose no conflict of interest. Rothuizen J, Bunch SE,
Charles JA, Cullen JM, Desmet VJ, Szatmari V, et al. Standards for Clinical and Histological Diagnosis of Canine and Feline Liver Diseases
(WSAVA). Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier Saunders; 2006 Modified Gömöri staining: Silver staining using routine protocol Vitamin B 12 Amino;
Amino AG, Neuenhof, Switzerland Prednisolone 5 mg; Streuli Pharma AG, Uznach, Switzerland Denosyl 90 mg; Nutramax Laboratories Inc,
Edgewood, MD Day MJ, Bilzer T, Mansell J, Wilcock B, Hall EJ, Jergens A, et al. Histopathological standards for the diagnosis of
gastrointestinal inflammation in endoscopic biopsy samples from the dog and cat: a report from the World Small Animal Veterinary Association
Gastrointestinal Standardization Group. World Small Animal Veterinary Association Gastrointestinal Standardization Group. J Comp Pathol
2008;138(Suppl 1):S1‐43 Immunohistochemistry: using a monoclonal mouse anti–smooth‐muscle actin antibody (Dako N1584) at room temperature
for 30 min without pretreatment. A peroxidase/AEC labeled secondary anti‐mouse antibody (detection kit from Dako, K 5003) was used. Dako
Schweiz AG; Baar, Switzerland.
