POEMS syndrome is a unique clinical entity, the diagnosis of which is made when polyneuropathy and monoclonal gammopathy occur together,
associated with other changes such as organomegaly, endocrinopathy, skin changes and papilledema. Cutaneous manifestations are
heterogeneous, with diffuse cutaneous hyperpigmentation, hemangiomas and hypertrichosis occurring more frequently. We report the case of a
65- year-old female patient with this syndrome, diagnosed after 15 years of disabling peripheral neuropathy. A síndrome de POEMS é uma
entidade clínica única cujo diagnóstico é colocado quando existe polineuropatia e gamapatia monoclonal associada a outras alterações tais
como organomegalia, endocrinopatia, alterações cutâneas e papiledema. As manifestações cutâneas são heterogéneas, sendo as mais frequentes a
hiperpigmentação cutânea difusa, os hemangiomas e a hipertricose. Relata-se o caso de uma doente de 65 anos com essa síndrome diagnosticada
após 15 anos de neuropatia periférica. Woman, 65-year-old, with sensory-motor polyneuropathy for 15 years, worsening in the previous 6
months. The patient had diffuse hyperpigmentation, dry skin and hemangiomas (Figures 1 and 2). She reported hypertrichosis, edema of the
legs, facial lipoatrophy, leukonychia and weight loss (Figures 2 and 3). Analytically, she presented polyglobulia, thrombocytosis,
hypotestosteronemia, hyperalbuminemia and elevation of IgG in the liquor. The immunochemical study emphasized IgG monoclonal gammopathy of
lambda chains. Cutaneous hyperpigmentation, cutaneous xerosis and angiomas Facial lipoatrophy and angioma Proximal leukonychia on the hands
Investigations showed small adenopathies, cardiomegaly, hepatosplenomegaly, generalized edema and extensive lytic lesion of L5. A biopsy of
this lesion showed a lytic proliferation of plasma cells, CD138 +, К chains - chains λ +. The myelogram showed hypercellularity and
eosinophilia. The electromyogram showed slowing of motor and sensory nerve conduction of several nerves. An excision of the right breast
angioma was performed and was compatible with capillary hemangioma. The patient has begun treatment with dexamethasone, radiotherapy,
bortezomib and is waiting for a bone marrow transplant. POEMS Syndrome or Crow-Fukase Syndrome, Takatsuki Myeloma Syndrome, Osteoclerotic
Myeloma Syndrome. In 1980, Bardwick invented the acronym for POEMS syndrome: polyneuropathy, organomegaly, endocrinopathy, M protein and
skin changes.1,2,3 No single criterion forms the basis for diagnosis of this entity. The diagnosis is made when polyneuropathy and
monoclonal gammopathy (major criteria) are present, associated with other criteria (minor criteria).4 The syndrome is more common in males
in their 50s and 60s and in Japanese people.1,3,5,6 Although the etiopathogenesis remains unknown, it appears to be associated with Herpes
Virus HHV8 and an increased production of cytokines (IL1ß, IL6, TNF-α and VEGF), leading to the production of plasmocytes.3,4,6 The
gammopathy is IgA, and less often IgG and light chains lambda.1 The bone lesions have a mixed pattern: osteosclerotic and lytic. The
peripheral neuropathy is a bilateral sensorymotor polyneuropathy, symmetric and ascending. The disease begins with changes in the
sensitivity level of the lower limbs, then progressing to motor deficit.3 Thrombocytosis and progressive cachexia (weight loss) occur in
most patients. Endocrine disorders such as hypogonadism, hyperestrogenemia, hypothyroidism, hypoparathyroidism and diabetes may also occur.
Amenorrhoea is common in women, while men experience hypotestoteronemia, gynecomastia and impotence.1,2 . 3 Cutaneous manifestations are
numerous, heterogeneous and nonspecific,1 with diffuse cutaneous hyperpigmentation, hypertricosis and hemangiomas being the most frequent.1
Hyperpigmentation occurs in over 90% of the patients, predominantly in sun-exposed areas, with pseudosclerodermiform skin thickening.2,7
Edema of the legs occurs in 90% of cases, usually early.1,2,3,7 Hypertrichosis (trunk and face), palmoplantar hyperhidrosis, Raynaud's
phenomenon, dry skin, clubbing leukonychia are also common.1,2,3 Angiomas occur in 9-44% of cases, locating preferably in the trunk and
proximal extremities. They can be capillary, lobular, cavernous, tuberous or glomeruloid hemangiomas. None of them are pathognomonic.4,5,6,7
Glomeruloid hemangiomas are more common in Japanese patients and are violaceous or blue papules, sessile, pedunculated or cerebriform.5,6,7
Treatment may consist of radiation therapy, surgery, chemotherapy (melphalan and prednisone), bone marrow transplantation and/or other drugs
such as interferon, lenalidomib, bevacizumab, bortezomib and thalidomide.1,3,7 The median survival is 13.8 years.3 Work performed at the
Santo António dos Capuchos Hospital - Centro Hospitalar de Lisboa Central, E.P.E - Lisbon, Portugal. Financial Support: None. Conflict of
Interests: None.
