The chondroid syringoma is a rare benign tumor, also called mixed cutaneous tumor by the presence of epithelial and mesenchymal components,
consisting of sweat elements in cartilaginous, collagenous, myxoid or osseous stroma, among others. It mainly affects middle-aged men and is
characterized by asymptomatic and slowgrowing, dermal or subcutaneous nodules. The most common locations are the head and neck. It is rare
on the extremities. There are reports of malignant variants predominantly in women, located on the extremities. We report a case of a female
patient with a lesion on the toe, with excellent outcome after surgical treatment. O siringoma condroide é um tumor benigno, raro, também
chamado de tumor misto cutâneo pela presença de componentes epiteliais e mesenquimais, que consistem em elementos sudoríparos em estroma
cartilaginoso, colagênico, mixoide ou ósseo, entre outros. Acomete, principalmente, homens de meia-idade e caracteriza-se por nódulos
subcutâneos ou dérmicos, assintomáticos e com crescimento lento. As localizações preferenciais são a cabeça e o pescoço, sendo raro nas
extremidades. Existem relatos de variantes malignas, com predomínio em mulheres, localizadas nas extremidades. Relatamos um caso em paciente
do sexo feminino, com lesão em extremidade e excelente resultado após o tratamento cirúrgico. A 68-year-old white female patient complained
of an asymptomatic nodular lesion on the second left toe, with onset 7 years before and progressive increase in size since then. At physical
examination a voluminous nodular lesion was observed, with smooth erythematous surface, telangiectasias and 4cm in diameter (Figure 1).
There were no palpable swollen inguinal lymph nodes. voluminous nodular lesion with a smooth erythematous surface with telangiectasias A
lesion biopsy was performed and the histopathological examination revealed cuboidal cell erytheagglomerates with basophilic round nucleus
and eosinophilic cytoplasm adjacent to cartilaginous tissue (Figure 2). cuboidal cells agglomerates with basophilic round nucleus and
eosinophilic cytoplasm (Fig. 2, full arrow) adjacent to cartilaginous tissue (Fig. 2, empty arrow). HE 200x A radiography of the left foot
revealed increase in soft tissue without bone involvement. In face of the clinical picture the following diagnostic hypotheses were
considered: schwannoma, neurofibroma, nodular tenosynovitis, dermatofibroma and dermatofibrosarcoma protuberans. The histopathological
examination indicated it was a chondroid syringoma (CS). The lesion was completely excised, with excellent esthetic and functional results
(Figure 3). images before and after the lesion was excised The CS is a benign tumor also called mixed cutaneous tumor due to the presence of
epithelial and mesenchymal components.1-3 In 1961, Hirsch and Helwig were the first to use the term CS to describe the presence of sweat
gland elements in cartilaginous stroma.1-5 It is a rare tumor, with incidence between 0.01 and 0.1%.3 It affects mainly middle-aged men and
is characterized by dermal or subcutaneous nodules, asymptomatic and of slow growth. It is typically located on the head and neck, only
rarely on the extremities.1-7 There have been reports of malignant variants, predominantly in women and located on the extremities.1,3,5,8
Although our patient was female, with a lesion on the extremity, the histopathological study of the surgical biopsy confirmed its benign
nature. The neoplasm is located in the deep dermis and/or subcutaneous, forming a well defined and symmetrical tumor mass, delimited by
fibrous septa. No pleomorphism, atypical mitoses and necrosis are found. It is currently believed that it might have an eccrine or apocrine
origin, with the latter being the most common. The epithelial component has apocrine characteristics when it presents tubular and/or ductal
structures with cuboidal cells internally and myoepithelial cells externally. In some cases, apocrine decapitation, follicular and sebaceous
differentiation foci can be noted. A tumor is considered as having eccrine characteristics when epithelial stroma is composed of diminutive
glands, with a single layer of cells, or of small islands of cuboidal cells dispersed in a myxoid or chondroid stroma. However, the
differentiation between eccrine and apocrine is not always simple, either by histopathology or by immunohistochemistry. Even by electronic
microscopy this differentiation may be unclear. The mesenchymal component is composed of myxoid or densely collagenized areas. The chondroid
areas are observed in 59% of the cases. They may also present calcification foci, trabeculae and bone marrow.1,9 The treatment of choice of
CS is surgical.1-9 As it is a lobulated type of tumor, it is recommended to include normal tissue margins to ensure that the entire tumor is
removed.3 Study carried out at the Dermatology Service of the Teaching Hospital Gaffrée e Guinle, Federal University of the State of Rio de
Janeiro (Universidade Federal do Estado do Rio de Janeiro - HUGG-UNIRIO) - Rio de Janeiro (RJ), Brazil. Financial funding: None Conflict of
interest: None
