Langerhans cell histiocytosis is a rare, clinically heterogeneous desease. Since there is considerable clinical overlap among the four
described variants (Hand-Schüller-Christian, eosinophilic granuloma, Letterer-Siwe and Hashimoto-Pritzker), the concept of spectral disease
applies to this entity. The Hashimoto-Pritzker variant was first described in 1973. Characteristically, it is present at birth or during the
first days of life, impairment is limited to the skin and prognosis is favorable with spontaneous resolution. We report a newborn male
patient with Hashimoto-Pritzker disease presenting as a S100 + and CD1a + single congenital perianal lesion with rapid involution in two
months. A histiocitose de células de Langerhans é doença rara, clinicamente heterogênea. Como há considerável sobreposição clínica entre as
quatro variantes descritas (Hand-Schüller-Christian, granuloma eosinofílico, Letterer-Siwe e Hashimoto-Pritzker), o conceito de doença
espectral aplica-se a esta entidade. A variante de Hashimoto-Pritzker foi descrita em 1973. Classicamente, está presente ao nascimento ou
nos primeiros dias de vida, acomete exclusivamente a pele e o prognóstico é favorável, com regressão espontânea. Relatamos caso de paciente
recém-nascido, masculino, com doença de Hashimoto-Pritzker, que se apresenta com positividade para S100 e CD1a, observando-se lesão
congênita única perianal com involução rápida em dois meses. A 1-month-old boy, born at term after an uneventful pregnancy, with a birth
weight of 3,480g. First child of healthy and unrelated parents. At birth his mother noticed a 1 x 1.5 cm erythematous, infiltrated, perianal
plaque that rapidly progressed to ulceration (Figure 1). The patient was otherwise healthy. A second evaluation at age two and a half months
showed a complete and spontaneous resolution of the lesion (Figure 2). Serologic test for syphilis (VDRL) was negative both for the mother
and the patient. Histopathological exam revealed a dermal infiltrate with predominance of large, round histiocytic cells with dense
eosinophilic cytoplasm, with ground glass appearance, and eccentric reniform nuclei (Figure 3A). Immunohistochemical staining was positive
for S100 and CD1a (Figures 3B and 3C). Routine laboratory workup and radiographs of chest, skull, pelvis and long bones were within normal
ranges. The patient remains asymptomatic with no signs of recurrence. Erythemato us, infiltrated, perianal plaque that rapidly progressed to
ulceration A second evaluation at two and a half months of age showed a complete and spontaneous resolution of the lesion A Dermal
infiltrate with prredominance of large, round histiocytic cells with dense eosinophilic cytoplasm, with ground glass appearance, and
eccentric reniform nuclei. B and C Immunohistochemical staining was positive for S100 and CD1a Langerhans cell histiocytosis (LCH) is a rare
and clinically heterogeneous condition with monoclonal proliferation of this type of histiocyte.1-3 Four clinical subtypes, which share
significant clinical overlap, are known: Letterer-Siwe disease, Hand-Schüller-Christian disease, eosinophilic granuloma and congenital self-
healing reticulohistiocytosis (CSHRH) or Hashimoto-Pritzker disease.1,4,5 Histopathological and immunohistochemical studies are essential
for diagnosis showing a dermal infiltrate with predominance of large, round histiocytic cells with dense eosinophilic cytoplasm with
eccentric, reniform nuclei and Langerhans cells stain positive for S100 and CD1a (Figure 3A).1-8 Birbeck granules on electron microscopy are
specific for Langerhans cells.1-9 Once the diagnosis is established, the extent of the disease must be carefully evaluated. Patients with
systemic involvement may have a mortality rate as high as 20%.9 CSHRH carries a good prognosis.1,4,7 Its true incidence may be
underestimated since spontaneous resolution often occurs before assessment by a dermatologist.1,6,8 CSHRH classic features include 1)
painless papules, nodules or plaques present at birth or during the first days of life; 2) spontaneous regression in months; and 3)
proliferation of histiocytes with features of Langerhans cell.8,10 Most patients present with multiple lesions, but solitary lesions are
seen in 25% of cases and spontaneous regression takes place in two to three months.4-5 Development of lesions in adulthood, as well as
pulmonary and ocular involvement, are extremely rare.9 CSHRH may eventually show multisystem recurrence with considerable increase in
morbidity and mortality.2,3,9 Routine laboratory workup should include full blood count and ESR, electrolytes, urea, liver function tests,
C-reactive protein and radiographic study of chest, skull, pelvis and long bones.3,9 Differential diagnosis comprises vesicular and pustular
neonatal eruptions such as congenital candidiasis, herpes simplex, varicela, Listeria monocytogenes infection and neonatal
hemangiomatosis.7,8 Since the differentiation between CSHRH and other forms of LCH cannot be made solely on clinical and histopathological
grounds, patients must have a multidisciplinary follow-up since recurrence and multisystemic involvement are reported in 5-10% of all
cases.5,8 Work performed at the Hospital das Clínicas of the Federal University of Minas Gerais (HC-UFMG) - Belo Horizonte (MG), Brazil.
Financial funding: None Conflict of interest: None
