Berardinelli-Seip syndrome is a rare autosomal recessive disease characterized by inadequate metabolism and inefficient storing of lipids in
fat cells, generating accumulation of fat in organs such as the liver, spleen, pancreas, heart, arterial endothelium and skin. Classically,
patients manifest generalized lipoatrophy at birth or until 2 years of age, and in adolescence usually develop marked insulin resistance
with rapid progression to diabetes and dyslipidemia. We report the case of a 17-year-old Berardinelli-Seip syndrome patient with eruptive
xanthoma associated with severe hypertriglyceridemia. It is worth noting Eruptive xanthoma as a dermatological manifestation that is not
generally highlighted in the reports of cases of this genetic metabolic disorder. Síndrome de Berardinelli-Seip é doença genética
autossômica recessiva rara, caracterizada por ineficiência em metabolizar e estocar material lipídico adequadamente nos adipócitos, gerando
acúmulo de gordura em órgãos não habituais, como fígado, baço, pâncreas, coração, endotélio arterial e pele. Classicamente, os portadores
nascem ou manifestam lipoatrofia generalizada até os 2 anos e, geralmente na adolescência, desenvolvem marcada resistência insulínica com
rápida progressão para diabetes e dislipidemia. Relatamos um caso de portadora da síndrome de Berardinelli-Seip, de 17 anos, com xantoma
eruptivo associado à hipertrigliceridemia grave. Ressalta-se o xantoma eruptivo como manifestação dermatológica não enfatizada nos casos
relatados sobre esse distúrbio metabólico genético. A 17-year-old female patient was referred from the Endocrinology Department with
yellowish papules on her arms and legs for about a year. On examination, the patient presented acromegaloid fascies, generalized
lipoatrophy, phlebomegaly, hepatomegaly, axillary acanthosis nigricans, clitoromegaly, and yellowish coalescing and isolated papules with an
erythematous halo in the upper and lower limbs (Figure 1). A: Generalized lipoatrophy leading to an athletic appearance. B: Right elbow
showing coalescing and isolated yellow papules with erythematous halo. C: Phlebomegaly in the lower limbs From birth, she presented a total
absence of subcutaneous fat. At age 10, she had impaired glucose tolerance which, because unchecked, had developed into diabetic
ketoacidosis in under one year. Subsequently, she presented type 2 diabetes mellitus (DM) associated with dyslipidemia and hepatic
steatosis. These disorders were not responsive to the usual pharmacological doses, and required the administration of high doses of
exogenous insulin, oral hypoglycemic and hypolipidemic agents. Despite therapy, tests showed fasting glucose level of 284 mg/dl;
postprandial glucose, 423 mg/dl; total cholesterol, 579 mg/dl; and triglycerides, 3.194 mg/dl. Histopathological examination confirmed
clinical hypothesis of eruptive xanthoma (Figure 2). A: Palmar region showing yellowish papules with erythematous halo. B: Rectified and
epidermal inflammatory infiltrate composed of lymphocytes and xanthomized histiocytes in upper and middle dermis. (Hematoxylin–eosin; 40×
magnification). C: Detail of xanthomized histiocytes (hematoxylin–eosin; 400× magnification) Berardinelli-Seip syndrome (BSS) or
Berardinelli-Seip congenital lipoatrophy, is a rare autosomal recessive genetic disease, with only up to 200 reported cases to date.1,2 The
first case was reported in Brazil in 1954 by Berardinelli.3 Four years later in Norway, Seip described the cases of 3 patients. Since then,
this disease has been referred to as the Seip-Berardinelli syndrome.4,5 BSS is diagnosed in cases where 3 major criteria or 2 major criteria
and 2 or more minor criteria are met (Chart 1).6 Diagnostic criteria of BSCL Source: Khandpur S, et al. 6 IQ: intelligence quotient. The
pathogenic mechanism of SBS is related to inefficiency in metabolizing and storing lipid material and is represented by generalized
lipoatrophy, hirsutism and acanthosis nigricans.7 Classically these patients develop progressive peripheral insulin resistance, with rapid
evolution for diabetes type 2, as in our patient, whose Diabetic Ketoacidosis was manifested at 10 years old. Early development of
atherosclerosis can be observed as well as non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (often progressing to liver cirrhosis), and type V dyslipidemia
(Fredrickson classification), which is represented by increased serum chylomicrons, very low-density lipoproteins (VLDL), and triglyceride
levels.8 Our patient showed 5 major diagnostic criteria and one minor criterion (Chart 1). Eruptive xanthoma is characterized by the
appearance of yellowish papules with erythematous halo arising from the deposition of increased blood triglycerides in the skin. The papulae
are generally observed around the buttocks and extensor surfaces of the extremities. These papulae occur in BSS patients with
chylomicronemia and hypertriglyceridemia, and these could be caused by either lipase deficiency or hyperlipidemia type V.8 Furthermore, this
could lead to eruptive xanthomas, as previously shown in the case of a Brazilian BSS patient.9 Despite this condition being an expected
cutaneous manifestation in patients with severe and resistant type of dyslipidemia, the medical literature has not highlighted this aspect
of cutaneous syndrome. This may indicate that the majority of studies have been conducted in the fields of metabolism and genetics. However,
we consider these cutaneous manifestations important and assume that xanthomas are predictors of lipid dysregulation. The therapy that we
administered restricted lipid intake and increased the intake of polyunsaturated fats. We also employed medical management of dyslipidemia
associated with insulin resistance or diabetes and closely monitored the liver and cardiovascular system to prevent fatal liver and
cardiological complications.1 Work performed at the Pedro Ernesto University Hospital - Rio de Janeiro State University, Rio de Janeiro
(RJ), Brazil. Financial Support: None. Conflict of Interests: None.
