Bullous pemphigoid is an autoimmune subepidermal blistering dermatosis that is uncommon in childhood. We report a case of a female infant, 3
months old, which presented clinical and laboratory data for the confirmatory diagnosis of bullous pemphigoid. The authors used
immunohistochemical staining for collagen type IV that allowed the differentiation of bullous pemphigoid from other subepidermal bullous
diseases. Opportunely we review the clinical, immunological, therapeutic and prognostic features of this pathology in children. O penfigoide
bolhoso é uma dermatose bolhosa autoimune subepidérmica, incomum na infância. Relatamos um caso de lactente feminina, com 3 meses de idade,
que apresentou dados clínicos e laboratoriais confirmatórios para o diagnóstico de penfigoide bolhoso. Os autores utilizaram a coloração de
imuno-histoquímica para o colágeno tipo IV que permitiu a diferenciação do penfigoide bolhoso de outras buloses subepidérmicas.
Oportunamente, revisamos as características clínicas, imunológicas, terapêuticas e prognósticas da patologia na criança. Bullous pemphigoid
(BP) is an acquired disease that belongs to the group of autoimmune subepidermic bullous disorders. It features circulating autoantibodies
against distinctive skin's basal membrane antigens and adjacent mucous membrane's antigens.1-6 Its incidence increases with age, contrary to
almost all of the autoimmune disorders.1 It is uncommon for the disease to begin during childhood and even more so during infancy.1,2,7,8-12
PB has a polymorphic clinical presentation. Vesicles and blisters arise on erythematous or apparently healthy skin combined with
pruriginous, erythematous infiltrated papules and plaques with irregular borders, annular and polycyclic configurations (sometimes similar
to erythema multiforme), which may precede or coexist with blisters.1,2,4,6,11,12,13 Blisters are tight, with variable size, usually
symmetrical and ungrouped, with serous and / or hemorrhagic contents.2 They are located primarily on flexural areas of the limbs, trunk and
abdomen. Face, head and neck are often affected.1,2,6,8,11,12,13 Itching is characteristic. Nikolsky sign is negative.1 Diagnosis is based
on clinical, histopathological and immunofluorescence exams, particularly DIF (direct immunofluorescence) and salt-split skin technique,
traditionally used to differentiate BP from other immune subepidermal bullous diseases.1,2,6,11,14 The clinical, histopathological and
immunopathologic characteristics of this disease during childhood overlap with those in the adult form.5,7,8 However, some peculiarities are
present in childhood BP, such as preferential involvement of palmoplantar regions, oral and genital mucosae and face.3,4,7,8,11,13,15
Bullous pemphigoid during childhood has a benign, self-limited evolution, with good response to treatment with corticosteroids, lower
recurrence rates and better prognosis when compared to the adult form.8,13 White infant female, three months and fifteen days old, developed
multiple tight bullae five days ago, initially on palms and soles, with progressive involvement of trunk, limbs and head, accompanied by
papules and plaques associated or not to blisters. Parents were not consanguineous, denied fever or use of medications, as well as other
comorbidities. Personal and family history of atopy, other cutaneous diseases or autoimmune disorders was negative. The patient was born
vaginally, at term, without complications. Exclusively breastfed. The patient received the recommended vaccines, with the last dose about 45
days previously. Dermatological examination revealed the presence of multiple vesicles and widespread tight blisters with serous content and
in different sizes, affecting areas of normal as well as erythematous skin. She presented serohemorrhagic crusts, papules and annular
urticarial erythematous plaques, some topped by vesicles and blisters. Lesions were located predominantly in the hands, feet, scalp, limbs,
trunk and back. There were no mucosal lesions. Nikolsky sign was negative (Figures 1 to 6). Complete blood count showed mild anemia
(hemoglobin: 10.8 g / dL), eosinophilia (2,300 eosinophils/mm3 or 26% of total leukocytes) and thrombocytosis (585,000 platelets).
Histopathology showed spongiotic dermatitis with subepidermal bullae rich in neutrophils and eosinophils. DIF detected the presence of
linear IgG and C3 deposits along the subepidermal basal membrane zone. Immunohistochemical staining for type IV collagen was positive at the
base of the blister, demonstrating that cleaving occurred above the lamina densa. Saltsplit skin technique and IIFs (indirect
immunofluorescence) could not be performed. (Figures 7 to 10) Presence of multiple tight, widespread vesicles in areas of normal and
erythematous skin Detail of the trunk with early lesions, and head with serohemorrhagic crusts HE 10x: Spongiotic dermatitis with presence
of subepidermal blister rich in neutrophils and eosinophils Cryostat section with immunohistochemical reaction for type IV collagen showing
positivity on the base of the blister The set of clinical and laboratory data confirmed the diagnosis of infantile bullous pemphigoid.
Treatment was started with prednisolone 1mg/kg. After five days, due to partial response, the dose of prednisolone was increased to
2mg/kg/day. Reassessment after fifteen days showed good control of the lesions, with only sparse escape blisters. Vaccinations were
suspended on account of the immunosuppressive doses of corticosteroids. In order to permit corticosteroid weaning, dapsone was initiated at
0.5 mg / kg. Previous control exams had shown normal G6PD levels and no subsequent worsening of anemia occurred with medication.
Corticosteroid therapy was reduced by 0.5 mg / kg every two weeks until its full suspension, while dapsone was maintained at 0.5 mg / kg /
day. Patient remained without skin lesions for three months, and resumed the use of vaccines without live antigens according to the national
vaccination calendar. At nine months old, she received acellular conjugated vaccines (DTPA), anti hepatitis B, polio and meningococcal
diseases, with subsequent display of new bullous lesions. Dapsone was increased to a dose of 1mg/kg and prednisolone 1mg/kg was initiated
for a week. With regression of the clinical symptoms dapsone was maintained for six months in which period no new lesions appeared, even
with the use of vaccines, so, the medication was discontinued. The patient is followed-up in the outpatient dermatology service, and she has
been lesion-free for six months without any signs of recurrence to date. The precise incidence of bullous pemphigoid in children and other
bullous dermatoses in childhood are unknown.4,7,13 The first case of juvenile BP confirmed by immunofluorescence was published in 1970.7
Since then, there has been a notable increase in published cases; currently there are just under 100 cases reported in childhood, a dozen in
infants.7,8 In BP, there is concrete evidence that circulating antibodies have a key role in disease pathogenesis, reacting against
epidermic basal membrane antigens, proteins BP180 antigen (antigen-2 BP) and BP230 antigen (antigen-1 BP) causing tissue injury.1,2,6,8,16
These proteins are components of adhesion junctional complexes, or hemidesmosomes, expressed in stratified epithelia.1 Bullous pemphigoid
can simulate various dermatoses and be clinically indistinguishable from other bullous diseases of childhood, such as dermatitis
herpetiformis, acquired epidermolysis bullosa, bullous systemic lupus erythematosus or linear IgA bullous dermatosis. Besides medical
history, physical examination and histopathological analysis, we use tests such as immunofluorescence, indirect immunofluorescence (with
salt-split skin technique), immunoblotting and ELISA for diagnosis.1,11,13,17,18,19,20 In this case, the question is whether the prior
administration of vaccines did act as a trigger for the formation of autoantigens against the basal membrane.7,21 It is suggested that, in
these cases, induced BP occurs through modulation of immunity.7 The vaccine could unmask a subclinical BP inducing a nonspecific immune
reactivation in genetically predisposed individuals.10 However, the true role of vaccine antigens in the emergence of the BP is still
questioned.10,15 The interruption of vaccination in children who have post-vaccination BP is not recommended.7 In the patient described
here, vaccinations were discontinued during the period of immunosuppressive dose of prednisolone and resumed when the dose was 0.5 mg /kg
/day. Palmoplantar lesions are typical of childhood BP, especially in children under one year, and these were the initial lesions in the
case reported. The widespread involvement predominates in infants. There were no mucosal lesions in our case, those being most commonly
found in children older than 1 year.11,15,18,21 Such differences in BP clinical features among infants and older children do not have
defined pathogenesis, but may be explained by differences in the expression of BP antigens according to age.5,15 There is no difference in
the prognosis or treatment. The clinical, histopathological, DIF and IIF aspects of bullous pemphigoid can also be observed in epidermolysis
bullosa acquisita (EBA), another subepidermal bullous disease.14 To differentiate them, we can use immunofluorescence with salt-split skin
technique. In EBA and bullous systemic lupus erythematosus, IgG deposits are only found on the dermal side of the cleft (base of the
blister), while in bullous pemphigoid deposits occur in the epidermal side (top of the blister) or, more rarely, on both sides, since the
main BP antigens are in the upper portion of the lamina lucida.1,6,10,11,13,14,20 In the case described here, we performed a lowcost method
that determined the location of target autoantigens. The authors used a simple staining immunohistochemistry exam for type IV collagen in
skin biopsies embedded in paraffin, allowing the differentiation of bullous pemphigoid from other subepidermal bullous diseases. The
advantage of this method is that it is not necessary to perform new immunofluorescence reactions, with another sets of costs and
techniques.4,22,23 Type IV collagen is a component of the lamina densa that in bullous pemphigoid will be detected in the base of the
blister, since autoantibodies against antigens BP180 antigen (antigen-2 PB) and BP230 antigen (antigen-1 PB) are located on hemidesmosomes
plates, above the lamina densa. EBA, characterized by autoantibodies against type VII collagen present in the sublamina densa region, will
have type IV collagen highlighted after staining, on the top part of the blister. Therefore, immunohistochemical staining for collagen type
IV also aids in the diagnosis of subepidermal bullous diseases.4,22,23 BP therapy aims only to alleviate symptoms and shorten the duration
of illness.7,8 Classically, the treatment of choice is performed with systemic corticosteroids at a dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg/day of prednisone,
only enough to control the disease, and not to completely suppress the lesions.3,4,6,7,9,11,15 Oral corticosteroids are generally well
tolerated by children, and healing occurs after a few weeks or months of treatment.7 Dapsone at 100 mg daily may be associated to systemic
corticosteroids, with the aim to reduce the corticosteroid while maintaining the sulfone as described in our case.6,20 Contrary to what is
observed in adults, the prognosis of BP in children is good because its clinical course is benign and self-limited, and lesions regress in
one year or less, with rare cases lasting two years or more.4,5,10,11,13,15,18 As there is a possibility of spontaneous remission in
childhood; treatment should not be aggressive or too toxic.9 The occurrence of relapses is infrequent.10 This disorder, although rare,
should always be among the differential diagnosis of bullous dermatoses in infants and children, especially in cases of palmar-plantar
involvement, in which the lesions are tight, wide and with an erythematous base.7,8,11,21 The more precise knowledge of PB's pathophysiology
can incite the development of new immunomodulatory target specific treatments, with fewer side effects than the traditional treatments.1 The
clinical aspects, diagnosis, treatment and management of cases can be challenging, so caution is advisable in theses circumstances.1,10 This
case confirmed most of the characteristics reviewed in the literature and had an excellent response to conventional therapy, achieving
remission within the usual time frame. Work performed at Asa Norte Regional Hospital (HRAN) - Brasília (DF), Brazil. Financial Support: None
Conflict of Interest: None Detail of the right thigh with annular pruriginous erythematous plaques, some topped by blisters and tight
vesicles Detail of the left foot with serohemorrhagic crusts Detail of the lower limbs with erythematous urticariform plaques topped by
blister and vesicles Detail of superior trunk and limbs HE 40x: Detail of subepidermal blister rich in neutrophils and eosinophils DIF:
Positive reaction for IgG in subepidermal basal membrane zone
