Cutaneous leishmaniasis and HIV coinfection has been reported in Brazil since the initial description of AIDS in the country. We report an
HIV-positive patient under antiretroviral treatment who presented with cutaneous leishmaniasis which was successfully treated with meglumine
antimoniate. A coinfecção leishmaniose cutânea e HIV tem sido descrita no Brasil desde o início da endemia de Aids no país. É relatado caso
de paciente masculino, HIV positivo, em uso de terapia antirretroviral, que apresentou quadro de leishmaniose cutânea, tratada com
antimoniato de meglumina. A 33-year-old male HIV-positive patient presented with a three-month history of an assymptomatic lesion on the
face. He had been taking biovir and efavirenz for the past six months. HIs T-CD4+ cell count was 380 cells/mm3 and viral load was below
detection level. The patient lived in Manaus, capital of Amazonas State, but reported hunting on side roads off the interstate highway.
Physical examination showed an ulcerated lesion, 4-cm in diameter, with irregular and infiltratated borders, granulous center on the right
malar region. Smaller ulcers were also apparent, some with crusting around the central lesion (Figure 1). There were no submandibular,
cervical or retro-auricular lymph nodes. Direct examination revealed Leishmania amastigotes, which were also revealed on histopathological
examination (Figures 2 and 3). The patient was given meglumine antimoniate, 15 mg/kg/day endovenously, for 20 days and after a three-month
follow-up, a complete reepitelization of the lesion was seen (Figure 4). An ulcerated lesion, about 4 cm in diameter, presenting with
infiltrated borders on the left malar region The arrows show Leishmania amastigotes Histopatholo gical examination reveals inflammatory
infiltrate consisting of histiocytes and plasmocytes. Leishmania amastigotes were revealed within the histiocytes Lesion reepitelization 3
months after first treatment Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis and HIV/AIDS coinfection has been reported in Brazil since 1987.1 Recently, in a
study conducted in the Amazon region, 7 of 15 coinfected patients presented with an atypical clinical picture or therapeutic failure, as has
been observed in the rest of the country.2,3 According to the Brazilian Ministry of Health, any ulcerated or mucosal lesion in patients with
HIV/AIDS exposed to leishmaniasis endemic areas should be investigated. Although the treatment of choice for mucocutaneous leishmaniasis and
HIV/AIDS is amphotericin B, meglumine antimoniate is also an alternative drug for coinfection, approved by the Brazilian Ministry of
Health.4,5 Work performed at the Amazonas Tropical Medicine Foundation (FMTAM) - Manaus (AM), Brazil. Financial Support: None Conflict of
Interests: None.
