Competing Interests: The authors have declared that no competing interests exist. Conceived and designed the experiments: VAC JLS. Performed
the experiments: SVS CL DG. Analyzed the data: VAC JLS MIH SVS. Wrote the paper: VAC JLS SVS. Congenital generalized lipodystrophy (CGL) is
a rare autosomal recessive disorder characterized by extreme reduction of white adipose tissue (WAT) mass. CGL type 1 is the most frequent
form and is caused by mutations in AGPAT2. Genetic and clinical studies were performed in two affected sisters of a Chilean family. These
patients have notoriously dissimilar metabolic abnormalities that correlate with differential levels of circulating leptin and soluble
leptin receptor fraction. Sequencing of AGPAT2 exons and exon-intron boundaries revealed two homozygous mutations in both sisters. Missense
mutation c.299G>A changes a conserved serine in the acyltransferase NHX4D motif of AGPAT2 (p.Ser100Asn). Intronic c.493-1G>C mutation
destroy a conserved splicing site that likely leads to exon 4 skipping and deletion of whole AGPAT2 substrate binding domain. In silico
protein modeling provided insights of the mechanisms of lack of catalytic activity owing to both mutations. Congenital generalized
lipodystrophy (CGL) or Berardinelli-Seip syndrome (OMIM # *608594) is an infrequent autosomal recessive disorder characterized by severe
reduction of whole body white adipose tissue (WAT) mass. CGL is usually diagnosed soon after birth and affected patients develop insulin
resistance, hypertriglyceridemia, hepatic steatosis and early onset diabetes mellitus . Although, four different CGL syndromes have been
defined , 95% of reported cases correspond to CGL-1 or CGL- 2 patients. CGL-1 is caused by mutations in AGPAT2 gene and is characterized by
profound reduction of subcutaneous and visceral WAT. Severe insulin resistance and reduced levels of circulating leptin and adiponectin are
typical findings along with acromegaloid features, umbilical hernia and focal lytic lesions in appendicular bones , . CGL2 is caused by
mutations in BSCL2 gene and is the most severe form of generalized lipodystrophy. These patients have virtual absence of both WAT and
mechanical fat depots and frequently develop mild to moderate intellectual impairment . AGPAT2 is located on chromosome 9q34 and encodes
1-acylglycerol-3-phosphate O-acyltransferase 2. This enzyme converts lysophosphatidic acid (LPA) to phosphatidic acid (PA) in the de novo
glycerolipid synthesis pathway and is mainly expressed in WAT, pancreas and liver . The exact mechanisms of lipodystrophy in patients with
AGPAT2 mutations remain elusive but possibly involve impaired adipogenesis owing to abnormal lipid signaling , . Here we report two sisters
harboring double homozygous mutations in AGPAT2 gene, that clinically illustrate the wide spectrum and variable degree of severity of
metabolic abnormalities in CGL1. We also analyze the potential structural and functional impact of these mutations on AGPAT2. The reported
patients are sisters, born to consanguineous parents (first-degree cousins) and originate from southern Chile. All their four grandparents
were born in Chile and have Spanish last names. The maternal grandmother was sister of the paternal grandfather of the patients a no other
cases of CGL have been identified in their sibship. The patients were informed of the aims of this research and signed informed consents
that were previously reviewed and approved by Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile institutional research ethics committee. This
investigation was conducted after Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile and Fondo Nacional de Ciencia y Tecnología (Fondecyt) ethics
committees provided their written approval for its execution. Both patients read, discuss with the corresponding author (V.A.C.) and
understood the text and figures that compose this article. The patients in this manuscript have given written informed consent to
publication of their case details. All blood biochemical and hormone determinations were carried out after 12 hours of fasting. Leptin,
leptin receptor soluble fraction (LepRs) and interleuquin-6 (IL-6) were determined by ELISA (Quantikine, R&D, Minneapolis, MN). Adiponectin
was determined by RIA (Millipore, MI). Thyroid hormones, testosterone, SHBG, insulin, as well as plasma glucose, cholesterol, triglycerides,
creatinine, HDL cholesterol, HbA1c and transaminases were determined at the Central Laboratory of Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile
by standard clinical laboratory procedures and techniques. Genomic DNA was extracted from whole blood using QIAamp DNA Blood Mini Kit
(Qiagen, Hilden, Germany). All six exons and exon-intron boundaries and 5′ and 3′ UTR regions of AGPAT2 gene were amplified by polymerase-
chain reaction (primer sequences listed in Table 1). PCR products were directly sequenced (Macrogen, Korea). The resulting sequences were
compared with the published reference AGPAT2 transcript ID (ENST 00000371696) using ChromasPro 1.5 (Technelysium, Australia). Sequence
variations were named in agreement with the recommendations of the Human Genome Variation Society . Intron mutation analysis was performed
with Human Splice Finder engine (http://www.umd.be/HSF/) that predicts the likelihood of splicing abnormalities. Natural splicing sites
(5′and 3′), branching points and exon splice enhancers are assigned a consensus values. A delta Consensus Value (ΔCV) of the splice sites
strength >10% is likely to determine splicing variations . Polyphen-2 v.2.2.2r398 and Provean (Protein Variant Effect Analyzer) v.1.1.3 were
used to assess the potential biological impact of missense mutations on AGPAT2 function. Provean works in a binary way resulting in either
neutral or deleterious effect of the mutation and Polyphen renders a score between 0 and 1, being 1 the highest and most damaging score. A
three-dimensional model for human AGPAT2 was generated by comparative modeling technique with the crystal structure of Curcubita moschata
glycerol-3-phosphate acyltransferase (cmGPAT) as a template. (UniProt access numbers O15120 and P10349). Sequence alignments of hAGPAT2 and
cmGPAT sequences were performed with ClustalX v2.0, using the blosum62 matrix , . Initial alignment was further manually modified to avoid
gaps in critical functional residues and the protein model constructed with Modeller program as implemented in the Build Homology Model
protocol available in Discovery Studio v2.1 (Accelrys Inc., San Diego, USA). Figures were rendered with Pymol v1.4 (Schrödinger, LLC).
29-years-old woman born to consanguineous parents (first degree cousins). She was born at term (39 weeks) but her weight and height at birth
data are not available. Patient 1 was diagnosed with lipoatrophic diabetes, severe mixed dyslipidemia (total cholesterol = 960 mg/dl,
triglycerides = 4,355 mg/dl) and fatty liver at 13-years-old. She has been treated with restriction of dietary fat and carbohydrates intake
and various combinations of insulin sensitizers (rosiglitazone or metformin), DPP IV inhibitors (sitagliptin) and insulin, but glycemic and
lipid control has been poor (Table 2). Before this current evaluation, no specific pharmacologic treatment was used for controlling her
plasma lipids. She refers incidental appearance of yellowish maculo-papular cutaneous lesions mainly in her back and face after insulin
supplementation. Because these complications she abandoned insulin therapy 4 years ago. The patient also complains of symmetric
polyarthralgia of hands and knees and morning stiffness with no local inflammatory signs. Her menstrual cycles are irregular, with very long
periods (years) of amenorrhea. Physical examination revealed normal height (1.6 m), low body weight (body mass index, BMI, 18.3 kg/m2),
generalized and severe reduction of subcutaneous fat, acromegaloid features (prognathism and enlarged hands and feet), acanthosis nigricans
on the neck and groins, sparse pink-yellowish small maculopapular skin lesions in the back, suggestive of eruptive xhantomas, and a small
umbilical hernia. A firm nodular mass (3 cm diameter) on each calcaneus tendon was found. No visceromegaly was detected but a moderate
intensity holosytolic murmur was present at mitral focus. She had advanced bilateral proliferative retinopathy, panphotocoagulation of both
eyes and amaurosis of the left eye because of vitreous hemorrhage. No signs of arthritis were found. Biochemical analysis showed poorly
controlled diabetes and severe mixed dyslipidemia (Table 2). Measured creatinine clearance and proteinuria were 89.7 ml/min/1.73 m2 and 2.79
g/24 hours, respectively (Table 2). Endocrine evaluation showed normal-low fasting insulin, normal thyroid function, reduced SHBG and normal
testosterone (Table 2). Plasma leptin was severely reduced, adiponectin was undetectable but soluble leptin receptor was ∼2-fold increased
relative to a group of control women (Table 2). Antibodies against plasma cyclic citrullinated peptides were negative and no signs of
arthritis were detected by magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) analysis of her hands. MRI also revealed no abnormalities of intra-abdominal
organs but incidental gallstones were observed data (not shown). A liver biopsy obtained during an elective cholecystectomy revealed no
hepatic steatosis or any other histological abnormality. Body composition assessed by DEXA showed 12.3% of body fat and resting energy
expenditure (REE) estimated by indirect calorimetry was 32.75 Kcal/Kg lean mass/day (Table 2). Reference values of normal Chilean female
population (Pontificia Universidad Católica de Chile). Reference values obtained from 13 healthy subjects matched by age and sex. Reference
resting energy expenditure was individually determined by instrument’s internal algorithm on the basis of anthropometry, age and sex
individual’s data. Abbreviations: A1C, glycated hemoglobin; HOMA-IR, HOMA-insulin resistance; HDL, high density lipoprotein, SGOT, serum
glutamic oxalacetic transaminase; SGPT, Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase; Free T4, free thyroxine; TSH, thyroid stimulating hormone;
SHBG, sex hormone binding globulin; LepRs, leptin receptor soluble fraction; N.D., not-detected. 26-years-old woman, sister of patient 1.
She was born at preterm (36 weeks) but her weight and height data at birth are unavailable. Patient 2 was diagnosed with
hypertriglyceridemia when she was 5-years-old and hyperglycemia when she was 19-years-old. Originally, this patient’s disease was recognized
as type 2 diabetes mellitus and was treated with restriction of dietary fats and carbohydrates, and submaximal doses of metformin.
Lipodystrophy was not previously diagnosed although she refers a persistent and marked lean phenotype. Her menarche was at 12 years old and
evolved with irregular menstruations. Polycystic ovary syndrome was diagnosed at 14 years old and received estrogen-based oral
contraceptives. This therapy was associated with a severe increase in plasma triglycerides and appearance of maculopapular skin lesions that
were diagnosed as eruptive xhantomatosis. These complications lead her to abandon oral contraceptives. No other abnormalities were referred
by the patient. Physical examination revealed severe reduction of whole body subcutaneous WAT and acromegaloid features. Biochemical blood
analysis revealed diabetes mellitus, mixed dyslipidemia and mild elevation of SGOT and SGPT levels (Table 2). Measured creatinine clearance
and proteinuria were 152.6 ml/min/1.73 m2 and 0.063 g/24 hours, respectively (Table 2). Hormone analysis showed normal thyroid function,
moderately elevated testosterone and normal SHBG (Table 2). Plasma leptin, although higher than in patient 1, was lower and soluble leptin
receptor was normal in comparison with a group of control women (Table 2). Adiponectin remained undetectable (Table 2). MRI revealed no
abnormalities of intra-abdominal organs (data not shown). Body composition assessed by DEXA showed 11.6% of body fat and REE estimated by
indirect calorimetry was 25.97 Kcal/Kg lean mass/day (Table 2). During the preparation of the manuscript, patient 2 coursed an uncomplicated
pregnancy and was able to vaginally deliver a full-term, phenotypically normal, 3,415 g female fetus. Glycemic control during her pregnancy
was achieved with restriction of dietary carbohydrates and metformin 1,700 mg/day. Insulin (10 units of NPH insulin/day) was used only the
last two weeks of her pregnancy. At the time of delivery, her HbA1c was 6.7% and her fasting glucose was 115 mg/dl. Clinical features
strongly suggested the diagnosis of CGL1 in both patients; thus, AGPAT2 exons and exon-intron boundaries were sequenced. As shown in Figure
1A, both sisters harbor a homozygous G for A substitution at position c.299 of AGPAT2 cDNA (c.299G>A). This mutation changes an evolutionary
conserved serine for asparagine in the acyltransferase NHX4D motif of AGPAT2 (p.Ser100Asn). A) Patient 1 (P1) and patient 2 (P2) harbor the
single nucleotide substitution c.299G>A in exon 2 of AGPAT2 gene (black arrows). This changes wild type codon AGC (not shown), that encodes
for serine, to AAC (underlined), that encodes for Asparagine. B) Patient 1 (P1) and patient 2 (P2) also harbor the single nucleotide
substitution c.493-1G>C (black arrows) in intron 3– exon 4 boundary. *denotes the first nucleotide of exon 4. The potential impact of
p.Ser100Asn mutation on AGPAT2 protein function was assessed with Polyphen and Provean algorithms. Polyphen analysis determined that this
mutation was “probably damaging” with a score of 0.995, whereas Provean described it as “deleterious”. A second homozygous mutation, G for C
substitution at position −1 of intron 3 (c.493-1G>C), was also found in both patients (Fig. 1B). As expected, patients’ parents were
heterozygous for these two mutations and these sequence variants were absent in 50 unrelated control subjects (data not shown), confirming
their pathogenic role in the patients. Intronic substitution c.493-1G>C is located in a highly conserved 3′ splicing acceptor site. It has
been shown that equivalent alterations determine pre-mRNA processing abnormalities, often resulting in exon skipping . Thus, on-line
software Human Splicing Finder (HSF) was used to evaluate AGPAT2 c.493-1G>C variant. This analysis revealed a ΔCV of −31% (CV wild
type = 93.26 vs CV mutant = 64.31) in the strength of the 3′ acceptor splicing site. In this algorithm, a ΔCV larger than 10% is considered
predictive of splicing variations . MaxEnt, a second HSF algorithm, showed a −81.4% variation in the splice site strength, also suggesting a
faulty splicing of exon 4 during AGPAT2 pre-mRNA processing. Thus, c.493-1G>C mutation possibly results in AGPAT2 exon 4 skipping .
Importantly, since the absence of exon 4 does not shift AGPAT2 mRNA reading frame, it should generate a protein product 246 amino acids
shorter than wild type AGPAT2 variant, lacking the entire segment between p.165Leu and p.196Gln residues. Importantly, this segment includes
the conserved PEGTR domain, which has been recognized essential for acyl-CoA transferase activity in all known members of this family .
Human AGPAT2 was modeled with cmGPAT crystal structure as template. Figure 2 shows the proposed structure of human AGPAT2 and its
interaction with LPA (C18∶1). As expected, the AGPAT2 model resembles other GPAT topologies, with a packed domain composed of 12 alpha
helices and 7 beta sheets (Figure 2A). In this model, the polar head of LPA makes polar contact with residues p.175Arg and p.120Lys, whereas
the bulky acyl chain of LPA is accommodated within a hydrophobic tunnel made of the side chains of p.101Ile, p.210Phe, p.122Glu, p.126Leu,
p.39Thr, p.36Leu, p.63Ile, p.218Phe and p.50Phe. An internal hydrogen bond occurs between p.100Ser and p.103Asp in the central section of
the conserved NHX4D motif, which stabilize the turn after this helix (Figure 2B). Importantly, neither pSer100N substitution nor p.165Leu to
p.196Gln deletion was expected to change AGPAT2 folding (data not shown). A) Representation of the secondary structure of the modeled human
AGPAT2 protein. Green color denotes the segment between Leu165 and Ala195 that contains the acyl-glycerol-3-phosphate substrate binding
motif (PEGTR) and that is encoed by exon 4. This segment is possibly deleted in c.493-1G>C mutants and converge with the catalytic site,
that is colored in magenta. B) Snapshot of the proposed molecular interactions between LPA (C18∶1) and human AGPAT2. The polar part of the
substrate make contacts with a cluster of basic residues, while its alkyl chain is accommodated inside a tunnel made of a cluster of
hydrophobic aminoacid side chains. This is the first report of Chilean patients with congenital generalized lipodystrophy. Chilean
population is genetically heterogeneous, with contribution of various Amerindian and northern hemisphere people, mainly southern Europeans
(Spanish and Italians) but also northern Europeans (Germans) and Middle-Easterners (Palestinians and Syrians). Interestingly, previously
reported individuals with mutations in AGPAT2 gene mainly originated from sub-Saharan Africa, Middle East and Northern Europe . All the
known ancestors of patients reported here were born in Chile and have Spanish last names, suggesting that they have a genetic heterogeneity
level analogous to the rest of the Chilean population. Clinically, these cases illustrate the wide spectrum of metabolic abnormalities that
can be associated with severe reduction of body adiposity. However, it is puzzling that whereas the two sisters reported here share
identical abnormalities in AGPAT2 gene and equivalent level of lipodystrophy, they have notoriously dissimilar severity in their metabolic
complications. In fact, whereas patient 1 has developed severe blood glucose and lipid dysregulation, advanced retinal and renal diabetic
microvascular complications and secondary amenorrhea, patient 2 has only mild to moderate metabolic dysregulation and was able to course a
near physiologic pregnancy. The factors and mechanisms underlying these differences remain unknown. Nonetheless, it is noteworthy that total
circulating leptin levels are lower and soluble leptin receptor levels are higher in the subject with the most severe phenotype (patient 1).
We speculate that differences in free circulating leptin could determine clinically significant divergent metabolic phenotype among these
patients with CGL1. It is also notorious that, in contrast to previously reported CGL cases, patient 1 has no evidence of fatty liver
disease. We propose that this might result from the combined effect of low dietary fat intake and low insulin driven hepatic de novo
lipogenesis. From the genetic stand point, it is also puzzling that two potentially deleterious mutations coexist in the same gene. This
combined mutational state was also noted in a CGL patient original from Argentina . A European CGL patient with c.299G>A mutation was
reported by Magré et al , however, the second mutation (c.493-1G>C) was not reported in this subject. The mechanisms of lipodystrophy in
patients with mutation of AGPAT2 gene remain unknown. Since AGPATs are critical for the biosynthesis of both glycerophospholipids and
triglycerides, it is logical to assume that loss of fat might be the consequence of decreased synthesis of these lipid products. However,
several facts indicate that this simple hypothesis may not be fully explanatory. First, the two major AGPAT isoforms (1 and 2) are expressed
in mature white adipocytes and, when are co-expressed in tagged forms in cultured cells, both co-localize in the same subdomains of the
endoplasmic reticulum . Furthermore, AGPAT1 and AGPAT2 catalytic activities are very similar in terms of substrates preference and kinetic
properties . Thus, it remains unclear why AGPAT1 does not compensate AGPAT2 loss in adipocytes. Many reported mutations in AGPAT2 gene
result in reduced AGPAT2 protein and/or activity levels , , suggesting that AGPAT activity is necessary for normal WAT mass. Indeed, total
loss of AGPAT2 results in a severe CGL phenotype in mice , . The prevailing hypothesis is that AGPAT2 is required for normal adipogenesis
likely by generating normal lipid signaling molecules required for adipocytes differentiation . The substitution of G for C in position −1
of intron 3 (c.493-1G>C) might result in deletion of whole exon 4 due to abnormal splicing of AGPAT2 pre-mRNA. In fact, analysis with two
HSF algorithms predicted that this mutation should determine high likelihood of splicing faults. Although this prediction has not been
experimentally tested yet, it might result in the in-frame deletion of 32 aminoacids, including the highly conserved PEGTR motif, which is
present in GPAT, AGPAT, DHAPAT and LPEAT enzymes . PEGTR motif is crucial for acyltransferase catalytic activity . Indeed, Arg175 has been
shown to be necessary for the binding of the charged portion of sn-glycerol-3-phosphate substrates in this family of enzymes , . Therefore,
although the deletion of the entire Leu165 - Ala195 segment should not affect global AGPAT2 folding it might severely affect substrate
binding, resulting in loss of catalytic activity. The other mutation observed in the reported patients (c.299G>A), might additionally
affects enzyme catalysis in two different ways. First, it precludes the formation of an intramolecular hydrogen bond between Ser100 and the
conserved Asp103, which is important for the charge relay system for the conserved catalytic His98 . Second, the bulkier Asn side-chain
might increases the steric hindrance of the catalytic pocket, possibly disrupting its topology and reducing its acyltransferase activity,
such as been previously reported for bacteria . Functional and biochemical studies will be required to empirically evaluate the effects of
these mutations on AGPAT2 enzymatic activity as well as its effects on adipogenesis. In summary, we have reported the first two cases co CGL
in Chile. These sisters harbor identical two homozygous single nucleotide substitutions in AGPAT2 gene, have severe reduction of body
adiposity but have developed markedly dissimilar metabolic phenotype, possibly as a result of different residual leptin levels.
Structurally, c.493-1G>C mutation potentially results in loss of the highly conserved substrate binding PEGTR domain of AGPAT2 protein,
whereas c.299G>A mutation results in the substitution of a highly conserved serine in the catalytic NHX4D motif of the protein.
