Hepatobiliary fibropolycystic diseases are a unique group of entities involving the liver and biliary tract, which are caused by abnormal
embryologic development of the ductal plates at various stages. We experienced strange hepatobiliary fibropolycystic diseases with a complex
mass composed of malformed ducts and biliary cysts, which did not belong to, and were different from, previously known malformations. They
were unique in imaging and histologic features. We herein report three cases of monosegmental hepatobiliary fibropolycystic disease
mimicking a mass. The ductal plate is a double-layered cylindrical bile duct structure present in early fetal life. Biliary ducts are
normally formed from remodeling and partial involution of these cylindrical ductal plates (1). The arrest or derangement of this process
causes the persistence of excessive embryonic bile duct structures, which may be apparent microscopically or macroscopically. The diseases
that develop in ductal plate malformation during different stages of remodeling-a continuum ranging from congenital hepatic fibrosis to
Caroli's disease-can exist alone or in combination. These diseases are characterized by varying degrees of persistent embryonic bile duct
structures, fibrosis, and ductal dilatation (2). Congenital biliary malformations, including adult and infantile polycystic disease of the
liver and kidneys, congenital hepatic fibrosis, Caroli's disease, von Meyenburg complexes, and choledochal cyst have been collectively
termed ductal plate malformations or hepatobiliary fibropolycystic diseases (3-6). However, the present cases did not belong to, and were
different from, the above described malformations. They were unique in imaging and histologic features. All of the biliary abnormalities in
the present study resemble the human fetal ductal plate, suggesting that the present case is caused by the persistence of the fetal ductal
plate. We herein report three cases with a complex mass composed of malformed ducts and biliary cysts. A 44-year-old woman presented with
mild upper abdominal pain and a lobulated mass in the left lobe of the liver. This patient had undergone abdominal computed tomography (CT)
scan for similar pain at a local hospital 4 years previously, and a hepatic mass had been detected. The laboratory tests showed no abnormal
findings and physical examination was normal. The evidence of polycystic kidney or liver disease was absent. There was no family history of
polycystic kidney or liver disease. On the present admission, ultrasound showed an ill-defined, isoechoic mass, with internal cystic
components in the lateral segment of the liver (Fig. 1A). A three-phase abdominal CT scan showed an irregularly-marginated multicystic mass
with tubular components, and with no contrast enhancement (Fig. 1B). The remaining liver was normal. This mass did not show a change in the
size or contour as compared with that observed 4 years previously. Laparoscopic left lateral segmentectomy was performed. The cut surface of
the hepatic left lobe showed aggregates of numerous small and large biliary cysts (Fig. 1C). Microscopically, the left hepatic mass showed
numerous dilated intrahepatic bile ducts with irregular contours, infoldings, and protrusions, surrounded by thick fibrous tissue, which are
known features of ductal plate malformation. There were ductal plate malformations of numerous dilated biliary cysts (Fig. 1D).
Immunohistochemical stains for CD10 (Fig. 1E), CK7 (Fig. 1F), and MUC1 (Fig. 1G) showed positive reactions in the lining (epithelial cells)
of dilated cysts, as well as proliferative bile ductules. A 46-year-old man presented with incidentally discovered hepatic mass in the right
lobe of the liver. The laboratory tests showed no abnormal findings, and physical examination was normal. The evidence of polycystic kidney
or liver disease was absent. No family history of polycystic kidney or liver disease was recognized. A three-phase abdominal CT scan showed
an ill-defined mass composed of numerous cysts and tubular lesions in segment VI of the liver (Fig. 2A). Magnetic resonance (MR) images
showed a cystic mass with very high T2 and low T1 signal intensities (Fig. 2B, C). Post-contrast MR images showed no contrast enhancement of
this mass (Fig. 2D). The remaining liver was normal. Percutaneous biopsy was performed. Microscopic findings of the needle biopsy specimen
showed several, irregular-shaped, dilated intrahepatic bile ducts, lined by the cuboidal biliary epithelial cells (Fig. 2E). There were also
ductal plate malformation and numerous inflammatory cells in a background of fibrous tissue. Immunohistochemical stains for CD10 (Fig. 2F),
CK7 (Fig. 2G), and MUC1 (Fig. 2H) showed positive reactions in the lining (epithelial cells) of dilated cysts, as well as proliferative bile
ductules. Follow-up imaging 18 months later showed no interval change of this cystic mass. A 50-year-old man presented with incidentally
discovered hepatic mass in the right lobe of the liver, during evaluation of sigmoid colon cancer. The laboratory tests showed no abnormal
findings, and physical examination was normal. The evidence of polycystic kidney or liver disease was absent. No family history of
polycystic kidney or liver disease was recognized. Ultrasound showed an ill-defined echogenic mass with multiple varying-sized cystic
components in the right lobe of the liver (Fig. 3A). A three-phase abdominal CT scan showed an irregularly-marginated mass with tubular
components but with no contrast enhancement (Fig. 3B). MR imaging showed a cystic mass with very high T2 signal intensities (Fig. 3C). Post-
contrast MR image showed a cystic mass with no contrast enhancement (Fig. 3D). 3 dimensional magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography
(MRCP) showed a cystic mass with tubular and cystic components (Fig. 3E). The remaining liver was normal. Anterior resection of sigmoid
colon cancer was performed, and TNM staging according to the American Joint Committee on Cancer was a stage II lesion (T2N0M0). A follow-up
imaging study 18 months later showed no interval change of this cystic mass. Ductal plate malformation is a persistent fetal ductal plate in
the postnatal livers. Desmet (5) considered that these congenital biliary diseases may be derived from the abnormal development at different
levels of the biliary tree, and named these diseases "ductal plate malformation". Summerfield et al. (6) proposed the term "hepatobiliary
fibropolycystic disease" for this congenital biliary disease group, because they show cystic lesions of the liver and bile ducts and overlap
each other relatively frequently. We experienced monosegmental hepatobiliary fibropolycystic disease mimicking a hepatic mass different from
previously described patterns in imaging and histologic features. To the best of our knowledge, such cases have not been reported in the
literature. Remodeling of the ductal plate results in the formation of bile ducts and ductules via epithelial proliferation and cell death,
with subsequent resorption of the remaining ductal plate elements. Either a complete or partial arrest or a derangement in ductal plate
remodeling is the primary abnormality in all variants of fibropolycystic liver disease, producing various degrees of duct pathology, such as
dilatation and cyst formation (2, 5, 7). Remodeling of the ductal plate begins in utero from the hilum to the periphery of the liver, with
successive development of the large ducts first, then the segmental ducts, the interlobular ducts, and finally, the smallest bile ductules.
Biliary anomalies may develop at various stages of this involution-remodeling process, and the timing or stage of maldevelopment determines
the resulting clinicopathologic disorder. An understanding of abnormal embryogenesis helps to explain the characteristic imaging features of
these disorders (1). Congenital hepatic fibrosis is characterized by ductal plate malformation of small interlobular bile ducts and fibrous
bands of variable thickness that link adjacent portal tracts, and is a rare autosomal recessive disorder with a variable clinical course
affecting both the hepatobiliary and renal systems. Biliary hamartomas are characterized by a focal disorderly collection of bile ducts and
ductules, with ductal plate malformation surrounded by abundant fibrous stroma, caused by the maldevelopment of small intralobular bile
ducts. Autosomal dominant polycystic liver disease is characterized by multiple biliary cysts of variable diameter that are disseminated
throughout the liver, caused by maldevelopment of medium-sized intrahepatic ducts. Caroli's disease is characterized by a congenital
dilatation of the larger intrahepatic bile ducts, which is caused by the arrested remodeling of the ductal plates of the large intrahepatic
ducts: pure type characterized by only ectasia of intrahepatic bile ducts (Caroli's disease) and a combined type caused by the arrest of
remodeling, both in the early period of bile duct embryogenesis, and later, during the development of the more peripheral biliary
ramifications, with subsequent simultaneous maldevelopment of large-sized intrahepatic duct and small-sized interlobular bile duct (Caroli's
syndrome). Choledochal cysts are characterized by ductal plate malformation of large extrahepatic ducts. Fibropolycystic liver diseases
usually do not exist as single entities, but occur in conjunction with a number of other symptoms and diseases, which can be found in
various combinations (1, 7, 8). Ductal plate malformations can be involved monosegmentally or monolobarly during the process of bile duct
development, as well Caroli's disease (3, 4). In the present cases, ductal plate malformations were involved monosegmentally, and the
remaining liver was normal. Therefore, we could diagnose monosegmental hepatobiliary fibropolycystic disease in all cases. Fibropolycystic
liver disease can be clinically silent or can cause numerous signs and symptoms, such as cholangitis, portal hypertension, gastrointestinal
bleeding, infections, and space-occupying masses, according to each entity (1, 6). In the present cases one patient complained of mild upper
abdominal pain, and the remaining two patients did not complain of pain or discomfort. At follow-up, the present cases did not change in
size or shape. The different types of fibropolycystic liver disease demonstrate characteristic findings at CT and MR imaging, according to
each entity (1, 7, 9). In Caroli's disease, cystic or fusiform dilatation of the intrahepatic ducts is seen, as well as the central dot
sign, which corresponds to a portal vein branch protruding into the lumen of a dilated bile duct. MRCP, percutaneous transhepatic
cholangiography, and endoscopic retrograde cholangiopancreatography can show the dilated biliary trees. In biliary hamartoma, multiple small
lesions (less than 15 mm) of uniform size throughout the liver are seen, which are cystic with or without peripheral rim enhancement.
Congenital hepatic fibrosis frequently shows alternating hypertrophy and shrinkage of hepatic segments or lobes, periportal hepatic
fibrosis, intrahepatic ductal dilatations, and renal cysts. This entity has nonspecific clinical and imaging findings, but ultrasound, CT,
and MR imaging can help to evaluate this entity. Autosomal dominant polycystic disease shows multiple hepatic cysts, which are observed at
the time of puberty, and increase slowly in size into adulthood (1, 7, 9, 10). Awareness of these CT and MR imaging features are essential
in detecting and differentiating between various fibropolycystic liver diseases, and can assist in proper management (1). We performed
immunohistochemical analyses to characterize the biliary epithelium. All the cyst-lining epitheliums were positive for CK7, CD10, and MUC1,
suggesting biliary epithelium with ductal plate malformation. MUC1 is expressed in the fetal ductal plate and fetal bile ducts, but not in
postnatal biliary epithelial cells. The present findings, that MUC1 apomucin was expressed in the ductal plate malformation suggest that the
ductal plate malformation in the present study was a persistent fetal ductal plate. CD10, a microvilli-associated antigen, is well-known to
be expressed in hepatocytes (canaliculi), but not in bile ducts. The reason for positive CD10 in biliary elements in the present study is
unclear. Ductal transformation of hepatocytes is unlikely in the present case, but may be due to fetal biliary antigen. Examination of CD10
in the fetal ductal plate is mandatory (3, 4). The present cases resemble monosegmental Caroli's disease, a rare disease. Caroli's disease
is defined as cystic or fusiform, non-obstructive dilatation of intrahepatic bile ducts, as well as the central dot sign. Caroli's disease
is characterized by retaining their communication with biliary trees (1). Monolobar or monosegmental Caroli's disease mainly affects the
left hepatic lobe, and is only composed of non-obstructive segmental dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts (2). However, there have been
no definite descriptions of the presence of proliferated intrahepatic peribiliary glands, peribiliary cysts, or ductal plate malformations
in monolobar or monosegmental Caroli's disease. Caroli's syndrome is characterized by the simultaneous maldevelopment of large-sized
intrahepatic ducts and small-sized interlobular bile ducts, as well as non-obstructive dilatation of the intrahepatic bile ducts, as well as
other findings of ductal plate malformations. The present cases did not involve biliary trees, and showed grape-like aggregates of numerous
biliary cysts, with ductal plate malformation different from the appearance of localized Caroli's disease. In the present cases, ultrasound
revealed an isoechoic or hyperechoic mass, studded with multiple varying-sized cystic components, whereas CT and MR showed mainly cystic
nature, with no contrast enhancement. This discrepancy may be attributed to the echogenic solid nature resulting from interface echoes of
numerous small cystic lesions at ultrasound like hepatic hemangioma. Numerous aggregated small and large biliary cysts and ductal plate
malformations seemed to produce an echogenic solid nature studded with multiple larger cysts. In summary, we report three cases of
monosegmental fibropolycystic disease mimicking a mass. Awareness of this entity and image feature is of importance for differential
diagnosis from incidentally discovered other hepatic masses. Case 1. Fibropolycystic liver disease mimicking hepatic mass in 44-year-old
woman. A. Transverse abdominal ultrasound shows ill-defined isoechoic solid mass with multiple internal cystic components in lateral segment
of liver. B. Axial contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan shows ill-defined cystic mass with marginal tubular components. C. Gross findings of
hepatic left lobe shows aggregates of numerous small and large biliary cysts. D. Microscopic findings of mass-like monosegmental
fibropolycystic disease shows numerous dilated intrahepatic bile ducts, with irregular contours, infoldings, and protrusions, surrounded by
thick fibrous tissue, which were features of ductal plate malformation (hematoxylin-eosin stain, × 200). E-G. Immunohistochemical stains for
CD10 (E), CK7 (F), and MUC1 (G) show positive in lining (epithelial cells) of dilated cysts, as well as those of proliferative bile ductules
(× 200). Case 2. Fibropolycystic liver disease mimicking hepatic mass in 46-year-old man. A. Axial contrast-enhanced abdominal CT image
shows ill-defined mass composed of numerous cysts and tubular lesions in segment VI of liver. B, C. Axial T2- and T1-weighted abdominal MR
images show ill-defined mass composed of numerous cysts and tubular lesions. D. Axial contrast-enhanced abdominal MR image shows tubular and
cystic lesions with no contrast enhancement. E. Microscopic finding of needle biopsy specimen shows several, irregular-shaped, dilated
intrahepatic bile ducts, lined by cuboidal biliary epithelial cells. There is also ductal plate malformation and numerous inflammatory cells
in background of fibrous tissue (hematoxylin-eosin stain, × 200). F-H. Immunohistochemical stains for CD10 (F), CK7 (G), MUC1 (H) shows
positive in lining (epithelial cells) of dilated cysts (× 200). Case 3. Fibropolycystic liver disease mimicking hepatic mass in 50-year-old
man. A. Transverse abdominal ultrasound shows ill-defined hyperechoic solid mass with multiple internal cystic components in segment VIII of
liver. B. Axial contrast-enhanced abdominal CT scan shows ill-defined cystic mass with marginal tubular components. C, D. Axial T2- and
contrast-enhanced T1-weighted abdominal MR images show ill-defined mass composed of numerous cysts and tubular lesions. E. Three dimensional
magnetic resonance cholangiopancreatography shows aggregates of cystic and tubular lesions.
