Editor, A 77-year-old man presented to hospital following two episodes of collapse. Past medical history was significant for stable angina,
osteoarthritis and squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue. On examination, he appeared frail with evidence of weight loss. Pulse was recorded
at 108 beats per minute and was irregular. He was pyrexial with a temperature of 38.3°C. Auscultation of the chest revealed crackles at the
left base. The remainder of the physical examination was unremarkable. In particular there was no evidence of lymphadenopathy or local
recurrence of tongue cancer. An electrocardiogram confirmed atrial fibrillation. A chest X-ray displayed widespread pleural plaques and
consolidation at the left base. Blood work was significant for an elevated white cell count, serum high sensitivity troponin T concentration
and serum C-reactive protein concentration. The patient was commenced on digoxin and received treatment for a lower respiratory tract
infection. A computed tomography (CT) scan of brain was unremarkable. A transthoracic echocardiogram demonstrated a large mass in the right
atrium. There was no evidence of a pericardial effusion. A trans-oesophageal echocardiogram confirmed a large mobile mass in the right
atrium, prolapsing through the tricuspid valve during the cardiac cycle, with evidence of intramural invasion (Figure 1). A cardiovascular
magnetic resonance imaging scan revealed a large infiltrative mass within the mediastinum extending from the distal superior vena cava to
the diaphragmatic surface of the right ventricle (Figure 2). The appearances were felt to be in keeping with invasive malignancy. No
definite evidence of lymph node or metastatic disease was observed on a CT scan of chest. The patient’s condition deteriorated acutely on
day 28 of he admission; he was managed conservatively and died the following day. On post-mortem examination, a tumour was observed arising
from the medial border of the right atrium, extending through the tricuspid valve and into the right ventricle with infiltration of the
myocardium (Figure 3). Histology demonstrated squamous cell carcinoma infiltrating the myocardium. The histological appearances were similar
to those of the patient’s previous tongue tumour (Figure 4), confirming a diagnosis of a cardiac metastasis from a squamous cell carcinoma
of the tongue. Trans-oesophageal echocardiogram images demonstrating a large mass (M) arising in the right atrium (RA) and prolapsing
through the tricuspid valve (TV) into the right ventricle (RV), during the cardiac cycle, with evidence of intramural invasion (I). Cardiac
magnetic resonance image demonstrating a large mass (M) involving the free surface of the right atrium (RA), right ventricle (RV) and
tricuspid valve (TV). Postmortem appearance of the heart demonstrating a tear (*) within the right aorta. Histology slides demonstrating
metastatic squamous cell carcinoma infiltrating the myocardium (left) and primary squamous cell carcinoma of the tongue (right).
Similarities between the primary tumour and a metastasis arising from it can be appreciated, in particular, the eosinophilic whorls of
squamous cells (asterisks). Post-mortem studies show cardiac metastases in up to 25% of patients who have died from malignancy, however,
ante-mortem presentation is rare. The most common tumours metastasising to the heart are carcinomas of the lung, breast and oesophagus,
malignant lymphoma, leukaemia and malignant melanoma1. Cardiac metastases usually present in patients with advanced widespread tumour
disease2. Treatment is therefore usually palliative and the prognosis is poor1. In the present case an extensive cardiac metastasis was
observed in the absence of clinically detectable local recurrence, lymphadenopathy or metastases elsewhere. Although such cases of cardiac
metastasis are uncommon, similar cases have been described in the literature3. This diagnosis should therefore be considered in patients
with a history of malignancy and new cardiovascular symptoms of uncertain aetiology. Specialist Trainee Specialist Trainee Consultant
Cardiologist Consultant Cardiologist The authors have no conflicts of interest.
