A 58-year-old diabetic male with hepatic cirrhosis presented with fever and vague bone pains. Technetium methylene diphosphonate (99mTc MDP)
three phase bone scan (Figures 1 Figure 1.99mTc MDP regional three-phase bone scan showed multifocal bone involvement. Vascular and soft
tissue phase images showed symmetrically increased vascularity and soft tissue tracer uptake in both knee joints. Increased soft tissue
tracer uptake was noted in the left hip and femoral region. and 2) Figure 2.99mTc MDP whole-body bone scan. Skeletal phase images depict
diffusely intense tracer uptake in the left femoral shaft with interspersed small cold defects. A hot spot is seen in left eighth rib
posteriorly with associated increased tracer uptake in the left hip and right ankle joints. Increased tracer uptake is also seen in the
bilateral tibial condyles. Incidentally, a cold defect was seen in right midpole of the kidney (bold arrow). On additional ultrasound
examination, the lesion was confirmed to be an abscess. B. pseudomallei was isolated from an aspirate of pus. identified not only multiple
sites of bone involvement but also extraskeletal renal involvement that was later proven by culture. Burkholderia pseudomallei was isolated
from a blood culture, confirming a diagnosis of systemic melioidosis. Although lung abscess is the most common presentation disseminated
disease often occurs, particularly in the presence of impaired host immunity, which was apparent in this patient. Pleural effusion, skin and
soft tissue swellings, and liver and splenic abscesses may be encountered. Neurological involvement (brain stem encephalitis, cerebral
abscess, cranial nerve palsies, and paraparesis), although less common, can be seen in 4% of cases. 99mTc MDP regional three-phase bone scan
showed multifocal bone involvement. Vascular and soft tissue phase images showed symmetrically increased vascularity and soft tissue tracer
uptake in both knee joints. Increased soft tissue tracer uptake was noted in the left hip and femoral region. 99mTc MDP whole-body bone
scan. Skeletal phase images depict diffusely intense tracer uptake in the left femoral shaft with interspersed small cold defects. A hot
spot is seen in left eighth rib posteriorly with associated increased tracer uptake in the left hip and right ankle joints. Increased tracer
uptake is also seen in the bilateral tibial condyles. Incidentally, a cold defect was seen in right midpole of the kidney (bold arrow). On
additional ultrasound examination, the lesion was confirmed to be an abscess. B. pseudomallei was isolated from an aspirate of pus.
Melioidosis1 is a great masquerader, and it is often confused with staphylococcal abscesses in acute form, tuberculosis in chronic
presentations, or a generalized sepsis. Aspirated pus may show caseating material similar to the material in tuberculosis, and tissue biopsy
may show granuloma. Authors' addresses: Padma Subramanyam and Shanmuga Sundaram Palaniswamy, Department of Nuclear Medicine & PETCT, Amrita
Institute of Medical Sciences, Cochin, Kerala, India, E-mails: padmas@aims.amrita.edu and ssundaram@aims.amrita.edu.
