Research recently published in the Lancet, led by Professor Usha Chakravarthy (Queen’s University Belfast), has established that an
anticancer drug (Bevacizumab) has been proven to be equally as effective in treating the most common cause of blindness in older adults
(i.e. wet age-related macular degeneration) as a more expensive drug (Ranibizumab) which is specifically devised for this purpose. These
findings have the potential to make significant cost savings in the treatment of this important condition.
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(13)61501-9/fulltext What is the name of this commonly used piece of medical
equipment? What is its link to Northern Ireland? Objective Structured Clinical Examinations (OSCEs) have been around since 1979. They are
complex and expensive forms of assessment. Therefore Curiositas is interested to read a study in the journal Medical Education that proposes
a new model of OSCEs which is less expensive and provides more information about those critical students that lie close to the pass/fail
boundary – too good to be true? Pell et al investigate a ‘sequential OSCE’. In essence all candidates complete a shorter OSCE (i.e.
therefore less expensive) and only those students that are within a certain range of the pass / fail boundary - are invited for further
testing. The authors conclude that this model of OSCE provides more reliable information on such borderline students, with potential
significant cost savings. Curiositas will look forward to hearing about future trials of this new form of OSCE in terms of its reliability
and, most importantly, acceptability amongst students. Pell G, Fuller R, Homer M, Roberts T. Advancing the objective structured clinical
examination: sequential testing in theory and practice. Medical Education 2013;47:569–577. UMJ readers may recall the article by Morrison
and Bradley on the ‘Giants of the British Isles’ (2011;80(1):31–32). Therefore Curiositas was intrigued to discover a recently published
study in the International Journal of Cultural Property which provides a detailed examination of the legal issues relating to the story of
Charles Byrne, the famous eighteenth-century celebrity ‘Irish giant’. Byrne’s corpse was allegedly stolen on the way to his funeral and then
acquired by the eminent surgeon John Hunter, who set about exhibiting his skeleton as the centerpiece of his anatomical collection. Some two
centuries later the skeleton remains on public display in the Hunterian Museum in London’s Royal College of Surgeons. This study sets out a
clear legal argument, that within acceptable medico-legal ethical standards, it would be more appropriate to withdraw the remains from
display and bury them in accordance with the giant’s wishes. Fieldwork carried out in this study also informs the potential form and
location that the burial could take. Curiositas was also interested to discover that a corpse is “nullius in bonis”, that is, in the legal
ownership of nobody. In other words, a dead body cannot be conventionally “owned” due to the general understanding that it cannot be classed
as property. Muinzer T. ‘A Grave Situation: An Examination of the Legal Issues Raised by the Life and Death of Charles Byrne, the “Irish
Giant”. International Journal of Cultural Property 2013;20:23–48. A 68-year-old lady, who lives alone with her pets, was referred to a
dermatology clinic. She gave a 3 month history of having ‘nodules’ on the back of her hand. The nodules appeared to be increasing in number
and spreading up her forearm. She was apyrexial and otherwise well. What is the diagnosis? How would you confirm your suspicions? What
treatment would help? Dr David Eedy, Consultant Dermatologist, Craigavon Area Hospital. Southern Health and Social Care Trust, Northern
Ireland. A 52-year-old man presents to the emergency department complaining of a throbbing headache affecting the left side of his head. On
examination you note partial ptosis on the left side and that the right pupil is bigger than the left. What diagnosis should you consider
first, and what test would be diagnostic? Dr Paul Hamilton, Consultant Physician, Belfast Health and Social Care Trust, Northern Ireland.
(Image kindly produced for Curiositas by Dr Matthew Skalski, Diagnostic Imaging Resident, Southern California University of Health Sciences,
USA) What congenital abnormality is responsible for these two classical signs on MRI of brain? Dr Ian Bickle, Consultant Radiologist, Raja
Isteri Penigran Anak Saleha Hospital, Bandar seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam. ANSWERS See overleaf. The instrument in this image are Magill
forceps. They can serve several functions including guiding endotracheal intubation and removal of foreign bodies. Sir Ivan Magill, who was
born in Larne Co. Antrim, is credited with the design and creation of this important piece of medical equipment (amongst many other notable
contributions to anaesthesia). Curiositas would encourage you to read Gail McLachlan’s article on the life of Sir Ivan Magill. Ulster Med J
2008;77(3):146–152. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2604469/#b13 The diagnosis is that of ‘fish tank granuloma’ (the patient was
an avid pet fish owner). It is mostly commonly acquired by washing a fish tank, in which some of the fish have atypical mycobacteria
infection. A punch biopsy from one of the nodules should be taken, half of it sent for routine histology and staining for acid-fast bacilli
and the other half sent for mycobacterial culture at 30 to 33°C.The routine histology shows chronic infammation and tuberculoid granuloma
formation. The treatment is with 100 mg of minocycline orally twice a day continued for a total of six weeks. Follow this link for further
information about this clinical case: www.ums.ac.uk/curiositas/082(3)cur.pdf This patient has Horner’s syndrome. The syndrome results from
the interruption of the sympathetic nervous system innervation of the eye and can result from several pathological processes. In the setting
of an acute headache, one should consider a carotid artery dissection. Computed tomography (CT) or magnetic resonance (MR) angiography of
head and neck vessels should be performed. Follow this link for further information about this clinical case:
www.ums.ac.uk/curiositas/082(3)cur.pdf The pro-offered magnetic resonance (MR) images illustrate two classical signs of agenesis of the
corpus callosum. These are the ‘racing car’ and the ‘moose-head’ signs. The ‘racing car’ sign describes the appearances in the axial plane
of the uncharacteristically widely spaced lateral ventricles, reminiscent of a Formula one car seen from above. The ‘moose-head’ sign refers
to the lateral ventricles in the coronal plane, The cingulate gyrus is everted into narrowed and elongated frontal horns appearing like the
antlers of a moose. Follow this link for further information about this clinical case: www.ums.ac.uk/curiositas/082(3)cur.pdf (Art work
kindly produced for Curiositas by Dr Matthew Skalski, Diagnostic Imaging Resident, Southern California University of Health Sciences, USA.
MRI images courtesy of Dr Ian Bickle)
