Editor We report a case of a polytrauma victim who required central venous catheter insertion in intensive care. This line was inserted but
required replacing due to malposition felt to be caused by unidirectional twisting motion. A 78-year-old female was involved in a road
traffic collision and sustained multiple injuries including pneumothoraces, diaphragm rupture and a lacerated spleen. She had chest drains
placed and proceeded to laparotomy with splenectomy. Post-operatively she required dialysis in the intensive care unit. A central venous
catheter (CVC) “Arrow 12 FR Blueguard” was placed in the right subclavian vein using a Seldinger technique. After dilatation the catheter
was advanced. In order to overcome some resistance in its placement a unidirectional clockwise rotating action was used. Initially position
seemed satisfactory because of some ventricular ectopics associated with the guide wire and easy aspiration of blood from both ports. Chest
radiograph (figure 1) showed the dialysis line was twisted into a U-shape position. It was removed and a new line one was fed through into
position. Right subclavian dialysis cathater tip curled up in ‘U’ shape within the superior vera cava. A repeat chest radiograph (figure 2)
indicated that withdrawal of the dialysis line had pulled the left subclavian CVC out of position and therefore also required replacement.
On withdrawal of the Dialysis catheter, the left-sided central line tip covers pulled out of position. CVCs are placed commonly in emergency
departments and intensive care units. Risks associated with central venous cannulation include malposition (9.3%), bloodstream infection
(4.0%), arterial punctures (3.0%) and pneumothorax (1.5%).1 This particular complication has not previously been described. The rotating
technique used to advance the catheter caused the twisting motion, which may have resulting in kinking of the line. This case demonstrates a
potential complication of the Seldinger technique. Smaller motions in both clockwise and anticlockwise directions could prevent this
complication occurring in future. consultant anaesthetist. Christopher Clarke The authors have no conflict of interest.
