A 4-year-old Papua New Guinean girl presented with unresponsive coma (Blantyre coma score = 2) after a short febrile illness. She did not
have neck stiffness, a positive Kernig's sign, or other clinical features of bacterial meningitis. Microscopy confirmed a peripheral blood
Plasmodium falciparum asexual parasite density of 33,960/μL. Despite parenteral artemether and intensive supportive therapy, she died within
6 hours of admission. Supraorbital post-mortem brain biopsy revealed P. falciparum in the cerebral microvasculature (Figures 1 Figure
1.Brain smear showing ruptured P. falciparum schizonts within a capillary. Giemsa stain immersion (100× magnification). and 2 Figure 2.A
phagocytic microphage containing the malaria pigment (hemozoin) identified on brain smear. Giemsa stain immersion (100× magnification).).
Brain smear showing ruptured P. falciparum schizonts within a capillary. Giemsa stain immersion (100× magnification). A phagocytic
microphage containing the malaria pigment (hemozoin) identified on brain smear. Giemsa stain immersion (100× magnification). As part of
renewed global efforts to eradicate malaria, the World Health Organization has recently emphasized the need for improved surveillance and
case management, including accurate documentation of malaria-related deaths.1 The supraorbital post-mortem biopsy technique used in this
case can be performed rapidly, and it is well-validated, is minimally invasive, and leaves no visible scars.2 Appropriately stained brain
tissue can be examined by microscopy without the need for conventional autopsies and histological examination even in resource-limited
settings, thus providing evidence for a diagnosis of cerebral malaria or perhaps other non-malarial central nervous system disease. Greater
certainty regarding the cause of a child's death benefits public health policy makers as well as families and clinicians. We are deeply
indebted to the bereaved parents of this child who gave informed consent for post-mortem investigation at such a difficult time. We also
thank Dr. Pascal Michon and Dr. Brioni Moore for assistance with photography and Professor Peter Siba for guidance and support. Authors'
addresses: Moses Laman, Papua New Guinea Institute of Medical Research, Madang, Papua New Guinea, and University of Western Australia,
School of Medicine and Pharmacology, Fremantle Hospital, Fremantle, Western Australia, Australia, E-mail: drmlaman@yahoo.com. Timothy M. E.
Davis and Laurens Manning, University of Western Australia, School of Medicine and Pharmacology, Fremantle Hospital, Fremantle, Western
Australia, Australia, E-mails: tim.davis@uwa.edu.au and laurens.manning@uwa.edu.au.
