A localized left breast ductal invasive triple-negative breast carcinoma (TNBC) was diagnosed in a 44-year-old woman. After surgery, she was
treated with chemotherapy and radiation therapy in accordance with national guidelines. At the end of treatment, she had local and
metastatic relapse with multiple sub-diaphragmatic lymph nodes. With her written consent, imagery-guided biopsies of a metastatic lymph node
were performed, one sample being used for genomic analyses and another for immediate xenograft (Additional file 1: Supplementary methods).
Because of the early metastases after docetaxel and epirubicin-cyclophosphamide, she received cisplatin but the disease progressed after
3 months. Meanwhile, the transcriptomic analysis of the metastatic sample enabled a molecular subclassification as Basal-Like 2 with EGFR
mRNA overexpression . We did not find any EGFR or K-RAS mutation. After successful engraftment of the metastastic samples, we tested eight
different chemotherapies over 1 month on the xenograft model. The combination of paclitaxel and cetuximab was the most efficient
(Figure 1A), so it was offered to the patient. After 3 months of this second-line treatment, the metabolic response was almost complete
(Figure 1B, C). Individual xenograft efficiently guided treatment of a patient with metastatic triple-negative breast carcinoma. (A) In vivo
effects of drugs or combination of drugs in the xenograft model obtained from metastatic triple-negative breast carcinoma. Mice (n = 5 per
group of treatment) were treated with drugs or combinations of drugs. Tumors were measured every week, from 4 weeks before the treatment
started to 4 weeks after treatment. Tumor volumes were calculated at each time-point. The greatest tumor growth inhibition is observed with
the combination of paclitaxel and cetuximab (purple circle). (B) Positron emission tomography (PET), maximum intensity projection. The left
panel shows baseline PET with intense fluoro-deoxyglucose (FDG) uptake in sub-diaphragmatic breast and lymph node lesions (white arrows);
the right panel shows PET after two cycles of combined paclitaxel and cetuximab. There is a marked decrease (88%) of SUVmax (maximum
standardized uptake value within the region of interest) in target lesions (white arrows) and thus a partial metabolic response according to
PERCIST (PET Response Criteria in Solid Tumors) criteria. (C) Fused PET/computed tomography. The left panel shows an image at baseline with
intense FDG uptake in a left breast lesion (SUVmax = 17.2, white arrow) and in a subcarinar lymph node (SUVmax = 14.3, white arrowhead);
after two treatment cycles (right panel), SUVmax of both target lesions (white arrow, white arrowhead) is below background level. In
compliance with French bioethics law (#2004-800, 06/08/2004), the patient had been informed of the research use of the part of her biopsy
samples remaining after diagnosis had been established and did not oppose it. The treatment combining paclitaxel and cetuximab was discussed
and approved in a multidisciplinary meeting and then offered to the patient. Informed written consent was obtained from the patient. The
Clinical Research Board Ethics Committee (in French, ‘Comité de Protection des Personnes’) approved this study (CPP Ile-de-France #13218).
The University Institute Board Ethics Committee for experimental animal studies approved this study (#2012-15/728-0115). The occurrence of
metastases heavily affects prognosis for women with TNBC, with a median survival of under 15 months . In addition, when progression occurs
after first-line chemotherapy, there is no standard care. Primary tumors are heterogeneous at the cellular and molecular level , and
metastases derive from aggressive clones that have usually acquired resistance to first-line treatments. These tumor cells, which may be a
minority in the primary tumor, are precisely those on which drug efficiency needs to be tested for individualized treatments for patients
with metastases. Recently, a molecular subclassification of TNBC was established, a new step toward innovative personalized treatments for
patients with TNBC . However, molecular analyses still have limitations, since molecular biomarkers are integrated into complex pathways and
can rarely be directly used in daily oncologic practice. These limitations make it necessary to implement a different, complementary method.
Individual xenografts from metastatic samples of TNBC are an additional, innovative tool and are more physiological than genomic analysis,
as the tumor is in a mammalian environment and can be followed up over time. In pancreatic cancer, which shares poor prognosis and high
metastatic potential with TNBC, individual xenografts have been proposed in a pilot study for personalized treatments . Individual
xenografts could also be proposed as a personalized therapeutic resort for women with metastatic TNBC. TNBC: Triple-negative breast
carcinoma. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. GB conceived and designed the study, provided the study material or
patient, collected and assembled the data, provided data analysis and interpretation, and drafted the manuscript. J-PF provided data
analysis and interpretation, and performed the statistical analyses. IF collected and assembled data and performed the xenografts. LV
collected and assembled data, provided data analysis and interpretation, and performed the positron emission tomography/computed tomography.
NJ provided data analysis and interpretation. PB provided the study material. CdB provided the study material or patient and performed tumor
biopsies. EB provided the study material or patient. AJ conceived and designed the study, located financial support, provided administrative
support, provided the study material or patient, collected and assembled data, provided data analysis and interpretation, and drafted the
manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Supplementary methods. Click here for file This work was supported by Région
Île-de-France, Institut National du Cancer (INCa). We thank Angela Swaine for the English language review. We thank the patient for her
consent to the publication of this study.
