A 42-year-old woman was admitted with a 2-day abdominal pain associated with fever and a 5-h headache with weakness of the right limbs. Head
MRI scan and dispersion showed multiple abnormal signals in the cerebrum and cerebellum hemispheres and abnormal signal lesions in the pons.
Computed tomography (CT) showed enlarged spleen with partial infarction. Multiple embolisms were diagnosed, which might have originated from
the heart. Cardiac ultrasound showed multiple high level echoes in the left atrium. Chest enhancement CT revealed a spiny body in the
anterior wall of the lower esophagus with perforation (Fig. 1) and gastroscopy revealed one wound 30 cm from the incisors with a fistula
formation. The patient recalled having eaten an Asian carp 2 weeks earlier, but did not feel discomfort then. Surgery was performed to
remove the foreign body, and left atrial thrombectomy and left atrial repair were performed simultaneously. Perioperatively a fishbone was
noted penetrating through the esophageal wall, piercing the left atrium 1.5 cm deep with a perforation of 0.5 cm in diameter. Around the
fishbone, a large number of excrescences and thrombosis (about 4.0 × 1.0 cm) attached to the left atrial wall. A 4.0-cm-long fishbone was
finally removed (Fig. 2). The patient recovered well postoperatively and was discharged 10 days after operation. We have obtained the
consent from the patient for publication of this case report. Physicians should be alerted to the short- and long-term complications
resulting from a fishbone piercing the esophagus and surrounding organs [1, 2] and proper treatment should be applied to the patients
.Fig. 1CT scan showing a spiny body in the anterior wall of the lower esophagus with perforation (arrow)Fig. 2Gross morphology of a huge
fishbone with some excrescences and thrombosis attached CT scan showing a spiny body in the anterior wall of the lower esophagus with
perforation (arrow) Gross morphology of a huge fishbone with some excrescences and thrombosis attached None.
