Metronidazole alone rarely causes Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS). We present a case of an elderly male patient who, following metronidazole
use, developed neurological symptoms followed by pain and blisters on both soles, erythema of face and neck, scrotal itching and erosion,
and hemorrhagic encrustation around the lips and oral mucous membrane. Initial neurological symptoms followed by mucocutaneous manifestation
of SJS following metronidazole use is probably a new presentation of this case. Metronidazole is used widely in the treatment of different
protozoal and anaerobic bacterial infections. Stevens-Johnson syndrome (SJS), a very rare side effect of metronidazole, is an acute, life-
threatening disease that is almost always drug related and having an immunological pathogenesis. It manifests as fever with skin lesions on
the trunk, face, neck, and proximal upper extremities including palms and soles sparing relatively the distal arms and legs. Involvement of
buccal, ocular, and genital mucosa is present in more than 90% of patients with characteristic hemorrhagic crusting of mouth and lips.
Eruption usually heals without sequelae. We present a case of SJS where the patient had early neurological manifestation followed by
mucocutaneous lesions. A 50-year-old nonalcoholic male was diagnosed with erosive lichen planus and prescribed oral vitamins, topical
triamcinolone, and oral metronidazole 400 mg twice daily. He took the first dose of metronidazole at 10.30 am and developed burning
sensation and itching all over the body around 4 pm the same day. He took cetirizine tablet 5 mg orally on his own and the symptoms abated
by evening. Then around 10 pm he took the second dose of metronidazole. After 2 h, he developed severe burning sensation and itching all
over the body followed by dizziness, confusion, convulsions, and transient loss of consciousness for a period of 15-20 min. Around 2.30 am,
he complained of shivering and palpitation and in the morning, he felt pain over the both feet during walking, redness over the face and
neck, and itching and erosion over scrotal skin. He then consulted a general physician, who withdrew metronidazole and had referred him to a
dermatologist. He visited the dermatologist the next day by which time he developed fever, ulcers around lips and oral mucosa, difficulty on
swallowing and burning sensation during micturition. He had no history of neurological disease. His pulse, blood pressure and other systemic
examinations were within normal limits; and he had hemorrhagic encrustation around the lips and oral mucous membrane [Figure 1], erosion of
scrotal skin, creamy urethral discharge, and big blisters over the both planter regions. His routine blood examination was normal except
postprandial hyperglycemia (2 h postprandial blood plasma glucose level was 234 mg/dL) and urine examination showed plenty of pus cells,
however culture was negative. He was diagnosed clinically and managed as a case of SJS with involvement of approximately 3% of total body
surface area. He was treated with oral olopatadine 5 mg, methyl prednisolone 16 mg, famotidine 40 mg once a day, and erythromycin 500 mg
thrice daily for 7 days. Methylprednisolone was tapered over the next 14 days. For hyperglycemia, patient had received glimeperide 1 mg
orally once daily for 1 week which controlled the blood glucose levels and the patient remained euglycemic even after the drug was
withdrawn. The patient recovered without any sequelae in 3 weeks. Hemorrhagic encrustation on both lips The clinical presentation of this
patient with planter blisters, erosion of scrotal skin, hemorrhagic encrustation of lips and oral mucous membrane, and involving 3% of total
body surface area following metronidazole use favors the clinical diagnosis of SJS. These preclude the possibility of toxic epidermal
necrolysis, staphylococcal scalded skin syndrome, erythema multiforme, and generalized fixed drug eruption. Patient had taken oral vitamins
and topical triamcinolone which are not related with this type of mucocutaneous lesion and developed SJS within 6 h of intake of
metronidazole. On withdrawal of metronidazole and subsequent treatment, patient had improved remarkably without any sequelae. Rechallenge
was not done on ethical grounds. As per World Health Organization-Uppsala Monitoring Centre (WHO-UMC) standardized case causality assessment
criteria and Naranjo's algorithm, this event can be considered as a probable reaction due to metronidazole (Naranjo's score - 6). Patient
had hyperglycemia at the time of SJS manifestation which was controlled and no therapy (pharmacological and nonpharmacological) was required
after that episode. SJS due to metronidazole has been previously reported by Piskin and Makkes. The present study shows that metronidazole
induced SJS may not follow the classical sequence of SJS, rather it may present with neurological symptoms followed by rapid mucocutaneous
manifestation. As metronidazole is a widely used drug, physicians should be aware with this adverse reaction for early detection and
intervention. The patient should also be encouraged to report any abnormal manifestation following use of metronidazole to prevent such
potentially life-threatening condition. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No
