Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) represents a serious problem for women and obstetricians. Because of its association with hemorrhagic shock and
predisposition to disseminated coagulopathy, it is a leading cause of maternal deaths worldwide. Furthermore, the jeopardy of PPH is rising
with the secondary form of PPH occurring between 24 hours and 6 weeks postpartum, when women are already discharged home. The causes of this
pathology are severe inflammation (endometritis), inherited coagulation disorders, consumptive coagulopathy, and retained products of
conceptions. Others are of rare occurrence, such as vessel subinvolution (VSI) of the placental implantation site, uterine artery
pseudoaneurysm, or trauma. We present a rare form of recurrent secondary postpartum hemorrhage in a woman after uncomplicated cesarean
delivery, with review of the literature linked to the management of this situation originating in the rare local VSI in the placental
implantation site, defective decidual homeostasis, and coagulopathy confined to the uterus. The placental site VSI is one of the rare causes
of secondary PPH, and this situation is frequently underdiagnosed by clinicians. The histological confirmation of dilated “clustered”-shaped
myometrial arteries partially occluded by thrombi of variable “age” together with the presence of endovascular extravillous trophoblasts
confirms the diagnosis. Postpartum hemorrhage (PPH) represents serious problem for women and obstetricians. Because of its association with
hemorrhagic shock and predisposition to disseminated coagulopathy, it is a leading cause of maternal deaths worldwide . The severity of PPH
is potentiated by the fact that it is not specifically associated with the mode of delivery (vaginal vs. cesarean section). Furthermore, the
jeopardy of PPH is rising with the secondary form of PPH (abnormal excessive bleeding from the birth canal, mostly uterus, occurring between
24 hours and 6 weeks postpartum), when women are already discharged home. PPH is a widely underestimated obstetric problem with variable
occurrence and severity when diagnosed. This is caused by the lack of definitions and describing criteria used for this condition (e.g.,
quantification of blood loss, variable cutoff limits for estimated blood loss, and linkage to the mode of delivery). In general, the
incidence of PPH is approximately 5%-20% of labors , with the highest rates in developing countries. The WHO evidence is showing the wide
geographic variability in PPH; for example, in Africa, it accounts for 33.9% of maternal deaths (interval 13.3-43.6%), and in Asia, 30.8%
(intercountry interval: 5.9-48.5%). Apart from this major problem in the “third world” countries, the rising worries are observed recently
also in developed countries like Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Great Britain, or USA, which are showing increased incidence of PPH
(from 1.9% to 2.8%) . The causes of this trend are unknown, and we can only hypothesize the preconditions. However, causes can be the recent
increase in the overall number of cesarean section, pertinently repeat cesarean section or IVF techniques with an increase in morbidly
attached placenta pathologies. In general, it is the change in health-care management about pregnant women and labor
conditions/circumstances. However, the common etiologies remain, such as placental abruption, transverse or classical cesarean delivery,
manual placental extraction, uterine hypotony/atony, severe inflammation (endometritis), inherited coagulation disorders, consumptive
coagulopathy, and retained products of conceptions . Others are of sporadic occurrence and play an important role such as vessel
subinvolution (VSI) of the placental implantation site , trauma, or uterine artery pseudoaneurysm, where the affected vessel wall does not
allow adequate contraction and involution. Under the physiological situation, there is spontaneous thrombi and fibrotic closure of the
utero-placental vessels in the normal postpartum period. Involution process brings the vessels back to the nongestational state. Failure in
this process may be associated with the transient reorganization of the vessel thrombi and their partial occlusion that can lead to severe
profuse or intermittent vaginal bleeding after delivery , with rapid cardiovascular collapse necessitating sometimes urgent hysterectomy .
As mentioned previously, the wicked situation occurs when PPH is presented in its secondary form, even if it affects only 1-2% of postnatal
women. This low incidence of secondary PPH and linkage to maternal morbidity rather than mortality was the reason for the little attention
among obstetricians, but it is recently gaining importance and interest with the understanding of VSI pathology and maternal deaths because
of this condition . The primary danger for patient is that bleeding in the majority occurs between 1 and 2 weeks after delivery when patient
is often home and unaware that the hemorrhage is significant and potentially life threatening. In this paper, we present a rare form of
recurrent secondary postpartum hemorrhage in a woman after uncomplicated cesarean delivery, with review of the literature linked to the
management of this situation originating in the rare local VSI in placental implantation site, defective decidual homeostasis, and
coagulopathy confined to the uterus. A 24-year-old nulliparous primigravida woman was referred to our department in 40 + 3 weeks’ gestation
for delivery with history of regular uterine contractions and fetal breech presentation (cervix dilated to 6 cm, presenting part above the
interspinal line). She underwent uncomplicated cesarean section (operative technique sec. Pfannenstiel-Geppert, uterus closed by double-
layer interlocking separate resorbable sutures, followed by continuous suture of the visceral peritoneum) because of arrest of descent and
signs of fetal intrauterine hypoxia. The estimated blood loss was 500 ml, and a prophylactic dose of the first-generation cephalosporin was
administered intravenously. Antenatal course was uneventful, except untreated mild pregnancy anemia (hemoglobin (Hb): 102 g/L). Patient was
discharged home on the 5th day postpartum with Hb level of 91 g/L, normal coagulation parameters, and a recommendation for iron
supplementation and follow-up of blood count. On the 27th day postpartum, she experienced profuse vaginal bleeding with drop in the
hemoglobin level (70 g/L), but physical and transvaginal uterine ultrasound examinations failed to reveal the cause (regular uterine
involution, no signs of the retained placental tissue, or a visible anomaly of the cesarean scar). Conservative management with blood
transfusion units (total volume 670 ml) and uterotonics (oxytocin, methylergometrine) was helpful to stabilize the patient, and she was
discharged home within 4 days. Vaginal and cervical microbiological culture has showed disturbed vaginal flora with bacterial colonization
of species: Escherichia coli, Corynebacterium species, Candida species, and Streptococcus agalactiae group B. However, recommended
antibiotics therapy was not administered because of patient carelessness. On the 43rd day after delivery, she was readmitted with recurrent
severe vaginal bleeding (Hb 86 g/L). After initial blood transfusions (680 ml in total), the patient underwent hysteroscopy with curettage,
showing no retained products of placental tissue or cesarean scar dehiscence. She was discharged home with blood count of 118 g/L, normal
systemic coagulation parameters, and the recommendation of combined estrogen-progestin therapy (estrophem/2 mg/+
duphaston/dydrogesterone/10 mg daily) for early endometrium recovery. Despite this, on the 63rd day following delivery, the patient came
back to the hospital with heavy life-threatening vaginal bleeding, signs of hemorrhagic shock (Hb level 61 g/L), and symptoms of hemodynamic
instability (sweaty, pale looking, hypotension 90/50 mmHg, and tachycardia 110 b.p.m.). She underwent emergency abdominal supravaginal
hysterectomy. Macroscopic examination of the lower uterine segment showed no signs of hysterorrhaphy dehiscence during explorative
laparotomy. Similarly, microscopic examination of the uterus and placental implantation site did not confirm the scare dehiscence but
revealed large, dilated arteries containing partially occluding thrombi; trophoblastic cells within and surrounding the spiral arteries
confirmed by immunohistochemistry; endometrial simplex hyperplasia; and infection (diffuse lymphomonocyte infiltrate) of the implantation
site demonstrated by the presence of Escherichia coli, Corynebacterium species, Candida species, and Streptococcus agalactiae group B
(Figures 1, 2, 3). Additionally, microscopic sections of the blood clot attached to the placental implantation site contained inflamed
necrotizing decidua. No retained placenta or placenta accrete was noted on multiple sections. Moreover, the local intravascular coagulation
disturbance confined to the uterus was suggested. The postoperative recovery was uneventful, and the patient was discharged after 11 days.
One and four months later, she came for follow-up and was healthy. Local placental site vessel subinvolution (right above) with active
bleeding (left down). (H&E staining, magnification: ×100) Detailed view on subinvoluted vessel with partial obliteration by thrombi (H&E
staining, magnification: ×400). Lymphoid (lympho-plasmocytic) inflammatory infiltration on myometrial and basal endometrium border (H&E
staining, magnification: ×200). Postpartum hemorrhage is a serious obstetrics emergency occurring independently from the mode of delivery.
The traditional definition of PPH is based on quantification of blood loss but has variable criteria and several limitations across
countries or obstetrics national societies. In general, for mild PPH, a blood loss >500 ml and a severe blood loss >1000 ml are considered
after spontaneous delivery or above 1000 ml in cesarean section . Regardless of definitions used, only a visual assessment of blood loss is
inaccurate , and many postpartum women are subsequently underdiagnosed/overdiagnosed for PPH. Thus, alternative blood loss assessment is a
check for a drop in hematocrit of 10% counted before and after delivery . The bleeding after labor can occur within 24 hours (primary form
of PPH) or, later, from 24 hours after delivery until 6 weeks postpartum (secondary form) of PPH. During the process of physiological
subinvolution, bleeding from the uterus is regulated by several factors and mechanisms, for example, myometrial contraction and local
decidual and systemic coagulation factors leading to the minimalization of blood loss after delivery. Moreover, at the end of the third
trimester, the extravillous endovascular trophoblast (EVCT) for maternal endothelial cells in myometrial vessels located in the placental
site is starting to be replaced. With this vascular involution, change is playing a role also in the occlusive form of the intima layer
thickening via its fibrotic transformation, local endarteritis, thrombotization, and regeneration of the internal elastic lamina of the
uterus vascular system. In pathology, for example, with abnormal complement component activity or with the presence of long-lasting
expression of apoptotic genes as Bcl-2 inhibiting apoptosis and supporting cell survival, VSI develops (luminal partial occlusion of the
uterine vessels) in the previous placental site implantation. This would result in temporary occlusion of the vessels (mainly spiral
arteries in the superficial myometrium at the placental implantation site) where the newly formed thrombi undergo resorption within a period
of 2–3 weeks, which can lead to recurrent uterine bleeding and enlarged and boggy uterus. The possibility of such phenomenon is becoming
more obvious when bleeding reoccurs in regular periods. In our case, the uterine bleeding recurred in a period of 15–20 days (27th, 43rd,
and 63rd day postpartum). The severity of bleeding can be augmented by the presence of active inflammation (confirmed also in our case),
which may enhance through the production of proinflammatory factors of the local tissue coagulopathy and switch to the chronicity with the
development of chronic disseminated intravascular coagulation . Such “terrain” is predisposed to secondary PPH. The situation observed also
by our study. To diagnose the placental site VSI with the presence of local site inflammation and tissue coagulopathy is difficult. The
exact directed histological examination of bioptic material from the previous placental site can be helpful. The presence of vascular
subinvolution can be confirmed by the finding of EVCT. Unfortunately, we did not observe this in our histological specimens that were
obtained from hysteroscopy and curettage. In this situation, we have many other clinicians working under pressure and focused more on
finding potential myometrium scar dehiscence and observing the condition of the endometrium (hyperplasia after hormonal replacement
therapy). Omitting detection of EVCT and other possible helpful markers as immunostaining positivity for cytokeratin profile, inhibin alpha,
Mel-CAM, Bcl-2, elastin, complement components, or human placental lactogen is a mistake as they are enriching the information for the
direct diagnosis of VSI. Moreover, the histological evidence of VSI is also the presence of complement cascade markers (C1q, C3d, C4, and
C9) or immunoglobulins G, A, and M . However, although all of these markers can be evaluated, they did not explain the basic molecular
mechanism of placental site subinvolution. Surgical pathologist must therefore be aware of the major histopathologic findings of VSI in
every postpartum curettage or hysterectomy specimens. The exact pathophysiology of VSI is not known. Some suspect an immune component
leading to abnormal interaction between the maternal uterine cells and fetal trophoblast ; others, as mentioned above, altered complement
components activity or the presence of long-lasting expression of apoptotic genes (e.g., Bcl-2), inhibiting apoptosis . However, after the
review of the literature, there is one specific situation that is related to secondary postpartum hemorrhage and published in MEDLINE. The
search in this register (June 2011) under keywords “secondary or delay or unusual cause of postpartum hemorrhage” showed 18 papers dealing
with secondary postpartum hemorrhage where 9 papers reported cases of secondary PPH after cesarean section with two major conclusions:
placental site VSI or uterine artery pseudoaneurysm. To explain how cesarean section enhances the higher occurrence of VSI is difficult. One
may only speculate that some mechanic (e.g., altered myometrium contraction and involution, fibrotic-proliferation in scar), immune
(autoimmune and healing processes, reaction to suturing material used, local viral or bacterial inflammation, role of lymphomonocytic and
cytokine activity), or molecular mechanisms like overexpression and underexpression of growth factor genes involved in the uterine scarring
process, genes modifying the decidua replacement by regular endometrium, collagen deposition in the vessels of wound site, platelet
aggregation, factor XIII activity, and gene expressions of pro-angiogenic and anti-angiogenic factors and receptors at the maternal-fetal
interface are playing a role with a consequent secondary postpartum hemorrhage . Although the incidence of secondary postpartum hemorrhage
after cesarean section is very low (app. 0.1%) , therapeutic management is close to primary PPH and requires coordination and
multidisciplinary care, aiming the immediate hemodynamic stabilization of the patient, depleted blood volume, and development of
coagulopathy. Treatment usually falls into one of two options: surgical evacuation of the uterine cavity or medical treatment . Often, blood
and plasma unit transfusion is required. Speculum examination of the cervix and the lower genital tract to exclude possible lacerations is
obligatory. Furthermore, uterine ultrasound is mandatory to exclude a possibility of the retained placental tissue . In differential
diagnosis, it is necessary to exclude vaginal bleeding because of the severe endometritis, retained placental tissue, or gestational
trophoblastic disease, where laboratory findings of inflammatory markers (e.g., CRP, leucocytes), positive blood and vaginal cultures,
elevated βHCG levels, and expert ultrasound examination are essential for the adequate diagnosis. In conclusion, we can say that placental
site VSI is one of the rare forms of secondary PPH and is frequently underdiagnosed by clinicians. The histological confirmation of dilated
and “clustered”-shaped myometrial arteries partially occluded by thrombi of variable “age,” together with the presence of endovascular
extravillous trophoblast, confirms the diagnosis. However, this is done mainly after the urgent hysterectomy. Furthermore, we believe that
this type of secondary PPH is of idiopathic than of iatrogenic cause, and our previously published data prove that there are no known
predictive factors for this pathology (e.g., clinical assessment with/without transabdominal ultrasound). The obstetricians and caregivers
are demanding for an early recognition of severe forms of a secondary PPH, thus emphasizing that VSI in the placental implantation site
could be beneficial for targeted therapy and may preserve woman’s fertility. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for
publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this
journal. The authors report no declarations of interest. PZ and KD contributed equally to write up of this case report. SK and KBB were
involved in the clinical management of this patient. KK and LS were involved in histopathological analysis. JD interpreted the data and
critically revised the manuscript. All authors have read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can
be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2393/14/80/prepub This work was supported by the ITMS no. 26220120036 project “Centre of
excellence for perinatology research II” supported by EU sources. We would like to thank Jozef Kornan, M.D. for the personal assistance in
patient management and data collection.
