SUPPORT AND FINANCIAL DISCLOSURE: The authors declare that they have no relevant financial interests. Renal histology results are very
scarce in dengue-associated rhabdomyolysis patients developing acute kidney injury (AKI). We report a case of dengue fever-induced AKI
associated to rhabdomyolysis with a renal biopsy showing acute tubular necrosis (ATN) and renal deposition of myoglobin. A 28-year-old
patient who presented dengue fever (DF) complicated by severe AKI and rhabdomyolysis is described. The patient required hemodialysis for
three weeks. A renal biopsy revealed ATN with positive staining for myoglobin in the renal tubuli. The patient was discharged with recovered
renal function. In conclusion, this case report described a biopsy proven ATN associated to DF-induced rhabdomyolysis, in which renal
deposition of myoglobin was demonstrated. We suggest that serum creatine phosphokinase should be monitored in DF patients to allow for an
early diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis and the institution of renal protective measures. Resultados de histologia renal são muito escassos em
pacientes com rabdomiólise e injúria renal aguda (IRA) associada a dengue. Descrevemos caso de dengue complicado por rabdomiólise e IRA no
qual a biópsia renal mostrou necrose tubular aguda (NTA) e deposição renal de mioglobina. Paciente de 28 anos que apresentou dengue
complicado por IRA grave e rabdomiólise é descrito. Ele necessitou de diálise por três semanas. A biópsia renal mostrou NTA, com
imunohistoquímica fortemente positiva para mioglobina nos túbulos renais. O paciente recebeu alta com recuperação da função renal. Em
conclusão, descrevemos caso de dengue complicado por IRA e rabdomiólise, em que a biópsia renal mostrou NTA e deposição de mioglobina.
Sugerimos que creatinofosfoquinase deve ser monitorizada em pacientes com dengue para permitir o diagnóstico precoce de rabdomiólise e a
instituição de medidas protetoras para o rim. Dengue is currently the most important infectious viral mosquito-borne disease in the world.
In recent years, there has been an explosive outbreak of this infectious disease, mainly affecting tropical countries, but also the warmer
areas of developed countries, such as the southern United States. In fact, the number of cases worldwide that are annually reported to the
World Health Organization (WHO) increased from approximately 900 in the 1950s to almost one million at present41. Dengue is a multifaceted
disease that can manifest as an undifferentiated fever, classical dengue fever (DF), dengue hemorrhagic fever (DHF) and dengue shock
syndrome (DSS)41. Different renal injuries have been described in dengue patients, such as an increase in serum creatinine, proteinuria,
glomerulonephritis, hemolytic-uremic syndrome and acute kidney injury (AKI)4,10,16,37,39. Most cases of AKI have been associated with DHF or
DSS6,7,20–23,25,27,34,40, but AKI has also been described in DF13–15,30,31, albeit less commonly. Similarly, rhabdomyolysis with1,5,7,19 and
without AKI9,24,28 has been described in dengue patients. Renal histology results from patients with dengue-associated AKI are scarce and to
the best of our knowledge, there were no previous cases of biopsy proven ATN with renal myoglobin deposition due to rhabdomyolysis
associated with DF31,37,39. We report a case of a young patient who developed AKI and rhabdomyolysis associated with DF. A renal biopsy
revealed acute tubular necrosis and positive staining for myoglobin in the renal tubuli. The literature on dengue-associated renal injury
and rhabdomyolysis is reviewed and discussed. A 28-year-old married male painter, from Sao Paulo, SP, Brazil, previously healthy, presented
a 20-day history of fever, myalgia, muscle weakness, cough, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, epigastric pain and lower limb edema. The patient
history did not disclose any epidemiological clue for a specific infectious disease nor had he receive any nephrotoxic drug. Laboratory
blood analysis at the time of the first hospital admission revealed the following: creatinine (SCr) 11.6 mg/dL, urea 277 mg/dL, sodium 124
mEq/L, potassium 6.6 mEq/L, bicarbonate 15.6 mEq/L, SGOT 1,206 IU/L, SGPT 853 IU/L, amylase 121 IU/L, total bilirubin 0.38 mg/dL, alkaline
phosphatase 68 IU/L, gamma-glutamyltransferase 104 IU/L, hemoglobin 14.2 g/dL, leukocytes 10,200/mm3, platelets 292,000/mm3 and C-reactive
protein (CRP) 1.95 mg/dL. The urinalysis disclosed a specific gravity of 1,027, pH 5.0, protein 3+, glucose traces, red blood cells > 1
million/mL, leukocytes > 1 million/mL and no casts. Renal replacement therapy (RRT) was initiated. After one week, he was transferred to
Hospital das Clinicas, University of Sao Paulo Medical School, Sao Paulo, Brazil. At admission, he was pale, had a blood pressure of 140/90
mmHg and oliguric (150 m/24 h), with a dialysis catheter in his right internal jugular vein and had no evidence of systemic hemorrhagic
phenomena. His physical exam was otherwise unremarkable. Laboratory tests performed at admission revealed: SCr 14.8 mg/dL, serum urea 323
mg/dL, hemoglobin 11.8 g/dL, leukocytes 9,400/mm3, platelets 469,000/mm3, albumin 3.6 g/L and CRP 2.5 mg/dL. The patient presented serum
creatine phosphokinase (CK) 4,063 IU/L, serum lactic dehydrogenase 657 IU/L, uric acid 13.4 mg/dL and phosphorus 9.2 mg/dL, suggesting
rhabdomyolysis. The urinalysis showed protein > 1 g/L, red blood cells > 100/field, and leukocytes 20/field. A subsequent 24 h proteinuria
showed 0.83 g of protein/24 h. Anti-nuclear factor, antineutrophil cytoplasmic antibodies, C3 and C4 complement fractions, rheumatoid factor
and anticardiolipin antibody levels were normal. A renal ultrasound disclosed normal kidneys. Serology for HIV, leptospirosis, hepatitis C,
hepatitis B and syphilis were negative. Patient tested positive for hepatitis A and cytomegalovirus immunoglobulin G. Five days after
admission, a positive test for dengue was obtained (IgM, ELISA assay). As the patient had a clinical picture and serology consistent with
dengue infection without hemorrhagic phenomena, low platelet count or evidence of plasma leakage, he was diagnosed with a case of dengue
fever complicated by rhabdomyolysis and AKI. After two weeks on RRT, due to non-recovery of renal function, a percutaneous renal biopsy was
performed. The biopsy included 11 glomeruli with normal volume and cellularity, dilated tubules with foci of epithelial cellular necrosis,
interstitial area with focal fibrosis (approximately 10%) and normal arterioles. Immunofluorescence assays for IgA, IgG, IgM, C1q, C3 and
fibrinogen were negative. The pathological diagnosis was acute tubular necrosis. Myoglobin immunohistochemistry staining was positive in the
renal tubuli (Fig. 1 A and B). Fig. 1 A. Light microscopy of renal tissue stained with Masson's trichrome (20X). Note the presence of
diffuse acute tubular necrosis and preserved glomeruli. In the interstitial area, thin fibrosis lines and edema are evident. B.
Immunostaining of renal tissue. Note the positive immunostaining for myoglobin in the cytoplasm of the tubular cells. Three weeks after
admission, RRT was interrupted and patient was discharged with SCr 2.4 mg/dL, normal urine output and urinalysis with pH 5.5, specific
gravity 1015, blood +, protein 0.3 g/dL, 12 WBCs and 3 RBCs. After three weeks, he returned to the outpatient facility with no complains and
an unremarkable physical examination. Laboratory tests performed at that time revealed a SCr of 0.98 mg/dL. To the best of our knowledge,
the current case is the first biopsy proven description of rhabdomyolysis and AKI associated with DF in which ATN and myoglobin staining in
the renal tubuli was demonstrated. There are only four previously reported cases of dengue-induced rhabdomyolysis and AKI (Table 1), but
renal biopsy was not performed on those patients1,7,15,19. All of them presented elevated CK levels, three studies reported myalgia, two
reported muscle weaknesses and three studies presented dark urine, positive urinary myoglobin and oliguria. Renal replacement therapy was
performed in two cases. Table 1Comparison of the current case with the cases of dengue with rhabdomyolysis and AKI previously
describedAuthor, year, countryGender, ageType of dengueMyalgiaMuscle weaknessDark urineUMyoOliguriaCK (IU/L)Cr (mg/dL)Renal
biopsyRRTOutcomeGunasekera et al, 2000, Ceylon (ref 14)Female, 28 yNRyesyes++yes>5,0008.8noPD, HFrecoveryDavis & Bourke, 2004, East Timor
(ref 7)Male, 33 yDHFNRNRNRNRNR17,548NRnoNRdeathKarakus et al, 2007, Suriname (ref 19)Male, 66 yDSSyesNR++yes156,9003.6noNRdeathAcharya et
al, 2010, India (ref 1)Male, 40 yNRyesyes++yes29,0002.6noNRNRCurrent case, 2013, BrazilMale, 28 yDFyesNDyes4,06314.8ATNHDrecoveryUMyo:
urinary myoglobin; CK: serum creatine phosphokinase; Cr: serum creatinine; RRT: renal replacement therapy; NR: not reported; PD: peritoneal
dialysis; HF: hemofiltration; DHF: dengue hemorrhagic fever; DSS: dengue shock syndrome; DF: dengue fever; ND: not done; ATN: acute tubular
necrosis; HD: hemodialysis. UMyo: urinary myoglobin; CK: serum creatine phosphokinase; Cr: serum creatinine; RRT: renal replacement therapy;
NR: not reported; PD: peritoneal dialysis; HF: hemofiltration; DHF: dengue hemorrhagic fever; DSS: dengue shock syndrome; DF: dengue fever;
ND: not done; ATN: acute tubular necrosis; HD: hemodialysis. There are also case descriptions of dengue-associated rhabdomyolysis with
myalgia, dark urine and highly elevated CK levels without AKI development5,7,9,24. In addition, AKI was not reported in series of patients
with dengue-induced quadriparesis or myositis and high CK levels28,33. Although rhabdomyolysis is a well-known risk factor for AKI, the
presence of other simultaneous injury factors, such as hypovolemia or dehydration, acidosis and aciduria, must be present to cause
clinically relevant myoglobinuria-induced renal injury. AKI has also been reported in DHF, DSS and DF without rhabdomyolysis. Hemodynamic
instability, hemolysis, glomerular injury and direct action of viral particles on renal tissue have been considered as possible injury
mechanisms6,10,25,30,32,34,37. In fact, the current patient presented proteinuria but the renal biopsy did not disclose glomerular injury.
Myositis and rhabdomyolysis have been considered as rare complications of dengue infection but few authors have systematically assessed
their occurrences. MALHEIROS et al. 26 performed muscle biopsies in 15 patients with DF and myalgia during an epidemic outbreak in Brazil.
Only three patients presented mild increased CK levels. They found mononuclear infiltrates in 12 biopsies, lipid accumulations in 11 and
rare foci of myonecrosis in three (one case had an elevated CK level). Seven out of 16 patients with serologically proven dengue infections
in India presented muscle weakness and increased CK levels18. A muscle biopsy was performed in one patient, revealing myositis18. SAID et
al. prospectively assessed CK levels and the incidence of myositis in 101 patients with serologically proven dengue in Saudi Arabia35. In
that study, 91% of the patients had elevated CK, 63.4% complained of myalgia and 2.9% had muscle weakness. MISRA et al. evaluated 39
patients with positive dengue serology during a dengue outbreak in Northern India29. Transient muscle dysfunction with CK levels of
approximately 1,000 U/L was observed in 11 (73.3%) patients with DF, in 18 (81.8%) with DHF and in the two patients with DSS. This
collection of data suggests that muscle injury is not uncommon in dengue and has probably been underreported. The pathogenesis of dengue-
associated muscle injury is unclear. Different mechanisms have been hypothesized, such as direct viral invasion of and immune-mediated
injury to the muscle fibers. Striated skeletal muscles from mice inoculated with dengue type 2 viruses exhibited myofibril destruction,
sarcoplasm involution, mitochondrial changes and aggregates of electron-dense material and cytoplasmic glycogen particles32. The dengue
virus has demonstrated high efficiency in infecting and replicating in human primary muscle satellite cells38 and muscle cells were
demonstrated to be highly susceptible to in vitro infection by the dengue 2 virus. The infected cells exhibited increased expression of
inflammatory genes and the IP-10 protein and elevated intracellular calcium36. Dengue virus infection has also been associated with
increased production of inflammatory cytokines which may cause muscle injury11,12. In conclusion, DF may cause rhabdomyolysis-associated
ATN. Dengue virus-associated muscle injury is probably under-recognized and underreported. CK levels should be monitored in dengue patients
to allow for an early diagnosis of rhabdomyolysis and the institution of renal protective measures. Written informed consent was obtained
from the patient for the publication of this Case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review
by the Series Editor of this journal.
