Delivery of coronary stents can be challenging, but the use of a second or ‘buddy’ wire helps the progression of equipment through tortuous
and rigid vessels. We successfully positioned a coronary stent in a distal lesion, intentionally jailing the buddy wire during stent
delivery. The jailed wire was then used to proceed further with proximal coronary stenting. We report 10 cases using either the jailed or
the non-jailed wire for this modified ‘buddy-in-jail’ technique. During percutaneous coronary intervention, ‘buddy wiring’ is an inexpensive
and routinely used technique, helping the progression of balloons and stents through tortuous coronary vessels (1): a second or ‘buddy’ wire
is placed parallel to the wire, which is used to guide catheter-balloons and stents. Usual practice involves removing the buddy wire as soon
as a stent is positioned in the target lesion, thus before stent delivery. Published in 2007 by Kaluski et al. (2), the method of
intentionally ‘burying’ or ‘jailing’ a buddy wire by stenting a proximal lesion was again described by Bagnall and Spratt in 2009 (3). The
‘buddy in jail’ wire secures the guiding catheter and provides a better support. It subsequently makes treatment of distal lesions easier,
as the balloon(s) and stent(s) being advanced over the non-buddy, non-jailed wire. In a first difficult case, involving a calcified and
tortuous large right coronary artery (RCA) with a stenosis on both proximal and mid segments, the buddy wire technique allowed us to reach
the more distal lesion with a 4–15 mm stent through a 5F left transradial access. Given the subsequent need for a longer stent at the
proximal level and given the extreme difficulties we encountered during the first stent positioning within the more distal lesion, we
decided to leave the buddy wire and to jail it during the stent deployment. The newly jailed wire was then loaded with a second stent (4–18
mm), leaving the other wire free and, therefore, in the ‘buddy position’. The stent advancement was easier and was facilitated by the
presence of a ‘buddy’ wire (better traction) and the support and stability provided by the distally jailed wire. Before delivery of this
proximal stent, the second and still free (‘buddy’) wire was removed. Given the ease of the process and its successful outcome, we decided
to re-use the same distal ‘stent jail (or trap)’ technique. Between September 2011 and September 2012 amongst 180 consecutive PCIs, the
technique was successfully applied to 10 male patients with challenging anatomies due to multifocal, complex, atherosclerotic lesions
involving one coronary artery. For cases 7, 9 and 10, after distal stent deployment resulted in jailing the buddy wire, the second stent was
advanced over the non-jailed wire. For these cases, we had to position the second stent in direct continuity with the distal one. However
the stent-balloon-catheter tip would have been stopped at the entry of the deployed stent if loaded over the jailed wire. Therefore, the
desired direct apposition would not have been possible because of a gap the size of the balloon-catheter nose. Table I summarizes the main
clinical and procedural characteristics of the 10 cases. Standard guidewires were used. Size 5 or 6F guiding catheters (RRAD, EBU Launcher®
and special order 5F VDL Sherpa® from Medtronic, 6F Voda RunWay® from Boston Scientific, 6F VDR heartrail II™ from Terumo as special order)
allowed successful stenting in all cases by a transradial access (left for 3 cases). Usually, all our cases would have been classified as
difficult and challenging due to combination of calcifications, bends, tortuosities, as well as the length and severity of the diseased
segments. 7 cases were ad hoc PCIs and 3 were elective procedures. Mean age was 69 (min 39, max 85), mean BMI was 28 ± 4, mean fluoroscopy
time was 12 min 24 s (± 7 min 45 s) and mean volume of contrast was 214 ml (± 74). 6 right coronary arteries, 1 Circumflex and 3 left
coronary arteries were treated. Hospital stays were uneventful after all PCIs. Case 6 depicts the use of the jailed wire for the second
stenting. Figure 1 depicts the distal ‘buddy-in-jail’ technique using either the jailed or the non-jailed wire. Diagram of the ‘stent jail’
technique: A. Proximal stenting using the jailed wire. B. Proximal stenting using the non-jailed wire. Clinical and procedural
characteristics. PVD, peripheral vascular disease; CRF, chronic renal failure; TRA, transradial access; BMS, bare metal stent; DES, drug-
eluting stent; PCI, percutaneous coronary intervention; ‘VDL’ and ‘VDR’ are special order shaped guiding catheters. A 60-year-old male,
heavy smoker and hypercholesterolemic was admitted for NSTEMI. Performed by 5F right transradial access, the coronary angiogram showed
severe multifocal RCA disease, with a highly calcified and tortuous vessel. The mid to distal segment was the most severely diseased. Ad hoc
PCI was decided, starting with a 5F RRAD Launcher from Medtronic as guiding catheter. Buddy wiring was planned from the beginning with one
SION (Asahi) as main wire and one Balance Middle Weight® (BMW) (Abbott Vascular) as the buddy wire. Starting from the distal lesion, we then
proceeded with balloon debulking: 2–10, 2.75–10 and finally 3–10 balloons (Sapphire II, OrbusNeich™) were successfully advanced and inflated
through all lesions. Despite this debulking and the presence of the BMW buddy wire, a bare metal stent (BMS) 3–13 (Azule™SDS, OrbusNeich™)
failed to reach the target distal lesion: the stent was unable to cross the bend at the level of the residual mid RCA lesion. We then
changed to a shorter and smaller BMS (2.75–09 PRO-kinetic Energy®, Biotronik), which fortunately reached the distal lesion. It was deployed
at 18 atmospheres, jailing the BMW wire. This BMW wire, now in a jailed position, was used subsequently to load the same 3–13 Azule™ stent
which had previously failed. We left the Sion wire as the buddy wire. The stent was successfully pushed forward and positioned at the mid
RCA lesion. Before delivery, the Sion wire was removed. Before un-jailing the BMW wire, we further expanded the Azule stent with a non-
compliant balloon. The final angiographic result was good. A. LAO view: severe multifocal right coronary artery disease, the artery being
very calcified and tortuous. The distal lesion was the most severe. B. Jailing the buddy wire during distal stenting. Note the actual shape
of the 5F guide catheter in a ‘power position’. C. More proximal stent positioning over the jailed wire (JW), the free wire has been pulled
back (FW). D. Final result. Stenting of severely and diffusely diseased coronary arteries can be technically challenging, particularly in
cases of vessels with acute bending, tortuosities, or rigid segments due to calcified atherosclerotic plaques or due to previously stented
segments. Reaching lesions with such rigid material as metallic coronary stents can be difficult (4). Likewise, large coronary arteries may
require very large stents: this extra stiff piece of angioplasty material does not accommodate to bends found in front of a target lesion.
Optimization of angioplasty materials (guiding catheter, coronary guide-wire, balloon-catheter and coronary stent) and certain techniques
(5) may help. Table II summarizes some available solutions for addressing difficult anatomies during PCI. Solutions for difficult PCI.
Amongst them, the buddy wire technique (1) is often applied: it uses a second wire forwarded into the distal bed of the target vessel
alongside the main one. This ‘buddy’ wire acts as a track and helps the progression of the balloon or the stent towards the target lesion.
The technique usually involves removal of the buddy wire as soon as the un-deployed stent is positioned in the target lesion. Since
September 2011, we have successfully used a modified ‘buddy-in jail’ technique (2,3) for difficult coronary anatomies: the previously
described method intentionally jails a buddy wire during the deployment of a proximal stent. The loaded wire for this proximal stenting
remains free and is then used for treatment of more distal lesion(s). Rather than jailing the buddy wire in a proximal lesion, we jailed the
wire during stenting of the most distant stenosis to be treated. This modified method provides two advantages. The first one is that the
most distant lesion is treated and stented first, as is commonly recommended. Indeed, most operators feel uncomfortable stenting proximally
at first. Being successful in stenting proximal lesion(s) does not warrant success for the distal disease. Second, this modified technique
provides the benefit of two usable wires for further proximal stent delivery: both wires, either the trapped wire (when no direct apposition
is required) or the free wire, may be used for further proximal ballooning or stenting (Figure 1). Of course, with the proximal ‘buddy-in-
jail’ method initially described, only the wire used for the delivery of the proximal stent may be further used for treatment of the
remaining distal lesions. The jailed buddy wire is indeed ‘buried’ proximally and out for further catheter-balloon loading. In both cases,
the presence of a jailed wire secures the guiding catheter and gives the extra support or the guiding catheter stability required for easier
distal stenting. In circumstances requiring the buddy wiring technique and particularly when equipment advancement is difficult, it should
be wise to consider our modified buddy-in jail technique rather than the classic technique. Our method consisting of distally jailing the
buddy wire described herein should find its best indication in circumstances of a tortuous diseased vessel at its proximal and or mid
segment combined with a discrete distal lesion: a short stent may be expected to reach the distal lesion, thanks to the buddy wire. The use
of the jailed wire will subsequently facilitate proximal stenting, particularly when large and/or long stents must be delivered. The
proposed method (Table III) has some limitations. Proximal versus distal buddy-in-jail techniques. First, it requires a preliminary
successful distal stenting. After delivery of a stent at the most distant lesion, often—but not always—the difficult part of the case is
over and done with. Nevertheless, the disease may significantly impact several consecutive segments and each stenosis alone presents
difficulties. A more ‘proximal’ stenosis may be located in a quite distal coronary segment as illustrated by case 5: a wire was jailed
during the right posterior descending artery stenting, allowing the placement of a longer and larger stent at the mid to distal RCA segment.
Moreover, treating more proximal coronary artery stenosis implies delivery of larger and thus stiffer materials. Case 6 illustrates the
extra support obtained when using the jailed wire: a stent—which initially failed to cross a proximal stenosis encountered before a distal
lesion despite the use of a buddy wire—was thereafter easily placed across the same lesion once loaded over a jailed wire. Our procedures
would also have been successful using standard techniques but this distal ‘stent jail’ technique made the proximal stenting particularly
easy, rapid and uneventful for all our 10 reported cases. Furthermore, the strategy of jailing a wire after crossing proximal and distal
lesions with a small short stent might provide the extra back-up allowing subsequent easy passage of larger and longer devices, otherwise
impossible. This could be a real advantage in challenging anatomies, reducing the procedure time and the risk of ending up with multiple
overlapping stents. Second, concerns about potential difficulties in pulling back the distally jailed wire called for the implementation of
two rules. The first is related to the distal lesion, particularly if it is calcified: the danger of unravelling a wire or not being able to
remove a wire trapped between a stent and calcium makes imperative a good lesion debulking with adequately sized balloon(s) prior to
stenting. The second one concerns the wires: we must carefully avoid having both wires jailed or jailing the same wire with two consecutive
stents. As soon as the proximal stent is well positioned and before its release, the wire that is not loaded with the stent has to be pulled
back (see Figure 1). Accordingly to the technique, we always remove only one trapped wire and a jailed wire is never buried by two
consecutive stents (Figure 1b). This process must be as easy as the pull back of the wire trapped and bent in a coronary bifurcation as
commonly seen in the provisional stenting technique. Concern about possible peeling of the hydrophilic coating during the pull-back favors
using non-coated wires. From a practical point of view and in order to avoid mistakes, we also recommend to ‘mark’ either the buddy or the
free wire on the working field (or to use wires of different colors). Caution is also required when using the distally jailed wire for
proximal stenting: the tip of the stent-balloon-catheter will be stopped at the level of the wire entrapment, leaving a gap at least
equivalent in length to the size of the nose of the stent-balloon-catheter. Direct apposition is thus impossible. Finally, the technique
could possibly be limited to small sized catheters with soft tips. We performed the technique with 5F and 6F (× 2) guide catheters. In some
cases, the removal of the jailed wire pushed the tip of the guiding catheter forward. Even if it is well aligned with the presence of two
wires, this forward move may induce vessel damage and even dissection at the coronary artery ostium and must be controlled. One possible way
to minimize such a hazard is to un-jail the trapped wire with the last inflated balloon still positioned at the coronary ostium. Removing
the jailed wire before expansion of the second stent may also result in a forward motion of the stent. Thus, after freeing the wire and
before deploying the stent, its correct position must be checked. When addressing multifocal severe atherosclerotic disease of one major
coronary artery, we propose to use the technique of intentionally jailing a buddy wire when deploying a distally positioned stent,
subsequently using either the jailed wire or the free wire for further proximal stenting. The jailed wire will be used for maximal support
and only if the second stent does not need to be in close apposition with the distal one. When properly used, these ‘stent jail’ techniques
have the potential to improve PCI safety through facilitated coronary stent delivery. Declaration of interest: The authors report no
conflicts of interest. The authors alone are responsible for the content and writing of the paper.
