We describe the case of a patient with an intramural hematoma and floating thrombus after cardiopulmonary resuscitation. The 92-year old man
had a cardiac arrest due to ventricular fibrillation and witnesses immediately initiated manual cardiopulmonary resuscitation.
Transesophageal echocardiography was performed immediately on hospital admission because the patient was in cardiogenic shock. In addition
to an akinetic anterior wall, examination of the descending thoracic aorta demonstrated an intramural hematoma and a floating intra-aortic
thrombus at a distance of 40cm from the dental arch. There was no aortic dissection. The thrombus was attributed to aortic compression
during cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Although the aortic thrombus and intramural hematoma were not associated with any complications in
this patient, insertion of an intra-aortic balloon may have led to aortic rupture or embolic events. Transesophageal echocardiography should
be performed, when available, prior to insertion of an intra-aortic balloon for counterpulsation in patients who have undergone
cardiopulmonary resuscitation. Descrevemos o caso de um paciente com hematoma intramural e trombo flutuante após ressuscitação
cardiopulmonar. Esse homem, de 92 anos de idade, teve uma parada cardíaca causada por fibrilação atrial e testemunhas iniciaram
imediatamente manobras manuais de ressuscitação cardiopulmonar. Ao ser admitido no hospital, o paciente apresentava-se em choque
cardiogênico, sendo, então, imediatamente submetido a ecocardiografia transesofágica. Além de uma parede anterior acinética, o exame da
aorta torácica descendente mostrou um hematoma intramural e um trombo intra-aórtico flutuante a uma distância de 40cm do arco dental. Não
havia dissecção da aorta. O trombo foi atribuído à compressão aórtica durante a ressuscitação cardiopulmonar. Embora o trombo aórtico e o
hematoma intramural não tenham se associado a qualquer complicação nesse paciente, a inserção de um balão intra-aórtico poderia ter levado a
uma ruptura da aorta ou a eventos embólicos. Recomenda-se a realização de ecocardiografia transesofágica, quando disponível, antes da
inserção de um balão intra-aórtico de contrapulsação em pacientes submetidos à ressuscitação cardiopulmonar. Cardiopulmonary resuscitation
(CPR) is a life saving procedure. However, it can be associated with thoracic and especially skeletal injuries, although direct cardiac
damage is rare.(1-6) A few cases of acute intramural aortic hematoma leading to fatal aortic rupture have been described.(4,7) We describe a
case of aortic hematoma combined with a floating intraluminal thrombus associated with manual CPR. A 92-year old male experienced cardiac
arrest due to ventricular fibrillation. Witnesses immediately initiated manual CPR, relayed by a medical team upon arrival on site.
Circulation was restored after 20 minutes. Electrocardiogram showed an anterior ST segment elevation myocardial infarction suggesting an
occlusion of the left anterior descending artery. Hypothermia was initiated during transfer to the hospital. The patient was admitted to the
emergency room in cardiogenic shock, requiring immediate administration of norepinephrine. Transesophageal echocardiography was performed
immediately to evaluate cardiac function. In addition to an akinetic anterior wall, examination of the aorta, before possible insertion of
an aortic counterpulsation balloon in this elderly patient, showed an intramural hematoma and a floating intraluminal thrombus in the
descending aorta, at a distance of 40cm from the dental arch (Figures 1 and 2, videos available in electronic supplement). There was no
aortic dissection. The thrombus was attributed to aortic compression during CPR. Of note, there were no other signs of thoracic trauma (no
rib nor sternum fracture). Shortly after admission, a coronary angiogram was performed using radial arterial access and occlusion of the
left main coronary artery was treated by endovascular stenting. In view of the advanced age of the patient, presence of an intra-aortic
hematoma(8,9) and persistent cardiogenic shock, stenting of the aorta was not performed. The patient was treated with unfractionated heparin
and clopidogrel. A second transesophageal echocardiography performed 2 days later showed that the intra-aortic thrombus had disappeared but
the intramural hematoma persisted. There was no evidence of systemic embolization. The patient made a good neurologic recovery but died of
severe cardiac failure on the 9th day. An autopsy could not be performed due to relative refusal. Transverse view of descending aorta. An
intramural hematoma and intraluminal clot are visualized at 40cm from the dental arch. Longitudinal view of descending aorta. This view
shows the floating aspect of the clot. Aortic thrombus may occur spontaneously in patients with a normal aorta or in the presence of
atherosclerotic plaques. It can also occur in aortic trauma.(10) In this patient, the thrombus may have been related to aortic trauma
induced by chest compressions during CPR. Manual compression CPR can result in significant thoracic trauma with multiple rib fractures,
bilateral pulmonary contusions, lacerations of intercostal arteries, myocardial laceration and hemopericardium.(1-5) Acute intramural aortic
hematomas, which rarely lead to fatal aortic rupture,(4,7) have been described as an uncommon complication of CPR. To the best of our
knowledge, there is no report of endoluminal thrombus (combined with intramural hematoma) associated with CPR in the literature. Given the
paucity of reports in the literature, it is difficult to identify factors associated with CPR-induced aortic lesions. The use of mechanical
devices may be involved in some cases(4) although they do not increase the incidence of serious complications.(2) Of note, only manual
compressions were used in the patient we describe. The age of the patient and the fact that the CPR was performed by laypersons may perhaps
have played a role. Indeed skeletal injuries are more frequent in older than in younger patients and when CPR is performed by bystanders
rather than trained personnel.(6) Nevertheless, age alone should not be used as a reason for not performing CPR, because old patients also
benefit from CPR, especially when associated with neuroprotective measures as in this patient.(11) Optimal treatment for such aortic lesions
is debated. Mobile aortic thrombi are often associated with thromboembolic events.(12) Heparin remains the first-line therapy for mobile
aortic thrombi,(13,14) and thrombectomy through direct aortotomy and aortic stenting can also be considered.(13,15) Usually, post-CPR aortic
lesions are diagnosed at autopsy.(4) Although the aortic thrombus and intramural hematoma were not associated with any complications in this
patient, insertion of an intra-aortic balloon may have resulted in aortic rupture or embolic events. Transesophageal echocardiography should
be performed, when available, prior to insertion of intra-aortic balloon counterpulsation in patients who have undergone cardiopulmonary
resuscitation. Conflicts of interest: None.
