Bevacizumab is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody that selectively blocks the activity of vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF)
receptor and it is used in metastatic colorectal patients. We present here a case of fatal necrotizing fasciitis in a patient during
bevacizumab treatment for colorectal cancer. In our review of the literature, necrotizing fasciitis was not reported before or during
bevacizumab treatment. Bevacizumab is a recombinant humanized monoclonal antibody that selectively blocks the activity of vascular
endothelial growth factor (VEGF) receptor. The addition of bevacizumab to first or second line chemotherapy was associated with longer
overall survival (OS) and progression free survival (PFS) in metastatic colorectal patients. The adverse events associated with bevacizumab
include hypertension, proteinuria, thromboembolism, impaired wound healing, bleeding, perforation, reversible leukoencephalopathy syndrome,
skin rash, and infusion-related hypersensitivity reactions. We present here a case of fatal necrotizing fasciitis in a patient during
bevacizumab treatment for colorectal cancer. A 49-year-old man was admitted to clinic with rectal bleeding. Low anterior resection with
ileostomy was performed for rectal mass 5 cm from anus. According to the tumor, node, metastases classification, the pathological stage of
the carcinoma was T3N1M0 (stage IIIA). The patient was treated with adjuvant 45 Gy chemoradiotherapy with 5-fluorouracil 225 mg/m2 daily and
then fluorouracil-leucovorin-oxaliplatin (FOLFOX4) regimen. After two cycles of FOLFOX4 regimen, serum carcinoembryonic antigen levels had
increased. In the radiologic evaluation with chest and abdominal computed tomography, new liver metastases in both lobes were detected. The
hepatic metastases were unresectable, hence the patient shifted to regimen of 5-fluorouracil-leucovorin-irinotecan (FOLFIRI). After 12
courses of the FOLFIRI regimen every 2 weeks, the chemotherapy was stopped due to the stable liver metastases. Because of the new metastatic
lesions in the liver and pelvic recurrence, bevacizumab added to FOLFIRI regimen. After 10 days of the third cycle of the FOLFIRI-
bevacizumab regimen, the patient was admitted with fever, weakness, abdominal pain and erythema of the proximal side of right thigh. The
laboratory evaluation revealed a white blood cell count of 22.000/μl (normal value 4,400-11,000/μl) with increased C-reactive protein to 160
mg/l (normal value: 0-10 mg/l). The magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) of the pelvis showed widespread significant air-fluid level abscess in
the tissues of right gluteus maximus, gluteus minimus and vastus muscles. A clinical diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis was made.
Ultrasonography-guided drainage of the abscess was performed and 10F pigtail catheter was inserted to the abscess location. The
microbiological culture of the material was revealed vancomycin-resistant enterococcus (VRE), Escherichia coli, and Bacteroides fragilis.
The patient was treated with linezolid, imipenem, and metronidazole. Patient responded to treatment for initial few days, but on the 7th day
of the antibiotic treatment, acute renal failure and septic shock was developed. The patient died due to the refractory septic shock.
Necrotizing fasciitis is an uncommon severe soft tissue infection involving the subcutaneous fat and fascia. There are an estimated 3.5
cases of necrotizing fasciitis per 100,000 persons, with a case-fatality rate of 24% despite immediate treatment. Approximately of the
60-70% of cases are polymicrobial. Severe and acute onset of the pain at the infectious site is the most common clinical presentation. The
risk factors of necrotizing fasciitis are diabetes mellitus, malnutrion, trauma, operative interventions, and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAİDs) usage. Rarely, necrotizing fasciitis can develop due to all-trans-retinoic acid, bisphosphonates, and radiotherapy. In
addition, necrotizing fasciitis has also been reported in renal transplant recipient who treated with FK506. Serious adverse events with
bevacizumab treatment were hemorrhage, gastrointestinal perforation, and arterial thromboembolic events. Arterial thromboemebolic events
were seen between 1 and 2% of patients during bevacizumab treatment. One of the pathophysiologic mechanism of necrotizing fasciitis is
subcutaneous arteries thrombosis and tissue ischemia, bevacizumab can be the etiologic factor for this. The Naranjo probability score
revealed that it was probable (+5) that bevacizumab might be responsible for necrotizing fasciitis. We believe that in our patient,
necrotizing fasciitis is due to bevacizumab treatment because there was no additional risk factor and there is temporal relationship between
necrotizing fasciitis and bevacizumab treatment. In conclusion, we presented fatal necrotizing fasciitis in a patient during bevacizumab
treatment for rectal cancer. Although precise mechanism is not clear, necrotizing fasciitis is a fulminant disease and can be observed
during bevacizumab treatment. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared
