The malignant transformation of abdominal wall endometriosis is a rare event and poorly understood. Less than 30 cases have been reported in
the literature. Most of the reported cases have a solitary tumor in the abdominal scar. A few cases have metastasis. Here we report a case
of clear cell carcinoma in abdominal wall endometriosis with bladder and lymph system metastasis. The patient had a history of abdominal
wall endometriosis and recently developed symptoms of urgent urination and inguinal mass. Physical examination and a computed tomography
(CT) scan detected lymph node metastasis. CT and cystoscopy confirmed bladder involvement. The patient underwent extensive surgery and
chemotherapy. Pathological analysis made a diagnosis of clear cell carcinoma with bladder and lymph node metastasis. The patient was
followed up and died of the disease. Symptoms of bladder invasion and lymph node spread could be a sign of malignant transformation. Local
invasion and lymph node spread are two important forms of tumor metastasis. Extensive lymph nodes metastasis might be related with poor
prognosis. Endometriosis is defined as the presence of endometrial glands and stroma outside the uterine cavity. It affects about 15% of
women of childbearing age. The most common site of endometriosis is in the pelvic cavity but it occasionally occurs in the extrapelvic area.
Abdominal wall endometriosis represents 1% to 2% of all endometriosis lesions . It is mostly found in umbilicus and incisional scars,
especially following caesarean sections (CSs). Malignant transformation of abdominal wall endometriosis is a rare event and poorly
understood. Most cases in the literature had local invasion. Here we report a unique case of clear cell carcinoma in abdominal wall
endometriosis with bladder and lymph system metastasis. A 39-year-old woman with a history of abdominal wall endometriosis presented to our
clinic complaining of urgent urination and an emerging inguinal mass. She had a CS due to a breech presentation in 1994. She noticed a mass
in the CS scar with cyclic pain in 1999. The mass was excised and diagnosed as abdominal scar endometriosis histologically. The margin was
free and no further treatment was given after surgery. In 2004 a similar mass with cyclic pain was detected in the scar again. The mass grew
gradually and was diagnosed as recurrent abdominal wall endometriosis without further treatment. She also developed urgent urination and
dysuria during her menstrual period. In the last 4 months she noticed masses emerging in the bilateral inguinal area with mild pain.A
physical examination showed a solid 6 cm × 5 cm mass without a clear borderline near the symphysis pubic in the previous longitudinal scar.
Two enlarged lymph nodes with diameters of 2 cm and 1 cm in the right groin, and one lymph node with a diameter of 1 cm in the left groin
were detected. Serum CA125 was 22.1 U/ml. Computed tomography (CT) scans showed that the mass had invaded the bladder and that the inguinal
lymph nodes were enlarged (Figure 1). Cystoscopy showed that the mass had penetrated the roof of the bladder near the membrane (Figure 2).
Malignant transformation of abdominal wall endometriosis was highly suspected before surgery.During laparotomy, it was seen that the mass
had invaded the whole abdominal wall to the peritoneum and the roof of the bladder was also involved (Figure 3). There was no endometriosis
detected in the pelvic cavity. A frozen section pathological analysis was done and malignant disease was confirmed. Therefore, the woman
underwent extensive surgery including: partial bladder excision, hysterectomy, bilateral adnexectomy, omentectomy and lymph node excision.
The inguinal lymph nodes, pelvic lymph nodes and para-aortic lymph nodes were all enlarged (Figure 4).Pathological examination gave a
diagnosis of clear cell carcinoma in a background of endometriosis with metastasis to the bladder and the lymph nodes (Figure 5). There were
8/8 positive bilateral inguinal lymph nodes, 18/21 positive pelvic lymph nodes and 6/6 positive para-aortic lymph nodes. Computed tomography
scans. The abdominal wall mass had invaded the bladder (A) and the inguinal lymph nodes (A, B). Cystoscopy image showing the abdominal wall
mass had penetrated the roof of the bladder near the membrane (arrow). Photograph taken during laparotomy showing the abdominal mass had
invaded the roof of the bladder. Samples from lymphonectomy. These showed that the inguinal lymph nodes, pelvic lymph nodes and the para-
aortic lymph nodes were all enlarged. Pathological finding of clear cell carcinoma within the lymph node. The patient recovered uneventfully
but refused further treatment after three cycles of chemotherapy with carboplatin and paclitaxel. She sought traditional Chinese herbal
medication. Ten months after chemotherapy, tumor recurrence was detected in the pelvic cavity and the patient died of the disease two months
later. Malignant transformation of endometriosis is quite rare, affecting 1% of women suffering from endometriosis. The most common sites of
malignant transformation of endometriosis are the ovaries. About 20% of cases occur in extragonadal sites including the rectovaginal septum,
colon and vagina . The malignant transformation of endometriosis in the abdominal wall is a rare event and less than 30 cases have been
reported in the literature. Sampson proposed three criteria to diagnose a malignant transformation of the endometriosis: demonstration of
both neoplastic and benign endometrial tissue in the tumor, histological type of tumor compatible with endometrial origin and no other
primary site identified. Scott added a fourth criterion of transition between histological benign endometriosis and carcinoma, which was
defined as atypical endometriosis with cytological or architectural atypia in the endometriotic glands . These criteria were based on the
characteristics of malignant transformation of ovary endometriosis. Only a few cases of malignant abdominal wall endometriosis have
fulfilled all four criteria . All cases of malignant transformation of abdominal wall endometriosis in the literature had a history of
surgery that caused the iatrogenic dissemination of the endometrium and a histological type of tumor compatible with an endometrial origin
and no other primary site was identified . Malignant transformation of endometriosis in the abdominal wall can invade all layers of the
abdominal wall and grow as large as 10 cm in diameter . However, there is no report of bladder invasion in the literature. In the present
case, the mass arose near the symphysis pubis just above the roof of the bladder. When the neoplasm grew and invaded the wall of the
bladder, the patient developed bladder-stimulating symptoms. CT scans clearly showed the bladder invasion since the margin between the mass
and the wall of the bladder was visible. Cystoscopy confirmed bladder metastasis because the involvement of the bladder wall and mucosa can
be identified clearly. Local invasion is one important biological characteristics for malignant transformation of endometriosis in the
abdominal wall; however, it can also spread through the lymph system. Three other cases with lymph metastasis have been reported in the
literature (Table 1). For the four cases, the average latency was 16.75 years. The carcinomas had a wide range of local invasion to all
layers of the abdominal wall with a diameter of at least 5 cm. Three of the four cases had a histological type of clear cell carcinoma and
one had mixed endometrioid and serous carcinoma. Pre-surgical evaluation and diagnosis of lymph node dissemination is difficult. Lymph
metastasis was missed in both preoperative magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), surgical exploration and postoperative CT in cases 1 and 3.
During the repair of the surgical wound, a 5-cm lymph node was found near the right external iliac artery in case 1. In case 3,
postoperative positron emission tomography with computed tomography (PET-CT) using 18-fluorodeoxyglucose showed the involvement of two left
iliac nodes. In case 2 and our case, a bilateral inguinal mass with metastasis was detected before surgery and confirmed by an imaging scan.
Only in our case, was a systemic lymph dissection conducted. The lymph invasion clearly demonstrated that the path for the lymph metastasis
in the malignant transformation of endometriosis in the abdominal wall was from the inguinal lymph nodes to the para-aortic lymph nodes
through the pelvic lymph nodes. This pathway is consistent with the route of lymph fluid reflux in the lower abdominal wall. Symptoms of
emerging inguinal mass together with local physical examination and imaging scan might be valuable for detecting primary lymph nodes
metastasis before surgery. Four cases of malignant transformation of endometriosis in the abdominal wall with lymph metastasis BSO,
bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy; CCC, clear cell carcinoma; DOD, died of disease; NED, no evidence of disease; TAH, transabdominal
hysterectomy. LH, laparoscopic hysterectomy. The diagnosis of malignant transformation of abdominal wall endometriosis is still a challenge
for gynecologists. There are no characteristic symptoms and markers during malignant transformation. Imaging can detect endometrioma and its
fast growth. Malignant transformation is only suspected when the tumor has a solid or mixed component. In the present case, the patient
developed urgent urination and an inguinal mass, which could be a sign of tumor invasion. Therefore, malignant transformation and metastasis
were highly suspected before surgery. Accordingly, we were able to make a detailed plan and prepare for extensive surgery. The best
treatment for malignant transformation of endometriosis in the abdominal wall is unknown. Radical surgery with a wide resection is believed
to be the primary treatment . Chemotherapy based on carboplatinum and radiotherapy have been proposed without any evidence of improved
prognosis. In all four cases with lymph metastasis, radical therapy together with hysterectomy salpingo-oophorectomy and lymph node excision
were the standard treatment. Chemotherapy was administered to cases 1 and 3. Our patient had chemotherapy and used traditional Chinese
herbal medicine. Cases 1 and 3 had limited or isolated unilateral iliac lymph node metastasis (one lymph node in case 1 and two in case 3).
These two patients had no sign of recurrence over the short time of the follow-up. While case 2 and our case had extensive lymph nodes
metastasis, these two patients died of the disease within one year. Extensive lymph node involvement indicated the late stage of the disease
with multiple metastases. This might also correlate with a poor prognosis. Malignant transformation of endometriosis in the abdominal wall
is a rare complication and poorly understood. Symptoms of bladder invasion and lymph node spread could be a sign of malignant
transformation. Local and lymph system invasion are two important routes for tumor metastasis. Extensive lymph node metastasis is probably
related with poor prognosis. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report. CS: Cesarean
section; CT: computed tomography. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HL collected clinical information, searched the
relevant literature and wrote the draft. JL provided the case, followed up the patient and approved the manuscript. JL and HS participated
in the surgery and revised the manuscript. QC performed the pathological analysis and provided the images in the manuscript. All authors
approved the final manuscript. The authors thanked to Dr&Professor Honghui Shi, Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology Peking Union Medical
College Hospital Peking Union Medical College and Chinese Academy of Medical Science for her support and advice.
