Triceps tendon avulsion is one of the rare tendinous injuries. Such injuries can easily be missed, and should be kept as a differential
diagnosis in all patients who present with pain and swelling at the back of the elbow after a traumatic event. We present a case of triceps
tendon avulsion which was missed in the initial workup by a local practitioner. Careful physical examination and evaluation of the X-rays
clinched the diagnosis. The patient was treated surgically by transosseous suture technique using the Krakow method. The end result was a
good range of movement and a power equal to the uninjured side. A high index of suspicion, physical examination seeking a palpable gap, and
search for a ‘flake’ fracture on lateral radiographs will help make the diagnosis of triceps avulsion. Early recognition of these injuries
and prompt intervention are the cornerstones of a successful outcome. A second examination after a few days, when the swelling has reduced,
should be the standard in doubtful cases or during any unclear joint injury. We recommend a primary repair through a transosseous suture
technique using Krakow method for optimal results. Triceps tendon rupture/avulsion is a rare injury (1); it constitutes less than 1% of all
tendon injuries in the upper extremity (2). Rupture most commonly occurs from the osseous tendon insertion in the olecrenon or rarely
through the muscle or its myotendinous junction (3–4). Very few cases have been reported in literature (5); hence, there is no well-
established treatment protocol for this condition. We report a rare case of triceps tendon avulsion due to direct trauma treated surgically
by transosseous suture technique with a good functional result. In April 2012, a 34 year old laborer came to our hospital with complaints of
pain and swelling around the right elbow following a history of assault by hard and blunt object on the posterior aspect of the right elbow
that had happened seven days back. He had consulted a local practitioner earlier, who treated him on the lines of soft tissue injury of the
elbow. Having gained only little benefit from the treatment, he was referred to our tertiary center. A physical examination revealed severe
tenderness and swelling on the posterior aspect of his right elbow. The patient was admitted for workup, and a reexamination revealed that
it was not possible to actively extend the elbow (power of triceps was 1/5). There was also a palpable depression just proximal to the
olecranon. Lateral X-rays of the affected elbow showed a small piece of avulsed osseous fragment from the olecranon (the ‘flake’ sign) (Fig
1). Avulsed osseous fragment from the olecranon (the ‘flake’ sign) The combination of a palpable depression proximal to the olecrenon, loss
of active elbow extension and the ‘flake sign’ helped us clinch the diagnosis of triceps tendon avulsion. Since the avulsion was complete,
suggested by loss of active elbow extension, a primary surgical repair was undertaken. A primary surgical repair of the triceps tendon
avulsion was performed. The patient was given regional brachial anesthesia and was positioned in lateral decubitus position. The surgery was
done under a tourniquet. A curvilinear incision was made over the posterior elbow, the rupture site was debrided and the haematoma was
removed. Triceps tendon was found to be retracted 2cm proximal to the tip of olecranon. The avulsed fragment was severely comminuted and was
removed. The edges of the tendon were cleared and were released from the surrounding tissues. The triceps tendon was repaired using the
Krakow method, constituting a 4-strand suture. The suture we used was No.2 Ethibond. The triceps tendon stump was positioned at the original
insertion into the olecranon to restore the excursion length of the tendon by passing the sutures through bone tunnels made into the
olecranon (Fig 2). Triceps tendon repaired using Krakow method The repair was put under tension and suture knots secured with elbow in full
extension. Range of movement was tested intraoperatively and was found stable from 0–90° flexion with no tension on sutures. The wound was
closed in layers and the arm put on long arm slab of 30° flexion. Postoperatively, progressive elbow flexion was started in the following
order: 0–30° flexion in the first two weeks; 0–60° in the next two weeks with the active flexion reaching 90° at the end of six weeks. The
range of movement after 4 months was excellent, and the power in triceps muscle was equal to the uninjured side. Triceps tendon avulsion or
rupture is a rare injury, the “least common of all tendon injuries” (6). The diagnosis of acute triceps tendon rupture is difficult and can
be easily missed because of the low degree of suspicion of triceps rupture. In addition, pain in acute injury prevents appropriate physical
examination such as active elbow extension. The common differential diagnoses of elbow injuries include a sprain, radial head fracture,
olecranon bursitis and fractures around the elbow joint (7). Likewise, swelling masks the palpation of the gap. Furthermore, tiny avulsed
flecks of bone are easily missed in an overcrowded emergency room where speedy evacuation and disposal of patients is a tendency. A second
examination after a few days, when the swelling has reduced, should be the standard in doubtful cases or in any unclear joint injury. In
doubtful cases, diagnosis using MRI or ultrasound is also of great use. Mechanism of injury in such cases is usually; a fall on an
outstretched hand when a sudden deceleration stress is put on a contracted triceps muscle or rarely after direct trauma due to assault (8).
Such injury can be seen in football players and weight-lifters (9–11) where substantial force is required to rupture a tendon in healthy
adult, but some local and systemic factors alter integrity of tendon and can lead to rupture even after a small trauma. Systemic causes such
as chronic renal failure, steriod use, diabetes mellitus, hyperparathyroidism, rheumatoid arthritis, osteogensis imperfecta and local causes
like local steriod injection, olecranon bursitis and attritional changes due to degenerative arthritis are associated with tendon weakening.
Another key point concerning the need for operative treatment is whether the injury is complete or partial. If a patient can perform active
elbow extension against gravity (power of triceps ≥3/5), the injury is partial and can be treated nonoperatively with splint protection for
about 4 weeks at 30° flexion (12). MRI is a useful investigation for determining the percentage of tears and hence is of great help in
preoperative management. If a tear of more than 50% is shown on MRI together with significant loss of triceps power (power less than 3/5),
then operative repair of the torn tendon is recommended (13). Surgical repair is usually successful with minimum morbidity. Other possible
surgical techniques of repair of acute and complete rupture that have been described in the literature include transosseous sutures through
horizontal bone tunnels in the olecronon using non-absorbable suture (14), Kwires reinforced by encirclage wire and bone anchor (15)
sutures. Patients undergoing repair with the above method usually have good functional recovery after a period of active strengthening
exercise. We used the transosseous suture technique using the Krakow method with 4 suture strand instead of conventional 2 strand which
provides better strength and more contact surface for tendon to bone healing. The period of immobilization is decreased and the recovery
period is fastened. Early repair of complete triceps tendon rupture is recommended for a good functional outcome, and the prognosis of these
lesions is effective. To conclude, avulsion of the triceps tendon is a rare injury. It can occur after direct or indirect trauma, and
usually occurs at the osseo-tendinous junction. A high index of suspicion, physical examination seeking a palpable gap, and search for a
‘flake’ fracture on lateral radiographs will help make the diagnosis. A second examination after a few days, when the swelling has reduced,
should be the standard in doubtful cases or in any unclear joint injury. Early identification of these injuries and prompt intervention are
the cornerstones of a successful outcome. Surgical repair of complete ruptures generally produces good functional results. We recommend a
primary repair through a transosseous suture technique using Krakow method for optimal results. Postoperative X-ray
