acetylcholine receptor high‐resolution manometry lower esophageal sphincter myasthenia gravis An 8‐year‐old, intact male Pug was examined
for a 7‐day history of progressive weakness, progressive decline in food intake, dysuria, and dysphonia. The dysuria was described as an
inability to void when being walked as the dog could not lift its leg and did not urinate although there was evidence of urine leakage in
the dog's blankets. When initially examined, the dog was alert with a BCS of 5/9. The physical examination did not reveal abnormalities.
Results of hematology, serum biochemistry, and urinalysis as well as abdominal ultrasound did not reveal abnormalities. Upon owners'
request, the dog was discharged without further work‐up, and gabapentin1 (5 mg/kg, PO q12h) were prescribed for suspected lumbosacral pain.
Because of increasing weakness over the next 2 days, the dog was presented at an emergency clinic, where urinary retention caused by
lumbosacral disease was suspected and treated with a single dose of dexamethasone2 (10 mg IM). Three days later, the dog was again examined
for anorexia and progressive weakness. Physical examination revealed an alert dog able to walk 2–3 m with a stiff gate and kyphotic posture
before finally lying down. Laboratory work revealed a CK (111 U/L; reference range, 51–191) within reference range and no abnormalities were
detected on urinalysis. A bacterial culture of urine showed no growth. Thoracic radiographs revealed moderate esophageal dilatation and a
markedly dilated stomach (Fig 1). Results of a neurologic examination were consistent with a neuromuscular junction disorder, and an
edrophonium chloride3 challenge (0.2 mg/kg IV) showed a dramatic positive response. At the time of electromyographic testing, an upper
gastrointestinal endoscopy was also performed because of concerns about steroid‐induced gastric ulceration. Left lateral (A) and
dorsoventral (B) radiographs illustrating a dilated esophagus filled with fluid and gas and a marked gastric distension, filled with a large
amount of gas. Before anesthesia, esophageal high‐resolution manometry (HRM) was used to evaluate esophageal function (Fig 2). A manometric
catheter was lubricated with 2% lidocaine gel6 and carefully inserted intranasally. It was passed through the nasopharynx into the esophagus
and finally positioned so that it recorded the pressure profile of the entire esophagus from the pharynx to the stomach. Real‐time pressure
imaging enabled accurate placement, and 3–4 pressure sensors were positioned intragastrically to rule out artifacts caused by
breathing‐related movements of the esophagogastric junction. HRM examination revealed an abnormal swallowing mechanism: after normal upper
esophageal sphincter (UES) relaxation (UES residual pressure 0.4 mmHg [−10.5 to 0.3 mmHg], UES relaxation time to nadir 138 mmHg
(58–140 mmHg), relaxation duration 300 ms [145–305 ms]) the aborally propagating peristaltic waves of the tubular esophagus, as well as
lower esophageal sphincter (LES) relaxations [LES baseline pressure 37.3 mmHg (14.6–45.1 mmHg), LES residual pressure 27 mmHg
(1.9–19.1 mmHg)] were completely absent throughout the study.1 The peristaltic waves were discontinued by simultaneous contractions of the
tubular esophagus beginning at a point just past the first third of the tubular esophagus (Fig 3). The subsequent esophagogastroduodenoscopy
did not reveal abnormalities except for a dilated and flaccid esophagus. Physiologic swallow pressure topography of a healthy Beagle
extending from the pharynx to the stomach, shown in the Manoview software program.4 Examination was performed with a
36‐channel‐circumferential solid‐state probe with 10‐mm spacing between adjacent sensors.5 The colors reflect the intensity of the
pressures; red stands for high and blue for low pressure (color scale on the left side). Upper esophageal sphincter and LES are clearly
detectable as high pressure zones. There is a relaxation of both sphincters after a swallow. The figure on the right side shows the
schematic position of the catheter in the body. LES, lower esophageal sphincter. Swallow pressure topography extending from pharynx to
stomach shown in the Manoview software program.4 Examination was performed with a 36‐channel‐circumferential solid‐state probe with 10‐mm
spacing between adjacent sensors.5 The 2 swallows demonstrate rapid compartmentalized pressurization extending from the lower two‐thirds of
the tubular esophagus to the closed LES. No normal peristalsis was seen during the entire manometric examination. (recording speed:
15 s/page). UES, upper esophageal sphincter; LES, lower esophageal sphincter; PIP, pressure inversion point. Biopsies were taken from the
middle and lower esophagus,2 stomach, and duodenum. Histopathologically, all esophageal, gastric, and duodenal biopsies did not reveal
abnormalities. Electromyographic examination7 of the limbs and epaxial muscles did not reveal abnormalities. Supramaximal repetitive nerve
stimulation of the tibial and ulnar nerve at a frequency of 3 Hz produced a decrement of 30% (reference <10%3). At this point, myasthenia
gravis (MG) was suspected on the basis of clinical, electromyographic, and pharmacologic testing results. After treatment with
pyridostigmin8 (1.5 mg/kg PO, q8h), the dog had progressive improvement of all clinical findings. By the time the AChR titer came back
negative (0.22 nmol/L; normal <0.6 nmol/L)9 on day 14, the dog had already fully recovered. Upon recheck on day 21, the dog's owners had
already stopped pyridostigmin 4 days previously. Weakness, anorexia, dysphonia, and dysuria had all completely resolved, and the dog
appeared bright and alert. The owners agreed to a repeated HRM study of the esophagus that did not reveal abnormalities of esophageal
function and swallowing (Fig 4). The dog's clinical signs had not recurred at the time of writing (12 months later). Swallow pressure
topography 15 days after the initial abnormal HRM (Fig 3) extending from pharynx to stomach, shown in the Manoview software program.4
Examination was performed with a 36‐channel‐circumferential solid‐state probe with 10‐mm spacing between adjacent sensors.5 The illustrated
swallow represents a physiologic swallow with normal esophageal function. (recording speed: 15 s/page). UES, upper esophageal sphincter;
LES, lower esophageal sphincter; PIP, pressure inversion point. This report describes a dog with an achalasia‐like condition of the
esophagus caused by MG. Achalasia is associated with functional loss of myenteric plexus ganglion cells in the distal esophagus4 and is the
most well‐defined esophageal motility disorder in people where it is characterized by the absence of distal esophageal peristalsis and
inadequate LES relaxation.5, 6 Achalasia can be subtyped into 3 groups based on manometric esophageal body pressure profiles. Type 1 is the
complete absence of peristaltic contractile activity and minimal pressurization. Type 2 denotes the absence of peristaltic contractile
activity with panesophageal pressurization, and type 3 is characterized through spastic esophageal contractions.6 Histopathologic findings
vary in humans with achalasia. The majority of endoscopic esophageal biopsies of achalasic patients are normal,7 whereas an increased number
of intraepithelial lymphocytes is found in patients with primary end‐stage achalasia.8 Our esophageal biopsies comprising epithelium and
lamina propria did not reveal abnormalities. This could have been caused by the comparatively acute onset of the disease, or because of the
unrepresentative endoscopic biopsies. Another possibility might have been the pretreatment with a high dose of corticosteroids. After
reviewing existing criteria for seronegative MG classification in dogs,9 we strongly believe the dog described here had seronegative MG,
because of the clinical signs consistent with MG, positive edrophonium response, decremental response of the compound muscle action
potential, and normalization of limb muscle weakness after anticholinesterase treatment. In humans, dysuria occurs in myasthenic
patients,10, 11 and there is also evidence for this in dogs.10 , 12 It has been hypothesized that this is because of autoantibodies directed
against ganglionic acetylcholine receptors in the autonomic nervous system.12 Another explanation would be the existence of both
muscarinic13 and nicotinic antibodies that could have blocked contractions of the detrusor muscle. Possible explanations for the negative
antibody titer result could include the prior treatment with an immunosuppressive dose of corticosteroid medication, early onset of disease
with clinical signs preceeding seropositivity causing the titer to rise and become positive upon repeated testing, antibodies directed
against non‐AChR end‐plate determinants, or antibodies bound to end plates without detectable circulating serum antibodies.14 It would have
been ideal to repeat determination of an AChR titer,9 but additional samples were not sent because of the rapid response to treatment, and
comparatively long turnaround time with overseas shipping. Although less frequently observed, very rapid improvements can be seen with MG in
dogs.11 Further, the complete resolution of all clinical signs is also compatible with an underlying diagnosis of MG.9 In humans, HRM
constitutes the gold standard for evaluating esophageal function. Utilizing color‐coded pressure topography, HRM quickly enables the
examiner to obtain an impression of the integrity of the whole swallowing act. Because of the closely spaced pressure sensors, the whole
esophagus can be visualized at the same time, from the pharynx to the LES (Fig 2). In addition, HRM is a noninvasive technique, and its
feasibility in awake healthy dogs has recently been evaluated by the authors.1 The unexplained clinical presentation (ie, refusal to eat)
together with the suspicion of MG, which can cause dysphagia, provided the indication for manometric assessment of the dog's esophageal
function. The HRM findings were consistent with what has been described as achalasia type II with panesophageal pressurization in humans.15
Strikingly, a similar phenomenon could also be documented in the present case, even though humans and dogs differ in their esophageal muscle
composition. Although the entire tubular esophagus is composed of striated muscle in dogs, most of the canine LES consists of smooth
muscle.16 Relaxation of the LES is mediated by a release of acetylcholine from the presynaptic nerve endings, followed by an activation of
inhibitory motor neurons.17 This activation occurs predominantly via nicotinic and muscarinic receptors and the inhibiting neurotransmitter
is nitric oxide.17 In the dog described here, bound AChR antibodies could have led to blocking of the LES relaxation. The esophagus seems to
be able to overcome a closed LES with an adaptive mechanism, the panesophageal pressurization, a condition in which the entire esophageal
lumen is pressurized between the 2 sphincters.18 In humans, achalasia type II patients have aperistalsis, but preserved muscularis propria
longitudinal muscle contraction and sufficient excitation of the circular muscle to generate substantial intrabolus pressure in the
esophageal body to result in bolus transport.15 This pressure phenomenon seems to be the major mechanism of esophageal emptying in people
suffering from achalasia.18 Also, in the present case, this mechanism could have allowed the dog to propel ingested food into its stomach.
The underlying pathomechanism that triggers the longitudinal muscle contractions has so far not been elucidated in human achalasia. In
humans, it is known that the pressurization action is perceived as very painful. It is usually described as a concurrent chest pain.19, 20
We believe this could also explain the anorexia in the dog described in this report. It is possible that refusal to eat was because of the
accompanying pain during the act of swallowing. The same observation of painful swallowing occurs in dysphagic myasthenic humans with
achalasia.21, 22, 23 In summary, this is a report of achalasia‐like disease secondary to suspected seronegative MG, and clinical recovery
from esophageal dysfunction after remission of MG in a dog. Further, this is the first HRM documentation of how esophageal muscles overcome
a nonrelaxing LES in dogs. Therefore, it appears conceivable that anorexia in a myasthenic dog might be caused by concomitant esophageal
achalasia. In humans with type II achalasia, reasons for chest pain as well as its treatment have not been fully understood.24 Strategies
for treating achalasia comprise medical and surgical options. Pharmacologic treatment with calcium channel blockers, nitrates,
phosphodiesterase inhibitors, and botulinum toxin injections may cause prompt reduction in LES pressure, some patients also respond to
pneumatic dilations of the LES. Surgical options comprise myotomy and esophagogastric junction stents.5 Similar strategies against suspected
esophageal discomfort in myasthenic dogs with achalasia‐like disease have not been investigated so far, but may include pain medication, as
well as feeding soft and slurry food until recovery from MG. Conflict of Interest: Authors disclose no conflict of interest. Neurontin
Pfizer AG, Zürich, Switzerland Dexadreson MSD Animal Health GmbH, Luzern, Switzerland Enlon Mylan Institutional LLC, Rockford, IL
ManoViewESO analysis software, Sierra Scientific Instruments (now Given Imaging), Los Angeles, CA ManoScan ESO Catheter, Small Diameter
Regular (EAS), 36 channels with 16 circumferential pressure sensitive segments, 10‐mm spacing between sensors, 2.75 mm diameter, Sierra
Scientific Instruments (now Given Imaging), Los Angeles, CA InstillagelAlmed, Farco‐Pharma GmbH, Köln, NRW, Germany NeMus 2+, EB Neuro
S.p.A., Florence, Italy Mestinon, MEDA Pharmaceuticals, Wangen‐Brüttisellen, Switzerland Comparative Neuromuscular Laboratory, University of
California, San Diego, CA Masticatory muscle myositis and myasthenia gravis in a 1.5 year old male Vizsla; Neuromuscular case of the month –
October 2004; http://vetneuromuscular.ucsd.edu/cases/2004/oct04.html Email communication Diane Shelton November 2012
