These two authors contributed equally to this research. Dear Editor, Denys–Drash syndrome (DDS) is characterized by the triad of progressive
nephropathy, urogenital malformation and Wilms’ tumor. Incomplete variants present with nephropathy with either intersex disorders or Wilms’
tumor.1 Most DDS patients carry WT1 mutations in exon 8 or 9.1 Here, we report an incomplete DDS child who carried a novel WT1 missense
mutation in exon 6 and had unique clinical manifestations. The subjected child’ age was 11 years and 9 months. His father is healthy and his
mother died suddenly after giving birth to his younger brother. The patient was born at full-term birth without asphyxia. He was found to
have abnormal external genitalia after birth and had been raised as a girl. He learned to speak between 2- and 3-years-old and learned to
walk between 4- and 5-years-old. He also had difficulties in learning at school. The child was not sent to hospital until his penile
development was noticed at 10 years and 11 months. Ultrasound revealed microcalcifications in the left testis, right cryptorchidism and a
right testis in the right iliac fossa. Magnetic resonance imaging revealed that prostate and seminal vesicles dysplasia could not be ruled
out. Karyotype was 46,XY. Right testicular descent surgery was performed. His urinary protein was observed positive (+ − ++) 5 months later.
He was admitted to our department for the unexplained proteinuria at 11 years and 9 months. Regular rhythm and a precordial grade II/VI
systolic murmur were heard. The penis was developing and scrotum was symmetrical dehisced. The urethral opening was located in the rift,
with little pubes on the symphysis pubica. The volume of the left testis was approximately 6 ml, and the volume of the right one was
approximately 0.5 ml. Ultrasound revealed kidneys of normal size and echoes. Echocardiography revealed a persistent left superior vena cava
and mitral valve prolapse with mild regurgitation as well as an enlargement of the left atrium, left ventricle and right ventricle (diameter
of right atrium 31 mm, right ventricle 18 mm, left atrium 29 mm, left ventricular 39 mm and ejection fraction of left ventricular was 68%).
Urinary protein was 10.6 mg kg−1 d−1, serum creatinine 50 μmol l−1 and albumin 41.8 g l−1. The hormones test revealed follicle-stimulating
hormone 22.25 IU l−1 (1–8 IU l−1); luteinizing hormone 12.34 IU l−1 (2–12 IU l−1); and prolactin, estradiol, testosterone and progesterone
were all in normal range. Renal histopathology revealed mild segmental hyperplasia in mesangial cells and matrix and minimal change disease
was indicated (Figure 1a and 1b). The child has not received specific therapy except for fosinopril. Urinary protein is still positive (+ −
++) at present and renal function is within normal range. Renal histopathology, sequencing results of WT1 and bioinformatic analysis of
mutant WT1. (a) Periodic acid-Schiff staining and (b) Masson trichrome staining (light microscope, bars: 30 μm both in a and b). Renal
pathology of the boy revealed mild lesion of glomeruli, urinary protein leakage in the Bowman's capsule (arrowhead in a) and mild segmental
proliferation of mesangial cells (arrow in a) and mild segmental accumulation of matrix (arrow in b). (c and d) Forward (c) and reverse (d)
sequencing results of the patient show the change at position c.893 A > T. The arrows indicate the position of the mutation. The underlining
denotes the codon that contains the mutation. (e) The sequencing results of the patient's father; no mutation was detected. (f) Alignments
of amino acid sequences. The glutamine at position p.298 was conserved in the amino acid sequences across the species examined (asterisks
present 100% conserved regions, colons presents conservative substitution regions and black spots present nonconservative substitution
regions). (g and h) Predicted structures of wild (g) and mutant (h) WT1 proteins across species are displayed by the Inter pro
(http://www.ebi.ac.uk/interpro/) and PROSITE databases (http://www.expasy.ch/prosite/). Secondary structure predictions for exon 6 of the
wild-type protein (g) and the mutant (c.893 A > T (p.Gln298Leu)) protein in the patient (h) were generated using the PSIPRED Protein
Structure Prediction Server (http://bioinf. cs.ucl.ac.uk/psipred/). The mutant WT1 protein lost an α helix near the mutant site (arrow). WT1
mutation in exon 6, c.893A>T (p.Q298L) was identified in the patient (Figure 1c and 1d), which was not found in his father (Figure 1e). This
mutation is absent from 100 control chromosomes. Alignment of the WT1 protein across six different species revealed that glutamine is
conserved at the 298th position in human, chimpanzee, dog, rat, mouse and zebrafish (Figure 1f). The missense mutation p.Q298L is predicted
to cause the loss of an α helix in vicinity of the mutant position (Figure 1g and 1h). WT1 is located at human chromosome 11p13 and contains
10 exons.2 Exons 1–6 of WT1 encode an amino-terminus rich in proline and glutamine, which regulates gene expression. Exons 7–10 encode four
contiguous Cys2-His2 zinc finger regions, which function as DNA- or RNA-binding domains.2 Mutant WT1 can lead to glomerular maturation
disorders and genitourinary malformations. Mutations in exon 8 and 9 of WT1 have been reported the most. There have been only a few reports
of truncate mutations in exons 1–6 that cause DDS.345 Missense mutation c.903A > G (p.Q298L) in exon 6, which was detected in the present
patient, is a novel mutation. This mutation causes a substitution of leucine for glutamine which leads to a helix lost in the peptide chain.
DDS patients usually present with congenital or early onset proteinuria and progress to end-stage renal disease before 4 years.1 The most
common histology of DDS is diffuse mesangial sclerosis; whereas, minimal change disease can also be observed occasionally.6 In the present
case, proteinuria was discovered at 11 years and 4 months, and renal histopathology was minimal change disease. It has been reported that
WT1 nephropathy caused by WT1 mutations in exons 1–6 had a mild phenotype.345 Although renal function is currently normal in this child;
proteinuria is persistent with the administration of angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor (fosinopril). Because WT1 nephropathy is
steroid resistant, calcineurin inhibitors (cyclosporine A or tacrolimus) is on consideration for next treatment in this child based on the
benefits observed in literature7 and our previous experience.18 Urogenital abnormalities, including male pseudohermaphroditism,
cryptorchidism, hypospadias and penile hypoplasia, mainly occur in DDS patients with 46,XY karyotype.5 Urogenital malformations are
prominent in the present case, though his nephropathy is mild. Gonadotropin disorders have been reported in a few patients with WT1
mutations.9 Most of these patients had genitourinary malformations and significantly elevated luteinizing hormone and follicle-stimulating
hormone, but normal range testosterone similar to the present case. These disorders may indicate that the child's gonads had a low response
to gonadotropins, as seminal vesicles dysplasia has not been ruled out in this child by magnetic resonance imaging, abnormal gonadal
development should be considered. Wilms’ tumor has been observed in all reported WT1 neprohopathy cases with WT1 mutations in exons 1–6.345
Thus, the present boy is at high risk of developing Wilms’ tumor and should receive periodic medical examination. Cardiovascular
abnormalities have been observed in the present case. It was reported that WT1 is expressed in the epicardium and subepicardial mesenchymal
cells and is required for normal vascularization in heart development.10 There has been no report on mental retardation in DDS patients to
date. Whether the heart abnormalities and mental retardation are attributed to the detected WT1 mutation deserves more study. In summary,
this study reports an incomplete DDS boy with unique manifestations and an atypical WT1 mutant site. This study may help to clarify the
genotype to phenotype relations of DDS patients. HYW and ZHY carried out the experiments and clinical data collection and drafted the
manuscript. JCM, YM and JJS helped collecting some clinical data and the blood samples. LZS conceived of the study, and participated in its
design and coordination and helped to draft the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. All authors declare no
competing interests. The authors thank all participants for their support. The study was supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the
Central Universities (No. 09ykpy40), Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangdong Province (No. 2011B031800126) and the Natural
Science Foundation of Guangdong Province (No. S2012010009405).
