Therapy-related AML (t-AML) is one of the newly expanded disease entities in the 2008 WHO classification, accounting for 10-20% of all cases
of AML, and its incidence is increasing worldwide because of improved survival rates following treatment for other primary cancers [1, 2].
Acute megakaryoblastic leukemia (AMKL) (M7) is the least common of the t-AML French-American-British (FAB) subtypes, and only two such cases
have been reported to date [3, 4], neither of which was in Korea. AMKL accounts for about 7-10% of childhood AML cases (frequently
associated with Down syndrome), but only about 1% of adult AML cases . Here, we describe a rare case of therapy-related acute
megakaryoblastic leukemia (t-AMKL) with chromosome 5 and 7 abnormalities that presented ten years after chemoradiotherapy in an elderly lung
cancer patient. A 72-yr-old man with lung cancer (non-small cell lung cancer , right lower lobe , squamous cell cancer, stage T2N1M0) was
treated with a combination of radiotherapy and a repeated chemotherapy regimen (4 trials, 13 cycles) consisting of docetaxel, cisplatin,
gemcitabine, vinorelbine, gefitinib, irinotecan, and carboplatin, between March 2003 and February 2005 (Table 1). Subsequently, in April
2005, he underwent surgical resection (RLL lobectomy) of the cancer and thereafter achieved complete remission. He was asymptomatic until
being referred to our hospital for further evaluation of pancytopenia discovered at a local hospital, to which he had been admitted for
fever persisting for three days, upper respiratory infection symptoms, and aggravated dyspnea. He had signs of anemic conjunctiva, but no
lymphadenopathy or organomegaly on physical examination. Abdominal sonography revealed hepatomegaly but no splenomegaly. A complete blood
count (CBC) revealed Hb level of 5.2 g/dL; white blood cell counts of 1.7×109/L (absolute neutrophil count 0.78×109/L); and platelet counts
of 34×109/L. A peripheral blood smear showed macrocytic normochromic anemia with teardrop cells, a shift to the left in the neutrophilic
series together with dysplastic features such as hypogranulation and the Pelger-Huët anomaly in segmented neutrophils, irregularly segmented
monocyte nuclei, and giant platelets (Fig. 1A).The plasma Hb (19.5 mg/dL; reference interval , 0.0-5.0 mg/dL) and D-dimer (4.59 µg/mL; RI,
0-0.5 µg/mL) levels were both elevated. Most biochemical tests were normal, except for elevated levels of serum lactate dehydrogenase (513
IU/L; RI, 0-480 IU/L), beta-2 microglobin (2.9 mg/L; RI, 0-2.4 mg/L), and C-reactive protein (22.24 mg/L; RI, 0-5.0 mg/L). Vitamin B12 was
raised at 19,030 pg/mL (RI, 160-970 pg/mL), but the folate level was within the RI. Bone marrow (BM) aspirate smears and a touch print
preparation of the BM biopsy revealed hypercellular marrow, dysplastic changes in all three hematopoietic cell lineages, and 23.5% blasts
(Fig. 1B). The blasts were medium to large sized and had round, slightly irregular or indented nuclei, fine reticular chromatin, one to
three inconspicuous nucleoli, basophilic agranular cytoplasm, and frequently formed pseudopod. There were relatively fewer erythroid cells,
and these had dysplastic features such as nuclear-cytoplasmic asynchrony. Conversely, there were relatively more granulocytes, but these
also showed dysplastic features such as megaloblastoid change, hyposegmentation, and cytoplasmic hypogranularity. Markedly, more
megakaryocytes that varied considerably in size were present, and they were multi-nucleated with hypolobated nuclei. Micromegakaryocytes,
megakaryocytic fragments, and bare megakaryocytic nuclei were frequently observed. It was also noteworthy that basophils accounted for up to
6.7% of the nucleated marrow cells. Cytochemical staining of the BM aspirate revealed that blasts were positive for periodic acid-Schiff,
acid phosphatase (punctuate), and non-specific esterase, and negative for Sudan black B, myeloperoxidase (MPO), and specific esterase. The
biopsied marrow was hypercellular relative to the patient's age (approximately 70%) (Fig. 1C), consisting predominantly of dysplastic
megakaryocytes of variable size and leukemic blasts. Immunohistochemical staining of the paraffin-embedded BM biopsy specimen showed that
the blasts and megakaryocytes were positive for Factor-VIII, CD61, MPO, and c-Kit. There were a reduced number of glycophorin-positive
erythroid cells, and reticulin staining showed mild myelofibrosis (grade MF-1) . Immunophenotyping of leukemic blasts in the BM using flow
cytometry revealed a weakly positive result for CD45, CD13, CD23, and cytoplasmic MPO and strong positivity for CD61 and CD41, consistent
with a megakaryocytic lineage. The same blasts were negative for CD2, CD5, CD7, CD10, CD11a, CD14, CD20, CD22, CD33, CD34, CD64, CD79a,
CD34, CD117, HLA-DR, cytoplasmic CD3, cytoplasmic CD19, and terminal deoxynucleotidyltransferase (TdT). G-banded metaphase analysis and FISH
were performed on the BM aspirate using standard cytogenetic techniques. The karyotype was 46,XY,-5,-7,+2mar in 2 of the 20 analyzed BM
cells (Fig. 1D), and 46,XY in the remaining 18 cells. BCR/ABL, AML1/ETO, PML/RARA, CBFB, MLL, D5S630/EGR1, and RELN/TESFISH probes (Abbott
Molecular/Vysis, Des Plaines, IL, USA) and the D5S630/EGR1 probe from Cytocell (Cambridge, UK) showed an additional AML1 signal, a 5q
deletion, and a 7q deletion (Fig. 1E-G). The FISH findings suggested that at least part of the marker chromosomes were derived from
chromosome 21 and the short arm of chromosome 5, and not from 5q or 7q. Multiplex reverse transcriptase-PCR (RT-PCR) with the Hemavision kit
(DNA Technology, Aarhus, Denmark) did not detect any fusion transcripts. The patient was diagnosed with t-AMKL and was treated for
neutropenic fever and pneumonia. No further therapy was administered for the leukemia because of his poor general condition, and he is
currently being followed up in our hospital with routine CBC check-ups. The previous 2008 WHO classification described two subsets of
therapy related myeloid neoplasm, consisting of t-AML/therapy-related myelodysplasia (t-MDS) and t-AML/t-MDS/therapy-related
myeloproliferative neoplasm (t-MPN). The former subset commonly caused by exposure to alkylating agents or radiotherapy has the following
characteristics: 1) It typically has a long latent period; 2) Its incidence increases with age; 3) It is frequently present with t-MDS,
t-AML after a myelodysplastic phase or t-AML with dysplastic features; 4) It has a poorer prognosis; 5) It is associated with an unbalanced
loss of genetic material; 6) It commonly affects chromosomes 5 or 7. The other subset is characterized by 1) exposure to topoisomerase II
inhibitors; 2) a short latency period; 3) a similar incidence across all ages; 4) the presence of overt t-AML without a preceding
myelodysplastic phase or dysplastic features; 5) a more indolent prognosis; and 6) balanced translocations involving 11q23 or 21q22 [1, 2].
The patient in this case was elderly, presented with overt t-AML with prominent dysplastic features after ten years of remission and
unbalanced chromosomal abnormalities in chromosomes 5 and 7. Alkylating agents, anti-tubulin agents, topoisomerase I inhibitors and ionizing
radiation were all used in his treatment, but not topoisomerase II inhibitor. This case therefore showed clinical features typical of the
former subset of t-AML/t-MDS. The two previously reported t-AMKL cases also involved dysplastic features, unbalanced chromosomal
rearrangements, and a history of alkylating agent or radiation therapy (Table 1) [3, 4]. AMKL in non-Down syndrome patients is rare,
accounting for less than 1% of all adult AML cases . A previous study reported t-AMKL in 4 of 37 (10.8%) adult AMKL cases , and another
study found t-AMKL in 2 of 23 (8.7%) adult AMKL cases , and on this basis the incidence of t-AMKL is about 0.1% of all adult AML cases.
Adherence of platelets to leukocytes during flow cytometry and the procedures used for fixation and decalcification in immunohistochemistry
can lead to difficulties in identifying megakaryocytic lineages . Recent studies have stated that accurate diagnosis of AMKL additionally
requires that cells are negative for CD11a and HLA-DR, as well as being positive for previously used markers such as CD41, CD42, CD61, or
Factor VIII . Likewise, in this case, the patient also showed a CD61+, Factor VIII+, CD11a-, and HLA-DR immunophenotype. In summary, to the
best of our knowledge, this is the third case report of t-AMKL worldwide and the first report of t-AMKL in Korea. Furthermore, it is the
first reported case of overt t-AMKL without any evidence of preceding myelodysplasia. This research was supported by the Nano·Material
Technology Development Program through the National Research Foundation of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science, ICT and Future
Planning (grant number 2012M3A7B4035286). No potential conflicts of interest relevant to this article were reported. (A) Peripheral blood
(PB) smear findings (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×1,000), (B) bone marrow (BM) aspirate smear (Wright-Giemsa stain, ×1,000), and (C) BM biopsy
section (H&E stain, ×1,000). Cells in the PB smear (A) had dysplastic features, such as marked anisopoikilocytosis, and some red blood cells
(RBCs) had a teardrop shape. Neutrophils showed the Pelger-Huët anomaly and cytoplasmic hypogranularity. Leukemic blasts (B), consistent
with acute megakaryoblastic leukemia, were of medium to large size and had round, slightly irregular or indented nuclei, with fine reticular
chromatin, one to three inconspicuous nucleoli, basophilic agranular cytoplasm, and frequent pseudopod formation. The biopsied marrow (C)
showed hypercellularity relative to the patient's age (approximately 70%). (D) The karyotype of the abnormal clone in 2 out of 20 analyzed
metaphase cells using G-banding. It was initially interpreted as 46,XY,-5,-7,+2mar. The arrows denote the abnormal chromosomes. (E-G)
Interphase FISH for AML1-ETO (E), RELN/TES (F), andTAS2R1/EGR1 (G) at diagnosis. The three green (RUNX1 probe on 21q22) and two orange
(RUNX1T1 probe on 8q22) signals (E) were consistent with an additional AML1 signal in 28.2% of the nuclei analyzed. The two green (D5S630
probe on 5p15.31) and one orange (EGR1 probe on 5q31) signal (F) and one green (RELN probe on 7q22) and one orange (TES probe on 7q31)
signal (G) were consistent with 5q and 7q deletions, respectively. The two green (D5S630 probe on 5p15.31) signals (F) signified that there
were two 5p loci. Abbreviation: H&E, hematoxylin and eosin. Characteristics of previously reported therapy-related acute megakaryoblastic
leukemia cases *22 months to diagnosis of t-MDS, 3 months to diagnosis of t-AML; †Karyotype of t-MDS: 46,XX,der(5;9)(p10;q10), del(7)(q?),
+19, add(3q21), der(12)add(12)(p11.2), t(3;12)(q21;q22), del(12)(p?) , Karyotype of t-AML: 46,XX,der(5;19)(p10;q10), -6, del(7)(q?),
add(12p11.2), -13, -17, +19.* Abbreviations: Pac, paclitaxel; Carbo, carboplatin; CHOP, adriamycin, cyclophosphamide, vincristine,
prednisolone; MEVP, mitoxantrone, etoposide, vindesine, prednisolone; Dox, doxorubicin; Etop, etoposide; Cis, cisplatin; Cyt, cytoxan; BH-
AC, behenoylara-C; MCNU, ranimustine; Proc, procainamide; Bleo, bleomycin; RT, radiotherapy; Taxol, docetaxel; Gemza, gemcitabine; Vin,
vinorelbine; Ire, iressa; Irin, irinotecan.
