Sparganosis, an infection due to the plerocercoid of Spirometra erinacei, are found worldwide but the majority of cases occur in East Asia
including Korea. This report is on a recurred case of sparganosis in the subcutaneous tissue of the right lower leg 1 year after a surgical
removal of a worm from a similar region. At admission, ultrasonography (USG) of the lesion strongly suggested sparganosis, and a worm was
successfully removed which turned out to be a sparganum with scolex. Since sparganum has a variable life span, and may develop into a life-
threatening severe case, a patient once diagnosed as sparganosis should be properly followed-up for a certain period of time. Although
imaging modalities were useful for the diagnosis of sparganosis as seen in this case, serological test such as ELISA should also be
accompanied so as to support the preoperative diagnosis. Among the parasitic infections, sparganosis is a relatively rare parasitic
infection caused by the migrating plerocercoid (=sparganum) of Spirometra erinacei. Sparganosis is found worldwide but the majority of cases
occur in East Asia, including Korea . Human sparganosis was first reported in China by the discovery of ribbon-like worm bodies from a dead
human body . In Korea, sparganosis was first discovered from the leg of a farmer in 1917 . Four years previously, we reported a sparganosis
case from which a sparganum was surgically removed from the ankle region of a 60-year-old woman who was presumed to be infected by ingestion
of infected copepods . However, sparganosis recurred in the same patient after 1 year. The present report deals with the recurred
sparganosis case in the subcutaneous tissue of the right lower leg. Although the majority of sparganosis does not make critical problems,
they are sometimes misunderstood as other clinical situations that make soft tissue masses. Sparganum may invade the vital organs such as
the brain, and Korea in one of the countries which shows the highest number of sparganum cases. Furthermore, sparganum can survive for a
long time in the human body , and the sparganum of the previous case (the same patient as in this report) was presumed to have survived for
at least 20 years inside the patient's leg . Therefore, possible suggestions for follow-up of sparganosis were discussed. In our previous
case report, a 60-year-old woman who had been living as a farmer in Cheonan-si, Chungcheongnam-do, Korea, was admitted to Dankook University
Hospital due to a painful nodular mass at the right ankle . A sparganum was surgically removed from the ankle, and the diagnosis was
sparganosis. Since she denied ingesting snake or frog meat, untreated mineral water from a local mountain was suggested to be the infection
source. While she was followed up after the operation, she (61-year-old) complained of discomfort in the region superior to the right
lateral malleolus with a feeling that something is moving inside her leg from 1 year after the surgical treatment. Routine laboratory tests
were unremarkable, and no eosinophilia was noted. Ultrasonography (USG) showed diffuse longitudinal (about 10 cm) thickening of the
subcutaneous fat layer with increased echogenicity on the lateral aspect of the right fibula (Fig. 1A). The subcutaneous thickening was
located around the region where the Achilles tendon of the right lower leg begins. A long tubular structure with a diameter of 3-5 mm was
found inside the subcutaneous thickening (Fig. 1B). The tubular structure was mostly continuous without interruption and partially filled
with echogenic material (Fig. 1B). The anteroinferior aspect of the lesion was isolated tubular-shaped whereas the posterosuperior aspect
was a tubular cystic lesion having a blind loop (Fig. 1C). These findings could be interpreted as partially thrombosed venous structure
surrounded by thrombophlebitic inflammatory changes. However, in this case, venous structures of the lesion were normal and accompanied by
an isolated cystic lesion. Thus, this case was suggested as a recurred sparganosis by a remained plerocercoid worm or possibly due to
incomplete removal of the scolex at the time of the previous operation. During the surgery, a longitudinal incision was made on the lateral
aspect of the right lower leg. A soft, movable, and poorly marginated mass with a diameter of 2 cm was observed. The same as the previous
operation, a white-shiny, synovium-like piece of body popped out through the incision, and determined as a sparganum. The removed worm was
15 cm in length, slightly shorter than that of the previously removed one (18 cm in length), and the scolex was easily seen (Fig. 2). After
removing the sparganum, neuroraphy was performed because a ruptured sural nerve was observed. The pathological examination revealed chronic
granulomatous inflammation with a degenerating parasite caused by a parasitic (possibly sparganum) infection. The patient's symptoms were
improved thereafter and considered not reappeared again for more than 2 years after the second operation. This case is on a sparganosis case
that recurred in the leg of a woman. There exists a strong gender preference with regard to sparganosis especially in Korea due to the habit
of eating raw reptiles among men , which might interrupt prompt diagnosis or even lead to a wrong diagnosis. However, as mentioned in our
previous report , sparganosis can also occur through drinking copepods contaminated in impure water . Various imaging tools including plain
X-ray, MRI, and ultrasonography (USG) were used in the present sparganosis case. USG findings were highly useful for the differential
diagnosis of sparganosis from superficial varicose veins or soft tissue tumors . USG finding of sparganosis generally includes a low
echogenic tubular lesion along with increased echogenicity of the surrounding tissue which comes from the sparganum itself and chronic
granulomatous inflammation, respectively. In our case, USG findings were typically in accordance with the above mentioned sparganosis that
can make other causes such as thrombophlebitis ruled out. Common clinical manifestations of sparganosis are subcutaneous lumps or masses.
However, sparganum can also invade other tissues or organs such as the intestine, eyes, and spine, and even can cause pericardial or pleural
effusion by invading peritoneopleural cavity . In these cases, special diagnostic tools such as pericardiocentesis or ELISA are necessary .
The laboratory examination of blood from the patient of this case did not show the typical eosinophilia which is one of the common signs of
parasite infections. Therefore, in case of sparganosis with neither eosinophilia nor subcutaneous masses, serological test should be used as
a diagnostic tool along with the imaging modalities. For example, in a case of sparganosis that presented as a recurrent pericardial
effusion, the anti-sparganum specific IgG level in the serum was significantly higher than the control . Furthermore, ELISA of the
cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) is also suggested as an effective diagnostic tool for cerebral sparganosis . Neuroradiologic imaging is very
sensitive and also provides differential features between live and degenerating spargana . However, neuroradiologic imaging alone is not
sufficient for a definite identification of the lesion although it can confirm the presence of a lesion in a specific site. During the
surgical procedure, neuroraphy was performed to restore a ruptured sural nerve which had been adhered to the adjacent soft tissue due to the
worm. Anatomically, the sural nerve is formed by the union of the medial sural cutaneous nerve and a branch of the common peroneal nerve
which are originated from the tibial and common peroneal nerve, respectively. It usually runs in the middle of the calf but this is highly
variable. It also accompanies the small saphenous vein, and superficial lymphatic vessels of the lower leg also gather around here. These
situations indicate the possibilities of varicose veins and even elephantiasis although only the sural nerve was affected in this case. In
general, direct removal of plerocercoids by surgical method is the treatment of choice and also provides a definite diagnosis , because
administration of praziquantel alone has a limitation on the successful treatment . Therefore, praziquantel should be an alternative
treatment only in surgically unresectable case. However, if 2 or more spargana exist in a patient, complete surgical removal is practically
difficult and recurrence of sparganosis should be possible by the remnant worm after a surgical removal of a sparganum. The recurrence of
sparganosis in our case may have been due to a sparganum which had been left from the previous surgery which migrated through the elongated
track-like structure later. However, it might also be possible that the scolex part was cut in the previous operation, retained in the
lesion, and regenerated thereafter. In about 70% of the patients, only 1 sparganum worm has been noted . However, several spargana may also
be involved. In a case of pulmonary sparganosis , plerocercoids had been surgically removed for several times from muscles and subcutaneous
tissues before the development of pulmonary sparganosis. This pulmonary sparganosis case, together with other case reports and reviews on
the recurrence of sparganosis, suggests strongly the importance of proper and effective following-up of patient once diagnosed as
sparganosis. The patient in our case is doing well for more than 2 years after the recurrence. We have no conflict of interest related with
this report. Ultrasonography of the right ankle in the present case. (A) The increased echogenicity was seen on the lateral aspect of the
right fibula. Arrow indicates the soft tissue swelling. (B) A long tubular structure with a diameter of 3-5 mm was seen inside the
subcutaneous thickening. The tubular structure was mostly continuous without interruption and partially filled with echogenic material.
Arrows indicate the sparganum. (C) The posterosuperior aspect was tubular cystic lesion having blind loop. A photograph of the removed
sparganum with its scolex (box).
