Superficial Acral Fibromyxoma is a rare tumor of soft tissues. It is a relatively new entity described in 2001 by Fetsch et al. It probably
represents a fibrohistiocytic tumor with less than 170 described cases. We bring a new case of SAF on the 5th toe of the right foot, in a
43-year-old woman. After surgical excision with safety margins which included the nail apparatus, it has not recurred (22 months of follow
up). We carried out a review of the location of all SAF published up to the present day. Superficial Acral Fibromyxoma (SAF) is a rare tumor
of soft tissues with slow growth and acral location. It has a benign behavior, but it may persist or recur if not properly treated. We
present a 43-year-old woman, without any known allergies whose personal history reports beta thalassemia. She referred having had cutaneous
changes not associated with any trauma for 8 years, consisting of swelling, partial nail loss and distal ulcerations with occasional
bleeding on the 5th toe of the right foot. When the patient wore open shoes it was painless; however, it hurt and bled when she wore closed
shoes. Upon examination, the distal end of the 5th toe presented a central ulcer with blood remains and partial onycholysis (Figure 1A). A:
Loss of the distal end of the 5th toe of the right foot and partial onycholysis; B: Fusiform cell proliferation in a myxoid stroma (HE,
x100); C: Fusiform cells show cytoplasmic positivity to CD34 (PAP, x200); D: Image after excision. The macroscopic part of the tumor along
with nail apparatus can be seen Antero-posterior and oblique X-rays were requested of both feet, which showed subluxation of the distal
phalanges of the 5th toes without signs of bone infiltration and a diagnostic biopsy was performed. Histological results showed neoplastic
dermal proliferation of fusiform cells without any relevant atypia, immersed in a myxoid stroma with collagenized areas and a prominent
vascular weave (Figure 1B). Immunohistochemical studies reported positive results for CD34 and negative for S100, AME and AML (Figure 1C).
The proliferation index, valued with Ki67 was low (less than 1%). These findings led to the diagnosis of Superficial Acral Fibromyxoma. The
subsequent therapeutic approach included complete removal of the tumor as well as the nail in order to avoid recurrence. Histological
examination of the surgical piece was similar to the previously described. The tumor was extirpated with wide margins, including the nail
matrix, respecting the distal phalanx (Figure 1D). Resection margins were reported as tumor-free. After a 22-month follow-up there was no
recurrence of the tumor. Superficial Acral Fibromyxoma (SAF) is a rare tumor of soft tissues, with slow growth and located in the subungual
or periungual region of the hands and feet1-7 (Table 1). However, the heel, palm and ankle can also be affected.5 It affects young adults
(mean age 43 years old), with higher frequency in men than in women in a 2:1 proportion. It is a relatively new entity described in 2001 by
Fetsch et al.4 It probably represents a fibrohistiocytic tumor with less than 170 described cases (SAF series and isolated case reports).2
Summary of all published cases and locations of SAF Pain is not usually mentioned. Ungual involvement may be present. Only one case has been
associated with previous trauma. X-rays rarely show bone alterations.1,8 Histologically, it is a well delimited, non-encapsulated dermal
tumor that may extend towards the hypodermis. It is composed of a proliferation of cells from a fibroblastic line usually accompanied by
many mast cells. The presence of a myxoid stroma with a rich vascular weave is very noticeable. Epidermis hyperplasia with hyperkeratosis is
also frequent. CD34 positivity is characteristic but CD10, CD99, EMA, and nestin immunoreactivity are also common. Negative results for
neural and muscular differentiation markers (S-100, HMB-45, SMA, desmin, actin), cytokeratin and apolipoprotein D are expected.1-3, 9,10
Although it is an infrequent event, it must be included in differential diagnosis of tumors present on the fingers and toes.1-7 Differential
diagnosis considerations are summarized in chart 1. Differential Diagnosis of Superficial Acral Fibromyxoma SAF has a benign behavior but
may persist or recur if not properly treated.7,8 Thus complete removal and follow-up is recommended. Up to this date, malignization has not
been described. In conclusion, this is the description of a rare case of Superficial Acral Fibromyxoma on the nail apparatus of a 43-year-
old woman. There are less than 170 published cases. It is a benign tumor with slow growth and, although rare, it should be considered in
differential diagnosis of acral lesions. Surgery is curative but requires adequate margins due to the high risk of recurrence. Malignization
has never been described. Work performed at the Hospital Universitario Virgen Macarena - Sevilla, Spain. Financial Support: none Conflict of
Interests: none
