Fabry disease is an X-linked, lysosomal storage disease caused by the inherited deficiency of the enzyme α-galactosidase A. The diagnosis is
usually late, with renal, cardiovascular and/or cerebral complications that reduce life expectancy. Angiokeratomas are asymptomatic lesions
present as the initial manifestation and usually less appreciated. Their detection is important for early diagnosis and institution of
treatment with enzyme replacement therapy, which prevents late complications reducing morbidity and mortality. We report a case of a male
teenager with acroparestesias and angiokeratomas. Family medical research discovered that his mother and brother had similar signs and
symptoms and that the three patients had the same mutation in the gene encoding the enzyme, confirming the diagnosis. Fabry disease is a
rare storage metabolic disease, linked to X chromosome, caused by deficiency of α- galactosidase A (α-Gal A) lysosomal hydrolase activity,
leading to the accumulation of two neutral glycosphingolipids, globotriaosylceramide (GL-3 or Gb3) and digalactosylceramide, in several
tissues, with progressive multisystemic damage.1-5 The angiokeratomas are part of the initial clinical presentation, although asymptomatic.
Angiokeratomas, acroparestesias and non-specific systemic symptoms are not initially associated with Fabry disease, which postpones the
beginning of enzyme replacement therapy (ERT), increasing the risk of late complications.6 We report three cases of Fabry disease in two
male brothers, in its classical form, as well as in the oligosymptomatic mother. Case 1: 16-year-old male, with asymptomatic periumbilical
lesions since his first years of life, progressing in number and size for the last 3 years. He presented right hypoacusia, tingling in hands
and feet and burning plantar pain, which worsened with hot weather and physical activity. At the dermatological exam he presented
erythematous-violaceous papules of keratotic surface, grouped on the upper limbs, paravertebral, paraumbilical, inguinal, scrotum and penile
regions, right thigh and knees (Figure 1). In the ophthalmological investigation the diagnosis was cornea verticillata (Figure 2). He
presented hearing deficit in the right ear at audiometry. In complementary exams, he showed high 24hours proteinuria (0.14; VR < 0.05);
remaining exams were normal (blood count, renal function, microalbuminuria, ECG, spirometry and cranial magnetic resonance imaging-MRI). The
deficiency of α-Gal activity was confirmed in the plasma (0.0 umol/h of protein; > 2.5) and leukocytes through paper filter (0.16 nmol / h /
mg of protein; > 1.4). The biopy of umbilical lesion resulted compatible with angiokeratoma (Figure 3). A. Keratotic erythematous-violaceous
papules, distributed on the umbilical and paraumbilical areas. B. Keratotic violaceous papules distributed on scrotum and penile body Cornea
verticillata: Yellowish lines that converge to a spot close to central cornea region A. Proliferation of capillary vases, ectasia and
congestion of the lumen in the papillary dermis, thickening of epidermis (HE100X). B. Proliferation of capillary vases, ectasied, congested
close to the dome of the papillary dermis (HE 400X) Case 2: an 11-year-old boy presented burning pains in the lower limbs, which worsened
with hot weather, although less intensively than in his brother's case (Case 1). During examination angiokeratomas were noticed, limited to
the periumbilical region. He presented cornea verticillata, while the audiometry and other laboratory, electrocardiographic and imaging
exams were normal. Enzyme α- Gal A deficiency was observed in the plasma and leukocytes (plasma: 0.11 umol/h; leukocytes: 0.46 nmol/mg/h).
Case 3: a 39-year-old female, mother of patients 1 and 2, presented with mild acroparestesia and cornea verticillata, without skin lesions.
Audiometry revealed diminished hearing in the right ear and slight loss in the left, discrete proteinuria (0.09) and microalbuminuria (20.93
VR < 20 ). Normal blood count, renal function, ESR, ECG and cranial MRI. Dosage of α-Gal A activity in the plasma was within normal range
(3.02 umol/h). Genotyping of the 3 patients revealed a similar mutation: Exon 7 Arg 342 Gln. In the two-year followup, patient 1 presented
worsening of lower limb pains and microangiopathy was detected in cranial MRI. Patient 2 started presenting proteinuria and increase of
angiokeratomas in size, number and distribution. The mother remained stable. The three patients still have not started enzyme replacement
due to family decision of postponing the beginning of treatment. Fabry disease was originally described in 1898 as 'angiokeratoma corporis
diffusum' by Anderson and Fabry.2,3 Later it was recognized as a systemic lysosomal storage disease, caused by a mutation of α-Gal gene
A(Xq22.1), leading to alteration of enzyme expression.1,2 This deficiency leads to accumulation of neutral glycosphingolipids, particularly
globotriaosylceramide (Gb3) and digalactosylceramide, mainly in the central nervous system, skin, heart, kidneys, auditory system and
eyes.3,6 The clinical expression of the disease depends on the α-galactosidase enzyme activity, whereas patients with residual enzymatic
activity show a milder clinical picture, with predominance of cardiac alterations, possibly with minimal renal damage and absence of
acroparestesia, which does not occur in the classical form of the disease, when the enzymatic activity is absent.2,7 This can be explained
by more than 400 different gene mutations, some of them leading to some residual enzymatic activity varying between 2 to 25%.2 Even though
it is considered a recessive disease linked to X chromosome, heterozygous women can manifest the disease symptoms in 70 % of the cases, due
to random activation of chromosome X, not being merely carriers of the mutation.2,3 This way, it is necessary to investigate and follow up
female patients of families that carry Fabry disease, as was done with the patients' mother. The classical form occurs in the male gender,
as presented in the two brothers. The initial symptoms appeared in infancy, predominantly neurological, like acroparestesias, generalized
pains, change of thermal sensitivity, hearing loss and hypohidrosis, but also gastrointestinal, including abdominal pain and change of
intestinal habit.1,2,3,4 The cornea verticillata may be present since early childhood.6 Angiokeratomas are papules of red to purplish
coloration, of varying sizes and tending to grow in number and size with age. They are distributed mainly on the periumbilical and inguinal
areas, in swimsuit form.1,7 Angiokeratomas and cornea verticillata, when present, are a clue to an early diagnosis.7 The late manifestations
occur in the third and fourth decades; the main ones are: chronic renal disease, cardiac arrhythmias and cerebral vascular accident, which
contribute to reduce life expectancy of patients by 15 to 20 years.7 Early diagnosis is important for the establishment of enzymatic
replacement treatment, diminishing Gb3 deposits in the vascular endothelium and plasma, with stabilization of renal function in children and
postponing disease progress in adults.7,8,9 Recent studies suggest that, in spite of variable ERT response among patient subgroups, the
treatment started before the occurrence of irreversible damage to organs could prevent late complications, with reduction of morbidity and
mortality related to the disease.5,10 We reported three cases of Fabry disease in first-degree relatives. The index patient received the
diagnosis at 16 years of age, despite the presence of angiokeratomas since early childhood, which demonstrates the importance of
dermatologists and pediatricians knowing the condition to ensure that early enzymatic treatment is ministered, capable of avoiding late
complications of the disease. Work performed at the Dermatology department, Escola Paulista de Medicina - Universidade Federal de São Paulo
(EPM-UNIFESP) - São Paulo (SP), Brazil. Financial Support: none Conflict of Interests: none
