Raised lesions were present on the left nasal vestibule of a 20-month-old Japanese Brown heifer. The largest mass which caused partial nasal
obstruction was removed surgically. Corynebacterium ulcerans was identified in the mass. 16S ribosomal RNA and RNA polymerase beta subunit
genes were 100% and 98% identical to other C. ulcerans strains. Histologically, multiple foci of eosinophilic granuloma with Splendore-
Hoeppli material were seen. Rod-shaped Gram-positive organisms were detected with metachromatic granules, producing diphtheria toxin with 5,
30 and 48 amino acid differences to another C. ulcerans strain, C. diphtheriae or C. pseudotuberculosis, respectively. The toxin is highly
cytotoxic and may be responsible for the formation of abundant Splendore-Hoeppli material. The lesion was therefore judged to be an allergic
reaction to bacterial antigens or diphtheria toxin. Sulfur granules, which are usually located within neutrophil abscesses, are distinct
masses of bacterial cells bordered by intensely eosinophilic, club-like projections of Splendore-Hoeppli material. This material is also
formed around fungi, parasites and non-infectious agents and is encircled by eosinophils in cases, such as pythiosis and schistosomiasis .
In cattle, Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon has been observed in some bacterial infections, including Actinomyces bovis and Actinobacillus
lignieresii . Bovine nocardiosis is usually accompanied by neutrophil accumulations, but in a case of eosinophilic granuloma, Nocardia-like
organisms in the cytoplasm of multinuclear epithelioid cells have been reported . Corynebacterium ulcerans is known as a pathogen that
causes purulent inflammation, such as mastitis, lymphadenitis and respiratory infections, in various animal species . However, necrotizing
angitis with marked eosinophil infiltration associated with C. ulcerans has been reported in the human lung . Toxigenic strains of C.
ulcerans can induce pharyngeal infections mimicking classical diphtheria in humans . The production of diphtheria toxin depends on infection
by an organism with a corynephage-encoding diphtheria toxin gene . Here, we report a case of nasal eosinophilic granuloma in a heifer, the
lesion being characterized by Splendore-Hoeppli material containing toxigenic C. ulcerans. A 14-month-old, Japanese Brown heifer was
examined, because of a raised mass on the left nasal vestibule. A number of smaller nodules, frequently fused together, showed an
irregularly elevated mucosal surface throughout. Despite antibiotic treatment, the lesion did not improve, and small elevations appeared on
the right vestibule five months later. The largest mass causing partial nasal obstruction was resected surgically, six months after the
initial examination. The mass, 4 × 3 × 1.5 cm in size, was relatively hard in consistency, and yellowish white nodules up to 5 mm in
diameter were detected on cut sections. The heifer calved six weeks after surgery, and the mucosal condition of both vestibules was
unchanged. Most of the removed tissue was fixed in 10% buffered formalin, embedded in paraffin, sectioned at 4 µm and stained with
hematoxylin and eosin (HE), Gram, toluidine blue, Giemsa, phosphotungstic acid hematoxylin (PTAH), von Kossa and calcium stain (Dahl’s
method). Immunohistochemistry was carried out by the streptavidin-biotin complex/horseradish peroxidase (SAB) method on histological
sections using a Histofine SAB kit (Nichirei, Tokyo, Japan). The primary antibodies employed were mouse monoclonal antibodies to CD68 (1:50;
Dako A/S, Glostrup, Denmark) and tryptase (1:200; Lab Vision, Fremont, CA, U.S.A.), rabbit polyclonal antibodies to immunoglobulin M (IgM)
(µ chain specific) (1:1,600; Bethyl Laboratories, Montgomery, TX, U.S.A.) and IgA (α chain specific) (1:1,600; Bethyl Laboratories) and a
sheep polyclonal antibody to IgG (γ chain specific) (1:1,600; Bethyl Laboratories). Immunostaining was also performed using a biotin-
conjugated goat polyclonal antibody to diphtheria toxoid (1:640; Thermo Fisher Scientific, Rockford, IL, U.S.A.) as part of the SAB kit.
Some stainings were also performed on bacterial smears. For comparison, tissues from a case of actinomycosis and a case of actinobacillosis
were treated in the same manner. In order to identify bacterial organisms observed in tissue sections, part of the removed tissue that had
been frozen for viral examination was utilized for culture. Its emulsion was cultured on 5% sheep blood agar at 37°C for one week
aerobically or anaerobically. The dominant organisms were identified as a Corynebacterium, confirmed as Gram-positive, metachromatic
granule-positive, hemolysis-positive, catalase-positive, nonspore-forming, nonmotile and rod-shaped. Sequencing of the 16S ribosomal RNA
gene (16Srrna), as previously mentioned for bacterial species identification , revealed similarities to other bacterial DNA sequences by
BLAST (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/blast). Although entirely corresponding to C. ulcerans strain 809 and sharing >99.7% identity with other C.
ulcerans strains, the 16Srrna of this isolate also possessed a very high degree of identity with a C. pseudotuberculosis strain. We then
sequenced the RNA polymerase beta subunit-encoding gene (rpoB) for definitive identification and compared it with other Corynebacterium
species . A phylogenetic tree of rpoB was generated using the CLASTAL W program on the DNA Data Bank of Japan (www.ddbj.nig.ac.jp/) (Fig.
1Fig. 1.Phylogenetic tree for different Corynebacterium species and C. ulcerans HAZ 120606 isolated from bovine eosinophilic granuloma,
based on alignment of rpoB sequences.). The rpoB of the isolate, which showed 98% identity with C. ulcerans strains, was registered with the
Bank as an accession No. AB828262. Phylogenetic tree for different Corynebacterium species and C. ulcerans HAZ 120606 isolated from bovine
eosinophilic granuloma, based on alignment of rpoB sequences. Histologically, in the propria-submucosa of the vestibule, there were multiple
foci of granuloma, many of which contained eosinophilic hyaline deposits called the Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon (Fig. 2AFig. 2.Histology
and immunohistochemistry of granulation tissues. (A) A large sulfur granule with eosinophil infiltration (arrow) is observed within an
abscess. The other granule is surrounded by epithelioid cells (lower right). HE. Bar=100 µm. (B) Intact bacterial organisms are small in
number (arrow) or absent in sulfur granules encircled by eosinophils and epithelioid cells. Giemsa. Bar=20 µm. (C) Many bacteria appear to
be located between cracks of Splendore-Hoeppli material. Giemsa. Bar=20 µm. (D) As shown in B, intact bacterial organisms are scarcely
present, but Gram stain shows the existence of larger numbers of bacteria in the same sulfur granule. Gram. Bar=5 µm. (E) Rod-shaped
bacteria with metachromatic granules (arrows) are present within Splendore-Hoeppli material. Gram. Bar=5 µm. (F) Staining for diphtheria
toxin in a section adjacent to that depicted in D shows its localization in areas where bacterial organisms are visible. SAB,
diaminobenzidine (DAB) chromogen, hematoxylin counterstain. Bar=20 µm. (G) This actinomycotic sulfur granule is characterized by a large
cluster of densely packed filamentous bacteria with a peripheral narrow band of eosinophilic club-shaped spicules. Unlike in B, infiltrating
cells are neutrophils. Giemsa. Bar=20 µm.). Most deposits were located within eosinophil abscesses surrounded by CD68-positive epithelioid
cells and macrophages (Fig. 2B), but some were in direct contact with epithelioid cells. Abscesses localized within glandular ducts were
rarely seen. Splendore-Hoeppli material was frequently calcified and/or infiltrated by eosinophils, and epithelioid cells phagocytosing
calcified material were also seen. The material stained blue with PTAH and was partially positive for IgG, IgM and IgA. In addition to
lymphocytes and plasma cells, tryptase-positive mast cells predominated in surrounding connective tissues. Histology and
immunohistochemistry of granulation tissues. (A) A large sulfur granule with eosinophil infiltration (arrow) is observed within an abscess.
The other granule is surrounded by epithelioid cells (lower right). HE. Bar=100 µm. (B) Intact bacterial organisms are small in number
(arrow) or absent in sulfur granules encircled by eosinophils and epithelioid cells. Giemsa. Bar=20 µm. (C) Many bacteria appear to be
located between cracks of Splendore-Hoeppli material. Giemsa. Bar=20 µm. (D) As shown in B, intact bacterial organisms are scarcely present,
but Gram stain shows the existence of larger numbers of bacteria in the same sulfur granule. Gram. Bar=5 µm. (E) Rod-shaped bacteria with
metachromatic granules (arrows) are present within Splendore-Hoeppli material. Gram. Bar=5 µm. (F) Staining for diphtheria toxin in a
section adjacent to that depicted in D shows its localization in areas where bacterial organisms are visible. SAB, diaminobenzidine (DAB)
chromogen, hematoxylin counterstain. Bar=20 µm. (G) This actinomycotic sulfur granule is characterized by a large cluster of densely packed
filamentous bacteria with a peripheral narrow band of eosinophilic club-shaped spicules. Unlike in B, infiltrating cells are neutrophils.
Giemsa. Bar=20 µm. In a few deposits of Splendore-Hoeppli material, rod-shaped bacteria were relatively abundant and extended to the
neighboring abscesses (Fig. 2C), but they were small in number in other deposits (Fig. 2D). The bacterial organisms were Gram-positive (Fig.
2D), having metachromatic granules at the ends of the cells (Fig. 2E). Immunohistochemistry demonstrated the presence of diphtheria toxin in
the deposits (Fig. 2F) and showed its widespread distribution in some deposits. Immunoreactive products were also observed in accumulations
of eosinophils. Lesions were characterized by large bacterial colonies with peripheral club-like spicules in the two control cases (Fig.
2G). Surrounding infiltrates consisted of neutrophils, CD68-positive cells, lymphocytes and plasma cells, but few tryptase-positive cells.
There were no calcium deposits in the spicules. Splendore-Hoeppli material stained blue with PTAH stain for fibrin. Immunohistochemical
stains for IgG, IgM and IgA were positive within the Splendore-Hoeppli material in the case of actinomycosis, but were negative in the case
of actinobacillosis. Since nearly all organisms were variably positive for diphtheria toxin on bacterial smears by immunostaining, molecular
analysis of the diphteria toxin gene was performed. Primers were designed from the C. ulcerans strain 0102 genome information (DTX-F:
5′-CTTGACCACGTTTTCCAC-3′, DTX-R: 5′-CGATACTTCCTGGTATCG-3′). A diphtheria toxin gene was detected in the C. ulcerans isolate (accession No.
AB828261). This toxin was different from that of another C. ulcerans strain, from C. diphtheriae strains and from a C. pseudotuberculosis
strain by 5, 30 and 48 amino acids, respectively. The most characteristic feature of the current case was the presence of Splendore-Hoeppli
material surrounded by eosinophils, and histological examination revealed Gram-positive organisms within the material or rarely eosinophil
abscesses. Splendore-Hoeppli phenomenon is associated with several bacteria, such as Actinomyces, Streptomyces, Nocardia, Arcanobacterium,
Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Pseudomonas and Actinobacillus species [9,10,11, 15]. The present organisms were readily distinguishable from
most of the species based on the Gram reaction and morphology including the presence of metachromatic granules. Additionally, C. ulcerans
was bacteriologically isolated, and diphtheria toxin was immunohistochemically demonstrated in both tissue sections and bacterial smears .
On the basis of these results, toxigenic C. ulcerans was considered to be the causal agent of the eosinophilic granuloma. Unlike in ordinary
aspergillosis with neutrophil infiltration, eosinophils and epithelioid cells are observed in allergic bronchopulmonary aspergillosis in
humans . Similarly, not only neutrophil abscesses but also eosinophilic granuloma may occur in bovine nocardiosis . The fungi and bacteria,
which are respectively found within allergic mucin and epithelioid cells, are relatively small in number [2, 18]. This may be due to the
fact that they act as allergens. In the current case, bacterial organisms were also inconspicuous, and hence, the Splendore-Hoeppli
phenomenon was much more prominent, compared with what is seen in other bacterial infections. Strains of C. ulcerans that produce diphtheria
toxin are capable of forming pseudomembranes composed mainly of cell debris and fibrin on the mucosa of the human throat . The Splendore-
Hoeppli material is composed of tissue debris, fibrin and immunoglobulin [4, 5], and we demonstrated the presence of fibrin and
immunoglobulins in the material. The intense cytotoxic effect of diphtheria toxin may be associated with the formation of abundant
Splendore-Hoeppli material. In sulfur granules, club-like peripheral projections of Splendore-Hoeppli material were thought to consist of
calcium phosphate [14, 19]. As shown in the control cases, however, the material is usually negative for von Kossa and calcium stain .
Although sulfur granules are usually embedded in neutrophil abscesses , the Splendore-Hoeppli material formed around non-bacterial agents is
frequently associated with eosinophils . These cases provide evidence that neutrophils are not indispensable for the formation of sulfur
granules. The formation of the peribacterial Splendore-Hoeppli reaction probably prevents phagocytosis and intracellular killing of the
aggravating agent, leading to chronicity of infection . In the present case, sulfur granules were infiltrated by eosinophils capable of
releasing highly toxic granule proteins, free radicals and profibrinolysin [1, 12]. Moreover, calcified sulfur granules were phagocytosed by
epithelioid cells. Such mechanisms for eliminating Splendore-Hoeppli material and bacteria may result in loss of characteristic histological
findings and difficulties in making a correct diagnosis in later stages of this type of granuloma.
