Post-operative rhabdomyolysis is a well-known complication, especially after bariatric and orthopaedic surgeries. There are few published
reports of rhabdomyolysis following cardiac surgery. Acute kidney injury had been distinguished as a serious complication of cardiac
surgery. We report a case of 55-years-old male patient who developed rhabdomyolysis precipitated acute kidney injury after coronary artery
bypass graft. The patient underwent urgent coronary artery bypass graft surgery, with a long duration of surgery due to technical difficulty
during grafting. He developed rhabdomyolysis induced acute kidney injury necessitating hemodialysis. The patient in turn developed heart
failure, which along with acute kidney injury lead to prolonged ventilation. There was supervening sepsis with prolonged intensive care
unity stay and eventually prolonged hospitalization. The peak creatine kinase level was 39000 IU/mL and peak myoglobin was 40000 ng/ml.
Reviewing the patient, surgery was prolonged due to technical difficulties encountered during grafting, leading to rhabdomyolysis induced
acute kidney injury. The pre-operative use of statins by the patient could also have contributed to the development of rhabdomyolysis. He
developed post-operative right heart failure and sepsis. The patient’s renal function gradually improved over 4 week’s duration. Favorable
outcome could be achieved but after prolonged course of renal replacement therapy in the form of hemodialysis. Prolonged duration of surgery
is a well-recognized risk factor in the development of rhabdomyolysis. Early recognition of rhabdomyolysis induced acute kidney injury is
important in reducing the post-operative morbidity and mortality in patients. A protocol based approach could be applied for early
recognition and management. Cardiovascular diseases is identified as a leading cause of mortality all over the world according to the recent
data by the World Health Organization (WHO), the mortality included 51% due to strokes and 45% due to coronary heart disease .
Rhabdomyolysis (RML) is a dissolution of skeletal muscles that produces a nonspecific clinical syndrome causing extravasation of toxic
intracellular contents from the myocytes into the circulatory system . This destruction leads to electrolyte disturbances, hypovolemia,
metabolic acidosis, coagulopathies and myoglobinuric renal failure. This abnormality is associated with more than 100 seemingly unrelated
disorders, including direct muscle injury (crush injury syndrome), muscle ischemia, excessive physical exertion, temperature extremes,
infections, drugs, toxins, venoms, and endocrine disorders, among others. Although RML was initially recognized solely as a posttraumatic
sequela, nontraumatic causes are now estimated to be more frequent than traumatic causes . Rhabdomyolysis with subsequent myoglobinuria as a
cause of acute renal insufficiency was first described by Meyer-Betz in 1911. Compression-induced rhabdomyolysis has been reported in
connection with several operations, in particular in certain positions for surgery. In non-traumatic patients after elective surgery RML
usually occurs as a result of compression because of unsuitable positioning or tourniquet use, but there are other contributing factors that
should be considered . Recently it has been recognized that myoglobinemia-induced acute kidney injury (AKI) may play a crucial role in
surgical settings, especially with urologic and thoraco-abdominal aortic surgery . In bariatric surgery, RML is considered a consequence of
the high pressure on the muscles on the operating table . Extreme positions such as that for lithotomy may lead to RML even in non-obese
patients . In laparoscopic bariatric surgery, gluteal and back muscles are at danger because of the patient’s position . Perioperative
myocardial injury cannot totally explain the occurrence of increased myoglobinemia. Skeletal muscle breakdown and necrosis play an important
role in determining increased myoglobin concentration after coronary artery bypass grafting (CABG) . Rhabdomyolysis during or after
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) is not very common . Preoperative medication seems to be causative in certain cases. A correlation of RML and
direct femoral artery cannulation, arteriopathy, prolonged extracorporal circulation, low cardiac output syndrome, and continuous
intravenous infusion of epinephrine could be shown. There have not been many published studies of RML in adult patients undergoing CPB . We
report a case of a patient who developed RML with acute renal injury following CABG. A fifty-six-year-old male, weighing 60 kg and height
160 cm, chronic smoker (40 pack years) quit four months before admission, with history of occasional alcohol intake. He was a known case of
hypertension and coronary artery disease (CAD) of 10 years duration, but on irregular treatment. Patient presented on 03/05/2012 with
unstable angina, underwent urgent coronary angiogram, which revealed 100% stenosis of right coronary artery (RCA) and 80% stenosis of left
anterior descending (LAD) branch. An attempt at percutaneous coronary angioplasty (PTCA) to RCA failed and patient was referred for surgical
revascularization. Preoperative medications included acetyl salicylic acid, metopralol, amlodipine, rosuvastatin, and ivabradin. Clopidogrel
was discontinued 10 days prior to surgery. All biochemical investigations prior to surgery were normal, including renal and liver function
tests. Patient was premedicated with oral lorazepam (2 mg) on the night before surgery and morphine 5 mg intramuscular with metoclopramide
10 mg intramuscular on the morning of surgery just before transferring to operating room. Anesthesia was induced with intravenous boluses of
fentanyl, midazolam, etomidate and cisatracurium, airway was secured with an 8.5 mm internal diameter (ID) endotracheal tube. Standard
monitoring including arterial blood pressure (20 G in right radial artery), central venous pressure (8.5 Fr. right internal jugular vein), 5
lead electrocardiogram (ECG), pulse oximetry (SPO2), end tidal carbon dioxide (ETCO2), end tidal concentration measurement of inhalational
agents were instituted. Anesthesia was maintained with intravenous infusions of propofol (60 mg/hour), fentanyl (250 mcg/hour),
cisatracurium (3 mcg/kg/minute) and sevoflourane at 1 minimum alveolar concentration (MAC) as inhalational agent. After harvesting the left
internal mammary artery (LIMA) and right internal mammary artery (RIMA) and systemic heparinisation with 400 IU/kg, the patient was put on
cardiopulmonary bypass (CPB) after securing an activated clotting time (ACT) of 480 seconds. The LIMA graft was anastomosed to LAD. The
anastomosis of RIMA to RCA was beset with technical difficulties necessitating repeated return to CPB thrice to redo the graft as there was
poor flow, and eventually a saphenous vein graft was used to anastomose RCA. Total CPB time was 250 minutes and the aortic cross clamp time
was 55 minutes (Figure 1). The patient was weaned off CPB with modest doses of adrenaline and noradrenaline infusions. Patient received 2
units of packed red blood cells (PRBC), 6 units of platelets and 2 units of fresh frozen plasma (FFP), directed by thromboelastography (TEG)
during the procedure. The total duration of surgery was nine hours. The patient was shifted to the cardiothoracic surgery intensive care
unit (CTICU) for recovery. High sensitive troponin T through the hospital stay. The patient remained hemodynamically stable in the CTICU.
His laboratory showed increase in serum creatinine to 185 micromol/L, had persistently elevated potassium levels (corrected by glucose
insulin boluses) and mild lactic metabolic acidosis. Patient was extubated around midnight on day zero as he maintained stable hemodynamics
with minimal chest drains. He remained in the CTICU for four days, during which time his serum creatinine remained elevated, but urine
output was maintained at >1 mL/kg/hour, albeit with reddish discoloration. The patient’s serum potassium remained elevated and calcium
resonium was started as per nephrologist’s advice. The patient’s creatine kinase (CK) remained elevated from zero post-operative day and a
diagnosis of RML was made. At the same time there was mild derangement in liver function tests. Patient was transferred to surgical step-
down unit (SSDU) on the fourth post-operative day. The patient’s course in the SSDU was complicated by a progressive rise in serum
creatinine, CK, myoglobin, and liver enzymes. There was progressive decline in urine output and furosemide infusion was instituted, with
little improvement. At the same time the patient became septic as evidenced by elevated levels of procalcitonin and white blood cell (WBC)
counts and was started on broad spectrum antibiotics for suspected nosocomial infection. The patient was shifted back to the CTICU on the
eighth post-operative day as his general condition had deteriorated with fluid overload, sepsis and AKI. On readmission to the CTICU his
serum creatinine was 460 micromol/L, CK was 23321 u/L (Figure 2), and serum myoglobin was 40228 ng/ml, with significant elevation in liver
and cardiac enzymes. He became anuric and had severe lactic metabolic acidosis on the day of readmission to CTICU, and hemodialysis was
instituted. Transthoracic echocardiogram (TTE) was done on the 11th post-operative day revealed severe right ventricular dysfunction with
normal left ventricular function (LVF). The patient’s general condition worsened progressively with drowsiness, hypoxia, hypotension, and
evidence of low cardiac output, and he was electively intubated and put on mechanical ventilation on the 11th post-operative day. The
patient was kept sedated with infusions of remifentanil (0.05-0.1 mcg/kg/min) and propofol (50–70 mg/hour). Hemodynamics was maintained with
infusions of dobutamine (5–10 mcg/kg/min) and noradrenaline (0.05-0.1 mcg/kg/min) and vasopressin (2–4 u/hour). Creatine kinase progression
till readmission in the intensive care unit. On the 12th post-operative day the patient developed abdominal distension and melena, his serum
biochemistry revealing deranged coagulation profile, liver function tests (LFTs), worsening renal parameters and increased markers of
sepsis. He was kept sedated and ventilated from the 11th to the 18th post-operative day. The patient developed generalized edema and intra-
abdominal pressure was elevated. CT scan of the abdomen revealed moderate ascites and diffuse liver surface nodularity. Klebsiella and
Enterobactor faecalis were isolated from the patient’s urine during this period. The patient underwent regular hemodialysis with gradual
restoration of renal function and was extubated after eight days of sedation and ventilation on the 18th post-operative day. He was
transferred out of the CTICU to SSDU after 14 days of stay on the 22nd post-operative day. The patient underwent regular nephrology follow-
up with frequent hemodialysis until his renal function recovered after a further two weeks. He was discharged from the hospital in another
week and has been followed up regularly. He had recovered from his heart failure, as evidenced by transthoracic echocardiography (TTE) done
prior to discharge. His total hospital stay was 56 days, of which 46 had been post-surgery. Rhabdomyolysis after CABG is defined as having a
CK level more than 2500 u/L . Use of myoglobin is confirmatory . According to the consensus definition proposed by the Acute Kidney Injury
Network, AKI was defined as an abrupt (within 48 hours) reduction in kidney function defined as an absolute increase in serum creatinine
concentration of 0.3 mg/dL or greater (26.4 mmol/L) or a percentage increase of 50% or greater (1.5-fold from baseline). We did not use
urine output in defining AKI (Figure 3) . Postoperative low cardiac output syndrome (LOS) was defined as the need for a postoperative intra-
aortic balloon pump or inotropic support for longer than 30 minutes in the intensive care unit to maintain systolic blood pressure at
greater than 90 mm Hg . Perioperative myocardial injury is diagnosed when the troponin I (cTnI) concentration at 1 hour after aortic
declamping was greater than 0.92 ng/mL . The European system for cardiac operative risk evaluation (Euro-SCORE) was used to assess
differences in patients’ risk profiles. Serum creatinine progression through the hospital stay. We are reporting a patient who presents with
plentiful risk factors for RML development after surgical intervention. Rhabdomyolysis is a known cause of morbidity and mortality. It had
been described on many occasions in trauma and after surgeries, but the incidence of RML after cardiac surgeries is quite variable, and had
been described only in individual case report. Some authors report a direct relation between AKI and RML, while others report a 19%
incidence of RML after CABG . Multiple factors have been claimed to be the causes of RML after cardiac surgery. A correlation of RML and
direct femoral artery cannulation, arteriopathy, prolonged extracorporal circulation, low cardiac output syndrome, and continuous
intravenous infusion of epinephrine has been described. Furthermore, diabetes mellitus, advanced age, and preexisting renal impairment have
been mentioned to be contributory factors . Rhabdomyolysis has also been reported in patients with pressure necrosis due to incorrect
positioning during surgery and in patients with an intra-aortic balloon pump . In this case, most of these causative factors could be
excluded, because they did not pertain to our patient. Prolonged surgeries, extreme surgical positions, American society of
anesthesiologists (ASA) physical status III–IV, and the presence of diabetes or hypertension have also been identified as added factors
could precipitate development of RML . The operating room has been considered as a favorable environment for RML occurrence because of
unusual positions and areas with increased pressures under anesthesia. Sustained high muscle pressure induces muscle ischemia, direct injury
to sarcolemma, disruption of sodium–potassium pump, electrolyte imbalance, and failure of energy supply to the muscle fiber . Our patient
was 56 years old, he was not known to be diabetic, he had normal preoperative renal functions, he was ASA class IV, his Euro-SCORE was 3,
and he had long surgery (about nine hours) as well as long bypass time (250 minutes). Statins were started for treatment of his
hyperlipdemia 20 days prior to admission. Some authors reckon that lipid-lowering medications are associated with a high risk of
perioperative mortality; moreover, they suggest discontinuing the intake prior to surgical interventions . However numerous studies have
demonstrated that statins improve the outcomes of patients undergoing CABG. The benefits seem to outweigh the potential risks that may
accompany usage, both in the preoperative and postoperative period. In the absence of contraindications, essentially all CABG patients are
candidates for lifelong statin therapy that ideally should be started before surgery . Propofol was used for 15 hours in a dose of less than
1 mg/kg/h; the risk factor for devlopement of RML associated with propofol infusion syndrome has been identified after useage of doses as a
high as 5 mg/kg/h for more than 48 hours . Epinenphrine was used for 240 minutes after coming from CPB, other vasopressors were used in the
form norepinhrine, and IABP was not needed as the patient did not initially exhibit low cardiac output state. Our patient developed gram
negative septicemia in his course but RML and creatinine peak level were before sepsis started. Rhabdomyolysis can be precipitated by many
conditions, and viral as well as bacterial infections are claimed as causing RML . Patient devloped transient impairment of his right
ventricular function as evidenced by TTE, in a recent observational study by Olsson et al., the authors found increased risk of heart
failure in patients suffered AKI after CABG . We think that multiple factors explained this association in our case including sepsis,
prolonged CBP and AKI. Severe RML triggers a cascade with many consequences, including hypovolemia, hypoalbuminemia, anemia, disseminated
intravascular coagulation (DIC), hyperkalemia, hypocalcemia, hypercalcemia, hyperphosphatemia, and acute tubular necrosis. It is possible
that higher pressures related to increased weight as well as other potential mechanisms related to the metabolic derangement are probably
present . When the patient is under sedation it is usually difficult to diagnose RML, usually it requires a high index of clinical
suspicion, and early prevention makes sense before later devlopment of renal dysfunction . Hyperkalemia was the alert to start searching for
RML. Later our patient devloped AKI necessitating regular hemodialysis which continued for 40 days until the patient regained his renal
functions, the likhood of AKI associated with RML may occur with CK level as low as 5000 U/L when there is association of hypovolemia,
sepsis and acidosis, AKI associated RML usually carries higher mortality than when RML devloped alone 59% versus 22% respectively . Here we
report on a patient who presented with numerous risk factors for developing rhabdomyolysis following surgical intervention. AKI developed in
this patient with prolonged length of ICU stay as well as hospitalization. Early diagnosis is essential for preventing deterioration.
Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ACT: Activated clotting time; ASA: American Society of
Anesthesiologists; AKI: Acute kidney injury; CABG: Coronary artery bypass graft; CAD: Coronary artery disease; CK: Creatine kinase; CPB:
Cardiopulmonary bypass; CTICU: Cardiothoracic surgery intensive care unit; ECG: Electrocardiogram; ETCO2: End tidal carbon dioxide; FFP:
Fresh frozen plasma; ID: Internal diameter; LAD: Left anterior descending; LIMA: Left internal mammary artery; LOS: Low cardiac output
syndrome; MAC: Minimum alveolar concentration; PO: Per oral; PRBC: Packed red blood cells; PTCA: Percutaneous transluminal coronary
angioplasty; RCA: Right coronary artery; RIMA: Right internal mammary artery; RML: Rhabdomyolysis; SPO2: Pulse oximetry; SSDU: Surgical step
down unit; TEG: Thromboelastograph; TTE: Trans thoracic echocardiogram; WBC: White blood cells; WHO: World Health Organization. The authors
declared that they have no competing interests. SS, carried out data collection, writing the clinical course. AO, wrote the main manuscript,
initial case diagnosis, and submission. AP, as chair of anesthesia, and intensive care provided general support. AA, was the surgeon
involved in operating the case, general supervision, and provided general support. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. I
have taken efforts through this work, which could not be possible without the kind support and help of many individuals and our
organization. I am highly indebted to all members Cardiothroacic surgery department, Heart Hospital, of Hamad Medical Corporation, Qatar,
for providing necessary information regarding the project and for support. I am also carrying gratitude to the medical research department,
Hamad Medical Corporation for giving all kinds of support throughout the work.
