Dermatomyositis is an idiopathic inflammatory myopathy with typical cutaneous manifestations. It has been proposed that dermatomyositis may
be caused by autoimmune responses to viral infections. Previous studies have shown an association between dermatomyositis and malignant
tumors such as ovarian cancer, lung cancer, and colorectal cancer. However, a chronic hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection associated with
dermatomyositis and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has been very rarely reported. Here, we report a rare case of dermatomyositis coinciding
with HBV-associated HCC. A 55-year-old male was confirmed to have HCC and dermatomyositis based on proximal muscle weakness, typical skin
manifestations, elevated muscle enzyme levels, and muscle biopsy findings. This case suggests that HCC and/or a chronic HBV infection may be
factors in the pathogenesis of dermatomyositis through a paraneoplastic mechanism. Dermatomyositis (DM) is an idiopathic inflammatory
myopathy with progressive, symmetrical weakness of the proximal muscles and characteristic cutaneous manifestations such as poikiloderma .
The etiology and pathogenesis of DM remain unknown; however, in recent years, some researchers have shown that the cause of DM may be
related to an autoimmune response induced by a viral infection or a paraneoplastic syndrome. In particular, DM has been strongly associated
with breast, ovarian, lung, pancreatic, gastric, and colorectal cancer, as well as non-Hodgkin's lymphoma . However, DM associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) has rarely been reported . Here, we report a case of DM associated with hepatitis B virus (HBV)-related liver
cirrhosis and HCC with a review of the current literature. A 55-year-old male visited our hospital complaining of progressive weakness in
his bilateral arms, hips, and thighs. He had difficulty combing his hair and was experiencing dysphagia and erythematous changes in the skin
(his face and a 'V' on his upper chest and neck that had developed 3 weeks earlier) (Fig. 1). A physical examination revealed a heliotrope
rash with bilateral periorbital edema and poikiloderma on the upper chest and neck. A musculoskeletal examination showed marked weakness of
all proximal muscles in the symmetric extremities. Serum laboratory tests revealed the following: white blood cells 9,720/mm3, hemoglobin
13.6 g/dL, platelets 98,000/mm3, creatine kinase 16,440 IU/L (normal range, 0 to 190), lactate dehydrogenase 994 IU/L, aspartate
aminotransferase 717 IU/L, alanine transaminase 139 IU/L, total bilirubin 1.4 mg/dL, albumin 2.2 g/dL, alkaline phosphatase 119 IU/L, and
prothrombin time (activity) 55%. HBV surface antigen was detected, and the HBV DNA level was 7,380 IU/mL. No antibodies against hepatitis C
virus were detected. IgM antibodies against Epstein-Barr virus, cytomegalovirus, and herpes simplex virus were not detected. There was no
other evidence of infectious mononucleosis. Antinuclear antibody and anti-SS-Ro tests were both positive. Tests for other autoantibodies,
including anti-dsDNA, anti-ribonucleoprotein, anti-Sm, anti-Jo-1, and anti-Scl70, were all negative. Electromyography showed a small number
of polyphasic waves with a normal interference pattern in all muscles tested. A muscle biopsy of the right upper arm showed a sparse
lymphocytic infiltrate around the blood vessels and negative immunofluorescence pathologic findings, compatible with DM (Fig. 2). The
patient's levels of carcinoembryonic antigen, carbohydrate antigen 19-9, and prostate-specific antigen were normal, but he had elevated
levels of α-fetoprotein (AFP; 448.8 ng/mL) and proteins induced by vitamin K absence-II (> 500 mAU/mL). Liver dynamic computed tomography
(CT) revealed a 6.5-cm sized arterial enhancing mass in hepatic segment 7/6 (Fig. 3). We diagnosed the patient with HBV-related HCC based on
his status as an HBV carrier, elevated AFP level (> 200 ng/mL), and typical radiographic findings (e.g., arterial enhancing features on
liver dynamic CT). Optimal management procedures for HCC such as transcatheter arterial chemoembolization could not be performed because of
the patient's poor general condition. We started prophylactic antiviral therapy with lamivudine for the prevention of viral reactivation. A
total of 60 mg of oral prednisolone was administered daily. After steroid therapy, the patient's skin rash, muscle strength, and dysphagia
showed slight improvement, and his elevated muscle enzyme levels returned to the near-normal range. However, his underlying HCC progressed
rapidly: the size of the cancer grew up to 11 cm with portal vein thrombosis and multiple lymph node metastasis. The patient ultimately died
due to hepatic failure after 4 months. An association between malignancy and DM has been widely reported in the literature with incidences
ranging from 3% to 35% . Possible mechanisms include paraneoplastic syndrome, a compromised immune system, common carcinogenic environmental
factors, and cross-activity of immune reactions against the tumor, all of which transform into an autoimmune syndrome as a consequence of
cross-reactivity with skin and muscle antigens . Levine suggested a model of paraneoplasia focusing on common autoantigen expression and
immune targeting between cancer tissues and muscle tissue in myositis. One of these so-called myositis-specific autoantibodies recognizes
Mi-2 antigen, a component of the nucleosome remodeling deacetylase complex. Recent data examining the immune recognition of Mi-2 antigen
suggest that patients with cancer-associated myositis develop humoral immune responses against different regions of the molecule, as
compared to the responses of those with myositis alone . Toshikuni et al. proposed that anti-Mi-2 antibodies may be cross-reactive with HCC.
In our case, there was another possibility-that the patient's DM was caused by other infectious agents. Therefore, we tested for various
infectious agents, including echovirus, adenovirus, coxsackie virus, influenza, human immunodeficiency virus, and human T cell
leukemia/lymphoma virus, which are known to cause myositis, and all tests were negative. Antibodies that attack a virus or virus-enzyme
complex could cross-react with a homologous area of host proteins and result in autoantibody production (i.e., a cross-reactive phenomenon).
A test for anti-Jo-1 antibodies was negative, but anti-Mi-2 antibodies were not examined in this case. Six patients with DM associated with
HCC have been described in the literature including the present case (Table 1) . These results suggest that DM in patients with HCC is a
risk factor for advanced HCC. DM has been noted to improve after the treatment of cancer, with recurrences of muscle weakness taking place
after relapse of the malignancy, further suggesting a paraneoplastic origin. Unfortunately, we could not manage the HCC in our patient
because of his poor general condition and hepatic function. There was a previous report of improvement in DM without corticosteroids after
the resection of HCC . In our case DM was improved by oral prednisolone. In conclusion, DM may be caused by HCC, especially advanced HCC,
and/or a chronic HBV infection. Therefore, HCC might be considered a cause of DM if no other etiology can be determined. No potential
conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Skin manifestations of a 55-year-old man with dermatomyositis. (A)
Characteristic purplish heliotrope rash over the upper eyelids. (B) 'V'-shaped purplish rash on the neck. (A) Under light microscopy, rare
degenerating cells (arrows) were present (H&E, ×200). (B) Mild perivascular mononuclear cell infiltration (arrow) was found (H&E, ×200). (C)
Ultrastructurally, degenerating cells were scattered and exhibited rarefaction of myofilaments and Z-band streaming (uranyl acetate lead
citrate, ×3,500). (D) The endothelial cells had a prominent tubuloreticular body (arrow) (uranyl acetate lead citrate, ×9,000). These
findings are compatible with dermatomyositis. Liver dynamic computed tomography showed a 6.5 × 6-cm arterial enhancing mass (arrows) in
hepatic segment 7/6, suggesting hepatocellular carcinoma. The nodular surfaced liver with perihepatic fluid collection suggested liver
cirrhosis (A, precontrast; B, arterial phase; C, portal phase; D, delayed phase). A review of cases of dermatomyositis associated with
hepatocellular carcinoma HCC, hepatocellular carcinoma; DM, dermatomyositis; F, female; HBV, hepatitis B virus; TACE, transarterial
chemoembolization; M, male; HCV, hepatitis C virus; ND, not described; IVIG, intravenous immunoglobulin.
