Gefitinib is regarded as a relatively safe agent for the treatment of an advanced non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC). Pulmonary toxicity
such as interstitial lung disease associated with gefitinib is uncommon with an estimated all time incidence around 1% worldwide. Moreover,
a case of gefitinib associated with pulmonary cystic changes has not been reported yet. In this report we present a case of progressive
multiple air cystic changes in both lungs in a patient with NSCLC and intrapulmonary metastases who underwent a gefitinib therapy. Gefitinib
(Iressa, Macclesfield, England) is a selective low-molecular-weight epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) tyrosine kinase inhibitor for
the treatment of locally advanced or metastatic non-small cell lung cancer (NSCLC) refractory to first and second line therapy (1).
Gefitinib is well tolerated and the most adverse drug reactions commonly reported are mild to moderate skin rash, nausea, vomiting and
diarrhea. All of them are manageable and non-cumulative (2). Interstitial lung disease (ILD) has been reported in a small minority of
patients with gefitinib treatment and is described with an estimated all time incidence of approximately 1% (1). However, the case of
gefitinib associated pulmonary cystic changes in NSCLC has not been reported yet. Here, we report the case of a 56-year-old female never-
smoker treated with gefitinib for NSCLC with multiple intrapulmonary metastases, who developed progressive diffuse lung parenchymal cystic
changes during the treatment. A 56-year-old female never-smoker initially developed persistent cough, sputum and progressive dyspnea
approximately 1 month before the diagnose NSCLC stage IV. The radiograph and computed tomography (CT) of the chest showed a 2.2-cm soft
tissue mass in the right upper lobe with multiple small nodules in the bilateral lungs. A case of lung adenocarcinoma with bilateral
intrapulmonary metastases was diagnosed. The patient received two courses of systemic chemotherapy with paclitaxel and cisplatin. However,
the chemotherapy had to be discontinued due to paclitaxel-induced hypersensitivity reaction. Thereafter the patient refused further
chemotherapy. One year later, after receiving two cycles of first-line chemotherapy, the patient visited the emergency room with an abrupt
onset of stuttering, quadriparesis and dyspnea. A spontaneous pneumothorax in the left lung and multiple brain metastases were noted. After
a chest tube insertion in the left lung and a 30-Gy whole brain irradiation for brain metastases, the treatment with gefitinib was started
with a 250-mg daily dosage and continued for the following 15 months because the patient showed an improvement of symptoms and pulmonary
function. Although the primary mass in the right upper lobe with multiple metastatic nodules slightly decreased in size after one month
gefitinib treatment, the development of new multiple cystic changes was detected on the follow-up high-resolution CT (HRCT) scan. The
pulmonary function 9 months after the initiation of gefitinib therapy showed combined severe obstructive and restrictive ventilatory
disturbances (predicted forced expiratory volume at timed interval of 1 second 36%, predicted forced vital capacity 31%). Due to a poor
performance status neither bronchoalveolar lavages nor histological evaluations were available. In contrast to the gradual progression of
parenchymal cystic changes in both lungs were on the follow-up chest CT scan a radiographic regression of the main lesion of NSCLC and
metastatic nodules noted (Fig. 1A). Simple chest radiographs showed diffuse multiple various sized thin walled cysts and illdefined nodules
in bilateral hemi-thorax after the gefitinib therapy. A fluorine-18 fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography scan taken 7
months after the use of gefitinib demonstrated a significant increased FDG uptake in the primary lesion only. No uptake was seen in other
areas of both lungs, suggesting an interval improvement of metastatic lesions (Fig. 1B). Because the patient's condition was tolerable with
improved respiratory symptoms, the therapy with gefitinib was continued for 15 months with the patient's approval, despite of the air cystic
changes in both lungs. During the follow-up period, neurologic recovery was noted and the patient underwent pulmonary and physical
rehabilitation therapies. A follow-up pulmonary function was performed 13 months after the initiation of gefitinib therapy and more
improvement was shown than after 9 months (FEV1, 56%; FVC, 53% vs. FEV1, 36%; FVC, 31%) respectively. The antineoplastic drug induced
pulmonary toxicity caused by drugs, such as cemcitabine, rituximab, fludarabine, paclitaxel, and docetaxel, etc. consists of interstitial
lung disease (ILD), i.e., diffuse alveolar and/or interstitial damage, and occurs usually during the first 3 months of treatment (3). The
incidence of ILD associated with gefitinib treatment was an all-time around 1% in a recent analysis by the US Food and Drug Administration
(2). Among these analyzed cases, 31% had prior radiation therapy and 57% had prior chemotherapy. In Japanese patients the frequency of ILD-
type events (1.9%) appears to be higher than in the rest of the world (0.3%). Similar to the present report the most cases were seen in the
first month of therapy. Multivariate analysis in previous studies revealed that preexisting pulmonary fibrosis, poor performance status and
prior thoracic irradiation were independent risk factors for ILD in patients with gefitinib treatment (4). Although the patient in the
presented case had a poor performance status as a factor which induces lung damage, she was a female never-smoker with adenocarcinoma which
are known as predictive factors for a good response to gefitinib and showed a tumor regression of lung during the gefitinib therapy also.
The patient's clinical background and current status with respect to pulmonary diseases should be considered carefully. However, there is no
reason to stop the gefitinib treatment in patients with an inoperable lung cancer (5). The characteristic HRCT images of gefitinib-induced
pulmonary toxicity were similar to those of a drugassociated lung injury (6). Several characteristic HRCT patterns which are seen in other
drug-associated ILDs also were observed in the gefitinib-associated condition such as acute interstitial pneumonia-like pattern, cryptogenic
organized pneumonia-like pattern, eosinophilic pneumonialike pattern and localized infiltration pattern. The cystic configuration of this
case showed similar pattern to the lymphocytic interstitial pneumonia (LIP). An improved lung function after gefitinib use could be
partially explained as cystic changes of lung lesions would be transformed into the type of LIP like as the effects of a pulmonary
rehabilitation with medications. But the cystic progression of the present case was too fast compared with the usual change of LIP. Also
other combined causes of cystic changes have to be considered. To our best knowledge, the presented case is the first report of multiple
lung parenchymal cystic changes in a patient treated with gefitinib for NSCLC. Cystic changes by the tumor itself or after a chemotherapy
were reported rarely. Tumor necrosis secondary to tumor killing effects in chemosensitive tumors and tumor infiltrations of air-containing
spaces with a check-valve mechanism have been postulated for cystic changes (7). Lee et al. (8) reported that squamous cell lung cancer is
presenting as an asymptomatic pneumatocele. Barnardt and du Toit (9) reported two cases of cystic metastatic pulmonary lesions, which
occurred after chemotherapy and were based on a cisplatinium regimen in an epithelioid trophoblastic tumor and accompanied by pneumothorax
as a results of ruptured cavitations. Also the present case showed a spontaneous pneumothorax after chemotherapy before treatment of
gefitinib. However, no cysts were found in both lungs at the time of CT evaluation. Also the cystic patterns and the progressing period were
unique because the cystic changes widely occurred in both lungs with various sizes. Those changes showed continuous progressive cystic
transformations after the use of gefitinib compared with the usual cystic transformation of tumors. Seemingly related to our case partially,
Zee et al. (10) reported about a fatal cystic change which occurred in the brain metastasis after gefitinib therapy in a patient with NSCLC.
The cytology of the metastatic cystic mass of the brain was negative for malignancy in this study. Cystic changes of tumor sites might have
been developed by tumor lysis and necrosis caused by the targeting property of gefitinib towards to cancer cells. This finding is similar to
reported case where a cystic formation was developed in the metastatic tumor lesion after the response to gefitinib. Although the cystic
changes were persistent the pulmonary function was more improved after 13 months gefitinib therapy then after 9 months. After the treatment
with gefitinib the size of the main lesion of right upper lobe with metastatic nodules of both lungs were markedly decreased and cystic
changes were developed around the tumor sites. The improvement of lung function could probably be explained as the effect of decrease of
tumor burden due to gefitinib and pulmonary medications as well as due to the pulmonary rehabilitation therapy. Therefore, the causes of
cystic changes of the presented case may be postulated by an unknown side effect of gefitinib. However, the clear causal relationship of
cystic changes with gefitinib remains still unknown, but some potential mechanisms of pulmonary toxicity may be considered. EGFR promotes
the regeneration of the alveolar epithelial cells and is up-regulated in an acute lung injury. Consequently, the EGFR inhibitor, gefitinib,
may impair normal repair and thereby exacerbate any lung injury, especially in patients with pulmonary comorbidities (11). In addition, it
may be considered that the tumor lysis of the main lesion or a lysis on multiple metastatic nodules due to direct cytotoxic effect by
gefitinib may have induced the formation of multiple cysts in this case. Within Asia (Korea and Singapore) were found two cases of cystic
changes after gefitinib treatment (including the present case) with the involvement of both lungs respective with the involvement of brain
(10). Hotta et al. (4) reported 4.5% incidence of ILD associated with gefitinib in Japanese patients. Also high incidences of EGFR somatic
mutations of Japanese patients were documented and might be suggested as a contributing factor for the high rate of ILD associated with
gefitinib (12). Therefore it may be assumed that unknown genetic factors such as EGFR somatic mutations might be involved in the development
of cystic changes in both cases. We are also aware about a possible close relation between the gefitinib therapy and the onset of illness
and suspect gefitinib-induced cystic lung damages. This case showed that progressive multiple cystic changes in both lungs occured during
gefitinib therapy besides an ILD. Lung adenocarcinoma in 56-year-old woman after gefitinib treatment. A. Lung window of transaxial enhanced
CT (5.0-mm collimation) scan obtained at time point of pre-medication and 1 month, 3 months, 7 months, 9 months, and 13 months after
initiation of gefitinib treatment. Irregular defined oval shaped 3.2 cm sized mass in right upper lobe with multiple ill-defined nodules of
both lungs was gradually decreased in size after use of gefitinib on follow-up chest CT scan in contrast to gradual progression of cystic
changes in both lungs. Some cystic lesions are continuously increased in size on follow-up scans during treatment with gefitinib. B. Coronal
fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG) positron emission tomography scan obtained after 12 months of treatment demonstrates lesion of markedly increased
FDG uptake (standardized uptake value = 5.2, representing primary malignancy) (arrow) without adjacent or distant significant FDG uptake.
