Diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis (DPL) is a rare lymphatic disorder characterized by lymphatic channel proliferation. It is mostly
reported in children and young adults. Here, we report a case involving a 52-year-old asymptomatic woman who presented with increased
interstitial markings, as seen on a chest radiograph. Diffuse interstitial septal thickening was found on a serial follow-up chest computed
tomography scan, and lymphangitic metastasis was the primary radiologic differential diagnosis. However, histologic sections of wedge
resected lung revealed diffuse pleural and interlobular septal lymphatic proliferation characteristic of DPL. Diffuse pulmonary
lymphangiomatosis (DPL) is a diffuse lymphatic disease characterized by the proliferation of lymphatic vessels. DPL mostly affects children
and young adults with an equal gender prevalence. DPL is a very rare disease, and so far, only five cases have been reported in middle-aged
patients in the English-language literature, to our knowledge (1-5). Computed tomography (CT) findings for DPL include increased
interlobular septal thickening, peribronchovascular thickening, patchy ground glass opacities, pleural thickening, pleural effusion, and
mediastinal soft tissue infiltration (5). Possible radiologic differential diagnoses include pulmonary edema, pulmonary veno-occlusive
disease, Erdheim-Chester disease, lymphangiectasis, lymphangitic carcinomatosis, sarcoidosis, and pulmonary lymphoma. An increase in the
size and the number of anastomosing lymphatic channels in interlobular septa or subpleural areas is seen histopathologically (2). Patients
with DPL present with various clinical manifestations and usually have a progressive clinical course (2). Here, we describe a middle-aged
woman with DPL in whom clinical suspicion of lymphangitic metastasis was raised preoperatively. A 52-year-old woman with abnormal chest
radiographs was referred to our hospital. She was asymptomatic and denied having any cough, wheezing, or hemoptysis. Her past medical
history was unremarkable. The findings of a physical examination were normal. Laboratory examination revealed a hemoglobin level of 14.1
g/dL, a white blood cell count of 8160/µL (61.7% neutrophils, 31.1% lymphocytes, 2.6% eosinophils, 4.4% monocytes, and 0.2% basophils), and
a platelet count of 209000/µL. Urine analysis findings, blood chemistry findings, and erythrocyte sedimentation rates were normal.
Posteroanterior chest radiograph showed increased interstitial markings in both lungs (Fig. 1A). Diffuse, smooth, and nodular interlobular
septal thickening, and minimal amounts of bilateral pleural effusion were demonstrated on CT scan (Fig. 1B, C). Low-density infiltration of
mediastinal fat and lymph node enlargement were noted in the right anterior diaphragmatic area of a mediastinal window (Fig. 1D). Although
the patient was asymptomatic, these imaging findings persisted on the follow-up CT scan taken one month later. Our primary radiologic
impression was that this was a case of lymphangitic carcinomatosis. Pulmonary edema, sarcoidosis, and lymphoma were included in the
differential diagnosis. A pulmonary function test showed mild restrictive patterns. The patient underwent bronchoscopy, and no endobronchial
lesion was found. Bronchoalveolar lavage results were negative for malignant cells. Thick varicose septal veins and intraalveolar
macrophages were identified on transbronchial lung biopsy. After seven months, a follow-up chest CT scan revealed increased interstitial
septal thickening (Fig. 1E, F), new peribronchovascular cuffing, and small amounts of bilateral pleural effusion (Fig. 1G). Finally, the
patient underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery wedge resection of the right, middle, and lower lobes. In the surgical field,
abnormal hypervascularity was noted on the lung surface (Fig. 1H). Microscopic examination showed proliferation of thinwalled, anastomosing
vascular spaces lined by a single layer of endothelial cells lacking cytological atypia (Fig. 1I). Theses lesions were located along the
lymphatic distribution and were highlighted by D2-40 (1:100, Dako, Glostrup, Denmark) immunohistochemical stain (Fig. 1J), characteristic of
DPL. Presently, the patient is alive without any symptoms and being observed without specific treatment such as low fat medium chain fat.
Diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis is a rare condition in which diffuse proliferation of anastomosing lymphatic channels is observed. It
manifests equally in both sexes, mostly in children and young adults (3). Symptoms include dyspnea, nonproductive cough, bronchial casts,
milky sputum, fever, and recurrent pneumonia. However, patients can present with the disease later in adulthood and often have symptoms
dating back to their childhood (5). To the best of our knowledge, only five cases of DPL in middle-aged patients have been reported in the
English literature (Table 1) (1-5), with the current report being the sixth. Ours is a unique one in the following aspects; although the
disease progression revealed on serial follow-up CT required differentiation from lymphangitic metastasis, the patient remained asymptomatic
and did not need any treatment; also, the extent of the disease markedly increased within one year, and a neoplastic but possibly benign
component was presumed. Making a preoperative diagnosis of DPL in adults is difficult. The most common radiologic finding is increased
interstitial markings on chest radiography. CT demonstrates smooth or nodular interlobular, septal, and peribronchovascular thickenings.
Patchy ground glass opacities are also seen. Pleural thickening, pleural effusion, and diffuse mediastinal soft tissue infiltration can also
occur (5). Pulmonary edema, pulmonary veno-occlusive disease, Erdheim-Chester disease, and lymphangiectasis can be considered possible
diagnoses when smooth interlobular septal thickening is found. In this patient, pulmonary edema was less likely since there was no evidence
of congestive heart failure or pleural effusion. Prominent central pulmonary arteries were also not identified, making pulmonary veno-
occlusive disease less likely (6). The possibility of Erdheim-Chester disease, characterized by proliferation of lipid-containing foamy
histiocytes in the skeleton and other organs, was ruled out by the absence of sclerotic changes in the diaphyses and metaphyses of long
bones in the current case (7). The CT appearance of DPL is virtually identical to that of pulmonary lymphangiectasia (8). Pulmonary
lymphangiectasia is a rare condition characterized by the diffuse dilatation of pulmonary lymphatics and classified as congenital or
secondary (9). In this case, there was no evidence of pulmonary hypertension or venous obstruction, factors that can cause secondary
lymphangiectasia. Congenital lymphangiectasia typically presents shortly after birth and is associated with high neonatal morbidity and
mortality. Lymphangiomatosis typically presents in older children and is rarely seen in adults (10). Histopathologically, lymphangiomatosis
is characterized by an increased number of variable-sized lymphatic spaces. This should be distinguished from the findings of
lymphangiectasia, in which nonproliferative lymphatic channels are dilated (4). Other diseases with lymphatic distributions, such as
lymphangitic carcinomatosis, sarcoidosis, and pulmonary lymphoma, can also be considered. In these diseases, interlobular septal thickening
tends to be nodular. There is no established treatment for DPL. Surgical resections can be indicated for localized mediastinal or lung
lesions. Other treatments include low-fat medium-chain triglyceride diets, interferon-alpha, radiation, corticosteroids, chemotherapy,
somatostatin, and propranolol (2). We revealed an unusual presentation of DPL in a middle-aged asymptomatic woman. In follow-up imaging
studies, the extent of the disease had increased, and a surgical biopsy was performed to rule out lymphangitic carcinomatosis. An awareness
of the possibility of DPL even in adults is necessary. 52-year-old woman with diffuse pulmonary lymphangiomatosis. Posteroanterior chest
radiograph revealing increased interstitial markings in both lungs (A). Initial CT scan demonstrating diffuse interstitial thickening in
both lungs (B, C) and lymph node enlargement in right anterior diaphragmatic area (D, arrow). Follow-up CT taken eight months after initial
CT scan showing increased interlobular septal thickening (E, F) with more prominent bronchovascular bundle thickening (arrows) and increased
bilateral pleural effusion (G). Intra-operative photograph showing hypervascularity of lung surface (H). I. Hematoxylin and eosin-stained
section of lesion showing proliferation of thin-walled, anastomosing lymphatic vessels lined by single layer of endothelial cells lacking
cytological atypia (arrows, × 200). J. Immunohistochemical staining with D2-40 revealing proliferative lymphatic channels (arrows, × 200).
Summary of Previously Reported Middle-Aged Patients with Pulmonary Lymphangiomatosis
