Here we report the first case of postoperative endophthalmitis due to Candida pelliculosa after cataract surgery. We describe the clinical
management of this type of candida infection in the eye. A 57-year-old Turk man was seen at our clinic at the end of the first postoperative
month after cataract surgery. He presented with eye redness, pain and decreased visual acuity. His ophthalmologic examination revealed
moderate tyndall and a mild flare in the anterior chamber. Hypopyon in the capsular bag posterior to the intraocular lens was seen in the
second postoperative month. Despite topical and subconjunctival bacterial endophthalmitis treatment, there was no improvement in the
clinical situation. Candida pelliculosa was isolated from a sample culture obtained from the anterior chamber. Oral fluconazole could not be
administered because of increased liver enzyme levels and intravenous amphotericin B could not be administered because of an allergic
reaction. Intraocular lens explantation, pars plana vitrectomy and anterior chamber lavage by rupturing the posterior wall of the
microabscesses were performed. Intravitreal and intracameral amphotericin B injections were given four times in addition to surgical
interventions. The patient has been followed for 2 years and his best-corrected visual acuity was 0.4 at the last visit. Nearly 1 month
after cataract surgery, a patient presented with eye redness and blurred vision, with corneal endothelial deposits, hypopyon in the capsular
bag and microabscesses on the incision sites and corneal endothelium. Candida pelliculosa should be considered in patients showing these
symptoms. Multiple intraocular amphotericin B (5 μg) administrations can be used safely even in cases with high sensitivity to systemic use.
Rupturing the posterior wall of the abscesses on the corneal endothelium surgically with intraocular lens explantation and pars plana
vitrectomy are recommended. Endophthalmitis is a serious intraocular inflammatory disease and the most common form is postoperative
endophthalmitis. The incidence of post-surgical endophthalmitis is nearly 0.093% and the organisms responsible are generally bacteria. Three
percent of all cases with endophthalmitis after cataract surgery are due to fungi . Fungi have been isolated from 21.8% of all culture
positive postoperative endophthalmitis cases, and mostly Aspergillus spp. and Candida spp. were determined to be the cause of fungal
endophthalmitis . This is the first reported case with endophthalmitis due to Candida pelliculosa. A 57-year-old Turk male was seen in our
clinic with complaints of blurred vision in his left eye. His visual acuity was 2/20 and he had a nucleocortical and posterior subcapsular
cataract. A history of systemic hypertension and past coronary by-pass surgery was present. Uncomplicated phacoemulsification surgery and
foldable posterior chamber intraocular lens (IOL) implantation was performed. 1 mg/0.1 ml intracameral cefuroxime sodium (Cefurol®
1.5 g/15 ml flacon, I.E. Ulagay) was given for prophylaxis. The eye was closed with tobramycin ophthalmic ointment 3 mg/g and dexamethasone
ophthalmic ointment 1 mg/g. Postoperative best-corrected visual acuity (BCVA) was 16/20 with minimal corneal edema after the first week. The
patient complained of pain and eye redness for 4 days on the 27th day after surgery. His BCVA was also decreased to 10/20. Ophthalmic
examination revealed ++++ Tyndall, no hypopyon and ++ flare in the anterior chamber. Intraocular pressure was 14 mmHg OD; 17 mmHg OS. Fundus
examination results were normal and the patient had no pain. Late onset toxic anterior segment syndrome (TASS) was suspected. Dexamethasone
sodium phosphate eye drops 0.1% (Onadron® collyrium 1 ml, I.E. Ulagay) were given hourly, netilmicin sulfate eye drops 0.38% (Netira®
collyrium, SIFI) were given 4 times a day and cyclopentolate HCl eye drops 1% (Sikloplejin® collyrium, Abdi Ibrahim) were given 3 times a
day as a topical treatment. Initially, the patient’s symptoms were under control, however, 3 weeks later, some deposits on the corneal
endothelium and dense exudate in the inferior capsular bag were observed despite topical treatment (Figure 1A). Even after treatment,
endothelial precipitates and exudates increased and the patient was hospitalized (Figure 1B). Visual acuity was not at the worst level
(6/20) and the patient felt no pain. A fundus evaluation showed ++ tyndall and + flare. Because the endophthalmitis was not as severe, we
decided to add subconjunctival vancomycin 25 mg/0.5 ml injection (Vancomycin® Hcl 1 g flacon, ORNA) twice a day. Ceftazidime 100 mg/0.5 ml
injection (Fortum® 1 g flacon, GlaxoSmithKline) and dexamethasone 2 mg/0.5 ml injection (Dekort® 2 ml, 8 mg, Deva) were added to the topical
treatment. gatifloxacin 0.3% eye drop hourly (Zymar® collyrium, Abdi Ibrahim), dexamethasone eye drop hourly (Maxidex® collyrium, Abdi
Ibrahim) and cyclopentolate eye drop 3 times a day (Sikloplejin® collyrium, Abdi Ibrahim). On the 5th day of hospitalization, a sample was
taken via paracentesis. Purulent material was aspirated from the capsular bag and anterior chamber while ceftazidime was injected. C.
pelliculosa was isolated from the sample culture. Systemic antifungal therapy (fluconazole Tab 100 mg × 4 daily) was initiated but increased
levels of liver enzymes (alanine aminotransferase: 461, aspartate aminotrasferase: 197) developed on the 4th day after starting fluconazole.
The drug was stopped and intravenous infusion therapy with liposomal amphotericin B (L-amB; 5 mg/kg/day) was started. One minute following
L-amB infusion, the patient began to feel pain and fever, with hyperemia in his neck region. The liposomal amB was then stopped because of
this allergic reaction. The patient refused any other systemic therapy. We were reticent to initiate intravitreous administration because of
the high sensitivity to antifungal agents and the side effects of intraocular amB. Then a topical treatment with fluconazole that was
prepared using fluconazole flacon 100 mg/50 ml was started. Despite medical treatment, the inflammation persisted. An intraocular lens
explantation was performed. Two weeks later, the BCVA decreased to 2/20 and the patient had 2 mm hypopyon and deposits on the anterior
hyaloid with a blurred fundus (++++tyndall, +++flare; Figure 1C). A pars plana vitrectomy (PPV) and an intraocular amB injection (5 μg) were
performed. Hypopyon was resolved and the deposits were decreased in number. Topical treatment with fluconazole, dexamethasone and
cyclopentolate were continued. The BCVA increased to 8/20 and the fundus was blurry but normal. Dense exudate (white arrow) in the inferior
capsular bag. (A), endothelial precipitates and increased exudate in the capsular bag (B), hypopyon and deposits on the anterior hyaloids
(C), corneal endothelial microabscesses (D), increased corneal endothelial microabscesses (white arrows) (E), sub endothelial encapsulated
abscesses (black arrows) (F). One month after the PPV, the patient was observed to have ciliary flush, an increased anterior chamber
reaction, corneal endothelial microabscesses and minimal optic nerve head swelling (Figure 1D). A second intravitreal amB ( 5 μg) dose was
injected on that day. Even with topical fluconazole treatment, the patient had pain, decreased visual acuity and increased corneal
endothelial microabscesses 1.5 months after the second intravitreal injection (Figure 1E). Therefore, anterior chamber lavage, aspiration of
the abscesses on the endothelium and a third intracameral intravitreal amB (5 μg) dose with triamcinolone acetonide 4 mg were given. An
increase in corneal endothelial microabscesses and pain occurred again after 1 month (Figure 1F). Then, anterior chamber lavage and
aspiration of abscesses by rupturing the posterior wall were performed and intracameral amB was injected for the 4th time. In the fundus,
there was a ++ vitreous cellular reaction and a pale optic nerve head. Thereafter, no relapse was observed. The Infection management took
place for 8 months. Moreover, there was no recurrence of endophthalmitis during 3 years of follow-up. The BCVA of the patient remained at
8/20. Fungus is the cause of 7–13% of culture positive cases of postoperative endophthalmitis and the common fungal species that are
isolated are Aspergillus spp., Cephalosporium spp. and Candida spp . Possible sources of exogenous fungal infection are contaminated
intraocular irrigation solutions , intraocular lenses , ventilation systems or hospital construction activities . We could not find any
predisposing factor to account for the fungal endophthalmitis in this case. Colonization at the time of cataract surgery or postoperative
self-inoculation by the patient may have occurred. The mean time interval between cataract surgery and the development of symptoms in
exogenous fungal endophthalmitis is 19.5 days . In candida endophthalmitis, it ranges from 3 days to 50 days . The interval was 23 days in
our C. pelliculosa case. Corneal involvement, anterior chamber exudates, hypopyon and fibrinous reaction localized around the IOL have been
seen in fungal endophthalmitis cases . Parental antifungal treatment is recommended for 4–6 weeks in candida endophthalmitis. We were unable
to manage allergic reactions due to L-AmB because of the hepatotoxicity of fluconazole and patient refusal. Increased liver enzymes due to
fluconazole, such as in our case, have been seen in 2 of 27 cases . Intraocular AmB injections might be needed several times in fungal
endophthalmitis. In one case with exogenous fungal endophthalmitis, three intravitreal AmB injections were needed . In another case with
candida endophthalmitis, 67 mg amB was injected 11 times in total . In a case series, two or more injections were performed in 2 of 27 eyes
. In our case, despite topical treatment, inflammation recurred and we performed intravitreal amB injections 4 times. A combination of PPV
and antifungal agents appears to be the best therapy for exogenous fungal endophthalmitis. The role of corticosteroids is controversial. Our
aim in using corticosteroids was to diminish tissue destruction due to damage by fungal toxins. It has been reported that visual outcomes
were unfavorable in fungal postoperative endophthalmitis cases following PPV . The final BCVA was better than 6/18 in only in 5 of 27 eyes .
Our final BCVA was 8/20 and we consider this a favorable outcome. In summary, 23 days after cataract surgery, the patient presented with eye
redness, pain and blurred vision. Corneal endothelial deposits, hypopyon in the capsular bag and microabscesses on the incision sites and
corneal endothelium were thought to be caused by C. pelliculosa. PPV with IOL explantation and multiple amB (5 μg) injections into the
anterior chamber and vitreous cavity with rupturing of the posterior wall of the abscesses on the endothelium are recommended. Written
informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case Report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. HE
carried out the diagnosis, surgery and follow-up and suggested this case report, which he developed and coordinated. EB was the main
physician responsible for caring for the patient and was involved in manuscript writing. ÇÖ performed retinal examinations and helped in
reviewing the literature for this manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
