Potential Conflict of Interest No potential conflict of interest relevant to this article was reported. Arrhythmogenic right ventricular
cardiomyopathy (ARVC) is an inherited disease affecting the heart muscle. It is clinically characterized by life-threatening ventricular
arrhythmias. Although it primarily affects the right ventricle, the left ventricle might also be involved1,2. However, the clinical
manifestations and prognosis of biventricular arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy not yet been established. We present a case of ARVC with left
ventricle (LV) involvement, with no typical symptoms and no relevant medical history. A 57-year-old hypertensive woman presented with a
6-month history of atypical chest pain. In addition, ongoing maintenance therapy with azathioprine for Crohn's disease and a nonfunctional
adrenal adenoma were observed. Family history was unremarkable, and physical examination results were normal. Electrocardiography revealed a
normal sinus rhythm, left axis deviation, and T-wave inversion in precordial leads from V2 to V6. Further, an epsilon wave in leads V1-V3
(Figure 1) led to the suspicion of ARVC. Monitoring using a 24-h Holter electrocardiogram documented only occasional ventricular
extrasystoles with left bundle branch block morphology and no significant cardiac arrhythmia. Further evaluation included cardiac magnetic
resonance (CMR) imaging, which revealed right ventricular (RV) enlargement with an indexed end-diastolic volume of 110 ml/m2 and mild
dysfunction (ejection fraction = 44%). No signs of fatty tissue infiltration were observed, but regional RV dyskinesia in the free wall and
outflow tract was identified (Figure 2A). LV was mildly enlarged (90 ml/m2), and systolic function was at the lower limit of normal. Flow
analysis revealed no shunts in the aorta and pulmonary artery. Subepicardial delayed enhancement was observed the lateral basal and middle
segments of LV as well as a small focal area of the RV free wall (Figure 2B). These findings suggested a diagnosis of ARVC with LV
involvement. Resting 12-lead ECG showing T-wave inversion from V2 to V6 (major diagnostic criteria) and epsilon waves in V1–V3 (major
diagnostic criteria). A) Steady-state free precession cine magnetic resonance imaging (RV long axis view) indicated regional RV dyskinesia
(arrows) at end-systole. B) CMR imaging acquired 10 min after gadolinium injection (0.1 mM). Note the subepicardial late enhancement in the
LV lateral wall (arrows) proximal to a small area of late enhancement in the RV. In this case involving a patient with atypical symptoms, no
clinical arrhythmia, and a negative family history, three major criteria led to the definite diagnosis of ARVC: inverted T waves in the
precordial leads in the absence of complete right bundle branch block; epsilon wave in the right precordial leads; and regional RV
dyskinesia with indexed end-diastolic volume ≥ 100 ml/m2. LV involvement in ARVC has been recognized in several studies and can occur in >
75% patients with disease progression1. CMR is an ideal technique to aid in the diagnosis of this condition3. Particularly, in asymptomatic
patients, the differential diagnosis of ARVC should be considered. Future investigations should clarify the clinical relevance of these
findings and the prognosis of patients with biventricular arrhythmogenic cardiomyopathy. Author contributions Conception and design of the
research: Rangel I; Acquisition of data: Rangel I, Madureira AJ; Analysis and interpretation of the data: Vasconcelos M, Campelo M, Frutuoso
C, Madureira AJ; Writing of the manuscript: Rangel I, Vasconcelos M; Critical revision of the manuscript for intellectual content:
Vasconcelos M, Campelo M, Frutuoso C, Madureira AJ, Maciel MJ. Study Association This study is not associated with any post-graduation
program. Sources of Funding There were no external funding sources for this study.
