Pathological complete remission of advanced stage rectal adenocarcinoma by chemotherapy alone is rare. A case of advanced stage, low-lying
rectal adenocarcinoma in which a complete response to treatment was obtained with mFOLFOX6 and panitumumab (Pmab) is reported. A 53-year-old
man was referred to Shiga University of Medical Science hospital Shiga, Japan, complaining of bloody stool. Gastrointestinal endoscopy was
performed, and advanced stage rectal adenocarcinoma was diagnosed. Computed tomography (CT) revealed regional lymph node metastases in the
mesorectum. Neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with mFOLFOX6 and Pmab was planned. Endoscopy following four courses of chemotherapy revealed
that the rectal cancer had been markedly reduced, and the results of biopsies of the rectal tumor were negative for cancer. On CT, the
mesorectal lymph node metastases had disappeared. Total intersphincteric resection (ISR) with a handsewn coloanal anastomosis was performed.
Histological examination showed a complete response to mFOLFOX6 and Pmab in advanced stage rectal cancer. The result seen in this case
suggests that short-term NAC with mFOLFOX6 and Pmab was effective for low-lying rectal adenocarcinoma. In Western countries, the standard
treatment for advanced stage rectal cancer is neoadjuvant chemoradiotherapy (CRT) followed by surgery . On the other hand, curative surgery
including lateral lymph node dissection followed by adjuvant chemotherapy is the standard treatment for advanced rectal cancer in Japan .
Recently, neoadjuvant CRT followed by anus-preserving surgery has also been reported in Japan . However, it was reported that postoperative
anal function was decreased when the effect of preoperative CRT was strong in patients treated with intersphincteric resection (ISR) . Use
of panitumumab (Pmab) and cetuximab (Cmab), anti-endothelial growth factor receptor (EGFR) antibodies, has resulted in earlier tumor
shrinkage for K-ras wild type metastatic colorectal cancer . The case of a 53-year-old man with stage III low rectal cancer who had a
complete response to neoadjuvant oxaliplatin, 5-fluorouracil (5-FU) and l-folinic acid (mFOLFOX6) and Pmab chemotherapy without concurrent
radiotherapy is reported. A 53-year-old man was referred to Shiga University of Medical Science hospital, Shiga, Japan, complaining of
bloody stool. The patient was diagnosed as having a 3 cm in length, type 2 K-ras wild type rectal cancer, 2 cm from the anal verge (Figure
1a) that invaded to the dentate line (Figure 1b) on screening colonoscopy. Computed tomography (CT) revealed rectal wall thickening and a
regional lymph node metastasis in the mesorectum (Figure 2a). Advanced stage, low-lying rectal cancer was diagnosed. We usually perform
abdominoperineal resection (APR) for advanced rectal cancer located in the anal canal as in this case. However, the patient was not willing
to undergo APR. Colonoscopy images. (a) Colonoscopy imaging shows a 3 cm in length, type 2 rectal cancer (b) that invades to the dentate
line. (c) Repeated colonoscopy after chemotherapy shows an excellent response with only injected mucosal scar in the area of the previously
identified rectal cancer. Computed tomography (CT) images. (a) CT imaging reveals rectal wall thickening and a regional lymph node
metastasis in the mesorectum. (b) CT scan after chemotherapy demonstrates no rectal wall thickening and no mesorectal lymph node metastasis.
CT, computed tomography. Previously, Canda et al. reported that neoadjuvant CRT may adversely affect anorectal function . It has also been
reported that Cmab and Pmab-containing chemotherapy enables early tumor shrinkage . For these reasons, neoadjuvant chemotherapy (NAC) with
mFOLFOX6 and Pmab was performed every 2 weeks with the patient’s written, informed consent. The patient received a total of four cycles of
chemotherapy over 2 months. Repeated colonoscopy after chemotherapy showed an excellent response with only injected mucosal scar in the area
of the previously identified rectal cancer (Figure 1c). The results of the biopsies were negative for cancer cells. Additionally, CT scan
demonstrated no rectal wall thickening and no mesorectal lymph node metastasis (Figure 2b). The patient underwent total ISR with a handsewn
coloanal anastomosis, total mesorectal and bilateral pelvic lymph node dissection, and temporary loop ileostomy 3 weeks after completion of
NAC. No residual carcinoma was found (Figure 3), 12 non-involved lymph nodes were identified, and all margins were negative for cancer on
histologic examination. No residual carcinoma is found on histologic examination. 5-FU-based adjuvant chemotherapy after neoadjuvant CRT
followed by surgery is the standard treatment for clinical stage III rectal cancer . For this reason, the patient received adjuvant
chemotherapy with tegafur-uracil (UFT) and leucovorin administration for 3 months after surgery. Three months after surgery, the patient is
alive without evidence of recurrence of cancer. Preoperative 5-FU-based concurrent CRT followed by surgery is the standard strategy for
advanced rectal cancer in Western countries . However, it has been suggested that preoperative CRT is strongly associated with postoperative
complications, including anastomotic leakage and poor anal function, after low anterior resection and ISR . It has been reported that
preoperative CRT also increases late complications such as sexual and voiding dysfunctions , intestinal and defecation problems , and
secondary carcinogenesis . All of these have recently become issues in Western countries. Recently, new anticancer agents have markedly
improved the response rate and prognosis of unresectable and recurrent colorectal cancer. Oxaliplatin-based combination chemotherapy
improves survival of colorectal cancer patients in the metastatic and adjuvant settings . Oxaliplatin-containing ‘induction chemotherapy’
before CRT is associated with an objective response rate of up to 88% and rapid symptomatic improvement . These regimens may also convert
unresectable liver metastases to resectable ones . It has been reported that bevacizumab (Bmab), an anti-vascular endothelial growth factor
(VEGF) receptor antagonist, added to oxaliplatin-based chemotherapy, capecitabine plus oxaliplatin (XELOX), resulted in a high response rate
for patients with colorectal liver metastases . In Japan, a multicenter phase II trial of NAC with XELOX plus Bmab for locally advanced
rectal cancer is now ongoing . In addition, two retrospective studies have shown that the early dimensional reduction of target lesions
after 6 weeks from the beginning of treatment is an indicator of sensitivity to Cmab . Pmab, a fully human immunoglobulin G (IgG) anti-EGFR
antibody, has been considered equally effective in patients with K-ras wild type refractory metastatic colorectal cancer. Cmab must be
administered every week, while Pmab can be administered every 2 weeks. In the neoadjuvant setting, surgery must be delayed for at least
1 month after the last Bmab-containing chemotherapy. However, it is not necessary to delay surgery after anti-EGFR-containing chemotherapy.
Because of these reasons, we considered that preoperative mFOLFOX6 and Pmab chemotherapy should be effective for this case. Recently, Li et
al. reported a case of advanced rectal cancer demonstrating a pathologic complete response after NAC with six cycles of FOLFOX7 . This case
is the first report in the English literature from an Asian country demonstrating a pathological complete response after NAC in a patient
with low-lying advanced rectal cancer. In the present case, NAC was given for four cycles, but the appropriate period of NAC administration
has not been determined. However, a pilot study demonstrated clear downstaging of primary colon cancer with only three cycles of NAC .
Another report showed that detection, by week 2 magnetic resonance imaging, of tumor shrinkage >10% in response to therapy with Cmab or Pmab
for metastatic colorectal cancer represents an early indicator of clinical outcome because it is predictive of the prolongation of
progression-free survival and overall survival . We thought that if NAC was not effective, the patient would not be able to receive curative
surgery because of disease progression. Therefore, we evaluated the efficacy of NAC after a short course (four cycles) of chemotherapy. We
then decided to perform surgery because of the excellent response to NAC. The present case suggests that Pmab is a good candidate for NAC
because of its earlier drug response. We consider NAC is a promising preoperative treatment for locally advanced rectal cancer instead of
neoadjuvant CRT. However, there are no data about whether NAC with or without concurrent radiotherapy is effective against advanced rectal
cancer. Further studies are needed. This case suggests that mFOLFOX6 and Pmab chemotherapy without irradiation may be an alternative therapy
for patients with low-lying rectal cancer. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this case report and
any accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. 5-FU: 5-Fluorouracil;
APR: Abdominoperineal resection; Bmab: Bevacizumab; Cmab: Cetuximab; CRT: Chemoradiotherapy; CT: Computed tomography; EGFR: Endothelial
growth factor receptor; IgG: Immunoglobulin G; ISR: Intersphincteric resection; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; NAC: Neoadjuvant
chemotherapy; Pmab: Panitumumab; UFT: Tegafur-uracil; VEGF: Vascular endothelial growth factor; XELOX: Capecitabine plus oxaliplatin The
authors declare that they have no competing interests. HS drafted the manuscript. TS, EM, YE and TT helped to draft the manuscript. MI
created Figure 3. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
