Supervising Section Editor: Rick McPheeters, DO Full text available through open access at http://escholarship.org/uc/uciem_westjem This
case report details the emergency department course of a 34 year-old female who presented with abdominal pain and vaginal bleeding after
reportedly falling one week earlier. She was subsequently found to have a drinking straw within her uterus next to an eight week-old live
intrauterine pregnancy on ultrasound. This case report and discussion reviews the literature on retained foreign bodies in pregnancy while
addressing the added complications of an evasive patient and a difficult consultant with significant intra-specialty disagreement. In many
ways, the medicine we practice as emergency physicians (EPs) is straightforward. Part of the rewarding nature of our field is simply due to
that simplicity—a patient comes in with an acute problem, we hopefully resolve the problem, and the patient leaves satisfied while we
receive high Press-Ganey scores. And yet sometimes, we stumble across cases that challenge us both ethically and intellectually. This is one
such case. A difficult patient, an unusual medical problem, and an obstinate consultant all come together to highlight several unique
challenges that we commonly encounter in emergency medicine, but which we rarely consider at length. The patient was a 34-year-old female
with a chief complaint of abdominal pain. Her triage vitals were blood pressure 110/57; heart rate 93; respiratory rate 16; temperature
36.4°C. She stated she fell in her yard several days ago resulting in abdominal pain with some vaginal bleeding starting the morning of
presentation. Upon further discussion during the physical exam, the patient admitted she missed her period and, in an effort to initiate it,
stuck a drinking straw into her vagina. She inserted the whole straw inside and could still feel it poking her. She denied being pregnant
and insisted she simply wanted to begin her period. Her pelvic exam was benign with a closed os, minimal blood in the vault, minimal right
adnexal tenderness, and no signs of a foreign body or any lacerations. Basic labs revealed the patient was pregnant with a βHCG of 90,034. A
subsequent ultrasound showed an intrauterine foreign body that appeared implanted within the myometrium with the width of a common straw and
an indeterminate length. An approximately 8-week-old live intrauterine device (IUP) was noted next to the foreign body. Upon discussing
these findings with the patient, she admitted she knew she was pregnant and was trying to perform an abortion with the straw. An obstetrics
(OB) consultation was placed. The initial OB consultant stated the patient was at high risk for septic shock and miscarriage.
Recommendation, prior to the consultant seeing the patient, was to admit the patient for observation and antibiotics, as well as possible
dilatation and curettage if she became unstable. However, shortly after requesting the consultation, a new OB attending took over the
service. The new attending stated they did not believe the patient was in any danger of infection and thought it unlikely that anything had
been inserted into the uterus dismissing the ultrasound finding simply as an “artifact.” The new OB consultant’s recommendation was to
discharge the patient with outpatient follow-up. Feeling uncomfortable with simply discharging a patient who was potentially at high risk
for infection, the EP performed a literature search which failed to provide guidance on the management of a patient with an intrauterine
foreign body that was placed post-conception and/or non-sterilely. To make matters more confusing, the patient was an African immigrant and
stated she did not want her husband to know of her condition or why she was in the hospital. She listed this as one reason why she would be
unable to follow-up with an outside clinic. By this time, the husband arrived at the hospital and was becoming annoyed no one would tell him
about his wife’s condition. The husband’s behavior was appropriate for the (unusual) situation and the patient denied sexual, physical or
emotional abuse at home. With the EP present, the patient eventually discussed the situation with her husband. Both the patient and her
husband repeatedly requested removal of the foreign body due to pain, and both unequivocally stated they felt the patient’s health was more
important to them than the health of the fetus. The patient was reluctant to be discharged home. At the request of the patient and her
husband, the EP contacted another hospital, and the OB on call there refused to accept the patient’s transfer. At this point, what should
the EP do? This is a case that is fraught with challenges and ethical difficulty. The patient is evasive, the medicine is unusual, the
consultant is obstructive, and there is potential for significant harm. EPs always need to maintain their part of the physician-patient
relationship; an EP has a duty to protect the patient from harm.1 Aside from the significant medical question of infection, there are
reasons to believe the patient will be at risk of harm if she is discharged. This is a patient who has gone to unusual lengths to abort her
fetus. The EP has to consider the possibility of deeper psychological problems and other self-harming behavior. Similarly, the mechanism of
attempted abortion, as well as the patient’s strong desire not to let her husband know her reason for being in the hospital, strongly
suggests some domestic unease. Furthermore, the patient is a foreign national who has questionable social support and will likely have less
than optimal follow-up. The patient is obviously at a high risk for a bad outcome if she is discharged, and the EP should be reluctant to
discharge the patient home with anything less than an optimal plan and concrete follow-up. What makes this case more challenging than most
is the medicine involved is not straightforward. Clearly, something appears to be in the uterus. Inserting foreign objects into the uterus,
while not common, is certainly a known method of causing an abortion, although retaining foreign bodies is much rarer.2–4 Such foreign
bodies have been known to cause infection and sepsis.5–7 Furthermore, as the numerous case reports of IUPs show, even sterile foreign bodies
can lead to perforation and migration with their respective complications.8–10 However, the exact risk of infection and perforation is
unknown, as is the timeline in which they may occur. At best, one can say that the patient appears to be in danger of infection with a
distinct possibility of septic shock. Nonetheless, the patient had normal vital signs, appeared non-toxic, and was not in a life-threatening
condition. It is at this point one turns to consultants for clarification and guidance, as the decisions for optimal medical care are
clearly outside of the EPs expertise. Unfortunately, just when a consultant was needed most, intra-specialty disagreement complicated the
case. The first consultant clearly thought this case was quite serious and needed immediate action. The second consultant thought exactly
the opposite downplaying the patient’s risks, questioning the patient’s credibility, denying objective evidence of the situation (the
ultrasound of the straw), and making recommendations that appeared solely focused on discharging the patient. Thankfully, situations such as
this one are noteworthy for their infrequency, and the objectivity of one’s consultants is rarely called into question. However, it is a
situation that EPs ought to be prepared for. One of the unique aspects of emergency medicine is that we are more at the mercies of our
consultants than any other hospital service. Our consultants have specialized medical knowledge, admit all of our patients, perform vital
interventions, and provide almost all of our follow-up patient care. If an irreconcilable disagreement arises between the EP and a
consultant, then from both a legal and a medical perspective, the EP must do, ultimately, what they believe is best for the patient; it is
our primary professional responsibility to embrace patient welfare.311 If the consultant adamantly refuses to admit or treat the patient,
several options still remain. The EP can place the patient in an observation status in the emergency department and watch for signs of
instability essentially using serial reevaluations to allow the patient’s condition to indicate its progression. This also allows more time
to arrange thorough out patient follow-up or to perhaps call for another consult when a more agreeable consultant is available. It would
also be quite appropriate to contact the hospital’s risk management team, ombudsman, or ethics representative, both for our own protection
and for the patient’s. Throughout this process, be certain to clearly and thoroughly document any concerns, as well as the steps taken to
look after the patient’s welfare and the reasoning for doing so. Avoid documentation of any disagreement with the consultant being sure to
limit comments to the facts of the case, rather then focusing upon frustration or anger. In this case, the EP followed many of the above
recommendations. The OB attending refused to admit the patient, and the EP had unresolved and significant worries about discharging her
home. At this point, the EP called the chairman of the OB department and, after much discussion among the EP, the chairman, and the OB
attending, the OB service agreed to admit the patient for observation. The patient was observed on the OB floor for one day before signing
out against medical advice. Several days later, she presented to an affiliated hospital with a surgical abdomen. Emergent laparoscopy
revealed a common drinking-straw in her peritoneal cavity. The patient had a miscarriage during the postoperative period. Conflicts of
Interest: By the WestJEM article submission agreement, all authors are required to disclose all affiliations, funding sources and financial
or management relationships that could be perceived as potential sources of bias. The authors disclosed none. Transabdominal ultrasound
image showing a foreign object within the uterus. Transabdominal ultrasound image showing a foreign object within the uterus. Transvaginal
ultrasound image showing a foreign object within the uterus (arrow) next to a gestational sac.
