Extra-adrenal pheochromocytomas are termed paragangliomas. Paragangliomas in the mediastinum, especially the superior mediastinum, are
extremely rare. It is known that paragangliomas or pheochromocytomas occur in combination with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. We present the
case of a non-functional superior mediastinal paraganglioma in a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, without a familial history
suggestive of the condition. This case highlights that we should be aware of possible sporadic von Hippel-Lindau syndrome in patients with a
mediastinal paraganglioma. Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are neuroendocrine tumors that arise from the sympathetic or parasympathetic
paraganglia. Mediastinal paragangliomas are rare and slow-growing tumors. Some patients with pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas show an
association with an inherited condition such as von Hippel-Lindau syndrome or multiple endocrine neoplasia type 2. We report the case of a
non-functional superior mediastinal paraganglioma in a patient with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. A previously healthy 18-year-old man was
referred to our hospital due to an abnormal shadow on a chest radiograph performed as part of a health check (Figure 1). The patient had no
past medical or familial history of note. Chest radiograph showing an abnormal shadow in the superior mediastinum. There were no
abnormalities on physical examination, and laboratory data were within normal limits. Chest computed tomography (CT) without contrast
revealed a 36 × 21 × 30 mm superior mediastinal mass located between the left common carotid and subclavian arteries, trachea, and spine
(Figure 2). Chest computed tomography showing a 36 × 21 × 30 mm superior mediastinal mass located between the left common carotid and
subclavian arteries, trachea, and spine. Chest magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed an inhomogeneous-intensity mass with no direct
invasion of the left common carotid and subclavian arteries (Figure 3). Preoperatively, we diagnosed the mass as a superior mediastinal
neurogenic tumor. Chest magnetic resonance image (T2-weighted) revealing an inhomogeneous-intensity mass with no direct invasion of the left
common carotid and subclavian arteries. Complete resection of the tumor was performed by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery using a direct
approach through a left supra-clavicular incision. No remarkable blood pressure changes and little blood loss occurred during the operative
procedure. Histologic findings showed that the tumor consisted of cells arranged in nests (‘zellballen’) with a vascular stroma (Figure 4).
Immunohistochemistry showed a positive immunoreaction for chromogranin A (Figure 5) and synaptophysin. A paraganglioma consisting of cells
arranged in nests (‘zellballen’) with a vascular stroma (H & E stain). Immunohistochemistry showing a positive immunoreaction for
chromogranin A. The patient’s postoperative course was uneventful, without Horner’s syndrome. Six months after the first operation, CT for
postoperative follow-up revealed a right adrenal gland and pancreatic tumor and para-aortic lymph node enlargement. These tumors were
resected, and histopathologic analysis led to the diagnosis of a right pheochromocytoma, para-aortic paraganglioma, and endocrine tumor.
Genetic analysis revealed a mutation of the VHL gene (exon2 TTT → TGT), indicating von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. Further analyses revealed no
abnormalities in other organs associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome. There was no sign of recurrence on CT scans six months and three
years after the first surgery. Extra-adrenal paragangliomas usually arise in the abdomen. Paragangliomas in the mediastinum, especially the
superior mediastinum, are extremely rare. Functional mediastinal paragangliomas are often discovered during the investigation of unexplained
hypertension or other typical symptoms such as palpitations, headaches, or profuse sweating. On the other hand, non-functional mediastinal
paragangliomas are asymptomatic and are usually found incidentally during the course of imaging studies for other reasons. The preoperative
diagnosis of mediastinal paragangliomas is generally confirmed through elevated plasma and urinary levels of catecholamines and the
methylated metabolites metanephrines. The location of the tumor is determined using CT, MRI, or 131I or 123I metaiodobenzylguanidine
scintigraphy. About 5 to 10% of pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are malignant . However, the diagnosis of malignant paragangliomas is
generally difficult. Malignant paragangliomas are usually diagnosed in patients with distant metastasis, commonly found in the lungs, bone,
or liver. Pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas are present in about 25 to 33% of patients with an inherited condition such as von Hippel-
Lindau syndrome . von Hippel-Lindau syndrome is an autosomal-dominant disorder, and mutation of one copy of the VHL tumor suppressor gene is
associated with the development of the tumors. Recently, it has been reported that de novo mutations seem to play a greater role in von
Hippel-Lindau syndrome than previously thought . In our case, since there was no mutation of the VHL gene in the patient’s family,
suggestive of von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, we suspect that the patient had a de novo mutation of the gene. The treatment of paragangliomas
involves complete tumor removal. In one report, the complete tumor removal rate was 76.9%, and only 20.0% of patients who were thought to
have undergone complete tumor resection experienced late recurrence . The survival rate associated with complete resection was 84.6%. On the
other hand, the survival rate was only 50.0% for patients who underwent only a biopsy or partial resection and adjuvant treatment (P < 0.01)
. Thus, complete tumor resection is an important prognostic factor. For functional paragangliomas, to avoid perioperative hypertensive
crisis, alpha-adrenergic blockade is often used preoperatively. Beta-adrenergic blockade and calcium channel blockers can also be used for
uncontrolled hypertension in conjunction with alpha-adrenergic blockade . When the tumor is hypervascular and invades surrounding vascular
structures, complete tumor resection may be challenging and result in massive bleeding. To prevent perioperative massive bleeding,
preoperative embolization of the tumor-feeding vessels may be essential . We report the extremely rare case of a young patient with a
superior mediastinal paraganglioma associated with von Hippel-Lindau syndrome, without a familial history suggestive of the condition. We
could safely perform complete resection of the superior mediastinal paraganglioma by video-assisted thoracoscopic surgery using a direct
approach through a left supra-clavicular incision. This case highlights that we should be aware of possible sporadic von Hippel-Lindau
syndrome in patients with multifocal paragangliomas. Written consent was obtained from the patient for the use and publication of this case
report and the accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review from the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CT:
computed tomography; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. TT collected the
information, researched the literature, and wrote the article. KK performed the histological examination and helped prepare the manuscript.
HN and RK helped in literature research and edited the final version of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final version of
the manuscript. I would like to express my sincere gratitude to Dr. Yutaka Oki at Division of Endocrinology, Department of Internal
Medicine, Hamamatsu Univerity School of Medicine, for the genetic analysis of the patient.
