We herein present the case of a 78-year-old man with an incidental finding of a solid hepatic mass without symptoms and only a laparotomic
cholecystectomy for acute cholecystitis in the past surgical history. A colonoscopy, a magnetic resonance imaging scan, a positron emission
tomography scan, and a computed tomography scan completed the preoperative workup: a neoplastic lesion 4.3 × 3 cm in size was diagnosed at
segments IV and V, associated with a neoplastic involvement of the splenic flexure without signs of colonic occlusion. After colonic
resection, a frozen section on a granulomatous-like tissue at gastric border suggested a diagnosis of an adenocarcinoma of bilio-pancreatic
type, changing the surgical strategy to include gastric resection and hepatic pedicle node dissection. The discussion turns around the idea
that a final diagnosis of colon cancer with regional nodal involvement (pT3N1) and metastatic gallbladder cancer with multiple peritoneal
seedings cannot be excluded. Preoperative distinction between primary or metastatic cancer has to be as accurate as possible for hepatic
lesions, because the treatment is generally different. CT and MRI are considered the best imaging techniques for cancer staging and surgical
strategy guiding; they can also lead to a strong suspicion of hepatocellular carcinoma, that is, through the vascular pattern evaluation,
suggesting to go straight to surgery . When a certain preoperative differential diagnosis between colonic metastasis and ICC is not
possible, further investigations are mandatory. A 78-year-old man was admitted to our ward for the incidental finding at the ultrasound of a
solid mass in the liver, without symptoms. His past surgical history consisted of only a laparotomic cholecystectomy for acute
cholecystitis, with a liver biopsy diagnostic for aggressive chronic hepatitis (the patient was HBV and anti HCV negative). The patient was
in good general condition, but significant morbidity was noted: chronic renal failure (creatinine value 1.4 mg/dl), chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, hypertension, and a recent asymptomatic myocardial infarction. The liver function was normal. At the computed tomography
(CT) scan, a 4.3 × 3 cm neoplastic lesion was found in segments IV and V. There was no macroscopic involvement of portal tree and hepatic
artery. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed the main lesion with a cystic or necrotic central portion and a peripheral enhancement with
late pooling; a little satellite nodule was also discovered. Imaging was suggestive either for a peripheral intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma
or for a liver metastasis from an occult cancer, probably arising from the gastroenteric tract. Tumor markers seemed to support this last
hypothesis: CEA, 30 ng/mL; Ca, 19-9 > 12,000 U/mL; and alpha phetoprotein 3 UI/mL, strongly suggestive for a cancer arising from a secretory
epithelium. An 18 F-FDG PET scan showed captation in the previously described sites (liver and colon), without any other visible spots.
Colonoscopy showed a neoplastic stenosis in the transverse colon, limiting the direct visualization of the right colon. A CT colonoscopy
confirmed the neoplastic involvement of the splenic flexure without signs of colonic occlusion and our endoscopic biopsy was positive for
adenocarcinoma. With a preoperative diagnosis of colon cancer with synchronous liver metastasis, the clinical case was evaluated by a
multidisciplinary team. The age of the patient, the chronic liver failure, and the recent acute coronary syndrome were considered by the
oncologist as contraindications to chemotherapy, neoadjuvant nor palliative. A further cardiologic evaluation showed no contraction of the
infero-posterior part of the myocardium with a slight reduction of the ejection fraction (40%). Myocardial scintigraphy showed a stable
hypoperfusion in the corresponding zone and a limited reversible hypoperfusion at the inferior portion of the septum; the dipiridamol test
was negative for ischemic signs and symptoms. The patient was considered by the cardiologist at low to medium risk of a severe ischemic
accident in the postoperative period. The anesthesiologist defined an increased risk for surgery with an ASA score of 3 (American Society of
Anesthesiologists’ score). A synchronous segmental colonic and liver resection was planned. The intraoperative evaluation confirmed the
splenic flexure neoplasia with a single hepatic lesion, lying in the gallbladder fossa with an extensive gastric adhesion. No ascites and no
macroscopic nodal involvement were evident. Intraoperative ultrasound was negative for further hepatic lesions. First, we performed the
resection of the splenic flexure of the colon with a regional lymphadenectomy, postponing the anastomosis after the liver resection. During
dissection of the stomach out of the liver, a small necrotic cavity was opened with the appearance of several free biliary stones along the
hepatic pedicle. The frozen biopsy of the residual granulomatous-like tissue at the gastric border was positive for ab extrinseco
infiltration of adenocarcinoma, with a deep involvement up to the submucosal layer. The tumor showed duct-like structures lined by cuboidal
cells. A cribriform pattern was present and there was heterogeneity of the neoplastic epithelial cells within the same gland together with
the lack of tall columnar cells of intestinal type adenocarcinoma and lack of necrosis in the glandular lumina. Stroma was abundant and
desmoplastic. These features were suggestive for a bilio-pancreatic adenocarcinoma instead of an intestinal one (Figure 1). As a result, the
diagnosis was changed into multiple synchronous primitive neoplasms: intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma (ICC) and colonic cancer. This
unexpected finding required a more complex surgical procedure, including gastric resection and hepatic pedicle lymphadenectomy. The
hypothesis of a curative procedure (no other localizations were evident) and the absence of any otherwise therapy (the patient was unfit for
the chemotherapy) forced towards a radical, extended surgery. We proceeded with a liver bisegmentectomy (segments IV and V), hepatic pedicle
lymphadenectomy, distal gastric resection, colonic anastomosis, and omentectomy. A peritoneal pelvic sampling was also performed (Figure 2).
Gastric border frozen section. Low magnification hematoxylin and eosin frozen section on the granulomatous like tissue at gastric border.
Intraoperative view. Intraoperative view at the end of the multivisceral resection and reconstruction. On postoperative day 2 an
asymptomatic myocardial infarction occurred, requiring a short recovery in the Intensive Coronary Care Unit of without any specific
therapeutic care other than endovenous heparin. No surgical complications were recorded. The patient was discharged on postoperative day 20.
The histological evaluation confirmed two distinct tumors: (1) adenocarcinoma of the colon infiltrating the adipose tissue, G2, with 3/16
metastatic nodes (Dukes C, Astler–Coller C2); and (2) adenocarcinoma of the biliary ducts with a central colliquative necrosis, a
perineural, vascular, and lymphatic invasion and the metastatic involvement in five out of 10 perihepatic nodes and in four out of 10
perigastric nodes. The hematoxylin-eosin evaluation was suggestive for this diagnosis, but above all the complete panel of monoclonal
antibodies. Immunohistochemical analysis with cytokeratin 20 (ck 20, clone ks 20.8, Novocastra Menarini), ck 7 (clone ov-tl 12/30, Dako),
and cdx2 (clone AMT 28, Novocastra Menarini) defined two distinct profiles of positivity: ck20 positive, ck7 negative, and cdx2 positive for
the colonic cancer, and ck20 negative, ck7 positive, and cdx2 negative for the liver (Figure 3). The anti-hepatocyte monoclonal antibodies
tested on the liver cancer were negative (Figure 4). The immunohistochemical panel applied to the metastatic lymph nodes showed the same
results: ‘colonic’ positivity for the metastatic nodes along the mesocolon and ‘biliary’ profile for the hepatic pedicle and perigastric
nodes (Figure 5). Several unexpected small metastatic lesion of biliary origin were discovered in omentum and perigastric tissue; pelvic
peritoneum was also positive for neoplastic involvement. Immunohistochemical analysis. Final immunohistochemical analysis on surgical
specimen. Ck20 positive, ck7 negative, and cdx2 positive for the colonic cancer, and ck20 negative, ck7 positive, and cdx2 negative for the
liver. Ck20: dilution 1:50; Ck7: dilution 1:100; Cdx2: dilution 1:80. Liver specimen pathology. Final pathology on liver cancer specimen.
The anti-hepatocyte monoclonal antibodies were negative. Metastatic nodes. Metastatic lymph nodes immonuhistochemistry: colonic type pattern
for the metastatic nodes along the mesocolon and biliary profile for the nodes at the level of the hepatic pedicle and gastric wall. At this
point, we reconsidered the past surgical history (urgent cholecystectomy 4 years before): the operating report described a difficult
surgery, the gallbladder being removed after a wide opening of the wall. A pathology re-evaluation confirmed the initial diagnosis of acute
necrotic ulcerative cholecystitis with slight dysplasia. Three months after surgery, a diffuse abdominal recurrence (liver, spleen, adrenal
gland, and mesenteric nodes) was noted. The patient died 9 months after surgery. For a differential diagnosis, two different strategies are
feasible: exclusion of a gastroenteric origin of the tumor by colonscopy and gastroscopy, or doing a percutaneous biopsy (PB). For PB, in
addition to technical problems due to reaching the lesion (this was not our case) and the specific risks of the procedure, some diagnostic
difficulties can arise for the pathologist, given that different lesions share similar histological aspects. Therefore, an endoscopic study
of the gastroenteric tract is considered the main diagnostic tool and when a primary colonic cancer is discovered, the diagnosis is
generally considered certain (colonic cancer with a synchronous liver metastasis), and PB is usually not performed. The following step is
the definition of a therapeutic strategy, either immediate surgery (synchronous colonic and liver resection) or sequential therapy, where
colonic resection, liver resection, and chemotherapy are differently combined in every single patient. However, multiple synchronous
neoplasms cannot be excluded a priori: colonic and biliary cancer association is rare but previously described and carries some diagnostic
and therapeutic problems. The first one, as above mentioned, is the difficulty to get a certain preoperative diagnosis, because the presence
of a secretory epithelium histology does not allow you to differentiate the colonic mucosa from the biliary tract . Immunohistochemical
tests can help for differential diagnosis, but the global accuracy of this method (expensive and time-consuming) is not complete when
applied on small specimens. Intraoperative evaluation also has some limitations, that is, considering that ICC and colonic metastases can be
macroscopically similar, mostly due to the high percentage of fibrosis. In our case, only the intraoperative frozen examination allowed us
making the diagnosis of multiple primary neoplasms; the ab extrinseco neoplastic involvement of the gastric wall (with normal mucosa) and
the adhesion to the liver suggested an invasion by continuity from a primary liver cancer. This diagnosis changed our surgical strategy: ICC
in our current practice requires hepatic pedicle node dissection, in particular for lesions larger than 5 cm ; according to neoplastic
finding on gastric wall, a gastric resection instead of simple adhesiolysis was mandatory. During gastric dissection, some free biliary
stones showed up and this was the clear demonstration that the gallbladder had been violated during the previous cholecistectomy. This
finding gives way to an intriguing hypothesis: the ‘biliary’ cancer may have been a gallbladder cancer and not a peripheral intrahepatic
cholangiocarcinoma. In favor of this diagnosis the cancer was located in the gallbladder fossa and macroscopically the adhesion with the
stomach seemed not to be a direct infiltrative growth of the tumor but a kind of easily fragmentable tissue with neoplastic involvement, as
one can expect for an initially adhesive process with a subsequent neoplastic colonization. Furthermore, multiple micro-localization spread
(perigastric, omentum, and pelvic peritoneum) would be expected after the dissemination of cancer cells and an iatrogenic perforation of the
gallbladder is a well described possible etiologic mechanism, given that this is the principal concern to a laparoscopic approach when a
significant risk of malignancy is supposed . On the other hand, the long period of time between cholecystectomy and our intervention (almost
4 years) and the negativity of the pathology are against this hypothesis. Gallbladder cancer is an interesting model of a step-by-step
process with fixed progression time: after a first phase of metaplasia and low dysplasia, the evidence of an early cancer takes generally
more than 12 years to show, while the passage to an advanced cancer takes only about 2 years; at this time the natural history of cancer is
very quick, with a mean life expectancy of 3 to 6 months . In the majority of cases, the process is clinically silent. Most gallbladder
carcinomas originate in the mucosa as de novo carcinoma and the adenoma-carcinoma sequence has little importance in the histogenesis of this
kind of cancer . In the presence of an early stage cancer, histology is not rarely considered negative by expert pathologists . Diagnostic
dilemmas are particularly evident when the inflammatory alterations are prevalent; furthermore, usually in these situations no exhaustive
evaluations of the specimen are performed, because without a clear cancer only two to three suspicious samplings from the different portions
of the gallbladder are routinely done. Finally, the rapid re-growth of cancer with a diffuse metastatization pattern supports the hypothesis
of gallbladder cancer. According to these considerations, a final diagnosis of colon cancer with regional nodal involvement (pT3N1) and
metastatic gallbladder cancer with multiple peritoneal seedings cannot be excluded. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient
for publication of this paper. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors
declare that they have no competing interests. NP and CB conceived the case report and drafted the manuscript. BG and FG contributed to get
the background, figures, and references, and helped to draft the manuscript. SMG revised the manuscript critically for important
intellectual content. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. Authors thank Mr. Ezio Melgazzi for photo editing.
