Total laparoscopic modified Duhamel procedure in combination with transanal endoscopic microsurgery is a feasible minimally invasive
technique for idiopathic megacolon and adult megacolon. Laparoscopic-assisted colonic resection has been well described for multiple
surgical indications and typically requires an abdominal incision for specimen removal that is associated with most of the postoperative
pain. We report the total laparoscopic modified Duhamel operation for megacolon in combination with transanal endoscopic microsurgery for
transanal specimen retrieval and anastomosis to avoid the additional abdominal extraction incision. Two cases are presented: case 1 was a
15-year-old boy who presented with intermittent abdominal distention, pain, and constipation for 3 years' duration and was diagnosed with
Hirschsprung disease, and case 2 was a 60-year-old man who presented with repeated attacks of incomplete intestinal obstruction for 2 years'
duration and was diagnosed with adult megacolon. They were treated by the total laparoscopic modified Duhamel operation without an abdominal
extraction incision in combination with transanal endoscopic microsurgery. The operations were successfully accomplished without conversion
to open surgery. The patients tolerated the procedure well, complained of minimal postoperative pain, and did not require narcotics beyond
the day of the operation. No surgical complications occurred. Discharge from the hospital occurred on the ninth postoperative day in case 1
and the 13th postoperative day in case 2. The total laparoscopic modified Duhamel operation in combination with transanal endoscopic
microsurgery is a feasible and minimally invasive technique for idiopathic megacolon and adult megacolon. This advanced surgical technique
was developed by combining laparoscopy with the concept of natural orifice transluminal endoscopic surgery. Laparoscopic procedures have
increasingly developed over the last 20 years. Compared with open surgery, minimally invasive colorectal procedures have been shown to have
better outcomes, such as improved cosmetic results, less postoperative pain, and a rapid recovery, all of which improve the patient's
comfort and satisfaction.1–4 Laparoscopy has become a proven and often preferred method for even the most complex operative problems.
However, the requirement of an abdominal incision for specimen retrieval in laparoscopic colorectal procedures can limit the advantages of
this modality, especially with regard to postoperative pain and recovery. Since the concept of natural orifice transluminal endoscopic
surgery (NOTES) was first presented in 2004,5 it has attracted a great deal of interest from surgeons and endoscopists.6–8 The anus is a
natural orifice that is anatomically in continuation with the colon and the rectum, and transanal removal of specimens during laparoscopic
colorectal procedures is an appealing concept in terms of its minimally invasive nature and its similarity to the concept of NOTES. We have
performed 34 cases of total laparoscopic sigmoid and rectal resection in combination with transanal endoscopic microsurgery (TEM) and proved
that it is safe and feasible with no notable increase in operative difficulty.9 Furthermore, Lamas-Pinheiro et al10 have reported a hybrid
natural orifice transluminal endoscopic Duhamel operation assisted by a transrectal port. Thus we believe that an additional abdominal
extraction incision in the laparoscopic modified Duhamel operation can be avoided by combining laparoscopy with TEM for transanal specimen
retrieval and anastomosis. Case 1 was a 15-year-old boy who presented with intermittent abdominal distention, abdominal pain, and
constipation for 3 years' duration and was diagnosed with Hirschsprung disease according to colonoscopy and biopsy (Table 1). Case 2 was a
60-year-old man who presented with repeated attacks of incomplete intestinal obstruction for 2 years' duration and was diagnosed with adult
megacolon by double-contrast barium enema (Figure 1a), colonoscopy, and biopsy. The patient had previously undergone a laparoscopic
intraperitoneal onlay mesh technique because of an umbilical hernia. Demographic and Perioperative Data a, A double-contrast barium enema
showed a narrowed distal segment of the descending and sigmoid colon and dilated proximal colon. b, The resected specimen showed a narrowed
segment of the descending and sigmoid colon and dilated proximal colon. After complete preoperative evaluation, the 2 patients were offered
the total laparoscopic modified Duhamel operation in combination with TEM. Polyethylene glycol electrolyte solution was administered 1 day
before the operation for bowel preparation. Prophylactic antibiotics (cefuroxime, 2.25 g; metronidazole, 200 mg) were intravenously
administered before the operation. The patients were placed in a modified lithotomy position with the head tilted downward, and general
anesthesia was administered, after which a pneumoperitoneum was created. A camera port was created in the supraumbilical region, and the
laparoscope was inserted through this port. Three 5-mm surgical ports were created in the upper right, upper left, and lower left abdominal
quadrants; a 12-mm surgical port was created in the right lower quadrant. After mobilization of the colon, the ileocecal region, and the
rectum at the level of peritoneal reflection was completed, the sacral hollow was opened. The ascending colon 10 cm from the ileocecal
region was marked. Then, the resectoscope shaft (diameter, 40 mm) for TEM was inserted into the rectum through the anus after gentle
dilatation while the intestine was maintained in an extended state by insufflation (carbon dioxide at a pressure of 12–15 mm Hg). After the
proximal and distal mesocolon was trimmed, a circumferential incision of the rectum at the level of peritoneal reflection was made with a
Harmonic scalpel (Ethicon Endo-Surgery, Cincinnati, Ohio). The proximal end of the bowel was ligated by use of hemp rope to prevent the
outflow of intestinal contents and prevent contamination in the peritoneal cavity. The mobilized colon and rectum were exteriorized through
the TEM resectoscope shaft (Figure 2), and the proximal colonic resection (Figure 1b) was performed extracorporeally at the marked location
by first creating a purse-string suture and then inserting a circular stapling anvil into the proximal end of the bowel. The ascending colon
was then replaced in the abdominal cavity, after which we performed iodine solution lavage of the abdominal and pelvic cavity. The distal
stump of the rectum was transversely clamped with a stapler (Endo GIA Roticulator 60–3.5 Sulu; Covidien, Mansfield, Massachusetts). Then, a
circular stapler (DST Series EEA, 31 mm; Covidien) was inserted transanally and penetrated out about 0.5 cm above the dentate line in the
posterior rectal wall, and an end-to-side anastomosis was laparoscopically created with the proximal end of the normal ascending colon. The
spur between the rectum and the normal ascending colon was then divided with a stapler (Proximate Linear Cutter 100; Ethicon Endo-Surgery).
The specimen was exteriorized through the TEM resectoscope shaft through the anus. The 2 operations were successfully accomplished without
conversion to open surgery. The operative time was 240 minutes in case 1 and 450 minutes in case 2. The patients tolerated the procedure
well, complained of minimal postoperative pain, and did not require narcotics beyond the day of the operation. No surgical complications
occurred. The patients were started on a regular diet 6 days (case 1) and 7 days (case 2) after the operation and were discharged from the
hospital on the ninth and 13th postoperative days, respectively. The diagnosis was confirmed by postoperative pathologic examination.
Hirschsprung disease is a congenital malformation characterized by the absence of ganglion cells in the distal bowel beginning at the
internal anal sphincter and extending proximally for various lengths. The main symptoms include constipation that gradually worsens,
abdominal distention, and pain in older patients and include delayed passage of meconium and vomit in neonates.11,12 The diagnosis is mainly
made based on a barium enema and histologic examination of rectal wall biopsy specimens. Barnes et al13 divided patients with Hirschsprung
disease into 2 subgroups: patients with idiopathic megacolon whose symptoms start in childhood and patients with adult megacolon in whom the
onset of clinical features occurs during adulthood. Among patients in whom symptoms associated with a megacolon develop during adulthood,
the treatment for constipation may be ineffective and most such patients are offered surgical treatment. The 3 most commonly performed
operations for definitive treatment of patients with Hirschsprung disease are the Swenson, Duhamel, and Soave procedures, as well as their
various modifications; the principal goal of surgery is to remove or bypass the poorly functioning aganglionic bowel with anastomosis of
normally innervated intestine to the distal rectum. Megacolon is a serious condition, but it is not a malignant disease in the usual sense
of the term. It is difficult and technically demanding to complete radical procedures (eg, Swenson operation and pull-through procedure) to
resect all the aganglionic segments of the rectosigmoid colon, which may lead to a high incidence of various immediate- and long-term
complications, especially enterocolitis and incontinence. The trend in treatment for megacolon has become less invasive over the years.
Duhamel14 devised his modification to simplify the operation and to avoid complications related to excision of the rectum. Travassos et al15
have completed 30 laparoscopic Duhamel operations by everting the rectum through the anus, and the outcome has been satisfactory. The
characteristic of the modified Duhamel operation is to resect the proximal dilated colon, retain part of the aganglionic rectum, and divide
the spur between the aganglionic rectum and ganglionic proximal colon. At the same time, the anastomosis is low enough to prevent residual
symptoms of megacolon. It has been shown that the modified Duhamel operation yields a significant improvement in individual functional
outcome scores.15–17 In the emerging era of natural orifice surgery, patients are willing to accept novel surgical techniques if they
provide superior cosmetic outcomes and reduce pain. The total laparoscopic modified Duhamel operation in combination with TEM is a
sublimation of a less invasive trend in treatment for megacolon and an advancement, by amalgamating the concept of NOTES with laparoscopic
techniques. Although the procedure requires a longer operative time (the longer operative time in the second case was mainly because of the
separation of the extensive adhesion), there are benefits in terms of minimal invasiveness, better cosmetic outcomes, and less postoperative
pain. Furthermore, this report shows that colon specimen retrieval through the anus is an acceptable alternative to a cutaneous extraction
incision or everting the rectum through the anus with no notable increase in operative difficulty. However, the long-term effects and
functional outcome of our technique still need to be investigated.
