Study Design Data Collection Statistical Analysis Data Interpretation Manuscript Preparation Literature Search Funds Collection Adequate
hemostasis in cranial and spinal tumor surgery is of paramount importance in neurosurgical practice. Generalized ooze bleeding from the
surgical walls cavity, coming from neoplastic vessels or nervous tissue, may be problematic. Recent technical advances have dramatically
reduced intraoperative complications related to blood loss. Several techniques are usually employed to control hemostasis in tumor surgery,
including preoperative embolization, intraoperative hypotension, electrical coagulation, and local application of fibrin sealants or
hemostatic matrix, which influence coagulation. Our aim in this study was to evaluate the efficacy and the safety of the Aquamantys® system
(Medtronic Advanced Energy, Portsmouth, NH, USA), a novel bipolar coagulation device that incorporates a new bipolar coagulation technique.
This device has been used in 10 consecutive patients affected by cerebral tumor along with the standard microsurgical technique and well-
known intraoperative tools. The technique is associated with simultaneous delivery of bipolar radio frequency energy and conductive fluid
through its electrode tip. The volume of saline passing by the electrode tip prevents charring and maintains a clean tip. This cools the
tissue as it raises the temperature sufficiently to shrink the collagen of veins and arteries. Effective hemostasis was achieved in all the
cases. No complications or unwanted reactions associated with the device have been observed. Our findings suggest that the Aquamantys®
system may be a highly effective adjuvant tool in minimizing blood loss in a patient with brain tumor, as well as reducing time of surgery.
Surgical treatment for intracranial tumor may be associated with blood loss. Several strategies are used to reduce blood loss, including
preoperative embolization, intraoperative controlled hypotension, electrical coagulation, or local application of fibrin sealants or
hemostatic matrix, which influence coagulation . With usual contact methods involving electrocautery, such as monopolar knife and bipolar
coagulator, removal of the probe from the adherent, desiccated eschar around the probe often detaches the eschar, causing greater bleeding
than before the coagulation. In this scenario, the Aquamantys® system (Medtronic Advanced Energy, Portsmouth, NH, USA) incorporates a new
bipolar coagulation technique associated with simultaneous delivery of bipolar radio frequency energy and conductive fluid through its
electrode tip. The volume of saline passing by the electrode tip prevents charring and maintains a clean tip. This cools the tissue as it
raises the temperature sufficiently to shrink the collagen of veins and arteries. Power and saline flow are adjustable for different types
of tissue to promote effective coagulation. We report a series of brain tumor patients undergoing surgery using the Aquamantys® system,
along with its epidural vein sealer (EVS), which revealed some practical advantages. Usefulness and limitations are discussed. The
Aquamantys® system (Medtronic Advanced Energy, Portsmouth, NH, USA) is based on a new bipolar coagulation technique, the so-called
transcollation technology, a proprietary combination of radiofrequency energy and saline . The technique is associated with simultaneous
delivery of bipolar radio frequency energy and conductive fluid through its electrode tip. Briefly, the system works by combining a bipolar
electrosurgical generator with a rotary peristaltic pump to provide simultaneous delivery of radiofrequency energy and saline when used with
Aquamantys® handheld disposable devices. The saline cools the tissue as it is treated and evenly conducts the energy into the tissue to seal
blood vessels. The thermal effect shrinks the collagen in the vessel walls of small arteries, and this results in the cessation of bleeding
from these vessels. The saline used as a conductive fluid cools the tissue surface and prevents the surface temperature from getting too
hot, thus avoiding charring. The Aquamantys® device, when associated with the handpiece EVS, has a shaft diameter of 4 mm, thus offering
good visibility and less crowdedness in the surgical field (Figure 1). The Aquamantys® system has been used in 10 consecutive patients with
brain tumors (5 meningiomas, 3 glioblastomas, and 2 pituitary adenomas). In cases with pituitary adenomas, the device was used for
hemostasis of the bleeding from the nasal mucosa and on the tumor capsule. The coagulation setting, adjustable from 20 to 200 watts, was 20
watts and the saline flow (with settings for low, medium, and high), was set in “medium” position. External irrigation was also maintained
as usual. The device was used in the same way as standard electrocautery except that the bipolar sealer could be used not only in a
localized manner to stop bleeding, but also in a spreading manner to stop diffuse bleeding. Effective hemostasis was achieved in all cases.
No complications or unwanted reactions associated with the device were observed. On the removal of meningioma, at first, the tumor capsule
was coagulated by the Aquamantys® device. This technique not only coagulated superficial blood vessels in the tumour capsule, but also
produced shrinkage of the capsule due to the heating effect, facilitating the dissection of the tumor from the surrounding arachnoid planes
with minimal manipulation of surrounding structures. The Aquamantys® probe can be used with both the naked eye and under the surgical
microscope. A thin and a relative flexible probe (tip diameter of 3.4 mm, distal bayonet shaft length of 139.45 mm) particularly increased
the usefulness of the system for hemostasis under the microscope. Thus, the total amount of bleeding was reduced and the reduction of the
tumor size due to shrinking made it very easy to handle the tumors. In glioma surgery, the device, with its relatively wide handpiece tip,
allowed optimal tumor coagulation during dissection and stopped generalized ooze bleeding from the surrounding surgical wall cavity. In
brain tumors that have a large blood supply from feeding arteries penetrating the skull base, the Aquamantys® device was extremely useful
for the hemostasis of these bone-penetrating feeding arteries. The Aquamantys® device was also useful for troublesome bleeding from the
nasal mucosa with the endonasal approach for a pituitary adenoma. By using its long distal bayonet, it was possible to stop the bleeding
from the sidewall of the nasal mucosa. Furthermore, the Aquamantys® device was very useful in coagulating the tumor capsule, leading to
lesion shrinking. A 52-year-old woman was admitted with mild occasional headache and disequilibrium. Neurological examination on admission
showed mild left hearing impairment and mild gait disturbance with ataxia. No other neurological findings (e.g., facial dysesthesia or
facial palsy) were observed. No familial history of neurofibromatosis was evident. The patient underwent brain computed tomography (CT),
which showed a lesion in the left cerebellopontine angle. Magnetic resonance imaging demonstrated a mass lesion in the left cerebellopontine
angle. The mass was approximately 6 cm in diameter, appearing hypointense on T1-weighted imaging, and heterogeneously intense on T2-weighted
imaging. The lesion had peritumoral edema apparent in the surrounding cerebellum on fluid-attenuated inversion recovery imaging. The mass
had a solid lobular shape with heterogeneous enhancement after contrast administration. The tumor margins were clear and no contact with the
internal auditory meatus was evident. Slight dural tail sign was evident on the left sigmoid sinus, which was infiltrated but not occluded
by the lesion (Figure 2). Left suboccipital retrosigmoid craniotomy exposed the tumor originating from the tentorium, and present mainly in
the infratentorial epiarachnoid space, with a small attachment to the edge of the petrosal bone. The lesion was well demarcated from the
surrounding cerebellum, but attachment to the petrosal vein was identified. The lesion was carefully dissected out by the surrounding
cerebellum. The Aquamantys® device was used both for tumor capsule coagulation and meningioma shrinking (Figure 3). Bipolar coagulation and
ultrasound suction were used to achieve tumor resection. A small piece of tumor was left inside the sigmoid sinus. Histological examination
of the tumor demonstrated typical findings of meningothelial meningioma. Postoperatively, the patient showed no neurological deficit and
recovered well. Two years later, brain MRI follow-up did not show development of the residual tumor inside the left sigmoid sinus (Figure
4). The development of bipolar coagulation began with the broad thermal-dispersion electrodes and has evolved to include highly accurate
devices that deliver thermal energy via nonstick methods. Over time, the operative range of coagulation instruments has dramatically
increased and improved. However, most of the contact methods of electrocautery have 2 shortcomings . First, despite suction and irrigation,
they work in the pooled blood. Coagulation in a bloody field only leads to boiling and then carbonization of the blood. Second, the
coagulation of the pooled blood and not the bleeding vessel leads to the formation of a coating eschar around the probe. Removal of the
probe from the adherent, desiccated eschar often detaches the eschar, causing greater bleeding than before the coagulation. In these
contexts, a new electrosurgery modality, the Aquamantys® system, which has been used successfully in orthopedic , general and cardiac
surgery , is gaining interest as an innovative method. The Aquamantys® system and bipolar sealers feature innovative Transcollation®
technology, a combination of radiofrequency (RF) energy and saline that provides hemostatic sealing of soft tissue and bone during surgery .
It consists of a generator and disposable, single-use handpieces. The generator delivers transcollation technology, simultaneous RF power
and saline delivery, to the disposable bipolar sealers. Power settings can vary from 20 to 200 watts and 3 different flow rates can be
selected. Various handpieces are available that are adept for use in specific surgical procedures. The 6.0 Bipolar Sealer is mainly used in
orthopedic surgery, where the system has been demonstrated to be useful in reducing blood loss during hip and knee replacement procedures
and trauma surgery . The EVS, with its out-of-body shaft length of 172 mm and shaft diameter of 4 mm, is recently used during spine surgery
such as decompression procedures (e.g., discectomy and laminectomy) and all procedures requiring access to the epidural space . In our
surgical procedures, we used the EVS handpiece. The coagulation setting was 20 watts and saline flow was set at medium. Compared with other
high-frequency contact coagulation methods, the depth of necrosis, due to thermal injury, is extremely superficial and the continuous saline
irrigation reduces the temperature in and around the treated area, which is crucially advantageous for neurosurgical operations. The use of
standard electrocautery results in a high tissue surface temperature and therefore leads to charring of the tissue and scar formation.
Preventing this charring and searing of the tissue by using the Aquamantys® device should avoid the possible postoperative breakage or
detachment of scar and clots produced by conventional electrocautery, which can lead to postoperative blood loss. Since the Aquamantys®
system uses a round handpiece tip, the tissue surface that can be treated is larger than that usually coagulated by the classical bipolar
forceps. This feature allows better control of capillary ooze, a well-known problem at the end of intracerebral tumor removal, and a wide
coagulation area of the tumor and its capsule. In meningioma surgery, capsule coagulation leads to tumor devascularization; by increasing
the power of the transcollation technology, tumor shrinking can be obtained. Furthermore, in skull base meningioma, when Simpson grade I
cannot be achieved , the Aquamantys® tip device allows an efficacious coagulation of dural attachment. Aquamantys® device can be applied in
a brushwork fashion over large areas and it is particularly well-suited for treating diffuse bleeding and broad tumors, even when it is
difficult to determine the bleeding point. Furthermore, since the device does not cause carbonization or vaporization and hence does not
generate smoke, the surgeon’s operative view is not disturbed. The relatively low initial cost and operating expenses are additional
advantages of this technique. The disadvantages of Aquamantys® should also be considered. In some instances, when the bleeding comes from a
well-recognized broken vein or artery, the bipolar forceps are more adequate and precise in controlling the bleeding than is the Aquamantys®
system. Furthermore, the limited flexibility of the handpiece is a drawback, especially in case of a deep, narrow, and irregular operating
channel. In such a case, however, the bipolar coagulation needs a wide enlargement of the working channel to provide complete control of the
bleeding. The Aquamantys® system is a novel coagulation technique with an innovative Transcollation® technology, a combination of
radiofrequency (RF) energy and saline that provides hemostatic sealing of soft tissue and bone during surgery . This technology can be
considered as an adjuvant strategy for achieving hemostasis in brain tumor surgery. The Aquamantys® device is complementary to rather than
competitive with bipolar coagulation and a conventional monopolar knife. The use of this device is certainly no substitute for a good
microsurgical hemostasis technique. With the development of tailored and more flexible probes, the device might become a valuable surgical
device. Disclosure The authors have no personal financial or institutional interest in the device described in this article. Source of
support: Departmental sources The Aquamantys® system consists of a proprietary radiofrequency generator that delivers transcollation
technology to disposable Aquamantys bipolar sealers. The epidural vein sealer (EVS) handpiece has an out-of-body shaft length of 172.50 mm
and a shaft diameter of 4 mm. Preoperative axial (A), sagittal (B), and coronal (C) magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scans with contrast
showing a mass lesion in the left cerebellopontine angle entering the left sigmoid sinus. Intraoperative photographs showing the tumor in
the left cerebellopontine angle. The Aquamantys® system is used to coagulate the tumor capsule (A). This allows a rapid devascularization,
as shown by the progressive capsule discoloration (B). Postoperative axial (A), sagittal (B), and coronal (C) magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) scans with contrast showing no recurrence of the lesion at 2-year follow-up.
