Disclaimer: The authors have no conflict of interest to declare. A 45-year-old otherwise healthy male from an endemic region for Leishmania
braziliensis infection in Bahia, Brazil, presented with three erosive hemorrhagic infiltrated plaques on the left shin accompanied with
lymphadenopathy in the groin since one month (Figure 1 Figure 1.Erosive hemorraghic infiltrated plaques on the left shin, suspective for
cutaneous leishmaniasis.). A Leishmania skin test performed on the left forearm was strongly positive (20 × 18 mm).1 Two days later, the
patient felt sick and feverish. Painful erythematous target lesions developed on the palms and scapula together with conjunctivitis (Figure
2 Figure 2.Target lesions (arrows) on the palm of the left hand.). Histopathology confirmed erythema exsudativum multiforme (EEM) (Figure
3). Both EEM and cutaneous leishmaniasis were successfully treated with a 5-day course of prednisone 20 mg, and a 20-day course of
intravenous pentavalent antimony, respectively. Erosive hemorraghic infiltrated plaques on the left shin, suspective for cutaneous
leishmaniasis. Target lesions (arrows) on the palm of the left hand. Hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) stain showing dermatitis in the upper
dermis and spongiosis at the dermal-epidermal junction (A) ×40. Vacuolization of epidermal basal cells (B) ×400, and the presence of
necrotic keratinocytes (C) ×1,000. This case supports the hypothesis that an exacerbated host immune response against Leishmania antigens
may be associated with tissue damage and several clinical manifestations including EEM2,3; this case should alert the clinicians that
Leishmania skin test is not totally risk free and may trigger hypersensitivity reactions. We acknowledge Dr. Sérgio Arruda for the
histopathology. Authors' addresses: Bas S. Wind, Department of Dermatology, Academic Medical Center, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, E-mail:
b.s.wind@amc.uva.nl. Luiz H. Guimarães and Paulo R. L. Machado, Serviço de Imunologia, Hospital Universitário Professor Edgard Santos,
Canela, Salvador, and Universidade Federal da Bahia, Salvador, Bahia, Brazil, E-mails: imuno@ufba.br and prlmachado@uol.com.br.
