A 38-year-old man, returned from Ivory Coast 2 months ago and presented with a 3-month history of pruritus exclusively on the scrotum.
Itching was continuous during the day and no pruritus was described in his wife and son. Clinical examination of the genitals revealed
several nodules on the scrotum, a chancrous lesion was seen on the penis, and multiple excoriations were noted. Dermoscopy exam with a
dermatoscope of the whole body was performed and no papules, nodules, or burrow were found. Microscopic examination of several superficial
skin samples obtained by scraping in the peri-genital area revealed one adult of Sarcoptes scabiei. The patient and his relatives were
successfully treated with Ivermectin 200 μg/kg with a second dose 2 weeks later. Very rare cases are described on localized scabies (scalp,
feet) and they mainly occurred in an immunocompromised patient unlike this patient who does not have any immunosuppression. A 38-year-old
man, returned from Ivory Coast 2 months ago and presented with a 3-month history of pruritus exclusively on the scrotum. Itching was
continuous during the day and no pruritus was described in his wife and son. It is to be noted that since the pruritus appeared, he stopped
sexual contact with his wife. Clinical examination of the genitals revealed several nodules on the scrotum (Figure 1 Figure 1.Nodules on the
scrotum.), a chancrous lesion was seen on the penis (Figure 2 Figure 2.Chancrous lesion on penis and nodules on the scrotum.), and multiple
excoriations were noted. Dermoscopy exam with a dermatoscope of the whole body, including the finger webs, the flexor surfaces of the
wrists, the elbows, and the axillae was performed. No papules, nodules, or burrow were found. Microscopic examination of several superficial
skin samples obtained by scraping in the peri-genital area revealed one adult of Sarcoptes scabiei (Figure 3)1; the patient and his
relatives were successfully treated with Ivermectin 200 μg/kg with a second dose 2 weeks later.2 He was seen in follow-up 1 month later and
the symptoms had resolved. Very rare cases are described on localized scabies (scalp, feet), and they mainly occurred in an
immunocompromised patient unlike this patient who does not have any immunosuppression.3 Nodules on the scrotum. Chancrous lesion on penis
and nodules on the scrotum. Sarcoptes scabiei (200×) revealed by microscopic examination of samples obtained from skin scrapings. Authors'
addresses: Christelle Pomares, Pierre Marty, and Pascal Delaunay, Service de Parasitologie Mycologie, Centre Hospitalier Universitaire de
Nice - Hôpital de l'Archet, Université de Nice-Sophia Antipolis, C3M, Inserm Nice Cedex 3, France, E-mails: pomares.c@chu-nice.fr,
marty.p@chu-nice.fr, and delaunay.p@chu-nice.fr.
