Cryptococcus spp. are saprophytic and opportunistic fungal pathogens that are known to cause severe disease in immunocompromised animals. In
goats there are reports of clinical cryptococcal pneumonia and mastitis but not of meningitis. The following report describes a case of a
five year old buck showing severe neurological signs, including paraplegia and strong pain reaction to touch of the hindquarters region.
Treatment with antibiotics was unsuccessful and the animal was euthanized for humanitarian reasons. Postmortem examination revealed lumbar
meningitis, lung nodules and caseous lymphadenitis lesions. Encapsulated Cryptococcus neoformans were identified from the lungs and
meninges, showing that cryptococcal meningitis should be included in the differential diagnosis of goats showing paresis and hyperesthesia.
The possibility of concurrent immunosuppression due to Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis infection is raised. Cryptoccocal meningitis
should be included in the differential diagnosis list of goat diseases with ataxia and hyperesthesia. Cryptococcus sp. is a dimorphic
yeastlike fungus with worldwide distribution. In animal tissues Cryptococcus is seen as a round encapsulated organism sometimes forming
daughter buds that are connected to the parent cell by an isthmus. The capsule provides protection from the host immune response and favours
chronic infection and dormancy . Cryptococcus neoformans is the usual causative agent of animal cryptococcosis. C. gattii, restricted to
tropical and subtropical regions, was previously classified as a variety of C. neoformans but is now considered an independent species. C.
neoformans causes disease in both animals and humans and is usually linked to immunosuppressive diseases in humans (HIV infection) and cats
(FeLV and FIV), commonly presenting signs as the immunosuppressed patient’s immunity wanes. The organism has been frequently isolated from
pigeon guano where it may remain viable for at least two years. C. gatti has been found to be especially associated with decomposing
material from eucalyptus trees . There is strong evidence that the mode of infection is via inhalation of air-borne organisms (desiccated
yeast cells or spores) and that systemic cryptococcosis will start in the nasal cavity or the lungs, although respiratory involvement
usually does not result in clinical signs. In the immunocompetent host, infection is usually limited to the lungs and is asymptomatic . C.
neoformans has predilection for the central nervous system with spread being probably haematogenous or by sinonasal extension to the CNS
through the cribriform plate . Skin disease in humans, cats and dogs and sinonasal and ear infection in cats have been described . In
ruminants the organisms may also enter through the teat causing mastitis. Our report describes a case of a male goat with neurologic signs
that was diagnosed post-mortem as having fungal (Cryptococcus) meningitis. This study was approved by the Welfare and Ethics Committee of
the Interdisciplinary Centre of Research in Animal Health of the Lisbon Veterinary Faculty (CIISA-FMV). A 5 year old male goat (from an
endangered Portuguese breed called Bravia) was presented with depression, reduced appetite and hind limb incoordination. Trauma had been
suspected and the animal had been treated with an anti-inflammatory drug (carprofen, 2 mg/kg SC) for three days. This pure bred buck was
part of a herd of autochthonous animals used to create a national gene bank. Pigeons had access to both the stable and the pastures used by
the herd but no other animal had previously shown any neurological or respiratory signs. The neurological signs were confined to the
hindquarters and ataxia rapidly progressed to a complete flaccid paraplegia (Figure 1). Patellar, perineal and hind limb withdrawal reflexes
were absent. Severe hyperalgesia and an intense pain reaction to touch were evident on both flanks and the hindquarters – for example,
gentle stroking of the hind legs caused high-pitched bellowing. Constant scratching and self-mutilation occurred with the long horns
resulting in a large alopecia on the right abdominal wall. There were no seizures, signs of blindness or other cranial nerve deficits. Head
movements, reaction to touch and front legs’ muscle tone were reduced but considered normal due to the depression state of the animal, so
the neurological examination suggested a lesion limited to the lumbosacral region. Neurologic signs - buck showing signs of hind limb
paralysis and self mutilation (skin excoriation on abdominal flank) due to hyperaesthesia. Rectal temperature, heart and respiratory rates
were inside the reference ranges. Blood analysis revealed leucocytosis characterized by a neutrophilia and monocytosis, moderate anemia and
hyperproteinemia (Table 1). Renal and liver values were normal. Radiography of the lumbosacral region were unremarkable. Cerebrospinal fluid
(CSF) was collected by lumbar puncture under local anaesthesia. The fluid was clear, colourless and did not flow freely from the needle hub.
CSF analysis showed severe mixed pleocytosis (980 cells/mm3; 65% neutrophils and 35% lymphocytes) with mild increase in protein
concentration (1.15 g/L). No cryptococcal organism was identified and bacteria culture of the CSF yielded no growth. Meanwhile treatment was
initiated with cephalosporin (ceftiofur, 4 mg/kg IM twice daily, Pfizer) and dexamethasone (one single 0.25 mg/kg IM injection). After three
days of antibiotic treatment (six days after initial clinical signs) hyperesthesia continued to be very severe and so the buck was
euthanized for humanitarian reasons. Blood parameters of male goat with neurological signs secondary to meningitis aMerck Veterinary Manual.
Post-mortem examination revealed cachexia, hind limbs muscular atrophy and skin excoriations on both flanks. Mild pneumonia in the ventral
lobes of the right lung, two well demarcated nodules with 1 cm in diameter in the right lung, caseous material in mediastinum and peripheral
lymph nodes and an enlarged oedematous lumbar spinal cord were evident on gross internal examination. Microscopically there were signs of
granulomatous pneumonia and extensive congestion and oedema with lymphocyte infiltration of the lumbosacral meninges consistent with acute
meningitis. In both lung and meninges numerous round shape organisms with narrow-necked budding were visible and identified morphologically
as C. neoformans (Figure 2). Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis was isolated from the caseous material found in the lymph nodes.
Histopathology exam - several round encapsulated microorganisms (yellow arrow) isolated from the lumbar meninges were identified as being
Cryptococcus neoformans (HE, ×400). Pulmonary disease and mastitis have been described in sheep and goats, but no report of goat meningitis
due to Cryptococcus infection has been published. Published references to caprine cryptococal disease include an outbreak of severe
pneumonia by C. gattii in Spain, cryptococcal pneumonia associated to M. bovis infection, experimental and natural occurring clinical
mastitis by C. neoformans and a granuloma obstructing the nasal cavity of a goat in Australia . Non-specific clinical findings may lead to
mis-diagnosis because other infectious diseases are much more common in small ruminants. The differential diagnosis in our case of
lumbosacral meningitis should include other neurological diseases causing lower spinal cord lesion leading to hindquarters paresis and
hyperestesia . Listeriosis and polioencephalomalacia may cause ataxia, recumbency and depression but will usually present cranial nerve
deficits and central blindness. Scrapie is more common in sheep but it does occur in goats causing ataxia and intense pruritus. Other less
likely causes of ataxia, paraplegia or central hyperestesia are bacterial meningitis (E. coli, Pasteurella sp., Mycoplasma sp.), inter-
vertebral disc hernia and trauma (e.g. vertebral fracture), rabies, tetanus or meningitis secondary to extension of superficial lymph node
infection by Corynebacterium pseudotuberculosis or Arcanobacterium pyogenes. A definitive diagnosis requires isolation of C. neoformans from
blood or body fluids such as CSF. Cryptococcal antigen latex agglutination serology (CALAS) can be performed on serum or body fluids but
only provides presumptive evidence . However, in our case isolation from the CSF was not possible suggesting that negative results should
not preclude the hypothesis of a cryptococcal infection of the meninges. Our results also suggest that an ante-mortem diagnosis may be
difficult and so prompt anti-fungal treatment should be implemented if no response to antibiotics is evident. Prompt treatment with
amphotericin B plus flucytosine, fluconazole, itraconazole or ketoconazole, have shown some success in the treatment of cats, horses and
humans. Success with oral fluconazole (5 mg/Kg/day PO for 6 months) was established in a goat with abdominal wall infection with C. gatti.
However, the prognosis for infected animals that develop CNS signs is considerably worse and humane euthanasia may be warranted. Although
cryptococcosis is considered to be typically a chronic infection, in our case severe unusual neurological signs developed within days. It
was not possible to estimate the duration of the lung infection but it should stressed that no respiratory signs were evident at clinical
examination of this animal. Strains differ in their virulence, but the immune status of the host seems to be more important than the
virulence of the strain . Systemic disease in other animals have been associated with immunosuppressing factors, such as HIV, Feline
immunodeficiency virus (FIV), Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) and surgery . Gutiérrez and García Marin suggest an underlying immunodeficiency
in a goat with granulomatous pneumonia caused by C. neoformans together with M. bovis, that was negative on intradermal and serologic tests
for tuberculosis . There are reports of synergism between C. pseudotuberculosis and other bacteria or virus (e.g. Maedi-visna), predisposing
animals to severe pneumonia and other diseases . Suggesting involvement of the caseous lymphadenitis in the pathogenesis of this
cryptococcal meningitis is speculative but deserves mentioning. While Cryptococcus spp. has been previously reported to cause mastitis and
pneumonia in goats, central nervous system infection has not been demonstrated in this species. The clinical relevance is that cryptoccocal
meningitis should be included in the differential diagnosis list of goat diseases with ataxia and hyperesthesia. The authors declare that
they have no competing interests. GS followed the clinical case and drafted the manuscript. HP carried out the necropsy and did the
pathology report. Both authors read and approved the final manuscript.
