Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia is a serious disease, in which the mother produces antibodies against fetal platelet antigens inherited
from the father; it is still an underdiagnosed disease. This disease is considered the platelet counterpart of the RhD hemolytic disease of
the fetus and newborn, yet in neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia the first child is affected with fetal and/or neonatal thrombocytopenia.
There is a significant risk of intracranial hemorrhage and severe neurological impairment, with a tendency for earlier and more severe
thrombocytopenia in subsequent pregnancies. This article reports a case of neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia in the second pregnancy
affected and discusses diagnosis, management and the clinical importance of this disease. A púrpura trombocitopênica neonatal aloimune é uma
doença grave, na qual a mãe produz anticorpos contra antígenos plaquetários fetais herdados do pai, e é ainda subdiagnosticada na prática
clínica. É considerada o equivalente plaquetário da doença hemolítica do recém-nascido, com a diferença que o primeiro filho é afetado,
apresentando trombocitopenia fetal e/ou neonatal. Há risco significativo de hemorragia intracraniana e sequelas neurológicas graves, com
tendência a trombocitopenia mais grave e mais precoce nas gestações subsequentes. Este artigo relata um caso de trombocitopenia aloimune
neonatal na segunda gestação afetada e discute diagnóstico, manejo e importância clínica dessa doença na prática clínica. Neonatal
alloimmune thrombocytopenia (NAIT) is a disease in which the mother produces antibodies against fetal platelet antigens inherited from the
father and which the mother lacks.(1–3) It is the platelet counterpart of the RhD hemolytic disease of the fetus and newborn. However, NAIT
affects the first pregnancy and can cause intracranial hemorrhage (ICH), with a tendency for earlier and more severe thrombocytopenia in
subsequent pregnancies.(1–5) We report the case of a 37-year-old woman with NAIT diagnosed in her first child and the strategy used to
manage this second at-risk pregnancy. A 37-year-old Caucasian female from São Paulo, Brazil, gave birth to a healthy male baby on February
2009 by vaginal delivery (40 weeks) weighing 3510g, Apgar 9 to 10 and no obstetric complications. In less than 24 hours of life, the newborn
presented with petechiae and severe thrombocytopenia (14,000/mm3), despite normal hemoglobin and white blood cell (WBC) counts (Table 1) and
absence of infection. The baby was transferred to the neonatal intensive care unit (NICU) for investigation. MCV: mean corpuscular volume;
MCHC: mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; RDW: red cell distribution width. The platelet count reached its lowest level on day 4
(9,000/mm3), despite daily platelet transfusions and IV immunoglobulin 1g/kg. On day 8, platelets finally raised to 51,000/mm3 and the baby
was discharged with 81,000/mm3 on day 9, without any bleeding complications. Human platelet antigen (HPA) genotyping showed that the mother
was HPA-1b1b, the father HPA-1a1a and the child HPA-1a1b (Figure 1). Maternal antibodies against HPA-1a were detected by monoclonal-specific
antibody immobilization of platelet antigens (MAIPA), confirming the diagnosis of NAIT. In March 2012 this patient became pregnant again.
The sibling was stratified to a standard risk of bleeding and intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG) 1g/kg/week was started at week 17. Regular
ultrasound scans were performed to monitor fetal ICH. At week 20, MAIPA was performed on the mother's serum and confirmed the anti-HPA-1a.
Non-invasive follow-up with quantitative MAIPA was used to assess the risk of neonatal thrombocytopenia instead of cordocentesis. It was
performed at weeks 25, 29 and 32, and the results were 29UI/mL, 21.69UI/mL and 32.51UI/mL, respectively (Figure 2). Oral prednisone 40mg/day
was started at week 32 and C-section was chosen to minimize the risk of bleeding at delivery. Moreover, HPA-1b1b donors were scheduled for
plateletpheresis donation close to the estimated date of delivery. The mother had moderate anemia during pregnancy (lowest level Hb=8.7g/dL
at week 36). Hemolytic anemia due to IVIG was excluded by normal lactate dehydrogenase (LDH) levels (383mg/dL) and negative direct
antiglobulin test. Since iron (87μg/dL) and ferritin (47.9ηg/mL) levels were normal, anemia was considered dilutional and IVIG was not
interrupted. Although delivery was scheduled for week 38, the woman went into labour and the baby was born at week 37, weighing 2750g and
with Apgar 9 to 10, without petechiae or ecchymoses and a platelet count of 59,000/mm3. He remained in the neonatal ICU for close
monitoring. Intracranial and abdominal ultrasound scans were normal. On day 2, he had 99,000/mm3 platelets and was discharged on day 3,
asymptomatic with platelet count of 150,000/mm3. Platelet transfusions were not necessary. NAIT affects 1:1000 live births, and in severe
cases, evolves to ICH with severe neurological impairment in 10 to 22% of children, and 75% of bleeding occur antenatally.(4) Despite being
the most frequent cause of severe thrombocytopenia in fetuses and neonates, and the most frequent cause of ICH in the newborn,(4) it is
underdiagnosed in routine clinical practice, with only 37% of severe cases detected in the absence of antenatal screening.(2) Antibodies
against HPA-1a account for more than 80% of cases in Caucasians; anti-HPA-3a, −4a and −5a have also been reported.(1) Mothers have the rare
HPA-1b1b genotype, whereas the fetus inherit a HPA-1a allele from the father. NAIT is suspected in a fetus with intracranial bleeding on
ultrasound and neonates with bleeding or severe unexplained and/or isolated thrombocytopenia. The mother has normal platelet counts and no
history of autoimmune disease or drug-induced thrombocytopenia.(1–3) Testing for fetal and neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia (FNAIT)
should be performed in any neonate with unexplained thrombocytopenia <50.000/mm3, regardless of the presumed cause.(2) Diagnosis is made by
platelet genotyping showing HPA fetal-maternal incompatibility and detection of anti-HPA antibodies in the mother's serum.(1) There is a
tendency for non-invasive monitoring during pregnancy, considering that 1.3% of fetal death cases per procedure and 5.5% cases per affected
pregnancy were attributed to cordocentesis.(2,5–8) The predictive value of the quantitative MAIPA for neonatal thrombocytopenia was reported
by Bertrand et al.(9), in 2005, and results were confirmed by Killie et al., in 2008.(10) The exact role of sequential quantitative anti-HPA
measurements remains to be established, but antibody clearance along pregnancy seems to have a better prognosis.(11) The maternal treatment
of NAIT(2,4–8,11–14) is based on the outcome of the first affected child and is classified into: (a) standard risk: first child with
platelet >20.000/mm3 and no bleeding history; (b) high risk: platelet <20.000/mm3 or neonatal bleeding; (c) very high risk: fetal bleeding
between 28 and 36 weeks; and (d) extremely high risk: fetal bleeding before 28 weeks. Weekly IVIG infusions are the treatment mainstay,
varying in dose (1 to 2g/kg/week) and time to start (20 weeks or earlier). High-risk mothers receive higher IVIG doses and oral prednisone
0.5-1mg/kg, starting at 16 weeks for very high risk or 12 weeks for extremely high risk pregnancies.(4,6,12) C-section seems to be safer
than vaginal delivery, especially when the fetal platelet count is unknown.(2,5,6,14) HPA-matched platelet transfusions are indicated during
the first 24 hours of life if platelets <30.000/mm3 or if there are signs of bleeding.(5,15) IVIG alone is not recommended, as it takes 24
to 48 hours to be effective with risk of central nervous system (CNS) bleeding(5) HPA-1b1b plateletpheresis donors should be contacted to
donate close to the estimated date of delivery. Alternatively, the mother can donate platelets if feasible.(15) IVIG 1g/kg for 2 days can be
associated to platelet transfusions to the newborn in severe cases.(5,15) Neonatal alloimmune thrombocytopenia is a serious underdiagnosed
condition that affects the first child associated with significant morbidity. Close monitoring during pregnancy with ultrasound scans,
treatment with immunoglobulin IV and/or corticosteroids and HPA-matched platelets at delivery can provide proper medical support to this
condition and reduce the incidence of neurological sequelae in the newborn. Financial sources: none. We wish to thank Gerald Bertrand and
Dr. Cécile Kaplan for the technical support with quantitative monoclonal-specific antibody immobilization of platelet antigens and HPA DNA
control samples.
