A 35-year-old female was referred to our hospital with bilateral loss of vision of two days duration. She gave history of consumption of
about 150 ml of neem oil five days back. Examination revealed no perception of light in both eyes. Both pupils were dilated and sluggishly
reacting to light. Her fundus examination showed bilateral hyperemic, edematous discs and also edema extending along the superior and
inferior temporal vascular arcade. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed bilateral putaminal regions with altered signal,
hypointensities in T1-weighted images, hyperintensities on T2-weighted, images and hyperintense on Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery
(FLAIR) images suggestive of cytotoxic edema due to tissue hypoxia. Her vision improved to 20/200 in both eyes with treatment after two
months. This is the first case report of such nature in the literature to the best of our knowledge. Neem oil (also known as Margosa oil) is
a deep yellow oil with an unpleasant taste and smell. It is an extract of the seed of the Neem tree (Azadirachta indica A. Juss) a native
tree of India but now widely distributed throughout Indo-Malaysia. Consumption is usually accidental, rarely suicidal or may be due to nasal
instillation for common cold in children as practiced in southern parts of India. Even small doses of neem oil are known to cause severe
metabolic acidosis along with seizures which can be refractory with known late neurological sequelae. The diagnosis is based on patient
history and neuro-ophthalmological findings. We report a rare case of toxic optic neuropathy secondary to neem oil consumption associated
with neurological manifestations. A 35-year-old female patient presented with bilateral visual loss of two days duration (on 16.12.2009)
with history of consumption of about 150 ml neem oil five days back (12.12.2009) in an attempted suicide, for which she was taken to the
nearby government hospital. She was admitted and treated with induced vomiting after about 2-3 hours of consumption. Patient was
asymptomatic for about 48 h in the hospital. Later patient noticed sudden bilateral visual loss and was referred to us for further
ophthalmic evaluation. Ophthalmic examination revealed no perception of light in both eyes. Anterior segment examination revealed bilateral
6-mm, dilated and sluggishly reactive pupils. Rest of her anterior segment examination was normal. Her fundus examination showed bilateral,
hyperemic and edematous discs with extension of edema along the superior and inferior temporal arcuate fibers for about 2-3 disc diopters
from the disc margins. The veins around the disc were mildly dilated and tortuous [Fig. 1 and 2]. The rest of the vitreous, fundus
examination revealed no abnormal findings. Neurological examination showed exaggerated deep tendon reflexes and an extensor bilateral
plantar reflex. Right Eye Fundus picture showing disc edema, venous tortuosity with extension of edema along the superior and inferior
arcades for about 2-3 disc diopters from the disc margins Left Eye Fundus picture showing disc edema, venous tortuosity with extension of
edema along the superior and inferior temporal arcades for about 2-3 disc diopters from the disc margins Complete hemogram was within normal
limits, Venereal Disease Research Laboratory (VDRL ), HIV1 and 2 were non-reactive. A magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) scan showed bilateral
putaminal regions with altered signal, hypointensities in T1-weighted images, hyperintensities on T2-weighted images and hyperintense on
Fluid Attenuation Inversion Recovery (FLAIR) images suggestive of cytotoxic edema due to tissue hypoxia [Fig. 3 and 4]. Medical therapy was
initiated which included methyl prednisolone 1 g intravenously (IV) for three days followed by oral prednisolone 50 mg /day for 11 days
along with 1000 μg vitamin B12 (injection methyl cobalamin – 1000 μg intramuscularly) every five days for eight weeks. Bilateral putaminal
regions showed altered signal hypointensities in T1W images Hyperintensities on T2W images Patient did not show any visual improvement after
one week of treatment but pupillary reactions improved. During her subsequent follow-up after about 15 days her vision in both eyes improved
to counting fingers 1/2 meters and at one month follow-up vision was 20/200 in both eyes and pupillary reactions were normal in both eyes.
Her fundus examination showed reduced disc edema [Fig. 5 and 6] Right Eye Fundus picture showing reduced disc edema Left Eye Fundus picture
showing reduced disc edema At two months follow-up her vision remained 20/200 in both eyes and injection methyl cobalamin 1000 μg
intramuscular was continued. Neem oil, also known as Margosa oil is obtained from the neem plant (Azadirachta indica A. Juss). Neem oil is
extracted from oil seed kernels. It contains neutral oils such as palmitic and stearic acids. The active ingredients are terpenoids such as
azadirachtin, nimbin, picrin and sialin. It also contains aflatoxin, but in very low concentrations. Azadirachtin is attributed with the
pesticide action of neem oil. It is used as an insecticide for arthropod pests. Neem oil is used as a traditional medicine in India for
various diseases like headache, gastrointestinal disorders, as a male contraceptive, menstrual disorders, asthma etc. Neem oil poisoning
causes vomiting which occurs within minutes to hours following ingestion of the oil. Drowsiness and tachypnea with acidotic respiration
followed by recurrent generalized seizures are the other clinical features. The seizures are usually associated with loss of consciousness
and coma. In our case, patient had bilateral toxic optic neuropathy. Patient had consumed 150 ml of neem oil which had the following
contents: Neem oil kernel extract in solvent methanol containing 0.15%, Azadirachtin – 60%, Emulsifier-5%, treated Neem oil – 35%. No
specific antidote is available. Gastric lavage is not recommended. Treatment is primarily symptomatic. She had bilateral toxic optic
neuropathy with exaggerated deep tendon reflexes and extensor plantar reflex. MRI scan findings were suggestive of acute toxic
encephalopathy and it can be considered as a possible etiology for bilateral toxic optic neuropathy. We treated her with injection IV methyl
prednisolone 1 g per kg body weight for three days based on case reports on methanol poisoning. Source of Support: Nil. Conflict of
Interest: None declared.
