Recently, necrotizing fasciitis has been reported in patients treated with bevacizumab, usually secondary to wound healing complications,
gastrointestinal perforations, or fistula formation. The risk of invasive Haemophilus influenzae type b infection is significantly increased
in immunocompromised hosts. However, necrotizing fasciitis due to Haemophilus influenzae type b in a patient treated with combined
bevacizumab and chemotherapy has not been previously reported. A 59-year-old woman was admitted to the intensive care unit after sudden
onset of fever, chills, and right thigh pain. She received chemotherapy with fluorouracil, irinotecan, and bevacizumab for colon cancer
10 days prior to admission. The advancing erythematous margin and her worsening clinical condition prompted us to suspect necrotizing
fasciitis and consult the orthopedics department for a fascia biopsy and debridement. Surgical exploration revealed a murky dishwater-
colored pus exudate from the incision site and the lack of a shiny appearance of the fascia that also suggested necrotizing fasciitis. After
2 days, the final results of the blood and exudate cultures confirmed the presence of Haemophilus influenzae type b. A diagnosis of
necrotizing fasciitis due to Haemophilus influenzae type b was made. The patient required recurrent surgical debridement and drainage, but
she recovered from the septic shock. We report a case of necrotizing fasciitis due to Haemophilus influenzae type b in a patient without
injury and with rectal cancer treated with combined bevacizumab and chemotherapy. Physicians should consider invasive Haemophilus influenzae
type b disease in the presence of necrotizing fasciitis in patients treated with this combined treatment modality. Bevacizumab is an
antibody designed to inhibit vascular endothelial growth factor, which is involved in blood vessel formation, and used primarily in the
cancer field for the treatment of colorectal cancer to prevent the formation of blood vessels that feed tumors. Recently, necrotizing
fasciitis has been reported in patients treated with bevacizumab, including some fatal cases . However, necrotizing fasciitis usually
develops secondary to wound healing complications, gastrointestinal perforations, or fistula formation. Here, we report a case of
necrotizing fasciitis due to Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) in a patient without injury and with rectal cancer treated with combined
bevacizumab and chemotherapy. A 59-year-old woman was admitted to the intensive care unit after sudden onset of fever, chills, and right
thigh pain. She had undergone low anterior resection for colon cancer 2 years earlier. After local recurrence, she underwent radiation
therapy (30 Gy) for spinal metastasis followed by chemotherapy, which commenced 6 months prior to admission to the intensive care unit. She
received chemotherapy with fluorouracil, irinotecan, and bevacizumab 10 days prior to admission. She did not have a history of previous
injury or the presence of other risk factors for necrotizing fasciitis such as a decubitus ulcer, diabetes, or liver cirrhosis. Her
medications included a 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, which is an antiemetic, and a proton pump inhibitor; however, her medications did not
include non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs, immunosuppressive drugs, or corticosteroids. She was hypotensive, tachycardic, and tachypneic
in the emergency room. The results of the physical examination were normal except for erythema in her right thigh. She had no previous
injuries. Hemoglobin level was 118 g/L with a white blood cell count of 2.1 × 109 cells/L and a platelet count of 1.3 × 1011 cells/L. Blood
urea nitrogen was 18.9 mmol/L, creatinine was 318.2 μmol/L, and C-reactive protein was 3.8 × 106 μg/L. The results of other blood tests and
urinalysis were normal. Computed tomography of the chest, abdomen, and pelvis showed normal results. Septic shock was suspected and managed
accordingly with supportive measures, such as the use of a vasopressor and supplemental oxygen. Blood cultures were collected, and empirical
treatment with meropenem (1 g every 12 hours) and vancomycin (1 g daily) were initiated, adjusted to renal dysfunction. The advancing
erythematous margin and her worsening clinical condition prompted us to suspect necrotizing fasciitis and consult the orthopedics department
for a fascia biopsy and debridement. Surgical exploration revealed a murky dishwater-colored pus exudate from the incision site and the lack
of a shiny appearance of the fascia that also suggested necrotizing fasciitis. The biopsy of the frozen section showed acute necrotizing
suppurative inflammation, and extensive debridement was performed. Gram staining of the exudates from the infected site showed the presence
of gram-negative rods. On the basis of all of this information, we formally diagnosed the patient with necrotizing fasciitis. On the
following day, gram-negative rods were also isolated from the blood cultures. After 2 days, the final results of the blood and exudate
cultures confirmed the presence of β-lactamase-negative Hib that was susceptible to ampicillin, cefotaxime, ciprofloxacin, and imipenem. The
histopathological findings of the debrided tissue were compatible with a diagnosis of necrotizing fasciitis due to Hib. The patient required
recurrent surgical debridement and drainage, but she recovered from the septic shock. The treatment was changed to ampicillin, and she
received intravenous ampicillin for a total of 51 days because of residual intermuscular abscesses. She recovered completely and was
discharged from the hospital 65 days after admission. Necrotizing fasciitis did not recur; however, she died of metastatic colorectal cancer
6 months after discharge. Necrotizing fasciitis is a rare but life-threatening infection of the soft tissue that is characterized by rapidly
spreading necrosis of the superficial fascia and subcutaneous tissue. Immunocompromised and diabetic patients are at a higher risk of
developing necrotizing fasciitis . Although bevacizumab suppresses the immune system , chemotherapy administered concurrently with
bevacizumab is more likely to be responsible for immune suppression. This combined treatment also contributes to impaired wound healing.
Furthermore, one of the pathophysiologic mechanisms of necrotizing fasciitis is subcutaneous artery thrombosis and tissue ischemia, to which
bevacizumab can contribute . Therefore, the combined treatment modality of bevacizumab and chemotherapy is likely to place patients at an
increased risk of developing necrotizing fasciitis. Despite the fact that necrotizing fasciitis is a rare complication, affecting only 1 in
5000 bevacizumab users, physicians should bear in mind the risk of necrotizing fasciitis when prescribing bevacizumab. In a comprehensive
safety review conducted by the company Roche, 52 case reports of serious necrotizing fasciitis were identified that occurred between
November 1997 and September 2012 in patients treated with bevacizumab for cancer . The majority of the patients described in case reports
have had gastrointestinal perforations, fistula formation, or wound healing complications preceding the development of necrotizing fasciitis
. However, in the present case, the patient had no previous injury or risk factor for necrotizing fasciitis such as a decubitus ulcer,
diabetes, or liver cirrhosis; her recent chemotherapy was her primary risk for necrotizing fasciitis. These findings suggest a possible
association between necrotizing fasciitis and the recent combined treatment of chemotherapy and bevacizumab in the absence of a previous
injury. It is of particular interest that Hib caused the necrotizing fasciitis in the present case. Prior to routine Hib vaccination, Hib
was a well-known cause of invasive diseases, such as meningitis and pneumonia with bacteremia, in children younger than 2 years. However,
the incidence of invasive H. influenzae disease, especially among persons aged over 65 years, and invasive non-typable H. influenzae disease
has increased from 1996 to 2004 . The risk of invasive Hib infection in adults is significantly increased by multiple myeloma and chronic
renal failure . Other factors conferring increased risk for H. influenzae infection include underlying immunocompromising conditions such as
complement deficiency, hypogammaglobulinemia, sickle cell anemia, functional asplenia, malignancy, and human immunodeficiency virus
infection . Although the association between bevacizumab and invasive Hib infection remains unclear, we caution physicians to consider
invasive Hib disease in patients treated with the combination of bevacizumab and chemotherapy. A review of the current literature resulted
in only 4 reported cases of necrotizing fasciitis caused by Hib. The first reported case occurred in a 13-month-old infant , while the
second case occurred in an 81-year-old man with diabetes mellitus . A 64-year-old woman who developed necrotizing fasciitis of her chest
wall secondary to the epiglottitis represented the third case . In the fourth case, a 44-year-old man developed necrotizing fasciitis of the
right lower extremity after intramuscular injections of paracetamol in his right buttock . Including our case, all of the patients with
necrotizing fasciitis due to Hib made a full recovery. Hib merits additional consideration when deciding on appropriate, empiric
antimicrobial therapy as an adjunct to surgical intervention for necrotizing fasciitis, especially in immunocompromised patients treated
with combined bevacizumab and chemotherapy. We report a case of necrotizing fasciitis due to Hib in a patient without injury and with rectal
cancer treated with combined bevacizumab and chemotherapy. Physicians should consider invasive Hib disease in the presence of necrotizing
fasciitis in patients treated with this combined treatment modality. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication
of this case report. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. Hib: Haemophilus
influenzae type b. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. All authors have submitted the ICMJE Form for Disclosure of
Potential Conflicts of Interest. Conflicts that the editors consider relevant to the content of the manuscript have been disclosed. All
authors were involved in the clinical care of the patient and acquisition and interpretation of the data. TU drafted the manuscript. All
authors read and approved the final manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here:
http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2334/14/198/prepub
