Two recurrent cases of severe acute liver injury attributed to the use of a wild germander decoction, prepared with some variation in
traditional method has been reported. The aim of the present study was to correlate the hepatotoxic effect observed in patients who consumed
germander decoction with teucrin A levels. Antioxidant properties were analyzed to assess any possible differences between the decoction
used traditionally by the family (without negative consequences) and the decoction taken by the patients. Different types of germander
decoctions were prepared in the laboratory by simulating the same conditions for preparing the decoction by the patients and their family
members. The levels of teucrin A, the polyphenols and the antioxidant power were determined. One-way analysis of variance was used to test
for differences between the groups. The extract consumed by the patients had higher concentration of teucrin A, lower antioxidant activity
and lower content of polyphenols compared with the traditional decoction, revealing an inverse relationship between teucrin A content and
antioxidant capacity. These case reports emphasize that more information is needed on the safety and quality of these natural products.
Herbal products can be potent or lethal if used improperly. The plant can have both beneficial and toxic effects in relation to the many
constituents or to the dose utilized. Teucrium chamaedrys L. (Lamiaceae), known as germander, is a perennial herb (30-60 cm) native to
Europe and South West Asia, blooming in late spring and summer. The flowering aerial parts are traditionally used as a folk medicine for
dyspepsia, anorexia, nasal catarrh, chronic bronchitis, gout, rheumatoid arthritis, fever, uterine infections and to promote wound healing,
more recently germander is used to reduce body weight. Teucrium species are rich in neo-clerodane diterpenoids, which are accepted as
chemotaxonomic markers of these species. In addition, aerial parts of T. chamaedrys contain numerous other compound classes including
saponins, glycosides and flavonoids. Capsules containing germander, either alone or combined, are marketed as a weight-control supplements
and has been associated with hepatotoxicity as reported about thirty cases from France. Toxicological studies showed that one of the major
furano neo-clerodane diterpenoids, teucrin A, was implicated in the hepatotoxicity of germander. A possible mechanism of the germander
induced hepatotoxicity is: activation of cytochrome P450 (mainly 3A) into reactive metabolites (probably epoxides). The reactive
electrophilic metabolites stimulate apoptosis by decreasing thiols (i.e. by glutathione conjugate formation) and increasing intracellular
calcium. In a study by Druckova et al. observed that metabolic activation of teucrin A in rats results in extensive damage of numerous
hepatic proteins (involved in lipid, aminoacid and drug metabolism, mitochondrial and peroxisomal enzymes) by covalent modification. The
formation of reactive metabolites may also lead to immune reactions. Therefore, it is likely that germander-induced hepatotoxicity may be
due to direct and secondary immune reactions. Despite its toxicity, the use of germander preparations still continues. Recent studies have
highlighted the antioxidant activity of T. chamaedrys, which has shown significant free radical scavenger activity in vitro, thus suggesting
its possible use as a natural antioxidant and consequently as protection against damage from free radicals. We report two cases of a husband
and wife with recurrent severe acute liver injury attributed to the ingestion of a wild germander decoction. The preparation was taken for
two consecutive periods (2 months and 1 month respectively) in 1 year, as herbal medicine with detoxifying properties, in accordance with a
traditional family custom which had previously produced no adverse consequences. History suggested that the patients had introduced two
variations with respect to the family tradition: The germander harvest area and the preparation time of the decoction. Hence, a study to
identify whether these variations were responsible for the hepatotoxicity was undertaken. The present case is about a 65-year-old male
patient and a 64-year-old women patient were hospitalized in the S. Maria alle Scotte Hospital in Siena because of nausea, vomiting,
diarrhea, asthenia and with severe acute liver failure. The serum levels of alanine aminotransferase (ALT), aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
and γ-glutamyltranspeptidase (γ-GT), were 5 times higher than the normal value (N < 41 IU/l). Hepatitis serological markers, including anti-
hepatitis A immunoglobulin M (IgM), hepatitis B surface antigen, anti-hepatitis B IgM, anti-hepatitis C antibodies, anti-hepatitis E
immunoglobulin M and Epstein-Barr virus IgM, were negative. Ultrasound examination was performed and steatosis and hepatomegaly were
recognized. The patients had no other cause of liver injury and they denied any recent ingestion of known hepatotoxins, drugs, alcohol,
mushrooms or substances of abuse. After discharge from hospital, the patients followed a dietary regime provided by the hospital, that
excluded the administration of drugs. They were checked monthly and 2 months later the hepatic markers had returned to the normal values. At
6 months after the first medical emergency, the same patients were hospitalized again with the above reported symptoms and clinical data. On
accurate investigation the medical team discovered that the cause of the liver damage could be correlated to the use of the germander
preparation. The patients were monitored and the clinical course was favorable after dechallenge. After 2 months the markers for liver
damage ALT, AST and γ-GT had normalized. To evaluate whether the variations in germander harvest area and preparation of the decoction were
responsible for hepatoxicity, four germander decoctions were prepared in the laboratory, using two different samples of germander and
following the traditional method used by the patients’ family and the method used by the patients themselves. To verify if the germander
decoction was responsible for the hepatotoxic effect observed in these patients, the levels of teucrin A were measured by high-performance
liquid chromatography (HPLC) method. In addition, the antioxidant activity was analyzed and the total phenolic content was determined, to
assess any possible differences between the decoction used traditionally by the family and the decoction taken by the patients. Two
different samples of aerial flowering parts of T. chamaedrys L. (Lamiaceae) were collected during the blooming period (June). The first
sample was collected near Grosseto (Tuscany), in a pinewood not far from the sea, the same harvesting area used by the patients, the second
one was collected in the hills around Siena (Tuscany), in a wood of holm oaks, in the same area chosen for harvesting by the female
patient's mother. For each of these samples of T. chamaedrys four different lots in the same habitat were collected for each sample. The
identification of both samples of germander was performed and two voucher specimens (Siena - 687411, Siena - 687511) were deposited at the
Herbarium, Department of Life Sciences, University of Siena. After drying, the flowering tops were ground with a knife-mill and left in
boiling water for 5 min to produce a decoction (1 g/300 ml). It was then filtered using two different procedures: (1) Filtering after 10
min, in accordance with the family tradition; (2) filtering after 12 h as in cases of intoxication. Thus four extracts were prepared:
Extract A: by filtering, after 10 min, the germander collected in a wood of holm oaks (reproduced according to family tradition);Extract B:
by filtering, after 12 h, the germander collected in a wood of holm oaks;Extract C: by filtering, after 10 min, the germander collected in a
pinewood;Extract D: By filtering, after 12 h, the germander collected in a pinewood (reproduced according to the method used by the
patients). Extract A: by filtering, after 10 min, the germander collected in a wood of holm oaks (reproduced according to family tradition);
Extract B: by filtering, after 12 h, the germander collected in a wood of holm oaks; Extract C: by filtering, after 10 min, the germander
collected in a pinewood; Extract D: By filtering, after 12 h, the germander collected in a pinewood (reproduced according to the method used
by the patients). To evaluate the teucrin A content a reversed phase HPLC analysis was performed using a method described by Bosisio et al.
Teucrin A (purity 99%) used as a standard was purchased from Phytolab GmbH and Co. Extracts (A-D) were dissolved in water at concentrations
of 2.5 mg/ml and injected in triplicate. The HPLC analytical procedure was validated (in terms of recovery, precision and accuracy) and its
intra- and inter-day performance was established. The scavenging activity of the DPPH radical (Sigma-Aldrich) was measured in triplicate as
described by Ramadan et al. The capacity to scavenge the DPPH radical was expressed as scavenging effect (I %) at 0.5 mg/ml, the highest
concentration tested. The FRAP test assay was used to measure the total antioxidant power. The results of triplicate determinations were
expressed as μmol of FRAP (the FRAP value)/gram of extract. The amount of the total phenolics in the Teucrium extracts was determined, in
triplicate, with Folin-Ciocalteu reagent according to Koski et al. using Gallic acid (Sigma-Aldrich) as a standard. The results were
expressed in milligrams of Gallic acid equivalent (GAE)/gram of extract (mg GAE/gram of extract). Statistical analysis was performed using
SPSS version 17 for Windows software package (SPSS Inc, Chicago, IL, USA). Results are expressed as the mean ± standard error of twelve
determinations (performed in triplicate on each of the four lots). Levene's test was used to assess the homogeneity of the variance of the
groups. One-way analysis of variance was utilized to evaluate differences among the groups. The Tukey multiple comparison test was used
because the variances between the groups were always homogeneous. P <0.05 were considered to be statistically significant. Extracts C and D
showed statically significant high content of teucrin A when compared with extracts A and B (P < 0.001) [Table 1]. Moreover, there was an
inverse relationship between the content of teucrin A and the extraction time (P < 0.001 A vs. B; C vs. D). The concentration of teucrin A
in the flowering aerial parts of the T. chamaedrys collected in the hills around Siena, in a wood of holm oaks, was 0.138% as reported in
literature: 0.13% referred to aerial parts; whereas the content of teucrin A in the T. chamaedrys collected in the pinewood was about 3
times higher (0.366%). Content of teucrin A in extracts and in flowering aerial parts obtained by Teucrium chamaedrys L. harvested in a wood
of holm oaks and in a pinewood Data relative to in vitro antioxidant analysis are reported in Table 2. The antioxidant activity of extract A
was higher than D (P < 0.01 in DPPH) as also the contents of polyphenols (P < 0.01). Consequently extract A, derived from the T. chamaedrys
collected in a wood of holm oaks and prepared according to family tradition, had high antioxidant properties, while extract D, derived from
the T. chamaedrys collected in the pinewood and prepared as the patients themselves had done, had lower antioxidant activity. Inhibition
percentage (I %) values at 0.5 mg/ml obtained with DPPH test, FRAP values and polyphenol levels in Teucrium chamaedrys L. extracts A
positive correlation was observed between antioxidant activity of Teucrium extracts, evaluated with FRAP tests and polyphenol content. A
linear function [Figure 1] was adopted as model of regression (y = 5.61 + 5.728x; r = 0.77 with P < 0.001). In addition, an inverse
relationship between the teucrin A content of Teucrium extracts and antioxidant capacity was observed and a power function [Figure 2] was
adopted as model of regression because, unlike the linear model, this function assigns positive values of teucrin A for all values of
polyphenol content. The co-efficient of determination (R2) was used to evaluate the goodness of fit of model (R2 = 0.834 with P < 0.001).
Correlation between antioxidant activity (ferric reducing/ antioxidant power) and polyphenol content of Teucrium extracts. A linear function
was adopted as model of regression Relationship between levels of teucrin A and polyphenol content of Teucrium extracts. A power function
was adopted as model of regression A causal relationship between T. chamaedrys and these severe cases of acute liver failure is supported by
the exclusion of viral, autoimmune, or biliary diseases and the time link between the second administration of the herbal preparation and
onset of hepatitis; in effect germander readministration was followed by rehospitalization. It is known that hepatotoxicity generally occurs
after approximately 2 months of ingestion of the oral preparation, frequently decoction and consists in a non-specific hepatitis, which
usually has a benign course. Typical features include anorexia, nausea, abdominal pain and jaundice associated with a marked rise in serum
amino-transferases; recovery usually occurs within 6 weeks-6 months once ingestion of the germander decoction has stopped. In these case
reports, we observed analogies with case reports in literature: the preparation was taken orally over a long period (for 2 months the 1st
time and 1 month the 2nd time), the patients presented the same symptoms described in the literature, except jaundice Larrey et al. have
reported “a marked increase in serum aminotransferase levels 3-18 weeks after germander administration.” The germander decoction was
consumed as a detoxifying drink for many years, by the patient's mother without any adverse consequences This caused the patients to believe
that the herbal preparations was harmless of the harmlessness of this herbal preparation. There are, however, two important differences
between family tradition and the use by these two patients: plant collection and plant extraction. First, the aerial flowering parts of T.
chamaedrys L. had been collected in a different habitat with respect to the woman's mother: in a pinewood not far from the sea, instead of
in a wood of holm oaks on a hill. Secondly, the patients had not followed the family method of preparing the decoction; traditionally, the
family had made the decoction using boiling water for 5 min and then filtered after 10 min, while in this case, the users left the decoction
overnight and filtered the next morning, thus increasing the contact time between plant and water. Using HPLC analysis we demonstrated that
the different extractive methods (varied length of contact) is not decisive for toxic effect, since an inverse correlation occurs between
the content of teucrin A and the extraction time. Undoubtedly, the different climatic/ecological conditions in which the plants grow are
crucial and may affect the concentration of the chemical compounds and consequently the pharmacological/toxicological activities. These
differences influence also the antioxidant capacity; the decoction used by the patients (extract D) not only has more hepatotoxic substance
(teucrin A) but also had lower antioxidant activity and the lower polyphenol content, which probably results in a lower level of protection.
The correlation between the antioxidant activity and the hepatoprotective effect has been demonstrated for other species of Teucrium. This
study showed that the different environmental or geographic location of the plant harvest influenced the content of phytoconstituents in
decoction and consequently the pharmacological and toxicological properties. However, the non-traditional method of preparation had little
effect on the toxic properties of the decoction. Different environmental or geographic locations of the plant harvest can influence the
content of phytoconstituents and consequently the pharmacological and toxicological properties of traditional herbal medicines. Further
investigations are required to identify the precise toxic molecules in herbal medicines to predict and ensure the safety and quality of the
plant. This study was supported by University of Siena Grant. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: No
