Hypoglycemia secondary to ectopic insulin secretion of non-pancreatic tumors is rare. We describe a middle aged woman with recurrent
hypoglycemia. On evaluation, she was detected to have hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and right sided renal mass lesion. 68Ga-Dotanoc and
99mTc-HYNICTOC scans confirmed the intrarenal mass to be of neuroendocrine origin. Right nephrectomy was done and it turned out to be an
insulin secreting neuroendocrine tumour. Neuroendocrine nature of this tumour was further confirmed by ultra-structural examination. Her
hypoglycemia did not recur after resection of this tumour. Few cases of ectopic insulin secretion have been reported though some are not
proven convincingly. This case addresses all the issues raised in previous case reports and proves by clinical, laboratory, functional
imaging and immunohistochemical analysis that ectopic origin of insulin by non-pancreatic tumors does occur. To our knowledge, this is the
first reported case of ectopic insulinoma arising from the kidney. The most common cause of endogenous hypoglycemia is hyperinsulinemia
secondary to islet cell tumours of pancreas. Hypoglycemia due to non-pancreatic tumours is infrequently reported. Most of these non-
pancreatic tumours secrete factors with insulin like activity. Ectopic insulin secretion has been reported in few cases but not convincingly
proved. We report a case of ectopic insulin secretion by neuroendocrine tumour (NET) of kidney. The ectopic origin of the tumour is
demonstrated by functional imaging (68Ga-Dotanoc and 99mTc-HYNICTOC), and by immunohistochemistry for insulin staining. We also extensively
reviewed literature for similar cases of ectopic insulin secreting tumours published previously. This 44-year- old female was admitted for
evaluation of recurrent hypoglycemic episodes of 3 years duration. She had complains of forgetfulness, altered behaviour, headache,
palpitation, sweating, and giddiness. Most of her symptoms occurred early in the morning and these symptoms improved spontaneously in 15
minutes. She had consulted various physicians including neurologist and psychiatrist and had been diagnosed as pseudo-seizure, panic attacks
or conversion disorder. One year back, she consulted endocrinologist and was diagnosed to have hypoglycemia and hyperinsulinemia. For
suspecting insulinoma, she underwent CT abdomen which showed a right renal mass lesion and possibility of renal cell carcinoma was
entertained. She was advised surgery for renal tumour. However, patient did not agree for surgery. There were no complains of hematuria,
urinary frequency, urgency, burning micturition, diarrhoea or flushing episodes. She was not on antidiabetic treatment and was not
hypertensive. For last 2 months, patient was having recurrent hypoglycemic seizures and came to this hospital. After admission, she had
persisted hypoglycemia and required continuous infusion of 10% Dextrose at the rate of 75 – 100 ml/hr in addition to 1-2 hourly feeds. Her
hemogram, electrolytes, renal and liver functions were normal. HbA1c was 4.5%. Hormonal assay showed thyroxine (T4) 5.67 (5.1 – 14.1
mcg/dl), TSH 4.42 (0.27 – 4.2 mIU/ml), Insulin like Growth Factor- I(IGF-1) - 165.90 (62 – 205 ng/ml), growth hormone 1.20 ng/ml and
cortisol 15.78 mcg/dl. Samples collected during hypoglycemia showed a serum insulin of 134 (2.6 – 24.9 μU/ml) and C-peptide of 13.35 (1.1 –
4.4) ng/ml. During another symptomatic hypoglycemia, she had plasma glucose of 44 mg/dl while her plasma insulin and C-peptide were 49.81
miu/ml and 9.36 ng/ml respectively confirming endogenous hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. She underwent high resolution radiological and
functional imaging for localisation of insulinoma. Both multi-phase CT abdomen (Figure 1) and contrast enhanced MRI abdomen demonstrated a
mass lesion arising from upper- mid pole of right kidney (Figure 1a, 1b, 1c). No lesion was identified in the pancreas (Figure 1d).
Endoscopic ultrasound also did not demonstrate any pancreatic lesion. 68Gallium DOTANOC scan (Figure 2a-c) and 99mTc-HYNICTOC (Figure 2d,e)
did not demonstrate any uptake in the pancreas but both demonstrated intense uptake in the mass lesion indicating a NET. She underwent
abdominal exploration and right nephrectomy. Post-operative period was uneventful and she became euglycemic without need for dextrose
infusion. Her glucose values were maintained between 120 – 160 mg/dl thus confirming the right sided mass near renal hilum to be the source
of ectopic insulin secretion. CT scan. Unenhanced CT axial image (1a) showing an isodense mass (arrow) to renal parenchyma which show
enhancement in arterial phase image (1b) but lesser than the renal cortex. The enhancement continued till the venous phase (1c). Arterial
phase image (1d) taken at the level of pancreas (arrow) did not show any arterial enhancing lesion. Nuclear scans. 3 mCi of 68Ga-Dotanoc
PET/CT scan demonstrates somatostatin receptor (SSTR) expressing an intrarenal mass (2a) that corresponds to NCCT mass (2b). There was no
abnormal SSTR expressing tumour in pancreas (2c), or any other abdominal structure. Similar observation was initially made from 15 mCi of
99mTc-HYNICTOC SPECT/CT scanning (2d, 2e). Gross examination: Grossly the kidney measured 10×7×6 cm and weighed 350 gram. A solid well
circumscribed yellowish tumour, measuring 7×6×5 cm, was identified in the upper pole of kidney (Figure 3a). There was no capsule breach or
renal sinus infiltration. Rest of the renal parenchyma and pelvicalyceal system were unremarkable. Areas of necrosis or hemorrhage were not
identified. Histopathology. Gross photomicrograph showing a yellow colored well circumscribed tumour in the upper pole of the kidney (3a).
Photomicrographs showing diffuse and trabecular arrangement of tumour cells (3b, 3c & 3d) with marked desmoplastic reaction at places (3e).
(3b, 3c & 3d: H&E × 400 each, 3e: H&E × 200). Tumour cells are immunoreactive to chromogranin, synaptophysin and insulin (3f, 3g, 3h × 400
each). MIB 1 LI is 2% (d3i × 200). Electron micrographs showing numerous membrane bound electron dense neurosecretory granules, mitochondria
and prominent rough endoplasmic reticulum (3j × 2550; 3k × 9000 original magnification). Microscopic Finding: Microscopically, the tumor was
composed of solid nests anastomosing cords and trabeculae of low columnar cells separated by a vascular stroma [Figures 3b-d]. The cellular
outlines were indistinct with centrally placed oval nuclei, fine chromatin and inconspicuous nucleoli. The cytoplasm was eosinophilic,
finely granular and moderate in amount. At places there were intense desmoplasia around the tumor cells (Figure 3e). Mitotic rate was 1 per
10 high power fields (hpf). Areas of tumour necrosis were not identified. Foci of perineural, lymphatic and vascular invasion were not seen.
No intra or extra-cellular mucin was identified. Immunohistochemical staining revealed diffuse and intense staining for pancytokeratin,
synaptophysin, chromogranin A, neuron specific enolase (NSE) and insulin (Figure 3f, 3g, 3h). MIB I labeling index was 2% (Figure 3i). The
lymph nodes dissected from the specimen show metastasis (2/3). Ultrastructural examination revealed numerous electron dense, membrane bound
round to oval shaped granules of variable diameter in the cytoplasm [Figure 3j, 3k]. A narrow peripheral lighter zone was present in some of
the granules. Based on the above features; the diagnosis neuroendocrine tumour grade G1; pathological stage IV was entertained. Serum
chromogranin A measured in the samples collected before surgery and stored in -40 degree was 2126.1 (N < 90.1 ng/ml). No metastasis was
detected. Our patient got discharged in stable condition on 10th post-operative day. The patient is asymptomatic, euglycemic and disease
free at last follow-up at 3 months. Islet cell tumours of pancreas produce insulin which cause hypoglycemia. Hypoglycemia due to non-
pancreatic tumours is infrequently reported and poorly understood. Various mechanisms were proposed are: (a) insulin or insulin-like
activity produced by the tumour, (b) decreased gluconeogenesis, (c) disruption of glucagon metabolism, and (d) increased utilization of
glucose by the tumour. The non-suppressible Insulin like Activity (NSILA) has been purposed to be secondary to Insulin like Growth Factor-2.
The non-islet cell tumours which commonly cause hypoglycaemia are of mesenchymal, epithelial or hematopoietic cell lines. Fibrosarcomas,
mesotheliomas, leiomyosarcomas, and hemangiopericytomas are the most frequent types of tumours which cause hypoglycemia. Hepatoma, gastric,
pancreatic, exocrine gland and lung carcinomas are epithelial cancers with frequent hypoglycemic potential. Mesenchymal and epithelial
tumors, which generally present as large masses, are located in the mediastinum or the abdomen. These tumours are known to cause
hypoglycemia via secretion of IGF-2 that leads to stimulation of insulin receptors . In a series of 78 cases of non-islet-cell tumour,
hypoglycemia (NICTH) due to IGF-2 production, hepatocellular carcinoma and gastric carcinoma were the common causes . Ectopic insulin
secreting tumours are rare, comprising only 1% to 2% of all insulinomas and are commonly located in the peripancreatic or periduodenal
region where most heterotopic pancreatic tissue is located. Ectopic insulin producing tumours located away from pancreatic beds are
infrequently reported in literature. Only few cases were described in literature due to hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and non-pancreatic
tumour and these tumors are described in Table 1. Insulin secreting extra-pancreatic tumors reported in literature aIncludes evidences other
than biochemical documentation of hyperinsulinemia in critical samples(collected at the time of hypoglycemia). bLiver functions are
reportedly normal in this patient. c70% of the liver was replaced by tumor at autopsy in this patient. dThis patient developed hypoglycemia
after left hepatectomy. HPE – Histo-pathological examination, EM – Electron Microscopy. The patient under discussion had presented with
right renal mass lesion and hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia. We initially considered the possibility of incidentally detected right renal cell
carcinoma in patient with insulinoma. In our Institute, we have both PET and SPECT imaging agents for octreoscan available for the
localisation of insulinoma. Somatostain receptor scintigraphy (SRS) is an established functional imaging method for patients with NETs. The
sensitivity of SRS for insulinoma is 50 – 60% . We did both 68Ga-Dotanoc and 99mTc-HYNICTOC scans for the localisation of insulinoma which
unexpectedly revealed increased uptake in the right renal mass lesion itself confirming it to be a NET. To the best of our knowledge, this
is the first case of ectopic insulin secretion confirmed in vivo by 68Ga-Dotanoc and 99mTc-HYNICTOC scan. Further, the neuroendocrine and
insulin secreting nature of the tumour was confirmed ex vivo by histopathological examination, immunohistochemistry and ultra-structural
examination. Paraganglioma and pheochromoctyoma were also reported to cause hyperinsulinemic hypoglycemia and also show tracer uptake by SRS
and are immunoreactive for chromogranin A and syanptophysin. Though the mass lesion was arising from upper pole of right kidney, it was
intra-renal and hisopathological examination was suggestive of NET. NETs are neoplasms that arise from cells of dispersed neuroendocrine
system. Although there are many kinds of NETs but they are treated as a group of tumours as these neoplasms share common features such as
histology, immunoreactivity for neuroendocrine markers (chromogranin A, synaptophysin, neuron specific enolase), presence of neurosecretory
granules, and secretion of biogenic amines and polypeptide hormones. Neuroendocrine tumours arising from pancreas are classified by the
hormone most commonly secreted. Neuroendocrine tumours arising from the intestine, respiratory system and rest of the body were known as
carcinoids but under the recent nomenclature they are all know as neuroendocrine neoplasm (NEN) of tumour. Primary carcinoid tumours of
kidney are extremely rare and around 90 cases has been reported in literature . None of the reported cases including two cases were reported
from our institute previously , were insulin secreting. The cell of origin of renal carcinoid is unclear as neuroendocrine cells are not
normally found in adult renal parenchyma. Carcinoid tumours of kidney are usually asymptomatic. In symptomatic cases, these tumours present
with abdominal pain or abdominal mass with hematuria or fever. Evidence of carcinoid syndrome with serotonin-related flushing, generalized
edema and diarrhoea, and occasional elevation of urine 5-hydroxyindoleaceticacid are uncommon and are seen in less than 10% of cases . Our
patient did not have these symptoms prior to presentation, although she had flushing, edema and blanching of the skin intraoperatively.
Rarely, these tumours may present with neuroendocrine syndromes like cushing syndrome, vipoma, or glucagonoma . Our case presented as
insulinoma. Macroscopically, renal carcinoid tumours are usually solitary and unilateral. They are well circumscribed with a lobulated and
bulging appearance. The cut surface the tumour is yellow-tan, or red brown as also observed in the case under discussion. Renal carcinoids
exhibit histological features that are typical of carcinoids at other sites. Primary carcinoid tumors as well as metastasis possess high
affinity receptors for somatostatin in 87% of cases . Localization of gastrointestinal tract carcinoid tumours and pancreatic endocrine
tumors has been achieved by the use of radiolabeled octreotide, a synthetic and slowly degraded somatostatin analogue that has a high
affinity for somatostatin receptors. Use of indium-111 pentetreotide scanning in the diagnosis of carcinoid tumors had been reported . In
the present case, functional imaging with 68Ga-Dotanoc and 99mTc-HYNICTOC was done for the localisation of insulinoma. Both showed uptake in
the right renal mass lesion and no uptake in pancreas (Figure 2a-e). All available modalities for diagnosis of carcinoid tumors were
employed namely Electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, both PET and SPECT octreotide scan along with conventional radiographic imaging
techniques were used in preoperative diagnosis this tumour. Prognosis of NET depends upon the grade and stage of the tumour. Although the
grade of the tumour was low, however stage was high as there was metastasis in the regional lymph nodes. There was no recurrence of
hypoglycaemia on till this time of reporting, however, long-term close follow up is needed for the malignant behaviour. Ectopic insulin
secreting extra-pancreatic tumours are rare. Confirmation of the source of hyperinsulinemia is often difficult. To our knowledge, this is
the first case of extra-pancreatic insulin secreting neuroendocrine tumour fully characterised by biochemical, radiological & functional
imaging, histopathology and immunohistochemistry. Our patient had successful post-operative outcome and maintained euglycaemia after three
months of follow-up. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this Case report and any accompanying images.
A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor of this journal. SRS: Somatostain receptor scintigraphy; NEN:
Neuroendocrine neoplasm; NICTH: Non-islet-cell tumour hypoglycemia; NET: Neuroendocrine tumor. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. 1) RS, JVP, DA, GMA have managed the case clinically with the help of DCJ (radiology), BCS (Nuclear Medicine), SMC
(pathology) and SA (Uro-Surgery) for diagnosis and management. DCJ has done and reported the CT scans, BCS has done and reported the Nuclear
scans (68Ga-Dotanoc PET/CT and 99mTc-HYNICTOC SPECT/CT scans), SMC has done the ultrastructural examination and immunostaining while SA has
performed the definitive surgery which was curative in this case. 2) RS And DA have been involved in drafting the manuscript and JVP in
revising it critically for important intellectual content. 3) All authors have given final approval of the version to be published. The pre-
publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1472-6823/14/36/prepub
