Ocular sebaceous carcinoma is an uncommon, aggressive ocular neoplasm with potential for regional and distant metastasis. A 77-year-old
woman was found to have a solitary pulmonary lesion 6 years after the initial treatment of sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid. Video-assisted
lung wedge resection of an undetermined pulmonary nodule was carried out successfully. Microscopically, the tumor showed foamy cytoplasm and
atypical nuclei, consistent with metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma. This is the first case report of resected solitary pulmonary
metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma. Pulmonary resection is a good option for the treatment and diagnosis of metastatic eyelid
sebaceous carcinoma. Sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid is a relatively rare malignant tumor, and accounts for less than 1% of all eyelid
tumors . As well as being a rare tumor, sebaceous carcinoma can mimic other benign inflammatory and malignant processes, thus errors or
delays in diagnosis are not unusual . Although local management strategies for this tumor have previously been described , very few reports
have focused on the patterns of metastasis of this tumor and the treatment strategies for such metastases . Here, we report a case of
solitary lung metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma, and discuss the clinical implication of surgery for a solitary pulmonary metastasis
from sebaceous carcinoma. A 77-year-old woman underwent left upper lid resection in April 2006 for sebaceous carcinoma of the eyelid. The
surgical margin was negative for cancer cells. In January 2008, she had developed a recurrence in the left upper eyelid, and underwent
radiotherapy with a total dose of 57.6 Gy of proton beam therapy followed by orbital exenteration of the left eye . In July 2012, positron
emission tomography–computed tomography (PET-CT) revealed a solitary pulmonary nodule 0.5 cm in size in the right upper lobe of the
patient’s lung, which had increased to 1.1 cm by September 2013 (Figure 1A). PET-CT revealed a focus of increased uptake in that nodule,
with a standardized uptake value of 3.7 (Figure 1B). There was no evidence of other metastatic disease on PET-CT scans. In September 2013,
the patient underwent video-assisted thoracoscopic wedge resection of the pulmonary nodule. Frozen sections using oil red O stain revealed
accentuation of lipid and presences of foamy cytoplasm in tumor cells, which was positive for lipid staining (Figure 2). Permanent histology
demonstrated tumor cells with foamy cytoplasm and atypical nuclei, accompanying numerous lipid globules within the cytoplasm (Figure 3),
consistent with metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma. At the last follow-up, 7 months after resection, there was no loco-regional
recurrence or distant metastasis of the tumor after surgery. Computed tomography (CT) and positron emission tomography of the tumors. (A)
Chest CT showed a 1.1 cm nodule in the anterior segment of the right upper lobe (arrow). (B) PET-CT showed fluorodeoxyglucose accumulation
with a Standardized uptake value (SUV) of 3.7 (arrowhead). Accentuation of lipid by staining. The lipid globules have a red color (frozen
sections, oil red O, magnification × 100). Sebaceous carcinoma cells. Foamy and frothy cytoplasm and atypical nuclei, occurred with numerous
lipid globules within the cytoplasm of the tumors cells, seen as clear spaces (hematoxylin and eosin, magnification × 100). Sebaceous
carcinoma of the eyelid refers to a group of carcinomas derived from sebaceous gland cells that occur in the ocular adnexa. It can be
invasive in the eyelid and conjunctiva, and can metastasize to regional lymph nodes and distant organs . Treatment strategies for primary
eyelid sebaceous carcinoma are surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy . Distant hematogenous metastases to the lung, liver, and brain have
a mortality rate as high as 30% . However, few reports demonstrated the surgical treatment of metastatic eyelid sebaceous carcinoma.
Standard treatment strategy for pulmonary metastatic sebaceous carcinoma has not yet been established because of the limited number of
cases. Chemotherapy regimens in existing reports are largely based on the combination regimens commonly used in the treatment of other forms
of poorly differentiated carcinomas of the head and neck region . Husain et al. reported combined chemotherapy of carboplatin and docetaxel
for the patient who had multiple lung and lymph node metastases, which resulted in a 30% decrease in tumor size, but the efficacy of this
regimen for sebaceous carcinoma has not yet been fully evaluated . Radiotherapy for primary eyelid sebaceous carcinoma was described in
several reports; however, there have been no reports describing radiotherapy for pulmonary metastatic eyelid sebaceous carcinoma . Resection
of pulmonary metastases in patients with sebaceous carcinoma is controversial. However, our case suggests that a surgical approach to lung
metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma could prolong survival in certain subgroups of patients, namely, those with a limited number of
metastatic nodules or a significant disease-free interval. The possibility of metastasis from eyelid sebaceous carcinoma or primary lung
cancer cannot be predicted only on the basis of radiologic findings or disease-free interval. In the present case, we could successfully
differentiate solitary lung metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma from primary lung cancer using oil red O stain, which stains lipid has
a red color, on frozen sections. We report a rare case of solitary lung metastasis of eyelid sebaceous carcinoma, which was successfully
resected and differentiated from primary lung cancer using oil red O stain on frozen sections. Pulmonary resection is a good option for the
treatment and diagnosis of metastatic eyelid sebaceous carcinoma. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for the publication
of this case presentation and accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for the review by the Editor-in-Chief of this
journal. CT: Computed tomography; FDG: Fluorodeoxyglucose; PET: Positron emission tomography. The authors declare that they have no
competing interests. KK and TO wrote the manuscript. KK, TO, KA, and IK performed surgery. YH and KE carried out the pathological
examination. MK and TG were involved in the final editing. All authors approved the final manuscript.
