Multiple autoimmune syndrome is a rare condition, described by Humbert and Dupond in 1988. It is defined by the association of at least 3
autoimmune diseases in the same patient. Vitiligo is the most common skin condition in this syndrome. This article presents the case of a
31-year-old male with vitiligo, alopecia areata, Crohn's disease, psoriasis vulgaris and oral lichen planus. The rarity of this case is
highlighted by the coexistence of four autoimmune skin diseases in association with Crohn's disease, never described in the literature. A
31-year-old male presented oral lichen planus and alopecia areata of the barb and legs that appeared 6 months before. He had also been
suffering from acrofacial vitiligo since the age of 18, Crohn's disease for 4 years and psoriasis vulgaris for 2 years (Figures 1 and 2).
His family history was positive for vitiligo (mother and brother) but negative for psoriasis and other autoimmune diseases. Analytically, no
changes were detected (HCV negative, thyroid function and B12 were in the normal range). (A)&(C) Vitiligo of the face, (B) vitiligo and
psoriasis of the hands, (C) alopecia areata of the barb and vitiligo, (D) lichen planus (a), (c-d): Psoriasis patches on the elbow and the
legs, (c) Koebner phenomenon with linear psoriasis patch on the abdomen , (c-d): alopecia areata of the lower limbs Multiple autoimmune
syndrome (MAS) is a rare condition, described by Humbert and Dupond in 1988 and defined by the association of at least three autoimmune
diseases in the same patient.1-5 Its pathogenesis is still unknown.1 About 25 percent of patients with autoimmune diseases have a tendency
to develop additional autoimmune disorders.5 MAS can be classified into three groups according to the prevalence of their association with
one another: Type 1 comprises myasthenia gravis, thymoma, polymyositis and giant cell myocarditis; Type 2 includes Sjögren's syndrome,
rheumatoid arthritis, primary biliary cirrhosis, scleroderma and autoimmune thyroid disease and Type 3 groups together autoimmune thyroid
disease, myasthenia and/or thymoma, Sjögren's syndrome, pernicious anemia, idiopathic thrombocytopenic purpura, Addison's disease, insulin-
dependent diabetes, vitiligo, autoimmune hemolytic anemia, systemic lupus erythematosus and dermatitis herpetiformis.2,3,4,5 Other
conditions can be found in various combinations. This classification helps in detecting a new condition liable to appear in a patient with
two previous autoimmune diseases.1-5 Multiple autoantibodies can be found and some of the specific mono- or polyclonal autoantibodies may be
multiple organ reactive.6 Psoriatic patients were found to have higher rates of Inflammatory Bowel Disease.7 The association between
psoriasis and vitiligo is also well-documented, with a prevalence of 2.07%-3.06%.8 In multiple autoimmune syndrome, patients often have at
least one dermatological condition, usually vitiligo or alopecia areata1,2 and the former is most frequently involved.9 A common mechanism
with T lymphocytes as a Th1 immune mechanism seems prevalent in all of these conditions. As vitiligo was the first autoimmune disorder to
appear in our patient, it could provide a basis for analysis of the pathophysiological mechanisms of autoimmunity. There is also a potential
mechanism for association of three of these skin diseases, known as the Koebner phenomenon.8 The rarity of this case is highlighted by the
coexistence of four autoimmune dermatoses in association with Crohn's disease, never described in the literature. Only the coexistence of
three dermatoses (lichen planus, psoriasis, and vitiligo) is reported. The occurrence of multiple autoimmune phenomena indicates the need
for continued monitoring for the development of new autoimmune disease in predisposed patients. Conflict of interest: None Financial
funding: None How to cite this article: Santos G, Sousa LE. Do you know this syndrome? Multiple Autoimmune Syndrome. An Bras Dermatol.
2014;89(2):361-2. Work performed in the Dermatology and Venereology Department - Hospital Santo António dos Capuchos - Centro Hospitalar de
Lisboa Central, EPE - Lisbon, Portugal.
