Ganglioneuromas are rare benign tumors arising from the neural crest tissue and are most commonly located in the posterior mediastinum and
retroperitoneum; they are rarely found in the adrenal gland. This tumor is usually asymptomatic and in the majority of cases is detected
incidentally. Although the characteristics of adrenal ganglioneuroma on computerized tomography and magnetic resonance imaging have been
well described, the exact diagnosis is difficult. Histopathological examination is currently the mainstay of diagnosis. Ganglioneuromas have
a very good prognosis with surgical removal. We report the case of a male patient with an incidentally identified adrenal ganglioneuroma
with high standardized uptake values in a positron emission tomography scan. An 18-year-old Turkish male patient with no previous
comorbidities was admitted to our hospital with lower-quadrant pain. He had no significant past medical or surgical history. A physical
examination did not reveal any signs and the results of routine laboratory tests were all within the normal ranges. Our patient underwent
computed tomography of his abdomen, which showed a relatively homogenous left adrenal tumor measuring 5.2×4.3×7.1cm. On a positron emission
tomography scan, the left adrenal gland disclosed a standardized uptake value of 4.1. Our patient underwent an exploratory laparotomy with
left adrenalectomy without any related complications. Ganglioneuroma may sometimes be similar to other adrenal malignancies. Careful
evaluation with endocrine tests and imaging procedures is necessary to provide an accurate diagnosis. Definitive diagnosis can be made by
histological examination. The prognosis is very good with surgical removal. Ganglioneuroma (GN) is a rare benign tumor arising from the
neural crest tissue and most commonly located in the posterior mediastinum and retroperitoneum. GN’s are rarely found in the adrenal gland .
This tumor is usually asymptomatic and, in the majority of cases, detected incidentally. Now that imaging procedures such as ultrasonography
and computerized tomography (CT) are used more frequently, this unexpected and exceptional incidentaloma lesion can be detected more easily
. The prevalence of adrenal incidentaloma is 0.2% in young patients, 3% in populations past their fifth decade, and as high as 7% in those
past their seventh decade . Although adrenal GN’s are usually hormonally inactive, some of them secrete catecholamines. Symptoms like
hypertension, diarrhea and virilization may develop as a result of mixed hormone secretion; in such case the diagnosis will be
controversial. Tumors that originate from the ganglion cells include GN (benign), ganglioneuroblastoma (intermediate differentiation) and
neuroblastoma (highly malignant lesion). The imaging characteristics of adrenal GN are variable and some are very similar to other adrenal
tumors such as adrenocortical carcinoma (ACC) and pheochromocytoma, a fact that is crucial in the clinic . Therefore, it is generally
challenging to obtain a precise differential diagnosis of adrenal GN prior to surgery. A definitive diagnosis can be made by histological
examination. In this case report, we present the case of an 18-year-old male patient with an adrenal tumor. The tumor was found incidentally
and was diagnosed as an adrenal GN during an evaluation of his right lower-quadrant pain. An 18-year-old Turkish male patient with no
previous comorbidities was admitted to our hospital with right lower-quadrant pain. He had no significant past medical or surgical history.
A physical examination revealed no signs and the results of routine laboratory tests were all found to be within the normal ranges. Because
of his symptoms, an abdominal ultrasound was performed and showed a heterogeneous, well-defined mass measuring 5×7cm at his left adrenal
gland. Our patient was referred to the endocrinology department where he underwent abdominal CT, which showing a relatively homogenous left
adrenal tumor measuring 5.2×4.3×7.1cm with faint calcification and well-defined edges. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) showed a solid mass
measuring 5×4×7cm arising from his left adrenal gland. The tumor was slightly hypointense on T1A-weighted MRI, whereas it was slightly
hyperintense on T2A-weighted MRI. After an intravenous injection of gadolinium, the mass showed a progressive, heterogeneous and delayed
enhancement. An endocrine workup, including urine catecholamine and cortisol levels and a 1mg overnight dexamethasone suppression test, was
normal. Because of the tumor size, we performed an 18F-2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose-positron emission tomography (PET) scan to diagnose the
malignant lesion. His left adrenal gland showed a standardized uptake value (SUV) of 4.1 (Figure 1). With these findings, it was not
possible to conclude whether the adrenal tumor was benign or malignant. Positron emission tomography and computerized tomography scans of
the patient with a left adrenal tumor. 18F-2-fluoro-deoxy-D-glucose-positron emission tomography scans show a standard uptake value of 4.1
for a left adrenal mass measuring 5.2×4.3×7.1cm. (arrow shows the mass on computed tomography). For this reason, exploratory laparotomy was
performed to allow a definite diagnosis. A left adrenalectomy was performed, with no related complication. The surgical specimen was an
elastic tumor with a slightly lobular edge, measuring 4.4×5.1×7.3cm (Figure 2). The cut surface of the tumor was light brown, covered by a
thin capsule without any evidence of hemorrhage or necrosis. On microscopy, the section showed irregular proliferation of spindle-shaped
cells and scattered mature ganglionic cells with dystrophic changes and focal lymphocytic infiltration. No evidence was found for the
malignancy. An immunohistochemical examination showed positive staining of the ganglion and Schwann cells for S-100, vimentin and
synaptophysin (Figure 3). The tumor was diagnosed as a left adrenal GN. Our patient experienced no complications during his postoperative
course. No recurrence was detected during the one-year follow-up visits. Macroscopic view of the specimen. Surgical specimen was an elastic
tumor with a slightly lobular edge, measuring 4.4×5.1×7.3cm. Immunohistochemical examination of the mass. (a) Positive staining for
vimentin, ×200. (b) Positive staining for synaptophysin, ×200. (c) Pattern of nerve bundles in the neoplasm with vesicular nucleus and huge
ganglion cells including wide cytoplasm. Hematoxylin and eosin staining, ×40. (d) Ganglion cell group in detail. Hematoxylin and eosin
staining, ×100. GN is a rare, differentiated and benign tumor arising from primordial neural crest cells that form the sympathetic nervous
system . On histology, it is composed of mature Schwann cells and ganglion cells with fibrous stroma . GN is a member of a group of
neurogenic tumors group that includes ganglioblastoma and neuroblastoma. It differs from other neurogenic tumors in its benign potential .
These non-functional and non-symptomatic masses are usually detected incidentally and are referred to as incidentaloma. Because of the
improvements in CT and ultrasonography procedures, the number of incidentalomas found has recently increased. The pathology of adrenal
incidentalomas may vary from a simple benign cyst or lipoma to adrenal carcinoma. The differential diagnosis of an adrenal mass comprises a
long list including adenoma, myelolipoma, cyst, lipoma, pheochromocytoma, adrenal cancer, metastatic cancer, hyperplasia and tuberculosis .
Functioning tumors and carcinomas are not generally discovered incidentally because their diagnosis is based on specific signs and symptoms.
It should be noted that some functional tumors may present a subclinical form without any specific symptoms and some malignant tumors may
look like benign lesions in radiological evaluations. The diagnosis of an adrenal tumor as a pheochromocytoma depends on the ability to
determine its catecholamine content by biochemical or histochemical methods. Although extra-adrenal tumors have also been designated as
pheochromocytomas by some authors, the preferred terminology for such neoplasms is ‘extra-adrenal paraganglioma’. Terms such as ‘composite
pheochromocytomas’ and ‘compound tumor of the adrenal medulla’ have been used to describe tumors containing pheochromocytoma together with
foci of neuroblastoma, ganglioneuroblastoma, GN or malignant peripheral nerve sheath tumor . Literature shows that about 71% of composite
pheochromocytoma or paraganglioma coexist with GN. Like ordinary pheochromocytomas and paragangliomas, most cases of composite
pheochromocytomas or paragangliomas were functional, with increased levels of catecholamines or corticotropin-releasing hormone . Although
GN is generally considered to occur more frequently in young people, some recent studies have shown that it may also be seen between the
ages 40 and 50 . GN is most commonly found in the posterior mediastinum and retroperitoneum, and the involvement of the adrenal gland is
relatively rare (21%) . Adrenal GN is usually regarded as having silent hormonal functions and therefore can be asymptomatic. Occasionally,
composite tumors with pheochromocytoma are seen and they, rarely, can secrete cortisol and androgen . Additionally, Geoerger et al. reported
that up to 30% of patients with GN had elevated plasma and urinary catecholamine levels but that patients were rarely found to have symptoms
of catecholamine excess . By contrast, Koch et al. reported the case of a patient with a GN that was positive for vasoactive intestinal
peptide, which is the product of ganglion cells . Patients with vasoactive intestinal peptide-positive tumors such as GN and neuroblastomas
may not have any symptoms or signs of vasoactive intestinal peptide secretion . GN can also produce and secrete other hormones, such as
testosterone, indicating the pluripotency of its precursor cell. In our patient, his tumor was hormonally inactive and asymptomatic . GN is
a benign neoplasm that originates from neural crest cells of sympathetic ganglia or adrenal medulla. The macroscopic characteristics of
adrenal GN are an encapsulated mass with a firm consistency and a solid, homogeneous, grayish-white cut surface. Histopathological
examination shows mature ganglion cells and Schwann cells among a fibrous stroma. Using microscopy they can be classified in two main
groups: mature and maturing. The mature type is composed of mature Schwann cells, ganglion cells and perineurial cells, whereas the maturing
type consists of cells with different maturation levels, ranging from mature cells to neuroblasts with a similar stroma. According to
immunohistochemical analysis, GN are characterized by reactivity for S-100, vimentin, synaptophysin and neuronal markers . In our patient, a
final pathological examination confirmed the diagnosis. Although the imaging characteristic of adrenal GN on CT and MRI have been well
described, the precise diagnosis of adrenal GN using radiological evaluation prior to surgery is difficult. Qing et al. reported that the
misdiagnosis rate of adrenal GN on CT and MRI before surgery is 64.7% . Adrenal GN is described as a well-circumscribed tumor with lobular
shape and low attenuation. In the literature, intratumoral calcification has been determined in 0% to 29% of the cases . On MRI, adrenal GN
shows homogenously low or intermediate signal intensity in T1-weighted images and heterogeneous slightly high signal intensity on
T2-weighted images . For a tumor size larger than 5cm, heterogeneity and calcification may suggest malignancy . In our patient, because the
size and heterogeneity of the mass made us suspect malignancy, we preferred to perform a PET scan prior to the surgery. PET scans can help
complete the picture obtained by CT and MRI when making a differential diagnosis between adrenal GN and ACC or metastasis. One study
reported that all cases of ACC had a SUV of 3.0 or higher, and that the sensitivity and specificity to distinguish ACC from adenoma were
100% and 98%, respectively . In another review of four patients with adrenal GN, the SUVs were between 1.5 and 2.9 . The SUV in our case was
4.1, which also suggested ACC. A PET scan is one of the most helpful modalities to differentiate malignancy and adenoma. However, in rare
cases it may still mislead the physicians. Even though a lesion size greater than 4.5cm seems to be a strong predictor of malignancy, this
is not correctly confirmed by histologic evaluations. In our patient, although his tumor was larger than 6cm and the SUV level on PET was
above than 3.0, pathology confirmed a benign tumor. Recent studies recommended that non-secretary adrenal incidentalomas larger than 6cm or
with suspicious features of malignancy on imagining procedures should be treated by adrenalectomy . There is no medical treatment for such
tumors. GN, although benign, can grow aggressively. Patients treated surgically for a benign neurogenic tumor have an excellent prognosis.
Papavramidis et al. reported that adrenal GN should be resected by adrenalectomy, whereas retroperitoneal GN can be resected without
adrenalectomy . The role of laparoscopic adrenalectomy in patients with large adrenal lesions or potential malignancy remains controversial.
The reduced hospital stay and morbidity have resulted in laparoscopic adrenalectomy becoming the procedure of choice for the surgical
removal of a vast majority of small sized (<6cm) adrenal lesions . The prognosis for an adrenal GN following surgical resection is good
without the need for additional treatment. A few cases of recurrence have been reported. Long-term follow-up is recommended. An adrenal GN
is a rare, hormonally silent benign tumor. GN can sometimes resemble other adrenal malignancies. Careful evaluation by endocrine tests and
imaging procedures is necessary for an accurate diagnosis. A definitive diagnosis can be made by histological examination. The prognosis is
very good with surgical removal. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient for publication of this care report and any
accompanying images. A copy of the written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. ACC: adrenal cortical
carcinoma; CT: computer tomography; GN: ganglioneuroma; MRI: magnetic resonance imaging; PET: positron emission tomography; SUV: standard
uptake value. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. MA and BK took care of patient and wrote the initial draft. BK and
GA operated on the patient. TA performed the pathologic evaluation of the specimen. BK, GA and FO edited the manuscript and performed the
literature review. All authors read and approved the final manuscript. We thank Prof. Servet Karahan and Irmak Bircan for discussion and
suggestions about the diagnosis.
