Hay-Wells syndrome or AEC (Ankyloblepharon, Ectodermal dysplasia and Cleft lip and palate syndrome) is a rare ectodermal disorder. The
treatment is aimed to prevent clinical complications. We describe the case of a four-month old male patient with erosions on the scalp,
trunk and arms, trachyonychia, deformity of the ears, micropenis, cleft palate, decreased eyebrow and eyelash hairs, in addition to
antecedents of surgical correction of ankyloblepharon. The importance of the correct diagnosis is emphasized, besides the investigation of
the associated diseases, treatment of complications and genetic counseling of the parents. A four-month old male patient, born from non-
consanguineous parents, coming from the countryside of São Paulo, was referred to our clinic due to chronic diarrhea, protein-energy
malnutrition and skin lesions. At admission, he presented exulcerations covered with honey-colored hematic crusts on the anterior chest,
upper limbs, dorsal area, face and especially on the scalp. The patient also had a cleft palate, deformity of the ears, decreased amount of
eyelashes and eyebrows, besides erythematous papules on lower limbs, micropenis, dystrophy on all nails and personal history of surgery for
ankyloblepharon (Figures 1-3). Skin biopsy result suggested epidermolysis bullosa. Exulcerations covered with honey-colored hematic crusts
mainly on the scalp, chest, and upper limbs, besides right-ear deformity Ungual dystrophy in hands and feet Given the clinical
manifestations we diagnosed Hay-Wells Syndrome. Foam dressings (Mepilex ®) on the scalp and topical antibiotics in areas with exulcerations
and exudation were instituted. Hay-Wells syndrome is a rare syndrome caused by a specific subtype of mutations in p63 gene, which encodes a
transcription factor involved in embryonic ectodermal development.1 At least six syndromes caused by p63 mutations are recognized: Hay-Wells
syndrome (AEC), ectrodactyly ectodermal dysplasia clefting syndrome (EEC), Rapp-Hodgkin syndrome (now considered synonymous with AEC
syndrome), limb mammary syndrome (LMS), acro-dermato-ungual-lacrimal-tooth syndrome (ADULT) and ectrodactyly syndrome(Splithand/Split-foot
malformation).2 Changes are evident at birth and characterized by ectodermal abnormalities of the skin, teeth, hair and nails, associated
with ankyloblepharon, and cleft palate and/or lip.3 Over 90% of all affected infants will present erythrodermia and superficial erosions,
involving the scalp. Abnormal granulation tissue is common, with colonization and recurrent bacterial infections, besides decrease in body
hair, malformed external ears and recurrent otitis media. Nails may be normal or appear thick, hiperconvex, absent or dystrophic. It is not
possible to differentiate a sporadic mutation from germinal mosaicism in parents, thus there is a risk that future children will be
affected.4 Clinical features are not specific and erythrodermia with desquamation and exulcerations in the postnatal period can lead to
misdiagnosis of epidermolysis bullosa, as occurred in this case.5 Therapy should be multidisciplinary and focused on ankyloblepharon and
oral cleft corrections, management of infections, in addition to local care with appropriate dressings and gentle removal of scales and
crusts. Treatment of exulcerated lesions is key to improve the quality of life of patients, alleviating pain, accelerating healing and
preventing recurrent episodes of bacterial colonization and infection. In this sense, we chose to use a semi-occlusive dressing of the foam
class. These dressings can be cut out in the exact shape of the wound and act by a combination of exudate absorption and moisture loss
through evaporation. On the other hand, they maintain thermal insulation and a moist environment. These dressings can be changed every four
days. The prognosis is good, with improvement of skin lesions according to age, however it is necessary to provide genetic counseling for
the parents.5 Conflict of Interests: None. Financial Support: None. How to cite this article: Tonolli VM, Stolf HO, Tonello CS, Pires RB,
Abbade LPF. Do you know this syndrome? Hay-Wells syndrome. An Bras Dermatol. 2014;89(2):363-4. Work performed at the Dermatology and
Radiology Department at Botucatu Medical School - "Júlio de Mesquita Filho" Paulista State University (FMBUNESP) - Botucatu (SP), Brazil.
Detail of genital region showing micropenis
