Letter to the Editor. Sir, – A unique case of Potocki Schaffer syndrome (PSS) was reported previously , but at that time the diagnosis could
not be genetically confirmed. Here, we delineate more detailed neuropathological findings, present a detailed list of deleted genes
confirmed by array comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH), and discuss possible genotype/phenotype relations in this patient. In short, in
addition to obligate exostoses (EXT) and parietal foramen (FPP), the patient also suffered from severe intellectual disability (ID). Motor
development was also retarded with documented regression of motor function at the age of 3. After puberty, athetotic movements and seizures
developed. In later life, he suffered from recurrent respiratory tract infections, anemia, thrombocytopenia, and finally generalized edema.
He never walked alone, he was non-verbal and unable to perform activities of daily living. He manifested craniofacial anomalies (CFA)
including a high and broad forehead, brachycephaly, a long narrow pointed nose, strabismus, thin palpebral fissures, the absence of
eyebrows, large dysplastic low set ears, and a hypoplastic mandible (Figure 1A). At various hospital admissions, obesity, cryptorchidism,
over stretchable joints, contractures, osteoporosis, hip dysplasia, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy were noted. Shortly before death, a
cranial computerized tomography (CCT) scan at the age of 33 demonstrated, in addition to micrencephaly, severe brain atrophy with
hydrocephalus e vacuo, a large cavum Vergae, and choroid plexus arachnoid cyst in the occipital horn of the left side ventricle as well as
hyperostosis frontalis (Figure 1B). These findings were also confirmed by autopsy on coronary slices of formalin-fixed brain sections
(Figure 1C). Detailed histomorphological study of FPP revealed associated lipomatous tissue in the center (Figure 1D). Bony rims of FPP
demonstrated dense predominantly lamellar bone. Despite rather large defects histomorphologically, FPP demonstrated remarkable preservation
of bony lamellae, representing extreme thinning rather than true loss of bone (not shown). The hyperostosis frontalis spared the area of the
sagittal sinus (Figure 1E). Histomorphologically, the bone tissue was predominantly composed of lamellar bone, and the bone marrow contained
fat tissue and hematopoietic cells (Figure 1F), and osteoclasts were infrequent and only observed with CD68 immunohistochemistry (Figure 1F
inset). In the occipital horn of the left ventricle, an arachnoid cyst of the choroid plexus was found (Figure 1G). Histology revealed large
cysts lined by arachnoid cells (Figure 1H). The surrounding tissue contained macrophages and psammoma bodies. At the surface, little pre-
existing choroid plexus was preserved. In the right ventricle, a choroid plexus cholesteatoma was found in the occipital horn (Figure 1I).
Histology showed a typical cholesteatoma with numerous cholesterol crystal clefts, macrophages, multinuclear giant cells of foreign body
type, and siderophages in the fibrous stroma as well as some psammoma bodies (Figure 1J). At autopsy, the detailed neuropathologic
examination of the micrencephalic brain revealed evidence of two separate diseases. First, a disturbance of mass growth of neurons with
micrencephaly, periventricular nodular heterotopias, a small degree of cortical dysplasia of the cerebellum, sometimes grouped nodular
heterotopias, and, not mentioned in the previous report, single ectopic ganglion cells were scattered in the subcortical white matter of the
cerebral hemispheres. The second central nervous system (CNS) disease included symmetric accumulations of macrophages at certain sites in
the white matter and cortex as described earlier . These findings resembled a metabolic storage disease and fit well with the clinically
described decline of motor function. For the array CGH, DNA was extracted from formalin fixed and paraffin embedded brain tissue of the
patient. In short, an Agilent 244K human genome oligonucleotide CGH microarray (G4411B) was used for array CGH analysis following the
manufacturer’s instructions. Images were captured by an Agilent scanner at the resolution of 2 µm and quantified using Feature Extraction
software v9.0 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA). CGH analytics software v3.4 (Agilent Technologies, Palo Alto, CA, USA) was
subsequently used for data normalization, quality evaluation, and data visualization. Copy number variants (CNV) were called using the ADM-2
(Aberration Detection Method 2) algorithm. A minimum of five probes was required to meet the size cut-off for a CNV. The average inter-probe
spacing is ~ 8.9 Kb, thus the average CNV detection sensitivity is ~ 45 Kb. This study revealed an 11.9 Mb deletion at 11p between
38,824,655 and 50,638,770 (hg18). The karyotype was confirmed as del(11)(p11.12p12). An OMIM database search revealed more than 50 annotated
genes in this region (Table 1). Included are ALX4, which explains FPP, EXT2 accounting for multiple exostoses, and the MYBPC3 gene involved
in hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM) of the patient. Thus, not only the PSS was confirmed, but also that the patient is the first to be
described with documented hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM). Diagnosis of HCM during his lifetime was probably possible because he is the
oldest one so far reported with PSS permitting development of a cardiomyopathy. Furthermore, all genes postulated to be deleted in the first
report were validated in addition to others . Besides FPP and EXT, for which the genes ALX4 and EXT2 are well established, osteoporosis and
hyperostosis frontalis were additional features observed in this patient. The simultaneous occurrence of bone loss, such as osteoporosis and
FPP, and gain of bone material at other sites, i.e., EXT and hyperostosis frontalis, is quite remarkable. A possible explanation could be
related to selective vulnerability/susceptibility of different bones at different sites and different gene expression status. Different
types of ossification or osteogenesis of bones, i.e., intramembranous vs. enchondral ossification, might explain these differences. The
parietal bones ossify intramembranously from ossification centers that appear during the 8th and 9th weeks of fetal life. From the
literature, it is known that there is a size reduction of FPP with advancing age (mechanical or disclosure type defect), but there can also
be a more prominent intracranial phenotype in consecutive generations . Indeed, the patient described here is the first one with PSS with
detailed pathologic macroscopic and microscopic findings. The more detailed histomorphological findings of FPP described here reveal that
the true bony defect resulted from extreme thinning of the parietal bone. Because there are no vessels or any other structures entering or
exiting the cranial vault at this site, the terms “hereditary bi-parietal diminished/delayed ossification”, “parietal bone hypoplasia”, or
“thinning of the parietal bone” might actually better characterize the underlying pathology. The origin of the lipomatous tissue at this
site remains obscure, but a malformative genesis appears most likely. As described in our previous report, osteoporosis might be associated
with ACP2 . A candidate gene for hyperostosis frontalis would be SPI1 as failure to express the gene product might preclude development of
osteoclasts, leading to arrested bone resorption and osteopetrosis . Indeed, our detailed histomorphological search of osteoclasts in the
area of hyperostosis frontalis revealed relatively few small osteoclasts that were only detectable by means of immunohistochemistry.
Hyperplasia of calvarial bones was also described as a CCT finding by Wuyts et al. . The candidate region for intellectual disability (ID)
in PSS was previously localized to 11p11.2 between D11S1361 and D11S1344, which is the same region postulated for craniofacial abnormalities
(CFA) [5, 6]. PHF21A was identified after the candidate gene region was narrowed to 1.1 Mb by deletion mapping and after PHF21A was found to
be disrupted in 3 unrelated balanced translocation patients with ID and craniofacial anomalies . Furthermore, the work of Wuyts and
colleagues points to a possible additional locus in the region telomeric to EXT2 . Apart from PHF21A responsible for ID and CFA , several
other candidate genes for both phenotypes include PEX16 and ACP2, whereas ID alone could be related to SLC35C1, MDK, AMBRA1, ARHGAP1, MADD,
or FOLH1. Multiple loci for ID are further supported by the phenotype. Two different diseases, a CNS malformation and a metabolic disease,
imply two different genes for ID. The brain malformations including micrencephaly, ventriculomegaly i.e., hydrocephalus e vacuo, cavum
Vergae, nodular heterotopias, and cerebellar cortical dysplasia, which is now supplemented by scattered ectopic ganglion cells, are
obviously due to disturbed growth of neurons. In the previous report , two candidate genes were identified: SLC35C1 and MDK. As delineated
in Table 1, there are now some additional candidate genes expressed in the brain that are involved in apoptosis, migration, or neural
development. These additional genes include API5, AMBRA1, ARHGAP1, and MADD. To date, no other PSS patient with an additional metabolic
storage disease has been described. Also, regression of motor function was not clinically documented in other reported PSS patients. Thus,
this phenotype might constitute a new and separate syndrome. The candidate gene for metabolic disease is ACP2, which constitutes a separate
ID locus because it is located in a centromeric direction from the generally postulated ID locus in PSS between D11S1361 and D11S1344. For
the first time, the detailed macroscopic and microscopic findings of a choroid plexus cholesteatoma and choroid plexus arachnoid cyst of a
PSS patient are reported. The cholesteatoma might be a sequelae due to high amounts of fatty acids. Genes with influence on fatty acid
metabolism include HSD17B12, MAPK8IP1, NR1H3 and FOLH1, all of which might also be responsible for obesity and consequent morbidities. A
choroid plexus cyst seems to be a recurrent finding of PSS as it has been described in 1 patient (PSS12) in the series of Wakui et al. and
in a recent series in 2 of 6 patients studied with magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) . Despite several imaging studies, patients with nodular
heterotopias have not been reported previously [4, 5, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. CT might not provide sufficient resolution, but MRI might be able
to delineate these lesions. In conclusion, the previously described unique clinical description of a patient with PSS was confirmed by array
CGH. This male is the oldest PSS patient described so far, the only singular individual with hypertrophic cardiomyopathy linked to deletion
of MYBPC3, and the first autopsied with detailed neuropathologic studies. The unambiguous presence of two different CNS diseases suggests
that there are at least two loci or genes for intellectual disability in PSS. This assumption is also supported by the clinical course of
the patient with early intellectual disability and later regression and development of athetotic movements and seizures. Arachnoid cysts of
the choroid plexus are recurrent findings of PSS. Detailed histomorphological studies of the FPP revealed extreme thinning and hypoplasia of
the parietal bone resembling hereditary bi-parietal diminished/delayed ossification rather than true foramina of the parietal bone. We thank
the family of the person whose details are described here for their permission to perform an autopsy, publish the findings, and providing
photographs of the patient; B. Kramann Institute for Radiodiagnostics, University of the Saarland, Homburg Saar, Germany, is gratefully
acknowledged for providing the CCT. Funded by grant from NIH GM061354 (CCM). The authors declare no conflict of interest. Table 1.Genes
involved in sequence of their physical position retrieved from: www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/omim/gene (accessed in March
2013).Gene/OMIMNamePhenotype or function: questionable (?), hypothetical (°) or likely (*) role in PSS LRRC4C/608817 Leucine-rich repeat-
containing protein 4C Promotes outgrowth of thalamocortical axons? API5/609774 Apoptosis inhibitor 5Expression prevents apoptosis? TTC17
Tetratricopeptide repeat domain 17Unknown? HSD17B12/609574 17-beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase XIIFatty acid elongation? ALKBH3/610603
AlkB, E. coli, homolog of,3Repair of single-stranded DNA lesions? ACCS/608405 1-aminocyclopropane-1-carboxylate synthaseCatalyzes the
deamination of L-vinylglycine?EXT2/608210 Exostosin 2 Loss of activity causes hereditary multiple osteochondroma (exostoses)* p ALX4/605420
Aristaless-like 4, mouse, homolog of Deletion or mutation results in foramina parietalia permagna* p , polydactyly° CD82/600623 CD 82
antigen, formerly: KAI1Metastasis suppressor gene, activation of T-cells? TSPAN18 Tetraspanin 18 isoform 1Unknown? TP53I11 Tumor protein
p53-induced proteinUnknown? PRDM11 PR domain containing 11Unknown? SYT13/607716 Synaptotagmin 13Vesicular traffic, exocytosis, and
secretion, neurotransmitter release? CHST1/603797 Carbohydrate sulfotransferase1Corneal transparency, macular corneal dystrophy?
SLC35C1/605881 Solute carrier family 35, member C1, formerly: FUCT1Congenital disorder of glycosylation type IIc with immunodeficiency°p and
severe mental and growth retardation°p, brain malformations°p, seizures°p, hypotonia°p, recurrent infections°p, bleeding disorder°p
CRY2/603732 Cryptochrome 2 Regulator of circadian feedback loop? MAPK8IP1/604641 Mitogen-activated protein kinase 8-interacting protein
1Non-insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus°p, adipositas°p, CNS damage°p, genitourinary abnormalities°p PEX16/603360 Peroxisome Biogenesis
Factor 16Zellweger syndrome, peroxisomal disorder – candidate? for craniofacial anomalies°p, mental and growth retardation°p, hypotonia°p,
seizures°p GYLTL1B/609709 Glycosyltransferase-like 1BUnknown?PHF21A/608325 PHD finger protein 21A Repression of neuron-specific genes -
causative for intellectual disability and craniofacial anomalies* p CREB3L1 CAMP responsive element binding protein 3-like 1Transcription
factor; acts during endoplasmic reticulum stress by activating unfolded protein response target genes? DGKZ/601441 Diacylglycerol kinase,
zetaT-cell regulation? MDK/162096 Midkine, formerly NEGF2Angiogenesis, cell growth, and cell migration – candidate for brain malformation°p,
mental retardation°p, seizures°p CHRM4/118495 Cholinergic receptor, muscarinic, 4 Unknown? AMBRA1/611359 Activating molecule in beclin
1-regulated autophagyNeural development – candidate for brain malformation with nodular heterotopias°p HARBI1/615086 Harbinger transposase
derived 1Transposase-derived protein that may have nuclease activity (potential). Does not have transposase activity? ATG13/615088
Autophagy-related protein 13Unknown? ARHGAP1/602732 Rho GTPase-activating protein 1Cell migration – candidate for brain malformation with
nodular heterotopias°p ZNF408 Zinc finger protein 408May be involved in transcriptional regulation? F2/176930 Coagulation factor IIHypo-,
dys-, or hyper-prothrombinemia, thromboses, hemorrhages; bleeding disorder°p CKAP5/611142 Cytoskeleton-associated protein 5Microtubule
organization? LRP4/604270 Low density lipoprotein receptor-related protein 4Sclerosteosis 2, brachydactyly or syndactyly. Associated with
Cenani-Lenz syndactyly syndrome and Mulefoot disease? C11orf49 Chromosome 11 open reading frame 49Interacts with uranyl acetate?
ARFGAP2/606908 ADP-ribosylation factor GTPase-activating protein 2Unknown? PACSIN3/606513 Protein kinase C and casein kinase substrate in
neurons 3Vesicle formation and transport? DDB2/600811 DNA damage-binding protein 2Repair of DNA damage induced by UV radiation; xeroderma
pigmentosum groupe E? ACP2/171650 Acid phosphatase 2, lysosomalLysosomal storage°, mental and growth retardation °p, seizures°p,
hypotonia°p, osteoporosis°p, hyperostosis frontalis°p, craniofacial dysostosis°p, bleeding disorder°p, edemas°p NR1H3/602423 Nuclear
receptor subfamily 1, group H, member 3Lipid homeostasis, cholesterol accumulation in peripheral tissues, adipositas°p, cardiovascular
disease, reduced inflammation or macrophage function. MADD/603584 MAP kinase-activating death domainPrevents apoptotic signaling – candidate
for brain malformation with nodular heterotopias°p MYBPC3/600958 Myosin-bindig protein C, cardiac Cardiomyopathy*p SPI1/165170 Spleen focus
forming virus proviral integration oncogene SPI1, aka PU.1Transcription factor of hematopoietic cells, arrested bone resorption and
osteopetrosis, hyperostosis frontalis°p SLC39A13/608735 Solute carrier family 39 (zinc transporter), member 13Skeletal and dental
abnormalities. Ehlers-Danlos syndrome-like spondylocheirodysplasia? PSMC3/186852 Proteasome 26S subunit, ATPase, 3Tat-mediated
transcriptional activation? RAPSN/601592 Receptor-associated protein of the synapse, 43-KDMyasthenia, fetal akinesia syndrome? CUGBP1/601074
CUG triplet repeat, RNA-binding protein 1RNA-binding protein implicated in the regulation of several post-transcriptional events; pre-mRNA
alternative splicing; mRNA translation and stability? PTPMT1/609538 Protein-tyrosine phosphatase, mitochondrial, 1Protein phosphatase;
specifically mediates dephosphorylation of mitochondrial proteins, thereby playing an essential role in ATP production? KBTBD4 Kelch repeat
and BTB (POZ) domain containing 4Interacts with acetaminophen? NDUFS3/603846 NADH-ubiquinone oxido-reductase Fe-S protein 3Complex I,
mitochondrial respiratory chain defect; Leigh syndrome? FAM180B Family with sequence similarity 180, member BUnknown? C1QTNF4/614911
Complement C1q and tumor necrosis factor related protein 4Unknown? MTCH2/613221 Mitochondrial carrier homolog 2Mitochondrial protein? AGBL2
ATP/GTP binding protein-like 2Cytoplasmic metallocarboxypeptidase; may play a role in regulation of microtubuli organization? FNBP4/615265
Formin binding protein 4Binds FMN1. Interacts with the Arg/Gly-rich-flanked Pro-rich of KHDRBS1/SAM68? NUP160/607614 Nucleoporin,
160-KDMediation of RNA export from the nucleus? PTPRJ/600925 Protein-tyrosin phosphatase, receptor-type, JSusceptibility to (colorectal)
cancer? OR4B1, OR4X2, OR4X1, OR4S1, OR4C3, OR4C45, OR4A47 Olfactory receptor, family 4Interact with odorant molecules in the nose, to
initiate a neuronal response that triggers the perception of a smell? FOLH1/600934 Folate hydrolase 1Impaired intestinal absorption of
dietary folates with consequent hyperhomocysteinemia with increased risk for cardiovascular disease – adipositas°p, neural tube defects, and
cognitive deficits°p; glutamate excitotoxicity. Top to bottom equals telomere to centromere direction; psymptoms and signs present in the
patient described here. Top to bottom equals telomere to centromere direction; psymptoms and signs present in the patient described here.
