A healthy 40-year-old man, restrained in the front passenger seat, suffered visually disabling blunt ocular trauma following spontaneous
release of the passenger side air-bag module, during vehicular deceleration, without an automobile crash. Though the driver-side airbag was
also released, the driver was unharmed. The passenger suffered bilateral hyphema, bilateral vitreous hemorrhage and suspected posterior
scleral rupture in the left eye and also had an eyebrow laceration, from impact with the dashboard panel covering the air-bag module, which
was detached by the force of airbag deployment. This is the first reported case from West Africa and the first case in which part of the
airbag module detached to cause additional trauma. This report adds to the growing burden of evidence world-wide, for a review of the safety
aspects of the automobile airbag. This case clearly illustrates that although airbags reduce mortality, they carry a high risk of ocular
morbidity, even with seat belt restraint. The use of airbags to provide a cushioning effect in the event of a collision was first researched
in the 1950s, approval for widespread commercial installation of airbags in passenger vehicles was given in the late 1980s and by the late
1990s, they became a regular safety feature in almost all cars, in aircrafts and even on the space shuttle.1 Airbags reduce fatalities in a
crash by 28-50%.234 The risk of death and serious injuries, from airbag deployment modules was first recognized in the early 1990s when
reports showed that certain groups of patients including small children, short statured women and persons seated in close proximity to a
rapidly inflating airbag during the early phase of deployment, were vulnerable.25 Mechanical and chemical eye injuries have also been
reported.23456 The majority of airbag-related eye injuries, appear to be of mild to moderate severity and are often unilateral.24 However,
bilateral severe eye injuries have also been reported with poor long-term visual outcomes.7 This case reports a visually devastating outcome
of airbag-related ocular injury. A healthy 40-year-old male passenger seated in the front seat presented with a 6-h history of sudden
bilateral vision loss following impact with the airbag module, which had suddenly deployed as the vehicle was decelerating. While the driver
remained unharmed, the patient sustained bilateral severe blunt ocular trauma. He had been wearing his seatbelt, but was not wearing any
eyewear. He had been sleeping until the impact of the airbag woke him. At presentation, visual acuity was no light perception (NLP) in the
right eye and light perception with accurate light projection on the left. He had bilateral periorbital edema and mechanical ptosis [Figure
1] with an oblique laceration of the right brow measuring 4 mm. The orbital walls were intact. However, the right conjunctiva was injected
with marked chemosis inferiorly, while there was left subconjunctival hemorrhage inferiorly and temporally (posterior limit seen). Both
corneas were intact. There was a blackball hyphema in the right anterior chamber obscuring further view [Figure 2] and 30% hyphema with
clots in the left eye [Figure 3]. The left pupil was round, mid-dilated and unreactive and the lens was clear. However, there was no view of
the fundus in either eye. B-scan ultrasonography confirmed bilateral vitreous hemorrhage. Marked bilateral periorbital edema, facial
abrasions, right brow laceration (covered), right subconjunctival hemorrhage and chemosis at presentation Marked lid edema, chemosis and
subconjunctival hemorrhage, with black ball hyphema in the right eye Hyphema clots and periorbital swelling of the left eye He had right
brow laceration repair with bilateral anterior chamber paracentesis and irrigation. The sclera underlying the subconjunctival hemorrhage in
the right eye was also explored to identify and repair any scleral laceration, but none was found as far as the equator. Post-operatively,
he received topical steroids, cycloplegics and prophylactic antibiotics. On the 10th day post-operatively, he remained blind with NLP in the
right eye and could barely read 6/60 on the Snellen chart after refraction in the left eye. Examination of the posterior segment remained
obscured by a dark reflex in the right eye and revealed commotio retinae on the left. He was discharged and is undergoing counseling and
rehabilitation through the out-patient clinic. At his last follow-up visit, vision remained NLP in the right eye and 6/60 in the left eye.
The airbag module is a complex engineering system consisting of an inflatable bag, a trigger system, a crash sensor and compressed
expandable gases including sodium azide, potassium nitrate, sodium dioxide and nitrogen.1248 The airbag system is delicately designed to
ensure that it rapidly inflates at a rate of approximately 100-200 mph within a period of 30-50 ms, when the sensor detects a deceleration
greater than 12-15 mph/s. However, spontaneous deployment has been reported at speeds below the deceleration threshold.1289 There are two
main mechanisms of air bag related eye injuries. Mechanical forces may injure the face and eye directly or indirectly through the propulsion
of hard objects, causing blunt or penetrating eye injury.2 This patient reported that the dashboard cover of the airbag module; was detached
by the force of deployment and had hit his right eyebrow (causing the brow laceration). The other mechanism responsible for airbag related
eye injury is chemical injury. Thermal burns to the cornea, lids and face occur as a result of heated gases released by the chemical
reaction converting sodium azide to nitrogen gas within the bag. Pearlman et al.2 reviewed 127 eye injuries in 101 patients with airbag
related trauma and reported corneal injuries in 57 patients (21.6%) while hyphema was the second most common injury in 45 cases (17%). Of
the 57 patients with corneal injury, 9 (3.4% of the total number of cases) had chemical keratitis.2 Thus, mechanical trauma is by far the
more common mechanism. Though airbags reportedly cause only 3% of all automobile crash related ocular injuries,5 these injuries are being
more commonly reported since airbags became standard issue in most cars after 1997. Vehicle parts causing ocular injury in a crash include
driver's side windshields, airbags and glass fragments.2 Bilateral airbag related eye injuries are relatively uncommon, especially in
restrained passengers. Lee et al. reported five cases of bilateral airbag related eye injuries and reviewed a further 89 cases in the
literature. Of the 94 cases reviewed, only 24 had bilateral eye injury and only 12 were passengers.3 Of 263 patients involved in 101
automobile accidents, Pearlman et al.2 recorded only 33 bilateral injuries. Most injuries involved the cornea and anterior segment (hyphema)
with good visual outcomes.2 However, posterior segment injury, though less common, was associated with less favorable outcomes.2 Most cases
of bilateral severe posterior segment airbag related injuries are individual case reports. Salman et al.7 reported bilateral globe rupture
with poor visual outcome in a 75-year old restrained front seat passenger. Ball and Bouchard6 presented seven cases of airbag-related eye
injury; only one of which was bilateral and in whom; the injury was limited to the anterior segment (bilateral hyphemas) with good visual
outcome in both eyes. While good visual outcome is to be expected with airbag-related trauma to the anterior segment, when the injury
involves the posterior segment as in the current case report, the injury is associated with a poor visual outcome with potentially permanent
visual loss. Rao et al.10 have suggested that the airbag mitigates severe ocular trauma in a crash, when deployed in addition to a three-
point restraint (seat-belt). Mechanical injuries caused by airbag inflation include periocular abrasions and lacerations, corneal abrasion,
laceration, endothelial contusion, hyphema, lens dislocation, traumatic aniridia and in the long-term, angle recession glaucoma as a result
of direct globe compression and rupture of blood vessels. Penetrating ocular injuries often result from projectiles within the vehicle
rather than the airbag itself.26 In this case, additional injury (a brow laceration) resulted from the plastic dashboard panel covering the
airbag, which was detached by the force of the expanding bag. The code of federal regulations (CFR), CFR 173.166 specifies that an airbag,
“if not completely enclosed by design, should be encased in a container or handling device which must be covered with plastic, fiberboard or
metal” and that “the covering must be secured to the container by banding or other comparable methods.” It is therefore important for
vehicle inspectors to ensure that the banding or other materials used to secure airbag module covers can withstand the explosive force of
airbag deployment, over time. This is particularly important in older or second hand cars, which are common in developing countries.
Nevertheless, the more significant injuries appear to have been a result of direct and forceful impact with the inflating airbag. This is
often the case with low velocity crashes because airbag technology is designed for greater protection in high impact, high velocity crashes8
where the rapid inflation protects the occupant from contact with more rigid interior surfaces in the car at high speed, which could be
fatal. The fact that the patient was sleeping at the time of impact, may also have contributed to the severity of his injuries, despite
seatbelt use, because he may not have been aware to brace himself for impact with the bag, nor would he have been able to shield his face
with his arms before impact, which would have been a natural protective response if the individual was awake. It is also possible that he
was slumped forward as a result of his slumber and this may have put his face dangerously close to the dashboard and at a greater risk of
ocular injury.4 Rao et al.10 observed posterior segment injuries only in patients who did not wear seatbelts. However, various reports of
severe bilateral eye injuries in seatbelt wearers have been described.467 Stein et al. reviewed 97 airbag related eye injuries and found
that 67% occurred at low speed (35 mph or less) and only 14% involved passengers.4 The fact that this case involved only the passenger and
resulted in such severe and permanent bilateral visual loss is therefore pertinent. The bilateral hyphema and vitreous hemorrhage and
suspected scleral rupture can be explained by horizontal expansile forces at the iris root, equator and vitreous base. Commotio retinae can
be explained by a counter coup response to the anteriorly-located compressive blunt force.24 The design of airbags have evolved from the
large, untethered, explosive first generation bags9 to “smart,” sensor-driven, depowered,9 tethered, venting airbags that are able to adjust
their threshold and rate of deployment depending on the crash severity and can also vent quickly to ensure that the occupant does not strike
a “hard” bag.1 However, this comes at an extra cost. In developing countries where the latest and safest technologies may be beyond reach,
it is necessary to educate the public about the risks inherent in the older generation airbags. It may be necessary to apply regulations to
restrict the use or recommend the replacement of first-generation airbags in second-hand vehicles purchased for resale in the less developed
or resource poor nations as the prevention of these devastating injuries is more cost effective than attempting treatment. The public should
be enlightened to the risk of severe ocular injuries from airbag systems and should be advised to avoid sitting too close to the dashboard
or sleeping while seated in the front passengers’ seat. The public should be encouraged to ensure regular vehicle and airbag module
maintenance especially in older model automobiles, commonly found in the resource-constrained developing world. With this illustrative case,
we hope that ophthalmologists will continue to advocate for safer airbag module designs, which address the vulnerability of the face and
globe. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
