Paradoxical response to anti-tubercular drugs remains a diagnostic dilemma. In India where tuberculosis is quite prevalent, paradoxical
response to anti-tubercular treatment (ATT) is either misdiagnosed or under-diagnosed. We report two cases of optochiasmatic arachnoiditis
due to paradoxical response in children suffering from tuberculous meningitis. Visual acuity was recorded as no light perception in all eyes
of both patients while they were taking 4-drug ATT (isoniazid, rifampicin, pyrazinamide and ethambutol). However their systemic conditions
did not worsen. They were treated with intravenous methylprednisolone for five days followed by systemic corticosteroids on a tapering dose
for four weeks along with ATT. This case report highlights the importance of early recognition of this sight-threatening complication and
timely, effective treatment to prevent permanent blindness. The incidence of tuberculosis is quite high in India.1 Tuberculous meningitis
(TBM) is the most devastating form of extrapulmonary tuberculosis in children,23 especially males.45 Therefore, TBM is an important cause of
optochiasmatic arachnoiditis (OCA) in the Indian subcontinent.6 OCA is an inflammation around the optic chiasm and optic nerves. This
inflammatory involvement of anterior visual pathway results in marked exudation in the leptomeninges6 seen on magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) as basal exudates, which are most prominent around the optic chiasm.78 It may occur during the course of neurotuberculosis or as a
paradoxical response to anti-tubercular treatment (ATT).69 OCA leads to profound visual impairment and, without timely diagnosis and
effective treatment, it may cause irreversible blindness.610 Reports of OCA are rare in the literature particularly in pediatric patients.
We report two cases of OCA who developed blindness due to a paradoxical response to ATT and the successful management of these cases. A six-
year-old male, who was fully immunized and his vaccinations were current, was treated for stage II TBM for one month, with good response,
developed profound diminution of vision. He was on oral 4-drug ATT, that comprised of isoniazid (5 mg/kg/day), rifampicin (10 mg/kg/day),
pyrazinamide (25 mg/kg/day) and ethambutol (15 mg/kg/day), and systemic steroids (1 mg/kg/day) on a tapering dose. The visual acuity was no
light perception in both eyes. The anterior segment examination was unremarkable except for semi-dilated pupils, which were not reactive to
light. The fundus examination showed slight disc hyperemia with well-defined margins bilaterally. Brain magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
showed extensive enhancing basal exudates along with dilatation of lateral and third ventricles and obstruction at the aqueductal level
[Figure 1]. A diagnosis of paradoxical tuberculous OCA was made on the basis of MRI findings, cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) analysis (cells
910/cu mm, protein 230 mg/dL, glucose 30 mg/dL, Pandy test positive), and clinical findings. Under cover of ATT, intravenous
methylprednisolone (IVMP), 30 mg/kg body weight/day, was administered. After three doses the visual acuity increased to light perception in
both eyes. IVMP was continued for two more days and then the medication was changed to oral prednisolone tablets (2 mg/kg body weight/day in
single dose) on a tapering schedule for a month. The vision slowly improved over a period of 12 weeks. Seven months after the visual loss,
brain MRI showed decreased inflammation of the meningeal sheaths around the optic nerves and mild hydrocephalus [Figure 2]. ATT was stopped
after 12 months. At the 18 months follow-up visit, the best corrected vision was 6/18 in right eye and 6/12 in the left. The pupils in both
eyes were approximately 4 mm in diameter round and briskly reactive to torch light. Fundus examination showed optic disc pallor bilaterally
[Figure 3]. Contrast-enhanced MRI brain showing enhancing basal exudates in the perichiasmal region (arrow) with moderate dilatation of
lateral and third ventricles and aqueductal obstruction Contrast-enhanced MRI brain seven months after initiation of treatment showing
decreased exudates around the optochiasmatic region (arrow) a and b. Diffuse bilateral optic disc pallor A four-year-old male child, fully
immunized and his vaccinations were current, had stage I TBM with hydrocephalus, was on oral ATT for three weeks. He underwent surgery for
ventriculoperitoneal shunt (VP shunt) under general anesthesia after his systemic condition stabilized. Preoperative ophthalmoscopic
examination showed a normal fundus. Six days postoperatively, the child was referred back to us by the pediatric surgeon with complaints of
bilateral loss of vision. The child was on 4-drug ATT (isoniazid 5 mg/kg/day, rifampicin 10 mg/kg/day, pyrazinamide 25 mg/kg/day and
ethambutol 15 mg/kg/day) but not on systemic steroids. The visual acuity at this visit was no fixation or following of light. There was no
light perception in both eyes with absence of pupillary reaction to light. Fundus examination by indirect ophthalmoscope and 78 D slit-lamp
ophthalmoscopy showed normal fundi bilaterally. Brain MRI showed enhancing lesions at the level of optic chiasm involving both the optic
nerves. A diagnosis of paradoxical OCA was made on the basis of the clinical picture, CSF analysis (cells 120/cu mm, 90% lymphocytes,
protein 20 mg/dL) and neuroimaging findings. The child was started on 30 mg/kg body weight IVMP for five days and then placed on systemic
prednisolone (2 mg/kg body weight/day) on tapering dose along with systemic ATT. Two weeks after starting systemic corticosteroids, the
child started to perceive light on vision testing. ATT was stopped after a year and the best corrected visual acuity at that time was 6/18
in both eyes. The pupils were round, semi-dilated with brisk reaction to light. Fundus examination showed prominent temporal pallor of the
optic nerve head in both eyes [Figure 4]. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain showed VP shunt in situ with no evidence of exudate in the
optochiasmatic region. Optic discs of right (a) and left (b) eyes showing pallor Tuberculosis is a common cause of morbidity and mortality
in developing countries such as India. TBM is the most serious form of TB in children below five years of age.23 There is preponderance of
the disease in male children.45 OCA refers to inflammatory changes with exudates in the leptomeninges around the optic chiasm and the optic
nerve.6 Tuberculosis is endemic in India, hence, OCA can occur during the course of treatment for TBM or following withdrawal of systemic
steroids.69 OCA is the leading cause of visual impairment in TBM.610 Early recognition of this condition and appropriate treatment can
prevent further visual loss and, at least, salvage some functional vision.6 A reliable method of establishing the diagnosis of OCA includes
visual complaints, abnormal pupillary reactions to light, dilated fundus examination with special attention on the examination of optic
nerve head and contrast-enhanced MRI. Dense plaque-like basal exudates especially around the optic chiasm are seen on MRI that show
enhancement and hypertrophy of the chiasm and proximal optic nerves.11 These features may be associated with hydrocephalus.6 Paradoxical
reaction is defined as appearance of fresh symptoms, physical and radiological signs in a patient who had shown improvement with ATT.9 It
may present while the patient is on ATT and steroids.6 It can occur as early as 2 weeks and as late as 18 months after the initiation of
ATT.12 Paradoxical response must be differentiated from drug-resistant tuberculosis where there is a worsening of the patient symptoms. In
the absence of specific CSF findings and negative culture report, the diagnosis of paradoxical deterioration depends mainly on close
clinical monitoring.12 The paradoxical response to ATT is an exaggerated host-organism interaction resulting in massive inflammation.1213
Effective treatment with ATT leads to revival of the host's immune system. Additionally, the death of M. tuberculosis causes activation and
accumulation of lymphocytes and macrophages at the site of bacterial deposition or toxin production.12 This is predominantly seen in the
basal region of the brain implicating the optic chiasm and optic nerves. The management of OCA remains a challenge and prognosis in most of
the cases remains poor.14 Systemic oral corticosteroids, IVMP,6 intrathecal hyaluronidase,15 thalidomide16 and microsurgical scraping of
exudates have been used to treat OCA with variable results. The treatment of OCA due to paradoxical reaction includes high-dose systemic
corticosteroids along with continuation of ATT. The rationale behind the use of adjuvant steroids lies in reducing the harmful effects of
inflammation as anti-tubercular drugs kill the organisms.9 Treatment with corticosteroids decreases the basal exudates and stabilizes
vision, and in some cases improves vision.6 In this case report, the two children were responding well to ATT when they noticed profound
vision loss. The first child was receiving systemic steroid on a tapering dose while the second child was on ATT only. Both cases were small
male children with high protein content and cell count in the CSF who developed paradoxical OCA. They responded well to intensive high-dose
intravenous methylprednisolone and systemic corticosteroids with reasonably good final visual acuity. Ophthalmologists and pediatricians
should be aware of the paradoxical response to ATT. One must predict OCA in children suffering from TBM who present with severe visual loss
without systemic deterioration and with high CSF protein and pleocytosis and perichiasmal exudates on MRI. Prompt treatment with IVMP
followed by oral steroid may salvage vision in these children. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None declared.
