Rett Syndrome (RS) is a chromosome X-linked genetic neurological disorder characterized by developmental regression, particularly in
relation to expressive language and use of the hands. It is also associated with profound mental retardation and almost exclusively affects
females. A four and a half year old girl reported to our dental OPD for a dental checkup. On complete examination, she was diagnosed to be
suffering from Rett Syndrome. Preventive therapies and proper oral hygiene instructions were explained to her mother. Early diagnosis of
such disorders is extremely important along with treatment of patients' problems with love and care to prevent them from further pain and
stress. There is no enigma like the mind. The normal mind functions at the speed of light, in a multitude of directions, and yet, there are
certain shadows that are never dissolved by light and remain a deep mystery, as when presented by a disordered human mind. This case report
is an attempt to present one of such numerous mysteries that the mind holds, a suspected case of Rett Syndrome (RS). Rett syndrome is a
pediatric neurological development disorder characterized by the regression of psychomotor development with autistic manifestations,
decelerated growth of head, seizures, and stereotyped repetitive movements of the hands (1). First described in 1966 by Andreas Rett, an
Austrian Physician, and thereafter by Bengt Hagberg et al. in 1983, this syndrome was shown in 1999 to be caused primarily by mutations in
the X-linked gene MECP2 [encoding MeCP2 (Methyl CPG-binding protein 2)] protein 2 (2). The estimated prevalence of the disorder ranges from
1 in 10000 to 1 in 22000. Despite reports from all over the world, very few cases have been reported from the Indian subcontinent. This may
probably be due to the under diagnosis of this condition or misdiagnosis of affected children as cerebral palsy or autism (2). Originally,
the condition was thought to be confined only to girls, but boys with features close to this disorder have also been described (3). Girls
with RS are born apparently healthy with normal prenatal and perinatal periods. Their psychomotor development is normal up to 1st or 2nd
year of life when brain functional regression begins. The regression is clinically manifested with a loss of manual motor skills and
appearance of stereotyped movements, gait apraxia, loss of verbal and nonverbal communication skills and association of episodes of
hyperventilation, aerophagia and epileptic seizures (1). Not many case reports have been published in this regard. This case report is an
effort to present and highlight the basic oral problems of such children, the criteria for diagnosing the disorder and the strategies
employed to prevent and manage their oral problems. A girl aged four and a half years old who visited the OPD with her mother complained of
decayed upper front teeth since last 6 months. Birth and Development History: The child's mother gave history of normal delivery of the
child and confirmed that she did not suffer any medical condition or take any sort of medication during her pregnancy. At birth, her child's
height and weight were normal. Gross motor, fine motor, social and emotional and language milestones were also normal during the first one
and a half years of her life. After that, the child's milestones got delayed and her development slowed down to the extent of regression.
Clinical Features: The girl presented with a unique feature of continuous stereotypic hand movements (Fig 3). She clenched her fingers so
tight that wounds and wasting could be observed on her phalangeal joints (Fig 2). She was unable to perform hand functions like grasping,
touching and holding objects. Stereotypic hand movements performed by the child Lesions on fingers caused due to stereotypic hand movements.
The child could not speak any meaningful words and her speech was only limited to a few sounds. Her history revealed that she was able to
speak better in the first three years of her life. The child could not sit still nor could she make an eye contact with the operator. Her
gait was abnormal and slow-she needed support to walk. She looked weak, and according to her mother, was unable to eat much due to poor
control on her tongue and felt difficulty in swallowing. The child was unable to understand and comprehend instructions and exhibited
autism. Though children with RS may exhibit seizures in late stages (4), the mother of this child gave no history of any such episode.
Intraoral examination of the child revealed four grossly decayed maxillary incisors (Fig 1). Other than that, there were no significant
findings. The mother gave recent history of involuntary teeth grinding by the child but no significant attrition was observed. Decayed upper
incisors of the girl Treatment: On first visit, mouth prop was used for exploration of the dentition and gross excavation of the carious
lesion was done. The mother of the child was told about the possible neurological problem of the child and was advised to get neurological
consultation for her daughter. She was counseled to emphasize the importance of primary dentition and prevention of further oral disease.
She was given instructions on more use of non-cariogenic diet for the girl, daily application of fluoride gel or mouth rinses. The mother
was requested to give frequent follow up visits with her child so that the child could get accustomed to the dental environment and be more
cooperative during dental treatment. She was also told about fabrication of a soft splint if the habit of grinding progressed. Treatment of
such children requires the use of sedation or general anesthesia. Unfortunately the anterior teeth could not be treated as the mother of
this child was not ready for the advised treatment. Two groups of oral manifestations of Rett syndrome can be distinguished: those derived
from the medication used to treat the disease and those derived from the condition of the syndrome itself. The drug-related (anxiolytic and
anticonvulsant) orofacial manifestations of RS are: xerostomia, stomatitis, glossitis, erythema multiformae, gingivitis, periodontal
abscess, sinusitis, dysphagia and tongue paralysis. The oral manifestations of the syndrome itself are not exclusive of the syndrome, since
they can also be seen in excessive oral/digital habits, difficulties for correct oral hygiene, etc. However, features like bruxism, anterior
open bite, high-arched palate and gingivitis are more prevalent (1). Other common problems associated with RS are presence of scoliosis (5),
constipation (6), gall bladder problems (6), arrhythmias (7) and sleep problems (8). The course of RS is divided into four basic stages (9,
10). These are: Early onset phase (6–18 months of age): unnoticeable slowing of development. Rapid Destructive phase (1–4 yrs): The child
loses skills quickly. Voluntary hand movements and speech are usually first skills lost. Difficult breathing and stereotypic hand movements
may start. Social aloofness begins and females demonstrate autistic traits. Plateau Phase (2–10 yrs):The regression slows and the condition
of child improves. Involuntary movements persist. Seizure activity is prominent and females have improved alertness. Late Motor
Deterioration Phase: This lasts for decades. The individual becomes stiff and may lose muscle tone. Severe scoliosis may occur. Use of
splints is controversial in Rett Syndrome to treat bruxism. Few authors contraindicate the use of splints due to mental retardation and
deficient oro motor skills of the child while others like Alpoz et al. have treated bruxism with soft splints, and special designs to avoid
anterior mandibular movement accompanying bruxism (1, 11). In the present case, bruxism was not very evident in the anterior teeth as it is
in most of the cases of RS. The probable reason for the absence of the feature must be the young age of the girl and her decayed anterior
maxillary teeth. Such cases, however, should be encouraged for regular follow up for prophylactic care and checkups of dental and jaw
development. RS is most often mistaken as autism, cerebral palsy, or nonspecific developmental delay. In the past, the diagnosis required
numerous diagnostic tests and procedures to rule out other disorders. However, since the discovery of MECP2 gene, a blood test can check
whether a child has a gene mutation that causes RS. The sole presence of this mutation is not enough to confirm RS; therefore, clinical
features and history of the child cannot be ignored (10). The self-injurious behavior of the affected children has been intervened using
splints for the elbow (elbow orthosis). Katisyannis et al. reported in a study that most successful intervention for self-injurious behavior
was differential reinforcement paired with response interruption. The behavioral management of the syndrome deals with: Speech language and
communication therapy (13) which includes: Lovaas Method / Applied Behavior Analysis (1987)-The trainer models the child a skill to master
and encourages him to replicate. Operant conditioning principles are used to teach language with positive reinforcement.Treatment and
education of autistic and related communication handicapped children (TEACCH) (1970)-This focuses on teaching the child communication skills
versus speech skills.Play Therapy (1997)-This one promotes skills designed to facilitate positive social interactions, either verbal/non
verbal using play designs.Option method / Son-rise program (1970)This is a home based, child -centered approach that encourages the parents
to participate and motivate the child. (4)Augmentative and Alternative Communication (1996)-This approach can be very beneficial when
dealing with RS affected children. Such strategy includes eye gaze and voice output devices. Their use can help in effective communication.
Physical Therapy (13, 14) Speech language and communication therapy (13) which includes: Lovaas Method / Applied Behavior Analysis
(1987)-The trainer models the child a skill to master and encourages him to replicate. Operant conditioning principles are used to teach
language with positive reinforcement.Treatment and education of autistic and related communication handicapped children (TEACCH) (1970)-This
focuses on teaching the child communication skills versus speech skills.Play Therapy (1997)-This one promotes skills designed to facilitate
positive social interactions, either verbal/non verbal using play designs.Option method / Son-rise program (1970)This is a home based, child
-centered approach that encourages the parents to participate and motivate the child. (4)Augmentative and Alternative Communication
(1996)-This approach can be very beneficial when dealing with RS affected children. Such strategy includes eye gaze and voice output
devices. Their use can help in effective communication. Lovaas Method / Applied Behavior Analysis (1987)-The trainer models the child a
skill to master and encourages him to replicate. Operant conditioning principles are used to teach language with positive reinforcement.
Treatment and education of autistic and related communication handicapped children (TEACCH) (1970)-This focuses on teaching the child
communication skills versus speech skills. Play Therapy (1997)-This one promotes skills designed to facilitate positive social interactions,
either verbal/non verbal using play designs. Option method / Son-rise program (1970)This is a home based, child -centered approach that
encourages the parents to participate and motivate the child. (4) Augmentative and Alternative Communication (1996)-This approach can be
very beneficial when dealing with RS affected children. Such strategy includes eye gaze and voice output devices. Their use can help in
effective communication. Physical Therapy (13, 14) According to the International Rett Syndrome Association, physical therapy should be one
of the priorities in RS patients. Stage 1 should focus on independent sitting, standing and walking; stage 2 on range of motion and
ambulation. Stage 3 should emphasize sitting, and stage 4 requires all aspects from previous stages. c) Occupational therapy (14) c)
Occupational therapy (14) It should focus on hand use and eating skills. The child should be assisted with adaptive eating utensils and try
to feed independently. Sensory integration therapies, such as tactile activities and joint compression can help the child to interpret and
respond better. The supportive therapies include Music Therapy (2001) and Hydro therapy (2003) (13). Rett Syndrome is unique in its own way;
so are the affected children. These children need early diagnosis and various medical and non-medical therapies to relieve their symptoms.
Besides therapy, they need the love and affection of people around them. Therefore, it is very important to help in diagnosing such
children, counseling their parents and trying to establish communication with them so that they allow us to treat them and prevent their
oral problems as much as possible.
