Orbital implants are now routinely used after enucleation and evisceration. However exposure of the implant can lead to infection and
extrusion. Hence, early repair of larger exposure with graft material is required. We describe three cases where early postoperative mucosal
dehiscence was successfully managed with autologous serum. Orbital implants have been successfully used for replacing volume loss during eye
removal. Various modifications in surgical technique for preventing implant exposure, migration and extrusion have been reported but the
incidence may be as high as 4.9-8.1% requiring repair using different graft materials.1 We describe three cases with postoperative
conjunctival dehiscence and necrosis over the anterior surface of an implant and the novel use of autologous serum (AS) drops which resulted
in complete healing, preventing exposure of the implant. A 28-year-male with history of right post-traumatic phthisis bulbi presented with
complaints of progressive difficulty in placing the prosthesis in the socket and enophthalmos. On examination, all the conjunctival fornices
were shallow along with deep supratarsal sulcus deformity. As globe size was very small with foreshortened conjunctival fornices,
enucleation with placement of donor sclera wrapped hydroxyapatite (HA) implant (20 mm) and surface area augmentation with buccal mucosa was
performed. Postoperative treatment included local hygiene, topical (tobramycin 0.3% eye drop q.i.d.) and systemic antibiotics (oral
ciprofloxacin 500 mg b.i.d.). At 1 week postoperatively, pallor and necrosis of the buccal mucosa in the central area was noted, which
progressed over 24 hours [Figure 1a]. A swab sample revealed no infection. After informed consent, the patient was administered 20% AS in
balanced salt solution (BSS) under standard aseptic condition. The solution was instilled over the graft at least 10 times a day. After five
days of AS use, there was significant decrease in the area of central necrosis [Figure 1b]. Complete healing occurred after 2 weeks of AS
use [Figure 1c], which was continued for an additional week. At 3 months postoperatively, scarring in area of previous necrosis was present
but the fornices were well formed and the implant well encapsulated [Figure 1d]. (Case 1) (a) Buccal mucosa necrosis at the 6th
postoperative day; (b) Response after 5 days of treatment with 20% autologous serum; (c) Complete healing after 2 weeks; (d) Well
encapsulated implant at 3 months (note the scar medially) A 56-year-male underwent evisceration of the right eye for a bleeding anterior
staphyloma. After adequate anterior and posterior sclerotomies, an 18 mm HA implant was placed in the scleral cavity and covered with double
layer of sclera anteriorly. Meticulous closure of Tenon's fascia and conjunctiva was performed, along with placement of an adequately sized
conformer. Five days postoperatively, rapidly progressing central conjunctival dehiscence with necrosis of the conjunctiva was observed
[Figure 2a]. Ocular pain, discharge or swelling was absent, and conjunctival swab culture was sterile. AS 20% was prepared in BSS and
instilled 10 times a day. After 24 h of AS use, there was noticeable decrease in the area of conjunctival defect and necrosis [Figure 2b],
and complete conjunctival healing occurred after one week of treatment but there was atrophic Tenon's fascia anteriorly [Figure 2c]. At 4
months post-treatment, conjunctiva and Tenon's fascia were healthy with a well encapsulated implant [Figure 2d]. (Case 2) (a) Conjunctival
dehiscence/necrosis at 5th day postoperative; (b) Decrease in necrosis after 24 hours with use of 20% autologous serum; (c) Conjunctival
healing with atrophic Tenon's after one week; (d) Healthy conjunctiva-Tenon's at 4 months A 32-year-male presented with a bleeding anterior
staphyloma in the left eye. Evisceration with 20 mm HA implant was performed after anterior and posterior sclerotomies. At one week
postoperatively, conjunctival dehiscence and necrosis was observed [Figure 3a]. AS (20%) in BSS was instilled 10 times a day over the
conjunctival dehiscence. After 2 days of AS use there was significant decrease in the area of necrosis with complete healing occurring after
one week [Figure 3b and c]. Therapy with AS was continued further for one week. At 4 months of follow up, the implant was well encapsulated
[Figure 3d]. (Case 3) (a) Central conjunctival necrosis at 1 week postoperative; (b) Response after 2 days of 20% autologous serum
treatment; (c) Healing after 1 week treatment; (d) Healthy socket at 4 months postoperatively In all 3 cases, the patients underwent an
informed consent procedure and principles of Declaration of Helsinki were followed. Conventional treatment of implant exposure includes
repair using different materials such as scleral patch, hard palate mucosa, dermis fat graft (DFG), buccal mucosa, temporalis fascia or
amniotic membrane.1 AS drops have been recommended for the treatment of severe dry eye, superior limbal kerato-conjunctivitis, recurrent
corneal erosion syndrome, persistent epithelial defects, supportive measure in ocular surface reconstruction, leaking blebs and refractive
surgery.2 It contains various growth factors, which accelerates migration of epithelial cell, and has anti-apoptotic and bactericidal
effects. In our series we observed necrosis and dehiscence of buccal mucosa (Case 1) and conjunctiva (Case 2, 3) with exposure of underlying
sclera in the early postoperative period. Generally, the conjunctiva grows over exposed implant without intervention. But in the cases
presented here, there was a progressive increase in the area of dehiscence. Tenon's capsule and conjunctiva are relatively avascular but the
orbital tissues and extraocular muscles are well vascularized.3 A more vascularized posterior socket was unable to provide sufficient
vascular supply to the anterior layers due to placement of the implant. Conjunctival dehiscence is prone to infection and further
progression may have resulted in exposure of the HA implant. As the sclera was intact beneath Tenon's, the rough surface of HA was not the
cause of conjunctival dehiscence. Using AS drops in our patient resulted in rapid healing and can be attributed to the presence of various
growth factors such as epithelial growth factor, vascular endothelial growth factor, nerve growth factor, transformer growth fibroblast
β-factor, fibronectin and vitamin A.2 These growth factors accelerate migration of epithelial cells, repair of epithelial and stromal
processes. Proteins such as albumin have anti-apoptotic activity, while α2 macroglobulin has anti-collagenase activity. AS also contains
various immunoglobulins e.g. IgG, IgA and lysozyme that provide bacteriostatic and bactericidal effects. Quality control issues with AS
includes proper storage (at 4° C) and the risk of microbial contamination. Transmission of infection can occur if serum from the donor is
utilized and therefore serology for blood-borne diseases should be performed prior to use. AS, for the current cases, was prepared using the
patients own blood which was allowed to clot for 2 hours. This was followed by centrifugation at 3000 g for 20 min. The serum was diluted
with BSS to make a 20% concentration of AS. AS have been used for the treatment of ulcerated DFG with complete resolution in 3 weeks.4 Kim
and associates studied the effect of AS on the conjunctivalization of exposed porous polyethylene implants in a rabbit model.5 Although
there was no statistical difference between the AS group and the control group, but there was a more rapid conjunctival growth rate with
higher complete healing rate in cases treated with AS. In a real clinical situation, the actual non-healing defect in humans may be
different from that left during primary closure along with different healing patterns between humans and rabbits. The primary shortcoming of
our case series is the lack of a comparison. All three cases were on topical antibiotic (tobramycin 0.03% q.i.d.) and routine systemic
antibiotic (oral ciprofloxacin 500 mg b.i.d.) postoperatively for one week. Although conjunctival swab culture was negative in all cases,
use of antibiotic could have a confounding effect on healing. However the arrest of progression and the prompt response that was observed
with AS suggests a causal relationship. The use of AS in our cases promoted the healing of conjunctival dehiscence and necrosis observed
during the early postoperative period and prevented the exposure of the HA implant. Other probable uses could include prevention of exposure
in cases with previous ocular surgery, trauma, or secondary implantation, where insufficient vascularization is anticipated. The use of AS
in such situations may obviate the need for surgical intervention. However, the role of AS in late exposure of implant, which occurs due to
constant abrasion of conjunctiva by irregular surface, would require further reports. Source of Support: Nil Conflict of Interest: None
declared.
