Myiases-causing flies are widely observed in tropical countries, whereas in Italy, a temperate country, their epidemiology and clinical
presentation are poorly known. We report three cases of human conjunctival myiasis recently observed at our hospital, and the results of a
review of the literature on human myiasis in Italy. In August 2012, a case of Oestrus ovis conjunctival myiasis acquired in the city centre
of Florence, Italy was diagnosed at our hospital. In the early fall of 2013, two additional cases, acquired in the neighbouring areas,
occurred. The review of literature showed that, up to the middle of 1990s, myiasis in Italy was mainly an occupational disease of shepherds,
caused by O. ovis. Recently, cases of travel acquired furuncular myiasis emerged, together with “opportunistic” autochthonous cases of wound
myiasis in patients with underlying health conditions. Considering the causative agents of human of myiasis in Italy, among the 703
autochthonous cases reported, 98.1 % were caused by O. ovis, while among the 42 imported cases described, 59.5 % were due to Cordylobia spp.
and 40.5 % to Dermatobia hominis. Our findings suggest that O. ovis conjunctival myiasis may still be observed in urban setting in Italy.
Health care providers should know and implement the basic rules of entomoprophylaxis for myiasis in the facilities where they are working
and use these indications to educate patients and care givers in both pretravel care and geriatric outpatient settings. The online version
of this article (doi:10.1007/s00436-014-3906-9) contains supplementary material, which is available to authorized users. Myiasis is defined
as an infestation of living vertebrate animals, included humans, by fly larvae (Diptera, Brachycera, Cyclorrhapha) that develop until the L3
stage feeding on the host’s dead or living tissue or liquid body substances (Zumpt 1965). Clinical presentation of myiasis varies according
to the causative species involved and to the anatomical location of the larvae (Francesconi and Lupi 2012). Each fly species has specific
geographical distribution, but, in general, all species have a greater abundance in tropical countries, where the climate favours faster
life cycles and a higher number of generations per year (Francesconi and Lupi 2012). In Italy, most autochthonous cases of human myiasis are
caused by Oestrus ovis, still highly widespread in Italian flocks (Scala et al. 2001). We report three cases of autochthonous O. ovis
conjunctival ophthalmomyiasis acquired in Florence area, Italy, by patients without history of any contact with environments particularly
frequented by animals. Published literature on human myiasis in Italy was reviewed. In August 2012, a 44-year-old woman was admitted to the
ophthalmic emergency department of the Careggi University Hospital, Florence (Italy), complaining left ocular foreign body sensation,
photophobia and lacrimation associated with rhinorrhea and sneezing fits. Symptoms had suddenly presented in the late afternoon of the same
day and gradually worsened while she was walking in a public garden, near the city centre of Florence. Few minutes before the onset of
symptoms, she noted the presence of an insect that was slowly flying around her. She had a visual acuity of 20/20 with spectacle correction
and, on slit-lamp examination, there was a conjunctival hyperemia in the left eye with follicular reaction and mild eyelids oedema. Moderate
superficial punctate keratopathy was present. Right eye was normal. Multiple cigar-shaped 1-mm long, clear-white, rapidly moving foreign
bodies, showing tendency to avoid bright light, were found in both the inferior and superior left conjunctival fornices. The mobile bodies
were presumptively identified as insect larvae by the ophthalmologist. After instillation of benoxinate 0.4 % eye drops, all the larvae were
removed using forceps and abundant and repeated washing with normal saline and 5 % iodopovidone performed. Finally, the lacrimal ducts were
flushed with saline. The removal was not easy due to the activity of the larvae; however, at the end of the procedure, ocular symptoms were
completely resolved. Four larvae were stored in formalin and five in normal saline, whereas the remaining eight were washed away. The
patient was discharged and prescribed with topical moxifloxacin 0.5 % four times a day, hydroxyzine dihydrochloride 25 mg and nasal douches
with saline for 1 week, due to the persistent rhinorrhea and sneezing fits. Ophthalmologic and otorhinolaryngological follow-ups were
scheduled, but no other larvae were found at repeated slit-lamp examination of the conjunctiva and at fiber-optic examination of
nasopharyngeal cavities. Rhinorrhea and sneezing resolved in about 3 weeks after the larvae removal. Maggots were microscopically identified
as O. ovis at first larval stage, given the observation of the “bull horns”-like buccal hooks in the cephalic extremity and the spines in
the caudal extremity (Figs. 1, 2 and 3) (Guitton and Dorchies 1993; Rodhain and Perez 1985).Fig. 1One of the first instar Oestrus ovis
larvae recovered from the conjunctiva of the left eye of the patient observed in 2012Fig. 2“Bull horns”-like buccal hooks in the cephalic
extremity of the first instar Oestrus ovis larva recovered from the conjunctiva of the left eyes of the patient observed in 2012Fig.
3Typical spines in the caudal extremity of the first instar Oestrus ovis larva recovered from the conjunctiva of the left eyes of the
patient observed in 2012 One of the first instar Oestrus ovis larvae recovered from the conjunctiva of the left eye of the patient observed
in 2012 “Bull horns”-like buccal hooks in the cephalic extremity of the first instar Oestrus ovis larva recovered from the conjunctiva of
the left eyes of the patient observed in 2012 Typical spines in the caudal extremity of the first instar Oestrus ovis larva recovered from
the conjunctiva of the left eyes of the patient observed in 2012 Two additional cases of conjunctival myiasis (involving the left eye in
both cases) were observed at the same emergency department in September and October 2013, respectively. The first patient was an 84-year-old
woman who lived in the country side in the Eastern Florence (Donnini), and the second one was a 28-year-old man who lived in an urban area
near Florence (Sesto Fiorentino). Symptoms abruptly started in both patients while they were doing outdoor activities near their home. Both
patients denied any attendance to grazing land or farms, both had clinical characteristics similar to that of the previous case and were
treated by mechanical removal of the larvae, repeated washing and topical antibiotics. Multiple larvae were extracted from the conjunctiva
of each patient and some of these larvae were sent for identification. However, due to poor state of preservation of the larvae that were
severely damaged and fragmented, only molecular diagnostics allowed to identify extracted larvae as O. ovis. Genomic DNA was extracted with
a commercial kit (NucleoSpin tissue kit, Macherey-Nagel, Duren, Germany), following the manufacturer’s instructions. As previously described
(Otranto et al. 2003), the most variable part of the COI gene was amplified by PCR using two sets of conserved primers (UEA7–UEA8 and
UEA8–UEA9) (Zhang and Hewitt 1997), which yielded a fragment of 688 bp. The PCR mix consisted of 3 μL of genomic DNA, 1× buffer including
1.5 mM MgCl2, 0.2 mM of each dNTP, 25 pM of each primer, and 1 unit of polymerase (BIOTAQ™ DNA Polymerase, Aurogene, Rome, Italy) in a final
volume of 25 μL. PCR was performed as follows: after an initial denaturation step of 10 min at 94 °C, a set of 40 cycles was run, each
consisting of 1 min at 94 °C, 1 min at 60 °C, 1 min at 72 °C, followed by a final extension of 7 min at 72 °C. PCR products were detected in
a 2 % agarose TBE gel. The obtained amplicons were purified using the SureClean kit (Aurogene, Rome, Italy), following the manufacturer’s
instructions and directly sequenced with PCR primers in both directions by an external sequencing core service (Eurofins MWG Operon,
Anzinger, Germany). Sequences were corrected by visual analysis of the electropherograms, aligned using the MEGA v5.1 package (Tamura et al.
2011) and compared with the most similar sequences available from the National Centre for Biotechnology Information database
(http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) using the BLAST program. Sequences analysis allowed the identification of the extracted larvae as O. ovis as
yielded an identity score of 100 % with the O.ovis/specific COI partial gene (accession number AF497767). A review of PubMed indexed
literature was performed using keywords “myiasis” and “Italy” in October 2013 without any language or period limit. Only articles reporting
human cases of myiasis were included and one article (Pampiglione 1957a) was excluded because the full text was not available. Twenty-three
papers concerning human myiases acquired in Italy, published in the period of 1957–2013, were found (Supplementary results and references).
A total of 703 autochthonous cases of myiasis were reported, 690 (98.1 %) caused by O. ovis. In the middle of 1950s, 414 Italian doctors
(8 % of interviewed) reported at least one case of O. ovis myiasis, 77 % of whom diagnosed in shepherds (Pampiglione 1958a). In the same
period, 101 shepherds (85.6 % of interviewed) reported to be affected at least one time in their lives (Pampiglione 1958b). Most cases were
observed from March to September, mostly in centre-southern Italy. Shepherds reported mainly oral, nasal, tonsillar and pharyngeal
locations, whereas the conjunctival location was the most commonly observed by physicians, probably because the involvement of the eye
prompts people to seek medical advice. Similar surveys carried out on shepherds (in the 1960s in Lazio region and in 1995 in Sicily)
evidenced that 86.9 % of 73 interviewed and 90/112 (80.3 %), respectively, had been affected by myiasis at least one time in their lives
(Pampiglione et al. 1997; Sacca et al. 1965). All surveys showed that shepherds are well aware of O. ovis myiasis, probably from centuries,
and usually able to manage by themselves this problem by removing the maggots with the help of a friend or just waiting some weeks until the
problems would be spontaneously solved. After 1995, seven sporadic cases of O. ovis have been reported in Italy, six of which in subjects
without history of contacts with environment associated to sheep, goat or other cattle animals (Crotti et al. 2005; Dono et al. 2005;
Otranto et al. 2009; Rivasi et al. 2009). Only 13 cases of non-O. ovis autochthonous myiasis were reported in Italy, 10 of them (76.9 %)
after the year 2000. Eight cases were caused by different species of flies belonging to Sarcophagidae family (that included Sarcophaga and
Wohlfahrtia genera) (Billi et al. 1997; Dutto and Bertero 2010; Dutto and Bertero 2011; Dutto et al. 2012; Iori et al. 1999; Magliulo et al.
2000; Panu et al. 2000; Zardi et al. 2002), three caused by species of Calliphoridae family (that included Lucilia and Calliphora genera)
(Dutto et al. 2010; Franza et al. 2006; Salvetti et al. 2011) and the remaining two cases were caused by Hypoderma lineatum (Pampiglione
1957b) and Clogmia albipunctata (Gelardi et al. 2009). All but one of cases due to Sarcophagidae and Calliphoridae families (10 cases) were
wound myiasis in which the larvae developed in a preexistent lesion such as trauma wound (Dutto and Bertero 2010; Salvetti et al. 2011),
surgical wound (Billi et al. 1997; Franza et al. 2006), chronic ulcers of lower limbs (Dutto et al. 2012; Dutto et al. 2010), neoplastic
fistula (Zardi et al. 2002), eardrum perforated (Panu et al. 2000), preexistent dermatological condition (Iori et al. 1999) or macerated
tissue in a skin fold (Dutto and Bertero 2011), whereas one case was an aural myiasis without previous ear damage (Magliulo et al. 2000).
Eight of these cases were diagnosed in non self-sufficient, severely ill or geriatric patients. The case due to H. lineatum, an obligate
parasite of ruminants, was described in a 13-year-old schoolboy with anterior internal ophthalmomyiasis (Pampiglione 1957b), while the case
due to C. albipunctata, [=Telmatoscopus albipunctatus, Diptera: Psycodidae], a rarer agent of human wound and body cavities myiasis, was
diagnosed in a 32-year-old women with nasal myiasis, working as an architect at the archaeological site of Pompeii (Gelardi et al. 2009).
Patients with non-O. ovis autochthonous myiasis were treated by mechanical non-surgical extraction and surgery in nine and four cases,
respectively. Twenty-one papers reporting 42 imported cases, published in the period 1965–2012, were found (Supplemental results and
supplemental references 25–45). All were furuncular myiases, 30 of them (71 %) reported from 2000 onwards. Twenty-five (59.5 %) had been
acquired in Africa (17 from Senegal) and caused by Cordylobia anthropophaga (in 23 cases) and by Cordylobia rodhaini and Cordylobia spp.
(one case each). About half (58.3 %) of the patients with C. anthropophaga acquired the infestation probably visiting African beaches.
Seventeen cases (40.5 %) caused by Dermatobia hominis were imported from Latin America (five from Brazil). Furuncular-like lesions involved
skin of limbs (primarily lower limbs for Cordylobia spp.), trunk and scalp (D. hominis only). Surgery to extract the larvae was more
frequently applied in D. hominis cases (87.5 %) than in Cordylobia cases (53.8 %), as maggots of the Latin American species penetrate in
tissues deeper than those of African species. Moreover, most cases (90 %) due to Cordylobia spp. were diagnosed within 7 days after the
return, whereas the majority of those due to D. hominis (83 %) were diagnosed 2 weeks or more after return from endemic area, reflecting the
different time required to the two species to develop in animal tissues. The number of furuncular lesions per patient was mostly one or two,
but it reached 150 in an exceptional case of C. rodhaini infestation (Pampiglione et al. 1991). Table 1 summarizes the characteristics of
the principal causative agents of human myiasis reported in Italy.Table 1Characteristics of principal causative agents of human myiasis
reported in Italy (Francesconi and Lupi 2012)Fly species or familyGeographical distributionEcological classification and hostsClinical
manifestationsMode of infestationResidence time in human tissuesMain treatment options in humansPrognosis in humans Oestrus ovis Worldwide
where sheep are bred. Mostly in Mediterranean basin including Italy and the Middle EastObligatory parasite of sheep and goatOphthalmomyiasis
externa; ENT myiasisAdult females project their larvae on the face (or muzzle) of humans (or sheep) while flying10–20 days (Macdonald et al.
1999; Pampiglione 1958a); probably not able to complete life cycle in humansMechanical removal; local anaesthetic to immobilize larvae and
facilitate extraction. Few cases treated with ivermectinUsually fair Dermatobia hominis Latin AmericaObligatory parasite of livestock,
humans and many other mammalsFuruncular myiasis (frequent localizations: scalp, face, extremities)Eggs are laid on foliage or on vector
insectsa (mosquitoes or other flies). Eggs hatch when entering in contact with a warm-blooded animals. Larvae penetrate the skin and start
to develop5–10 weeksOcclusion of the breathing hole (with petroleum jelly or other staff) to force the larva to emerge and use of forceps
when the larva became visible. Surgical incision if occlusion strategy failsUsually fair. Bacterial superinfections possible Cordylobia
anthropophaga AfricaObligatory parasite of animals (mainly rats and dogs) and humansFuruncular myiasis (frequent localizations: trunk,
buttocks, thighs)Eggs are laid on sandy ground or on clothes. Larvae penetrate the skin and start to develop8–10 daysSee D. hominis
treatment option. Usually easier to remove compared with D. hominis (do not migrate in depth into tissues). Expression of furuncular lesion
may be enoughUsually fair. Bacterial superinfections possibleFamily SarcophagidaeDepending on speciesObligatory parasite of humans and warm
blooded animalsWound myiasis (more rarely furuncular myiasis, or body cavity myiasis)Larvae are directly deposited in wounds or other
sites7 days (Zumpt 1965)b Mechanical or surgical removal of larvae with debridement of necrotic tissueDepending on underling conditions of
patient ENT ear-nose-throat aAdult females of Dermatobia hominis attach eggs to the abdomen of a bloodsucking intermediary mosquito or non-
biting flies of the family Muscidae, which feed on liquid secretions such as sweat. This method of egg delivery is called phoresis bThis
time may vary according to different species. Seven days is referred to Wohlfahrtia magnifica Characteristics of principal causative agents
of human myiasis reported in Italy (Francesconi and Lupi 2012) ENT ear-nose-throat aAdult females of Dermatobia hominis attach eggs to the
abdomen of a bloodsucking intermediary mosquito or non-biting flies of the family Muscidae, which feed on liquid secretions such as sweat.
This method of egg delivery is called phoresis bThis time may vary according to different species. Seven days is referred to Wohlfahrtia
magnifica We reported three cases of O. ovis conjunctival myiasis with a typical clinical pattern, one acquired in a public garden of the
city centre of Florence, an unusual environmental scenario and two additional cases acquired in the Florence neighbouring areas. Previous
publications report high frequency of conjunctival and otorhinolaryngological myiases by O. ovis in Italian shepherds, configuring myiasis
in Italy mainly as an occupational disease up to the middle of 1990s, at least according to the published scientific literature (Pampiglione
et al. 1997). Following these years, only sporadic O. ovis human infestations have been reported, mainly in non-shepherds (Crotti et al.
2005; Dono et al. 2005; Mazzeo et al. 1987; Otranto et al. 2009), one of them acquired in urban setting (Otranto et al. 2009). The reduction
in detected human cases has not been accompanied by the reduction of the burden of oestriasis in Italian sheep. In the matter of fact, some
surveys still report prevalence in sheep of 73 % in 1989–1990 in Tuscany and 75 % in 2004 in Sardinia (Marconcini and Ercolani 1990; Suarez
et al. 2005). The reduction of O. ovis cases in humans is probably related to the modernization of breeding techniques that led to a
reduction of the prolonged contacts between humans and grazing lands that were a characteristic of Italian shepherds’ life until some
decades ago (Pampiglione 1958b). A plausible explanation for the case acquired in the centre of Florence is the transport of an adult female
fly from the countryside through a motor vehicle, like the case acquired in the Bari city centre, which was hypothesized as due to the
transport of a female fly through a ship-transporting livestock from Greece or Albania (Otranto et al. 2009). Indeed, the occurrence in the
same area of two additional cases of conjunctival myiasis caused by O. ovis suggests that the province of Florence could be a low endemic
area for O. ovis. It is difficult to say if these three cases diagnosed in a 2-year period represent a real increase of incidence of human
oestriasis in the Florence area. A more systematic reporting of human cases could be warranted together with veterinary studies to assess
the current role of farm and wild animals as O. ovis reservoir in this area. Human cases of O. ovis myiasis are becoming infrequent in
Italy, whereas the review of literature shows that other myiases are increasingly diagnosed. The increasing number of international travels
led to the emergence of furuncular myiasis cases, mainly after 2000. At the same time, reports of wound myiasis cases caused by flies
belonging to Sarcophagidae and Calliphoridae families increased in the recent years, mainly in severely ill or geriatric patients,
configuring myiasis in Italy also as an opportunistic, sometimes hospital-acquired, infection. The real magnitude of wound myiasis is likely
to be underestimated because this kind of infestation is probably not considered so extraordinary and is likely unreported in the scientific
literature. The etiologic agents of wound myiasis (including Cochliomyia hominivorax, Chrysomya bezziana, Wohlfahrtia magnifica and Lucilia
sericata) are very common worldwide (Francesconi and Lupi 2012). The results of a multicentre prospective observational study carried out in
the USA strongly support the underreporting of wound myiasis in scientific literature. In this study, 42 cases (71 % of which due to L.
sericata) were diagnosed in a 3-year period (Sherman 2000). In the same paper, the authors presented a review of literature on human myiasis
reported in USA in the period of 1960–1995 retrieving a relatively low number of cases (137) (Sherman 2000). The underreporting of wound
myiasis is likely to occur in Italy as well. People who are in need of care (e.g. in a home environment with family or day care) and
marginalized subjects such as homeless and unsheltered people are the most prone to develop this disease (Sherman 2000) and probably
overlooked by the scientific literature. Most myiases can be easily managed and have a good prognosis; however, the infestation is
considered embarrassing and repugnant to patients and to health care professionals (Francesconi and Lupi 2012). Moreover, maggot
infestations diagnosed in non self-sufficient patients may indicate inadequate care, may have significant psychological impact on patients
and their families and can seriously harm the reputation of the involved healthcare facility (Sherman et al. 2005; Thyssen et al. 2012).
Italian health care providers should know and implement the basic rules of entomoprophylaxis for myiasis in the facilities where they are
working and educate patients, care giver and travellers accordingly (Table 2).Table 2Entomoprophylaxis measures recommended by Istituto
Superiore di Sanità, Italy (Dutto et al. 2011)Behavioural prophylaxis Avoid activities in close contact with cattle (Hypoderma and
Oestrus) Do not sleep outdoors near to livestock (particularly sheep) Take care to personal and environmental hygiene Cover any open wounds
in exposed parts of the body Do not walk barefoot, especially on sandy soils (Cordylobia)Chemical prophylaxis Use repellent active against
ticks and mosquitoes to prevent the phoretic transmission of Dermatobia a Prophylaxis physical Use mosquito nets in the rooms where people
are hospitalized with exposed/necrotic injuries (possibility of nosocomial myiasis) Ironing clothes (Cordylobia)Mechanical prophylaxis Use
mosquito nets (Dermatobia) aAdult females of Dermatobia hominis attach eggs to the abdomen of a bloodsucking intermediary mosquito or non-
biting flies of the family Muscidae, which feed on liquid secretions such as sweat. This method of egg delivery is called phoresis
Entomoprophylaxis measures recommended by Istituto Superiore di Sanità, Italy (Dutto et al. 2011) aAdult females of Dermatobia hominis
attach eggs to the abdomen of a bloodsucking intermediary mosquito or non-biting flies of the family Muscidae, which feed on liquid
secretions such as sweat. This method of egg delivery is called phoresis (DOC 139 kb) Authors thank Miss Laura Passalacqua for the help in
preparing the figure files and Mr. Marco Miranda who kindly assisted the preparation and proof-reading of the manuscript. Ethical approval
was not deemed necessary. The authors state that they have no conflict of interest.
