Academic Editor: Stefano F. Cappa Fahr's disease (FD) is characterized by sporadic or familiar idiopathic calcification of the basal
ganglia, dentate nuclei of the cerebellum, and centrum semiovale, mainly presenting with movement disorder, dementia, and behavioral
abnormalities. We described a rare case of Fahr's disease presenting at onset only with behavioral and neuropsychological alterations, whose
diagnosis was supposed only after a brain CT, which showed extensive bilateral calcifications in the dentate nuclei of the cerebellum and
basal ganglia. Since the onset of Fahr's disease may be a dysexecutive syndrome with behavioral abnormalities, the clinical and radiological
features are really important to do the appropriate diagnosis. Fahr's disease (FD) is characterized by sporadic or familiar idiopathic
calcification of the basal ganglia, dentate nuclei of the cerebellum, and centrum semiovale . People with FD frequently present with
movement disorders such as rigidity, hypokinesia, tremor, choreoathetosis, and ataxia and with frontal subcortical and cortical patterns of
behavioral disturbances such as psychosis, mood disorders, and dysexecutive neuropsychological syndrome . Other neurological features are
seizures or stroke-like events . Although dementia is a common disorder in FD, the presentation of this disease with pure dementia (without
extrapyramidal disorders) has been rarely reported [2, 5]. There is no cure for FD, nor is there a standard course of treatment. Treatment
is symptomatic. While the exact pathological process is not known, it has been suggested that the hyperintense T2-weighted images seen on
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) may reflect a slowly progressive metabolic or inflammatory process in the brain, which subsequently
calcifies and is probably responsible for the neurologic deficits observed. Herein we report a 71-year-old man presenting with cognitive
impairment as the sole manifestation of FD. A 71-year-old man came to our observation for short-term memory impairment. His family history
was negative for neurodegenerative and movement disorders. He had been affected for around 15 years by diabetes mellitus and for 3 years by
arterial hypertension, with good pharmacological glycemia and blood pressure control. General as well as neurological examinations were
normal. At neuropsychological assessment, he presented with a dysexecutive syndrome with alterations in abstract reasoning, calculation, and
sequential complex tasks, beyond mild memory impairment. Indeed, MMSE (Italian version) score was 23/30, Rey Auditory Verbal Learning test
(RAVLT) was 30.30 (cut-off 28.52), Rey Auditory RAVLT Recall was 3.8 (cut-off 4.68), Attentive Matrices score was 32.75 (cut-off 30), Trial
Making Test (TMT) A score was 63 (cut-off 93), TMT B score was 402 (cut-off 282), TMT B-A score was 339 (cut-off 186), and Raven's Coloured
Progressive (CPM) Matrices score was 20.5 (cut-off 18). He performed daily living activities and had no behavioral disorders. Standard blood
tests, including calcium and phosphorus, as well as the hormonal profile, including thyroid hormones, parathormone, and vitamin D, were
normal. At one-year follow-up, the patient started losing memory daily and presenting an aggressive behavior; moreover, he had to be helped
in the performance of many of the activities of daily living. Finally, in the last period, he became totally unable to perform daily living
activities, with decreased short- and long-term memory and language deficits, with an important memory deficit and a severe dysexecutive
syndrome. The MMSE score got as low as 11/30, RAVLT Learning was 12.30, RAVLT Recall was 0, and Attentive Matrices score was 5.75, whilst
TMT and CPM were not administered. Moreover, a clear extrapyramidal syndrome was also evidenced. The computed tomography showed extensive
bilateral calcifications in the dentate nuclei of the cerebellum and basal ganglia (Figure 1) and bilateral occipital silent brain
infarctions. This is a rare case of FD presenting solely with cognitive and behavioral impairments. Indeed, to the best of our knowledge,
only a few cases with the same clinical features have been described so far. The first case of FD with a pure and presenile dementia without
either extrapyramidal symptoms or metabolic abnormalities has been reported by Modrego and coworkers. The authors described a patient
showing bilateral striopallidodentate calcinosis and diffuse cortical atrophy predominantly in parietotemporal areas and mild
periventricular hyperintensities . The patient by Benke et al. presented with a neurologically “asymptomatic” FD with rapidly progressive
cognitive and behavioral disorders . In particular, the patient's dysexecutive syndrome was severe whereas memory and attention were only
grossly/roughly compromised. Intriguingly, within twelve-month follow-up, the authors observed a rapid global deterioration, with PET
findings (a reduction in glucose metabolism in the basal ganglia and frontal brain) correlating with neuropsychological symptoms. In both
case reports, as in our patient, the first cognitive symptoms concern a dysexecutive syndrome with a rapidly global cognitive deterioration
without any specific neurological patterns. Moreover, the brain metabolism studied by Benke et al. may explain the cognitive and behavioral
problems in FD with dementia and without or with mild parkinsonian symptoms. Thus, the CT findings are really important for a correct
differential diagnosis with respect to the frontotemporal dementia (FTD). Indeed, a patient by Weisman et al. had a wrong diagnosis of FTD,
disconfirmed only after autopsy. Finally, Lam et al. also described two cases of FD with minimal extra pyramidal symptoms and specific
neuropsychological deficit in frontal lobe tasks and in memory. FD is a rare condition with specific neuroradiological features but numerous
clinical manifestations. In the literature, there are 35 terms to describe bilateral calcification involving striatum, pallidum, and dentate
nucleus, commonly referred to as Fahr's disease . In “Fahr's Disease Registry,” the common manifestation was movement disorders (55%), in
particular parkinsonism (57%), while the hyperkinetic movement disorders accounted for the rest; cognitive impairment was the second most
common manifestation followed by cerebellar impairment and speech disorder. Overlap of neurologic manifestations such as movement disorder
associated with cognitive impairment and cerebellar signs were often present . Other minor overlapping manifestationsinclude pyramidal
signs, psychiatric disorders, sensory changes, and pain . In the few cases of FD with pure dementia without movement disorders, the
neuropsychological evaluation disclosed a dysexecutive syndrome with behavioral problems becoming dementia, as also showed by MRI and PET
images . It is interesting to note the use of also the diagnostic category “diffuse neurofibrillary tangles with calcification” (DNTC) as a
form of progressive dementia characterized by temporal or frontotemporal atrophy with neuronal loss and astrocytosis, neurofibrillary
tangles, and Fahr-type calcification, but no senile plaques in the cerebral cortex . DNTC is a rare entity, largely confined to Japan.
However, as suggested by Modrego et al. , the most appropriate diagnosis for the case of FD with dementia may be DNTC, although in vivo
diagnosis is still controversial . The present case describes FD with dementia without any other specific neurological signs, with regard to
the extrapyramidal ones. According to the few reported cases (Table 1), the first neuropsychological signs were a dysexecutive syndrome with
behavioral disorders, and, therefore, these clinical and radiological features are really important to do the most appropriate diagnosis and
to differentiate FD from FTD. Since individuals with FD may present at onset only with cognitive dysfunction without extrapyramidal signs,
physiciansshould consider this complex syndrome when counseling patients with mental deterioration and behavioral abnormalities. The authors
wish to thank Professor Agata Grosso for revising the paper in the English language. The authors declare that there is no conflict of
interests regarding the publication of this paper. Brain TC shows calcifications of the basal ganglia and dentate nucleus of cerebellum.
Summary of FD case with pure dementia.
