Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is an extremely rare malignant soft tissue sarcoma primarily affecting young patients. It usually occurs
in the lower extremities, although it can occur in soft tissue anywhere in the body. However, to our knowledge, there has been no case of
primary ASPS originating from the kidney in the literature. We herein present the imaging and clinical features of an ASPS which occurred in
a 16-year-old male presented as a palpable mass in the left side of the abdomen. Alveolar soft part sarcoma (ASPS) is a rare mesenchymal
tumor, accounting for 0.5-1.0% of all soft tissue sarcomas (1). It mainly occurs in young adults aged between 15 and 35 years. This slowly
growing, painless mass frequently accompanies metastatic lesions at the time of diagnosis. It usually affects the lower extremities in
adults and the head and neck in children. It could occur in many other sites including the female genital tract, mediastinum, breast,
urinary bladder, gastrointestinal tract, retroperitoneum and bones (2). Likewise, ASPS can arise in soft tissue anywhere in the body.
However, no case of primary ASPS of the kidney has been reported yet. Here, we report a rare case of renal involvement of ASPS with a brief
review of the literature. A 16-year-old male patient visited our hospital for the evaluation of left-sided abdominal pain and a palpable
mass for three months. Ultrasonography (US) (iU22; Philips Medical Systems, Bothel, WA, USA) revealed a solid heterogeneously hyperechoic
mass measuring more than 20 cm in the left mid-abdomen combined with internal increased blood flow and dilated vascular structures (Fig. 1A,
B). The renal parenchyma maintained its normal structure in the upper aspect of the mass. Since the boundary between the mass and renal
parenchyma was poorly defined, we assumed that the mass was arising from the left kidney. Enhanced abdominal computed tomography (CT) scans
(Somatom Sensation 64; Siemens Medical Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) showed a huge enhancing mass (about 15 × 13 × 21 cm), involving almost
the whole left kidney (Fig. 1C, D). The mass demonstrated a few faint calcifications and non-enhancing areas suggestive of necrosis.
Although the upper portion of the kidney appeared to be normal even on US, the boundary of the mass seemed relatively indistinctive on CT.
The left renal artery and a vein with variceal dilatation were observed around the mass and no distinctive filling defect was detected
within the vessels. In addition to this mass in the left kidney, multiple enlarged lymph nodes were found in the left retroperitoneal, left
para-aortic, aortocaval and left retrocrural regions. At the same time, the chest radiography showed a mediastinal widening with contour
bulging of both hila and diffuse nodular opacities in both lung fields. An enhanced chest CT (Somatom Sensation 64; Siemens Medical
Solutions, Erlangen, Germany) revealed a mild interlobular septal thickening with randomly distributed multiple nodules in both lung fields.
Moreover, extensive mediastinal and bilateral perihilar lymphadenopathies were detected (Fig. 1E). An osteolytic lesion was found in the
glenoid cavity of the right scapula. According to the positron emission tomography (PET)/CT (Biograph 40 True Point; Siemens Medical
Solutions, Knoxville, TN, USA) images acquired 60 minutes after injection of 8.3 mCi 18F-fluorodeoxyglucose (FDG), an inhomogeneous FDG
uptake was detected in the large mass of the left kidney (maximum standardized uptake value [max SUV] = 6.4). Multiple pulmonary nodules in
both lungs showed a max SUV of 1.5. The lymphadenopathies of the left retroperitoneal, left para-aortic, aortocaval and retrocrural regions,
right supraclavicular region, mediastinum and both perihilar regions showed a max SUV from 2.8-3.9 (Fig. 1F). An US-guided core needle
biopsy was performed for the mass of the left kidney. The pathology findings of the biopsy specimen confirmed the diagnosis of ASPS; nests
of polygonal cells abundant with eosinophilic cytoplasm were separated by vascular structures (Fig. 1G), showing periodic acid-Schiff
(PAS)-positive and diastase-resistant rod-shaped crystals within the cytoplasm (Fig. 1H). The suspicion of renal cell carcinoma (RCC) was
ruled out as the specimen did not contain psammomatous calcifications on hematoxylin and eosin staining and the cells were negative for
pancytokeratin and RCC antigen on immunohistochemical staining. Also no genetic abnormality was found in the additionally conducted
cytogenetic study with karyotyping. The patient received chemotherapy with ifosfamide and doxorubicin including multiple pulmonary lymph
nodes and bone metastases after the diagnosis. The left kidney tumor showed no change on the enhanced CT which was performed for response
evaluation after two chemotherapy sessions and the metastatic lymphadenopathies increased in size, exhibiting a further progression of the
disease. The patient refused further treatment and died after two months. Alveolar soft part sarcoma was first described by Christopherson
et al. (3) in 1952. Histologically, round or polygonal cells abundant with eosinophilic cytoplasm are arranged in nests and each nest is
separated by a coated vascular structure, exhibiting similar features to those of alveoli. The tumor cells are positive for PAS staining and
rhombus- and rod-shaped crystals resistant to diastase are identified within the cytoplasm (2). Although a large number of studies have been
conducted to find out the exact mechanism underlying the development of ASPS, the pathological mechanism still remains unclear. The name
'alveolar' soft part sarcoma is given based on the histological features of the tumors. In general, ASPSs are negative for epithelial
markers (i.e., cytokeratins and epithelial membrane antigen), specific neuroendocrine markers (i.e., chromogranin A and synaptophysin) and
specific melanocytic markers (i.e., HMB45 and Melan-A). Non-specific markers such as neuron-specific enolase and vimentin may be positive in
roughly 30-50% of the cases (2). Alveolar soft part sarcoma is often characterized by its slow growing nature and tendency to metastasize.
Approximately 20% of ASPSs accompany metastatic lesions at the initial diagnosis and approximately 80% of patients with ASPS experience
metastasis during the periods of treatment and follow-up. The prevalence of metastasis is higher with a large tumor size at the initial
diagnosis. ASPS tumors are larger in size and have a poor prognosis in adult patients (1). The size of the mass was 21 cm in our case and
metastatic lesions were already present in the lungs, lymph nodes and bones at the time of diagnosis. Extensive resection of the mass (R0
resection: complete resection with no microscopic residual tumor) is considered as the most effective treatment of ASPS. The local
recurrence rate reportedly ranges from 10% to 30% after the removal of the mass and an adjunctive radiation treatment could be beneficial to
prevent a relapse. The surgical resection of the lesion was considered to be difficult in our patient due to concurrent extensive
metastasis. For this reason, a conventional chemotherapy was initially attempted using cytotoxic agents. However, the effectiveness of
conventional chemotherapy is known to be insignificant in ASPS according to several previous other studies (1). Some studies have reported
the effectiveness of interferon alpha and recent studies have proved the effectiveness of anti-angiogenic agents (4). Usually, ASPS could
demonstrate a similar appearance as cavernous hemangioma or arteriovenous malformation, since there is an abundant distribution of blood
vessels within the mass. ASPS can be differentiated from those similar-looking tumors as the progress of this malignant soft tissue tumor is
totally different from others. The ASPS appeared as a solid mass with heterogeneous internal echogenicity and a rapid blood flow on US and
exhibited a low resistance index due to the arteriovenous shunt within the internal mass. The CT scan showed a low or the same attenuation
as the peripheral muscles on the pre-contrast scan and a dense enhancement was observed after contrast infusion. The signal intensity of the
mass was slightly higher or the same as that of the surrounding muscles on T1-weighted MR images, and a high signal intensity of the lesion
was seen on T2-weighted MR images. A dense enhancement was noted after the administration of contrast medium. The findings of a dilated
feeding artery and particularly a draining vein around the masses strongly suggested the presence of ASPS. A flow void was seen inside and
outside of the mass on T1- and T2-weighted MR images due to the prominent vascular structure (5). Our case also demonstrated the presence of
numerous collateral vessels in the tumor and in the peritumoral region in addition to the renal artery and vein with variceal changes. The
PET-CT facilitated the differentiation of the primary lesion from metastatic lesions in the presence of multiple masses at the time of
initial diagnosis (6). In this case, the highest FDG uptake (max SUV = 6.4) was observed in the mass of the left kidney. Considering the
fact that the primary lesion involved the kidney and that the above mentioned radiological findings were manifested, ASPS needs to be
differentiated from malignant renal tumors such as RCC, Wilms' tumor and other primary renal sarcomas including clear cell sarcoma and
malignant rhabdoid tumor. Renal cell carcinoma is an extremely rare childhood renal malignancy. However, it may be more frequently seen in
the age between 15 and 19 years. Histologically, RCC may mimic ASPS by the virtue of their abundant eosinophilic to clear cytoplasm. An
immunohistochemical evidence of strong cytokeratin and expression of RCC antigen makes it possible to distinguish RCC from ASPS (2). A large
number of recent studies of molecular cytogenetics had confirmed the expression of ASPL-TFE3 fusion gene in ASPS. ASPL-TFE3 fusion gene is a
fusion protein which is composed of ASPL gene on chromosome 17p25 and the TFE3 gene on chromosome Xp11. The expression of ASPL-TFE3 fusion
gene and its type could play a crucial role in the discrimination between an ASPS occurrence in the kidney and a RCC variant. This gene is
expressed as unbalanced der (17) t(X;17)(p11.2;q25) in ASPS while it is found as balanced t(X;17)(p11.2;q25) in some of RCC variants
occurring in children or young adults (7). In this case, karyotyping was done with both tumor specimen and bone marrow, and no genetic
abnormality was found. Wilms' tumor, the most common pediatric renal malignancy, is hardly seen in adults aged over 16 years. The tumor
commonly metastasizes into the lungs, liver and lymph nodes as in RCC. Furthermore, the tumor may extend to the renal vein and inferior vena
cava (IVC). In our case, there was no evidence of tumor extension into the renal vein and IVC, although multiple metastases were found in
the lungs, bones and lymph nodes (8). Clear cell sarcoma and rhabdoid tumor are particularly uncommon pediatric neoplasms of the kidney. In
the case of clear cell sarcoma, it mainly affects patients aged between 1-4 years, while rhabdoid tumor mostly occurs before the age of 2
years (9). Unfortunately, radiological findings do not provide distinct characteristics for each of those tumors. Therefore, the
pathological confirmation with a biopsy is crucial for making an accurate diagnosis. Like in other ASPSs, the findings of increased vascular
flow and variceal dilatation of vessels within and around the mass, including the necrotic portion, were detected on a CT scan in our case.
The US revealed the presence of a solid mass with heterogeneous echotexture, showing an increased vascular flow and variceal dilatation of
vessels. An ASPS is a very rare mesenchymal tumor and this is the first case report about an ASPS occurring in the kidney. Although it is an
uncommon entity, ASPS needs to be included in the list of differential diagnosis when a renal mass displaying the above imaging findings is
found in young adult patients. Imaging and pathologic findings of alveolar soft part sarcoma arising from kidney in 16-year-old boy. Two-
dimensional (A) and Doppler (B) ultrasonographic images show heterogeneously hyperechoic mass in left kidney with internal and peritumoral
dilated vascular structures. C, D. Contrast-enhanced CT scan of abdomen. Axial (C) and coronal (D) images show huge enhancing mass with
internal necrotic foci, occupying almost whole left kidney. Numerous collateral vessels in addition to renal artery and vein show variceal
changes. E. On chest CT with lung window setting, multiple different sized pulmonary nodules and diffuse interlobular septal thickening are
noted in both lung fields, suggesting metastasis. F. PET-CT shows inhomogeneous FDG uptakes in large mass of left kidney (max SUV = 6.4) and
in mass of small bowel mesentery (max SUV = 3.9). Multiple pulmonary nodules in both lungs and lymphadenopathies of left paraaortic,
aortocaval and retrocrural regions, right supraclavicular region, mediastinum and in both perihilar regions showed FDG uptakes. FDG =
fluorodeoxyglucose, max SUV = maximum standardized uptake value, PET = positron emission tomography. G. Epithelioid tumor cells arranged in
nests contain abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm (H&E, × 200). H. Tumor cells exhibit prominent periodic acid-Schiff (PAS)-positive, rod-shaped
crystals (arrow) in cytoplasm (PAS Stain with diastase, × 1000).
