cytokeratin cerebellopontine angle continuous rate infusion fluid‐attenuated inversion recovery glial fibrillary acidic protein
haematoxylin–eosin intracranial epidermoid/dermoid cyst intracranial neuroenteric cyst magnetic resonance imaging T1‐weighted images
T2‐weighted images An 11‐month‐old female Bloodhound was presented because of progressive ataxia and head swaying with insidious onset
2 weeks before admission. On neurologic examination, the dog was bright, alert, and responsive, but showed involuntary swaying of the head
to both sides and a mild head tilt to the left. Gait inspection disclosed mild ataxia. Paw placing responses were delayed in all 4 limbs.
Segmental spinal reflexes and skin sensation were normal. Cranial nerve examination identified left‐sided ventrolateral strabismus.
Nystagmus was not seen. All other cranial nerve functions were normal. Based on the clinical findings, bilateral central vestibular disease
was suspected. Hematology and serum biochemistry findings were within normal reference ranges. For magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), the dog
was premedicated with diazepam (0.5 mg/kg IV) and alfaxolone (2 mg/kg IV). Anesthesia was maintained with isoflurane. MRI was performed at
the MRB1 using a 1.5 Tesla Siemens Magnetom Avanto and 2 purpose‐built CPC coils. Magnetic resonance imaging of the brain disclosed a
well‐circumscribed cystic lesion with dimensions of approximately 1.5 × 2.2 × 2.9 cm inside of the fourth ventricle, with dorsal
displacement of the cerebellum, which was pushed against the osseous tentorium cerebelli, and dorsal compression of the myelencephalon
(Fig 1). Both structures were decreased by >50% of their expected dorsoventral diameters (Fig 1A). Sagittal images indicated no signs of
foramen magnum herniation or cervical syringomyelia (Fig 1A,B). MRI features of the RE‐INC on T1W pre‐(A) and post‐(B) contrast, T2W (C) and
FLAIR (D). The cyst caused severe compression of the adjacent cerebellum and brainstem (A; double‐pointed arrows). Mild ring enhancement is
seen after contrast administration (B; arrows). The cyst consists of a large dorsal compartment (Cyst) and a smaller ventrolateral
compartment, that is, less hyperintensive on T2W (C; asterisk) and isointensive to brain tissue on FLAIR (D; asterisk). Insets: mid‐sagittal
images T1 pre‐ and postcontrast. MRI, magnetic resonance imaging; FLAIR, fluid attenuated inversion recovery; TC, tentorium cerebelli. On
close examination, the cyst appeared loculated with a large dorsomedial compartment being strongly hyperintense on T2‐weighted images (T2W;
Fig 1C) and on fluid‐attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) sequence (Fig 1D). Another, smaller ventrolateral compartment was hyperintense on
T2W (Fig 1C asterisk) and isointense to brain parenchyma on FLAIR images (Fig 1D asterisk). The entire lesion was hypointense on precontrast
T1‐weighted images (T1W; Fig 1A) with slightly more extensive signal void in the smaller ventrolateral compartment. After injection of a
single bolus of gadopentetate dimeglumine (Magnograf, 0.2 mmol/kg IV), a peripheral ring enhancement with clear demarcation from neighboring
neuroparenchyma and the ventricular lumen was seen (Fig 1B arrows). The rostral parts of the ventricular system were symmetrically enlarged.
Based on the imaging findings, an intraventricular cyst was diagnosed. The authors considered an epidermoid/dermoid cyst (IEDC) most likely.
Additional differential diagnoses included choroid plexus cyst, ependymal cyst, and abscess bulging into the ventricle. Upon careful risk
evaluation, the dog underwent brain surgery. The dog received cefazolin (20 mg/kg IV) before surgery. Premedication, induction, and
maintenance of anesthesia were performed as described above. In addition, fentanyl was given as a continuous rate infusion (CRI)
(0.002 mg/kg/h). Just after craniotomy, the dog received methylprednisolone (30 mg/kg IV) and mannitol (1 g/kg IV) as a CRI over 20 minutes.
To prevent possible mannitol rebound effect, the dog received an injection of furosemide (2 mg/kg IV) 30 minutes after the CRI.
Perioperative monitoring included continuous assessment of cardiorespiratory function by pulse oximetry, electrocardiography, and expired
gas analysis. The caudal fossa was approached through a central suboccipital craniotomy. After durotomy, a cyst was identified within the
fourth ventricle, confined by an opaque, yellowish‐white capsule. The cyst wall was incised, after which approximately 6 mL of
yellowish‐brown mucoid fluid was removed with a syringe. The cyst then was removed in total by blunt dissection without obvious damage to
the neuroparenchyma. Approximately 10 minutes after extirpation, the dog experienced acute respiratory arrest. With recurrence of
spontaneous breathing, after 3–4 minutes, the dog developed persistent ataxic respirations characterized by exaggerated laryngeal and tongue
movements and the dog's lips were pulled back. Because spontaneous breathing did not restore physiological oxygen saturation of the blood,
oxygen was supplied. The gag reflex remained absent after withdrawal of anesthesia. All other cranial nerve functions were within normal
limits. Intravenous injection of naloxone hydrochloride (0.04 mg/kg) did not result in improvement. The dog did not regain consciousness and
died of apnea 12 hours after surgery. Cytologic examination of the cyst contents identified paucicellular mucoid material containing
necrotic cellular debris, keratin flakes, cholesterol crystals, fibrin, some free red blood cells, mixed degenerate mixed leukocytes, and
xanthomatous macrophages. Histologically, the inner surface of the cyst wall was lined by pseudostratified squamous epithelium interrupted
by segments of 2‐layered, ciliated, cuboidal, or columnar respiratory epithelium (Fig 2A). The transition between the 2 types of epithelium
was gradual and some keratinized foci very present. Either type of epithelium was present on a partially ruptured (Fig 2B), fibrovascular
capsule with multiple perivascular lymphoid aggregates and diffusely scattered lymphocytes and plasma cells (Fig 2C). Focal neutrophilic
infiltrates were seen in areas of squamous metaplasia and keratinization (Fig 2D). In addition, the stroma of the cyst wall contained
several microhemorrhages with hemosiderophage aggregation. (A) Photomicrograph of the transition between squamous (left) and respiratory
epithelium (right) lining the cyst. At higher magnification, the respiratory epithelium has a ciliated surface (inset). HE stain; scale
bars: 200 μm/inset 25 μm. (B) The cyst contains aggregates of fibrin, cell debris, and cholesterol clefts (arrowhead). HE stain; scale bar:
400 μm. Inflammatory changes consist of stromal lymphoid infiltrates (C; HE stain; scale bar: 100 μm) and intraepithelial and stromal
neutrophilic infiltrates associated with keratinization (D; PAS stain; scale bar: 100 μm). Immunohistochemically, all cells stain strongly
for CK (E) and also express S‐100 protein (F). The epithelium is negative for GFAP (G) and vimentin (H). Scale bars: 25 μm. HE,
hematoxylin–eosin; PAS, periodic acid‐Schiff; CK, cytokeratin; GFAP, glial fibrillary acidic protein. Although no goblet cells were evident
on conventional stains, the secretory activity of the epithelium was demonstrated by a large number of epithelial cells containing
cytoplasmic periodic acid‐Schiff (PAS)‐positive droplets (Fig 2D). Immunohistochemically, epithelial cells stained strongly for cytokeratin
(CK), weakly for S‐100 protein (if compared to attaching meningothelial cells), and negative for vimentin and glial fibrillary acidic
protein (GFAP; Fig 2E–H). Based on these results, the ventricular mass lesion was diagnosed as a respiratory subtype of an intracranial
neuroenteric cyst (RE‐INC). Neuroenteric cysts are rare CNS lesions that result from segmental persistence of the neuroenteric canal that
transiently connects the yolk sac to the amniotic cavity in the trilaminar germ disk or from impaired ventral separation of the endoderm
from the neural plate. Being related to the embryonic foregut, INC are lined by a mucin‐secreting epithelium, similar to that found in the
respiratory and gastrointestinal tract.1, 2 To date, approximately 140 INC cases have been described in the human medical literature,1 but
no such cases have been reported in the veterinary literature. Basically, INC can occur throughout the neuroaxis. Most INC in humans affect
the spinal cord with a predominance in the lower cervical and upper thoracic segments. INC are uncommon and usually occur in the caudal
fossa. Therefore, most reports describe midline lesions cranial to the brain stem. Other rare localizations comprise the craniocervical
junction, cerebellopontine angle (CPA), cerebellum, and fourth ventricle.1, 2 The clinical presentation of INC, as of other expansive mass
lesions, is related to pressure on the adjacent neural structures and blood vessels and to inflammatory changes, such as leukocyte‐mediated
injury, release of neurotoxic factors, and vasogenic edema. Neurologic dysfunction in the caudal fossa may arise from lesions of the
cerebellum, peduncles, brainstem, and nuclei and roots of cranial nerves V, VII, VIII, and IX.1, 2, 3, 4 With ventricular and CPA masses,
the vestibular system is particularly susceptible because of its superficial nuclear placement and its connections involving the brainstem
and caudal cerebellar peduncles.3, 5, 6 Accordingly, the left‐sided predominantly ventrolateral strabismus and head tilt, the bilateral
swaying of the head and delayed paw placing in this dog were compatible with an asymmetric, bilateral brainstem lesion affecting the
vestibular and proprioceptive pathways. Magnetic resonance imaging confirmed compression of both brainstem and cerebellum by a cystic mass
lesion of the fourth ventricle. Previously reported fourth ventricle and CPA cysts in dogs consisted of arachnoid diverticula, IEDC, choroid
plexus cysts and cysts arising from the ependyma.7 In agreement with previous reports in people, the RE‐INC appeared hypointense compared to
gray matter on T1W images and hyperintense on T2W and FLAIR sequences.1 Thus, the pattern is nonspecific and overlaps with the MRI features
of the most prevalent canine IEDC3, 6, 8 and much more rare choroid plexus cysts and ependymal cysts in dogs.9, 10 Based on experience in
human medicine, intracranial epithelial cysts appear hypo‐, iso‐, or hyperintense compared to CSF on both T1W and T2W sequences depending on
their protein content that results from intracystic hemorrhage, secretory activity, and breakdown products related to degeneration and
desquamation of the cellular lining.11 The distinction of nonsecretory and nondegenerate cysts, such as arachnoid diverticula may be
facilitated by FLAIR sequence, on which hyperintensity may persist if the protein, cholesterol, keratin content, or some combination of
these are increased.3, 12 As in the present case, postcontrast peripheral ring enhancement on T1W occasionally is seen in both INC2 and in
IEDC of dogs.3, 6 It is attributed to abundance of blood vessels within the cyst wall or vascular leakage.9 Peripheral ring enhancement also
is a frequent finding in brain abscesses. This differential diagnosis was considered unlikely because of the intraventricular location of
the lesion, lack of perilesional edema in the adjacent neuroparenchyma, absence of penetrating injuries to the calvarium or infection of the
inner ear, maxillary sinus and dental alveoli and no indications of a compromised immune system.13 In humans, neurocystocercosis would have
been considered a relevant differential diagnosis.13, 14, 15 Among the more likely differential diagnoses, cystic neoplasms such as
meningioma were excluded because of lack of neoplastic growth.13 Because the MR features provided nonspecific findings, the definite
diagnosis relied on histologic examination, by which the mass lesion was classified as a cyst of epithelial origin. Apical cilia,
PAS‐positive basement membrane and the secretory activity of CK‐positive epithelial cells were findings compatible with origin from endoderm
rather than from neuroepithelium. Most conspicuously, the ciliated pseudostratified columnar epithelium resembled upper airway epithelium
and led to the final diagnosis of a respiratory neuroenteric cyst type A.2, 11, 16, 17, 18 Multifocal transition into keratinized squamous
epithelium represents a metaplastic adaptation to chronic physical and inflammatory irritation of the cyst wall.16 As a consequence, leakage
of cyst contents resulted in aseptic meningitis. In particular, keratin flakes have been associated with PMN‐mediated recurrent meningitis
in humans with INC,1, 16 similar to the reactions seen in dogs with IEDC.6 Ontogenetically, respiratory epithelium is a hallmark of the
nasopharynx, paranasal sinuses, and middle ear cavities. In hypophyseal and parahypophyseal areas, Rathke's cleft would be considered most
likely among the likely origins of the cyst.18, 19 The caudal fossa, caudal nasopharynx, and middle ear would be more probable sources. In
the absence of a patent connection to these compartments on MRI, a misplaced vesicle or cell raft from the primitive endoderm very likely
could have given rise to the cyst wall that was disconnected to or later entrapped in the course of neurocranium development. The normal
derivates of the foregut include the upper and lower respiratory tract (causing RE‐INC) and the proximal gastrointestinal tract, including
the esophagus, stomach, duodenum, liver, and pancreas (causing GI‐INC). To the authors′ knowledge, this report represents the first
documented case of a RE‐INC in a dog. Regardless of their benign character, INC incite neurologic deficits either by impingement on neural
structures or by the recurrent aseptic meningitis or both.1, 16 Additionally, malignant transformation of INC and other epithelial
inclusions into carcinoma or adenocarcinoma has been reported occasionally.1 Therefore, complete surgical excision of the cyst is the
treatment of choice whereas cyst fenestration and partial removal of the cyst wall for mass reduction carry the risk of recurrence and
progression to malignancy.1 The surgical outcome of extirpation was good in most reported human cases. Aseptic meningitis is a considerable
but usually transient complication.1, 2 Surgical exploration of the caudal fossa carries some procedural risks. Fatal cardiorespiratory
impairment (as occurred in this case) has been reported in a child and a young woman with IEC in the pons and medulla.2, 17 Similar cases of
apnea and acute respiratory arrest after suboccipital craniectomy or cranioplasty for caudal fossa decompression and cerebellar ptosis from
Arnold Chiari malformation have been reported in the human medical literature; in particular in pediatric patients.20, 21 Intraoperative
injury to the brainstem, secondary compression or cerebellar ptosis from postoperative hematoma and acute obstructive hydrocephalus as well
as loss of respiratory center neurons caused by chronic brainstem compression are possible pathogenetic mechanisms.21 It also may be
hypothesized that sudden decompression triggered reperfusion injury. Unfortunately, the owners declined postmortem evaluation. In summary,
this is the first report on an INC and, in particular, its respiratory subtype (RE‐INC) in a dog. Hence, endodermal cysts should be
considered among the differential diagnoses for cystic lesions of the caudal fossa. Their radiologic appearance may be misleading owing to
variable protein content of INC and the existence of similar intracranial lesions, in particular IEDC, from which they can only be
distinguished by histopathologic examination. Complete surgical removal is the treatment of choice, but can be associated with critical
cardiorespiratory center dysfunction. Aside from the mass effect, morbidity by INC may arise from aseptic chemical meningitis that may even
become apparent after surgical removal. Conflict of Interest Declaration: The authors disclose no conflict of interest. MRB
Forschungszentrum Magnet‐Resonanz‐Bayern e.V., Wuerzburg, Germany
