Recessive mutations in the ANO5 gene, encoding anoctamin 5, cause proximal limb girdle muscular dystrophy (LGMD2L), Miyoshi-type distal
myopathy (MM3) and asymptomatic hyper- CKemia. We report a woman with exertion-induced myalgia and weakness in the hip girdle manifesting at
the age of 40. Creatine kinase (CK) was increased 20-fold. Histologically the dominating feature was necrotizing myopathy, but long-term
immunosuppressive therapy did not change CK level or myopathic symptoms. Molecular genetic investigation led to the finding of the
homozygous ANO5 c.191dupA mutation. This is a report of a muscular dystrophy due to ANO5 mutation presenting histologically as necrotizing
myopathy. For this reason our finding extends the histological spectrum of myopathies due to ANO5 mutations as well as the possible
differential diagnoses for necrotizing myopathy. Recessive mutations in the ANO5 gene (ANO5, MIM 6086629) are associated with limb girdle
muscular dystrophy (LGMD) 2L; known to be the third most common LGMD in Northern and Central Europe (1-3) but also with a distal non-
dysferlin Miyoshi type dystrophy (MM3) or with asymptomatic hyperCKemia (4, 5). We present here a patient homozygous for the ANO5 mutation
c.191dupA with necrotizing myopathy as the dominating histological feature. A 40-year-old athletic Caucasian woman started to complain about
exertion-induced weakness and myalgia, especially in thighs and buttocks. At the time she had been weight training and mountain biking
several times a week. Creatine kinase (CK) was 20-fold increased. A muscle biopsy from the gastrocnemius muscle presented as necrotizing
myopathy (Fig. 1). Due to MHC upregulation myositis therapy with prednisolone and methotrexate (MTX) was initiated which diminished myalgia
but the CK remained constantly raised (10- to 20-fold, maximum 35-fold) over several years. Investigations for myotoxic medication,
potential malignancies and antibodies against signal recognition particle were negative. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) revealed
asymmetric fatty atrophy of both thighs with accentuation of the posterior compartment (Fig. 2). First presentation of the patient in our
clinic was five years after disease onset. She then complained of ongoing exercise intolerance with myalgia of the upper legs and hip
girdle, difficulties in climbing stairs and rising from sitting or squatting position. Examination revealed mildly asymmetric weakness of
the hip flexors and foot plantarflexors with restricted monopedal jumping and tiptoe walking. The CK was elevated 15-fold. Some
fibrillations in the gastrocnemius muscle were obvious. The permanent elevation of CK despite immunosuppression, and the clinical
presentation with prevalent proximal leg weakness as well as the charcteristic MRI-findings prompted us to search for causative mutations in
ANO5. Amplification and sequencing of exon 5 of the ANO5 gene revealed the homozygous mutation c.191dupA (4) a founder mutation frequently
identified in northern Europe patients with ANO5 myopathy (2-4, 6, 7). Therefore we diagnosed a necrotizing myopathy characterized by
necrotic fibres and the absence of inflammatory and dystrophic signs, accompanied by an otherwise typical clinical presentation of ANO5
myopathy with LGMD phenotype. (a-d). Muscle biopsy from the gastrocnemic muscle. (a) H&E, (b) Gomori Trichrome. Occurence of 8% disseminated
necrotic muscle fibers *, positive for (c) major histocompatibility complex (MHC I) and (d) complement (C5b9). Some smaller muscle fibres
(25 μm) contained internalized caveolin and (e) dysferlin, indicating regenerating fibres. No inflammatory infiltrates, fibrosis, fatty
degeneration, or further myopathic changes were detected. (f) H&E. Some lipocytes (arrow) were visible in the perifascicular connective
tissue. Magnification x 10. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI, T1 fat suppressed) of the upper legs of the patient at 42 years old, with very
mild asymmetric fatty replacement in the posterior compartment, accentuated in the left semimembranous muscle (a). Further progression at
follow-up after one year (b). Necrotizing myopathy has been associated with a variety of neoplasms and with autoimmune processes, e.g. as in
the anti-signal recognition particle (anti-SRP) syndrome. However, we did not find any evidence of such etiological causes in our patient.
Interestingly most recently Claeys at al. presented a patient with immune mediated necrotizing myopathy with antibodies against
3-hydoxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme-Areductase without previous statin exposure in which 2 pathogenetic mutations of ANO5 (c.191dupA, exon 5;
c.1627dupA, exon 15) were identified (8). Since we did not test for other antibodies, we cannot completely rule out the possibility of
myositis or immune mediated necrotizing myopathy, although it is very unlikely because immunosuppressive therapy had no beneficial effect in
our patient. There was also no hint of other underlying causes for myocyte necrosis; e.g. rhabdomyolysis in metabolic myopathies, necrosis
as a sequelae of inflammation, toxin and drug-induced causes. Few necrotic fibers can also occur as part of the dystrophic pattern in ANO5
myopathy (2, 9, 10), but in contrast to necotizing myopathy they are invariably associated with fatty and fibrotic remodelling. Deficiency
in Anoctamin 5, a putative calcium-activated chloride channel in skeletal muscle, is associated with multifocal loss of the costameres and
gaps in the sarcolemmal membrane. Therefore a defective membrane repair might result in a higher vulnerability of muscle fibres, causing
ongoing hyperCKemia and necrosis even in early (histological) stages of ANO 5 myopathy. ANO5 myopathy can present as necrotizing myopathy
extending the histological spectrum of myopathies due to ANO5 mutations as well as the possible differential diagnoses for necrotizing
myopathy. The authors thank Prof. Rolf Schröder, Institute of Neuropathology, University Erlangen for histological analysis of the muscle
biopsy, Thekla Wangemann for performing the PCR, and Dr. Kathryn Birch for copy editing the manuscript.
