To the Editor: Dermoscopy (also known as dermatoscopy, epiluminescence microscopy, and surface microscopy) is a noninvasive technique that
enables rapid and magnified (×10) in vivo observation of the skin and detection of morphologic details often not visible to the naked eye.
Videodermatoscopy, which is performed with a probe equipped with lenses providing higher magnification (up to ×1,000) and connected to a
personal computer, enables more detailed inspection of the skin than does manual dermoscopy and enables storage of digital images. Both
techniques have been widely used for the differential diagnosis and monitoring of pigmented lesions; however, a role for these techniques in
the diagnosis and follow-up of other skin disorders has recently emerged (1,2). Their usefulness for diagnosing several parasitic disorders
of the skin (e.g., scabies, pediculosis, phthiriasis, larva migrans, tungiasis, myiasis, and tick infestations) has led to introduction of
the term entodermoscopy. In the hands of trained physicians, these techniques are more effective than traditional methods (e.g., parasite
identification by microscopic examination of samples obtained by skin scraping); they are well accepted by patients and particularly
suitable for mass screening and posttreatment follow-up examinations (1–8). We describe a puzzling case in which videodermatoscopy enabled a
definitive diagnosis of trombiculosis. Trombiculosis is a common but underreported ectoparasitosis that is probably often misdiagnosed. In
January 2013, a 66-year-old man from eastern Sicily, Italy, reported diffuse intense pruritus that persisted despite various treatments
administered in the previous months for a well-documented diagnosis of scabies. The condition had considerably impaired his quality of life,
causing family concerns and missed workdays. Physical examination revealed multiple excoriations and pinpoint erythematous macules scattered
throughout the trunk and lower legs (Figure, panel A), but no burrows or other findings suggestive of scabies were detectable with use of a
common magnification lens. An accurate and thorough examination by videodermatoscopy (at ×150 magnification) revealed a reddish mite
strongly attached to the skin on the patient’s right shin. In the stored images, a larval Neotrombicula autumnalis mite was subsequently
identified (Figure, panel B). A diagnosis of cutaneous trombiculosis was made, and the patient was instructed to avoid further environmental
exposure; his symptoms were consequently relieved. Clinical features of a nonspecific lesion (A) and its corresponding, unequivocal
dermoscopy findings (B), showing a Neotrombicula autumnalis mite attached to the skin (magnification ×150). Trombiculosis is an infestation
of the skin by the larval stage of various species of mites belonging to the phylum Arthropoda, class Arachnida, subclass Acarina. N.
autumnalis mites are more diffuse in the temperate and humid European environment, where adult individuals live and reproduce on the soil,
especially during warmer and wet late summer months. Eggs usually hatch at the end of autumn, and new mites, which at their larval stage are
obligate parasites of warm-blooded hosts, usually feed and grow on the skin of small rodents and dogs, injecting lytic enzymes to digest
cutaneous cells. Humans engaged in outdoor activities or staying in the countryside for professional or recreational purposes can become
occasional hosts of this ectoparasite. Infection is more common in autumn and should be suspected for persons at risk (e.g., farmers,
hunters, children) who have an itchy eruption with a likely environmental cause (9). No specific medications are required to treat
trombiculosis in humans. Usually effective measures are use of repellents, avoidance of exposure by wearing adequate clothing when in mite-
infested areas, and washing of body and clothes with soap and hot water immediately after exposure. Itch can sometimes be relieved by
supportive care with oral antihistamines or topical corticosteroids (9). Antimicrobial drugs might be needed to cure bacterial
superinfection resulting from repeated scratching. Trombiculosis is not considered rare, but it is underreported and, probably, often
misdiagnosed. Cutaneous findings are nonspecific, and an accurate anamnesis is essential for making this challenging diagnosis. Because the
patient reported here denied any professional or recreational outdoor activities, a single clinical examination would probably have led to a
wrong diagnosis of a nonspecific itchy dermatitis, leading to use of inadequate or needless medications. Also, our experience confirms that
common magnification lenses and even dermoscopy at ×10 magnification have some limitations; parasites can easily be missed or barely
noticeable so that their identification can be quite difficult. In such instances, videodermatoscopy might lead to the diagnosis and should
be considered as a useful diagnostic aid. Image storage and sharing can also facilitate collaboration with experts and can enable timely
recognition of unusual parasitic disorders imported from different geographic areas or tropical countries. The cost of the equipment varies
according to resolution quality, magnification capability, and image storage facility; costs range from 500 (for simple systems) to 10,000
(for sophisticated systems) euros. The expense is greatly outweighed by the advantages of avoiding the high cost of managing outbreaks of
epidemic parasitoses resulting from misdiagnosis, treatment failures, and incomplete posttreatment monitoring (10). Videodermatoscopy is a
noninvasive way to diagnose some pruritic disorders while avoiding unnecessary, uncomfortable, and sometimes expensive investigations and
treatments. Physicians without access to such equipment should consider promptly referring patients to the nearest available
videodermatoscopy service for effective management. Suggested citation for this article: Nasca MR, Lacarrubba F, Micali G. Diagnosis of
trombiculosis by videodermatoscopy . Emerg Infect Dis . 2014 Jun [date cited]. http://dx.doi.org/10.3201/eid2006.130767
