Enteroviruses commonly encounter babies and children and infections present in a wide variety of symptoms ranging from asymptomatic
infection, benign illness, and aseptic meningitis, hand-foot-and-mouth disease to severe life-threatening disease. Some newborns develop
severe disease in the first 2 weeks of life and long-term sequelae may occur among survivors. We present a case report of a Caucasian
newborn baby boy with severe encephalitis and systemic coxsackievirus B3 infection. The coincidence of maternal infection as well as
previous mild respiratory illness in his sister suggests either prenatal or horizontal postnatal transmission. An electroencephalogram
showed a severe pathologic pattern with theta-delta-rhythm and spike-wave complexes on both hemispheres. We also observed an unusual
prolonged viremia for a period of 6 weeks. Due to the lack of specific antiviral treatment options, the supportive management included
ventilation and medical treatment of seizures. Phylogenetic analysis revealed a genogroup D2 virus previously exclusively detected in China
and now described in Europe for the first time. Enteroviral infection is an important differential diagnosis in neonatal encephalitis.
Prolonged viremia must be taken into account and might correlate with disease severity. The newly observed enterovirus genotype D2 is
spreading from Asia to other continents. Enteroviruses commonly infect children, with syndromes ranging from asymptomatic infection and
benign illness, aseptic meningitis, to severe life-threatening disease . Some newborns develop severe disease in the first 2 weeks of life
and long-term sequelae may occur among survivors. Risk factors and clinical features associated with severe disease involve early onset of
illness within the first few days of life . Enteroviruses include more than 260 different types of pathogens including polioviruses,
echoviruses, coxsackieviruses and rhinoviruses. Illness encompasses a wide spectrum of symptoms from mild fever to upper respiratory tract
infections, rash, aseptic meningitis, severe myocarditis, encephalitis, and paralytic disorders. Enteroviruses are transmitted primarily via
a fecal-oral route and respiratory aerosols . Coxsackie A viruses have been associated with mild clinical symptoms such as flu-like illness
and meningitis and hand-foot-and-mouth disease. By contrast, coxsackie B viruses may cause pancreatitis, hepatitis, aseptic meningitis,
myocarditis/pericarditis, and type 1 diabetes as well as neonatal sepsis . In 2006, six neonates with enteroviral meningoencephalitis were
described . Five babies presented with prolonged seizures, and one presented with systemic enteroviral disease. Cranial ultrasonography
showed increased echogenicity in the periventricular white matter, and magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) confirmed mild to severe white
matter damage in all babies. Recent case reports describe a full-term neonate with coxsackie B2 infection presenting with
meningoencephalitis with seizures, and lesions in the white matter, and a fatal case of newborn coxsackie B1 virus infection with apnoeic
episodes and desaturations . In these cases, an electroencephalogram (EEG) revealed multifocal epileptiform discharges, and a cranial MRI
showed multiple lesions, respectively. We report here a full-term Caucasian newborn boy, who was delivered by Caesarean section at 38 weeks
of gestation in 2011. Within the last weeks of a previously unremarkable pregnancy, his mother showed signs of infection. His 2-year-old
sister presented with a common cold within the week of his birth. On the first day postpartum he showed a macular exanthema on his trunk and
face. On day 5 postpartum, he showed a decline in his general condition and phases of severe apnea. Hence, he was admitted to a neonatal
intensive care unit. Positive airway pressure ventilation was performed for a period of 24 hours followed by spontaneous breathing of the
neonate. Broad spectrum antibiotic therapy including gentamicin and ampicillin was started. In the course of treatment, he showed signs of
partial seizures and an EEG performed on day 7 postpartum indicated a severe pathologic pattern with theta-delta-rhythm and spike-wave
complexes on both hemispheres. An intermitted burst-suppression pattern was detected in slow sleep and levetiracetam therapy was initiated.
Follow-up EEGs continued to show multifocal spike-wave complexes and burst-suppression. A neurological examination showed a severe muscle
hypotonia but no signs of focal neurological deficits. A cardiorespirogram revealed central apnea with desaturations and bradycardias. Due
to the clinical picture of encephalitis, a lumbar puncture was performed, showing an elevation of his cell count (29 leucocytes/μL) and
protein level (1140g/L). Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) bacterial cultures were sterile and antibiotic treatment was stopped accordingly.
Epstein–Barr virus and herpes simplex virus were not detected in his CSF, but enterovirus ribonucleic acid (RNA) was positive by polymerase
chain reaction (PCR). The genetic relationship of the virus was revealed by sequencing the VP1 gene. This analysis showed that this virus
isolate is closely related to coxsackievirus B3 (CV-B3) detected in China in 2008 and belonged to D2 genogroup (Figure 1). The accession
number of our isolate 11-859-10 is KJ400861. Retrospectively, all available blood and urine samples were analyzed for enterovirus RNA. In
two urine samples and in several serum samples up to week 6 postpartum, enterovirus RNA was still detectable indicating a generalized
enterovirus infection with prolonged viremia. Phylogenetic analysis of coxsackievirus B3 strains based on 804 nucleotides VP1 sequence
(according to nucleotide position 2469 – 3272 of coxsackievirus B3 prototype Nancy CXA3G) using representative strains in the GenBank
database. Geneious 6.1.1 software was used to construct the neighbor-joining tree with CoxB1 as outgroup strain (CXA1G). The strain
identified in this case report is indicated by a rectangle. The patient’s seizures ceased rapidly after initiation of levetiracetam
medication. A cranial MRI on day 5 revealed a deficiency of white matter with subsequent ventriculomegaly which decreased but was still
observed in a follow-up MRI at the age of 3 months. During the further course of treatment anti-convulsive therapy could be stopped since
the following EEGs revealed a gradual improvement with cessation of epilepsy typical potentials. Nevertheless, he still showed muscle
hypotonia at the age of 1 year. Perinatal acquired enterovirus infections may lead to severe disease such as meningitis or encephalitis.
Recently, two cases of neonatal enterovirus meningitis were reported and etiologically the parents probably transmitted the infection during
rooming-in . Severe disease has been described with infection in the first 2 weeks of life and preceding maternal illness peripartum . In
the case presented here, maternal infection as well as previous mild respiratory illness in the neonate’s sister preceding the baby’s
disease indicates either prenatal or horizontal postnatal transmission. Central nervous system disease in babies can cause significant long-
term morbidity including cerebral palsy and seizures . Hypoxia or circulatory compromise as cause for the baby’s neurological state could be
excluded as no prolonged hypoxic episodes occurred and myocarditis was not present. Immunoglobulin has been used as a therapeutic agent for
neonates; however, clinical efficacy has not been proven. Specific antiviral therapy is not available. Therefore, treatment is supportive
and tailored to organ dysfunction including ventilation and medical treatment of seizures . Whereas the diagnosis of enterovirus infection
is traditionally performed by viral isolation in cell culture, PCR has been demonstrated to be highly sensitive, specific and rapid . We
observed an unusual prolonged viremia for a period of 6 weeks, whereas viremia usually lasts only for a few days . Duration and level of
detectable viral RNA in blood specimens are positively correlated with disease severity . Most variable regions of the enterovirus genome
are within the gene coding for the capsid protein VP1. In 2008, an outbreak of aseptic meningitis due to coxsackie B3 virus genogroup D2 was
described for Shandong Province in China . Phylogenetic analysis revealed that the CV-B3 identified in the presented case is closely related
to the Chinese outbreak strain and has so far not been reported in Europe. Enterovirus infections are of clinical relevance during the
neonatal period. In particular, in the typical season, enteroviral infections may be an important differential diagnosis in neonatal
encephalitis. We report a newborn presenting with encephalitis and systemic coxsackie B3 virus infection. In addition to the CSF, viral RNA
was also detectable in urine and serum samples. The isolated virus is closely related genetically to an enterovirus type previously unique
to Eastern China and is now spreading from Asia to Europe. Written informed consent was obtained from the patient’s parents. A copy of the
written consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. CSF: Cerebrospinal fluid; CV-B3: Coxsackievirus B3; EEG:
Electroencephalogram; MRI: Magnetic resonance imaging; PCR: Polymerase chain reaction; RNA: Ribonucleic acid. The authors declare that they
have no competing interests. SR, DF, SSB and JP analyzed and interpreted the patient data regarding enterovirus infection. SB and SD
performed sequence analysis and sequence comparison. SR, JT and PS wrote the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
We would like to thank B. Lenz for excellent technical assistance and C. Gesell for valuable support.
