In small children, retropharyngeal abscesses usually occur after upper respiratory tract infections. Unlike in adults, these abscesses are
difficult to diagnose in small children, and can rapidly develop into deep neck or mediastinal abscesses. A 2-year-old Japanese boy recently
presented to our department with a chief complaint of neck swelling. Physical examination revealed bilateral tonsillitis and swelling of the
left posterior pharyngeal wall. Emergency neck computed tomography angiography showed a contrast-enhanced abscess cavity posterior to the
left retropharyngeal space, and a low-density area surrounded by an area without contrast enhancement in the posterior neck. The latter was
suspected to be a deep neck infection secondary to a retropharyngeal abscess. After surgery, the patient was diagnosed with a
retropharyngeal abscess and concurrent cystic lymphangioma. The lesions improved after intraoral incision and drainage, and administration
of antibiotics. Lymphangiomas and retropharyngeal abscesses are both known to be more common in children than in adults. However, we found
no other reports of concomitant presentation of lymphangioma and retropharyngeal abscess in the literature. Retropharyngeal abscesses occur
more often in children than in adults, and are not rare . Although the first-line treatment is usually surgical incision and drainage , a
few recent case studies reported successful treatment with antimicrobial agents only . Retropharyngeal abscesses have been reported to cause
deep neck and mediastinal abscesses in some cases. In children, the symptoms of retropharyngeal abscesses are less specific than in adults,
and physical examination is less likely to reveal definitive findings, which can cause delayed diagnosis. We recently encountered a patient
who presented with a chief complaint of neck swelling, and was subsequently found to have a retropharyngeal abscess caused by drug-resistant
pneumococcal infection, with a concurrent cervical tumour. We report here our surgical and medical treatment of concomitant retropharyngeal
abscess and cystic lymphangioma, and review the relevant literature. A 2-year-old Japanese boy was hospitalised with a 2-day history of
fever and neck swelling. He had visited a nearby hospital the previous day and had been prescribed clarithromycin. However, the neck
swelling increased rapidly, and he was referred to our hospital. On admission, his temperature was 37.5°C and blood pressure was
118/80 mmHg. Physical examination revealed bilateral tonsillitis and swelling of the left posterior pharyngeal wall, and a mildly tender
soft mass on his left posterior neck. Laboratory tests revealed a white blood cell count of 14,840 cells/μL and C-reactive protein level of
1.70 mg/dL. Emergency neck computed tomography (CT) angiography showed an enhanced abscess cavity posterior to the left retropharyngeal
space, and a low-density area surrounded by an area without contrast enhancement in the posterior neck (Figure 1). The latter was suspected
to be a deep neck infection secondary to the retropharyngeal abscess. Based on these findings, we performed surgical incision and drainage
under general anaesthesia. After induction of anaesthesia, we used a gag to hold the mouth open, and examined the patient’s oral cavity to
locate the exact site of swelling in the left posterior pharyngeal wall (Figure 2). After aspirating 1 mL of purulent fluid by needle
puncture, we made an incision over the abscess and washed the abscess cavity with physiological saline. Culture of the abscess fluid was
positive for penicillin-resistant Streptococcus pneumoniae (PRSP). We also percutaneously punctured the mass on the posterior neck, and
drained approximately 10 mL of clear yellowish lymph, but no pus. Rapid cytology showed that this fluid contained mostly protein-like
substances and lymphocytes. The mass was no longer palpable after drainage, and no further surgery was performed. The patient was placed
under observation with postoperative administration of meropenem (450 mg) and clindamycin (150 mg). On postoperative day 3, his laboratory
test results showed improvement, and the antibiotic therapy was changed to ceftriaxone sodium hydrate (700 mg) based on the sensitivities of
the cultured organisms. There were signs of improvement in the pharynx, but the mass on the posterior neck had recurred. Repeat neck CT
angiography showed a low-density area in the posterior neck, and signs of improvement in the posterior pharyngeal wall. Subsequent magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI) angiography showed an area with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted
images, and an area of low signal intensity surrounded by an area of high signal intensity on post-gadolinium images (Figure 3). The lesion
in the posterior neck was diagnosed as a cystic lymphangioma based on the MRI findings and the results of the needle-puncture biopsy
culture. Although repeat CT on postoperative day 7 showed slight asymmetry between the left and right retropharyngeal spaces, the patient
was discharged as there was no observable asymmetry of the posterior pharyngeal wall, and the posterior neck mass continued to decrease in
size. He was followed up at our outpatient clinic for a year, and there was no recurrence of the lymphangioma during that time. Neck
computed tomography angiography findings. There was a low-density cavity surrounded by a high-density area (arrow) in the retropharyngeal
space. A poorly enhanced low-density area was also observed in the posterior neck (arrowhead). Operative findings. (a) Operative view of the
posterior neck swelling. (b) Operative view of the oral cavity, showing swelling of the left posterior pharyngeal wall. (c) Operative view
of the posterior neck swelling. (d-1) Purulent fluid (1 mL) was aspirated from the left pharyngeal wall swelling by needle puncture. (d-2)
Fluid aspirated from the posterior neck mass. Postoperative progress. (a) Preoperative neck CT angiography image. (b) CT image on
postoperative day (POD) 3, showing improvement of the retropharyngeal abscess but recurrence of the posterior neck swelling. (c) MRI on POD
3, showing a lesion with low signal intensity on T1-weighted images and high signal intensity on T2-weighted images, and an area of low
signal intensity surrounded by an area of high signal intensity on post-gadolinium images. (d) CT image on POD 7, showing slight asymmetry
between the right and left sides of the neck. MEPN, meropenem; CLDM, clindamycin; CTRX, ceftriaxone; CDTR-PI, cefditoren-pivoxil.
Retropharyngeal infection most commonly occurs in children aged younger than 6 years. Early detection of a developing retropharyngeal
abscess can alleviate the need for surgical drainage. Infections originate in the lymphatic chains that drain the upper airway and pharynx.
By 3 to 4 years of age, the retropharyngeal lymph node system begins to atrophy, and the risks of inflammation and infection subsequently
decrease . Although retropharyngeal abscesses have few specific symptoms, 50% of patients experience fever, stiff neck, neck pain, and
difficulty swallowing . However, retropharyngeal abscesses often occur after upper respiratory tract infections, and these symptoms are not
specific to the development of an abscess. Previous studies reported that the most common symptoms at presentation were decreased oral
intake (92%), neck pain (89%), and neck swelling or mass (79–83%) . Although it is not uncommon for patients with retropharyngeal abscesses
to present with a main complaint of neck swelling, this is often associated with enlarged lymph nodes or a deep neck abscess, and none of
the previously reported cases had a cystic lymphangioma. CT angiography is an effective diagnostic imaging modality for the detection of
retropharyngeal abscesses . Contrast-enhanced CT is the radiological modality of choice for evaluating retropharyngeal abscesses, and is
highly sensitive but not very specific. MRI is better than CT for imaging soft tissue masses such as cystic lymphangiomas. We believe that
CT angiography is also useful for the investigation of retropharyngeal abscesses. Because retropharyngeal abscesses are often accompanied by
upper respiratory tract infections, the microorganisms isolated from these abscesses are often similar to those isolated from patients with
upper respiratory tract infections. In a study by Hoffmann et al., the bacteria isolated from retropharyngeal abscesses included
Streptococcus spp. (72%), S. pyogenes (41%), Staphylococcus aureus (13%), Candida (6%), and Haemophilus influenzae (3%). The proportion of
cases with S. aureus infection was particularly high in children aged less than 1 year. The rates of detection of methicillin-resistant S.
aureus are increasing. Many patients have also been shown to have mixed infections. Brook performed needle aspirations on 14 paediatric
patients with retropharyngeal abscesses and found that 12 had mixed anaerobic and aerobic infections, including Streptococcus spp., S.
aureus, and H. influenzae. Studies by Asmar and Craig et al. had similar findings. However, antibiotic-resistant bacteria were rarely
isolated in these studies, suggesting that isolation of PRSP in the current patient can be attributed to the high prevalence of antibiotic-
resistant bacteria in Japan . Lymphangiomas are uncommon lesions of the lymphatic channels, and are often present at birth and usually
diagnosed during childhood, mostly before the age of 2 years. Diagnosis is by MRI and fine-needle aspiration cytology findings . In the
past, surgery was the treatment of choice for lymphangiomas. However, because of surgical complications including nerve injury, cyst
recurrence, and cosmetic problems, OK-432 therapy has recently become the treatment of choice. Injection of OK-432 into the cyst produces
inflammation , and induction of cytokines in the cells of the cyst wall results in fibrotic adhesions in the cyst with resolution of fluid
accumulation. In the present case, we hypothesize that inflammation arising from the retropharyngeal abscess also caused inflammation of the
congenital lymphangioma. The cystic lymphangioma then remained inflamed after resolution of the retropharyngeal abscess, but resolved after
OK-432 therapy. Lymphangiomas and retropharyngeal abscesses are both known to be more common in children than in adults. However, we found
no other reports of concomitant presentation of lymphangioma and retropharyngeal abscess in the literature. Concomitant occurrence of these
conditions may increase with increasing age. We reported here a case of retropharyngeal abscess caused by PRSP in a young child who
presented with neck swelling. Investigation revealed a retropharyngeal abscess and an enlarged cystic lymphangioma secondary to the abscess.
After intraoral surgical incision and drainage and administration of antibiotics, the patient recovered uneventfully. Written informed
consent was obtained from the patient’s parents for publication of this case report and any accompanying images. A copy of the written
consent is available for review by the Editor-in-Chief of this journal. The authors declare that they have no competing interests. YH and HF
were the main consultant surgeons involved in the management of the patient. YH reviewed the literature and wrote the manuscript. TH was
involved in caring for the patient in hospital and contributed the case history notes used in this report. All authors read and approved the
final manuscript. This work was supported by a Grant-in-Aid for Scientific Research from the Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science
and Technology (23791947,26861424), and a research project grant from Kawasaki Medical School (23S-2).
