The discovery of the fusion gene echinodermmicro tubule associated proteinlike 4-anaplastic lymphoma kinase, EML4-ALK, in patients with non-
small-cell lung cancer has led to the remarkable development of anaplastic lymphoma kinase inhibitors, such as crizotinib. Consequently, the
clinical outcomes of these patients have improved dramatically. Herein, we report the case of a woman with ALK gene translocation-squamous
cell lung cancer who experienced a remarkable tumor response to crizotinib after two courses of failed chemotherapy. A 55-year-old Chinese
woman was diagnosed with cervical lymph node metastatic squamous carcinoma. Chest computed tomography scan showed the primary tumor in the
lower lobe of the right lung. The patient had received two successive courses of first-line chemotherapy without tumor response. Tumor cells
were negative for wild-type of epidermal growth factor receptor/K-RAS variants; thus, she was not eligible for tyrosine kinase inhibitor
therapy. Unfortunately, increased levels of interleukin-6 and carcinoembryonic antigen, and computed tomography scan results indicated
cancer progression. Once crizotinib was approved by the China Food and Drug Administration and the ALK gene translocation was identified in
tumor cells by fluorescent in situ hybridization, the patient commenced treatment with crizotinib. Remarkably, the tumor response to
crizotinib was classified as partial response after only 26 days of treatment commencement. The partial response status has been maintained
to date (23 weeks). Considering this remarkable response to crizotinib, we can safely conclude that patients with squamous cell lung cancer
should have the option of undergoing ALK testing to determine if there is indication for crizotinib treatment even after they have failed
chemotherapy. Treatment of EML4-ALK fusion-positive non-small-cell lung cancer (NSCLC) with the anaplastic lymphoma kinase (ALK)-targeted
agent, crizotinib, offers significant improvement of clinical outcomes . Herein, we report the successful case of a patient with squamous
cell lung cancer and ALK gene translocation that experienced a remarkable response to crizotinib treatment after two courses of failed
chemotherapy. A 55-year-old woman presented in May 2013 with cough, sputum, and annihilation after activities of daily living, for more than
20 days. She had no history of smoking or alcoholism, but had undergone total hysterectomy because of hysteromyoma in 2010. She was
diagnosed with hypertension three years earlier. On physical examination, an enlarged right cervical lymph node was palpated. Chest computed
tomography (CT) scan (Figure 1A) indicated the presence of a mass in the lower lobe of the right lung and mediastinal lymph node
enlargement. The patient was then accepted and treated by the Department of Respiration for lung cancer stage IV with cervical lymph node
metastasis (T4N3M1). Chest computed tomography (CT) scans. Before the first chemotherapy treatment (May 2013) (A). After the second course
of chemotherapy (B). After 26 days (C) and 11 weeks (D) of crizotinib treatment. The whole enlarged right cervical lymph node was resected,
and followed by biopsy and histologic examination. Hematoxylin and eosin (H & E) staining showed the typical morphology of squamous cell
carcinoma cells (Figure 2A and B). Immunohistochemistry (IHC) analysis demonstrated that tumor cells were positive for cytokeratin (CK) 5/6
(Figure 2C) and P63 (Figure 2D), and negative for CK7, CK20, TTF-1, and Napsin A. The positive rate of Ki-67 was 30%. Altogether, these
results confirmed the diagnosis of metastatic squamous cell carcinoma. The patient requested treatment with epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR)-tyrosine kinase inhibitors (TKIs) because dozens of patients with squamous cell carcinoma and EGFR mutations responded well to TKIs
at our institute. Amplification refractory mutation system (ARMS) was used to assess EGFR and K-RAS gene profiles to determine the presence
of mutated variants. However, evidence of a normal genotype excluded the patient from receiving EGFR-TKI treatment. Right cervical lymph
node analysis. H & E staining (A and B). IHC staining of CK5/6 (C), P63 (D), and ALK (1A4) (E). ALK gene translocation (FISH, arrows: split-
apart signals for ALK gene translocation) (F). As first-line chemotherapy, the patient was initially administered 135 mg/m2 (210 mg) of
paclitaxel and 80 mg/m2 (120 mg) of nedaplatin. During treatment, the patient’s condition did not seem to improve; thus, after a 20-day
treatment, a second round of chemotherapy was administered with 75 mg/m2 (120 mg) of docetaxel and 80 mg/m2 (120 mg) of nedaplatin.
Unfortunately, increasing levels of interleukin-6 (IL-6) (25.41 vs 16.03 pg/mL) and carcinoembryonic antigen (CEA) (23.43 vs 7.13 ng/mL)
indicated cancer progression, which was confirmed by the presence of multiple metastases in both lungs on CT scan images (Figure 1B).
Although not initially indicated, the patient was then administered oral treatment with the EGFR-TKI, erlotinib (1-month trial). However,
this treatment showed no efficacy. After the use of crizotinib was approved by the China Food and Drug Administration (CFDA) in July 2013,
the patient underwent ALK testing. IHC staining (Clone 1A4, Origene, 1:200) showed tumor cell positivity for ALK protein (Figure 2E). Then
ALK break-apart fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) was performed on 4-μm, formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue sections. Slides
were hybridized with the LSI ALK Break Apart Rearrangement Probe (Vysis, Abbott Molecular, Des Plaines, IL, USA), and read on an
epifluorescence microscope (BX41, Olympus, Tokyo, Japan). The lung cancer cell line, NCI-H2228, (American Type Culture Collection-ATCC) was
used as positive control. At least 50 tumor cell nuclei were analyzed and at least 15% of interpretable tumor cells harboring break-apart
signals were used as the cutoff value . As a result, the presence of ALK gene translocation was confirmed (Figure 2F). The patient underwent
crizotinib treatment (250 mg/bid, orally) for 26 days. After this period, symptoms, including neck constriction and cough, were improved.
Chest CT scan images demonstrated decrease in tumor size and metastases. According to the Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors
(RECIST) guidelines (version 1.1), such tumor response to crizotinib was classified as partial response (PR) (Figure 1C). Follow-up chest CT
scan performed 11 weeks after the beginning of the treatment revealed a dramatic reduction in tumor size and mediastinal lymph node, with
nearly no presence of metastases in both lungs (Figure 1D). IL-6 (3.34 vs 25.41 pg/mL) and CEA (1.84 vs 23.43 ng/mL) levels were also
reduced 23 weeks after the beginning of the therapy, which demonstrated continuous partial response. According to the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network guidelines, ALK testing is not routinely performed in patients with squamous cell lung cancer. Therefore, this patient was
not tested for ALK until crizotinib was approved for marketing by the CFDA (June 23, 2013). Unfortunately, neither chemotherapy nor EGFR-TKI
treatment produced effective tumor response in this patient. ALK gene translocations have been previously detected in patients with lung
adenocarcinoma and light or non smoking history . To date, two studies have previously reported cases of patients with mixed carcinoma and
squamous cell component harboring ALK rearrangements , but these studies did not describe specific therapy or diagnostic procedures. Another
report showed that a patient with squamous cell lung cancer, harboring c-MET amplification, had partially responded to crizotinib . Herein,
we report the case of a non-smoking woman with squamous cell lung cancer and ALK gene rearrangement who experienced remarkable response to
crizotinib treatment after failed chemotherapy. In concordance with other studies on patients with lung adenocarcinoma treated with
crizotinib , this patient has remained in remission (PR). Most importantly, such remarkable response was obtained after two courses of
failed chemotherapy. Despite the low reconstruction rate of ALK gene, if applicable, patients with squamous cell lung cancer should have the
option of undergoing ALK testing and receiving crizotinib treatment. ALK testing and subsequent targeted therapy could be an effective
option for patients with non-small cell lung cancer who present progression following chemotherapy, radiotherapy, or any other treatment.
The patient provided written consent for publication of this case report. EML4: Echinodermmicro tubule associated protein like 4; ALK:
Anaplastic lymphoma kinase; NSCLC: Non-small-cell lung cancer; CT: Chest computed tomography; TKIs: Tyrosine kinase inhibitors; EGFR:
Epidermal growth factor receptor; IL-6: Interleukin-6; CEA: Carcinoembryonic antigen; CFDA: China Food and Drug Administration; FISH:
Fluorescent in situ hybridization; PR: Partial response; IHC: Immunohistochemistry; H & E: Hematoxylin and eosin; ARMS: Amplification
refractory mutation system; RECIST: Response Evaluation Criteria in Solid Tumors. The authors declare that they have no competing interests.
QSW carried out the molecular identifications of EGFR and K-ras, and drafted the manuscript. YH provided parts of the clinical treatment
data and revised the manuscript. XY participated in the H & E, IHC, and FISH analyses. YBW provided parts of the clinical treatment data.
HLX participated in the design and coordination of this study, and helped to revise the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final
manuscript. The pre-publication history for this paper can be accessed here: http://www.biomedcentral.com/1471-2466/14/83/prepub We would
like to thank Li Lin for the assistance on IHC analysis. We would also like to thank Edanz Editing for language revision of the manuscript.
